
the essential DAVIDBOHM
There are few scientists of the twentieth century whose life’s work has
created more excitement and controversy than that of physicist David
Bohm (1917–1992). Exploring the philosophical implications of both
physics and consciousness, Bohm’s penchant for questioning scientiﬁc
and social orthodoxy was the expression of a rare and maverick
intelligence.
For Bohm, the world of matter and the experience of consciousness
were complementary aspects of a more fundamental process he called
the implicate order. Without a working sensibility of what an implicate
order might be, our conceptions of the various threads of Bohm’s work –
whether in quantum theory or social dialogue – remain incomplete. But
with an enhanced understanding of such an order, the wholeness of
Bohm’s work becomes apparent and accessible.
For the ﬁrst time in a single volume, The Essential David Bohm offers a
comprehensive overview of Bohm’s original works from a non-technical
perspective. Including three chapters of previously unpublished
material, each reading has been selected to highlight some aspects of the
implicate order process, and to provide an introduction to one of the
most provocative thinkers of our time.


the essential
DAVIDBOHM
edited by lee nichol
With a Reminiscence by H.H. The Dalai Lama

First published 2003
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
© 2003 Sarah Bohm; Lee Nichol for selection, editorial matter
and Chapter 8; Yitzhak Woolfson for Chapter 7
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Bohm, David.
[Selections. 2002]
The essential David Bohm / edited by Lee Nichol.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Science–Philosophy. 2. Creative ability in science. 3. Order (Philosophy) I. Nichol,
Lee, 1955– II. Title.
QC175 .B6652 2002
501–dc21
2002031683
ISBN 0–415–26173–2 (hbk)
ISBN 0–415–26174–0 (pbk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2005.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s 
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
ISBN 0-203-98696-2 Master e-book ISBN

It was a hard thing to undo this knot.
The rainbow shines, but only in the thought
Of him that looks. Yet not in that alone,
For who makes rainbows by invention?
And many standing round a waterfall
See one bow each, yet not the same to all,
But each a hand’s breadth further than the next.
The sun on falling waters writes the text
Which yet is in the eye or in the thought.
It was a hard thing to undo this knot.
—Gerard Manley Hopkins


CONTENTS
Acknowledgements
ix
Reminiscence About David Bohm
x
His Holiness the Dalai Lama
Editor’s Introduction
1
Lee Nichol
Part One – Universal Orders
9
1
The Qualitative Inﬁnity of Nature (1957)
9
2
Physics and Perception (1967)
39
3
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe and Consciousness
(1980)
78
4
The Super-Implicate Order (1986)
139
5
Soma-Signiﬁcance and the Activity of Meaning (1985)
158
6
The Causal-Ontological Interpretation and Implicate Orders
(1987)
183
Part Two – Individual Orders
199
7
Structure-Process and the Ego (1958–67)
199
8
Unfolding the Self–World Image (1987)
235
9
Freedom and the Value of the Individual (1986)
253
Part Three – Collective Orders
261
10
Knowledge as Endarkenment (1980)
261
Contents
vii

11
Dialogue as a New Creative Order (1987)
289
12
On Dialogue and its Application (1989)
301
Bibliography
341
Index
343
viii
Contents

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The editor would like to express his gratitude to the following indi-
viduals, each of whom uniquely contributed to the completion of this
volume: His Holiness the Dalai Lama, Saral Bohm, Neil Nelson, Sonia
Nelson, Yitzhak Woolfson, Leroy Little Bear, Amethyst First Rider,
Michael Krohnen, Bruce Robertson, Jean Robertson, Sylvia Gretchen,
Ron Purser, John Erskine, Steve McCarl, Bill Nichol, Brenda Goings,
Fred Calhoun, Bruce Garber, Arthur Braverman, Richard Kortum, Peter
Gold, Richard Burg, Jack Petranker, Leslie Bradburn, Tony Bruce, Muna
Khogali, Nann Henderson, Kevin Shluker and Aja Bulla-Richards.
Special thanks are due to Basil Hiley, David Peat, Renée Weber,
Paavo Pylkkänen, Don Factor, Mark Edwards, Arleta Griffor, and Jane
Fleming, without whose efforts over many years the body of work from
which this volume is distilled would have been greatly diminished.
The untitled poem by Gerard Manley Hopkins (1844–1889) on page
v is included to honor the vision and perseverance of David Bohm.
The editor and publisher wish to thank the following for kind per-
mission to reprint:
Chapter 4: reprinted from Dialogues with Scientists and Sages: The
Search for Unity by Renée Weber, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London ©
Renée Weber, 1986.
Chapter 9: reprinted from Physics and the Ultimate Signiﬁcance of
Time, ed. David Ray Grifﬁn by permission of the State University of
New York Press, New York © 1986, State University of New York. All
rights reserved.
Acknowledgements
ix

Reminiscence About David Bohm
David Bohm was a scientist well known for his work in quantum
physics. I met him on several occasions and my personal impression of
him as a human being was that although he was a famous scientist,
he was neither arrogant nor proud. On the contrary, he was humble
and easy to talk to. True to his scientiﬁc training he was unbiased
and open-minded. Consequently, although he was mostly focused on
his own ﬁeld of scientiﬁc research, he was also interested in conscious-
ness because of its implications with regard to the theories of quantum
physics. Therefore, he also showed interest in some of the ancient
Indian schools of philosophy.
He seems to have known Krishnamurti quite well and had stimulating
interactions with him. When we met, he would ask about the Buddhist
concept of interdependence and the corresponding theory of emptiness.
For my part I had the opportunity to listen to him explain quantum
physics on a number of occasions and I made some effort to understand
these difﬁcult ideas. Because he was the one I could question in detail
about quantum mechanics, I consider him to have been one of my
scientiﬁc ‘gurus’.
November 17, 2001

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION
There are few scientists of the twentieth century whose life’s work has
generated more excitement and controversy than that of physicist David
Bohm. Marginalized by his colleagues in the physics élite for chal-
lenging the standard interpretation of quantum theory, forced into de
facto expatriation for resisting McCarthyism, admired and derided alike
for his interest in the phenomenology of consciousness, Bohm’s pen-
chant for questioning scientiﬁc and social orthodoxy was the natural
expression of a rare and maverick intelligence.
Bohm, who in the 1940s reﬁned the theory of plasma as the fourth
state of matter, and in the 1950s recast the Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen
paradox and shared in the discovery of the Aharonov–Bohm effect, was
widely considered one of the most talented and promising physicists of
his generation. But his primary work from the 1950s to the 1990s – the
ongoing development of his “causal interpretation” of quantum mech-
anics as an alternative to the standard Copenhagen interpretation – was
met with surprising hostility by the majority of the world physics
community.
Due largely to a 1994 Scientiﬁc American cover story1 and F. David
Peat’s Inﬁnite Potential – The Life and Times of David Bohm (1997),2 the
means by which Bohm’s alternative quantum theory had been effect-
ively suppressed came to light, and the general outlines of this alterna-
tive were ﬁnally presented to a substantial reading public. This theory,
developed in collaboration with Prof. Basil Hiley and known in its
mature form as the “ontological interpretation” of quantum mechanics,3
is now widely viewed as a serious critique of the Copenhagen interpret-
ation, and proffers a revisioning of quantum theory in which objective
reality is restored and undivided wholeness is fundamental.
Editor’s Introduction
1

Concurrent with the development of the ontological interpretation
– and ultimately as an integral part of it – was the evolution of Bohm’s
philosophy of consciousness. At once ancient and modern, this phil-
osophy employs concepts of contemporary psychology and cognitive
science, yet is deeply resonant with perspectives as diverse as those of
Native America, Buddhism, and Vedanta. And while there exists no
school of Bohmian philosophy of consciousness, Bohm’s insistence that
the subtle unity of the “observer and the observed” be brought out of the
laboratory and into the domain of immediate experience has contrib-
uted signiﬁcantly to the mainstreaming of cognitive philosophy and
consciousness studies.
For many observers there has been an easy temptation to think of
these lines of inquiry as two separate and unrelated threads. To many
physicists, Bohm squandered precious time and resources in exploring
the nature of mind. For those non-scientists who were intuitively drawn
to Bohm’s philosophy of consciousness, particularly as it manifested in
his work with social dialogue, Bohm’s physics was the stuff of academia
– respectable arcana perhaps, but forever out of reach, and without
much concrete relevance.
For Bohm himself, however, these seemingly disparate lines of
inquiry were manifestations of an integral primary vision he eventually
came to call the implicate order. This “order” was a propositional tem-
plate for plotting the emergence and dynamics of both matter and con-
sciousness. Hinted at by topical analogies such as the hologram, Bohm’s
vision of the implicate order posited a dynamic “structure-process” from
which our coordinate-based experience of three-dimensional space and
time is but a derivative, temporary projection. Within that coordinate-
based “explicate” order, we may have any number and variety of experi-
ences, yet never come to consider that the very coordinate frame for all
those experiences is itself a projection, another experience arising from
a deeper “implicate” order.
Consequently, grasping what Bohm was alluding to with the impli-
cate order can be an elusive undertaking, and as it likely was for him,
ever a work in progress. Yet without a working sensibility of what an
implicate order might be, our conceptions of the various aspects of
Bohm’s work will necessarily remain limited and incomplete. With such
a sensibility in hand, however, not only does the wholeness of Bohm’s
work become readily apparent, but each facet – be it scientiﬁc, socio-
logical, or contemplative – is now illuminated as if from within, infused
with new and richer meaning.4
It is thus the intention of the present volume to provide the reader
2
Editor’s Introduction

with the essential materials for acquiring such an enhanced understand-
ing of one of the most radical and important thinkers of the twentieth
century. Offering for the ﬁrst time between two covers a comprehen-
sive overview of David Bohm’s original works from a non-technical
perspective, each reading has been selected to contextualize or highlight
some feature of the implicate order process.
In conceiving the implicate order, Bohm was originally concerned
with the nature of order per se. Both scientiﬁcally and socially, he felt
that we are largely unaware of the degree to which inherited orders, or
paradigms, dominate our perception and thought. In our current time, it
is the order of mechanism that prevails. The essence of a mechanistic
view is that all natural phenomena exist in a strictly external relation-
ship to one another, and exhibit precise and discernible chains of cause
and effect. In such a world of externalized entities, the theory goes, it is
only a matter of time before the “ultimate particle” – the basic stuff of
which the universe is made – will be discovered and explained.
However, in both theory and experiment this mechanistic order has
been undermined by a series of developments in twentieth-century
physics. Bohm points to four features of the “new” physics that, taken
together, require the formulation of a larger, more encompassing order.
The ﬁrst signiﬁcant challenge to mechanism came from Einstein, who
claimed there were deep contradictions in the very notion of an
independently existing particle. He proposed that what we normally
think of as a particle is actually a temporary localized pulse emerging
from a larger ﬁeld, very much as a vortex temporarily forms from the
dynamic ﬂowing of a stream. In Bohm’s words, “the ﬁeld structure
associated with two pulses will merge and ﬂow together in one unbroken
whole.”5 In this way, the mechanistic notion of the inherent separability
of material structures was initially questioned. Yet Einstein ultimately
took recourse in a mechanistic view by asserting that the ﬁelds them-
selves were separate and external from one another.
It was to be three subsequent discoveries in quantum mechanics
that would more profoundly challenge a mechanistic world view. The
ﬁrst of these is that the movement of quantum entities (photons, elec-
trons, etc.) does not possess the classical (and common sense) attribute
of steady, continuous development from one state or position to
another. Rather, the movement of quantum entities is discontinuous.
Action or movement is constituted of indivisible quanta – discrete
pulses or packets of energy – which “jump” from one energy state to the
next, without passing through intermediary energy states. To Bohm, this
quantum discontinuity implies a universe woven together in a dynamic,
Editor’s Introduction
3

tapestry-like conﬁguration: “If all actions are in the form of discrete
quanta, the interactions between different entities (e.g., electrons) con-
stitute a single structure of indivisible links, so that the entire universe
has to be thought of as an unbroken whole.”6
The second quantum discovery is that matter may behave like a
solid particle in one context, like a wave in another context, and like
both together in yet a third context. This context-dependent aspect of
matter violates the mechanistic axiom that an entity is what it is, until it
irreversibly transforms through disintegration. That an entity (e.g., an
electron) can manifest as a wave in one context and a particle in another
suggests, according to Bohm, a kind of information exchange that is
more akin to transformations in organisms than to the interacting parts
of machines. From this perspective, the “particle” would seem to be
gathering information about its environment and responding according
to the meaning of the information. This capacity for transformation –
the famous “wave–particle duality” – is vividly illustrated in the double
slit experiment.7
The third quantum discovery, and perhaps the strangest, is the well-
demonstrated non-local connection between particles (e.g., electrons) –
referred to as “entanglement” in current terminology. When under cer-
tain conditions electrons combine to form a coupled pair, and are then
again separated by signiﬁcant distances, instantaneous inﬂuence
between the particles is discovered, for which there is no “local” or
mechanical explanation. One of the possibilities that arises from this
observation is that the speed of light has been violated; at the very least
it becomes clear that local causality cannot fully account for the phe-
nomena of quantum mechanics. Thus, either the theory of quantum
mechanics is wrong – very unlikely, based on a century of unqualiﬁed
experimental validation – or some form of non-locality permeates
reality.
For Bohm, a reality structure founded on discontinuous quantized
movement, context-dependent form, and non-local action requires the
envisioning of a new order that both incorporates and goes beyond the
order of mechanism. However, it was Bohm’s position that this
requirement is understood by the majority of the physics community
only via highly abstract mathematical algorithms, with little or no con-
cern for what these rather shocking assaults on common sense might
mean. Indeed, the prevailing quantum orthodoxy maintains that any
search for meaning or structure behind experimental phenomena is
itself pointless and without meaning. Thus, the three quantum discover-
ies – with their potentially vast implications – are shoe-horned into a
4
Editor’s Introduction

tacit metaphysical commitment to mechanism, in spite of the fact that
such a commitment is philosophically inconsistent with experimental
fact. And as go the assumptions of the scientiﬁc community, felt Bohm,
so go the assumptions of the culture at large. In this way the philosophy
of mechanism continues to trickle into and structure the perception,
imagination, and creativity of contemporary society.
Bohm’s intention in outlining a philosophy of implicate order is
therefore twofold. On the one hand he is pointing to the quite precise
wholeness of the natural world suggested in the intersection of relativ-
ity and quantum theory. For Bohm, this wholeness is actual, it matters,
and it warrants metaphysical investigation.8 The implicate order there-
fore becomes a means of overtly modeling aspects of wholeness implied
in that intersection, of providing a framework for approaching the con-
tradictory aspects of that intersection, and of urging the community of
physicists away from its investment in outmoded world views.
On the other hand, the structure of reality implied by twentieth-
century physics is seen by Bohm to be enfolded within and therefore
available to human experience. Wholeness is thus understood to be
more than a theoretical construct – it is a meaning-ﬁeld, a living totality
that includes us. Here we enter new terrain in which we are active
participants, not simply detached observers. For Bohm, the shift from an
abstract observational perspective to the embodied knowledge of a par-
ticipatory lifeworld was of the highest importance and carried the full
force of necessity. Yet to the extent we remain invested in a non-
participatory, mechanistic outlook, we deny ourselves even a glimpse of
such new possibilities. And currently, the assumptions of mechanism
continue to be tacitly embraced by each of us, made only stronger by the
further assumption that we have no metaphysical assumptions – that we
are more or less seeing reality “as it is.”
In the social domain, these nested assumptions virtually assure con-
ﬂict and fragmentation, because they tie us to existential identiﬁcations
as absolutes rather than as functional categories. Self, family, nation,
and ideology become restrictions and distortions, rather than mem-
branes which connect us to larger wholes. When defending and sustain-
ing these identiﬁcations become paramount, we are faced with a deep
irony in which our shared creative potential – mind itself – has turned
against us.
It was with this understanding in hand that Bohm ventured into the
realm of experience, both individual and collective. It is not necessary to
wait for the community of scientists to transcend a mechanistic view,
felt Bohm. We can begin to inquire now, in the course of daily life, as to
Editor’s Introduction
5

the efﬁcacy and limits of a mechanistic orientation. And much may be
at stake. As Paavo Pylkkänen suggests in his introduction to the Bohm–
Biederman Correspondence,
We live in an age where science and technology increasingly need
to serve the interests of economic growth and immediate practical
applications. The adverse effects of science and technology are
well known, but it seems to be impossible to control and foresee
developments such as those in information technology. For
example, how will the current developments in this technology
affect human consciousness? Will consciousness have to mech-
anize itself in order for the new information technology to function
efficiently?9
It is issues of precisely this magnitude that led Bohm to repeatedly
breach the artiﬁcial boundary between science and experience, and to
question not only the structure of objectiﬁable reality, but also the
structure of human subjectivity. He came to a position as old as civiliza-
tion itself, though much out of favor in our time: mind and matter
cannot be understood as two. But dedicated as he was to exploring the
implications of such a view, Bohm repeatedly warned against assuming
the ﬁnal truth of any perspective, including his own. It was his view
that, like the universe itself, no theory is ever complete. Each advance in
knowledge may serve as a temporary resting point, but ultimately
should function as a portal to yet further comprehension and insight. In
this light, the implicate order model and The Essential David Bohm are
perhaps best approached in a spirit of leisurely exploration and free
play, and with a willingness to test the soundness of our world views,
including those we hold most dear.
Lee Nichol
Albuquerque, New Mexico,
January 2002
Notes
1
Albert, David Z., “Bohm’s Alternative to Quantum Mechanics,” Scientiﬁc American, May 1994.
2
Peat, F. David, Inﬁnite Potential: The Life and Times of David Bohm, Addison-Wesley, Reading,
Mass. (1997).
3
See Bohm, D. and Hiley, B. J., The Undivided Universe: An Ontological Interpretation of Quantum
Theory, Routledge, London (1993).
4
In working with the material in this volume, the reader may ﬁnd the following illustrations
6
Editor’s Introduction

useful. Viewing the Necker cube gives a very good intuitive sense of an implicate order, in this
case a perceptual implicate order. Generally speaking, it is only possible to perceive one of the
two possible cubes at a time – while one is enfolded in perception (an implicate order), the other
is unfolded in perception (an explicate order). This phenomenon is signiﬁcantly ampliﬁed when
one views the hypercube – many possible geometric orders remain enfolded in perception (a
complex implicate order), while only one is unfolded at any given moment (an explicate order).
5
Bohm, D., Wholeness and the Implicate Order, Routledge, London (1980), p. 174.
6
Ibid, p. 175.
7
For an explanation of the double slit experiment, see Chapter 6 of the present volume; also see
Zukav, G., The Dancing Wu Li Masters – An Overview of the New Physics, William Morrow, New
York (1979), pp. 82–9.
8
Bohm uses the term “metaphysics” in its original sense of making philosophical claims about the
way all things are, not in its currently dismissive connotation which suggests fanciful speculation
or mysticism. When “metaphysics” is considered in its original meaning, Bohm claims that all
cultures and the individuals within them hold thoroughgoing metaphysical presuppositions. See
Bohm, D., On Creativity, Routledge, London (1998), Ch. 4, for a fuller treatment of Bohm’s views
of metaphysics.
9
Bohm, D. and Biederman, C., Bohm–Biederman Correspondence (ed. Paavo Pylkkänen), London,
Routledge (1999), p. xxi.
Figure I.1 A Necker cube
Figure I.2 A hypercube
Editor’s Introduction
7


Part One – Universal Orders
1
THE QUALITATIVE INFINITY OF NATURE (1957)
In this essay Bohm argues for a philosophical perspective that transcends
classical mechanism, while still utilizing a mechanistic framework when
applicable. With such an approach we can sidestep unnecessary “either–or”
philosophical choices, and thus maintain maximum ﬂexibility of view with
regard to a philosophy of science. Innocuous on its face, this perspective
ultimately casts doubt on the widely-held view that the whole of nature can be
reduced to a set of laws that are in principle ﬁnite and knowable.
To illustrate the basis for such a non-mechanical view, Bohm points to
research into the structure of the atom. In spite of perennial claims that the
ultimate structure of the atom is about to be found, the simple fact is that no
such structure has yet been discovered. On the contrary, the depth and scale
of atomic substructure give no indication whatsoever of being exhaustively
determined, giving way to ever greater subtlety and theoretical complexity.
An ultimate structure will not be found, says Bohm, because it does not exist.
There is no ultimate or ﬁnal structure to anything at all, including atoms.
There are only relatively invariant dynamic structures that appear as
“things” – electrons, starﬁsh, trees – within limited contexts, inexorably
transforming into new structures, forms, and processes when these contexts
change. This theme of relative invariance recurs in subsequent chapters, and
plays a central role in conceiving the implicate order.
Intersecting with the inexhaustible nature of form and structure is what
Bohm refers to as the “background.” This background is the totality of causes
and conditions that contribute to the creation and dissolution of each
Extract from Chapter 5 of D. Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, University of Pennsylvania
Press, Philadelphia (1957) and Routledge, London (1957).
The Qualitative Inﬁnity of Nature
9

temporary “thing.” Each thing not only has its own relatively stable sub-
structure, but has a potentially unlimited context as well, much like a par-
ticle’s derivative relation to its ﬁeld. In Bohm’s view, the complex relation of
each thing to its background, together with the richness of its substructure,
suggest that mechanistic accounts will always be superseded by new levels of
complexity and order. If indeed elementary material “things” are thus poten-
tially inﬁnite in their nature, far more so will be the case for the whole of
nature. Consequently, we must reformulate our conceptions of the laws of
nature so that they account for context and contingency, rather than general-
izing them in absolute fashion.
The pairing of substructure and background is an early formulation of
the relation between implicate and explicate orders. While the investigation
of material substructures is oriented toward increasingly subtle aspects of an
explicate three-dimensional order, the notion of an inﬁnite background lays
the foundation for conceiving a multi-dimensional implicate order, from
which all material structure – of any degree of subtlety – derives its relative
existence and sustenance.
In outlining the dynamic between structure and background, Bohm
introduces the notion of reciprocal relationship. In the mechanistic concept of
interaction, the various components of a given system affect one another in
strictly quantitative fashion, exempliﬁed by Newton’s laws of motion which
specify equality of action and reaction, as well as the maintenance of the
identity of the components. By contrast, a reciprocal relationship enables a
qualitative relation between structure and background, in which each has the
potential not only to “impact” the other, but to generate transformations in
the nature of what each actually is.
From this perspective, each “thing,” whether particle or starﬁsh, derives
its relative stability through the inﬂuence of background and substructure. But
this inﬂuence is not a one-way affair – each particular thing in its turn may
affect and inﬂuence its respective background and substructure. Thus qualita-
tive changes may ﬂow in both directions, with particles subtly affecting their
ﬁelds (as well as the reverse) or starﬁsh subtly affecting their ecosystems (as
well as the reverse). More broadly considered, the notion of reciprocal relation
allows for nested, mutual inﬂuence even between macroscopic processes and
those at the atomic level, indicating the complexity of the pathways through
which the qualitative inﬁnity of nature may manifest.
1
INTRODUCTION
For several centuries there has existed a very strong tendency for one
form or another of the philosophy of mechanism to be generally
10
Universal Orders

adopted among physicists. In the present chapter we shall criticize this
philosophy, demonstrating the weaknesses in its basic assumptions, and
then we shall go on to propose a different and broader point of view
which we believe to correspond more nearly than does mechanism to
the implications of scientiﬁc research in a wide range of ﬁelds. In
addition to presenting this broader point of view in some detail, we shall
also show how it permits a more satisfactory resolution of several
important problems, scientiﬁc as well as philosophical, than is possible
within the framework of a mechanistic philosophy.
2
SUMMARY OF THE ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTICS
OF A MECHANISTIC PHILOSOPHY
The essential characteristics of a mechanistic philosophy in the most
general form that it has developed thus far in physics are the
following:
The enormous diversity of things found in the world, both in com-
mon experience and in scientiﬁc research, can all be reduced com-
pletely and perfectly and unconditionally (i.e. without approximation
and in every possible domain) to nothing more than the effects of some
deﬁnite and limited general framework of laws. While it is admitted
that the details of these laws may be subjected to changes in accordance
with new experimental results that may be obtained in the future, its
basic general features are regarded as absolute and ﬁnal. This means
that the fundamental entities that are supposed to exist, the kinds of
qualities that deﬁne the modes of being of these entities, and the gen-
eral kinds of relationships in terms of which the basic laws are to be
expressed, are supposed to ﬁt into some ﬁxed and limited physical and
mathematical scheme, which could in principle be subjected to a com-
plete and exhaustive formulation, if indeed it is not supposed that this
has already been done. At bottom, the only changes that are regarded as
possible within this scheme are quantitative changes in the parameters
or functions deﬁning the state of the system (as precisely as the nature
of the system permits this state to be deﬁned1), while fundamental
qualitative changes in the modes of being of the basic entities and in the
forms in which the basic laws are to be expressed are not regarded as
possible. Thus, the essence of the mechanistic position lies in its
assumption of ﬁxed basic qualities, which means that the laws them-
selves will ﬁnally reduce to purely quantitative relationships.
The philosophy of mechanism has undergone an extensive evolution
in its speciﬁc form, all the while retaining the essential characteristics
The Qualitative Inﬁnity of Nature
11

described above, in forms that tend, however, to become more and more
complex and subtle with the further development of science.
3
CRITICISM OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF MECHANISM
We shall now review some of the most important criticisms that can be
made against the philosophy of mechanism.
First of all, the historical development of physics has not conﬁrmed
the basic assumptions of this philosophy, but rather, has continually
contradicted them. Thus, since the time of Newton, there have been
introduced, not only the whole series of speciﬁc changes in the con-
ceptual structure of physics,2 but also the revolutionary changes in the
whole general framework, brought about by the theory of relativity and
the quantum theory. Moreover, physics is now faced with a crisis in
which it is generally admitted that further changes will have to take
place, which will probably be as revolutionary compared to relativity
and the quantum theory as these theories are compared to classical
physics.
Secondly, the mechanistic assumption of the absolute and ﬁnal
character of any feature of our theories is never necessary. For the possi-
bility is always open that such a feature has only a relative and limited
validity, and that the limits of its validity may be discovered in the
future. Thus, Newton’s laws of motion, regarded as absolute and ﬁnal
for over two hundred years, were eventually found to have a limited
domain of validity, these limits having ﬁnally been expressed with the
aid of the quantum theory and the theory of relativity. Indeed, the
mechanistic thesis that certain features of our theories are absolute and
ﬁnal is an assumption that is not subject to any conceivable kind of
experimental proof, so that it is, at best, purely philosophical in
character.
Thirdly, the assumption of the absolute and ﬁnal character of any
feature of our theories contradicts the basic spirit of the scientiﬁc
method itself, which requires that every feature be subjected to con-
tinual probing and testing, which may show up contradictions at any
point where we come into a new domain or to a more accurate study of
previously known domains than has hitherto been carried out. Indeed,
the normal pattern that has developed without exception in every ﬁeld
of science studied thus far has been just the appearance of an endless
series of such contradictions, each of which has led to a new theory
permitting an improved and deeper understanding of the material
under investigation. Thus, the full and consistent application of the
12
Universal Orders

scientiﬁc method makes sense only in a context in which we refrain
from assuming the absolute and ﬁnal character of any feature of any
theory and in which we therefore do not accept a mechanistic
philosophy.
Of course, the above arguments do not prove that a mechanistic
philosophy is deﬁnitely wrong. For it is always conceivable that the
trouble thus far has been that we have just not found the true absolute
and ﬁnal theory, and that this theory may be somewhere beyond the
horizon of current scientiﬁc research. On the other hand, the historic-
ally demonstrated inadequacy of this philosophy up to the present, the
fact that its basic assumptions cannot possibly be proved, and the fact
that they are in disagreement with the whole spirit of the scientiﬁc
method, would suggest to us that it may well be worth our while to
consider points of view that go outside the limits of a mechanistic phil-
osophy. It is with the development of a point of view having such an
aim that we shall be concerned throughout the rest of this chapter.
4
A POINT OF VIEW THAT GOES BEYOND
MECHANISM
The nucleus of a point of view that goes beyond mechanism and that is
also in better accord than is mechanism with general scientiﬁc experi-
ence and with the needs of scientiﬁc research has been previously
presented,3 in connection with the extremely rich and diversiﬁed struc-
ture that has thus far actually been found in the laws of nature. The
most essential feature characterizing this general structure is this: Any
given set of qualities and properties of matter and categories of laws
that are expressed in terms of these qualities and properties is in general
applicable only within limited contexts, over limited ranges of condi-
tions and to limited degrees of approximation, these limits being subject
to better and better determination with the aid of further scientiﬁc
research. Indeed, both the very character of the empirical data and the
results of a more detailed logical analysis show that beyond the above
limitations on the validity of any given theory, the possibility is always
open that there may exist an unlimited variety of additional properties,
qualities, entities, systems, levels, etc., to which apply correspondingly
new kinds of laws of nature. Or, lumping all of the above diverse possi-
bilities into the single category of “things,” we see that a systematic and
consistent analysis of what we can actually conclude from experimental
and observational data leads us to the notion that nature may have in it
an inﬁnity of different kinds of things.
The Qualitative Inﬁnity of Nature
13

It is clear that this point of view carries us completely outside the
scope of what can be considered a mechanistic philosophy. For, as we
recall, the mechanistic point of view involves the assumption that the
possible variety in the basic properties and qualities existing in nature is
limited, so that one is permitted at most to consider quantitative inﬁn-
ities, which come from making some ﬁnite number of kinds of things
bigger and bigger or more and more numerous. Moreover, it is also clear
that the notion to which we have been led is quite distinct from that of a
series of successive approximations that converge to some ﬁxed and
limited set of ﬁnal laws. For there is evidently no reason why new
qualities and properties and the corresponding new laws should always
lead just to smaller and smaller corrections that converge in this simple
and uniform way towards deﬁnite results. This may well be what hap-
pens in certain contexts and within a deﬁnite range of conditions.
Nevertheless, there is no conceivable empirical justiﬁcation for exclud-
ing the possibility that in different contexts or under changed condi-
tions these new qualities, properties, and laws will lead to effects that
are not small in relation to those following from previously known
properties, qualities, and laws.
Thus, for example, while the laws of relativity and quantum theory
do in fact lead under special conditions to small corrections to those of
Newtonian mechanics, they lead more generally, as is well known, to
qualitatively new results of enormous signiﬁcance, results that are not
contained in Newtonian mechanics at all.4 The same possibility evi-
dently necessarily exists with regard to any other new laws that may
eventually be discovered. Therefore, the assumption that the laws of
nature constitute an inﬁnite series of smaller and smaller steps that
approach what is in essence a mechanistic limit is just as arbitrary and
unprovable as is the assumption of a ﬁnite set of laws permitting an
exhaustive treatment of the whole of nature.
We see then, that, as far as the empirical data of science themselves
are concerned, they cannot justify any a priori restrictions at all, either
on the character or on the relative importance in different conditions
and contexts of the inexhaustibly rich and diversiﬁed qualities and
properties that may exist in nature. Such qualities and properties –
which can always, as far as we are able to tell, lie hidden behind the
errors and inadequacies of any given set of theories – may be disclosed
later in an investigation carried out under new conditions, in new
contexts, or to new degrees of approximation.
Thus far, we have been led by our analysis of the character of em-
pirical data and of scientiﬁc theories only to a consideration of the
14
Universal Orders

possibility that nature may have in it an inﬁnity of potentially or actu-
ally signiﬁcant qualities (i.e. qualities which are of major importance or
which can become of major importance under suitable conditions and
in suitable contexts). It is now clear, however, that there are really only
two possibilities with regard to this problem. Either the qualities having
this kind of signiﬁcance are limited in number, or else they are not. To
suppose the former is essentially to fall back into one form or another of
the mechanistic philosophy, to which, as we have seen, so many objec-
tions can be raised. If we wish to go outside the mechanistic philosophy,
we therefore really have no choice but to consider the consequences of
the assumption that the number of such signiﬁcant qualities is not
limited.
We have thus been led to see what is the ﬁrst crucial step towards a
point of view that goes beyond the mechanistic philosophy. On the
other hand, at this stage of the analysis, this point of view presents itself
as one of two possible alternatives: i.e. either mechanism or an inﬁnity
of potentially or actually signiﬁcant qualities. Evidently we must
choose one or the other. But on what basis can we make such a choice?
In order to answer this question we point out that the notion of the
qualitative inﬁnity of nature becomes more than merely an alternative
to the philosophy of mechanism, if we take into account the role of
conditions, context, and degree of approximation in limiting the domain
of applicability of any given theory. For, with this addition, it constitutes
a broader point of view, in the sense that it contains within it all of those
consequences of mechanism which represent a genuine contribution to
the progress of scientiﬁc research, while it does not contain those which
make no such contribution and which impede scientiﬁc research.
To see this, we ﬁrst note that, with regard to any given domain of
phenomena, the speciﬁc form of the assumption of the qualitative
inﬁnity of nature that has been suggested above does not contradict the
notion that these phenomena can be treated in terms of some ﬁnite set
of qualities and laws, and indeed, in terms of a number much smaller
than the number of items of empirical data that may be available. It is
evident that if this were not possible, then one of the most important
achievements of scientiﬁc theories would be lost, for they would no
longer permit the explanation and prediction of a large number of at
ﬁrst sight independent phenomena on the basis of relatively few gen-
eral qualities, properties, laws, principles, etc. The recognition of this
possibility and its practical exploitation in a wide range of ﬁelds was
indeed the basic contribution that the mechanistic philosophy brought
to science in the early phases of its development.
The Qualitative Inﬁnity of Nature
15

As we have seen, however, as long as we qualify our theories by
specifying the context, conditions, and degrees of approximation to
which they are valid, or at least by admitting that these limitations on
their validity must eventually be discovered, then the notion of the
qualitative inﬁnity of nature leads one to treat any given domain of
phenomena in exactly the same way as is done if one adopts a mech-
anistic point of view. It is only with regard to predictions in new
domains, in new contexts, and to new degrees of approximation that the
qualitative inﬁnity of nature dictates an additional measure of caution,
since it implies that eventually (but exactly where must be determined
only empirically) any limited number of qualities, properties, and laws
will prove to be inadequate. But, as we have seen, the very form of the
data themselves, as well as a logical analysis of their meaning, dictates
exactly the same measure of caution. We see, then, that none of the
really well-founded conclusions that can be obtained with the aid of the
assumption of a ﬁnite number of qualities in nature can possibly be lost
if we assume instead that the number of such qualities is inﬁnite, and at
the same time recognize the role of contexts, conditions, and degrees of
approximation.5 All that we can lose is the illusion that we have good
grounds for supposing that in principle we can, or eventually will be
able, to predict everything that exists in the universe in every context
and under all possible conditions.
Not only can nothing of real value for scientiﬁc work be lost if we
adopt the notion of the qualitative inﬁnity of nature in the speciﬁc
form that has been described here, but on the contrary, much can be
gained by doing this. For, ﬁrst of all, we can thereby free scientiﬁc
research from irrelevant restrictions which tend to result from (and
which have in fact so often actually resulted from) the supposition that a
particular set of general properties, qualities, and laws must be the cor-
rect ones to use in all possible contexts and conditions and to all pos-
sible degrees of approximation. Secondly, we are led to a concept of the
nature of things which is in complete accord with the most basic and
essential characteristic of the scientiﬁc method; i.e. the requirement of
continual probing, criticizing and testing of every feature of every the-
ory, no matter how fundamental that theory may seem to be. For this
view explains the necessity for doing scientiﬁc research in just this way
and in no other way, since, if there is no end to the qualities in nature,
there can be no end to our need to probe and test all features of all of its
laws. Finally, as we shall show throughout the rest of this chapter, the
assumption of the qualitative inﬁnity of nature leads to a much more
satisfactory solution of a number of important problems, both scientiﬁc
16
Universal Orders

and philosophical, than is possible within the framework of a mechanist
philosophy; and this in turn gives further evidence that it is a better
point of view for the guidance of scientiﬁc research.
In conclusion, then, the notion of the qualitative inﬁnity of nature
permits us to retain all the positive achievements that were made pos-
sible by the development of mechanism. In addition, it enables us to go
beyond mechanism by showing the limitations of the latter philosophy
and by pointing towards new directions in which our concepts and
theories may undergo further development. Naturally, we do not wish to
propose here that the qualitative inﬁnity of nature is a ﬁnal doctrine,
beyond which no further steps can ever be made. Indeed, as science
progresses, it seems very likely that the qualitative inﬁnity of nature
will eventually be found to ﬁt into some still more general point of
view, which in turn retains its positive achievements, and which goes
beyond them, much as the notion of the qualitative inﬁnity of nature
goes beyond mechanism. But, in this chapter, our purpose is merely to
call attention to the many factors that suggest the need for this import-
ant step carrying us outside the limits of a mechanistic philosophy, and
to show the numerous advantages that come from taking this step.
5
MORE DETAILED EXPOSITION OF THE MEANING OF
QUALITATIVE INFINITY OF NATURE
In this section we shall bring out in more detail what is the general view
of the world implied by the notion of the qualitative inﬁnity of nature,
and we shall show how this view agrees with the actual results of
research that have been obtained thus far in the ﬁeld of physics.
In order to make possible a discussion in relatively concrete terms
we shall begin by considering a speciﬁc example: viz., the atomic theory
of matter. Now, as is well known, the earliest forms of the atomic theory
were based on the assumption that the fundamental qualities and prop-
erties deﬁning the modes of being of the atoms were limited in number.
On the other hand, deeper studies of the atom have disclosed more and
more details of a moving substructure, which has within it a richness of
properties and qualities that has never yet shown the slightest sign of
being exhausted or of approaching exhaustion. Thus, there was found in
the atoms a structure of electrons moving around a central nucleus
consisting of neutrons and protons which themselves took part in fur-
ther characteristic kinds of motions of their own. Within all of these
motions appeared quantum-mechanical ﬂuctuations of various kinds.
Then came the discovery of a structure for the electrons and protons
The Qualitative Inﬁnity of Nature
17

involving in some as yet poorly understood way the motions of unstable
particles such as mesons and hyperons. Still later came the realization
that because these latter particles can be “created,” “destroyed,” and
transformed into each other, they too are very likely to have a further
structure that is related to the motions of some still deeper-lying kinds
of entities the nature of which is not yet known.
An essential characteristic of the rich and highly interconnected
substructure of moving matter described above is that not only do the
quantitative properties in it continually change but that the basic qual-
ities that deﬁne its mode of being can also undergo fundamental trans-
formations when conditions alter sufﬁciently. Thus, in electrical dis-
charges, atoms can be excited and ionized, in which case they obtain
many new physical and chemical properties. Under bombardment with
very high-energy particles, the nuclei of the various chemical elements
can be excited and transformed into new kinds of nuclei, with even
more radical changes in their physical and chemical properties. More-
over, in nuclear processes, neutrons can be transformed into protons,
either by the emission of neutrinos or of mesons; and of course, as we
have seen, mesons are unstable, so that their very mode of existence
implies the necessity for their transforming into basically different
kinds of particles. Thus, further research into the structure of matter has
not only shown what is, as far as we have been able to tell, an unlimited
variety of qualities, processes, and relationships, but it has also demon-
strated that all of these things are subject to fundamental transform-
ations that depend on conditions.
Thus far, we have tended to emphasize the inexhaustible depth in
the properties and qualities of matter. In other words, we have con-
sidered how experiments have shown the existence of level within level
of smaller and smaller kinds of entities, each of which helps to consti-
tute the substructure of the entities above it in size, and each of which
helps to explain, at least approximately, by means of its motions how
and why the qualities of the entities above it are what they are under
certain conditions, as well as how and why they can change in funda-
mental ways when conditions change. But now we must take into
account the fact that the basic qualities and properties of each kind of
entity depend not only on their substructures but also on what is hap-
pening in their general background. In physics, research thus far has not
tended to stress this feature of the laws of nature as much as it has
emphasized the substructure. Nevertheless, the various ﬁelds (e.g., elec-
tromagnetic, gravitational, mesonic, etc.) that have been introduced into
the conceptual structure of physics represent to some extent an explicit
18
Universal Orders

recognition of the importance of the background. For, as we have seen,
these ﬁelds (whose mode of existence requires that they be deﬁned
over broad regions of space) enter into the deﬁnition of the basic char-
acteristics of all the fundamental particles of current physics.
Moreover, when such ﬁelds are highly excited, they too can give
rise to qualitative transformations in the particles, while, vice versa, the
particles have an important inﬂuence on the character of the ﬁelds.
Indeed, previous discussion6 of the quantum theory shows that ﬁelds
and particles are closely linked in an even deeper way, in the sense that
both are probably opposite sides of some still more general type of
entity, the detailed character of which remains to be discovered.7 Thus,
the next step in physics may well show the inadequacy of the simple
procedure of just going through level after level of smaller and smaller
particles, connected perhaps by ﬁelds which interact with these par-
ticles. Instead, we may ﬁnd that the background enters in a very fun-
damental way even into the deﬁnition of the conditions for the exist-
ence of the new kinds of basic entities to which we will eventually
come, whatever they may turn out to be. Thus, we may be led to a
theory in which appears a much closer integration of substructure and
background into a well-knit whole than is characteristic of current
theories.
We see from the above discussion that the qualitative inﬁnity of
nature is not equivalent to the idea expressed by the well-known rhyme:
“Great ﬂeas have little ﬂeas
Upon their backs to bite ’em;
Little ﬂeas have lesser ﬂeas,
And so ad inﬁnitum.”
For, ﬁrstly, we are not supposing that the same pattern of things is
necessarily repeated at all levels; and secondly, we are not even suppos-
ing that the general pattern of levels that has been so widely found in
nature thus far must necessarily continue without limit. While we can-
not decide this question from what is known at present, we have already
suggested reasons why we may perhaps now be approaching a point at
which the notion of levels will, at the very least, have to be enriched a
great deal by the explicit inclusion of the effects of a background that is
essential for the very existence of the entities in terms of which our
theories are to be formulated. Moreover, it is evidently quite possible
that as we penetrate further still, we will ﬁnd that the character of the
organization of things into levels will change so fundamentally that
The Qualitative Inﬁnity of Nature
19

even the pattern of levels itself will eventually fade out and be replaced
by something quite different. Hence, while the qualitative inﬁnity of
nature is consistent with an inﬁnity of levels, it does not necessarily
imply such an inﬁnity. And, more generally, this notion does not
require a priori the continuation of any special feature of the general
pattern of things that has been found thus far, nor does it exclude a
priori the possibility that any such feature may continue to be
encountered, perhaps in new contexts and in new forms, no matter how
far we may go. Such questions are left to be settled entirely by the
results of future scientiﬁc research.
There is, however, one general statement that can be made at this
point about the inexhaustible diversity of things that may exist in the
universe; namely, that they must have some degree of autonomy and
stability in their modes of being. Now, thus far, we have always found
that such autonomy exists.8 Indeed, if it did not exist, then we would not
be able to apply the concept of a “thing” and there would then be no way
even to formulate any laws of nature. For how can there be an object,
entity, process, quality, property, system, level, or whatever other thing
one cares to mention, unless such a thing has some degree of stability
and autonomy in its mode of existence, which enables it to preserve its
own identity for some time, and which enables it to be deﬁned at least
well enough to permit it to be distinguished from other things? If such
relatively and approximately autonomous things did not exist, then laws
would lose their essential signiﬁcance . . .
In conclusion, then, actual scientiﬁc research has thus far shown
the need to analyse nature in terms of a series of concepts that involve
the recognition of the existence of more and more kinds of things; and
the development of such new concepts has never yet shown any signs of
coming to an end. Up to the present, the various kinds of things existing
in nature have, at least as far as investigations in the ﬁeld of physics are
concerned, been found to be organized into levels. Each level enters into
the substructure of the higher levels, while, vice versa, its characteristics
depend on general conditions in a background determined in part in
other levels both higher and lower, and in part in the same level. It is
quite possible, of course, that further studies will disclose a still more
general pattern of organization of things. In any case, it is clear that the
results of scientiﬁc research to date strongly support the notion that
nature is inexhaustible in the qualities and properties that it can have or
develop. If the laws of nature are to be expressible in any kind of terms
at all, however, it is necessary that the things into which it can be
analysed shall have at least some degree of approximate and relative
20
Universal Orders

autonomy in their modes of being, which is maintained over some
range of variation of the conditions in which they exist.
6
CHANCE AND NECESSARY CAUSAL
INTERCONNECTIONS
With the aid of the general world view described in Section 5, we shall
now proceed to show that the hypothesis of the qualitative inﬁnity of
nature provides a framework within which can ﬁt quite naturally the
concept of chance and necessary causal interconnections as two sides of
every real natural process.
First of all, we point out that if there are an unlimited number of
kinds of things in nature, no system of purely determinate law can ever
attain a perfect validity. For every such system works only with a ﬁnite
number of kinds of things, and thus necessarily leaves out of account an
inﬁnity of factors, both in the substructure of the basic entities entering
into the system of law in question and in the general environment in
which these entities exist. And since these factors possess some degree
of autonomy, one may conclude9 that the things that are left out of any
such system of theory are in general undergoing some kind of a random
ﬂuctuation. Hence, the determinations of any purely causal theory are
always subject to random disturbances, arising from chance ﬂuctuations
in entities, existing outside the context treated by the theory in question.
It thus becomes clear why chance is an essential aspect of any real
process and why any particular set of causal laws will provide only a
partial and one-sided treatment of this process, which has to be cor-
rected by taking chance into account.
Of course, it should not be supposed that every inadequacy or
breakdown of causal laws must necessarily be due to the effects of
chance ﬂuctuations. Indeed, as happened in connection with the experi-
ments leading to the theory of relativity (Michelson–Morley experi-
ment, etc.), the failure of a given set of causal laws may represent just a
simple and reproducible deviation between the predictions of these
laws and the experimental results. A deviation of this kind implies only
that the causal laws in question must be replaced by newer, more
extensive, and more accurate causal laws (as indeed happened with
Newtonian mechanics, which was replaced by the more general and
more nearly correct relativistic mechanics). Quite often, however,
experiments have disclosed not just simple and reproducible deviations
from the predictions of a certain set of causal laws, but rather a break-
down of the entire scheme by which a speciﬁed set of properties are
The Qualitative Inﬁnity of Nature
21

found to be related in a unique and necessary way in terms of a set of
causal laws of a given general kind. Such a breakdown manifests itself
in the appearance of chance ﬂuctuations, not coming from anything in
the context under investigation, but coming rather from qualitatively
different kinds of factors existing in contexts that are new relative to the
one under consideration.10 In such a case, the original causal law is seen
to be valid only to the extent that the chance ﬂuctuations in question
cancel out, while in any given application the law will have a certain
characteristic minimum range of error. This range of error is an object-
ive property of the law in question, a property that is determined by the
magnitudes of the chance ﬂuctuations arising outside the context under
investigation.
Vice versa, however, the characteristic limitation on the domain of
validity of any given causal law which results from the neglect of the
effects of chance ﬂuctuations is balanced by a corresponding limitation
on the domain of validity of any given law of chance, which results from
the neglect of systematic causal interconnections between different con-
texts. In many cases (e.g. throws of a die) these interconnections are so
unimportant that they have never yet been signiﬁcant in any real appli-
cations. Nevertheless, this need not always be so. Consider, for example,
the case of insurance statistics. Here, one is able to make approximate
predictions concerning the mean lifetime of an individual in a given
group (e.g. one of deﬁnite age, height, weight, etc.) without the need to
go into a detailed investigation of the multitudes of complex factors that
contribute to the life or death of each individual in this group. This is
possible only because the factors responsible for the death of any indi-
vidual are extremely manifold and diverse, and because they tend to
work more or less independently in such a way as to lead to regular
statistical laws. But the assumptions underlying the use of these stat-
istical laws are not always true. Thus, in the case of an epidemic or a war,
the systematic interconnection between the cause of death of different
individuals grows so strong that statistical predictions of any kind
become practically impossible. To apply the laws of chance uncritically,
by ignoring the possibility of corrections due to causal interconnections
that may be unimportant in some conditions but crucially important in
others, is therefore just as capable of leading to erroneous results as is
the uncritical application of causal laws, in which one ignores the cor-
rections that may be due to the effects of chance ﬂuctuations . . .
Neither causal laws nor laws of chance can ever be perfectly correct,
because each inevitably leaves out some aspect of what is happening in
broader contexts. Under certain conditions, one of these kinds of laws or
22
Universal Orders

the other may be a better representation of the effects of the factors that
are dominant and may therefore be the better approximation for these
particular conditions. Nevertheless, with sufﬁcient changes of condi-
tions, either type of law may eventually cease to represent even what is
essential in a given context and may have to be replaced by the other.
Thus, we are led to regard these two kinds of laws as effectively furnish-
ing different views of any given natural process, such that at times we
may need one view or the other to catch what is essential, while at still
other times, we may have to combine both views in an appropriate way.
But we do not assume, as is generally done in a mechanistic philosophy,
that the whole of nature can eventually be treated completely perfectly
and unconditionally in terms of just one of these sides, so that the other
will be seen to be inessential, a mere shadow, that makes no funda-
mental contribution to our representation of nature as a whole. Thus,
the notion of the qualitative inﬁnity of nature leads us to the necessity
of considering the laws of nature both from the side of causality and
from that of chance, as well as more generally from new directions that
may go beyond these two limits.
7
RECIPROCAL RELATIONSHIPS AND THE
APPROXIMATE AND RELATIVE CHARACTER OF
THE AUTONOMY OF THE MODES OF BEING OF
THINGS
The qualitative inﬁnity of nature has an important bearing on the prob-
lem of the reciprocal relationships between things, and on the question
of the extent to which the modes of being of different things have an
approximate autonomy.
First of all, we note that the universal interconnection of things has
long been so evident from empirical evidence that one can no longer
even question it. However, in a mechanistic point of view, it is assumed
that this interconnection can ultimately be reduced to nothing more
than interaction between the fundamental entities which compose the
system. By this we mean that in the mutual action of these entities on
each other, there can only be quantitative changes in their properties,
while fundamental qualitative changes in their modes of being cannot
take place, provided that these entities are really the basic ones out of
which the system is composed. Thus, in Newton’s laws of motion there
is equality of action and reaction of the elementary particles on each
other, but this action and reaction is not supposed to affect the proper-
ties of the particles in a fundamental way.
The Qualitative Inﬁnity of Nature
23

On the other hand, in terms of the notion of the qualitative inﬁnity
of nature, one is led, as we have seen in previous sections, to the conclu-
sion that every entity, however fundamental it may seem, is dependent
for its existence on the maintenance of appropriate conditions in its
inﬁnite background and substructure. The conditions in the back-
ground and substructure, however, must themselves evidently be
affected by their mutual interconnections with the entities under con-
sideration. Indeed, as we have shown in many examples, this intercon-
nection can, under appropriate conditions, grow so strong that it brings
about qualitative changes in the modes of being of every kind of entity
known thus far.11 This type of interconnection we shall denote by the
name of reciprocal relationship, to distinguish it from mere interaction.
The question now follows quite naturally, “If everything is in this
very fundamental kind of reciprocal relationship with everything else, a
relationship in which even the basic qualities and modes of being can be
transformed, then how can we disentangle these relationships in such a
way as to obtain an intelligible treatment of the laws governing the
universe, or any part of it?” The answer is that all effects of reciprocal
connections are not in general of equal importance. Of course we have
the well-known fact that within suitable contexts many of the reciprocal
connections produce no signiﬁcant effects, so that they can be ignored.
On the other hand, if we consider a signiﬁcant reciprocal connection
between two things, then we must in general take both directions of this
connection into account. If both directions are of comparable import-
ance, then we will still ﬁnd it very difﬁcult to disentangle the real
relationships between things, because one thing affects the basic qual-
ities and laws determining the mode of being of the other; and this
effect is returned in a complex process.
Experience in a wide range of ﬁelds of science shows, however, that
both directions of a reciprocal connection do not always have to have
comparable signiﬁcance. When they do not have equal signiﬁcance,
the problem is evidently simpliﬁed because the thing which has the
major effect on the other is the dominant and controlling factor in the
relationship. In this case we can study the laws and modes of being of
the factors of major importance to a good degree of approximation,
independently of the effects which may originate in the minor factor. A
fundamental problem in scientiﬁc research is then to ﬁnd what are the
things12 that in a given context, and in a given set of conditions, are able
to inﬂuence other things without themselves being signiﬁcantly
changed in their basic qualities, properties, and laws. These are, then,
the things that are, within the domain under consideration, autonomous
24
Universal Orders

in their essential characteristics to an adequate degree of approxima-
tion. When we have found such things, then we can make use of them
for the prediction and control of the other things whose modes of being
and basic characteristics are dependent on them. For example, in the
case of the relationship between the large-scale level and the atomic
level, we ﬁnd that under conditions that are usually met and in most of
the contexts that have thus far been treated in research in physics, the
effect of the atomic motions on the laws of the large-scale level is much
more important than the effects of the large-scale level on the laws of
the atomic motions. Thus, it becomes possible by studying the laws of
the atomic motions to make many kinds of approximate predictions
concerning the laws and properties of things at the large-scale level and
in this way to improve our understanding and control of the large-scale
level.
On the other hand, our prediction of the properties of the large-scale
level through those of the atomic level can never be perfect, if only
because there is a small but nevertheless real reciprocal inﬂuence of the
large-scale level on the laws of the atomic level. This is due to the
electronic and nucleonic substructure of the atom, which can be signiﬁ-
cantly affected by suitable conditions at the large-scale level (e.g. very
high temperatures). Moreover, as we saw, the same possibility can arise
with regard to the substructure of every entity that is known in physics
(e.g. electrons, protons, mesons, etc.), provided that the conditions at the
large-scale level are changed appropriately. As a result, we are led to the
conclusion that in its reciprocal connections with the things existing in
any given lower level, the entities at the macroscopic level must have at
least some relative autonomy in their modes of being, in the sense that
these modes cannot be predicted perfectly from the speciﬁc lower level
(or levels) in question. Even though the effects of this autonomy may be
negligible in a wide range of conditions and contexts, it may neverthe-
less become very important in other conditions and contexts.
We see, then, that the existence of reciprocal relationships of things
implies that each “thing” existing in nature makes some contribution to
what the universe as a whole is, a contribution that cannot be reduced
completely, perfectly, and unconditionally, to the effects of any speciﬁc
set or sets of other things with which it is in reciprocal interconnection.
And, vice versa, this also means evidently that no given thing can have a
complete autonomy in its mode of being, since its basic characteristics
must depend on its relationships with other things. The notion of a
thing is thus seen to be an abstraction, in which it is conceptually separ-
ated from its inﬁnite background and substructure. Actually, however, a
The Qualitative Inﬁnity of Nature
25

thing does not and could not exist apart from the context from which it
has thus been conceptually abstracted. And therefore the world is not
made by putting together the various “things” in it, but, rather, these
things are only approximately what we ﬁnd on analysis in certain con-
texts and under suitable conditions.
To sum up, then, the notion of the inﬁnity of nature leads us to
regard each thing that is found in nature as some kind of abstraction
and approximation. It is clear that we must utilize such abstractions and
approximations if only because we cannot hope to deal directly with the
qualitative and quantitative inﬁnity of the universe. The task of science
is, then, to ﬁnd the right kind of things that should be abstracted from
the world for the correct treatment of problems in various contexts and
sets of conditions. The proof that any particular kinds of things are the
right ones for a given context is then obtained by showing that they
provide us with a good approximation to the essential features of reality
in the context of interest. In other words, we require that theories for-
mulated in terms of these abstractions lead to correct predictions, and to
the control of natural processes in accordance with the plans that are
made on the basis of these theories. When this does not happen, we
must, of course, revise our abstractions until success is obtained in these
efforts. Scientiﬁc research thus brings us through an unending series of
such revisions in which we are led to conceptual abstractions of things
that are relatively autonomous in progressively higher degrees of
approximation, wider contexts, and broader sets of conditions.
8
THE PROCESS OF BECOMING
Thus far, we have been discussing the properties and qualities of things
mainly in so far as they may be abstracted from the processes in which
these things are always changing their properties and qualities and
becoming other things. We shall now consider in more detail the charac-
teristics of these processes which may be denoted by the general term of
“motion.” By “motion” we mean to include not only displacements of
bodies through space, but also all possible changes and transformations
of matter, internal and external, qualitative and quantitative, etc.
Both the existence and the necessity for the process of motion
described above have now been demonstrated in innumerable ways in
all the sciences. Thus, the study of astronomy shows that the planets,
stars, nebulae, and galaxies all take part in a very large number of kinds
of characteristic motions. These motions follow from the effects of the
gravitational forces which would start bodies moving even if they were
26
Universal Orders

initially at rest, and because of the inertia, which keeps them in motion.
And as a result of these motions, over periods of time of the order of
billions of years, new stars, new planets, new nebulae, new galaxies, new
galaxies of galaxies, etc., can come into existence, while the older organ-
ization of things passes out of existence. On the earth, the science of
geology has shown that the apparently permanent features of the sur-
face are always changing. Thus, as a result of the ﬂow of water and the
action of wind, existing rocks and mountains, and even continents, are
continually being worn away while subterranean motions are continu-
ally leading to the formation of new ones.
The science of biology shows that life is a continual process of
inexhaustible complexity in which various kinds of organisms come
into being, live, and die. Indeed, every organism is maintained in exist-
ence by characteristic metabolic processes taking place within it, as well
as by the motions necessary for it to obtain food and other materials
from its environment. Over longer time, as a result of the effects of
natural selection and other factors, the forms of life have had to evolve;
and in this process, new species of organisms have come into existence
while old species have died out. Over still longer periods of time, life
itself has come into existence out of a basis of inanimate matter, very
probably as a result of motions at the inorganic level of the kind sug-
gested by Opharin;13 and as conditions change it may later have to pass
out of existence, perhaps to give way to something new, of which we can
at present have no idea.
In chemistry, one sees that as a result of thermal agitation of the
molecules and other causes, different chemical compounds must react
to produce new kinds of compounds, while already existing kinds of
compounds must be dissociated into simpler compounds. In physics we
ﬁnd, at the atomic level and below, a universal and ceaseless motion
which follows as a necessary consequence of the laws appropriate to
these levels, and which is discovered to be more violent the deeper we
penetrate into it. Thus, we have atomic motions, electronic and nucle-
onic motions, ﬁeld motions, quantum ﬂuctuations, probable ﬂuctuations
in a sub-quantum mechanical level, etc. Moreover, as happens at the
higher levels, not only do the quantitative properties of things change in
these motions (e.g., position, velocity, etc., of the various particles, the
strength of the various ﬁelds, etc.), but so also do the basic qualities
deﬁning the modes of being of the entities, such as molecules, atoms,
nucleons, mesons, etc., with which we deal in this theory.
In sum, then, no feature of anything has as yet been found which
does not undergo necessary and characteristic motions. In other words,
The Qualitative Inﬁnity of Nature
27

such motions are not inessential disturbances superimposed from out-
side on an otherwise statically existing kind of matter. Rather, they are
inherent and indispensable to what matter is, so that it would in general
not even make sense to discuss matter apart from the motions which are
necessary to deﬁne its mode of existence.
Now, the various motions taking place in matter have the further
very important characteristic that, in general, they are not and cannot be
smoothly co-ordinated to produce simple and regular results. Rather,
they are often quite complex and poorly co-ordinated and contain
within them a great many relatively independent and contradictory
tendencies.
There are two general reasons why such contradictory tendencies
must develop; ﬁrst because there are always chance disturbances aris-
ing from essentially independent causes, and secondly, because the sys-
tematic processes that are necessary for the very existence of the things
under discussion are, as a rule, contradictory in some of their long-run
effects. We shall give here a few examples taken from the ﬁelds that
were discussed in the previous paragraph. Thus, in the ﬁeld of astron-
omy, we ﬁnd that partly as a result of chance disturbances from other
galaxies and partly as a result of the laws of motion under the gravita-
tional forces originating in the same galaxy, stars have a very complicated
and irregular distribution of velocities going in all sorts of directions,
etc., with the result that some systems of stars are being disrupted,
while new systems are formed. On the surface of the earth, storms,
earthquakes, etc., which are of chance origin relative to the life of a given
individual, may produce conditions in which this individual cannot con-
tinue to exist; while a similar result can be brought about by old age,
which follows from the effects of the very metabolic processes that are
necessary to maintain life.
Going on to the subject of physics, we see that both the effects of
chance ﬂuctuations and of the operation of systematic causal laws are
continually leading to complicated and violent ﬂuctuations in the various
levels, which are not at all well co-ordinated with each other, and which
quite often lead to contradictory tendencies in the motions. Indeed,
these contradictory tendencies not only follow necessarily from the laws
governing the motions, but must exist in order for many things to pos-
sess characteristic properties which help deﬁne what they are. For
example, a gas would not have its typical properties if all the molecules
had a strong tendency to move together in a co-ordinated way. More
generally, the relative autonomy in the modes of being of different
things implies a certain independence of these things, and this in turn
28
Universal Orders

implies that contradictions between these things can arise. For if things
were co-ordinated in such a way that they could not come into contra-
diction with each other, they could not be really independent.
We conclude, then, that opposing and contradictory motions are the
rule throughout the universe, and this is an essential aspect of the very
mode of things.
Now it may be asked how it is possible for any kind of quality,
property, entity, level, domain, etc., to have even an approximately
autonomous existence, in the face of the fact that an inﬁnity of rela-
tively independent kinds of motions with contradictory tendencies are
taking place in its environment and in its substructure. The answer is
that the existence of any particular quality, property, entity, level,
domain, etc., is made possible by a balancing of the processes that are
tending to change it in various directions. Thus, in the simple case of a
liquid, we have a balancing of the effects of the inter-molecular forces
tending to hold the molecules together, and the random thermal
motions tending to disrupt the entire system. In a galaxy, we have a
balancing of the gravitational forces against the centrifugal tendencies
due to rotation and the disruptive effects of the random components of
the motions of stars. In atoms we have a similar balancing of the attract-
ive forces of the nucleus against the disruptive effects due to quantum
ﬂuctuations in the electronic motions and the centrifugal tendencies due
to rotations of the electrons around the nucleus. With living beings, we
have a much more subtle and complex system of balancing processes.
The full analysis of this process naturally cannot yet be made. But
already we can see that the two essential directions of processes in living
beings are those leading to growth and those leading to decay. If the
growth processes go unchecked, then a typical possible result is the
development of a cancer, which eventually destroys the organism. On
the other hand, if the opposite processes go unchecked, then the organs
will atrophy and wither away, and the organism will again eventually be
destroyed. The maintenance of life then requires an approximate bal-
ancing of the destruction and decay of tissue by fresh growth.
Now it is clear that if qualities, properties, entities, domains, levels,
etc., are maintained in existence by a balance of the processes tending to
change them, then this balance can, in general, be only an approximate
and conditional one. As a result, any given thing is subject to being
changed with changing conditions, both by changes of conditions that
are produced externally and by changes that may be necessary con-
sequences of internal motions connected with the very mode of being
of the thing in question. To illustrate this point, let us return to the
The Qualitative Inﬁnity of Nature
29

problem of a liquid. As long as the temperature, pressure, etc., of the liquid
are held constant, the balance of molecular processes that maintains the
liquid state will be continued. But to think of an isolated specimen of a
liquid is evidently an abstraction. Any real liquid exists in some kind of
environment, which cannot fail to change with enough time. Thus, if the
container is on the earth, it will be subject to changes of temperature, to
storms and earthquakes that may destroy any temperature-stabilizing
mechanism surrounding it, and over longer periods of time to geological
processes that may have similar effects. Thus, it can safely be predicted
that if, for example, we consider a period of a hundred million years, no
particular specimen of a liquid will remain a liquid throughout the whole
of this time. Analysing this problem further, we see that, as we consider
broader contexts and longer periods of time, there will be more and more
opportunities for conditions to change in such a way that any particular
balance of processes is fundamentally altered. This is because it will be
able to come into reciprocal relationships with more and more relatively
autonomous entities, domains, systems, etc., the motions of which can
come to inﬂuence the processes in question.
Indeed, if we go to the extreme of considering supergalactic regions
of space and corresponding epochs of time, we see that there is a possi-
bility for such a broad range of changes of conditions that every kind of
entity, domain, system, or level will eventually be subject to funda-
mental changes, even to destruction or extinction, while new kinds of
entities, domains, and levels will come into existence in their place. For
example, there is currently under discussion a theory in which it is
assumed that some ﬁve billion years ago or more the parts of the
universe that are now visible to us were originally concentrated in a
comparatively small space having an extremely high temperature, and a
density so high that neither atoms nor nuclei, nor electrons, nor protons,
nor neutrons as we now know them could have existed. (Matter would
then have taken some other form about which we cannot have much
idea at the present.) This particular section of the universe is then
assumed to have exploded, and subsequently to have cooled down to
give rise ultimately to electrons, protons, neutrons, atoms, dust, clouds,
galaxies, stars, planets, etc., by means of a series of processes into which
we need not go further here. The recession of the stars, suggested by the
so-called red shift,14 would then be a residual effect of the velocities
imparted to matter in this explosion. Now, it is very important to
emphasize how speculative and provisional large parts of this theory
are.15 Nevertheless, for our purposes here, it is interesting in that it gives
an example of how widespread could be the effects of a breaking of the
30
Universal Orders

balance of opposing processes within the previously existing highly
dense state of matter; for the resulting explosion would have given rise
to everything that exists in the part of the universe that is now visible
to us.
In any case, whatever may have been the at present practically
unknown earlier phase of the process of evolution of this particular part
of the universe, there exists by now a considerable amount of evidence
suggesting that the galaxies, the stars, and the earth come from some
quite different previously existing state of things. With regard to what
happened on our planet after it came into existence, we have of course
much better evidence coming from traces left in the rocks, fossils, etc.
Then, coming to the consideration of the origin of life, we have the
hypothesis of Opharin, which gives at least the general outlines of how
living matter could have come into existence on the earth. Here we see
the importance of the incomplete co-ordination and contradictory char-
acter of the various kinds of processes that took place on the earth at the
time in question; for storms, ocean currents, air currents, etc., would
have led to a chance mixing of various organic compounds until at last a
substance appeared that began to reproduce itself at the expense of the
surrounding organic material. As a result, the contradictory character of
the motions at the inorganic level created the conditions in which a
whole new level could come into existence, the level of living matter.
And from here on, changes in the inanimate environment ceased to be
the only causes of development. For a fundamental property of life is
that the very processes that are necessary for its existence will change it.
Thus, in the case of the individual living being, the balance of growth
and decay is never perfect, so that in the earlier phases of its life, the
organism grows, then it reaches approximate balance at maturity, and
then the processes of decay begin to win out, leading to death. With
regard to the various species of living beings considered collectively,
these provide each other with a mutual environment, both through their
competition and through their co-operation. Thus as a result of the very
development of many kinds of living beings, the environment is
changed in such a way that the balance of the processes maintaining the
heredity of such species is altered, and the result is the well-known
evolution of the species.
In sum, then, we see that the very nature of the world is such that it
contains an enormous diversity of semi-autonomous and conﬂicting
motions, trends, and processes. Thus, if we consider any particular
thing, either the motions taking place externally to it or those taking
place internally and which are inherent aspects of its mode of being, will
The Qualitative Inﬁnity of Nature
31

eventually alter or destroy the balance of processes that is necessary to
maintain that thing in existence in its present form and with its present
characteristics. For this reason, any given thing or aspect of that thing
must necessarily be subjected to fundamental modiﬁcations and even-
tually to destruction or decay, to be replaced by new kinds of things.
In conclusion, the notion of the qualitative inﬁnity of nature leads
us to regard the eternal but ever-changing process of motion and devel-
opment described above as an inherent and essential aspect of what
matter is. In this process there is no limit to the new kinds of things that
can come into being, and no limit to the number of kinds of transform-
ations, both qualitative and quantitative, that can occur. This process, in
which exist inﬁnitely varied types of natural laws, is just the process of
becoming, ﬁrst described by Heraclitus several thousand years ago
(although, of course, by now we have a much more precise and accurate
idea of the nature of this process than the ancient Greeks could have
had).
9
ON THE ABSTRACT CHARACTER OF THE NOTION OF
DEFINITE AND UNVARYING MODES OF BEING
It is clear from the preceding section that the empirical evidence avail-
able thus far shows that nothing has yet been discovered which has a
mode of being that remains eternally deﬁned in any given way. Rather,
every element, however fundamental it may seem to be, has always been
found under suitable conditions to change even in its basic qualities,
and to become something else. Moreover, as we have also seen, the
notion of the qualitative inﬁnity of nature implies that every kind of
thing not only can change in this very fundamental way but that, given
enough time, conditions in its inﬁnite background and substructure
will alter so much that it must do so. Hence, the notion of something
with an exhaustively speciﬁable and unvarying mode of being can be
only an approximation and an abstraction from the inﬁnite complexity
of the changes taking place in the real process of becoming. Such an
approximation and abstraction will be applicable only for periods of
time short enough so that no signiﬁcant changes can take place in the
basic properties and qualities deﬁning the modes of being of the things
under consideration.
When we come to times that are long enough for the basic kinds of
things entering into any speciﬁc theory to undergo fundamental quali-
tative changes, then what breaks down is the assumption that we can
specify the modes of being of these things precisely and exhaustively in
32
Universal Orders

terms of the concepts that were applicable before this change took place.
Indeed, the very fact that a thing is able to undergo a qualitative change
is itself a property that is an essential part of the mode of being of the
thing, and yet a property that is not contained in the original concept of
it. For example, the fact that the liquid, water, turns into steam when
heated and ice when cooled, is a basic property of the liquid in question,
without which it could not be water as we know it. Nevertheless, the
original concept of water as nothing more than a liquid evidently does
not contain these possibilities, either explicitly or implicitly, as neces-
sary properties of this liquid. Hence, this concept does not give a precise
and exhaustive representation of all the properties of the liquid in
question.
Now the way one usually deals with this problem is to regard the
transformations between solid, liquid, and vapour that take place at
certain temperatures as part of the qualities deﬁning the mode of being
of a single broader category of substance; viz., water. But now the same
kind of problem arises again at a new level. For the laws governing the
transformations of these qualities are, in turn, being regarded as part of
an eternal and exhaustive speciﬁcation of the properties of the sub-
stance, water. On the other hand, in reality this law is applicable and has
meaning only under limited conditions. For example, it will no longer
have relevance at temperatures and denotes of matter so high that there
can be no such things as atoms, and therefore no such a substance as
water. Thus, we are led to include water as a special state of a still
broader category of things (e.g., systems of electrons, protons, neutrons,
etc.) and the laws governing the transformation of water into other
kinds of substances as a part of the mode of being of this still broader
category. But if all things eventually undergo qualitative transform-
ations, then the process described above will never end. Thus we con-
clude that the notion that all things can become other kinds of things
implies that a complete and eternally applicable deﬁnition of any given
thing is not possible in terms of any ﬁnite number of qualities and
properties.
If, however, we now start from the opposite side, viz., from the
notion of the qualitative inﬁnity of nature, we are then immediately
able to arrive at a type of deﬁnition of the mode of being of any given
kind of thing that does not contradict the possibility of its becoming
something else. For, as we have previously seen, the reciprocal relation-
ships between all things then imply that no given thing can be exactly
and in all respects the kind of thing that is deﬁned by any speciﬁed
conceptual abstraction. Instead, it is always something more than this
The Qualitative Inﬁnity of Nature
33

and, at least in some respects, something different. Hence, if the thing
becomes something else, no unresolvable contradiction is now necessar-
ily implied. For it is in any case never exactly represented by our original
concept of it. Logically speaking, what this point of view towards the
meaning of our conceptual abstractions does is, therefore, to create
room for the possibility of qualitative change, by leading us to recognize
that those aspects of things that have been ignored may, under suitable
conditions, cease to have negligible effects, and indeed may become so
important that they can bring about fundamental changes in the basic
properties of the things under consideration.
We may illustrate the above conclusions by returning to a more
detailed discussion of the transformations between steam, liquid water,
and ice. Thus, the macroscopic concept of a certain state of matter (e.g.,
gaseous, liquid, or solid) leaves out of account an enormous number of
kinds of factors that are not and cannot be deﬁned in the macroscopic
domain alone. Among these are the motions of the molecules constitut-
ing the ﬂuid quantum ﬂuctuations, ﬁeld ﬂuctuations, nuclear motions,
mesonic motions, motions in a possible sub-quantum mechanical level,
and so on. In short, we may say that the real ﬂuid is enormously richer in
qualities and properties than is our macroscopic concept of it. It is
richer, however, in just such a way that these additional characteristics
may, in a wide variety of applications, be ignored in the macroscopic
domain. Nevertheless, when we come to the problem of understanding
why transformations between gas, liquid, and solid are possible, we can
no longer completely ignore the additional properties of the real ﬂuid . . .
Not only is the notion of unvarying and exhaustively speciﬁable
modes of being of things an abstraction that fails for periods of time
that are too long (because of the possibility of fundamental qualitative
changes), but it also fails for times that are too short. This is because the
characteristic properties and qualities of a thing depend in an essential
way on processes that are taking place in the background and sub-
structure of the thing in question. Thus, for example, the properties of
an atom (e.g. spectral frequencies, chemical reactivity, etc.) arise and are
determined mainly in the process of motion of the electrons in the orbit,
which take a period of time of the order of 10−15 seconds. Over shorter
periods of time, however, the properties of an atom as a whole are so
poorly deﬁned that it is not even appropriate to consider them as such.
A better conception of what the atom is can then be obtained by regard-
ing it as a collection of electrons in motion around the nucleus. But as
we shorten the period of time still further, the same problem arises with
regard to electrons, protons, neutrons, mesons, etc. And if we go to a
34
Universal Orders

larger scale, the reader will readily see that a similar behaviour is
obtained (e.g., the existence of a living being is maintained by inner
metabolic and nervous processes that are fast in comparison with the
period in which it makes sense to deﬁne the basic characteristics of
such a being). Indeed, the notion of the qualitative inﬁnity of nature
implies that such behaviour is inevitable. For, as we saw in the previous
section, each kind of thing is maintained in existence by a balance of
opposing processes in its inﬁnite background and substructure, which
are tending to change it in different ways. Thus, the properties of such a
thing can be deﬁned only over periods of time long enough so that the
average of the effects of all these processes does not ﬂuctuate
signiﬁcantly.
It is clear, then, that all our concepts are, in a great many ways,
abstract representations of matter in the process of becoming. The
choice of such abstractions is, however, limited by the requirement that
they shall represent what is essential in a certain context to a suitable
degree of approximation and under appropriate conditions . . .
We conclude, then, that we must ﬁnally reach a stage in every
theory where we introduce the notion of something with unvarying and
exhaustively speciﬁable modes of being, if only because we cannot
possibly take into account all the inexhaustibly rich properties, qualities,
and relationships that exist in the process of becoming. At this point,
then, we are making an abstraction from the real process of becoming.
Whether the abstraction is adequate or not depends on whether or not
the speciﬁc phenomena that we are studying depend signiﬁcantly on
what we have left out. With the further progress of science, we are then
led through a series of such abstractions, which furnish ever better
representations of more and more aspects of matter in the concrete and
real process of becoming.
Now, when we refer to the process of becoming by the word “con-
crete,” we mean by this to call attention to the quality of being special,
peculiar, and unique that one always ﬁnds to be characteristic of real
things when one studies them in sufﬁcient detail. For example, if we
consider any concept (e.g. apples), then this concept contains nothing in
it that would permit us to distinguish one apple from another. We may
then indicate other qualities which make such a distinction possible (red
apples, hard apples, sweet apples, etc.). Evidently, no ﬁnite number of
such qualities can ever give a complete representation of any speciﬁc
example of a real apple. Of course, by going deeper (e.g., by giving the
physical and chemical state of each part of the apple) we could come
closer to our goal. But this process could never end. For even the modes
The Qualitative Inﬁnity of Nature
35

of being of the individual atoms, electrons, protons, etc., inside the apple
are in turn determined by an inﬁnity of complex processes in their
substructures and backgrounds. Thus, we see that because every kind of
thing is deﬁned only through an inexhaustible set of qualities each
having a certain degree of relative autonomy, such a thing can and
indeed must be unique; i.e., not completely identical with any other
thing in the universe, however similar the two things may be.16
Carrying the analysis further, we now note that because all of the
inﬁnity of factors determining what any given thing is are always
changing with time, no such a thing can even remain identical with itself
as time passes. In certain respects, this brings us to a deeper notion of
the process of becoming than we had before. For at each instant of time,
each thing has, when viewed from one side, an enormous (in fact inﬁn-
ite) number of aspects which are in common with those that it had a
short time ago. Indeed, if this were not so, it would not be a thing; i.e., it
would not preserve any kind of identity at all. On the other hand, when
viewed from another side, it has an equally enormous (in fact inﬁnite)
number of aspects that are not those that it had a short time ago. For
typical sorts of things with which we commonly deal, however, these
latter aspects are not essential in the normal contexts and conditions
with which we work. In new contexts (e.g., a sub-atomic or a super-
galactic time scale) or under new conditions (e.g., very high temperat-
ures), these aspects may, however, take on a crucial importance.
We are in this way led to the conclusion that the process of becom-
ing will necessarily have, at each moment, certain aspects that are con-
crete and unique. In other words, each thing in each moment of its
existence must have certain qualities which, in some respects, belong
uniquely to that thing and to that moment. The notion of unvarying and
exhaustively speciﬁable modes of being is then an abstraction obtained,
in general, by considering what is common to the same thing at differ-
ent moments, or to many similar things at the same moment. In doing
this, we evidently ignore the differences between these things, which
are just as essential a side of them as are their similarities. By abstract-
ing in more detail from these differences, we are then led to see newer
but subtler aspects in which these differences contain common or simi-
lar relationships that apply to all of these things. Thus, the uniqueness
of each thing at each instant of time is reﬂected in our abstract concepts
by the limitless richness and complexity of the concepts that one needs
to obtain a better and better abstract representation of matter in the
process of becoming, or, in other words, by the inexhaustibility of the
qualities that are to be found in nature.
36
Universal Orders

Notes
1
For example, in the usual interpretation of the quantum theory, the state of a system is subject, in
general, only to a statistical determination.
2
The ﬁeld concept, the concept of quantitative changes that lead to qualitative changes, the
concepts of chance and statistical law.
3
See Bohm, D., Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, University of Pennsylvania Press, Phila-
delphia (1957), Ch. 1, Sec. 10; Ch. 2, Sec. 15.
4
E.g., the “rest energy” of matter, the stability of atoms, etc.
5
It is by recognizing that a ﬁnite and generally limited number of qualities, properties and laws
may be adequate in given contexts, conditions, and degrees of approximation that we avoid the
procedure of simply falling back into an arbitrary multiplication of qualities that was character-
istic of the pre-mechanistic point of view, especially in the scholastic form of the Aristotelian
philosophy that was prevalent in the Middle Ages.
6
See Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, Chs 3 and 4.
7
This is suggested by the wave–particle duality in the general properties of matter, which implies,
as we have seen, that we may have to deal with some new kind of thing that can, under suitable
circumstances, act either like a localized particle or like an extended ﬁeld.
8
This autonomy may have many origins; e.g., the falling of the propagation of inﬂuences of one
thing on another with an increase of separation between them, the decay of such inﬂuence with
the passage of time, electrical screening, the existence of thresholds, such that inﬂuences which
are too weak to surpass these thresholds produce no signiﬁcant effects; the fact that individual
constituents of an object (such as atoms) are too small to have an appreciable effect on the object
as a whole, while collectively there is considerable independence of motions of the constituents
leading to the cancellation of chance ﬂuctuations. Many other such sources of autonomy exist, and
doubtless more will be discovered in the future.
9
See Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, Ch. 1, Sec. 8.
10
This is, for example, what happens to classical physics. For a particle such as an electron follows
the classical orbit only approximately, and in a more accurate treatment is found to undergo
random ﬂuctuations in its motions, arising outside the context of the classical level (see Bohm,
Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, Chs 3 and 4).
11
See ibid, Ch. 2, Sec. 13.
12
Let us recall that we are here using the word “thing” in a very general sense, so that it represents
anything (e.g., objects, entities, qualities, properties, systems, levels, etc.).
13
See Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, Ch. 1, Sec. 8.
14
The “red shift” of the spectral lines of stars has been interpreted as a Doppler shift due to a
recessional motion. If this interpretation is correct, then the stars are receding from each other
with a velocity that is more or less proportional to their distances. The most distant stars visible
would have speeds as high as 10,000 miles a second, and still more distant stars would presum-
ably have still higher velocities. However, there are many possible explanations for the same
phenomenon; e.g., perhaps the behaviour of light over long distances is slightly different from
that predicted by Maxwell’s equations, in such a way that the frequency of light diminishes as it
is transmitted through space.
15
In the actually published forms of this theory, it is assumed that the whole universe (and not just a
part of it) was originally concentrated into the small space referred to above. Even if we do not
make this additional assumption, the theory is already quite speculative. But this additional
assumption is based on Einstein’s theory of general relativity, which has been proved to a rather
low level of approximation only in weak gravitational ﬁelds for low concentrations of matter and
over limited regions of space. A gigantic extrapolation is then made to gravitational ﬁelds of
fantastic intensity, to unheard of concentrations of matter, and to a region of space that includes
nothing less than the whole universe. While this extrapolation cannot be proved to be wrong at
The Qualitative Inﬁnity of Nature
37

present, it is in any case an example of extreme mechanism. If we divest the theory of these
irrelevant and unfounded extrapolations, then the hypothesis is still, however, interesting to
consider.
16
According to the Pauli exclusion principle, any two electrons are said to be “identical.” This
conclusion follows from the fact that within the framework of the current quantum theory there
can be no property by which they could be distinguished. On the other hand, the conclusion that
they are completely identical in all respects follows only if we accept the assumption of the usual
interpretation of the quantum theory that the present general form of the theory will persist in
every domain that will ever be investigated. If we do not make this assumption, then it is
evidently always possible to suppose that distinctions between electrons can arise at deeper
levels.
38
Universal Orders

2
PHYSICS AND PERCEPTION (1967)
Here Bohm argues that discoveries in contemporary physics, particularly
those of Einstein, have striking correlates in the nature of human perception
as outlined by Piaget and others. Since the development of the special theory
of relativity, Newton’s formulations of space, time, and mass have come to be
understood not as absolutes, but rather as relatively invariant (stable) struc-
tures that depend for this stability upon the observer’s perspective and frame
of reference. Similarly, the work of Piaget suggests a process of perception
which at its root also depends on the discernment of relatively invariant
entities and processes.
Bohm explores at length Piaget’s thesis that the experiential world of the
infant is rooted in ﬂuid frames of reference that give shape and form to the
immensely complex totalities of the natural world. It is only through a cumu-
lative process of abstraction that the child, and consequently the adult, comes
to perceive this inherently ﬂuid, relative domain in terms of ﬁxed, solid
objects existing within ﬁxed structures of space and time. Ironically then, the
full-blown abstracting process of the adult yields a world more in line with the
absolutes of Newton, while the rudimentary perceptual processes of the infant
are more consistent with Einstein’s relativistic discoveries.
But underlying the ﬁxity of the adult’s highly abstract “world maps,” a
rich world of indeterminate perception is potentially available. In this context
Bohm continues his investigation of reciprocal movements, now in the form
of a “circular reﬂex” which Piaget claims to be the basis for all percep-
tual learning. This circular reﬂex is a feedback loop in which the incoming
Extract from the Appendix of D. Bohm, The Special Theory of Relativity, Routledge, London ([1965],
1996).
Physics and Perception
39

reception of sensory data is always complemented by active, outgoing
impulses. These outgoing impulses run continuous “tests” upon the sensory
data, accommodate new information, and form abstracted images of predict-
able (relatively invariant) structures and movements. As one loop, these
impulses are the basis for mapping a world and its contents into existence.
Bohm envisions a continuum of such two-way perceptual interaction that
extends to all knowledge structures. At the simplest level it is how a child
formulates the relative stability of body and objects. At the everyday level it is
how we negotiate yet more abstract processes, such as inserting a key into a
keyhole. At a further level of abstraction, it is how science progresses, as in the
case of shifting from a view of absolute space and time to one of relative
space and time.
The existence of this continuum – from rudimentary perception to highly
abstract constructions of thought – leads Bohm to the unorthodox conclusion
that at its root, science is not a process of accumulating knowledge of the
world. Rather it is one of extending this two-way circular reﬂex via the use of
sophisticated instruments and progressive degrees of abstraction. Thus,
knowledge is seen by Bohm as a secondary aspect of scientiﬁc endeavor, the
frozen by-product of a potentially open-ended perceptual movement.
Such a perspective raises questions about the efﬁcacy of the mental
maps we abstract from the raw data of the world, whether these maps be
scientiﬁcally “objective” or personally “subjective.” In many respects, much
of our accumulated knowledge has a very good ﬁt with the objective world, in
that it allows us to successfully navigate that world with a minimum of
mishaps. We do step out of the way of moving cars, and would suffer the
consequences if we did not. The two-way perceptual process and its resultant
knowledge is thus far from arbitrary. But based on this relatively successful
“mapping,” we tacitly assume that our maps are true replicas of the world – a
perfect match rather than a relatively good ﬁt.1 Once we make this assump-
tion, and our maps fuse with the territory, we all too easily develop a tacit
conservatism which diminishes the exploratory potential of the perceptual
act itself. But if we can be aware of this fusion and ascertain in what ways it
is correct and what ways it is not, we have taken a signiﬁcant step in restor-
ing the primacy of perception.
Whereas the reciprocal relations outlined in Chapter 1 primarily
describe the “external” world, the thread of this chapter goes a step further,
linking the “internal” process of perception to analogous processes in the
external world. In positing this linkage, Bohm is anticipating his later formu-
lation of soma-signiﬁcance (Chapter 5), in which mind and matter are
understood as reciprocal, evolving aspects of a more fundamental implicate
order.
40
Universal Orders

1
INTRODUCTION
In Einstein’s theory of relativity, the notions of space, time, mass, etc.,
are no longer regarded as representing absolutes, existing in themselves
as permanent substances or entities. Rather, the whole of physics is
conceived as dealing with the discovery of what is relatively invariant in
the ever-changing movements that are to be observed in the world, as
well as in the changes of points of view, frames of reference, different
perspectives, etc., that can be adopted in such observations. Of course,
the laws of Newton and Galileo had already incorporated a number of
relativistic notions of this kind (e.g., relativity of the centre of coordin-
ates, of the orientation, and speed of the frame of reference). But in
them the basic concepts of space, time, mass, etc., were still treated as
absolutes. Einstein’s contribution was to extend these relativistic
notions to encompass the laws, not only of mechanics, but also those of
electrodynamics and optics, in the special theory, and of gravitation in
the general theory. In doing this he was led to make the revolutionary
step to which we have referred, i.e., of ceasing to regard the properties of
space, time, mass, etc., as absolutes, instead treating these as invariant
features of the relationships of observed sets of objects and events to
frames of reference. In different frames of reference the space coordin-
ates, time, mass, energy, etc., to be associated to speciﬁed objects and
events will be different . . .
At ﬁrst sight the point of view described above may seem to be very
different to that of “common sense” (as well as of the older Newtonian
physics). For are we not in the habit of regarding the world as consti-
tuted of more or less permanent objects, satisfying certain permanent
laws? That is to say, in everyday life we never talk about “invariant
relationships,” but rather we refer to tables, chairs, trees, buildings,
people, etc., each of which is more or less unconsciously conceived as
being a certain kind of object or entity, which, added to others, makes up
the world as we know it. We do not regard these objects or entities as
relative invariants which along with their properties, and the laws that
they satisfy, have been abstracted from the total ﬂux of change and
movement. There appears then to be a striking difference between the
way we conceive the world as observed in immediate experience (as well
as in the domain of classical nonrelativistic physics) and the way it is
conceived in relativity theory.
In this essay we shall show that the difference between the notions
of common experience and those of relativity theory arise mainly
because of certain habitual ideas concerning this experience, and that
there is now a great deal of new, but fairly well conﬁrmed, scientiﬁc
Physics and Perception
41

evidence suggesting that our actual mode of perception of the world
(seeing it, hearing it, touching it, etc.) is much closer in character and
general structure to what is suggested by relativistic physics than it is to
what is suggested by prerelativistic physics. In the light of this evidence
it would seem that nonrelativistic notions appear more natural to us
than relativistic notions, mainly because of our limited and inadequate
understanding of the domain of common experience, rather than
because of any inherent inevitability of our habitual mode of
apprehending this domain.
2
THE DEVELOPMENT OF OUR COMMON NOTIONS IN
INFANTS AND YOUNG CHILDREN
We shall begin with the fascinating studies of the development of intel-
ligence in infants and young children carried out by Piaget.2 On the
basis of long and careful observations of children of all ages from birth
up to 10 or more years, he was actually able to see the development of
our customary ideas of space, time, the permanent objects, the perman-
ent substance with the conserved total quantity, etc., and thus to trace
the process in which such notions are built up until they seem natural
and inevitable.
The very young infant does not behave as if he had the adult’s
concept of a world separate from himself, containing various more or
less permanent objects in it. Rather, Piaget gives good evidence suggest-
ing that the infant begins by experiencing an almost undifferentiated
totality. That is to say he has not yet learned to distinguish between
what arises inside of him and outside of him, nor to distinguish between
the various aspects of either the “outer” or the “inner” worlds. Instead
there is experienced only one world, in a state of continual ﬂux of sensa-
tions, perceptions, feelings, etc., with nothing recognizable as perman-
ent in it. However, the infant is endowed with certain inborn reﬂexes,
connected with food, movements, etc. These reﬂexes can develop so as to
selectively accommodate different aspects of the environment; and in
this way the environment begins effectively to be differentiated to the
extent of taking on certain “recognizable” features. But at this stage
recognition is largely functional (e.g., some objects are “for eating,” some
“for drinking,” some “for pulling” etc.), and there seems to be little or no
development of the adult’s ability to recognize an object by the shape,
form, structure, or other perceived characteristics.
At ﬁrst these reﬂexes and functions are carried out largely in the
satisfaction of primary needs, indicated by sensations, such as hunger,
42
Universal Orders

etc. In the next stage, however, there develops the so-called “circular
reﬂex,” which is crucial to the development of intelligence. In such a
reﬂex there is an outgoing impulse (e.g., leading to the movement of the
hand) followed, not mainly by the satisfaction of need, but rather by
some incoming sensory impulse (e.g., in the eye, ear, etc.). This may be
said to be a beginning of real perception. For the most elementary way
of coming into contact with something that is not just the immediate
satisfaction of a bodily need is by incorporating it into a process in
which a certain impulse toward action is accompanied by a certain
sensation.
This principle of the circular reﬂex is carried along in all further
developments. Thus, at a certain stage, the infant begins to take pleasure
in operating such reﬂexes, in order, as Piaget puts it, “to produce interest-
ing spectacles.” He ﬁnds, for example, that pulling a certain cord will
produce an interesting sensation of movement in front of him (e.g., if
the cord is attached to a colored object). It must not be supposed that he
understands the causal connection between the cord and the movement,
or even that he foresees the sensation of movement in his imagination
and then tries to realize it by some operation. Rather, he discovers that
by doing such an operation he gets a pleasant sensation that is recogniz-
able. In other words, recognition that a past event has been repeated
comes ﬁrst; the ability to call up this event in the memory comes only
much later. Thus, at this stage, he only knows that a certain operation
will lead to some recognizable experience that is pleasurable.
The ability to recognize something as similar to what was experi-
enced before is certainly a necessary prerequisite for beginning to see
something relatively permanent in the ﬂux of process that is very prob-
ably the major element in the infant’s early experiences. Another
important prerequisite for this is the coordination of many different
kinds of reﬂexes that are associated to a given object. Thus, at ﬁrst the
infant seems to have little or no realization that the object he sees is the
same as the object he hears. Rather, there seem to be fairly separate
reﬂexes, such as listening, looking with the eyes, etc. Later, however,
these reﬂexes begin to be coordinated, so that he is ﬁnally able to under-
stand that he sees what he hears, grasps what he sees, etc. This is an
important step in the growth of intelligence, for in it is already implicit
the notion that will ﬁnally develop – of a single object that is respon-
sible for all of our different kinds of experience with it.
The infant is, however, as yet far from the notion of a permanent
object, or of permanent causal relationships between such objects.
Rather, his behavior at this stage suggests that when presented with
Physics and Perception
43

something familiar he now abstracts certain vaguely recognizable total-
ities of sensation and response, involving the coordination of hand, eye,
ear, etc. Thus there is a kind of a germ of the notion of the invariant
here; for in the total ﬂux of experience he can now recognize certain
invariant combinations of features of the pattern. These combinations
are themselves experienced as totalities, so that the object is not recog-
nized outside of its customary context.
Later the infant begins to follow a moving object with his eyes,
being able to recognize the invariance of its form, etc., despite its
movement. He is thus beginning to build up the reﬂexes needed for
perceiving the continuity of existence of certain objects, apart from their
customary contexts. However, he still has no notion of anything per-
manent. Rather, he behaves as if he believed that an object comes into
existence where he ﬁrst sees it and passes out of existence where he last
sees it. Thus, if an object passes in front of him and disappears later
from his ﬁeld of view, he looks for it, not in the direction where he has
last seen it, but rather toward the place where he ﬁrst saw it, as if this
were regarded as the natural source of such objects. Thus, if an object
goes behind an obstacle, he does not seem to have any notion of looking
for it there. The realization that this can be done comes only later, after
the child has begun to work with what Piaget calls “groups of
operations.”
The most elementary of these is the “group of two.” That is, there
are operations such as turning something round and round, hiding it
behind an obstacle and bringing it back to view, shaking something
back and forth, etc., which have in common that there is an operation,
the result of which can be “undone” by a second operation, so that the
two operations following each other lead back to the original state of
affairs. It is only after he understands this possibility that the infant
begins to look for an object behind the obstacle where it vanished from
view. But his behavior suggests that he still does not have the idea of a
permanent object, existing even when he doesn’t see it. Rather, he prob-
ably feels that he can “undo” the vanishing of an object, by means of the
“operation” of putting his hand behind the obstacle and bringing forth
the object in question.
In this connection we must recall that the infant still sees no clear
and permanent demarcation between himself and the world, or between
the various objects in it. However, he is building up the reﬂexes and
operations needed to conceive this demarcation later. Thus, he is begin-
ning to develop the notion of causality, and the distinction of cause and
effect. At ﬁrst he seems to regard causality as if it were a kind of
44
Universal Orders

“sympathetic” magic. As long as the child views all aspects of his experi-
ence as a single totality, with no clear distinction of “within” and “with-
out,” there is nothing in his experience to deny the expectation of such
sympathetic magical causality. Later, however, he begins to see the need
for intermediate connections in causal relationships, and still later he is
able to recognize other people, animals, and even objects as the causes of
things that are happening in his ﬁeld of experiencing.
Meanwhile, the notions of space and time are being built up. Thus
as the child handles objects and moves his body he learns to coordinate
his changing visual experiences with the tactile perceptions and bodily
movements. At this stage, his notion of groups of movements is being
extended from the “group of two” to more general groups. Thus, he is
learning that he can go from one place A to another B by many different
paths, and that all these paths lead him to the same place (or alter-
natively that if he goes from A to B by any one path, he can “undo” this
and return to A by a large number of alternative paths). This may seem
to be self-evident to us, but for an infant living in a ﬂux of process it is
probably a gigantic discovery to ﬁnd out that in all of this movement
there are certain things that he can always return to in a wide variety of
ways. The notion of the reversible group of movements or operations
thus provides a foundation on which he will later erect that of perman-
ent places to which one can return, and permanent objects, which can
always be brought back to something familiar and recognizable by
means of suitable operations (e.g., rotations, displacements, etc.).
Meanwhile the child is gradually learning to call up images of the
past, in some approximation to the sequence in which it occurred, and
not merely to recognize something as familiar only after he sees it. Thus
begins true memory, and with it the basis for the notion of the distinc-
tion of past time and present time (and later future time, when the child
begins to form mental images of what he expects).
A really crucial step occurs when the child is able to form an image
of an absent object, as existing even when he is not actually perceiving
it. Just before he can do this he seems to deal with this problem as if he
regarded the absent object as something that he (or other people) can
produce or create with the aid of certain operations. But now he begins
to form a mental image of the world, containing both perceived and
unperceived things, each in its place. These objects, along with their
places, are now conceived as permanently existing, and in a set of
relationships corresponding perfectly to the groups of movements
and operations already known to him (e.g., the picture of a space in
which each point is connected to every other by many paths faithfully
Physics and Perception
45

represents the invariant feature of his experience with groups of oper-
ations, in which he was able to go from one point to another by many
routes).
At this stage it seems that the child begins to see clearly the distinc-
tion between himself and the rest of the world. Until now he could not
make such a distinction, because there was only one ﬁeld of experi-
encing what was actually present to his total set of perceptions. How-
ever, with his ability to create a mental image of the world, i.e., to
imagine it, he now conceives a set of places which are permanent, these
places being occupied by various permanent objects. But one of these
objects is himself. In his new mental “map” of the world he can main-
tain a permanent distinction between himself and other objects. Every-
thing on this map falls into two categories – what is “inside his skin”
and what is not. He learns to associate various feelings, pleasures, pains,
desires, etc., with what is “inside his skin,” and thus he forms the con-
cept of a “self,” distinct from the rest of the world, and yet having its
place in this world. He similarly attributes “selves” to the insides of
other people’s skins, as well as to animals. Each “self” is conceived as
both initiating causal actions in the world and suffering the effects of
causal actions originating outside of it. Eventually he learns to attribute
to inanimate objects a lower and more mechanical kind of “selfhood”
without feelings, aims, and desires, but still having a certain ability to
initiate causal actions, and to suffer the effects of causes originating
outside of it. In this way the general picture of a world in space (and
time), constituted of separate and permanent entities which can act on
each other causally, is formed.
The notions of an objective world and of a subject corresponding to
one of the objects in the world are, as we have seen, thus formed
together, in the same step. And this is evidently necessary, since the
mental image of the world that serves as a kind of conceptual “map”
requires the singling out of one of the objects on this “map” to represent
the place of the observer, in order that his special perspective on the
world at each moment can be taken into account. That is to say, just as
the relativistic “map,” in the form of the Minkowski diagram3 must
contain something in it to represent the place, time, orientation, velocity,
etc., of the observer, so the mental map that is created by each person
must have a corresponding representation of that person’s relationship
to the environment.
It must not be supposed, of course, that the child knows that he is
making a mental image or map of the world. Rather, as Piaget brings out
very well, young children often ﬁnd it difﬁcult to distinguish between
46
Universal Orders

what is imagined or remembered in thought and what is actually per-
ceived through their senses (e.g., they may think that other people are
able to see the objects that they are thinking about). Thus the child will
take this mental map as equivalent to reality. And this habit is intensi-
ﬁed with each new experience, because once the map is formed it enters
into and shapes all immediate perceptions, thus interpenetrating the
whole of experience and becoming inseparable from it. Indeed, it is well
known that how we see something depends on what we know about it.
(E.g., an extreme case is that of an ambiguous picture, subject to two
interpretations, one obvious and the other less so. Once a person is told
about the second interpretation, in many cases, he can no longer see the
picture in the original way.) Thus, over a period of years we learn to see
the world through a certain structure of ideas, with which we react
immediately to each new experience before we even have time to think.
In this way we come to believe that certain ways of conceiving and
perceiving the world cannot be otherwise, although in fact they were
discovered and built up by us when we were children, and have since
then become habits that may well be appropriate only in certain
domains of experience . . .
It will be relevant for our purposes here to discuss brieﬂy the devel-
opment of the child’s concept of the constancy of the number of objects,
and of the total quantity of matter in them, because these concepts have
evidently played a fundamental role in physics. As Piaget demonstrates,
a child who has recently begun to talk does not at ﬁrst have the notion
that a set of objects has a ﬁxed number, independent of how they are
moved and rearranged. Rather, he forms at each instant a general per-
ceptual estimate of whether a given collection seems to be more, or less,
or equal to another, and does not hesitate to say that two initially equal
collections are unequal, after they have been subject to some
rearrangements in space (even though the numbers of objects have
actually remained constant).
The results described above will be seen to be not surprising, if one
keeps in mind the fact that the child does not yet have the idea of the
conservation of the number of objects as they move and change their
relationships to each other and to the observer. Indeed, this notion is
developed only in a series of stages. First, the child learns to establish a
one-to-one correspondence between objects that are in simple relation-
ship, such as parallel rows. When he loses sight of this correspondence
(e.g., when the objects are rearranged and are no longer in rows) he
cannot yet think of them as having the same number. Later, as he learns
to put them into correspondence again, he forms an idea similar to that
Physics and Perception
47

of the “reversible group,” i.e., that certain sets of objects can be brought
back by suitable operations into their original state of one-to-one cor-
respondence. From here he forms a new concept or “mental map” of the
objects as having at all times a ﬁxed number, which faithfully portrays
the structure of his operations with such sets as capable of being put
back into correspondence. Then, gradually, he forgets the operations
that establish correspondence and thinks of the number of objects as a
ﬁxed property belonging to a given total set, even when these move and
rearrange.
The procedure of thinking of numbers as an inherent and perman-
ent property of a set becomes so habitual that the problem “What is
number?” is considered as being too obvious to require much discus-
sion. Yet when modern mathematicians came to study this question,
what they had to do was in effect to uncover the operational basis on
which each child originally develops his concept of number. We see
then that the deepest problems are often found in the study of what
seems obvious, because the “obvious” is frequently merely a notion that
summarizes the invariant features of a certain domain of experience
which has become habitual and the basis of which has dropped out of
consciousness. So to understand the obvious it is necessary very often to
go to a broader point of view, in which one brings to light the basic
operations, movements, and changes, within which certain character-
istics have been found to be invariant.
A very similar problem arises with regard to conservation of the
quantity of matter or substance. Thus, when a given quantity of liquid is
distributed into many containers of various shapes, the young child does
not hesitate to say that the total quantity of water has increased or
decreased, according to the impressions that the new distribution pro-
duces in his immediate perceptions. Later, when he sees the possibility
of bringing the water back into the original container, where it has the
same volume as it had originally, he is led to the idea of a constant
quantity of liquid. The necessity for this step in the development of the
child’s conceptions is evident. For a priori there is no reason to suppose
that the quantity of a given substance is conserved. This idea comes
forth only as a result of the need to understand certain kinds of experi-
ence. Then later, one forgets that such an idea had to be developed. It
becomes habitual, and eventually it seems inevitable to suppose that the
world is made of certain basic substances that are absolutely permanent
in their total quantities. Then, when we do not ﬁnd this absolute per-
manence in the level of common experience, we postulate it in the
atomic level or somewhere else.
48
Universal Orders

As in the case of numbers, some very deep problems arise here in
the effort to understand what seems obvious. Nothing seems more
obvious than the notion of a permanent quantity of substance. Yet, to
understand this idea more deeply, we must go on to a broader context,
in which such a notion need not apply. We can then see that such
conceptions arise when the child discovers a kind of relative invariance
under certain operations, e.g., of pouring the liquid back into the ori-
ginal container. So we ﬁnd that in the understanding of immediate
perception, one must do essentially what is done in the theory of relativ-
ity, i.e., to give up the concept of something that is absolutely permanent
and constant, to see the constancy of certain relationships or properties
in a broad domain of operations involved in observation, measurement,
etc., in which the conditions, context, and perspective are altered.
To sum up the work of Piaget, then, we recall that the infant begins
with some kind of totality of sensation, perception, feeling, etc., in a
state of ﬂux, in which there is little or no recognizable structure with
permanent characteristics. The development of intelligence then arises
in a series of operations, movements, etc., by which the child learns
about the world. In particular, what he learns is always based on his
ability to see invariant relationships in these operations and move-
ments, e.g., an invariant kind of correspondence between what he sees
and what he hears, etc., an invariant relationship between cause and
effect, an invariant form to an object as he follows it with his eye, an
invariant possibility of “undoing” certain changes by means of suitable
operations, etc. The perception of each kind of invariance is then fol-
lowed by the development of a corresponding mental image (and later a
structure of organized ideas and language) which functions as a kind of
“map” representing the invariance relationships correctly, in the sense
that it implies invariant features similar to those disclosed in the oper-
ations (e.g., the mental image of a space with permanent positions con-
nected by an inﬁnity of possible paths corresponds to the operational
experience of being able to reach the same place by many different
routes). Very soon immediate perception takes on the structure of these
“maps,” and, after this, one is no longer aware that the map only repre-
sents what has been found to be invariant. Rather, the map begins to
interpenetrate what is perceived in such a way that it seems to be an
inevitable and necessary feature of the whole of experience, so obvious
that it is very difﬁcult to question its basic features.
The work of Piaget indicates that in order to understand the process
of perception it is necessary to go beyond the habitual standpoint, in
which one more or less confuses the general structural features of our
Physics and Perception
49

mental “maps” with features of the world that cannot be otherwise,
under any conceivable circumstances. Rather, one is led to consider the
broader totality of our perceptive process as a kind of ﬂux, in which
certain relatively invariant features have emerged, to be represented by
such “maps,” in the sense that these faithfully portray the structure of
such features. But a similar step is involved in going from a nonrelativis-
tic point of view in physics to a relativistic point of view. For in doing
this we cease to regard our concepts of space, time, mass, etc., as repre-
senting absolutely permanent and necessary features of the world, and,
instead, we regard them as expressing the invariant relationships that
actually exist in certain domains of investigation.
3
THE ROLE OF THE INVARIANT IN PERCEPTION
The work of Piaget, discussed in the previous section, shows that the
development of intelligence seems to be based on the ability to realize
what is invariant in a given domain of operations, changes, movements,
etc., and to grasp these relationships by means of suitable mental
images, ideas, verbal expressions, mathematical symbolism, etc., imply-
ing a structure similar to that which is actually encountered. We shall
now cite some evidence coming from the direct study of the process of
perception, which strongly conﬁrms the implications of this point of
view, and considerably extends their domain of applicability.
There is a common notion of perception as a sort of passive process,
in which we simply allow sense impressions to come into us, there to be
assembled into whole structures, recorded in memory, etc. Actually,
however, the new studies make it clear that perception is, on the con-
trary, an active process, in which a person must do a great many things
in the course of which actions he helps to supply a certain general
structure to what he perceives. To be sure, this structure is objectively
correct, in the sense that it is similar to the structure of the kind of
things that are encountered in common experience. Yet the fact that a
great deal of what we see is ordered and organized in a form determined
by the functioning of our own bodies and nervous systems has very far
reaching implications for the study of new domains of experience,
whether in the ﬁeld of immediate perception itself or in science (which
generally depends on instrumentally aided perception, in order to reach
new domains).
One can see the active role of the observer most clearly by ﬁrst
considering tactile perception. Thus, if one tries to ﬁnd the shape of an
unseen object simply by feeling it, one must handle the object, turn it
50
Universal Orders

round, touch it in various ways, etc. (This problem has been studied in
detail by Gibson and his co-workers.4)
In such operations one seldom notices the individual sensations on
the ﬁngers, wrist joints, etc. Rather, one directly perceives the general
structure of the object, which emerges, somehow, out of a very complex
change in all the sensations. This perception of the structure depends on
two nervous currents of energy – not only the inward current of sensa-
tions to which we have referred above, but also an outward current
determining movements of the hand. For knowledge of this structure is
implicit in the relationship between the outward and the inward cur-
rents (e.g., in the response to certain movements of turning, pressing,
etc.).
It is evident, then, that tactile perception is evidently inherently the
result of a set of active operations, performed by the percipient. Never-
theless, the outgoing impulses leading to the movement of the hand and
the inﬂux of sensations are either not noticed or else they are only on the
fringe of awareness. What is perceived most strongly is actually the
structure of the object itself. It seems clear that out of a remarkably
complex and variable ﬂux of movement with their related sensual
responses, the brain is able to abstract a relatively invariant structure of
the object that is handled. This invariant structure is evidently not in the
individual operations and sensations but can be abstracted only out of
their totality over some period of time.
At ﬁrst one might think that in vision the situation is basically
different, and that one just passively “takes in” the picture of the world.
But more careful studies show that vision involves a similar active role
of the percipient, and that the structure of what one sees is abstracted
out of similar invariant relations between certain movements and the
changing sensations which are the eye’s response to these movements.
One of the most elementary movements that is necessary for vision
has been demonstrated by Ditchburn,5 who has discovered that the eye-
ball is continually undergoing small and very rapid vibrations, which
shift the image by a distance equal roughly to that between adjacent
cells on the retina of the eye. In addition, it has a slower regular drift,
followed by a “ﬂick” which brings the image more or less back to its
original center. Experiments in which a person looked at the whole ﬁeld
of vision through mirrors arranged to cancel the effects of this move-
ment led at ﬁrst to a distorted vision and soon to a complete breakdown
of vision, in the sense that the viewer could see nothing at all, even
though a clear image of the world was being focused on his retina.
Ditchburn has explained this phenomenon by appealing to the fact
Physics and Perception
51

that when a constant stimulus is maintained on nerve cells for some
time, they accommodate; i.e., the strength of their response tends to
decrease, eventually falling below the threshold of what is perceptible.
Under conditions in which the pattern of intensity of light on the whole
retina is kept ﬁxed by mirrors that compensate for the movements of
the eyeball, it is then to be expected that such a process of accommoda-
tion will take place. In this way one can explain the distortion and
eventual fading away of what is in the ﬁeld of view, as observed in the
experiments of Ditchburn. In normal vision, however, accommodation
will be only partial, because the vibration and other movements of the
eyeball will always be producing corresponding changes in the pattern
of light on the retina. The response of the nerves connected to a given
retinal cell will therefore depend less on the light intensity at the point
in question than on the way in which this light intensity changes with
position. This means that the excitation of the optic nerve does not
correspond to the pattern of light on the retina, but rather to a modiﬁed
pattern in which contrasts are heightened, and in which a strong
impression is produced at the boundaries of objects, where the light
intensity varies sharply with position. In this way one obtains an
emphasis on the outlines and forms of objects which helps to lead to
their being perceived as separate and distinct, a perception that would
not be nearly so clear and noticeable if the eye were sensitive to the light
intensity itself, rather than to its changes . . .
The essential point that we wish to emphasize in the work concern-
ing the eye is that nothing is perceived without movements or variations
in the image on the retina of the eye, and that the characteristics of these
variations play a large part in determining the structure that is actually
seen. It is important that such variations shall not only be a result of
changes that take place naturally in the environment, but that (as in the
case of tactile perception) they also can be produced actively by move-
ments in the sense organs of the observer himself. These variations are
not themselves perceived to any appreciable extent. What is perceived is
something relatively invariant, e.g., the outline and form of an object,
the straightness of lines, the sizes and shapes of things, etc. Yet the
invariant could not be perceived unless the image were actively varied.
Experiments by Held and his co-workers and by Gibson6 make it
clear that movements of the body also play an essential role in optical
perception, particularly the coordination between such movements and
the resulting changes that are seen in the optical image of the world. For
example, when people are furnished with distorting spectacles (which
cause straight lines to appear to be curved) and allowed to enter a room
52
Universal Orders

patterned in a way that is not previously known to them, they eventu-
ally learn to “correct” the effects of this distortion by the spectacles, and
cease to see the curvature that must actually be present in the image of a
straight line on the retinas of their eyes. Later, when they take off the
spectacles, they see straight lines as curved, at least for a while. (A more
extreme case of such an experiment is to allow a person to see the world
through spectacles that invert the image. After some time he sees it right
side up, but when he takes off the spectacles he sees it upside down
again, for a while.)
The interesting point of these experiments is that the “relearning”
of what corresponds to a straight line depends very strongly on the
ability to move the body actively. Thus people who are free to walk
around are able to adjust their vision to their spectacles fairly rapidly,
whereas people who passively undergo equivalent movements in chairs
either never learn to do so or else are very much less effective in such
learning. So it is clear that what is essential is not only that there shall be
appropriate variations of the image on the eye, resulting from move-
ment, but also that some of these variations shall be produced actively
by the percipient. In other words, as in the case of tactile perception,
what one actually sees is determined somehow by the abstraction of
what is invariant from a set of variations in what is seen, this variation
having been produced, at least in part, as an essential aspect of the
process of observation itself . . .
The perceived picture is therefore not just an image or reﬂection of
our momentary sense impressions, but rather it is the outcome of a
complex process leading to an ever-changing (three-dimensional) con-
struction which is present to our awareness in a kind of “inner show.”
This construction is based on the abstraction of what is invariant in the
relationship between a set of movements produced actively by the per-
cipient himself and the resulting changes in the totality of his sensual
“inputs.” Such a construction functions, in effect, as a kind of “hypoth-
esis” compatible with the observed invariant features of the person’s
over-all experience with the environment in question . . .
Not only is the process of construction dependent on the abstrac-
tion of invariant relationships between movement and sense percep-
tions, as described above; it also depends on all that is known by the
percipient. For example, if a person looks at a letter at a distance too
great for clear distinct vision, he will see something very vague and
indistinct in form. But if he is told what the letter is, its image will
suddenly appear with comparatively great clarity. Or alternatively,
he can drop a small coin on a highly patterned carpet, where he will
Physics and Perception
53

generally ﬁnd that it is lost to his sight. Then, if he catches a glint of
reﬂected light, the coin that he knows that he has lost will suddenly stand
out in his perception. Its image must have been on the retina of the eye
all the time, but it did not enter the “inner show” of perception until the
reﬂected glint contradicted the perception of a carpet with nothing on it,
and also suggested the lost coin that he knows about . . .
Thus far we have been considering only the case in which a percipi-
ent moves in a relatively static environment. If movements are taking
place in his environment as well, then there is the additional problem of
knowing which of the observed changes are due to the movements of
the observer and which are due to movements of what is in the
environment. This problem is dealt with, in effect, by the capacity to
abstract a higher order type of invariant, i.e., a relatively invariant state
of movement.
Generally speaking, as a person moves in his environment his brain
begins (largely unconsciously) to note those features which do not
change signiﬁcantly as a result of these movements. These are treated
as a distant and relatively ﬁxed background, against which other
movements can be perceived. The closer objects do, of course, change
their apparent sizes, shapes, etc., appreciably in a systematic way as a
person walks, moves his head, etc. It seems that the brain has developed
the ability to be sensitive to such apparent movements and changes in
the nearby environment, especially when they are coordinated with
movements produced by the percipient himself. This permits the elim-
ination of the self-produced movements in the ﬁeld of what is per-
ceived, so that the construction of the “inner show” corresponds to a
generally static world, in which the percipient himself is seen to be
moving. Therefore, as a person walks around a room, he does not feel
the room to be moving, whirling around, and changing its shape, etc.
Rather, he perceives the room as ﬁxed and himself as moving, in such a
way as to explain all the variations in what he has perceived. But if, for
example, he has suffered damage to the delicate balancing mechanism
in the inner ear, he can no longer coordinate his mechanical perceptions
with his optical perceptions. He may then suffer vertigo, and feel that
the world is moving around him. The difference between these two
modes of perception is very striking to anyone who has ever experi-
enced it.
On the basis of the elimination of the movement of the percipient,
the brain is then able to go to the next level of abstraction, in which it
senses the movement of some part of the ﬁeld of vision against a
background that is perceived as ﬁxed. The simplest case arises when a
54
Universal Orders

given object merely suffers a dislocation in space and perhaps also a
rotation. In this case one is able to perceive the object as actually having
a constant size and shape, despite the fact that its image on the retina is
changing all the time. This perception is inextricably bound up with the
ability to see such an object as possessing a certain state of motion,
rather than as a series of “still” pictures of the object in question, each in
a slightly different position. It is almost as if the brain were able to
establish a co-moving reference frame, in which a moving object could
be seen to have a constant shape. In this way, the brain seems to include
in its construction process the ability to abstract a certain state of
movement, which under the assumption of an object of a given shape is
compatible with the changes that have been perceived in the appear-
ance of the object over some period of time.
Of course, there will then be further kinds of changes which cannot
be explained in this way (e.g., an object may actually grow in size,
change its form, etc.). These will have to be perceived in terms of more
subtle internal changes in the object in question.
The problem of how movement is perceived is far from being fully
solved. Yet it is already clear that such perception cannot be based
merely on “sense impressions” at a given moment. Rather, the “inner
show” that we perceive embodies certain structural features, based not
only on abstractions from immediate sensations, but also on a series of
abstractions over a more or less extended set of earlier perceptions.
Indeed, without such a series of abstractions we could not be able to see
a world having some well-deﬁned order, organization, structure, etc.
Even a static environment is effectively presented in the “inner show”
as a tentative and hypothetical structure, which when assumed to be
invariant, will be compatible with the changing experiences that the
percipient has had with this environment, in movements that he him-
self has produced. And an environment which is itself changing is pre-
sented in the “inner show” as a structure expressed in terms of invariant
states of movement of parts of the environment which account for
earlier changing experiences that are not explained by the movements
of the percipient.
There may also arise an ambiguity in the attribution of movements
to the observer or to various parts of the environment. Thus, if a person
is sitting in a train that is not moving, and watches another moving train
through the window, he may ﬁnd that he perceives himself as moving,
and that he even gets some of the physical (kinesthetic) sensations of
movement. But when he fails to feel the expected shaking and vibration
of the train, he begins to look more carefully, and can soon see in the
Physics and Perception
55

environment certain further clues, suggesting that the other train is
moving and that he is at rest. Suddenly his mode of perception of the
world changes. This is a striking demonstration of how our perceptions
of the world are a construction in the “inner show,” based on the search
for a hypothesis that is compatible with all that we have experienced in
connection with a certain situation. So we do not perceive just what is
before our eyes. We perceive it organized and structured through
abstractions of what kind of invariant state of affairs (which may
include invariant states of movement) will explain immediate experi-
ence and a wide range of earlier experiences that led up to it.
Results of the kind described above led Gibson7 to suggest a new
concept of what constitutes perception. He emphasizes the need to drop
the idea that perception consists of passively gathering sense impres-
sions, which are organized and structured through principles supplied
only by the observer. Indeed, the isolated sense impression is seen to be
an extremely high level abstraction, which does not play any signiﬁcant
part in the actual process of perception. Instead, we are sensitive dir-
ectly to the structure of our environment itself. In the last analysis the
observer therefore does not supply the structure of his perceptions, so
much as he abstracts it. Or as Gibson himself puts this point, the struc-
ture of our environment is the stimulus that gives rise to what we per-
ceive (i.e., to the construction in the “inner show” that is presented in
our awareness). With regard to optical perception, for example, Gibson
points out that through each region of space there passes an inﬁnity of
rays of light, going in all directions. These rays of light implicitly contain
all the information about the structure of the world that we can obtain
from vision.8 But an eye ﬁxed in a certain position cannot abstract this
information. It must move in many ways, and at least some part of these
movements must be produced by the observer himself, because (as was
ﬁrst brought out by Held and his co-workers) structural information is
abstracted mainly from invariant relationships between the outgoing
nervous excitations that give rise to these movements and the corres-
ponding ingoing nervous excitations that result from them.
Gibson raises a related set of questions regarding the role of time in
perception. A typical question is, for example, “When does a particular
stimulus come to an end?” The older way of looking at this problem is to
refer to what is called the “specious present.” That is, it is found that
there is an interval of time, of the order of a tenth of a second, which is
“speciously” experienced as a single moment, in the sense that people
do not seem to be able clearly to discriminate changes that take place
in times less than this. From this notion it would follow that all our
56
Universal Orders

perceptions can in principle be uniquely ordered in time, within an
accuracy of a tenth of a second or so. Nevertheless, Gibson raises ques-
tions which suggest that it is a source of confusion to try to understand
the essential features of the process of perception by referring it in this
way to such a time order.
To see why Gibson questions the simple time order of perceptions
described above, let us recall that we do not perceive momentary sensa-
tions, to any appreciable extent. Rather, we perceive an over-all structure
that is abstracted from these, a structure evidently built up over some
period of time. We have already seen in connection with optical percep-
tion, for example, that clues obtained over some time may come
together at a given moment and give rise to a new structure of what is
perceived. It evidently makes no sense to say that this new structure is
based only on the very last clue to be received. Rather, it is based on the
whole set of clues. This means that a given stimulus to our perceptions
is not restricted to the smallest time interval that can be discriminated.
Rather, it may be said that some stimuli take place over much longer
intervals.
In music the property of stimuli is much more clearly seen. As one
is listening to a tune, the notes heard earlier continue to reverberate in
the mind, while each new note comes in. One may suddenly understand
(i.e., perceive the over-all structure) of a piece of music at a certain
moment in this process. But evidently the very last note to be received is
not the sole basis of such an understanding. Rather, it is the whole
structure of tones reverberating in the mind. These tones have manifold
relationships, which are not restricted to their time order. To grasp these
relationships is essential to the understanding of the music. The effort
to regard the essential content of the music in terms of its time order
could then lead to too narrow a way of looking at the problem, which
would tend to produce confusion.
In a similar way one can consider the problem of how one perceives
rhythm. At any moment there is only one beat to be heard. But one beat
is not a rhythm. Evidently it is the reverberation of a whole set of beats
in the mind, all in a certain relationship that constitutes the perception
of rhythm. The stimulus that constitutes a rhythm cannot then refer
only to a single moment of time. So it seems important to realize that
the essential features of perception will not always be understood by
stringing out what is perceived in a time order.
Indeed, in many cases it is not possible to assign a unique moment
of time to a given feature of what is perceived. While listening to a piece
of music one may be appreciating a rhythm that is based on many
Physics and Perception
57

seconds, a theme that may require a minute or more to be apprehended,
and we may be looking at a stop-watch, seeing the movements of the
hand that perhaps indicates some fraction of a second. When one says
“now,” what does one mean by this? Does it refer to the perception of a
certain position of the indicator on the watch, the perception of a certain
part of the rhythm, the perception of some part of the theme, or perhaps
to something else?
It would seem then that the effort to order the totality of one’s
perceptions in terms of a single, unique time order must lead to confu-
sion and absurdity. Certain perceptions can thus be ordered (e.g., those
that are similar to seeing the indicator on the watch dial). But to under-
stand the process of perception in a broader context, we must see that
the structures that are perceived are not as rigidly related to such a time
order as our customary notions might lead us to think. There is a loose
time order, in the sense, for example, that today’s perceptions are not
strongly related to yesterday’s events (although these do in fact still
“reverberate” in us and help to shape present perceptions). Yet the hard
and fast notion that each perception is uniquely ordered as earlier, later,
or simultaneous with another (within the period of the “specious pres-
ent”) seems to lead to a kind of confusion, indicating that it probably has
little relevance to the actual facts of perception.
It may perhaps be instructive to consider a simple example of a
physical problem in which the attempt to regard the time order of
events as basic to the understanding of a process leads to a type of
confusion similar to that in which it results when applied to perception.
Suppose, for the sake of our discussion, that there were beings on Mars,
and that they had become interested in studying the radio signals com-
ing from the Earth. When they came to observe television signals they
would not be able to make a great deal of sense of them, if they sup-
posed that the essential principle of these signals were some kind of
formula or set of relationships determining their time order. The signals
can in fact be understood properly only when it is realized that they
originate in a series of whole pictures, which are then translated system-
atically into a time series of pulses. The principles governing the actual
order of pulses are therefore to be grasped in terms of a spatial structure
very different from that of the time order that is received in the radio
signals. Or, to put it differently, the order of the signals is not essentially
related to the order of time. In a similar way, the structure of our per-
ceptual process may also not be essentially related to some hypothetical
series of instants, but may be based on entirely different kinds of prin-
ciples involving (like the television signal) the integration of what is
58
Universal Orders

received over suitable intervals of time, extending far beyond the period
of the “specious present.”
If a given perception integrates what comes in over such extended
periods of time, does this mean that memory is the main factor that
determines the general structure of what we perceive? (Memory being
the ability, for example, to recall approximately the sensations, events,
objects, etc., that were experienced in the past.) Gibson does not accept
the notion that the structure in our perceptions comes mainly from
memory, although of course memories do evidently have some inﬂuence
in shaping such perceptions. He suggests that the main process is what
he calls “attunement” to what one perceives. Thus, as one sees some-
thing new and unfamiliar he ﬁrst vaguely perceives only a few general
structural features. Then as he moves in relation to what he is looking at
and perhaps probes as well, he starts to abstract more of the details of
the structure, and his perceptions sharpen. Perhaps one could compare
this process to a kind of skill, which is also not based simply on memory
of all the steps by which the skill was acquired.
Both in the case of perception and in that of building a skill, a
person must actively meet his environment in such a way that he
coordinates his outgoing nervous impulses with those that are coming
in. As a result the structure of his environment is, as it were, gradually
incorporated into his outgoing impulses, so that he learns how to meet
his environment with the right kind of response. With regard to learn-
ing a skill it is evident how this happens. But in a sense the perception
of each kind of thing is also a skill, because it requires a person actively
to meet the environment with the movements that are appropriate for
the disclosure of the structure of that environment. (This fact would also
be evident if it were not for our habitual notion that perception is a
purely passive affair.)
If we learn the structure of things by “attunement” it seems clear
that the very general features of our ability to apprehend the structure
of the world will, in many cases, go back to what was learned in early
childhood. It is here that the studies of the process of perception can
link up with the work of Piaget, discussed in the previous section. For
there we saw how the infant begins with a limited set of inborn reﬂexes.
When these are developed into the “circular reﬂex” he has the most basic
feature of perception, i.e., the ability to be sensitive to a relationship
between outgoing and incoming nervous impulses, a relationship that is
characteristic of what is to be perceived. From here on he is able to
“attune” himself step by step with his environment, by abstracting from
such relationships what is invariant in its general structure. In doing
Physics and Perception
59

this he builds up his notions of space, time, causality, the division of the
world into permanent objects (one of which is himself), the notion of
permanent substance, permanent numbers of objects, etc. All of these
notions are interwoven into the fabric of perception, in the sense that
they help shape the structure of what appears in the “inner show” that is
present in our awareness. So while we are able to “attune” ourselves to
new kinds of structures when we meet something new, there seem to be
certain general structural features, of the kind described above, which
were ﬁrst learned in childhood, and which are present in all that we
perceive.
The over-all or general structure of our total perceptual process can
be regarded not only from the standpoint of its development from
infancy but can also be investigated directly in the adult. Such studies
have been made by Hebb and his group,9 by isolating individuals in
environments in which there was little or nothing to be perceived. The
extreme cases of such isolation involved putting people in tanks of
water at a comfortable temperature, with nothing to be seen or heard,
and with hands covered in such a way that nothing could be felt. Those
individuals who were hardy enough to volunteer for such treatment
found that after a while the structure of the perceptual ﬁeld began to
change. Hallucinations and other self-induced perceptions, as well as
distortions of awareness of time, became more and more frequent.
Finally, when these people emerged from isolation, it was found that
they had undergone a considerable degree of general disorientation, not
only in their emotions but also in their ability to perceive. For example,
they often found themselves unable to see the shapes of objects clearly,
or even to see their forms as ﬁxed. They saw changing colors which
were not there, etc. (In time, normal perception was, of course,
regained.)
The results of these experiments were rather difﬁcult to under-
stand in detail, but their over-all implication was that the general struc-
tural “attunements,” built into the brain since early childhood, tend to
disintegrate when there is no appropriately structured environment for
them to work on. If we compare these attunements to some kinds of
skills, needed in meeting our typical environment, then perhaps it is not
entirely unexpected that they should decay when they are not used. But
what is still surprising is the extremely great speed with which such
“skills” built up over a lifetime can deteriorate. To explain this it has
been proposed that when there is no external environment for the brain
to work on it starts to operate on the internal environment, i.e., on the
impulses produced spontaneously on the nervous system itself. But
60
Universal Orders

these impulses do not seem actually to have a well-deﬁned structure
that is comprehensible to us. So in the active effort to “attune” to a
structure that is either nonexistent or else incomprehensible to the
people who actually did the experiment, the older adjustments, built up
over a lifetime, are mixed up and broken down.
The above hypothesis has to some extent been conﬁrmed by
experiments in which people looked for a long time at a television
screen containing a changing random (unstructured) pattern of spots. A
disorientation of perception resulted which was similar to that obtained
in the experiments in which subjects were isolated. Thus it could be
argued that in the effort to adjust to a nonexistent or incomprehensible
structure in its general environment, the brain began to break down the
older structural “attunement” that was appropriate to the normal
environment in which people generally live.
The implications of these experiments are so far-reaching as to be
rather disturbing. Nevertheless, it can be seen that, on the whole, they
tend to carry further what is already suggested in the work of Piaget and
in the results that have been summarized in this section. For in all of
this we have seen that in perception there is present an outgoing ner-
vous impulse producing a movement, in response to which there is a
coordinated incoming set of sensations. The ability to abstract an
invariant relationship in these nervous impulses seems to be what is at
the basis of intelligent perception. For the structure that is present in the
“inner show” is determined by the need to account for what is invariant
in the relationship of the outgoing movements and the incoming sensa-
tions. In this way the percipient is not only always learning about his
environment but is also changing himself. That is, some reﬂection of the
general structure of his environment is being built into his nervous
system. As long as his general environment is not too different in struc-
ture from what has already thus been built into his nervous system he
can make adjustments by “attuning” to the new features of the
environment. But in an environment without such a perceptible struc-
ture, it seems that there is a tendency for this attunement to be lost, in
the search for a structure which either does not exist or which has
features that are beyond the ability of the percipient to grasp if it does
exist.
These results lead us back to the old question ﬁrst formulated by
Kant, as to whether our general mode of apprehending the world as
ordered and structured in space and time and through causal relation-
ships, etc., is objectively inherent in the nature of the world, or whether
it is imposed by our own minds. Kant proposed that these general
Physics and Perception
61

principles constituted a kind of a priori knowledge, built into the mind,
which was a necessary precondition for any recognizable experience at
all, but which may not be a characteristic of “things in themselves.” It
would seem that Kant’s proposal was right in some respects but basic-
ally wrong in that he had considered the problem in too narrow a
framework. It is certainly true that at any given moment we meet new
experience with a particular structural “attunement” in the brain that is
a necessary condition for perception of recognizable aspects of the
world. This “attunement” is responsible for our ability to see a more or
less ﬁxed set of things at each moment, organized in space, causally
related, changing in a simply ordered time sequence, etc. When this
“attunement” is broken down by long isolation from perception or by
perception of an environment without visible structure, then the
experiments cited above do indeed show that the process of recogniz-
able experiencing of an environment is seriously interfered with.
On the other hand, a broader view of this problem shows that an
adult’s attunement to the general structure of the world has been built
up in a development, starting with infancy. In the beginning of this
development the child must discover the structure of his environment in
a long process in which he experiments with it, operates on it, etc. His
procedure in doing this is perhaps not basically different from that used
in scientiﬁc research. He is interested in his environment, probing it,
testing it, observing it, etc., and, as it were, always developing new per-
ceptual “hypotheses” in the “inner show” that explain his experiences
better. In doing this he is “attuning” himself to his environment, devel-
oping the right responses to perceive its structure adequately. As he gets
older this whole process tends to fall into the domain of habit. But
whenever he meets something strange and unexpected, he is able to
abstract new structural features, by a continuation of the kind of inter-
ested experimentation and observation that is characteristic of early
childhood.
Of course, a person ﬁnds it hard to change very general structural
features, such as the organization of all experience in terms of space,
time, causality, etc. Yet the experiments cited above suggest that there
seems to be no inherent need to continue any particular structure, and
that the brain probably is capable of abstracting a very wide variety of
kinds of structural features that may be actually present in the part of
the environment that is available to his senses, provided that there is
appropriate interest, leading to the proper kind of experimentation,
probing, etc. At any given moment the structure that we already know
depends on past experiences, habits, etc.; this in turn is dictated in part
62
Universal Orders

by the general environment that people have actually lived in, and in
part by the interests that determine to which structural features people
will have paid a great deal of attention. So we do in fact approach new
experiences, as Kant suggested, with some kind of already given general
structural principles. Yet the experiments cited here suggest that Kant
was wrong in regarding any particular set of principles of this kind as
inevitably following a priori from the very nature of the human mind.
Rather, along the lines suggested by Gibson, it would seem that a person
might become “attuned” to any structural features of his environment to
which his nervous system could respond, and in which he was suf-
ﬁciently interested.
In terms of the notions described above we can see that while our
perceptions do have a subjective side, dependent on the particular back-
ground and conditioning of each person, as well as on the general back-
ground and conditioning of the whole of humanity, they also have a
kind of objective content, which can go beyond this particular and
limited background. For the general structure of our perceptions (result-
ing from this background) can be regarded as a kind of hypothesis, with
the aid of which we approach subsequent experiences in which things
have changed not only of their own accord, but also because of our own
movements, actions, and probings, which alter our own relationships to
our environments. To the extent that the new experiences ﬁt into the
continuation of the old structure without contradictions, these hypoth-
eses are effectively conﬁrmed. But if we are alert, we will sense contra-
dictions when they arise (as we have already seen, in numerous
examples discussed earlier). When this happens the brain is sensitive to
the discovery of new relationships, leading spontaneously to further
hypotheses, which are embodied in the appearance of new structures in
the “inner show.” Anyone can see this happening as he approaches a
distant object that is unknown to him, or as he approaches something
unknown in the obscure light, for example, of the moon. He will see
various forms, shapes, objects, etc., which appear and then disappear,
because they are not compatible with further experiences resulting from
his movements, probings, etc. So there is a continual process of “trial
and error” in which what is shown to be false is continually being set
aside, while new structures are continually being put forth for “criti-
cism.” Eventually there develops in this way a perception which stands
up to further movements, probings, etc., in the sense that its predictive
implications are actually borne out in such experiences. (Of course, even
this is always tentative, in the sense that it can be contradicted later.)
The objective content of our perceptions is then implicit in the
Physics and Perception
63

process of falsiﬁcation and conﬁrmation described above. Indeed, the
very fact that our vision of the world can be falsiﬁed as a result of
further movement, observation, probing, etc., implies that there is more
in the world than what we have perceived and known. That is to say, we
do not actually create the world. In fact, we only create an “inner show”
of the world in response to our movements and sensations. It is,
however, the possibility of conﬁrmation of the “inner show” which
demonstrates that there is more in it than merely a summary of past
experiences. For this “inner show” is based on the abstraction of the
general structure of these past experiences, the structure having predict-
ive inferences for later experiences. For example, as we approach the
front of an object such as a house, we (largely unconsciously) predict a
great many structural features of the parts of the object that are not yet
visible. Thus, on seeing the front and one side of the house, along with
parts of its roof, we infer that it has other sides, that these have certain
parallel lines, certain angles, etc. These inferences may come partially
from memory, having gone round similar houses previously. But in
large part they come, not from the simple recall of earlier experiences
themselves, but from the general structural principles that have been
abstracted from a very wide range of such experiences (e.g., the three-
dimensionality of space, the existence of straight lines, parallel lines,
and right angles, all of which together imply a certain general ﬁeld of
possibilities for the unseen sides of an object, independent of the par-
ticular memories of similar objects that we may possess).
A little reﬂection shows that there is an enormous number of cases in
which the above-described kinds of predictive inferences based on the
general structure of our perceptions have turned out to be correct. That
is to say, the “world” that we see in immediate perception has, at a given
moment, a general structure, which has withstood a long series of tests,
in the observations that have led up to the moment in question. And as a
rule it happens that the natural projection of this structure in accordance
with the known state of movement of the observer and of what is in the
ﬁeld of perception will continue to be more or less in accord with later
observations in a great many respects. This means that the general struc-
ture of our perceptions has a certain similarity to the general structure of
what is actually in our environment. Yet, the similarity is not perfect, as
is evidenced by the appearance of contradictions, unexpected events,
etc., which necessitate continual changes in what is “constructed” in the
ﬁeld of perception, and are not merely the result of the natural projec-
tion from what was perceived earlier. In this way we are continually
being confronted with what is not even implicitly contained in our
64
Universal Orders

earlier perceptions, thus we are being reminded that there is a reality
beyond what we have already perceived, aspects of which are always in
the process of being revealed in our further perceptions.
4
THE SIMILARITY BETWEEN THE PROCESS OF
PERCEPTION AND THE PROCESS BY WHICH
SCIENCE INVESTIGATES THE WORLD
In the previous sections of this essay we have discussed studies of the
development of the process of perception in an individual human being
from infancy, as well as direct studies of how this process takes place in
adults. What comes out of these studies can be summed up in the
statement that in the process of perception we learn about the world
mainly by being sensitive to what is invariant in the relationships
between our own movements, activities, probings, etc., and the resulting
changes in what comes in through our sense organs. These invariant
relationships are then presented immediately in our awareness as a kind
of “construction” in an “inner show,” embodying, in effect, a hypothesis
that accounts for the invariant features that have been found in such
experiences up to the moment in question. This hypothesis is, however,
tentative in the sense that it will be replaced by another one, if in our
subsequent movements, probings, etc., we encounter contradictions
with the implications of our “constructions.”
However, we have seen that research in physics has shown basic
features very similar to those of perception described above, and that
with the further development of physics, into its more modern forms (in
particular, with the theory of relativity), this similarity has tended to
become stronger. Thus, those aspects of Newtonian mechanics which
eventually proved to be correct consisted of the discovery of the invari-
ance of certain relationships (Newton’s laws of motion), in a wide var-
iety of systems, movements, changes of frames of reference, etc. On the
other hand, those features of the theory which were considered to repre-
sent absolutes (i.e., absolute space, absolute time, the notion of perman-
ent substances with ﬁxed masses, etc.) were eventually shown to be
unnecessary, and indeed important sources of confusion and error, in
the effort to extend scientiﬁc knowledge of the laws of movement into
broader domains.
Einstein’s major steps were based on setting aside such ideas of an
absolute, and on extending into broader domains the notion of the laws
of physics as invariant relationships (e.g., so as to include velocities
comparable to that of light). In doing this he was led also to drop the
Physics and Perception
65

notion of ﬁxed quantities of substances, having constant masses.
Instead, mass was seen to be only a relatively invariant property,
expressing a relationship between energy of a body and its inertial
resistance to acceleration, along with its gravitational properties. Fur-
ther developments in modern physics, including quantum theory and
the studies of the transformations of the so-called “elementary” particles
suggest that the notion of permanent entities constituted of substances
with unchanging qualitative and quantitative properties may have to be
dropped altogether, and that physics will be left with nothing but the
study of what is relatively invariant in as wide as possible a variety of
movements, transformations of coordinates, changes of perspective, etc.
Moreover, it seems that the notion that science is collecting absolute
truths about nature, or even approaching such truths in a convergent
fashion, is not in good accord with the facts concerning the actual
development of scientiﬁc theories thus far, and has indeed also been a
major source of confusion in scientiﬁc research. Rather, as Professor
Popper has emphasized, science actually progresses through the putting
forth of falsiﬁable hypotheses, which are conﬁrmed up to a certain
point and thereafter, as a rule, eventually falsiﬁed. New hypotheses are
then put forth, which are criticized and tested by a process of “trial and
error” very similar to that to which our immediate perceptions are con-
tinually being subjected.
The interesting point that has emerged from a simultaneous con-
sideration of what has developed in modern science and of what has
been disclosed in modern studies of the process of perception is that the
new ideas required to understand both of them are rather similar. In
this section we shall give some arguments in favor of the suggestion
that this similarity is not accidental but rather has a deep reason behind
it. The reason that we are proposing is that scientiﬁc investigation is
basically a mode of extending our perception of the world, and not
mainly a mode of obtaining knowledge about it. That is to say, while
science does involve a search for knowledge, the essential role of this
knowledge is that it is an adjunct to an extended perceptual process.
And if science is basically such a mode of perception, then, as we shall
try to show, it is quite reasonable that certain essential features of scien-
tiﬁc research shall be rather similar to corresponding features of
immediate perception.10
Since science has generally been regarded thus far as basically
a search for knowledge, it will be necessary to begin by going more
deeply into the question of the relationship between knowledge and im-
mediate perception. Now, as we have seen, what appears in immediate
66
Universal Orders

perception already embodies a kind of abstraction of the general struc-
ture of what has been found to be invariant in an earlier active process
of probing the environment that has led up to the perception in ques-
tion. We propose that knowledge is a higher-level abstraction, based on
what is found to be invariant in a wide range of experiences involving
immediate perception.
We can perhaps explain this notion most directly by ﬁrst referring
to Piaget’s account of the development of the child’s concept of space
(discussed in Section 2). At ﬁrst the child discovers a group of oper-
ations, such that he can go from one place to another by a certain route,
and return invariantly to the same place by a wide range of different
routes. Later the child is able to imagine (i.e., to produce a mental image)
of a space, containing even objects that are no longer in his ﬁeld of
immediate perception, and also an imagined object that corresponds to
himself. The structure of this mental image faithfully corresponds to
what has been found by the child to be invariant in his earlier experi-
ences with groups of movements. This mental image therefore abstracts
a kind of “higher-order invariant,” i.e., something that has been invari-
ant in a wide range of immediate perceptions. When we use the words
“to abstract” we do not wish to suggest that there is merely a process of
induction, or of taking out some kind of summation of what has been
experienced earlier. Rather, each abstraction constitutes, as it were, a
kind of “hypothesis,” put forth to explain what has been found to be
invariant in such earlier experiences. Only the abstractions which stand
up to further tests and probings will be retained. Eventually, however,
these become habitual, and we cease to be aware of their basically hypo-
thetical and tentative character, regarding them instead as inherent and
necessary features of all that exists, in every possible domain and ﬁeld
of experiencing and investigation.
Piaget then goes on to describe how with the development of lan-
guage and logical thinking the child goes on to make still higher level
abstractions, in which there are formed structures of words, ideas, con-
cepts, etc., which express the invariant features of the world that he
abstractly considers in his perceptions. Evidently there is in principle no
limit to this process of abstraction. Thus science and mathematics may
be said to form still higher level abstractions (formulated in words,
diagrams, and mathematical symbols), expressing the invariant features
of what has been found in experiments and observations (which latter
are carried out in terms of the ordinary abstractions of everyday lan-
guage and common sense). Thus all knowledge is a structure of abstrac-
tions, the ultimate test of the validity of which is, however, in the process
Physics and Perception
67

of coming into contact with the world that takes place in immediate
perception.
It can be seen that a crucial state in this over-all process of abstrac-
tion is the setting aside of certain parts of what appears in the “inner
show” as not directly representing immediate perception. These are
what we imagine, conceive, symbolize, think about, etc. These parts are
then seen to be related to immediate perception as abstractions, repre-
senting the general structural features of this perception, much as a map
represents the terrain of which it is a map.11 However, as has been
pointed out in Section 2, a young child does not readily distinguish
between what has been imagined and what is seen in response to
immediate perception. In this way, there arises the habit of confusing
our abstract conceptual “maps” with reality itself, and of not noticing
that they are only maps. When the child grows older he is able to avoid
this confusion in superﬁcial problems, but when it comes to funda-
mental concepts, such as space, time, causality, etc., it is much more
difﬁcult to do so. As a result, the adult continues the habit of looking, as
it were, at his comparatively abstract conceptual maps, and seeing them
as if they were inherent in the nature of things, rather than understand-
ing that they are higher-level abstractions, having only a kind of struc-
tural similarity to what has been found to be invariant in lower levels. It
is this confusion, based on habits of very long standing, which makes a
clear discussion of such fundamental problems so difﬁcult.
We can perhaps best illustrate these notions with the aid of a simple
example. Suppose that we are looking at a circular disk. Now its
immediate appearance to our eyes will be that of an ellipse, correspond-
ing to its projection on the retina of the eyes (as would, for example, be
portrayed by an artist, who was trying to draw it in perspective). Never-
theless, we know that it is really a circle. What is the basis of this
knowledge?
What actually happens is, as we have indicated earlier, that the eye,
the head, the body, etc., are always moving. In these movements the
appearance of the disk is always changing, undergoing in fact a series of
projective transformations that are related in a deﬁnite way to the
movements in question. By various means (some of which are discussed
in Section 3) the brain is able to abstract what is invariant in all this
movement, change of perspective, etc. This abstraction, expressed in
terms of the notion that a circular object accounts for all the changing
views of it, is the basis of the “construction” of it that we perceive in the
“inner show.” The “hypothesis” that this object is really a circle is then
further probed and tested in subsequent ways of coming in contact with
68
Universal Orders

it perceptually, and it is retained as long as it stands up to such probing
and testing.
But the realization that the perceived object is a circle depends also
on knowledge going beyond the level of immediate perception. Thus
from early childhood a person has learned to imagine looking straight at
the object in a perpendicular direction, and seeing its circular shape (as
well as feeling it to be circular when his hands grasp it). He may also
have learned further to imagine himself represented as a point on a
diagram, and to follow the course of the light rays from the circle to his
point of perspective, thus being able to see how the circular shape is
transformed into an elliptical appearance. If he has been further edu-
cated, he can go to a still higher level of abstraction, by mathematically
calculating the correct shape of the disk, from a knowledge of its
appearance in several views and from a knowledge of the relationship
of the observer to the disk in all of these views (distance, etc.). In carry-
ing out this calculation he will do consciously on a higher level of
abstraction what his brain does spontaneously on a lower level, i.e., to
ﬁnd a single structure that accounts for what is invariant in our chan-
ging relationships with the object under discussion.
We see then that there is no sharp break between the abstractions of
immediate perception and those which constitute our knowledge, even
if we carry this knowledge to the highest levels reached by science and
mathematics. From the very ﬁrst, our immediate perceptions express a
“construction” in an “inner show,” based on a preconscious abstraction
of what is invariant in, or active process of coming into contact with, our
environment. Each higher level of abstraction repeats a similar process
of discovery of what is invariant in lower levels, which is then repre-
sented in the form of a picture, an image, a symbolic structure of words
and formulas, etc. These higher-level abstractions then contribute to
shaping the general structure of those at lower levels, even coming
down to that of immediate perception. So between all the levels of
abstraction there is a continual two-way interaction.
Consider, for example, the experience of looking out at the night
sky. Ancient man abstracted from the stars the patterns of animals, men,
and gods, and thereafter was unable to look at the sky without seeing
such entities in it. Modern man knows that what is really behind this
view is an immeasurable universe of stars, galaxies, galaxies of galaxies,
etc., and that each person, having a particular place in this universe,
obtains a certain perspective on it, which is what is seen in the night sky.
Such a man does not see animals, gods, etc., in the sky, but he sees
an immense universe there. But even the view of modern science is
Physics and Perception
69

probably true only in a certain domain. So future man may form a very
different notion of the invariant totality that is behind our view of the
night sky, in which present notions will perhaps be seen as a simpliﬁca-
tion, approximation, and limiting case, but actually very far from being
completely true. Can we not say then that at every stage man was
extending his perception of the night sky, going from one level of
abstraction to another, and in each stage thus being led to hypotheses on
what is invariant, which are able to stand up better to further tests,
probings, etc.? But if this is the case, then the most abstract and general
scientiﬁc investigations are natural extensions of the very same process
by which the young child learns to come into perceptual contact with
his environment.
As we have pointed out on several occasions (e.g., in the discussion
of Piaget’s work in Section 2 and of the perception of movement in
Section 3) one of the basic problems that has to be solved in every act of
perception is that of taking into account the special point of view and
perspective of the observer. The solution of this problem depends essen-
tially on the use of a number of levels of abstraction, all properly related
to each other. Thus a person not only perceives the immediate elliptical
appearance of the disk in front of him. He can also perceive the changes
in appearance of the disk, which result from certain movements which
he himself actively undertakes. From these changes his brain is able to
abstract information about his relationship to the disk (e.g., how far
away it is). The essential point here is that through many levels of
abstraction, all going on simultaneously in the mind, it is possible to
perceive not only a projection of the object of interest but also the
relationship of the observer to the object in question. From this it is
always possible in principle to obtain an invariant notion as to what is
actually going on. This is represented in a higher level of abstraction, for
example, by imagining space containing the disk and the observer him-
self, in which both are represented in their proper relationships. When a
person says that the object is really circular, he is then evidently not
referring to an immediate sensation of the shape of the object but to this
extended process of abstraction, the essential results of which are repre-
sented in this imagined space, containing both the object and himself.
A very similar problem arises in science. Here, the hands, body, and
sense organs of the observer are generally, in effect, extended by means
of suitable instruments, which are in certain ways more sensitive, more
powerful, more accurate, as well as capable of new modes of making
contact with the world. But in the essential point that the observer is
actively probing and testing his environment, the situation is very similar
70
Universal Orders

to what it is in immediate perception, unaided by such instruments.
In such tests there is always some observable response to this prob-
ing and testing; and it is the relationship of variations in this response
to known variations in the state of the instruments that constitutes the
relevant information in what is observed (just as happens directly with
the sense organs themselves).
As in the case of immediate perception, however, such an observa-
tion has very little signiﬁcance until one knows the relationship of the
instrument to the ﬁeld that is under observation. It is possible to know
this relationship with the aid of a series of abstractions. Thus in any
experiment one not only knows the observed result; one knows the
structure of the instrument, its mode of functioning, etc., all of which
has been found out with the aid of earlier observations and actions of
many kinds. In other words, in each process of observation there is
always implicit an observation of the observing instrument itself, car-
ried out in terms of different levels of conceptual abstractions. But to
understand the observation one always needs certain modes of thinking
about the problem, in which the instrument and what is observed are
represented together, so that one can see “a total picture” in which an
invariant ﬁeld of what is being studied stands in a certain relationship
to the instrument, this relationship determining, as it were, how what is
in the ﬁeld “projects” into some observable response of the instrument.
In the theory of relativity one uses the Minkowski diagram,12 in
which one can in principle represent all the events that happen in the
whole of space-time. However, each example of such a diagram must
contain a line corresponding to the world line of the observer whose
results are under discussion. This is usually represented by the axis of
the diagram. Then, if we wish to discuss the results of another observer,
we must include in the diagram a representation of his world line. In a
similar way we must choose a point to represent the place and time
which determine the perspective of a given observation. By taking all of
this into account we are able, from the response of the observing
instruments (which is relative to their speed, time and place of function-
ing, etc.), to calculate the invariant properties of what is observed, in
such a way that the different results of different observers are explained
by their differing relationships to the process under investigation. It can
be seen then that relativity theory approaches the universe in a way very
similar to that in which a person approaches his environment in
immediate perception. In both these ﬁelds all that is observed is based
on the abstraction of what is invariant as seen in various movements,
from various points of view, perspectives, frames of reference, etc. And
Physics and Perception
71

in both the invariant is ﬁnally understood with the aid of various
hypotheses, expressed in terms of higher levels of abstraction, which
serve as a kind of “map,” having an order, pattern, and structure similar
to that of what is being observed.
The tendency for the use of such maps to become habitual is also
common to scientiﬁc investigation and to immediate perception. When
this happens a person’s thinking is limited to what can ﬁt into such
maps, because he thinks that they contain all that can possibly happen,
in every condition and domain of experience. For example, the
common-sense notion of simultaneity of all that is co-present in our
immediate perceptions is abstracted into the Newtonian concept of
absolute time, with the result that it seems incomprehensible that two
twins who are accelerated in different ways and then meet may experi-
ence different amounts of time.13 But in Section 3, we saw that the
notion of a single unique time order does not seem to apply without
confusion in the ﬁeld of our immediate perceptions either. The main
reason that this has been so little noticed is probably our habit of taking
seriously only what ﬁts into our habitual perception of all that happens,
both inwardly and outwardly, as being in such a unique and universal
time order.
It may be remarked in passing that in the quantum theory the point
of view described above is carried even further. The reason is basically
the indivisibility of the quantum of action, which implies that when we
observe something very precisely at the atomic level, it is found that
there must be an irreducible disturbance of the observed system by the
quanta needed for such an observation (the fact behind the derivation of
Heisenberg’s famous uncertainty principle). On the large-scale level the
effects of these quanta can be neglected. Therefore, although the obser-
ver must engage in active movements and probings in order to perceive
anything whatsoever, he can in principle (at least in large-scale optical
perception) refrain from signiﬁcantly disturbing what he is looking at.
At the quantum level of accuracy, however, the situation is different.
Here, the light quanta may be compared to a blind man’s ﬁngers, which
can give information about an object only if they move and disturb the
latter. The blind man is nevertheless able to abstract certain invariant
properties of the object (e.g., size and shape), but in doing this, his brain
spontaneously takes into account the movement which his perceptual
operations impart to the object. Similarly, the physicist is still able to
abstract certain invariant properties of atoms, electrons, protons, etc.
(e.g., charge, mass, spin, etc.); but in so doing he must consciously take
into account the operations involved in his observation process in a
72
Universal Orders

similar way. (To discuss this point in detail is, of course, beyond the
scope of the present work; but these questions will be treated in sub-
sequent publications.)
5
THE ROLE OF PERCEPTION IN SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCH
In the previous discussion we have seen the close similarity between
our modes of immediate perception of the world and our modes of
approach to it in modern scientiﬁc investigations. We shall now go on
to consider directly the centrally perceptual character of scientiﬁc
research, which we suggested at the beginning of Section 4.
While man’s scientiﬁc instruments do constitute, as we have seen,
an effective extension of his body and his sense organs, there are no
comparable external structures that substitute for the inward side of the
perceptive process (in which the invariant features of what has been
experienced are presented in the “inner show”). Thus, it is up to the
scientist himself to be aware of contradictions between his hypotheses
and what he observes, to be sensitive to new relationships in what he
observes, and to put forth conjectures or hypotheses, which explain the
known facts, embodying these new relationships, and have additional
implications with regard to what is as yet unknown, so that they can be
tested in further experiments and observations. So there is always
ﬁnally a stage where an essentially perceptual process is needed in
scientiﬁc research – a process taking place within the scientist himself.
The importance of the perceptual stage tends to be under-
emphasized, however, because scientists pay attention mostly to the
next stage, in which hypotheses that have withstood a number of tests
are incorporated into the body of currently accepted scientiﬁc know-
ledge. In effect they are thus led to suppose the essential activity of the
scientist is the accumulation of veriﬁed knowledge, toward which goal
all other activities of the scientist are ultimately directed.
If such knowledge could constitute a set of absolute truths, then it
would make at least some kind of sense to regard its accumulation as the
main purpose of science. As we have seen, however, it is the fate of all
theories eventually to be falsiﬁed, so that they are relative truths,
adequate in certain domains, including what has already been observed,
along with some as yet further unknown region that can be delimited, to
some extent at least, in future experiments and observations. But if this
is the case then the accumulation of knowledge cannot be regarded as
the essential purpose of scientiﬁc research, simply because the validity
Physics and Perception
73

of all knowledge is relative to something that is not in the knowledge
itself. So one will not be able to see what scientiﬁc research is really
about without taking into account what it is to which even established
and well-tested scientiﬁc knowledge must continually be further
related, if we are to be able to discuss its (necessarily incompletely
known) domain of validity.
There is also a similar relative validity of the knowledge that we
gain in immediate perception. But in this ﬁeld the reason for this is
fairly evident. Indeed, the world is so vast and has so much that is
unknown within it that we are not tempted to suppose that what we
learn from immediate perception is a set of absolute truths, the implica-
tions of which could be expected to be valid in unlimited domains of
future experience. Rather, we realize that immediate perception is actu-
ally a means of remaining in a kind of contact with a certain segment of
the world, in such a way that we can be aware of the general structure
of that segment, from moment to moment, if we carry out the process of
perception properly. In this contact we are satisﬁed if we are able to
keep up with what we see and perhaps, in some respects, get a little
ahead of it (e.g., in driving an automobile, we can, to a certain extent,
anticipate the movements of other automobiles, people, the turns in the
road, etc.). Thus, in the process of immediate perception, one obtains a
kind of knowledge, the implications of which are valid in the moment of
contact and for some unpredictable period beyond this moment. The
major signiﬁcance of past knowledge of this kind is then in its implica-
tions for present and future perceptions, rather than in the accumula-
tion of a store of truths, considered to be absolute.
Thus our knowledge of what happened yesterday is in itself of little
signiﬁcance because yesterday is gone and will never return. This
knowledge will be signiﬁcant, however, to the extent that its implica-
tions and the inferences that can be drawn from it may be valid today or
at some later date.
Of course, scientiﬁc theories evidently have much broader domains
of validity of their predictive inferences than do the “hypotheses” that
arise in immediate perception (these broader domains being purchased,
however, at the expense of the need to operate only at very high levels of
abstraction). Because the domain of validity is so broad, it often takes a
long time to demonstrate its limits. Nevertheless, what happens in sci-
entiﬁc research is, in regard to the problem under discussion, not fun-
damentally different from what happens in immediate perception. For
in science too the totality of the universe is too much to be grasped
deﬁnitively in any form of knowledge, not only because it is so vast and
74
Universal Orders

immeasurable, but even more because in its many levels, domains, and
aspects it contains an inexhaustible variety of structures, which escape
any given conceptual “net” that we may use in trying to express their
order and pattern. Therefore, as in the ﬁeld of immediate perception,
our knowledge is adequate for an original domain of contact with the
world, extending in an unpredictable way into some further domains.
Since the goal of obtaining absolutely valid knowledge has no relevance
in such a situation, we are led to suggest that scientiﬁc research is
basically to be regarded as a mode of extending man’s perceptual contact
with the world, and that the main signiﬁcance of scientiﬁc knowledge is
(as happens in immediate perception) that it is an adjunct to this process.
The basically perceptual character of scientiﬁc research shows up
most strongly when the time comes to understand new facts, as distinct
from merely accumulating further knowledge. Everyone has experi-
enced such a process on various occasions in his life. Suppose some-
thing unfamiliar is being explained (e.g., a theorem in geometry). At
ﬁrst a person is able to take in only various bits of knowledge, the
relationship of which is not yet clear. But at a certain stage, in a very
rapid process often described as “click” or as a “ﬂash,” he understands
what is being explained. When this happens he says “I see,” indicating
the basically perceptual character of such a process. (Of course, he does
not see with optical vision but rather, as it were, with the “mind’s eye.”)
But what is it that he sees? What he perceives is a new total structure in
terms of which the older items of knowledge all fall into their proper
places, naturally related, while many new and unsuspected relationships
suddenly come into view. Later, to preserve this understanding, to
communicate it to other people, to apply it, or to test its validity, he may
translate it into words, formulas, diagrams, etc. But initially it seems to
be a single act, in which older structures are set aside and a new struc-
ture comes into being in the mind . . .
There seems to be no limit to the possibility of the human mind for
developing new structures in the way described above. And it is this
possibility that seems to be behind our ability to put forth new theories
and concepts, which lead to knowledge that goes beyond the facts that
are accessible at the time when the theories are ﬁrst developed. It
should be recalled that this possibility exists as much in immediate
perception as in scientiﬁc research, since very often what is constructed
in the “inner show” leads, as we have seen earlier, to many correct
predictive inferences for future perceptions. It is evident that such an
ability cannot be due merely to some sort of mechanism that randomly
puts forth “hypotheses” until one of them is conﬁrmed. Rather, for
Physics and Perception
75

reasons that are as yet not known, the human mind in its general pro-
cess of perception, whether on the immediate level or on the highest
level involved in understanding, can create structures that have a
remarkably good chance of being correct in domains going beyond that
on which the evidence for them is founded. On the basis of this possibil-
ity, the process of “trial and error” can efﬁciently weed out those struc-
tures that are inappropriate. At the same time it can help provide
material, the criticism of which leads to a fresh act of understanding or
perception, in which yet newer structures are put forth which are gener-
ally likely to have a broader domain of validity and better correspond-
ence to the facts than the earlier ones had.
To sum up, the essential point is that through perception we are
always in a process of coming into contact with the world, in such a way
that we can be aware of the general structure of the segment with which
we have been in contact. Science may then be regarded as a means of
establishing new kinds of contacts with the world, in new domains, in
new levels, with the aid of different instruments, etc. But these contacts
would mean very little without the act of understanding, which corres-
ponds on a very high level to that process by which what has been
invariant is presented in terms of structure in the “inner show” of
immediate perception. It need then no longer be puzzling that science
does not lead to knowledge of an absolute truth. For the knowledge
supplied by science is (like all other knowledge) basically an expression
of the structure that has been revealed in our process of coming from
moment to moment into contact with a world the totality of which is
beyond our ability to grasp in terms of any given sets of percepts, ideas,
concepts, notions, etc. Nevertheless, we can obtain a fairly good grasp of
that with which we have thus far been in contact, which is also valid in
some domain, either large or small, beyond what is based on this con-
tact. By remaining alert to contradictions and sensitive to new relation-
ships, thus permitting the growth of a fresh understanding, we can keep
up with our contact with the world, and in some ways we can anticipate
what is coming later.
In science this process takes place at a very high level of abstraction,
on a scale of time involving years. In immediate perception it occurs on
a lower level of abstraction, and it is very rapid. In science the process
depends strongly on collective work, involving contributions of many
people, and in immediate perception it is largely individual. But funda-
mentally both can be regarded as limiting cases of one over-all process,
of a generalized kind of perception, in which no absolute knowledge is
to be encountered.
76
Universal Orders

Notes
1
The following image may be illustrative. On a dark and stormy night, a ship’s captain struggles to
navigate a circuitous harbor and reach port. In fact, he succeeds and arrives safely. But the
question remains, did his route approximate the channel well enough to avoid being grounded (a
good functional ﬁt), or did his course exactly match the channel? (Ed.)
2
Piaget, J., The Origins of Intelligence in the Child, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London (1953);
Piaget, J. and Inhelder, B., The Child’s Conception of Space, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London
(1956).
3
See Bohm, D., The Special Theory of Relativity, Routledge, London (1996), Ch. 31.
4
See Gibson, J. G., Psychological Review, 69, 477 (1962).
5
Ditchburn, R. W., Research, 9, 466 (1951), Optica Actica, 1, 171 and 2, 128 (1955).
6
For a discussion of these experiments see Held, R. and Freeman, S. J., Science, 142, 455 (1963);
Psychology, A Study of Science, S. Koch (ed.), McGraw-Hill, New York, 1959, p. 456; Held, R. and
Rekosh, J., Science, 141, 722 (1963).
7
Gibson, J. G., American Psychologist, 15, 694 (1960).
8
The same principle applies to the radio telescope, which is in contact (as it were) with the
structure of the whole universe, through a similar set of radio waves.
9
See survey by Held, R. and Freeman, S. J., Science, 142, 455 (1963); also the Symposium on
Sensory Deprivation, The Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases, No. 1, January 1961.
10
The similarity between scientiﬁc research and perception has already been noted by several
authors. See Hanson, N. H., Pattern of Discovery, Cambridge University Press, New York (1958),
and Kuhn, T., The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1963).
11
See Bohm, D., The Special Theory of Relativity, Chapter 31, where a similar role has been sug-
gested for the Minkowski diagram in physics.
12
See ibid.
13
See ibid., Ch. 28.
Physics and Perception
77

3
THE ENFOLDING–UNFOLDING UNIVERSE AND
CONSCIOUSNESS (1980)
In this chapter Bohm gives an extended account of what is meant by an
“implicate order,” as well as analogies indicating how implicate orders mani-
fest in the explicate, sensual world. The processes of matter, organic life, and
consciousness are all seen as ﬂowing from the reciprocal ordering principles
of enfoldment and unfoldment. It is through these ordering principles that
the holomovement – the “ground of all that is” – expresses itself in particular
forms and experiences.
The basic notion of enfoldment is quite straightforward – as when baking
a cake eggs are “folded into” the batter. What was once overt and explicit –
the eggs – becomes implicit and enfolded in the batter. But in the case of the
cake, the medium of the batter results in an essentially random process of
enfoldment, lacking any sustainable or discernible order. Bohm suggests that
a more penetrating image of enfoldment is a mixing device that enfolds drops
of ink into a viscous solution like glycerine. The combination of viscous
medium and ink illustrate a process of ordered enfoldment. Through describ-
ing multiple variations of this ordered enfoldment and unfoldment, Bohm
draws analogies with the movements and discontinuities of electrons as
understood in quantum physics.
Rather than suggesting a continuous entity that moves “through” time
and space, the image of ordered enfoldment–unfoldment allows for a view of
the electron as a perpetually emerging explicate structure, temporarily
unfolding from an ordered implicate background, and then rapidly enfolding
back into this background, in an ongoing cycle. By extension, the whole of
Extract from Chapter 7 of D. Bohm, Wholeness and Implicate Order, Routledge, London (1980).
78
Universal Orders

experience can be understood as a ﬂow of appearances resulting from such a
cycle of enfoldment and unfoldment.
Bohm also uses enfoldment as a means of explaining non-local effects in
the quantum domain. He presents the analogy of a ﬁsh in an aquarium,
projected onto two TV screens via two separate cameras, from two different
angles. As a result of this conﬁguration, each movement of the actual ﬁsh
produces two seemingly separate images on the screens. But these two images
have a suspicious, instantaneous relationship to one another – much like the
non-local relation between“entangled” particles at the quantum level. In this
analogy, the crucial relationship is that of the three-dimensional “actual”
ﬁsh to the two-dimensional TV images of the ﬁsh, these latter being seen as
unfolded projections from the more fundamental three-dimensional reality. In
similar fashion, claims Bohm, our three-dimensional world – including
entangled particles in a laboratory – manifests as a projection from a yet
more fundamental multi-dimensional reality.
The concept of a multi-dimensional reality – from which explicate
“things” unfold and into which they enfold – is closely linked to Bohm’s
considerations of the nature of space. In this view, space is neither inert nor
empty. The deep nature of space – of which our “regular” space is but a
projection – is understood as a plenum, a highly varied structure-process
which includes potentially inﬁnite dimensions. Thus space itself is understood
as a multi-dimensional ordering medium – a higher-order correlate to the
mechanical analogy of the glycerine mixing device.
In outlining the relationship of consciousness to enfoldment and unfold-
ment, Bohm ﬁrst considers consciousness as a “substantial” process. In this
regard, our sense experiences, nervous system, and brain are understood as
continuous with the whole of the material world. Though we normally assume
a distinct separation between subject and object in our perceptual ﬁeld, this
distinction cannot be maintained when we consider the substantial media of
light and sound which transmit much of our sensory input; there is really no
ultimate break to be found between subject and object. Bohm suggests that
the totality of these material phenomena may be enfolded and unfolded
throughout the brain in a process not unlike that of a hologram, creating
memory structures that bear a likeness to “original” perceptions.
Beyond this substantial aspect of consciousness, Bohm outlines his views
of the “essence of conscious experience” – factors such as awareness, atten-
tion, and understanding. At the root of any such capacities, says Bohm, is a pre-
conscious “undivided state of ﬂowing movement” – the actual and immediate
activity of the holomovement. The nature of this movement can be discerned
in a number of common experiences, such as listening to music. A sequence
of harmonious notes, says Bohm, does not sufﬁciently account for the
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
79

experience of coherence we may feel when listening to music. If the sequence
of notes was stretched out so that long lapses occurred between the notes, the
sense of musical integrity would collapse. It is the co-present reverberations
of multiple notes, in varying degrees of interpenetration and unfoldment, that
give music a sense of meaning and wholeness.
Similarly, our overall explicate experience derives from an implicate struc-
ture of ﬂowing movement, active transformations, and subtle interpenetrating
meanings, not unlike that revealed by Piaget and discussed in Chapter 2. Bohm
suggests that the “essence” of consciousness is just this ﬂowing movement,
arising from the depths of the holomovement itself. The substantial aspects of
consciousness – memory, reiﬁcation, and subject–object polarities – are under-
stood as explicated forms of this deeper unitary movement, much as the two
images of the ﬁsh unfold from a deeper, single actuality. Thus, the material
structures of the objective world, the substantial aspects of consciousness, and
the “essence” of consciousness can now be seen as a continuous ﬂow, eliminat-
ing any absolute distinction between mind and matter.
In the appendix to this chapter, Bohm advances his argument for con-
ceptualizing a new order in modern physics. To this end, the glycerine device
and the hologram are explored in greater detail than in the main body of the
chapter. While the glycerine device serves as an elementary, intuitive analogy
for the structure of an implicate order, Bohm suggests that a hologram –
though still three-dimensional – is yet closer to the nature of a multi-
dimensional implicate order.
1
INTRODUCTION
Throughout this book the central underlying theme is the unbroken
wholeness of the totality of existence as an undivided ﬂowing movement
without borders. The implicate order is particularly suitable for the
understanding of such unbroken wholeness in ﬂowing movement, for in
the implicate order the totality of existence is enfolded within each
region of space (and time). So, whatever part, element, or aspect we may
abstract in thought, this still enfolds the whole and is therefore
intrinsically related to the totality from which it has been abstracted.
Thus, wholeness permeates all that is being discussed, from the very
outset.
In this chapter we shall give a non-technical presentation of the
main features of the implicate order, ﬁrst as it arises in physics, and
then as it may be extended to the ﬁeld of consciousness, to indicate
certain general lines along which it is possible to comprehend both
cosmos and consciousness as a single unbroken totality of movement.1
80
Universal Orders

2
RÉSUMÉ, CONTRASTING MECHANISTIC ORDER IN
PHYSICS WITH IMPLICATE ORDER
It will be helpful to begin by giving a résumé of some of the main points
that have been made earlier, contrasting the generally accepted mech-
anistic order in physics and the implicate order. Let us ﬁrst consider the
mechanistic order. The principal feature of this order is that the world is
regarded as constituted of entities which are outside of each other, in the
sense that they exist independently in different regions of space (and
time) and interact through forces that do not bring about any changes in
their essential natures. The machine gives a typical illustration of such a
system of order. Each part is formed (e.g., by stamping or casting)
independently of the others, and interacts with the other parts only
through some kind of external contact. By contrast, in a living organism,
for example, each part grows in the context of the whole, so that it does
not exist independently, nor can it be said that it merely “interacts” with
the others, without itself being essentially affected in this relationship.
Physics has become almost totally committed to the notion that
the order of the universe is basically mechanistic. The most common
form of this notion is that the world is assumed to be constituted of a
set of separately existent, indivisible and unchangeable “elementary
particles,” which are the fundamental “building blocks” of the entire
universe. Originally, these were thought to be atoms, but atoms were
eventually divided into electrons, protons and neutrons. These latter
were thought to be the absolutely unchangeable and indivisible con-
stituents of all matter, but then, these were in turn found to be subject to
transformation into hundreds of different kinds of unstable particles,
and now even smaller particles called “quarks” and “partons” have been
postulated to explain these transformations. Though these have not yet
been isolated there appears to be an unshakable faith among physicists
that either such particles, or some other kind yet to be discovered,
will eventually make possible a complete and coherent explanation of
everything.
The theory of relativity was the ﬁrst signiﬁcant indication in phys-
ics of the need to question the mechanistic order. It implied that no
coherent concept of an independently existent particle is possible, nei-
ther one in which the particle would be an extended body, nor one in
which it would be a dimensionless point.2 Thus, a basic assumption
underlying the generally accepted form of mechanism in physics has
been shown to be untenable.
To meet this fundamental challenge, Einstein proposed that the par-
ticle concept no longer be taken as primary, and that instead reality be
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
81

regarded from the very beginning as constituted of ﬁelds, obeying laws
that are consistent with the requirements of the theory of relativity. A
key new idea of this “uniﬁed ﬁeld theory” of Einstein is that the ﬁeld
equations be non-linear. These equations could have solutions in the
form of localized pulses, consisting of a region of intense ﬁeld that
could move through space stably as a whole, and that could thus provide
a model of the “particle.” Such pulses do not end abruptly but spread
out to arbitrarily large distances with decreasing intensity. Thus the
ﬁeld structures associated with two pulses will merge and ﬂow together
in one unbroken whole. Moreover, when two pulses come close together,
the original particle-like forms will be so radically altered that there is
no longer even a resemblance to a structure consisting of two particles.
So, in terms of this notion, the idea of a separately and independently
existent particle is seen to be, at best, an abstraction furnishing a valid
approximation only in a certain limited domain. Ultimately, the entire
universe (with all its “particles,” including those constituting human
beings, their laboratories, observing instruments, etc.) has to be under-
stood as a single undivided whole, in which analysis into separately and
independently existent parts has no fundamental status.
However, Einstein was not able to obtain a generally coherent and
satisfactory formulation of his uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. Moreover (and per-
haps more important in the context of our discussion of the mechanistic
approach to physics) the ﬁeld concept, which is his basic starting point,
still retains the essential features of a mechanistic order, for the funda-
mental entities, the ﬁelds, are conceived as existing outside of each
other, at separate points of space and time, and are assumed to be
connected with each other only through external relationships which
indeed are also taken to be local, in the sense that only those ﬁeld
elements that are separated by “inﬁnitesimal” distances can affect each
other.3
Though the uniﬁed ﬁeld theory was not successful in this attempt
to provide an ultimate mechanistic basis for physics in terms of the
ﬁeld concept, it nevertheless did show in a concrete way how consist-
ency with the theory of relativity may be achieved by deriving the par-
ticle concept as an abstraction from an unbroken and undivided totality
of existence. Thus, it helped to strengthen the challenge posed by rela-
tivity theory to the prevailing mechanistic order.
The quantum theory presents, however, a much more serious chal-
lenge to this mechanistic order, going far beyond that provided by the
theory of relativity. The key features of the quantum theory that chal-
lenge mechanism are:
82
Universal Orders

1
Movement is in general discontinuous, in the sense that action is
constituted of indivisible quanta (implying also that an electron, for
example, can go from one state to another, without passing through
any states in between).
2
Entities, such as electrons, can show different properties (e.g.,
particle-like, wavelike, or something in between), depending on the
environmental context within which they exist and are subject to
observation.
3
Two entities, such as electrons, which initially combine to form a
molecule and then separate, show a peculiar nonlocal relationship,
which can best be described as a non-causal connection of elements
that are far apart4 (as demonstrated in the experiment of Einstein,
Podolsky, and Rosen5).
It should be added of course that the laws of quantum mechanics
are statistical and do not determine individual future events uniquely
and precisely. This is, of course, different from classical laws, which do
in principle determine these events. Such indeterminism is, however,
not a serious challenge to a mechanistic order, i.e., one in which the
fundamental elements are independently existent, lying outside each
other, and connected only by external relationships. The fact that (as in a
pinball machine) such elements are related by the rules of chance
(expressed mathematically in terms of the theory of probability) does
not change the basic externality of the elements6 and so does not essen-
tially affect the question of whether the fundamental order is mech-
anistic or not.
The three key features of the quantum theory given do, however,
clearly show the inadequacy of mechanistic notions. Thus, if all actions
are in the form of discrete quanta, the interactions between different
entities (e.g., electrons) constitute a single structure of indivisible links,
so that the entire universe has to be thought of as an unbroken whole. In
this whole, each element that we can abstract in thought shows basic
properties (wave or particle, etc.) that depend on its overall environ-
ment, in a way that is much more reminiscent of how the organs consti-
tuting living beings are related, than it is of how parts of a machine
interact. Further, the non-local, non-causal nature of the relationships of
elements distant from each other evidently violates the requirements of
separateness and independence of fundamental constituents that is
basic to any mechanistic approach.
It is instructive at this point to contrast the key features of relativ-
istic and quantum theories. Relativity theory requires continuity, strict
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
83

causality (or determinism) and locality. On the other hand, quantum
theory requires non-continuity, non-causality and non-locality. So the
basic concepts of relativity and quantum theory directly contradict each
other. It is therefore hardly surprising that these two theories have never
been uniﬁed in a consistent way. Rather, it seems most likely that such a
uniﬁcation is not actually possible. What is very probably needed
instead is a qualitatively new theory, from which both relativity and
quantum theory are to be derived as abstractions, approximations and
limiting cases.
The basic notions of this new theory evidently cannot be found by
beginning with those features in which relativity and quantum theory
stand in direct contradiction. The best place to begin is with what they
have basically in common. This is undivided wholeness. Though each
comes to such wholeness in a different way, it is clear that it is this to
which they are both fundamentally pointing.
To begin with undivided wholeness means, however, that we must
drop the mechanistic order. But this order has been, for many centuries,
basic to all thinking on physics. The mechanistic order is most naturally
and directly expressed through the Cartesian grid. Though physics has
changed radically in many ways, the Cartesian grid (with minor modiﬁ-
cations, such as the use of curvilinear coordinates) has remained the one
key feature that has not changed. Evidently, it is not easy to change this,
because our notions of order are pervasive, for not only do they involve
our thinking but also our senses, our feelings, our intuitions, our phys-
ical movement, our relationships with other people and with society as a
whole and, indeed, every phase of our lives. It is thus difﬁcult to “step
back” from our old notions of order sufﬁciently to be able seriously to
consider new notions of order.
To help make it easier to see what is meant by our proposal of new
notions of order that are appropriate to undivided wholeness, it is there-
fore useful to start with examples that may directly involve sense per-
ception, as well as with models and analogies that illustrate such notions
in an imaginative and intuitive way. We have noted elsewhere7 that the
photographic lens is an instrument that has given us a very direct kind
of sense perception of the meaning of the mechanistic order, for by
bringing about an approximate correspondence between points on the
object and points on the photographic image, it very strongly calls atten-
tion to the separate elements into which the object can be analysed. By
making possible the point-to-point imaging and recording of things that
are too small to be seen with the naked eye, too big, too fast, too slow,
etc., it leads us to believe that eventually everything can be perceived in
84
Universal Orders

this way. From this grows the idea that there is nothing that cannot also
be conceived as constituted of such localized elements. Thus, the mech-
anistic approach was greatly encouraged by the development of the
photographic lens.
We then went on to consider a new instrument, called the hologram.
As explained in the appendix to this chapter, this makes a photographic
record of the interference pattern of light waves that have come off an
object. The key new feature of this record is that each part contains
information about the whole object (so that there is no point-to-point
correspondence of object and recorded image). That is to say, the form
and structure of the entire object may be said to be enfolded within each
region of the photographic record. When one shines light on any region,
this form and structure are then unfolded to give a recognizable image
of the whole object once again.
We proposed that a new notion of order is involved here, which we
call the implicate order (from a Latin root meaning “to enfold” or “to
fold inward”). In terms of the implicate order one may say that every-
thing is enfolded into everything. This contrasts with the explicate order
now dominant in physics in which things are unfolded in the sense that
each thing lies only in its own particular region of space (and time) and
outside the regions belonging to other things.
The value of the hologram in this context is that it may help to bring
this new notion of order to our attention in a sensibly perceptible way;
but of course, the hologram is only an instrument whose function is to
make a static record (or “snapshot”) of this order. The actual order itself
which has thus been recorded is in the complex movement of electro-
magnetic ﬁelds, in the form of light waves. Such movement of light
waves is present everywhere and in principle enfolds the entire universe
of space (and time) in each region (as can be demonstrated in any such
region by placing one’s eye or a telescope there, which will “unfold” this
content).
This enfoldment and unfoldment takes place not only in the move-
ment of the electromagnetic ﬁeld but also in that of other ﬁelds, such
as the electronic, protonic, sound waves, etc. There is already a whole
host of such ﬁelds that are known, and any number of additional ones, as
yet unknown, that may be discovered later. Moreover, the movement is
only approximated by the classical concept of ﬁelds (which is generally
used for the explanation of how the hologram works). More accurately,
these ﬁelds obey quantum-mechanical laws, implying the properties of
discontinuity and non-locality, which we have already mentioned
(and which we shall discuss again later in this chapter). As we shall see
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
85

later, even the quantum laws may only be abstractions from still more
general laws, of which only some outlines are now vaguely to be seen.
So the totality of movement of enfoldment and unfoldment may go
immensely beyond what has revealed itself to our observations thus far.
We have called this totality by the name holomovement. Our basic
proposal is that what is is the holomovement, and that everything is to
be explained in terms of forms derived from this holomovement.
Though the full set of laws governing its totality is unknown (and,
indeed, probably unknowable) nevertheless these laws are assumed to
be such that from them may be abstracted relatively autonomous or
independent sub-totalities of movement (e.g., ﬁelds, particles, etc.) hav-
ing a certain recurrence and stability of their basic patterns of order and
measure. Such sub-totalities may then be investigated, each in its own
right, without our having ﬁrst to know the full laws of the holomove-
ment. This implies, of course, that we are not to regard what we ﬁnd in
such investigations as having an absolute and ﬁnal validity, but rather
we have always to be ready to discover the limits of independence of
any relatively autonomous structure of law, and from this to go on to
look for new laws that may refer to yet larger relatively autonomous
domains of this kind.
Up till now we have contrasted implicate and explicate orders, treat-
ing them as separate and distinct, but the explicate order can be
regarded as a particular or distinguished case of a more general set of
implicate orders from which latter it can be derived. What distinguishes
the explicate order is that what is thus derived is a set of recurrent and
relatively stable elements that are outside of each other. This set of
elements (e.g., ﬁelds and particles) then provides the explanation of
that domain of experience in which the mechanistic order yields an
adequate treatment. In the prevailing mechanistic approach, however,
these elements, assumed to be separately and independently existent,
are taken as constituting the basic reality. The task of science is then to
start from such parts and to derive all wholes through abstraction,
explaining them as the results of interactions of the parts. On the con-
trary, when one works in terms of the implicate order, one begins with
the undivided wholeness of the universe, and the task of science is to
derive the parts through abstraction from the whole, explaining them as
approximately separable, stable and recurrent, but externally related
elements making up relatively autonomous sub-totalities, which are to
be described in terms of an explicate order.
86
Universal Orders

3
THE IMPLICATE ORDER AND THE GENERAL
STRUCTURE OF MATTER
We shall now go on to give a more detailed account of how the general
structure of matter may be understood in terms of the implicate order.
To do this we shall begin by considering a device, which serves as an
analogy, illustrating certain essential features of the implicate order.8 (It
must be emphasized, however, that it is only an analogy and that, as will
be brought out in more detail later, its correspondence with the impli-
cate order is limited.)
This device consists of two concentric glass cylinders, with a highly
viscous ﬂuid such as glycerine between them, which is arranged in such a
way that the outer cylinder can be turned very slowly, so that there is
negligible diffusion of the viscous ﬂuid. A droplet of insoluble ink is
placed in the ﬂuid, and the outer cylinder is then turned, with the result
that the droplet is drawn out into a ﬁne thread-like form that eventually
becomes invisible. When the cylinder is turned in the opposite direction
the thread-form draws back and suddenly becomes visible as a droplet,
essentially the same as the one that was there originally (see Figure 3.1).
It is worthwhile to reﬂect carefully on what is actually happening in the
process described above. First, let us consider an element of ﬂuid. The
parts at larger radii will move faster than those at smaller radii. Such an
element will therefore be deformed, and this explains why it is eventu-
ally drawn out into a long thread. Now, the ink droplet consists of an
aggregate of carbon particles that are initially suspended in such an
element of ﬂuid. As the element is drawn out the ink particles will be
carried with it. The set of particles will thus spread out over such a large
volume that their density falls below the minimum threshold that is
visible. When the movement is reversed, then (as is known from the
physical laws governing viscous media) each part of the ﬂuid retraces its
path, so that eventually the thread-like ﬂuid element draws back to its
original form. As it does so, it carries the ink particles with it, so that
eventually they, too, draw together and become dense enough to pass
the threshold of perceptibility, so emerging once again as visible
droplets.
When the ink particles have been drawn out into a long thread, one
can say that they have been enfolded into the glycerine, as it might be
said that an egg can be folded into a cake. Of course, the difference is
that the droplet can be unfolded by reversing the motion of the ﬂuid,
while there is no way to unfold the egg (this is because the material here
undergoes irreversible diffusive mixing).
The analogy of such enfoldment and unfoldment to the implicate
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
87

order introduced in connection with the hologram is quite good.9 To
develop this analogy further, let us consider two ink droplets close to
each other, and to make visualization easier we will suppose that the ink
particles in one droplet are red, while those in the other are blue. If the
outer cylinder is then turned, each of the two separate elements of ﬂuid
in which the ink particles are suspended will be drawn out into a thread-
like form, and the two thread-like forms will, while remaining separate
and distinct, weave through each other in a complex pattern too ﬁne to
be perceptible to the eye (rather like the interference pattern that is
recorded on the hologram, which has, however, quite a different origin).
The ink particles in each droplet will of course be carried along by the
ﬂuid motions, but with each particle remaining in its own thread of ﬂuid.
Eventually, however, in any region that was large enough to be visible to
the eye, red particles from the one droplet and blue particles from the
other will be seen to intermingle, apparently at random. When the
ﬂuid motions are reversed, however, each thread-like element of ﬂuid
will draw back into itself until eventually the two gather into clearly
Figure 3.1 Illustration by Kevin Shluker
88
Universal Orders

separated regions once again. If one were able to watch what is happen-
ing more closely (e.g., with a microscope) one would see red and blue
particles that were close to each other beginning to separate, while par-
ticles of a given colour that were far from each other would begin to
come together. It is almost as if distant particles of a given colour had
“known” that they had a common destiny, separate from that of par-
ticles of the other colour, to which they were close.
Of course, there is in this case actually no such “destiny.” Indeed, all
that has happened mechanically, through the complex movements of
the ﬂuid elements in which the ink particles are suspended. But we have
to recall here that this device is only an analogy, intended to illustrate a
new notion of order. To allow this new notion to stand out clearly, it is
necessary to begin by focusing our attention on the ink particles alone,
and to set aside the consideration of the ﬂuid in which they are sus-
pended, at least for the moment. When the sets of ink particles from
each droplet have been drawn out into an invisible thread, so that par-
ticles of both colours intermingle, one can nevertheless say that as an
ensemble each set is, in a certain way, distinct from the other. This
distinction is not in general evident to the senses, but it has a certain
relationship to the total situation out of which the ensembles have
come. This situation includes the glass cylinders, the viscous ﬂuid and its
movements, and the original distribution of ink particles. It may then be
said that each ink particle belongs to a certain distinct ensemble and
that it is bound up with the others in this ensemble by the force of an
overall necessity, inherent in this total situation, which can bring the
whole set to a common end (i.e., to reconstitute the form of a droplet).
In the case of this device, the overall necessity operates mechanic-
ally as the movement of ﬂuid, according to certain well-known laws of
hydrodynamics. As indicated earlier, however, we will eventually drop
this mechanical analogy and go on to consider the holomovement. In
the holomovement, there is still an overall necessity (which we have
elsewhere called “holonomy”10) but its laws are no longer mechanical.
Rather, as pointed out in Section 2 of this chapter, its laws will be in a
ﬁrst approximation those of the quantum theory, while more accurately
they will go beyond even these, in ways that are at present only vaguely
discernible. Nevertheless, certain similar principles of distinction will
prevail in the holomovement as in the analogy of the device made up of
glass cylinders. That is to say, ensembles of elements which intermingle
or interpenetrate in space can nevertheless be distinguished, but only
in the context of certain total situations in which the members of each
ensemble are related through the force of an overall necessity, inherent
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
89

in these situations, that can bring them together in a speciﬁable way.
Now that we have established a new kind of distinction of
ensembles that are enfolded together in space, we can go on to put these
distinctions into an order. The simplest notion of order is that of a
sequence or succession. We shall start with such a simple idea and
develop it later to much more complex and subtle notions of order.
The essence of a simple, sequential order is in the series of relation-
ships among distinct elements:
A : B :: B : C :: C : D . . . .
For example, if A represents one segment of a line, B the succeeding one,
etc., the sequentiality of segments of the line follows from the above set
of relationships.
Let us now return to our ink-in-ﬂuid analogy, and suppose that we
have inserted into the ﬂuid a large number of droplets, set close to each
other and arranged in a line (this time we do not suppose different
colours). These we label as A, B, C, D . . . . We then turn the outer cylinder
many times, so that each of the droplets gives rise to an ensemble of ink
particles, enfolded in so large a region of space that particles from all the
droplets intermingle. We label the successive ensembles A′, B′, C′, D′ . . . .
It is clear that, in some sense, an entire linear order has been
enfolded into the ﬂuid. This order may be expressed through the
relationships
A′ : B′ :: B′ : C′ :: C′ : D′ . . . .
This order is not present to the senses. Yet its reality may be demon-
strated by reversing the motion of the ﬂuid, so that the ensembles, A′, B′,
C′, D′ . . . , will unfold to give rise to the original linearly arranged series
of droplets, A, B, C, D . . . .
In the above, we have taken a pre-existent explicate order, consisting
of ensembles of ink particles arranged along a line, and transformed it
into an order of enfolded ensembles, which is in some key way similar.
We shall next consider a more subtle kind of order, not derivable from
such a transformation.
Suppose now that we insert an ink droplet, A, and turn the outer
cylinder n times. We then insert a second ink droplet, B, at the same
place, and again turn the cylinder n times. We keep up this procedure
with further droplets, C, D, E . . . . The resulting ensembles of ink par-
ticles, a, b, c, d, e, . . . , will now differ in a new way, for, when the motion
90
Universal Orders

of the ﬂuid is reversed, the ensembles will successively come together to
form droplets in an order opposite to the one in which they were put in.
For example, at a certain stage the particles of ensemble d will come
together (after which they will be drawn out into a thread again). This
will happen to those of c, then to b, etc. It is clear from this that
ensemble d is related to c as c is to b, and so on. So these ensembles form
a certain sequential order. However, this is in no sense a transformation
of a linear order in space (as was that of the sequence A′, B′, C′, D′ . . .
that we considered earlier), for in general only one of these ensembles
will unfold at a time; when any one is unfolded, the rest are still
enfolded. In short, we have an order which cannot all be made explicate
at once and which is nevertheless real, as may be revealed when succes-
sive droplets become visible as the cylinder is turned.
We call this an intrinsically implicate order, to distinguish it from an
order that may be enfolded but which can unfold all at once into a single
explicate order. So we have here an example of how, as stated in Section
2, an explicate order is a particular case of a more general set of impli-
cate orders.
Let us now go on to combine both of the above-described types of
order.
We ﬁrst insert a droplet, A, in a certain position and turn the cylin-
der n times. We then insert a droplet, B, in a slightly different position
and turn the cylinder n more times (so that A has been enfolded by 2n
turns). We then insert C further along the line AB and turn n more times,
so that A has been enfolded by 3n turns, B 2n turns, and C by n turns. We
proceed in this way to enfold a large number of droplets. We then move
the cylinder fairly rapidly in the reverse direction. If the rate of emer-
gence of droplets is faster than the minimum time of resolution of the
human eye, what we will see is apparently a particle moving continu-
ously and crossing the space.
Such enfoldment and unfoldment in the implicate order may evi-
dently provide a new model of, for example, an electron, which is quite
different from that provided by the current mechanistic notion of a
particle that exists at each moment only in a small region of space and
that changes its position continuously with time. What is essential to
this new model is that the electron is instead to be understood through a
total set of enfolded ensembles, which are generally not localized in
space. At any given moment one of these may be unfolded and therefore
localized, but in the next moment, this one enfolds to be replaced by the
one that follows. The notion of continuity of existence is approximated
by that of very rapid recurrence of similar forms, changing in a simple
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
91

and regular way (rather as a rapidly spinning bicycle wheel gives the
impression of a solid disc, rather than of a sequence of rotating spokes).
Of course, more fundamentally, the particle is only an abstraction that is
manifest to our senses. What is is always a totality of ensembles, all
present together, in an orderly series of stages of enfoldment and
unfoldment, which intermingle and inter-penetrate each other in prin-
ciple throughout the whole of space.
It is further evident that we could have enfolded any number of
such “electrons,” whose forms would have intermingled and inter-
penetrated in the implicate order. Nevertheless, as these forms unfolded
and became manifest to our senses, they would have come out as a set of
“particles” clearly separated from each other. The arrangement of
ensembles could have been such that these particle-like manifestations
came out “moving” independently in straight lines, or equally well,
along curved paths that were mutually related and dependent, as if there
had been a force of interaction between them. Since classical physics
traditionally aims to explain everything in terms of interacting systems
of particles, it is clear that in principle one could equally well treat the
entire domain that is correctly covered by such classical concepts in
terms of our model of ordered sequences of enfolding and unfolding
ensembles.
What we are proposing here is that in the quantum domain this
model is a great deal better than is the classical notion of an interacting
set of particles. Thus, although successive localized manifestations of an
electron, for example, may be very close to each other, so that they
approximate a continuous track, this need not always be so. In principle,
discontinuities may be allowed in the manifest tracks – and these may,
of course, provide the basis of an explanation of how, as stated in Sec-
tion 2, an electron can go from one state to another without passing
through states in between. This is possible, of course, because the “par-
ticle” is only an abstraction of a much greater totality of structure. This
abstraction is what is manifest to our senses (or instruments) but evi-
dently there is no reason why it has to have continuous movement (or
indeed continuous existence).
Next, if the total context of the process is changed, entirely new
modes of manifestation may arise. Thus, returning to the ink-in-ﬂuid
analogy, if the cylinders are changed, or if obstacles are placed in the
ﬂuid, the form and order of manifestation will be different. Such a
dependence – the dependence of what manifests to observation on the
total situation – has a close parallel to a feature which we have also
mentioned in Section 2, i.e., that according to the quantum theory
92
Universal Orders

electrons may show properties resembling either those of particles or
those of waves (or of something in between) in accordance with the total
situation involved in which they exist and in which they may be
observed experimentally.
What has been said thus far indicates that the implicate order gives
generally a much more coherent account of the quantum properties of
matter than does the traditional mechanistic order. What we are propos-
ing here is that the implicate order therefore be taken as fundamental.
To understand this proposal fully, however, it is necessary to contrast it
carefully with what is implied in a mechanistic approach based on the
explicate order; for, even in terms of this latter approach, it may of
course be admitted that in a certain sense at least, enfoldment and
unfoldment can take place in various speciﬁc situations (e.g., such as
that which happens with the ink droplet). However, this sort of situation
is not regarded as having a fundamental kind of signiﬁcance. All that is
primary, independently existent, and universal is thought to be express-
ible in an explicate order, in terms of elements that are externally related
(and these are usually thought to be particles, or ﬁelds, or some com-
bination of the two). Whenever enfoldment and unfoldment are found
actually to take place, it is therefore assumed that these can ultimately
be explained in terms of an underlying explicate order through a deeper
mechanical analysis (as, indeed, does happen with the ink-droplet
device).
Our proposal to start with the implicate order as basic, then, means
that what is primary, independently existent, and universal has to be
expressed in terms of the implicate order. So we are suggesting that it is
the implicate order that is autonomously active while, as indicated earl-
ier, the explicate order ﬂows out of a law of the implicate order, so that it
is secondary, derivative, and appropriate only in certain limited con-
texts. Or, to put it another way, the relationships constituting the fun-
damental law are between the enfolded structures that interweave and
interpenetrate each other, throughout the whole of space, rather than
between the abstracted and separated forms that are manifest to the
senses (and to our instruments).
What, then, is the meaning of the appearance of the apparently
independent and self-existent “manifest world” in the explicate order?
The answer to this question is indicated by the root of the word “mani-
fest,” which comes from the Latin “manus,” meaning “hand.” Essen-
tially, what is manifest is what can be held with the hand – something
solid, tangible, and visibly stable. The implicate order has its ground in
the holomovement which is vast, rich, and in a state of unending ﬂux of
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
93

enfoldment and unfoldment, with laws most of which are only vaguely
known, and which may even be ultimately unknowable in their totality.
Thus it cannot be grasped as something solid, tangible and stable to the
senses (or to our instruments). Nevertheless, as has been indicated earl-
ier, the overall law (holonomy) may be assumed to be such that in a
certain sub-order, within the whole set of implicate order, there is a
totality of forms that have an approximate kind of recurrence, stability
and separability. Evidently, these forms are capable of appearing as the
relatively solid, tangible, and stable elements that make up our “mani-
fest world.” The special distinguished sub-order indicated above, which
is the basis of the possibility of this manifest world, is then, in effect,
what is meant by the explicate order.
We can, for convenience, always picture the explicate order, or
imagine it, or represent it to ourselves, as the order present to the senses.
The fact that this order is actually more or less the one appearing to our
senses must, however, be explained. This can be done only when we
bring consciousness into our “universe of discourse” and show that
matter in general and consciousness in particular may, at least in a
certain sense, have this explicate (manifest) order in common. This
question will be explored further when we discuss consciousness in
Sections 7 and 8.
4
QUANTUM THEORY AS AN INDICATION OF A
MULTIDIMENSIONAL IMPLICATE ORDER
Thus far we have been presenting the implicate order as a process of
enfoldment and unfoldment taking place in the ordinary three-
dimensional space. However, as pointed out in Section 2 the quantum
theory has a fundamentally new kind of non-local relationship, which
may be described as a non-causal connection of elements that are
distant from each other, which is brought out in the experiment of
Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen.11 For our purposes, it is not necessary to
go into the technical details concerning this non-local relationship. All
that is important here is that one ﬁnds, through a study of the implica-
tions of the quantum theory, that the analysis of a total system into a set
of independently existent but interacting particles breaks down in a
radically new way. One discovers, instead, both from consideration of
the meaning of the mathematical equations and from the results of the
actual experiments, that the various particles have to be taken literally as
projections of a higher-dimensional reality which cannot be accounted
for in terms of any force of interaction between them.12
94
Universal Orders

We can obtain a helpful intuitive sense of what is meant by the
notion of projection here, through the consideration of the following
device. Let us begin with a rectangular tank full of water, with transpar-
ent walls (see Figure 3.2).
Suppose further that there are two television cameras, A and B,
directed at what is going on in the water (e.g., ﬁsh swimming around)
as seen through the two walls at right angles to each other. Now let the
corresponding television images be made visible on screens A and B in
another room. What we will see there is a certain relationship between
the images appearing on the two screens. For example, on screen A we
may see an image of a ﬁsh, and on screen B we will see another such
image. At any given moment each image will generally look different
from the other. Nevertheless the differences will be related, in the sense
that when one image is seen to execute certain movements, the other
will be seen to execute corresponding movements. Moreover, content
that is mainly on one screen will pass into the other, and vice versa (e.g.,
when a ﬁsh initially facing camera A turns through a right angle, the
image that was on A is now to be found on B). Thus at all times the
image content on the other screen will correlate with and reﬂect that of
the other.
Of course, we know that the two images do not refer to independ-
ently existent though interacting actualities (in which, for example, one
image could be said to “cause” related changes in the other). Rather, they
refer to a single actuality, which is the common ground of both (and this
explains the correlation of images without the assumption that they
causally affect each other). This actuality is of higher dimensionality
than are the separate images on the screens; or, to put it differently, the
images on the screens are two-dimensional projections (or facets) of a
three-dimensional reality. In some sense this three-dimensional reality
holds these two-dimensional projections within it. Yet, since these
Figure 3.2
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
95

projections exist only as abstractions, the three-dimensional reality is
neither of these, but rather it is something else, something of a nature
beyond both.
What we are proposing here is that the quantum property of a non-
local, non-causal relationship of distant elements may be understood
through an extension of the notion described above. That is to say, we
may regard each of the “particles” constituting a system as a projection
of a “higher-dimensional” reality, rather than as a separate particle,
existing together with all the others in a common three-dimensional
space. For example, in the experiment of Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen,
which we have mentioned earlier, each of two atoms that initially com-
bine to form a single molecule are to be regarded as three-dimensional
projections of a six-dimensional reality. This may be demonstrated
experimentally by causing the molecule to disintegrate and then observ-
ing the two atoms after they have separated and are quite distant from
each other, so that they do not interact and therefore have no causal
connections. What is actually found is that the behaviour of the two
atoms is correlated in a way that is rather similar to that of the two
television images of the ﬁsh, as described earlier. Thus (as is, indeed,
further shown by a more careful consideration of the mathematical
form of the quantum laws involved here), each electron acts as if it were
a projection of a higher-dimensional reality.
Under certain conditions,13 the two three-dimensional projections
corresponding to the two atoms may have a relative independence of
behaviour. When these conditions are satisﬁed it will be a good
approximation to treat both atoms as relatively independent but inter-
acting particles, both in the same three-dimensional space. More gener-
ally, however, the two atoms will show the typical non-local correlation
of behaviour which implies that, more deeply, they are only three-
dimensional projections of the kind described above.
A system constituted of N “particles” is then a 3N-dimensional real-
ity, of which each “particle” is a three-dimensional projection. Under the
ordinary conditions of our experience, these projections will be close
enough to independence so that it will be a good approximation to treat
them in the way that we usually do, as a set of separately existing
particles all in the same three-dimensional space. Under other con-
ditions this approximation will not be adequate. For example, at low
temperatures an aggregate of electrons shows a new property of
superconductivity, in which electrical resistance vanishes, so that elec-
tric current can ﬂow indeﬁnitely. This is explained by showing that the
electrons enter a different kind of state, in which they are no longer
96
Universal Orders

relatively independent. Rather, each electron acts as a projection of a
single higher-dimensional reality and all these projections share a non-
local, non-causal correlation, which is such that they go round obstacles
“co-operatively” without being scattered or diffused, and therefore
without resistance. (One could compare this behaviour to a ballet dance,
while the usual behaviour of electrons could be compared to that of an
agitated crowd of people, moving in a helter-skelter way.)
What follows from all this is that basically the implicate order has
to be considered as a process of enfoldment and unfoldment in a higher-
dimensional space. Only under certain conditions can this be simpliﬁed
as a process of enfoldment and unfoldment in three dimensions. Thus
far, we have indeed used this sort of simpliﬁcation, not only with the
ink-in-ﬂuid analogy but also with the hologram. Such a treatment,
though, is only an approximation, even for the hologram. Indeed, as has
already been pointed out earlier in this chapter, the electromagnetic
ﬁeld, which is the ground of the holographic image, obeys the laws of
the quantum theory, and when these are properly applied to the ﬁeld it
is found that this, too, is actually a multidimensional reality which can
only under certain conditions be simpliﬁed as a three-dimensional
reality.
Quite generally, then, the implicate order has to be extended into a
multidimensional reality. In principle this reality is one unbroken
whole, including the entire universe with all its “ﬁelds” and “particles.”
Thus we have to say that the holomovement enfolds and unfolds in a
multidimensional order, the dimensionality of which is effectively
inﬁnite. However, as we have already seen, relatively independent sub-
totalities can generally be abstracted, which may be approximated as
autonomous. Thus the principle of relative autonomy of sub-totalities
which we introduced earlier as basic to the holomovement is now seen
to extend to the multidimensional order of reality.
5
COSMOLOGY AND THE IMPLICATE ORDER
From our consideration of how the general structure of matter can be
understood in terms of the implicate order, we now come to certain new
notions of cosmology that are implicit in what is being done here.
To bring these out, we ﬁrst note that when the quantum theory is
applied to ﬁelds (in the manner discussed in the previous section) it is
found that the possible states of energy of this ﬁeld are discrete (or
quantized). Such a state of the ﬁeld is, in some respects, a wavelike
excitation spreading out over a broad region of space. Nevertheless, it
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
97

also has somehow a discrete quantum of energy (and momentum) pro-
portional to its frequency, so that in other respects it is like a particle14
(e.g., a photon). However, if one considers the electromagnetic ﬁeld in
empty space, for example, one ﬁnds from the quantum theory that each
such “wave-particle” mode of excitation of the ﬁeld has what is called a
“zero-point” energy, below which it cannot go, even when its energy
falls to the minimum that is possible. If one were to add up the energies
of all the “wave-particle” modes of excitation in any region of space, the
result would be inﬁnite, because an inﬁnite number of wavelengths is
present. However, there is good reason to suppose that one need not
keep on adding the energies corresponding to shorter and shorter wave-
lengths. There may be a certain shortest possible wavelength, so that the
total number of modes of excitation, and therefore the energy, would be
ﬁnite.
Indeed, if one applies the rules of quantum theory to the currently
accepted general theory of relativity, one ﬁnds that the gravitational
ﬁeld is also constituted of such “wave-particle” modes, each having a
minimum “zero-point” energy. As a result the gravitational ﬁeld, and
therefore the deﬁnition of what is to be meant by distance, cease to be
completely deﬁned. As we keep on adding excitations corresponding to
shorter and shorter wavelengths to the gravitational ﬁeld, we come to a
certain length at which the measurement of space and time becomes
totally undeﬁnable. Beyond this, the whole notion of space and time as
we know it would fade out, into something that is at present unspeciﬁ-
able. So it would be reasonable to suppose, at least provisionally, that
this is the shortest wavelength that should be considered as contributing
to the “zero-point” energy of space.
When this length is estimated it turns out to be about 10−33 cm. This
is much shorter than anything thus far probed in physical experiments
(which have got down to about 10−17 cm or so). If one computes the
amount of energy that would be in one cubic centimetre of space, with
this shortest possible wavelength, it turns out to be very far beyond the
total energy of all the matter in the known universe.15
What is implied by this proposal is that what we call empty space
contains an immense background of energy, and that matter as we know
it is a small, “quantized” wavelike excitation on top of this background,
rather like a tiny ripple on a vast sea. In current physical theories, one
avoids the explicit consideration of this background by calculating only
the difference between the energy of empty space and that of space with
matter in it. This difference is all that counts in the determination of
the general properties of matter as they are presently accessible to
98
Universal Orders

observation. However, further developments in physics may make it
possible to probe the above-described background in a more direct way.
Moreover, even at present, this vast sea of energy may play a key part in
the understanding of the cosmos as a whole.
In this connection it may be said that space, which has so much
energy, is full rather than empty. The two opposing notions of space as
empty and space as full have indeed continually alternated with each
other in the development of philosophical and physical ideas. Thus, in
Ancient Greece, the School of Parmenides and Zeno held that space is a
plenum. This view was opposed by Democritus, who was perhaps the
ﬁrst seriously to propose a world view that conceived of space as emp-
tiness (i.e., the void) in which material particles (e.g., atoms) are free to
move. Modern science has generally favoured this latter atomistic view,
and yet, during the nineteenth century, the former view was also ser-
iously entertained, through the hypothesis of an ether that ﬁlls all
space. Matter, thought of as consisting of special recurrent stable and
separable forms in the ether (such as ripples or vortices), would be
transmitted through this plenum as if the latter were empty.
A similar notion is used in modern physics. According to the quan-
tum theory, a crystal at absolute zero allows electrons to pass through it
without scattering. They go through as if the space were empty. If the
temperature is raised, inhomogeneities appear, and these scatter elec-
trons. If one were to use such electrons to observe the crystal (i.e. by
focusing them with an electron lens to make an image) what would be
visible would be just the inhomogeneities. It would then appear that the
inhomogeneities exist independently and that the main body of the
crystal was sheer nothingness.
It is being suggested here, then, that what we perceive through the
senses as empty space is actually the plenum, which is the ground for
the existence of everything, including ourselves. The things that appear
to our senses are derivative forms and their true meaning can be seen
only when we consider the plenum, in which they are generated and
sustained, and into which they must ultimately vanish.
This plenum is, however, no longer to be conceived through the idea
of a simple material medium, such as an ether, which would be regarded
as existing and moving only in a three-dimensional space. Rather, one is
to begin with the holomovement, in which there is the immense “sea” of
energy described earlier. This sea is to be understood in terms of a
multidimensional implicate order, along the lines sketched in Section 4,
while the entire universe of matter as we generally observe it is to be
treated as a comparatively small pattern of excitation. This excitation
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
99

pattern is relatively autonomous and gives rise to approximately recur-
rent, stable and separable projections into a three-dimensional explicate
order of manifestation, which is more or less equivalent to that of space
as we commonly experience it.
With all this in mind let us consider the current generally accepted
notion that the universe, as we know it, originated in what is almost a
single point in space and time from a “big bang” that happened some
ten thousand million years ago. In our approach this “big bang” is to be
regarded as actually just a “little ripple.” An interesting image is
obtained by considering that in the middle of the actual ocean (i.e., on
the surface of the Earth) myriads of small waves occasionally come
together fortuitously with such phase relationships that they end up in a
certain small region of space, suddenly to produce a very high wave
which just appears as if from nowhere and out of nothing. Perhaps
something like this could happen in the immense ocean of cosmic
energy, creating a sudden wave pulse, from which our “universe” would
be born. This pulse would explode outward and break up into smaller
ripples that spread yet further outward to constitute our “expanding
universe.” The latter would have its “space” enfolded within it as a
special distinguished explicate and manifest order.16
In terms of this proposal it follows that the current attempt to
understand our “universe” as if it were self-existent and independent of
the sea of cosmic energy can work at best in some limited way (depend-
ing on how far the notion of a relatively independent sub-totality
applies to it). For example, the “black holes” may lead us into an area in
which the cosmic background of energy is important. Also, of course,
there may be many other such expanding universes.
Moreover, it must be remembered that even this vast sea of cosmic
energy takes into account only what happens on a scale larger than the
critical length of 10−33 cm, to which we have referred earlier. But this
length is only a certain kind of limit on the applicability of ordinary
notions of space and time. To suppose that there is nothing beyond this
limit at all would indeed be quite arbitrary. Rather, it is very probable
that beyond it lies a further domain, or set of domains, of the nature of
which we have as yet little or no idea.
What we have seen thus far is a progression from explicate order to
simple three-dimensional implicate order, then to a multidimensional
implicate order, then to an extension of this to the immense “sea” in
what is sensed as empty space. The next stage may well lead to yet
further enrichment and extension of the notion of implicate order,
beyond the critical limit of 10−33 cm mentioned above; or it may lead to
100
Universal Orders

some basically new notions which could not be comprehended even
within the possible further developments of the implicate order. Never-
theless, whatever may be possible in this regard, it is clear that we may
assume that the principle of relative autonomy of sub-totalities con-
tinues to be valid. Any sub-totality, including those which we have thus
far considered, may up to a point be studied in its own right. Thus,
without assuming that we have already arrived even at an outline of
absolute and ﬁnal truth, we may at least for a time put aside the need to
consider what may be beyond the immense energies of empty space,
and go on to bring out the further implications of the sub-totality of
order that has revealed itself thus far.
6
THE IMPLICATE ORDER, LIFE AND THE FORCE OF
OVERALL NECESSITY
In this section we shall bring out the meaning of the implicate order by
ﬁrst showing how it makes possible the comprehension of both
inanimate matter and life on the basis of a single ground, common to
both, and then we shall go on to propose a certain more general form for
the laws of the implicate order.
Let us begin by considering the growth of a living plant. This
growth starts from a seed, but the seed contributes little or nothing to
the actual material substance of the plant or to the energy needed to
make it grow. This latter comes almost entirely from the soil, the water,
the air and the sunlight. According to modern theories the seed contains
information, in the form of DNA, and this information somehow “dir-
ects” the environment to form a corresponding plant.
In terms of the implicate order, we may say that even inanimate
matter maintains itself in a continual process similar to the growth of
plants. Thus, recalling the ink-in-ﬂuid model of the electron, we see that
such a “particle” is to be understood as a recurrent stable order of
unfoldment in which a certain form undergoing regular changes mani-
fests again and again, but so rapidly that it appears to be in continuous
existence. We may compare this to a forest, constituted of trees that are
continually dying and being replaced by new ones. If it is considered on
a long time-scale, this forest may be regarded likewise as a continuously
existent but slowly-changing entity. So when understood through the
implicate order, inanimate matter and living beings are seen to be, in
certain key respects, basically similar in their modes of existence.
When inanimate matter is left to itself the above-described process
of enfoldment and unfoldment just reproduces a similar form of
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
101

inanimate matter, but when this is further “informed” by the seed, it
begins to produce a living plant instead. Ultimately, this latter gives rise
to a new seed, which allows the process to continue after the death of
this plant.
As the plant is formed, maintained and dissolved by the exchange of
matter and energy with its environment, at which point can we say that
there is a sharp distinction between what is alive and what is not?
Clearly, a molecule of carbon dioxide that crosses a cell boundary into a
leaf does not suddenly “come alive” nor does a molecule of oxygen
suddenly “die” when it is released to the atmosphere. Rather, life itself
has to be regarded as belonging in some sense to a totality, including
plant and environment.
It may indeed be said that life is enfolded in the totality and that,
even when it is not manifest, it is somehow “implicit” in what we gener-
ally call a situation in which there is no life. We can illustrate this by
considering the ensemble of all the atoms that are now in the environ-
ment but that are eventually going to constitute a plant that will grow
from a certain seed. This ensemble is evidently, in certain key ways,
similar to that considered in Section 3, of ink particles forming a drop-
let. In both cases the elements of the ensemble are bound together to
contribute to a common end (in one case an ink droplet and in the other
case a living plant).
The above does not mean, however, that life can be reduced com-
pletely to nothing more than that which comes out of the activity of a
basis governed by the laws of inanimate matter alone (though we do not
deny that certain features of life may be understood in this way). Rather,
we are proposing that as the notion of the holomovement was enriched
by going from three-dimensional to multidimensional implicate order
and then to the vast “sea” of energy in “empty” space, so we may now
enrich this notion further by saying that in its totality the holomove-
ment includes the principle of life as well. Inanimate matter is then to
be regarded as a relatively autonomous sub-totality in which, at least as
far as we now know, life does not signiﬁcantly manifest. That is to say,
inanimate matter is a secondary, derivative, and particular abstraction
from the holomovement (as would also be the notion of a “life force”
entirely independent of matter). Indeed, the holomovement which is
“life implicit” is the ground both of “life explicit” and of “inanimate”
matter, and this ground is what is primary, self-existent and universal.
Thus we do not fragment life and inanimate matter, nor do we try to
reduce the former completely to nothing but an outcome of the latter.
Let us now put the above approach in a more general way. What is
102
Universal Orders

basic to the law of the holomovement is, as we have seen, the possibility
of abstraction of a set of relatively autonomous sub-totalities. We can
now add that the laws of each such abstracted sub-totality quite gener-
ally operate under certain conditions and limitations deﬁned only in a
corresponding total situation (or set of similar situations). This oper-
ation will in general have these three key features:
1
A set of implicate orders.
2
A special distinguished case of the above set, which constitutes an
explicate order of manifestation.
3
A general relationship (or law) expressing a force of necessity which
binds together a certain set of the elements of the implicate order in
such a way that they contribute to a common explicate end (differ-
ent from that to which another set of inter-penetrating and inter-
mingling elements will contribute).
The origin of this force of necessity cannot be understood solely in
terms of the explicate and implicate orders belonging to the type of
situation in question. Rather, at this level, such necessity has simply to
be accepted as inherent in the overall situation under discussion. An
understanding of its origin would take us to a deeper, more comprehen-
sive and more inward level of relative autonomy which, however, would
also have its implicate and explicate orders and a correspondingly
deeper and more inward force of necessity that would bring about their
transformation into each other.17
In short, we are proposing that this form of the law of a relatively
autonomous sub-totality, which is a consistent generalization of all the
forms that we have studied thus far, is to be considered as universal; and
that in our subsequent work we shall explore the implicates of such a
notion, at least tentatively and provisionally.
7
CONSCIOUSNESS AND THE IMPLICATE ORDER
At this point it may be said that at least some outlines of our notions of
cosmology and of the general nature of reality have been sketched
(though, of course, to “ﬁll in” this sketch with adequate detail would
require a great deal of further work much of which still remains to be
done). Let us now consider how consciousness may be understood in
relation to these notions.
We begin by proposing that in some sense, consciousness (which we
take to include thought, feeling, desire, will, etc.) is to be comprehended
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
103

in terms of the implicate order, along with reality as a whole. That is
to say, we are suggesting that the implicate order applies both to
matter (living and non-living) and to consciousness, and that it can
therefore make possible an understanding of the general relationship
of these two, from which we may be able to come to some notion of
a common ground of both (rather as was also suggested in the previ-
ous section in our discussion of the relationship of inanimate matter
and life).
To obtain an understanding of the relationship of matter and con-
sciousness has, however, thus far proved to be extremely difﬁcult, and
this difﬁculty has its root in the very great difference in their basic
qualities as they present themselves in our experience. This difference
has been expressed with particularly great clarity by Descartes, who
described matter as “extended substance” and consciousness as “think-
ing substance.” Evidently, by “extended substance” Descartes meant
something made up of distinct forms existing in space, in an order of
extension and separation basically similar to the one that we have been
calling explicate. By using the term “thinking substance” in such sharp
contrast to “extended substance” he was clearly implying that the vari-
ous distinct forms appearing in thought do not have their existence in
such an order of extension and separation (i.e., some kind of space), but
rather in a different order, in which extension and separations have no
fundamental signiﬁcance. The implicate order has just this latter qual-
ity, so in a certain sense Descartes was perhaps anticipating that con-
sciousness has to be understood in terms of an order that is closer to the
implicate than it is to the explicate.
However, when we start, as Descartes did, with extension and sep-
aration in space as primary for matter, then we can see nothing in this
notion that can serve as a basis for a relationship between matter and
consciousness, whose orders are so different. Descartes clearly under-
stood this difﬁculty and indeed proposed to resolve it by means of the
idea that such a relationship is made possible by God, who being outside
of and beyond matter and consciousness (both of which He has indeed
created) is able to give the latter “clear and distinct notions” that are
currently applicable to the former. Since then, the idea that God takes
care of this requirement has generally been abandoned, but it has not
commonly been noticed that thereby the possibility of comprehending
the relationship between matter and consciousness has collapsed.
In this chapter, we have, however, shown in some detail that matter
as a whole can be understood in terms of the notion that the implicate
order is the immediate and primary actuality (while the explicate order
104
Universal Orders

can be derived as a particular, distinguished case of the implicate order).
The question that arises here, then, is that of whether or not (as was in a
certain sense anticipated by Descartes) the actual “substance” of con-
sciousness can be understood in terms of the notion that the implicate
order is also its primary and immediate actuality. If matter and con-
sciousness could in this way be understood together, in terms of the
same general notion of order, the way would be opened to comprehend-
ing their relationship on the basis of some common ground.18 Thus we
could come to the germ of a new notion of unbroken wholeness, in
which consciousness is no longer to be fundamentally separated from
matter.
Let us now consider what justiﬁcation there is for the notion that
matter and consciousness have the implicate order in common. First, we
note that matter in general is, in the ﬁrst instance, the object of our
consciousness. However, as we have seen throughout this chapter, vari-
ous energies such as light, sound, etc., are continually enfolding infor-
mation in principle concerning the entire universe of matter into each
region of space. Through this process, such information may of course
enter our sense organs, to go on through the nervous system to the
brain. More deeply, all the matter in our bodies, from the very ﬁrst,
enfolds the universe in some way. Is this enfolded structure, both of
information and of matter (e.g., in the brain and nervous system), that
which primarily enters consciousness?
Let us ﬁrst consider the question of whether information is actually
enfolded in the brain cells. Some light on this question is afforded by
certain work on brain structure, notably that of Pribram.19 Pribram has
given evidence backing up his suggestion that memories are generally
recorded all over the brain in such a way that information concerning a
given object or quality is not stored in a particular cell or localized part
of the brain, but rather that all the information is enfolded over the
whole. This storage resembles a hologram in its function, but its actual
structure is much more complex. We can then suggest that when the
“holographic” record in the brain is suitably activated, the response is to
create a pattern of nervous energy constituting a partial experience
similar to that which produced the “hologram” in the ﬁrst place. But it
is also different in that it is less detailed, in that memories from many
different times may merge together, and in that memories may be con-
nected by association and by logical thought to give a certain further
order to the whole pattern. In addition, if sensory data is also being
attended to at the same time, the whole of this response from memory
will, in general, fuse with the nervous excitation coming from the senses
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
105

to give rise to an overall experience in which memory, logic, and sensory
activity combine into a single unanalysable whole.
Of course, consciousness is more than what has been described
above. It also involves awareness, attention, perception, acts of under-
standing, and perhaps yet more. We have suggested in the ﬁrst chapter
[of Wholeness and Implicate Order] that these must go beyond a mech-
anistic response (such as that which the holographic model of brain
function would by itself imply). So in studying them we may be coming
closer to the essence of actual conscious experience than is possible
merely by discussing patterns of excitation of the sensory nerves and
how they may be recorded in memory.
It is difﬁcult to say much about faculties as subtle as these. How-
ever, by reﬂecting on and giving careful attention to what happens in
certain experiences, one can obtain valuable clues. Consider, for
example, what takes place when one is listening to music. At a given
moment a certain note is being played but a number of the previous
notes are still “reverberating” in consciousness. Close attention will
show that it is the simultaneous presence and activity of all these rever-
berations that is responsible for the direct and immediately felt sense of
movement, ﬂow and continuity. To hear a set of notes so far apart in time
that there is no such reverberation will destroy altogether the sense of a
whole unbroken, living movement that gives meaning and force to what
is heard.
It is clear from the above that one does not experience the actuality
of this whole movement by “holding on” to the past, with the aid of a
memory of the sequence of notes, and comparing this past with the
present. Rather, as one can discover by further attention, the “reverber-
ations” that make such an experience possible are not memories but are
rather active transformations of what came earlier, in which are to be
found not only a generally diffused sense of the original sounds, with an
intensity that falls off, according to the time elapsed since they were
picked up by the ear, but also various emotional responses, bodily sensa-
tions, incipient muscular movements, and the evocation of a wide range
of yet further meanings, often of great subtlety. One can thus obtain a
direct sense of how a sequence of notes is enfolding into many levels of
consciousness, and of how at any given moment, the transformations
ﬂowing out of many such enfolded notes interpenetrate and intermingle
to give rise to an immediate and primary feeling of movement.
This activity in consciousness evidently constitutes a striking paral-
lel to the activity that we have proposed for the implicate order in
general. Thus in Section 3, we have given a model of an electron in
106
Universal Orders

which, at any instant, there is a co-present set of differently transformed
ensembles which interpenetrate and intermingle in their various
degrees of enfoldment. In such enfoldment, there is a radical change,
not only of form but also of structure, in the entire set of ensembles
(which change we have elsewhere called a metamorphosis20); and yet, a
certain totality of order in the ensembles remains invariant, in the sense
that in all these changes a subtle but fundamental similarity of order is
preserved.21
In the music, there is, as we have seen, a basically similar trans-
formation (of notes) in which a certain order can also be seen to be
preserved. The key difference in these two cases is that for our model of
the electron an enfolded order is grasped in thought, as the presence
together of many different but interrelated degrees of transformations
of ensembles, while for the music, it is sensed immediately as the pres-
ence together of many different but interrelated degrees of transform-
ations of tones and sounds. In the latter, there is a feeling of both
tension and harmony between the various co-present transformations,
and this feeling is indeed what is primary in the apprehension of the
music in its undivided state of ﬂowing movement.
In listening to music, one is therefore directly perceiving an impli-
cate order. Evidently this order is active in the sense that it continually
ﬂows into emotional, physical, and other responses, that are inseparable
from the transformations out of which it is essentially constituted.
A similar notion can be seen to be applicable for vision. To bring
this out, consider the sense of motion that arises when one is watching
the cinema screen. What is actually happening is that a series of images,
each slightly different, is being ﬂashed on the screen. If the images are
separated by long intervals of time, one does not get a feeling of con-
tinuous motion, but rather, one sees a series of disconnected images
perhaps accompanied by a sense of jerkiness. If, however, the images are
close enough together (say a hundredth of a second) one has a direct and
immediate experience, as if from a continuously moving and ﬂowing
reality, undivided and without a break.
This point can be brought out even more clearly by considering a
well-known illusion of movement, produced with the aid of a strobo-
scopic device, illustrated in Figure 3.3.
Two discs, A and B, enclosed in a bulb, can be caused to give off light
by means of electrical excitation. The light is made to ﬂash on and off so
rapidly that it appears to be continuous, but in each ﬂash it is arranged
that B will come on slightly later than A. What one actually feels is a
sense of “ﬂowing movement” between A and B, but that paradoxically
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
107

nothing is ﬂowing out of B (contrary to what would be expected if there
had been a real process of ﬂow). This means that a sense of ﬂowing
movement is experienced when, on the retina of the eye, there are two
images in neighbouring positions one of which comes on slightly later
than the other. (Closely related to this is the fact that a blurred photo-
graph of a speeding car, containing a sequence of overlaid images in
slightly different positions, conveys to us a much more immediate and
vivid sense of movement than does a sharp picture, taken with a high-
speed camera.)
It seems evident that the sense of unbroken movement described
above is basically similar to that arising from a sequence of musical
notes. The main difference between music and visual images, in this
regard, is that the latter may arrive so close together in time that they
cannot be resolved in consciousness. Nevertheless, it is clear that visual
images must also undergo active transformation as they “enfold” into
the brain and nervous system (e.g., they give rise to emotional, physical
and other more subtle responses of which one may be only dimly con-
scious as well as to “after images” that are in certain ways similar to the
reverberations in musical notes). Even though the time difference of
two such images may be small, the examples cited above make it clear
that a sense of movement is experienced through the intermingling and
interpenetration of the co-present transformations to which these
images must give rise as they penetrate the brain and nervous system.
All of this suggests that quite generally (and not merely for the
special case of listening to music), there is a basic similarity between the
order of our immediate experience of movement and the implicate
order as expressed in terms of our thought. We have in this way been
brought to the possibility of a coherent mode of understanding the
immediate experience of motion in terms of our thought (in effect thus
resolving Zeno’s paradox concerning motion).
To see how this comes about, consider how motion is usually
thought of, in terms of a series of points along a line. Let us suppose that
Figure 3.3
108
Universal Orders

at a certain time t1, a particle is at a position x1, while at a later time t2, it
is at another position x2. We then say that this particle is moving and
that its velocity is:
v = x2 −x1
t2 −t1
Of course, this way of thinking does not in any way reﬂect or convey
the immediate sense of motion that we may have at a given moment, for
example, with a sequence of musical notes reverberating in conscious-
ness (or in the visual perception of a speeding car). Rather, it is only an
abstract symbolization of movement, having a relation to the actuality
of motion, similar to that between a musical score and the actual experi-
ence of the music itself.
If, as is commonly done, we take the above abstract symbolization
as a faithful representation of the actuality of movement, we become
entangled in a series of confused and basically insoluble problems.
These all have to do with the image in which we represent time, as if it
were a series of points along a line that are somehow all present
together, either to our conceptual gaze or perhaps to that of God. Our
actual experience is, however, that when a given moment, say t2, is
present and actual, an earlier moment, such as t1 is past. That is to say, it
is gone, non-existent, never to return. So if we say that the velocity of a
particular now (at t2) is (x2 – xl)/(t2 – t1) we are trying to relate what is (i.e.,
x2 and t2) to what is not (i.e., x1, and t1). We can of course do this
abstractly and symbolically (as is, indeed, the common practice in sci-
ence and mathematics), but the further fact, not comprehended in this
abstract symbolism, is that the velocity now is active now (e.g., it deter-
mines how a particle will act from now on, in itself, and in relation to
other particles). How are we to understand the present activity of a
position (x1) that is now non-existent and gone for ever?
It is commonly thought that this problem is resolved by the differ-
ential calculus. What is done here is to let the time interval, ∆t = t2 − t1
become vanishingly small, along with ∆x = x2 − x1. The velocity now is
deﬁned as the limit of the ratio ∆x/∆t as ∆t approaches zero. It is then
implied that the problem described above no longer arises, because x2
and x1 are in effect taken at the same time. They may thus be present
together and related in an activity that depends on both.
A little reﬂection shows, however, that this procedure is still as
abstract and symbolic as was the original one in which the time interval
was taken as ﬁnite. Thus one has no immediate experience of a time
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
109

interval of zero length, nor can one see in terms of reﬂective thought
what this could mean.
Even as an abstract formalism, this approach is not fully consistent
in a logical sense, nor does it have a universal range of applicability.
Indeed, it applies only within the area of continuous movements and
then only as a technical algorithm that happens to be correct for this
sort of movement. As we have seen, however, according to the quantum
theory, movement is not fundamentally continuous. So even as an algo-
rithm its current ﬁeld of application is limited to theories expressed in
terms of classical concepts (i.e., in the explicate order) in which it pro-
vides a good approximation for the purpose of calculating the move-
ments of material objects.
When we think of movement in terms of the implicate order,22
however, these problems do not arise. In this order, movement is com-
prehended in terms of a series of interpenetrating and intermingling
elements in different degrees of enfoldment all present together. The
activity of this movement then presents no difﬁculty, because it is an
outcome of this whole enfolded order, and is determined by relation-
ships of co-present elements, rather than by the relationships of elem-
ents that exist to others that no longer exist.
We see, then, that through thinking in terms of the implicate order,
we come to a notion of movement that is logically coherent and that
properly represents our immediate experience of movement. Thus the
sharp break between abstract logical thought and concrete immediate
experience, that has pervaded our culture for so long, need no longer be
maintained. Rather, the possibility is created for an unbroken ﬂowing
movement from immediate experience to logical thought and back, and
thus for an ending to this kind of fragmentation.
Moreover we are now able to understand in a new and more
consistent way our proposed notion concerning the general nature of
reality, that what is is movement. Actually, what tends to make it
difﬁcult for us to work in terms of this notion is that we usually think
of movement in the traditional way as an active relationship of what is
to what is not. Our traditional notion concerning the general nature of
reality would then amount to saying that what is is an active relation-
ship of what is to what is not. To say this is, at the very least, confused.
In terms of the implicate order, however, movement is a relationship
of certain phases of what is to other phases of what is, that are in
different stages of enfoldment. This notion implies that the essence
of reality as a whole is the above relationship among the various
phases in different stages of enfoldment (rather than, for example, a
110
Universal Orders

relationship between various particles and ﬁelds that are all explicate
and manifest).
Of course, actual movement involves more than the mere immedi-
ate intuitive sense of unbroken ﬂow, which is our mode of directly
experiencing the implicate order. The presence of such a sense of ﬂow
generally implies further that, in the next moment, the state of affairs
will actually change – i.e., it will be different. How are we to understand
this fact of experience in terms of the implicate order?
A valuable clue is provided by reﬂecting on and giving careful atten-
tion to what happens when, in our thinking, we say that one set of ideas
implies an entirely different set. Of course, the word “imply” has the
same root as the word “implicate” and thus also involves the notion of
enfoldment. Indeed, by saying that something is implicit we generally
mean more than merely to say that this thing is an inference following
from something else through the rules of logic. Rather, we usually mean
that from many different ideas and notions (of some of which we are
explicitly conscious) a new notion emerges that somehow brings all
these together in a concrete and undivided whole.
We see, then, that each moment of consciousness has a certain
explicit content, which is a foreground, and an implicit content, which is
a corresponding background. We now propose that not only is immedi-
ate experience best understood in terms of the implicate order, but that
thought also is basically to be comprehended in this order. Here we
mean not just the content of thought for which we have already begun
to use the implicate order. Rather, we also mean that the actual structure,
function and activity of thought is in the implicate order. The distinction
between implicit and explicit in thought is thus being taken here to be
essentially equivalent to the distinction between implicate and explicate
in matter in general.
To help clarify what this means, let us recall brieﬂy the basic form of
the law of a sub-totality (discussed in Sections 3 and 6), i.e., that the
enfolded elements of a characteristic ensemble (e.g., of ink particles or
of atoms) that are going to constitute the next stage of enfoldment are
bound by a force of overall necessity, which brings them together, to
contribute to a common end that emerges in the next phase of the
process under discussion. Similarly, we propose that the ensemble of
elements enfolded in the brain and nervous system that are going to
constitute the next stage of development of a line of thought are like-
wise bound through a force of overall necessity, which brings them
together to contribute to the common notion that emerges in the next
moment of consciousness.
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
111

In this study, we have been using the idea that consciousness can be
described in terms of a series of moments. Attention shows that a given
moment cannot be ﬁxed exactly in relation to time (e.g., by the clock)
but rather, that it covers some vaguely deﬁned and somewhat variable
extended period of duration. As pointed out earlier, each moment is
experienced directly in the implicate order. We have further seen that
through the force of necessity in the overall situation, one moment gives
rise to the next, in which content that was previously implicate is now
explicate while the previous explicate content has become implicate
(e.g., as happened in the analogy of the ink droplets).
The continuation of the above process gives an account of how
change takes place from one moment to another. In principle, the
change in any moment may be a fundamental and radical transform-
ation. However, experience shows that in thought (as in matter in gen-
eral) there is usually a great deal of recurrence and stability leading to
the possibility of relatively independent sub-totalities.
In any such sub-totality, there is the possibility of the continuation
of a certain line of thought that enfolds in a fairly regularly changing
way. Evidently, the precise character of such a sequence of thoughts, as it
enfolds from one moment to the next, will generally depend on the
content of the implicate order in earlier moments. For example, a
moment containing a sense of movement tends quite generally to be
followed by a change in the next moment which is greater the stronger
the sense of movement that was originally present (so that, as in the case
of the stroboscopic device discussed earlier, when this does not happen
we feel that something surprising or paradoxical is taking place).
As in our discussion of matter in general, it is now necessary to go
into the question of how in consciousness the explicate order is what is
manifest. As observation and attention show (keeping in mind that the
word “manifest” means that which is recurrent, stable and separable)
the manifest content of consciousness is based essentially on memory,
which is what allows such content to be held in a fairly constant form.
Of course, to make possible such constancy it is also necessary that this
content be organized, not only through relatively ﬁxed associations but
also with the aid of the rules of logic, and of our basic categories of
space, time, causality, universality, etc. In this way an overall system of
concepts and mental images may be developed, which is a more or less
faithful representation of the “manifest world.”
The process of thought is not, however, merely a representation of
the manifest world; rather, it makes an important contribution to how
we experience this world, for, as we have already pointed out earlier, this
112
Universal Orders

experience is a fusion of sensory information with the “replay” of some
of the content of memory (which latter contains thought built into its
very form and order). In such experience, there will be a strong back-
ground of recurrent stable, and separable features, against which the
transitory and changing aspects of the unbroken ﬂow of experience will
be seen as ﬂeeting impressions that tend to be arranged and ordered
mainly in terms of the vast totality of the relatively static and frag-
mented content of recordings from the past.
One can, in fact, adduce a considerable amount of scientiﬁc evi-
dence showing how much of our conscious experience is a construction
based on memory organized through thought, in the general way
described above.23 To go into this subject in detail would, however, carry
us too far aﬁeld. It may nevertheless be useful here to mention that
Piaget24 has made it clear that a consciousness of what to us is the
familiar order of space, time, causality, etc. (which is essentially what we
have been calling the explicate order) operates only to a small extent in
the earliest phases of life of the human individual. Rather, as he shows
from careful observations, for the most part infants learn this content
ﬁrst in the area of sensori-motor experience, and later as they grow
older they connect such experience with its expression in language and
logic. On the other hand, there seems to be an immediate awareness of
movement from the very earliest. Recalling that movement is sensed
primarily in the implicate order, we see that Piaget’s work supports the
notion that the experiencing of the implicate order is fundamentally
much more immediate and direct than is that of the explicate order,
which, as we have pointed out above, requires a complex construction
that has to be learned.
One reason why we do not generally notice the primacy of the
implicate order is that we have become so habituated to the explicate
order, and have emphasized it so much in our thought and language,
that we tend strongly to feel that our primary experience is of that
which is explicate and manifest. However, another reason, perhaps
more important, is that the activation of memory recordings whose
content is mainly that which is recurrent, stable, and separable, must
evidently focus our attention very strongly on what is static and
fragmented.
This then contributes to the formation of an experience in which
these static and fragmented features are often so intense that the more
transitory and subtle features of the unbroken ﬂow (e.g., the “transform-
ations” of musical notes) generally tend to pale into such seeming
insigniﬁcance that one is, at best, only dimly conscious of them. Thus,
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
113

an illusion may arise in which the manifest static and fragmented con-
tent of consciousness is experienced as the very basis of reality and from
this illusion one may apparently obtain a proof of the correctness of that
mode of thought in which this content is taken to be fundamental.25
8
MATTER, CONSCIOUSNESS AND THEIR COMMON
GROUND
At the beginning of the previous section we suggested that matter and
consciousness can both be understood in terms of the implicate order.
We shall now show how the notions of implicate order that we have
developed in connection with consciousness may be related to those
concerning matter, to make possible an understanding of how both may
have a common ground.
We begin by noting that current relativistic theories in physics
describe the whole of reality in terms of a process whose ultimate elem-
ent is a point event, i.e., something happening in a relatively small
region of space and time. We propose instead that the basic element be a
moment which, like the moment of consciousness, cannot be precisely
related to measurements of space and time, but rather covers a some-
what vaguely deﬁned region which is extended in space and has dur-
ation in time. The extent and duration of a moment may vary from
something very small to something very large, according to the context
under discussion (even a particular century may be a “moment” in the
history of mankind). As with consciousness, each moment has a certain
explicate order, and in addition it enfolds all the others, though in its
own way. So the relationship of each moment in the whole to all the
others is implied by its total content: the way in which it “holds” all the
others enfolded within it.
In certain ways this notion is similar to Leibniz’s idea of monads,
each of which “mirrors” the whole in its own way, some in great detail
and others rather vaguely. The difference is that Leibniz’s monads had a
permanent existence, whereas our basic elements are only moments
and are thus not permanent. Whitehead’s idea of “actual occasions” is
closer to the one proposed here, the main difference being that we use
the implicate order to express the qualities and relationships of our
moments, whereas Whitehead does this in a rather different way.
We now recall that the laws of the implicate order are such that
there is a relatively independent, recurrent, stable sub-totality which
constitutes the explicate order, and which, of course, is basically the
order that we commonly contact in common experience (extended in
114
Universal Orders

certain ways by our scientiﬁc instruments). This order has room in it
for something like memory, in the sense that previous moments gener-
ally leave a trace (usually enfolded) that continues in later moments,
though this trace may change and transform almost without limit. From
this trace (e.g., in the rocks) it is in principle possible for us to unfold an
image of past moments, similar in certain ways, to what actually hap-
pened; and by taking advantage of such traces, we design instruments
such as photographic cameras, tape recorders, and computer memories,
which are able to register actual moments in such a way that much more
of the content of what has happened can be made directly and immedi-
ately accessible to us than is generally possible from natural traces
alone.
One may indeed say that our memory is a special case of the process
described above, for all that is recorded is held enfolded within the brain
cells and these are part of matter in general. The recurrence and stability
of our own memory as a relatively independent sub-totality is thus
brought about as part of the very same process that sustains the recur-
rence and stability in the manifest order of matter in general.
It follows, then, that the explicate and manifest order of conscious-
ness is not ultimately distinct from that of matter in general. Funda-
mentally these are essentially different aspects of the one overall order.
This explains a basic fact that we have pointed out earlier – that the ex-
plicate order of matter in general is also in essence the sensuous expli-
cate order that is presented in consciousness in ordinary experience.
Not only in this respect but, as we have seen, also in a wide range of
other important respects, consciousness and matter in general are basic-
ally the same order (i.e., the implicate order as a whole). As we have
indicated earlier this order is what makes a relationship between the
two possible; but more speciﬁcally, what are we to say about the nature
of this relationship?
We may begin by considering the individual human being as a
relatively independent sub-totality, with a sufﬁcient recurrence and
stability of his total process (e.g., physical, chemical, neurological, men-
tal, etc.) to enable him to subsist over a certain period of time. In this
process we know it to be a fact that the physical state can affect the
content of consciousness in many ways. (The simplest case is that we
can become conscious of neural excitations as sensations.) Vice versa,
we know that the content of consciousness can affect the physical state
(e.g., from a conscious intention nerves may be excited, muscles may
move, the heart-beat change, along with alterations of glandular activity,
blood chemistry, etc.).
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
115

This connection of the mind and body has commonly been called
psychosomatic (from the Greek “psyche,” meaning “mind,” and “soma,”
meaning “body.” This word is generally used, however, in such a way as
to imply that mind and body are separately existent but connected by
some sort of interaction. Such a meaning is not compatible with the
implicate order. In the implicate order we have to say that mind enfolds
matter in general and therefore the body in particular. Similarly, the
body enfolds not only the mind but also in some sense the entire
material universe (in the manner explained earlier in this section, both
through the senses and through the fact that the constituent atoms of
the body are actually structures that are enfolded in principle through-
out all space).
This kind of relationship has in fact already been encountered in
Section 4, where we introduced the notion of a higher-dimensional real-
ity which projects into lower-dimensional elements that have not only a
non-local and non-causal relationship but also just the sort of mutual
enfoldment that we have suggested for mind and body. So we are led to
propose further that the more comprehensive, deeper, and more inward
actuality is neither mind nor body but rather a yet higher-dimensional
actuality, which is their common ground and which is of a nature
beyond both. Each of these is then only a relatively independent sub-
totality and it is implied that this relative independence derives from
the higher-dimensional ground in which mind and body are ultimately
one (rather as we ﬁnd that the relative independence of the manifest
order derives from the ground of the implicate order).
In this higher-dimensional ground the implicate order prevails.
Thus, within this ground, what is is movement which is represented in
thought as the co-presence of many phases of the implicate order. As
happens with the simpler forms of the implicate order considered earl-
ier, the state of movement at one moment unfolds through a more
inward force of necessity inherent in this overall state of affairs, to give
rise to a new state of affairs in the next moment. The projections of the
higher-dimensional ground, as mind and body, will in the later moment
both be different from what they were in the earlier moment, though
these differences will of course be related. So we do not say that mind
and body causally affect each other, but rather that the movements of
both are the outcome of related projections of a common higher-
dimensional ground.
Of course, even this ground of mind and body is limited. At the very
least we have evidently to include matter beyond the body if we are
to give an adequate account of what actually happens and this must
116
Universal Orders

eventually include other people, going on to society and to mankind as a
whole. In doing this, however, we will have to be careful not to slip back
into regarding the various elements of any given total situation as hav-
ing anything more than relative independence. In a deeper and gener-
ally more suitable way of thinking, each of these elements is a projec-
tion, in a sub-totality of yet higher “dimension.” So it will be ultimately
misleading and indeed wrong to suppose, for example, that each human
being is an independent actuality who interacts with other human
beings and with nature. Rather, all these are projections of a single
totality. As a human being takes part in the process of this totality, he is
fundamentally changed in the very activity in which his aim is to
change that reality which is the content of his consciousness. To fail to
take this into account must inevitably lead one to serious and sustained
confusion in all that one does.
From the side of mind we can also see that it is necessary to go on to
a more inclusive ground. Thus, as we have seen, the easily accessible
explicit content of consciousness is included within a much greater
implicit (or implicate) background. This in turn evidently has to be
contained in a yet greater background which may include not only
neuro-physiological processes at levels of which we are not generally
conscious but also a yet greater background of unknown (and indeed
ultimately unknowable) depths of inwardness that may be analogous to
the “sea” of energy that ﬁlls the sensibly perceived “empty” space.26
Whatever may be the nature of these inward depths of conscious-
ness, they are the very ground, both of the explicit content and of that
content which is usually called implicit. Although this ground may not
appear in ordinary consciousness, it may nevertheless be present in a
certain way. Just as the vast “sea” of energy in space is present to our
perception as a sense of emptiness or nothingness so the vast
“unconscious” background of explicit consciousness with all its implica-
tions is present in a similar way. That is to say, it may be sensed as an
emptiness, a nothingness, within which the usual content of conscious-
ness is only a vanishingly small set of facets.
Let us now consider brieﬂy what may be said about time in this total
order of matter and consciousness.
First, it is well known that, as directly sensed and experienced in
consciousness, time is highly variable and relative to conditions (e.g., a
given period may be felt to be short or long by different people, or even
by the same person, according to the interests of the different people
concerned). On the other hand it seems in common experience that
physical time is absolute and does not depend on conditions. However,
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
117

one of the most important implications of the theory of relativity is that
physical time is in fact relative, in the sense that it may vary according to
the speed of the observer. (This variation is, however, signiﬁcant only as
we approach the speed of light and is quite negligible in the domain of
ordinary experience.) What is crucial in the present context is that,
according to the theory of relativity, a sharp distinction between space
and time can not be maintained (except as an approximation, valid at
velocities small compared with that of light). Thus, since the quantum
theory implies that elements that are separated in space are generally
non-causally and non-locally related projections of a higher-dimensional
reality, it follows that moments separated in time are also such projec-
tions of this reality.
Evidently, this leads to a fundamentally new notion of the meaning
of time. Both in common experience and in physics, time has generally
been considered to be a primary, independent and universally applic-
able order, perhaps the most fundamental one known to us. Now, we
have been led to propose that it is secondary and that, like space (see
Section 5), it is to be derived from a higher-dimensional ground, as a
particular order. Indeed, one can further say that many such particular
interrelated time orders can be derived for different sets of sequences of
moments, corresponding to material systems that travel at different
speeds. However, these are all dependent on a multidimensional reality
that cannot be comprehended fully in terms of any time order, or set of
such orders.
Similarly, we are led to propose that this multidimensional reality
may project into many orders of sequences of moments in conscious-
ness. Not only do we have in mind here the relativity of psychological
time discussed above, but also much more subtle implications. Thus, for
example, people who know each other well may separate for a long time
(as measured by the sequence of moments registered by a clock) and yet
they are often able to “take up from where they left off” as if no time
had passed. What we are proposing here is that sequences of moments
that “skip” intervening spaces are just as allowable forms of time as
those which seem continuous.27
The fundamental law, then, is that of the immense multidimen-
sional ground; and the projections from this ground determine what-
ever time orders there may be. Of course, this law may be such that in
certain limiting cases the order of moments corresponds approximately
to what would be determined by a simple causal law. Or, in a different
limiting case, the order would be a complex one of a high degree which
would approximate what is usually called a random order.28 These two
118
Universal Orders

alternatives cover what happens for the most part in the domain of
ordinary experience as well as in that of classical physics. Nevertheless,
in the quantum domain as well as in connection with consciousness and
probably with the understanding of the deeper more inward essence of
life, such approximations will prove to be inadequate. One must then go
on to a consideration of time as a projection of multidimensional reality
into a sequence of moments.
Such a projection can be described as creative, rather than mechan-
ical, for by creativity one means just the inception of new content,
which unfolds into a sequence of moments that is not completely deriv-
able from what came earlier in this sequence or set of such sequences.
What we are saying is, then, that movement is basically such a creative
inception of new content as projected from the multidimensional
ground. In contrast, what is mechanical is a relatively autonomous sub-
totality that can be abstracted from that which is basically a creative
movement of unfoldment.
How, then, are we to consider the evolution of life as this is gener-
ally formulated in biology? First, it has to be pointed out that the very
word “evolution” (whose literal meaning is “unrolling”) is too mech-
anistic in its connotation to serve properly in this context. Rather, as we
have already pointed out above, we should say that various successive
living forms unfold creatively. Later members are not completely deriv-
able from what came earlier, through a process in which effect arises out
of cause (though in some approximation such a causal process may
explain certain limited aspects of the sequence). The law of this
unfoldment cannot be properly understood without considering the
immense multidimensional reality of which it is a projection (except in
the rough approximation in which the implications of the quantum
theory and of what is beyond this theory may be neglected).
Our overall approach has thus brought together questions of the
nature of the cosmos, of matter in general, of life, and of consciousness.
All of these have been considered to be projections of a common
ground. This we may call the ground of all that is, at least in so far as this
may be sensed and known by us, in our present phase of unfoldment of
consciousness. Although we have no detailed perception or knowledge
of this ground it is still in a certain sense enfolded in our consciousness,
in the ways in which we have outlined, as well as perhaps in other ways
that are yet to be discovered.
Is this ground the absolute end of everything? In our proposed
views concerning the general nature of “the totality of all that is” we
regard even this ground as a mere stage, in the sense that there could in
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
119

principle be an inﬁnity of further development beyond it. At any par-
ticular moment in this development each such set of views that may
arise will constitute at most a proposal. It is not to be taken as an
assumption about what the ﬁnal truth is supposed to be, and still less as
a conclusion concerning the nature of such truth. Rather, this proposal
becomes itself an active factor in the totality of existence which includes
ourselves as well as the objects of our thoughts and experimental
investigations. Any further proposals on this process will, like those
already made, have to be viable. That is to say, one will require of them a
general self-consistency as well as consistency in what ﬂows from them
in life as a whole. Through the force of an even deeper, more inward
necessity in this totality, some new state of affairs may emerge in which
both the world as we know it and our ideas about it may undergo an
unending process of yet further change.
With this we have in essence carried the presentation of our cos-
mology and our general notions concerning the nature of the totality to
a natural (though of course only a temporary) stopping point. From here
on we can further survey it as a whole and perhaps ﬁll in some of the
details that have been left out in this necessarily sketchy treatment
before going on to new developments of the kinds indicated above.
120
Universal Orders

APPENDIX
IMPLICATE AND EXPLICATE ORDER IN PHYSICAL LAW
A1 INTRODUCTION
Previously we have called attention to the emergence of new orders
throughout the history of physics.29 A general feature of the develop-
ment of this subject has been a tendency to regard certain basic notions
of order as permanent and unchangeable. The task of physics was then
taken to be to accommodate new observations by means of adaptations
within these basic notions of order, so as to ﬁt the new facts. This kind
of adaptation began with the Ptolemaic epicycles, which continued from
ancient times until the advent of the work of Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo,
and Newton. As soon as the basic notions of order in classical physics
had been fairly clearly expressed, it was supposed that further work in
physics would consist of adaptation within this order to accommodate
new facts. This continued until the appearance of relativity and the
quantum theory. It can accurately be said that since then the main line
of work in physics has been adaptation within the general orders under-
lying these theories, to accommodate the facts to which these in turn
have led.
It may thus be inferred that accommodation within already existing
frameworks of order has generally been considered to be the main activ-
ity to be emphasized in physics, while the perception of new orders has
been thought of as something that happens only occasionally, perhaps
in revolutionary periods, during which what is regarded as the normal
process of accommodation has broken down.30
It is pertinent to this subject to consider Piaget’s31 description of
Extract from Chapter 6 of D. Bohm, Wholeness and Implicate Order, Routledge, London (1980).
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
121

all intelligent perception in terms of two complementary move-
ments, accommodation and assimilation. From the roots “mod,” mean-
ing “measure,” and “com,” meaning “together,” one sees that to
accommodate means “to establish a common measure.” Examples of
accommodation are ﬁtting, cutting to a pattern, adapting, imitating,
conforming to rules, etc. On the other hand, “to assimilate” is “to digest”
or to make into a comprehensive and inseparable whole (which includes
oneself). Thus, to assimilate means “to understand.”
It is clear that in intelligent perception, primary emphasis has in
general to be given to assimilation, while accommodation tends to play
a relatively secondary role in the sense that its main signiﬁcance is as
an aid to assimilation.
Of course, we are able in certain sorts of contexts just to accom-
modate something that we observe within known orders of thought,
and in this very act it will be adequately assimilated. However, it is
necessary in more general contexts to give serious attention to the pos-
sibility that the old orders of thought may cease to be relevant, so that
they can no longer coherently be adapted to ﬁt the new fact. One may
then have to see the irrelevance of old differences, and the relevance of
new differences, and thus one may open the way to the perception of
new orders, new measures, and new structures.
Clearly, such perception can appropriately take place at almost any
time, and does not have to be restricted to unusual and revolutionary
periods in which one ﬁnds that the older orders can no longer be
conveniently adapted to the facts. Rather, one may be continually ready
to drop old notions of order at various contexts, which may be broad or
narrow, and to perceive new notions that may be relevant in such con-
texts. Thus, understanding the fact by assimilating it into new orders
can become what could perhaps be called the normal way of doing
scientiﬁc research.
To work in this way is evidently to give primary emphasis to some-
thing similar to artistic perception. Such perception begins by observing
the whole fact in its full individuality, and then by degree articulates the
order that is proper to the assimilation of this fact. It does not begin
with abstract preconceptions as to what the order has to be, which are
then adapted to the order that is observed.
What, then, is the proper role of accommodation of facts within
known theoretical orders, measures and structures? Here, it is import-
ant to note that facts are not to be considered as if they were independ-
ently existent objects that we might ﬁnd or pick up in the laboratory.
Rather, as the Latin root of the word “facere” indicates, the fact is “what
122
Universal Orders

has been made” (e.g., as in “manufacture”). Thus, in a certain sense, we
“make” the fact. That is to say, beginning with immediate perception of
an actual situation, we develop the fact by giving it further order, form
and structure with the aid of our theoretical concepts. For example, by
using the notions of order prevailing in ancient times, men were led to
“make” the fact about planetary motions by describing and measuring
in terms of epicycles. In classical physics, the fact was “made” in terms
of the order of planetary orbits, measured through positions and times.
In general relativity, the fact was “made” in terms of the order of
Riemannian geometry, and of the measure implied by concepts such as
“curvature of space.” In the quantum theory, the fact was made in terms
of the order of energy levels, quantum numbers, symmetry groups, etc.,
along with appropriate measures (e.g. scattering cross-sections, charges,
and masses of particles, etc.).
It is clear, then, that changes of order and measures in the theory
ultimately lead to new ways of doing experiments and to new kinds of
instruments, which in turn lead to the “making” of correspondingly
ordered and measured facts of new kinds. In this development, the
experimental fact serves in the ﬁrst instance as a test for theoretical
notions. Thus, the general form of theoretical explanation is that of a
generalized kind of ratio of reason. “As A is to B in our structure of
thinking, so it is in fact.” This ratio or reason constitutes a kind of
“common measure” or “accommodation” between theory and fact.
As long as such a common measure prevails, then of course the
theory used need not be changed. If the common measure is found not
to be realized, then the ﬁrst step is to see whether it can be re-
established by means of adjustments within the theory without a
change in its underlying order. If, after reasonable efforts, a proper
accommodation of this kind is not achieved, then what is needed is a
fresh perception of the whole fact. This now includes not only the
results of experiments but also the failure of certain lines of theory to ﬁt
the experimental results in a “common measure.” Then, as has been
indicated earlier, one has to be very sensitively aware of all the relevant
differences which underly the main orders in the old theory, to see
whether there is room for a change of overall order. It is being
emphasized here that this kind of perception should properly be inter-
woven continually with the activities aimed at accommodation, and
should not have to be delayed for so long that the whole situation
becomes confused and chaotic, apparently requiring the revolutionary
destruction of the old order to clear it up.
As relativity and quantum theory have shown that it has no meaning
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
123

to divide the observing apparatus from what is observed, so the con-
siderations discussed here indicate that it has no meaning to separate
the observed fact (along with the instruments used to observe it) from
the theoretical notions of order that help to give “shape” to this fact. As
we go on to develop new notions of order going beyond those of relativ-
ity and quantum theory, it will thus not be appropriate to try immedi-
ately to apply these notions to current problems that have arisen in the
consideration of the present set of experimental facts. Rather, what is
called for in this context is very broadly to assimilate the whole of the
fact in physics into the new theoretical notions of order. After this fact
has generally been “digested,” we can begin to glimpse new ways in
which such notions of order can be tested and perhaps extended in
various directions. We have to proceed slowly and patiently here or else
we may become confused by “undigested” facts.
Fact and theory are thus seen to be different aspects of one whole in
which analysis into separate but interacting parts is not relevant. That is
to say, not only is undivided wholeness implied in the content of physics
(notably relativity and quantum theory) but also in the manner of work-
ing in physics. This means that we do not try always to force the theory
to ﬁt the kinds of facts that may be appropriate in currently accepted
general orders of description, but that we are also ready when necessary
to consider changes in what is meant by fact, which may be required for
assimilation of such fact into new theoretical notions of order.
A2 UNDIVIDED WHOLENESS – THE LENS AND THE
HOLOGRAM
The undivided wholeness of modes of observation, instrumentation,
and theoretical understanding indicated above implies the need to con-
sider a new order of fact, i.e., the fact about the way in which modes of
theoretical understanding and of observation and instrumentation are
related to each other. Until now, we have more or less just taken such a
relationship for granted, without giving serious attention to the manner
in which it arises, very probably because of the belief that the study of
the subject belongs to “the history of science” rather than to “science
proper.” However, it is now being suggested that the consideration of
this relationship is essential for an adequate understanding of science
itself, because the content of the observed fact cannot coherently be
regarded as separate from modes of observation and instrumentation
and modes of theoretical understanding.
An example of the very close relationship between instrumentation
124
Universal Orders

and theory can be seen by considering the lens, which was indeed one of
the key features behind the development of modern scientiﬁc thought.
The essential feature of a lens is, as indicated in Figure 3.4, that it forms
an image in which a given point P in the object corresponds (in a high
degree of approximation) to a point Q in the image. By thus bringing the
correspondence of speciﬁed features of object and image into such
sharp relief, the lens greatly strengthened man’s awareness of the vari-
ous parts of the object and of the relationship between these parts. In
this way, it furthered the tendency to think in terms of analysis and
synthesis. Moreover, it made possible an enormous extension of the
classical order of analysis and synthesis to objects that were too far
away, too big, too small, or too rapidly moving to be thus ordered by
means of unaided vision. As a result, scientists were encouraged to
extrapolate their ideas and to think that such an approach would be
relevant and valid no matter how far they went, in all possible condi-
tions, contexts, and degrees of approximation.
However, relativity and quantum theory imply undivided whole-
ness, in which analysis into distinct and well-deﬁned parts is no longer
relevant. Is there an instrument that can help give a certain immediate
perceptual insight into what can be meant by undivided wholeness, as
the lens did for what can be meant by analysis of a system into parts? It
is suggested here that one can obtain such insight by considering the
hologram. (The name is derived from the Greek words “holo,” meaning
“whole,” and “gram” meaning “to write.” Thus, the hologram is an
instrument that, as it were, “writes the whole.”)
As shown in Figure 3.5, coherent light from a laser is passed
through a half-silvered mirror. Part of the beam goes on directly to a
photographic plate, while another part is reﬂected so that it illuminates a
certain whole structure. The light reﬂected from this whole structure also
reaches the plate, where it interferes with that arriving there by a direct
path. The resulting interference pattern which is recorded on the plate is
not only very complex but also usually so ﬁne that it is not even visible
Figure 3.4
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
125

to the naked eye. Yet, it is somehow relevant to the whole illuminated
structure, though only in a highly implicit way.
This relevance of the interference pattern to the whole illuminated
structure is revealed when the photographic plate is illuminated with
laser light. As shown in Figure 3.6, a wavefront is then created which is
very similar in form to that coming off the original illuminated struc-
ture. By placing the eye in this way, one in effect sees the whole of the
original structure, in three dimensions, and from a range of possible
points of view (as if one were looking at it through a window). If we
then illuminate only a small region R of the plate, we still see the whole
structure, but in somewhat less sharply deﬁned detail and from a
decreased range of possible points of view (as if we were looking
through a smaller window).
Figure 3.5
Figure 3.6
126
Universal Orders

It is clear, then, that there is no one-to-one correspondence between
parts of an “illuminated object” and parts of an “image of this object on
the plate.” Rather, the interference pattern in each region R of the plate
is relevant to the whole structure, and each region of the structure is
relevant to the whole of the interference pattern on the plate.
Because of the wave properties of light, even a lens cannot produce
an exact one-to-one correspondence. A lens can therefore be regarded as
a limiting case of a hologram.
We can, however, go further and say that in their overall ways of
indicating the meaning of observations, typical experiments as cur-
rently done in physics (especially in the “quantum” context) are more
like the general case of a hologram than like the special case of a lens.
For example, consider a scattering experiment. As shown in Figure 3.7,
what can be observed in the detector is generally relevant to the whole
target, or at least to an area large enough to contain a great many atoms.
Moreover, although one might in principle try to make an image
of a particular atom, the quantum theory implies that to do this
would have little or no signiﬁcance. Indeed, as the discussion of the
Heisenberg microscope experiment shows,32 the formation of an image
is just what is not relevant in a “quantum” context; at most a discussion
of image formation serves to indicate the limits of applicability of
classical modes of description.
So we may say that in current research in physics, an instrument
tends to be relevant to a whole structure, in a way rather similar to what
happens with a hologram. To be sure, there are certain differences. For
example, in current experiments with electron beams or with X-rays,
these latter are seldom coherent over appreciable distances. If, however,
it should ever prove to be possible to develop something like an electron
laser or an X-ray laser, then experiments will directly reveal “atomic”
and “nuclear” structures without the need for complex chains of
Figure 3.7
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
127

inference of the sort now generally required, as the hologram does for
ordinary large-scale structures.
A3 IMPLICATE AND EXPLICATE ORDER
What is being suggested here is that the consideration of the difference
between lens and hologram can play a signiﬁcant part in the perception
of a new order that is relevant for physical law. As Galileo noted the
distinction between a viscous medium and a vacuum and saw that phys-
ical law should refer primarily to the order of motion of an object in a
vacuum, so we might now note the distinction between a lens and a
hologram and consider the possibility that physical law should refer
primarily to an order of undivided wholeness of the content of a
description similar to that indicated by the hologram rather than to an
order of analysis of such content into separate parts indicated by a lens.
However, when Aristotle’s ideas on movement were dropped,
Galileo and those who followed him had to consider the question of how
the new order of motion was to be described in adequate details. The
answer came in the form of Cartesian coordinates extended to the lan-
guage of the calculus (differential equations, etc.). But this kind of
description is of course appropriate only in a context in which analysis
into distinct and autonomous parts is relevant, and will therefore in turn
have to be dropped. What, then, will be the new kind of description
appropriate to the present context?
As happened with Cartesian coordinates and the calculus, such a
question cannot be answered immediately in terms of deﬁnite prescrip-
tions as to what to do. Rather, one has to observe the new situation very
broadly and tentatively and to “feel out” what may be the relevant new
features. From this, there will arise a discernment of the new order,
which will articulate and unfold in a natural way (and not as a result of
efforts to make it ﬁt well-deﬁned and preconceived notions as to what
this order should be able to achieve).
We can begin such an inquiry by noting that in some subtle sense,
which does not appear in ordinary vision, the interference pattern in the
whole plate can distinguish different orders and measures in the whole
illuminated structure. For example, the illuminated structure may con-
tain all sorts of shapes and sizes of geometric forms (indicated in Figure
3.8a), as well as topological relationships, such as inside and outside
(indicated in Figure 3.8b), and intersection and separation (indicated in
Figure 3.8c). All of these lead to different interference patterns and it is
this difference that is somehow to be described in detail.
128
Universal Orders

The differences indicated above are, however, not only in the plate.
Indeed, the latter is of secondary signiﬁcance, in the sense that its main
function is to make a relatively permanent “written record” of the inter-
ference pattern of the light that is present in each region of space. More
generally, however, in each such region, the movement of the light
implicitly contains a vast range of distinctions of order and measure,
appropriate to a whole illuminated structure. Indeed, in principle, this
structure extends over the whole universe and over the whole past, with
implications for the whole future. Consider, for example, how on look-
ing at the night sky, we are able to discern structures covering immense
stretches of space and time, which are in some sense contained in the
movements of light in the tiny space encompassed by the eye (and also
how instruments, such as optical and radio telescopes, can discern more
and more of this totality, contained in each region of space).
There is the germ of a new notion of order here. This order is not to
be understood solely in terms of a regular arrangement of objects (e.g.,
in rows) or as a regular arrangement of events (e.g. in a series). Rather, a
total order is contained, in some implicit sense, in each region of space
and time.
Now, the word “implicit” is based on the verb “to implicate.” This
means “to fold inward” (as multiplication means “folding many times”).
So we may be led to explore the notion that in some sense each region
contains a total structure “enfolded” within it.
It will be useful in such an exploration to consider some further
examples of enfolded or implicate order. Thus, in a television broadcast,
the visual image is translated into a time order, which is “carried” by the
radio wave. Points that are near each other in the visual image are not
necessarily “near” in the order of the radio signal. Thus, the radio wave
carries the visual image in an implicate order. The function of the
receiver is then to explicate this order, i.e., to “unfold” it in the form of a
new visual image.
Figure 3.8
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
129

A more striking example of implicate order can be demonstrated in
the laboratory, with a transparent container full of a very viscous ﬂuid,
such as treacle, and equipped with a mechanical rotator that can “stir”
the ﬂuid very slowly but very thoroughly. If an insoluble droplet of ink is
placed in the ﬂuid and the stirring device is set in motion, the ink drop is
gradually transformed into a thread that extends over the whole ﬂuid.
The latter now appears to be distributed more or less at “random” so
that it is seen as some shade of grey. But if the mechanical stirring
device is now turned in the opposite direction, the transformation is
reversed, and the droplet of dye suddenly appears, reconstituted.
When the dye was distributed in what appeared to be a random
way, it nevertheless had some kind of order which is different, for
example, from that arising from another droplet originally placed in a
different position. But this order is enfolded or implicated in the “grey
mass” that is visible in the ﬂuid. Indeed, one could thus “enfold” a whole
picture. Different pictures would look indistinguishable and yet have
different implicate orders, which differences would be revealed when
they were explicated, as the stirring device was turned in a reverse
direction.
What happens here is evidently similar in certain crucial ways to
what happens with the hologram. To be sure there are differences. Thus,
in a ﬁne enough analysis, one could see that the parts of the ink droplet
remain in a one-to-one correspondence as they are stirred up and the
ﬂuid moves continuously. On the other hand, in the functioning of the
hologram there is no such one-to-one correspondence. So in the holo-
gram (as also in experiments in a “quantum” context), there is no way
ultimately to reduce the implicate order to a ﬁner and more complex
type of explicate order.
All this calls attention to the relevance of a new distinction between
implicate and explicate order. Generally speaking, the laws of physics
have thus far referred mainly to the explicate order. Indeed, it may be
said that the principle function of Cartesian coordinates is just to give a
clear and precise description of explicate order. Now, we are proposing
that in the formulation of the laws of physics, primary relevance is to be
given to the implicate order, while the explicate order is to have a sec-
ondary kind of signiﬁcance (e.g., as happened with Aristotle’s notion of
movement, after the development of classical physics). Thus, it may be
expected that a description in terms of Cartesian coordinates can no
longer be given a primary emphasis, and that a new kind of description
will indeed have to be developed for discussing the laws of physics.
130
Universal Orders

A4 THE HOLOMOVEMENT AND ITS ASPECTS
To indicate a new kind of description appropriate for giving primary
relevance to implicate order, let us consider once again the key feature of
the functioning of the hologram, i.e., in each region of space, the order of
a whole illuminated structure is “enfolded” and “carried” in the move-
ment of light. Something similar happens with a signal that modulates a
radio wave (see Figure 3.9). In all cases, the content or meaning that is
“enfolded” and “carried” is primarily an order and a measure, permit-
ting the development of a structure. With the radio wave, this structure
can be that of a verbal communication, a visual image, etc., but with the
hologram far more subtle structures can be involved in this way (not-
ably three-dimensional structures, visible from many points of view).
More generally, such order and measure can be “enfolded” and “car-
ried” not only in electromagnetic waves but also in other ways (by
electron beams, sound, and in other countless forms of movement). To
generalize so as to emphasize undivided wholeness, we shall say that
what “carries” an implicate order is the holomovement, which is an
unbroken and undivided totality. In certain cases, we can abstract par-
ticular aspects of the holomovement (e.g., light, electrons, sound, etc.),
but more generally, all forms of the holomovement merge and are
inseparable. Thus, in its totality, the holomovement is not limited in any
speciﬁable way at all. It is not required to conform to any particular
order, or to be bounded by any particular measure. Thus, the holomove-
ment is undeﬁnable and immeasurable.
To give primary signiﬁcance to the undeﬁnable and immeasurable
holomovement implies that it has no meaning to talk of a fundamental
theory, on which all of physics could ﬁnd a permanent basis, or to which
all the phenomena of physics could ultimately be reduced. Rather, each
theory will abstract a certain aspect that is relevant only in some limited
context, which is indicated by some appropriate measure.
In discussing how attention is to be called to such aspects, it is
useful to recall that the word “relevant” is a form obtained from the verb
“to relevate” which has dropped out of common usage, and which
Figure 3.9
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
131

means “to lift up” (as in “elevate”). We can thus say in a particular
context that may be under consideration, the general modes of descrip-
tion that belong to a given theory serve to relevate a certain content, i.e.,
to lift it into attention so that it stands out “in relief.” If this content is
pertinent in the context under discussion, it is said to be relevant, and
otherwise, irrelevant.
To illustrate what it means to relevate certain aspects of the impli-
cate order in the holomovement, it is useful to consider once again the
example of the mechanical device for stirring a viscous ﬂuid, as
described in the previous section. Suppose that we ﬁrst put in a droplet
of dye and turn the stirring mechanism n times. We could then place
another droplet of dye nearby and stir once again through n turns. We
could repeat this process indeﬁnitely, with a long series of droplets,
arranged more or less along a line, as shown in Figure 3.10.
Suppose, then, that after thus “enfolding” a large number of drop-
lets, we turn the stirring device in a reverse direction, but so rapidly that
the individual droplets are not resolved in perception. Then we will see
what appears to be a “solid” object (e.g. a particle) moving continuously
through space. This form of a moving object appears in immediate
perception primarily because the eye is not sensitive to concentrations
of dye lower than a certain minimum, so that one does not directly see
the “whole movement” of the dye. Rather, such perception relevates a
certain aspect. That is to say, it makes this aspect stand out “in relief”
while the rest of the ﬂuid is seen only as a “grey background” within
which the related “object” seems to be moving.
Of course, such an aspect has little interest in itself, i.e. apart from its
broader meaning. Thus, in the present example, one possible meaning is
that there actually is an autonomous object moving through the ﬂuid.
This would signify, of course, that the whole order of movement is to be
regarded as similar to that in the immediately perceived aspect. In some
contexts, such a meaning is pertinent and adequate (e.g., if we are deal-
ing in the ordinary level of experience with a rock ﬂying through the air).
However, in the present context, a very different meaning is indicated,
and this can be communicated only through a very different kind of
description.
Such a description has to start by conceptually relevating certain
broader orders of movement, going beyond any that are similar to those
Figure 3.10
132
Universal Orders

relevated in immediate perception. In doing this, one always begins
with the holomovement, and then one abstracts special aspects which
involve a totality broad enough for a proper description in the context
under discussion. In the present example, this totality should include
the whole movement of the ﬂuid and the dye as determined by the
mechanical stirring device, and the movement of the light, which
enables us visually to perceive what is happening, along with the
movement of the eye and nervous system, which determines the distinc-
tions that can be perceived in the movement of light.
It may then be said that the content relevated in immediate percep-
tion (i.e., the “moving object”) is a kind of intersection between two
orders. One of these is the order of movement that brings about the
possibility of a direct perceptual contact (in this case, that of the light
and the response of the nervous system to this light), and the other is an
order of movement that determines the detailed content that is per-
ceived (in this case, the order of movement of the dye in the ﬂuid). Such a
description in terms of intersection of orders is evidently very generally
applicable.33
It has already been seen that, in general, the movement of light is to
be described in terms of “the enfolding and carrying” of implicate
orders that are relevant to a whole structure, in which analysis into
separate and autonomous parts is not applicable (though, of course, in
certain limited contexts, a description in terms of explicate orders will
be adequate). In the present example, however, it is also appropriate to
describe the movement of the dye in similar terms. That is to say, in the
movement, certain implicate orders (in the distribution of dye) become
explicate, while explicate orders become implicate.
To specify this movement in more detail, it is useful here to intro-
duce a new measure, i.e., an “implication parameter,” denoted by T. In the
ﬂuid, this would be the number of turns needed to bring a given droplet
of dye into explicate form. The total structure of dye present at any
moment can then be regarded as a ordered series of substructures, each
corresponding to a single droplet N with its implication parameter TN.
Evidently, we have here a new notion of structure, for we no longer
build structures solely as ordered and measured arrangements on which
we join separate things, all of which are explicate together. Rather, we
can now consider structures in which aspects of different degrees of
implication (as measured by T) can be arranged in a certain order.
Such aspects can be quite complex. For example, we could implicate
a “whole picture” by turning the stirring device n times. We could then
implicate a slightly different picture, and so on indeﬁnitely. If the
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
133

stirring device were turned rapidly in the reverse direction, we could see
a “three-dimensional scene” apparently consisting of a “whole system”
of objects in continuous movement and interaction.
In this movement, the “picture” present at any given moment would
consist only of aspects that can be explicated together (i.e., aspects cor-
responding to a certain value of the implication parameter T). As events
happening at the same time are said to be synchronous, so aspects that
can be explicated together can be called synordinate, while those that
cannot be explicated together may then be called asynordinate. Evi-
dently, the new notions of structure under discussion here involve asyn-
ordinate aspects, whereas previous notions involve only synordinate
aspects.
It has to be emphasized here that the order of implication, as meas-
ured by the parameter T, has no necessary relationship to the order of
time (as measured by another parameter, t). These two parameters are
only related in a contingent manner (in this case by the rate of turning of
the stirring device). It is the T parameter that is directly relevant to the
description of the implicate structure, and not the t parameter.
When a structure is asynordinate (that is, constituted of aspects
with different degrees of implication), then evidently the time order is
not in general the primary one that is pertinent for the expression of
law. Rather, as one can see by considering the previous examples, the
whole implicate order is present at any moment, in such a way that the
entire structure growing out of this implicate order can be described
without giving any primary role to time. The law of the structure will
then just be a law relating aspects with various degrees of implication.
Such a law will, of course, not be deterministic in time. But, as has been
indicated elsewhere,34 determinism in time is not the only form of ratio
or reason; and as long as we can ﬁnd ratio or reason in the orders that
are primarily relevant, this is all that is needed for law.
One can see in the “quantum context” a signiﬁcant similarity to the
orders of movement that have been described in terms of the simple
examples discussed above. Thus, as shown in Figure 3.11, “elementary
particles” are generally observed by means of tracks that they are sup-
posed to make in detecting devices (photographic emulsions, bubble
chambers, etc.). Such a track is evidently to be regarded as no more than
an aspect appearing in immediate perception (as was done with the
moving sequence of droplets of dye indicated in Figure 3.10). To
describe it as the track of a “particle” is then to assume in addition that
the primarily relevant order of movement is similar to that in the
immediately perceived aspect.
134
Universal Orders

However, the whole discussion of the new order implicit in the
quantum theory shows that such a description cannot coherently be
maintained. For example, the need to describe movement discontinu-
ously in terms of “quantum jumps” implies that the notion of a well-
deﬁned orbit of a particle that connects the visible marks constituting
the track cannot have any meaning. In any case, the wave-particle prop-
erties of matter show that the overall movement depends on the total
experimental arrangement in a way that is not consistent with the idea
of autonomous motion of localized particles; and, of course, the discus-
sion of the Heisenberg microscope experiment indicates the relevance
of a new order of undivided wholeness in which it has no meaning to
talk about an observed object as if it were separate from the entire
experimental situation in which observation takes place. So the use of
the descriptive term “particle” in this “quantum” context is very mis-
leading.
Evidently, we have here to deal with something that is similar in
certain important ways to the example of stirring a dye into a viscous
ﬂuid. In both cases, there appears in immediate perception an explicate
order that cannot consistently be regarded as autonomous. In the
example of the dye, the explicate order is determined as an intersection
of the implicate order of “the whole movement” of the ﬂuid and an
implicate order of distinctions of density of dye that are relevated in
sense perception. In the “quantum” context, there similarly will be an
intersection of an implicate order of some “whole movement” corres-
ponding to what we have called, for example, “the electron,” and
another implicate order of distinctions that are relevated (and recorded)
by our instruments. Thus, the word “electron” should be regarded as no
more than a name by which we call attention to a certain aspect of the
holomovement, an aspect that can be discussed only by taking into
account the entire experimental situation and that cannot be speciﬁed
in terms of localized objects moving autonomously through space. And,
Figure 3.11
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
135

of course, every kind of “particle” which in current physics is said to be a
basic constituent of matter will have to be discussed in the same sort of
terms (so that such “particles” are no longer considered as autonomous
and separately existent). Thus, we come to a new general physical
description in which “everything implicates everything” in an order of
undivided wholeness.
A5 LAW IN THE HOLOMOVEMENT
We have seen that in the “quantum” context, the order in every immedi-
ately perceptible aspect of the world is to be regarded as coming out of a
more comprehensive implicate order, in which all aspects ultimately
merge in the undeﬁnable and immeasurable holomovement. How,
then, are we to understand the fact that descriptions involving the
analysis of the world into autonomous components do actually work, at
least in certain contexts (e.g., those in which classical physics is valid)?
To answer the question, we ﬁrst note that the word “autonomy” is
based on two Greek words: “auto,” meaning “self,” and “nomos” mean-
ing “law.” So, to be autonomous is to be self-ruling.
Evidently, nothing is “a law unto itself.” At most, something may
behave with a relative and limited degree of autonomy, under certain
conditions and in certain degrees of approximation. Indeed, at the very
least, each relatively autonomous thing (e.g., a particle) is limited by
other such relatively autonomous things. Such a limitation is currently
described in terms of interaction. However, we shall introduce here the
word “heteronomy” to call attention to a law in which many relatively
autonomous things are related in this way, i.e., externally and more or
less mechanically.
Now, what is characteristic of heteronomy is the applicability of
analytic descriptions. (The root of the word “analysis” is the Greek
“lysis” meaning “to dissolve” or “to loosen.” Since the preﬁx “ana”
means “above,” it may be said that “to analyse” is to “loosen from
above,” i.e., to obtain a broad view as if from a great height in terms of
components that are regarded as autonomous and separately evident
though in mutual interaction.)
As has been seen, however, in sufﬁciently broad contexts such ana-
lytic descriptions cease to be adequate. What is then called for is holon-
omy, i.e., the law of the whole. Holonomy does not totally deny the
relevance of analysis in the sense discussed above. Indeed, “the law of
the whole” will generally include the possibility of describing the “loos-
ening” of aspects from each other, so that they will be relatively
136
Universal Orders

autonomous in limited contexts (as well as the possibility of describing
the interactions of these aspects in a system of heteronomy). However,
any form of relative autonomy (and heteronomy) is ultimately limited
by holonomy, so that in a broad enough context such forms are seen to
be merely aspects, relevated in the holomovement, rather than disjoint
and separately existent things in interaction.
Scientiﬁc investigations have generally tended to begin by relevat-
ing apparently autonomous aspects of the totality. The study of the laws
of these aspects has generally been emphasized at ﬁrst, but as a rule this
kind of study has led gradually to an awareness that such aspects are
related to others originally thought to have no signiﬁcant bearing on
the subject of primary interest.
From time to time, a wide range of aspects has been comprehended
within a “new whole.” But of course the general tendency until now has
been to ﬁx on this “new whole” as a ﬁnally valid general order that is
henceforth to be adapted (in the manner discussed in Section A1) to ﬁt
any further facts that may be observed or discovered.
It is implied here, however, that even such a “new whole” will itself
be revealed as an aspect in yet another new whole. Thus, holonomy is
not to be regarded as a ﬁxed and ﬁnal goal of scientiﬁc research, but
rather as a movement in which “new wholes” are continually emerging.
And of course this further implies that the total law of the undeﬁnable
and immeasurable holomovement could never be known or speciﬁed
or put into words. Rather, such a law has necessarily to be regarded as
implicit.
Notes
1
See Re-Vision, vol. 3, no. 4, 1978, for a treatment of this subject in a different way. (Published at 20
Longfellow Road, Cambridge, Mass. 02148, USA.)
2
See Bohm, D., Wholeness and the Implicate Order, Routledge, London (1980), Ch. 5.
3
See Bohm, D., Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London
(1957), Ch. 2, for a further discussion of this point.
4
For a more detailed discussion of this point, see, for example, Bohm, D. and Hiley, B., Foundations
of Physics, vol. 5, 1975, p. 93.
5
For a detailed discussion on this experiment see Bohm, D., Quantum Theory, Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey (1951), Ch. 22.
6
See Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, Ch. 2, for a discussion of this feature of
“indeterminate mechanism.”
7
See Appendix to this chapter.
8
See Appendix to this chapter for further discussion of this device.
9
See Appendix to this chapter.
The Enfolding–Unfolding Universe
137

10
See Appendix to this chapter.
11
See Bohm and Hiley, Foundations of Physics, vol. 5, 1975, p. 93, and Bohm, Quantum Theory, for a
more detailed treatment of this feature of the quantum theory.
12
Mathematically one derives all the properties of the system from a 3N-dimensional wave func-
tion (where N is the number of particles) which cannot be represented in three-dimensional
space alone. Physically one actually ﬁnds the non-local, non-causal relationship of distant elem-
ents described above, which correspond very well with what is implied by the mathematical
equations.
13
Notably those in which the “wave function” of the combined system can be factored approxi-
mately into two separate three-dimensional wave functions (as shown in Bohm and Hiley, Foun-
dations of Physics).
14
This is just an example of the combination of wavelike and particle-like properties of matter
described in Section 2.
15
This sort of calculation is suggested in Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, p. 163.
16
In Section 8 we shall see that time, as well as space, may be enfolded in this way.
17
Compare with the idea of sub-system, system, and super-system, suggested in Bohm and Hiley,
Foundations of Physics.
18
This notion has already been suggested in a preliminary way in Bohm, Wholeness and the
Implicate Order, Ch. 3.
19
See Pribram, K., Languages of the Brain, G. Globus, et al. (eds), (1971); Consciousness and the
Brain, Plenum, New York (1976).
20
Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order, Ch. 6.
21
E.g., as shown in Section 3, a linearly ordered array of droplets may be enfolded together in such
a way that this order is still subtly held in the whole set of ensembles of ink particles.
22
As shown in Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order, Appendix to Ch. 6, on the implicate order
the basic algorithm is an algebra rather than the calculus.
23
For a more detailed discussion, see Ch. 2 of the present volume, originally in Bohm, D., The
Special Theory of Relativity, Benjamin, New York (1965), Appendix.
24
See ibid.
25
This illusion is essentially the one discussed in Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order, Chs 1
and 2, in which the whole of existence is seen as constituted of basically static fragments.
26
In some ways this idea of an “unconscious” background is similar to that of Freud. However, in
Freud’s point of view the unconscious has a fairly deﬁnite and limited kind of content and is
thus not comparable to the immensity of the background that we are proposing. Perhaps Freud’s
“oceanic feeling” would be somewhat closer to the latter than would be his notion of the
unconscious.
27
This corresponds to the quantum theoretical requirement that electrons may go from one state in
space to another without passing through intermediate states.
28
See Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order, Ch. 5.
29
See ibid.
30
For a very clear presentation of this view, see Kuhn, T., The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1955).
31
Piaget, J., The Origin of Intelligence in the Child, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London (1956).
32
See Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order, Ch. 5.
33
See Bohm, D., Hiley, B., and Stuart, A., Progressive Theoretical Physics, vol. 3. 1970, p. 171, where
this description of a perceived content considered as the intersection of two orders is treated in a
different context.
34
See Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order, Ch. 5.
138
Universal Orders

4
THE SUPER-IMPLICATE ORDER (1986)
The following conversation with David Bohm was conducted by Renée Weber,
Ph.D., Professor of Philosophy at Rutgers University, currently Afﬁliate Pro-
fessor of Philosophy at University of Washington. Here Bohm reﬁnes his
original model of the implicate order, addressing how the unfoldment of an
implicate order results in manifest order and structure. Why is the multi-
dimensional medium of space (the vacuum, or plenum) capable of unfolding
the forms we experience in the sensual, three-dimensional world? Why does
the plenum of space correspond more to the analogies of ink enfolded into
glycerine, or to light enfolded in a hologram, than to the diffuse and random
order of eggs enfolded into cake batter, as discussed in Chapter 3?
It is the activity of a super-implicate order, says Bohm, that accounts for
this ordered manifestation. Bohm derives the super-implicate order by apply-
ing his causal interpretation to quantum ﬁeld theory (a concise account of
this application is provided in Chapter 6). This super-implicate order infuses
the implicate order of space with active information, which generates various
levels of organization, structure, and meaning. To illustrate the relationship of
active information to these levels of organization, Bohm introduces the prin-
ciple of soma-signiﬁcance, whereby meaning and form are transmitted
throughout a hierarchical continuum of matter and consciousness.
The ﬁnal portion of the conversation is concerned with the nature of
light. Bohm suggests an intimate relation, even an identity, between light and
the “ocean” of energy that emanates from multi-dimensional space, or the
vacuum. The movement and activity of light can be understood as a ﬁrst
Extract from Chapter 2 of R. Weber, Dialogues with Scientists and Sages: The Search for Unity,
Routledge and Kegan Paul, London (1986).
The Super-Implicate Order
139

phase in explicate manifestation, foundationally necessary for the subsequent
emergence of all material structures. Indeed, Bohm proposes that all matter is
a form of “frozen” light, resulting from the oscillation of intersecting light rays.
By way of explaining the concept of a super-implicate order, Bohm gives
a brief sketch of Louis de Broglie’s model of the electron, ﬁrst put forward in
1923. This model is particularly signiﬁcant as it is the basis for what eventu-
ally becomes the causal-ontological interpretation, Bohm and Hiley’s quan-
tum formalism for the implicate order.
Weber
You’ve recently proposed a super-implicate order. How does it
differ from the implicate order?
Bohm
If you apply this model, the enfoldment is now seen on two
levels: ﬁrst, an enfolded order of the vacuum with ripples on it that
unfold; and second, a super-information ﬁeld of the whole universe,
a super-implicate order which organizes the ﬁrst level into various
structures and is capable of tremendous development of structure.
The point about the super-implicate order is that if we take the holo-
graphic theory, though we have an implicate order, nothing organizes
it. It is what’s called “linear,” and it just passes through itself and
diffuses around; special devices can unfold it but it does not have an
intrinsic capacity to unfold an order. The super-implicate order, which
is the so-called higher ﬁeld (the implicate order would be a wave
function), would be a function of the wave function, a higher order, a
super-wave function. The super-implicate order makes the implicate
order non-linear and organizes it into relatively stable forms with
complex structures.
Weber
Is there a super super-implicate order?
Bohm
There might be an implicate order even beyond that one. I’d
like to propose that we are making a series of abstractions and any
level of thought must cut off somewhere. Even if we put more in,
there is still more left out. It’s inherent in thought that it is not going
to grasp the actual totality. But the holistic part of thought would be
thought which does not make a break, thought which is unbroken.
Weber
It’s a continuum of ordering principles.
Bohm
That’s right. Even when we say that we have made a break, we
realize that it really shades off into the unknown. That’s essential for
this quality of wholeness.
Weber
It has no endpoint and no origin?
Bohm
We produce an arbitrary distinction, merely for the sake of
thought.
140
Universal Orders

Weber
But the reason for postulating a super-implicate order is that
you want an organizing and active principle.
Bohm
I don’t need to postulate it. As soon as you make this model
of de Broglie and extend it to the quantum mechanical ﬁeld, you’ve
got it.
Weber
In physics?
Bohm
That is exactly what is implied by quantum mechanical ﬁeld
theory. When seen in this way and through this model, this theory is
exactly what I have described.
Weber
Would conventional physicists accept that?
Bohm
They have accepted it, but they say, “What is the use? It does
not produce anything different from what we’ve already done. We
only care about the empirical results.” The other is philosophy and
poetry as far as they are concerned.
Weber
They are only attuned to the explicate and not to the enfolded
source of it.
Bohm
Yes, of course, that’s the whole purpose of the operation. They
say, “The essential thing of truth is to produce theoretical, mathemat-
ical ideas which actually predict the results of experiments, and in
that act you are grasping truth.”
Weber
How it got there is irrelevant?
Bohm
They say that’s not interesting, and they dismiss it.
Weber
One of your reservations about the direction of contemporary
physics is that it does not tie its ﬁndings enough to the philosophical
meaning.
Bohm
The imaginative side, the intuitive side.
Weber
Making models?
Bohm
Not necessarily new models, but new forms of imagination. I
regard the implicate order as a new form of imagination. They would
say, “It’s no use if it doesn’t produce an empirical pay-off. We will
look at that as soon as it is producing an empirical pay-off – we’ll look
at anything.” That’s one of the errors of science, which is just part of
the error of our society, that the empirical pay-off is the main point of
the operation, that it is truth. They feel that the empirical agreement
is what is meant by truth, provided that you have a logical mathemat-
ical argument behind it.
Weber
You are saying that an imaginative model like the implicate
order may, in fact, get us closer to the truth of things, even though at
the moment we may not be sure what the empirical pay-off is.
Bohm
Yes. In fact, I think any new idea must involve the free play of
the mind without thinking too much about the empirical pay-off.
The Super-Implicate Order
141

Weber
Einstein got to the idea of relativity because as a child he
imagined what the universe looked like riding on a beam of light.
Bohm
That’s right. It took him ten years even to work out the theory
of relativity.
Weber
So you are endorsing that as one possible avenue to discover-
ing physics. When I asked a colleague in physics for his reaction to
the implicate order, he said: it is an interesting idea, but does Bohm
have any shred of evidence for it?
Bohm
I would say, what shred of evidence is there for the present
interpretation as opposed to the one I propose? I have heard that
argument before and I say it is fortuitous that this interpretation of
quantum mechanics and this way of doing it have developed. For
example, de Broglie proposed quite a different approach which was
squelched by the leading physicists of the time. Had that been
adopted and had people got used to that, then people would have
asked the same question, “What is the point of this present
approach?” It is nothing different from de Broglie.
Weber
You are saying that the accepted model of quantum physics is
accepted because of familiarity.
Bohm
Yes, and that it was chosen for reasons that are fortuitous as far
as science itself is concerned.
Weber
The implicate order, as you said elsewhere, is highly compat-
ible with the equations, more so perhaps.
Bohm
Yes. Even de Broglie’s idea extended in the way I did it would
have been a more imaginative way of looking at the thing and it
would have been easier to reach. Had people adopted it, they would
have regarded this current way [of interpreting physics] as terribly
obscure.
Weber
Is it too technical to give a brief picture of de Broglie’s theory?
Bohm
It was the idea that basically an electron is a particle (I’ll sim-
plify it very much) and that it has a ﬁeld around it, a new kind of
quantum mechanical ﬁeld which in some ways is similar to old kinds
of ﬁelds, in some ways different. The key difference was that its
activity did not depend on its intensity. That’s like saying that it did
not act by mechanical pressure on the particle, but it acted from the
information content which carried information about the whole
experimental arrangement. So the meaning of an experimental result
and the form of the experimental conditions were no longer separ-
able, they were a whole, as even Bohr said. This was immediately
obvious in de Broglie’s interpretation, whereas it’s a deep, impene-
trable mystery in Bohr’s language.
142
Universal Orders

Weber
Did Bohr not accept it?
Bohm
Bohr did. Bohr had the insight to see this, and this is the basis
of his work on interpretation, that the form of the experimental con-
ditions and the meaning of the results are a whole, not further ana-
lyzable. He has a very complex way of putting it which very few
physicists understand. In fact, one of the points is that the only con-
sistent interpretation of that kind is Bohr’s, and the number who
understand it is very small. Most physicists are just using it, taking it
for granted that Bohr has done it right.
Weber
When you say “he,” you have been referring to Bohr, not to de
Broglie.
Bohm
Yes, de Broglie, even before Bohr, had proposed another inter-
pretation. What happened was that scientists ignored his picture and
just took the mathematical formula.
Weber
If the community of physicists had taken the de Broglie
model, would that have moved them closer to an awareness of the
unity of things?
Bohm
Yes, because nowadays no physicist understands this at all
except by very complicated mathematical arguments which are so
distant from his intuition that he regards it as signiﬁcant only in
connection with his work, but not connected with anything else. It’s
so complicated that very few physicists hear about it and each time
new textbooks are written, more and more of it is lost so that by now
textbooks don’t refer to it all; they just present quantum mechanics
as a set of formulae you’ve got to learn how to use. Because of the lack
of imaginative understanding, this result was very likely to come
about.
Weber
You are assigning a creative and constructive role to imagin-
ation, whereas earlier you cautioned against its abuse.
Bohm
Coleridge has proposed two kinds of imagination, primary and
secondary. The primary imagination is the direct expression of the
creative intent within, what we may call the display in the mind. The
imagination is an unfoldment of some deeper operation of the mind
which is displayed as if coming from the senses, and you can grasp it
as if looking at it directly as a whole.
Weber
It reveals.
Bohm
Yes. Reveal and display have much the same meaning here.
But the secondary imagination arises when you keep on repeating an
image from the primary display and it becomes automatic.
Weber
It becomes self-referring. It no longer reveals but becomes a
fantasy.
The Super-Implicate Order
143

Bohm
That’s exactly what Coleridge called it. He called it “fancy,”
which is the same as fantasy.
Weber
Imagination, then, in the creative scientiﬁc sense, is our
attempt to verbalize deep insights about nature.
Bohm
Or make a picture.
Weber
So you are arguing for imaginative models that would be
multi-leveled, mutually supportive, and, most importantly, show their
interconnectedness. That is not being done in physics?
Bohm
Well, they simply ignore it and say that it’s out of date. It
doesn’t produce an empirical pay-off.
Weber
This model would produce only understanding!
Bohm
Yes. But they say, “What does it mean to understand unless
you can predict something empirically?”
Weber
So they have equated understanding with empirical predic-
tion and control and you are diverging from that. You are saying to
understand means to grasp it clearly and to see it connected to every-
thing else. Is that right?
Bohm
That’s right. Comprehension is the word. To comprehend, to
hold it all together.
Weber
Is talk of a super-implicate order something new, or was it
already implied in the implicate order?
Bohm
In talking of a super-implicate order, I am not making further
assumptions beyond what is implied in physics today. Once we
extend this model of de Broglie to the quantum mechanical ﬁeld
rather than just to the particle, that picture immediately is the super-
implicate order. So this is not just speculation, it is the picture which
is implied by present quantum mechanics if you look at it
imaginatively.
Weber
Including the claim that there is an ordering principle?
Bohm
That’s right. Mathematically it is called non-linear equations.
Weber
When you say we should look at it imaginatively, let’s be
clear: you are not proposing that we introduce vague fantasy.
Bohm
No.
Weber
You mean imaginative interpretations and models for the
mathematical equations, creative imagination.
Bohm
Imagination which directly displays the meaning of the math-
ematics, the mathematics which is being used by all the leading
physicists now in whatever they are doing.
Weber
You are drawing out the consequences of quantum mechan-
ical mathematics.
Bohm
Yes. Further, I am saying that by not doing this you fail to see
144
Universal Orders

the full meaning of that mathematics and are able to restrict it to
making empirical predictions.
Weber
This super-implicate order is not the end. It can go as far as
thought can take it, a super super-implicate order, and so on?
Bohm
That’s right. That was one point I wanted to make. The second
point is that if we remain with the holographic model, this essentially
sticks to the implicate order and leaves out the super-implicate order.
In other words, it’s a tremendous simpliﬁcation of quantum mech-
anics to make the holographic model; that is good enough in the
classical sense where you use the holograph. But as a model for
organizing the implicate order through the informational ﬁeld – the
quantum information potential – it leaves out what is very interest-
ing, namely that this implicate order now actively organizes itself.
This is crucial to understanding thought and the mind.
Weber
So it’s the self-organizing universe, and it makes clear that
consciousness can’t be divorced from matter because it resides within
it in some way.
Bohm
Yes, that’s right. The relationship of the super-implicate order
to the implicate order is similar to the relationship of consciousness
to matter as we know it. There is a kind of analogy.
Weber
The super-implicate order would be the conscious aspect and
the implicate order would be the material aspect?
Bohm
The neuro-physiological aspect, which is still enfolded relative
to what we ordinarily see.
Weber
So these pairs occur on many different levels.
Bohm
Yes, in fact there is a principle I once thought of, I called it
“soma-signiﬁcance,” instead of “psychosomatic.” The word psycho-
somatic emphasizes two entities, mind and soma (or body), but I want
to emphasize two sides of one process. Any process can be treated
either as somatic or as signiﬁcant. A very elementary case is the
printed paper: it’s somatic in that it’s just printed ink, and it also has
signiﬁcance. I say all along the line any part of the body or the body
processes is somatic, it’s the nerves moving chemically and physic-
ally; and in addition it has a meaning which is active. The essential
point about intelligence is the activity of signiﬁcance, right? In com-
puters, we have begun to imitate that to some extent. I am trying to
say that all of nature is organized according to the activity of signiﬁ-
cance. This, however, can be conceived somatically in a more subtle
form of matter which, in turn, is organized by a still more subtle form
of signiﬁcance. So in that way every level is both somatic and
signiﬁcant.
The Super-Implicate Order
145

Weber
That is very much like Spinoza. Would you extend this all the
way into the heart of matter to the atom and the sub-atomic particles?
Bohm
Yes, because what we call the atom is organized by the super or
the quantum ﬁeld of information, which gives it its signiﬁcance.
Weber
Is the signiﬁcance something that we impute to an otherwise
neutral domain?
Bohm
No, the essential point is that if we merely imputed signiﬁ-
cance to it, it wouldn’t be active. Do we impute signiﬁcance to the
activity of the computer? There is information-content stored in a
program. That signiﬁcance is active because it determines the activ-
ity of the computer and all sorts of activities that ﬂow out of it.
Weber
One might question that analogy because the signiﬁcance of
the information-content in the computer is what we’ve put in and then
we read it back out. But here we’re dealing with nature as a whole.
Bohm
But quantum mechanics is indicating that that order of activity
or that order of relationship is what is actually present, and that we
are merely imitating nature.
Weber
We’re imitating nature in our cognitive processes and creative
acts?
Bohm
Yes, and extending it in some ways.
Weber
But are these processes truly similar?
Bohm
If we take the basic structure as similar, we can say that the
super or information-potential is related to the implicate order of
matter as the subtle aspects of consciousness are related to the
material movements of hormones and electrical currents in the
nerves.
Weber
It’s almost the old hermetic principle, “as above, so below.”
We’re the mirror image of larger processes.
Bohm
Yes, you could say that essentially it’s the principle of what we
call similarities and differences: the differences within one ﬁeld are
paralleled by similar differences in the other ﬁeld. The quantum
ﬁeld contains information about the whole environment and about
the whole past, which regulates the present activity of the electron in
much the same way that information about the whole past and our
whole environment regulates our own activity as human beings,
through consciousness.
Weber
Is that like saying that nature thinks?
Bohm
Not exactly, but nature has active information as we have; at
least at the level of unconscious thought it’s similar.
Weber
And part of that active information is derived from its own
past?
146
Universal Orders

Bohm
Yes, or from elsewhere.
Weber
Is the super-implicate order a euphemism for God?
Bohm
I don’t know what the meaning of the question is since the
super-implicate order is in turn part of a still greater implicate order.
It’s not a euphemism for God because it’s limited.
Weber
Then let’s shift the question to the ultimate super super-
implicate order.
Bohm
But we can’t grasp that in thought. We’re not saying that any
of this is another word for God. I would put it another way: people
had insight in the past about a form of intelligence that had organized
the universe and they personalized it and called it God. A similar
insight can prevail today without personalizing it and without calling
it a personal God.
Weber
Still, it’s a kind of super-intelligence and you’ve said elsewhere
that that is benevolent and compassionate, not neutral.
Bohm
Well, we can propose that.
Weber
To you the notion of creativity entails building larger wholes.
Bohm
We cannot in the end do anything but destroy if we have a
fragmentary approach.
Weber
How do you order these various levels?
Bohm
To say that the higher level simply transcends the lower level
altogether. It’s immensely greater and has an entirely different set of
relationships out of which the lower level is obtained as a very small
part, in an abstraction.
Weber
It has wholeness, more power, more energy, more insight?
Bohm
Yes, and it contains the lower level in some sense.
Weber
And not vice-versa?
Bohm
The lower level will be the unfoldment of the higher level.
Weber
In space and time.
Bohm
Yes.
Weber
So in a sense they contain each other but in another sense the
higher one contains the whole and the lower one is more linear.
Bohm
Yes. The higher one is called non-linear, mathematically, and
the lower one is linear. That means of course that the linear organiza-
tion of time and thought characteristic of the ordinary level will not
necessarily be characteristic of the higher level. Therefore what is
beyond time may have an order of its own, not the same as the simple
linear order of time.
Weber
In that case we have this all upside down: we foist our limited
version of space and time on these higher levels and think that’s the
only ordering possible.
The Super-Implicate Order
147

Bohm
This higher order is not basically the order of space and time,
but the order of space and time unfolds from it and folds back into it
in the way we’ve been discussing.
Weber
Our kind of space and time is one among perhaps inﬁnitely
many orderings possible in the universe yet we think that it’s the only
way and in fact the necessary condition for understanding. Kant
almost said that and could not conceive of an alternative arrange-
ment. The super-implicate order proposes an alternative to current
narrow western epistemology.
Bohm
Yes, it says that the information content out of which the
implicate order unfolds is not determined in an order of space and
time as we know it, but it contains that order within it.
Weber
We might say this is the creative play (lila in Sanskrit) of the
universe, where from its deep recesses it evolves different
combinations.
Bohm
Yes, and through that it’s unfolding and developing and ﬂower-
ing (if you want to use that word as Krishnamurti does) and therefore
evolution is fundamental. This involves both space and time. Time
itself is an order of manifestation, you see. We are going to say that it
is possible to have an implicate order with regard to time as well as to
space, to say that in any given period of time, the whole of time may
be enfolded. It’s implied in the implicate order when you carry it
through: the holomovement is the reality and what is going on in the
full depth of that one moment of time contains information about all
of it.
Weber
You’ve said that the moment is timeless.
Bohm
Yes, the moment is atemporal, the connection of moments is
not in time but in the implicate order.
Weber
Which you said is timeless.
Bohm
Yes. So let me propose that also for consciousness; let me
propose that consciousness is basically in the implicate order as all
matter is and therefore it’s not that consciousness is one thing and
matter is another. Rather consciousness is a material process
and consciousness is itself in the implicate order, as is all matter,
and consciousness manifests in some explicate order, as does
matter.
Weber
The difference between what we call matter and conscious-
ness would be the state of density or subtlety?
Bohm
The state of subtlety. Consciousness is possibly a more subtle
form of matter and movement, a more subtle aspect of the holo-
movement. In the nonmanifest order there is no separation in space
148
Universal Orders

and time. In ordinary matter this is so and it’s even more so for this
subtle matter which is consciousness. Therefore if we are separate it
is because we are sticking largely to the manifest world as the basic
reality where the whole point is to have separate units, relatively
separate anyway, but interacting. In nonmanifest reality it’s all inter-
penetrating, interconnected, one. So we say deep down the con-
sciousness of mankind is one. This is a virtual certainty because even
in the vacuum matter is one; and if we don’t see this it’s because we
are blinding ourselves to it.
Weber
Your implicate order philosophy treats space very differently
from the usual way.
Bohm
Yes. There are two views of space. One view is to maintain that
the skin is the boundary of ourselves, that there’s the space without
and the space within. The space within is the separate self, obviously,
and the space without is the space which separates the separate
selves, right? And therefore to overcome the separation you must
have a process of moving through that space, which takes time. Is that
clear?
Weber
That’s how human beings have always thought of it.
Bohm
That’s right. But if we looked at it as a holomovement with this
vast reserve of energy and empty space where matter itself is that
small wave on empty space, then we should really say that the space
as a whole is the ground of existence and we are in it. So the space
doesn’t separate us, it unites us. Therefore it’s like saying that there
are two separate points and a certain dotted line connecting them,
which shows how we think they are related; or to say there is a real
line and that the points are abstractions from that.
Weber
Demarking the boundaries of the line.
Bohm
Yes.
Weber
You turn the whole thing around.
Bohm
The line is the reality and the points are abstractions. In that
sense we say that there are no separate people, you see, but that that
idea is an abstraction which comes by taking certain features of the
whole as abstracted and self-existent.
Weber
So space is more fundamental and more real than the objects
in it. Applying your theory to time, we would have to say that the
interval between the moments is the real.
Bohm
It could be considered to be that. But see, if we take the view
that the space is what is real, then I think that we have to say that the
measure of space is not what is real. The measure of space is what
matter provides. So space goes beyond the measure of space.
The Super-Implicate Order
149

It’s the same with time. If we want to say that the interval is real,
then the measure of time cannot be taken as fundamental. Therefore
we are already outside of what we ordinarily would call time.
But rather, if we have silence and “emptiness,” it does not have the
measure either of space or of time. Now in that silence there may
appear something which is a little ripple which has that measure. But
if we thought that the little ripple was all that there is and that the
space between was nothing, of no signiﬁcance, then we would have
the usual view of fragmentation.
Weber
Taking what we call events as the points.
Bohm
Yes. Events are like the points.
Weber
But if you don’t allow time to be measured by events, the line
then . . .
Bohm
Then it’s ﬂowing movement, right?
Weber
Well, then in a way it’s silence.
Bohm
It’s just ﬂow. If you look at nature and say, there’s no event in
nature, really, then it’s just ﬂowing. It’s the mind that abstracts and
puts an event in there.
Weber
But doesn’t it follow that the ﬂow or the silence cannot be
broken up by any distinguishing characteristics?
Bohm
Yes. Except that’s what thought puts in, the distinguishing
characteristics. The distinguishing characteristics have their place
in a certain limited domain of the explicate order and of the
manifest.
Weber
Still, I think to some people all this is going to seem very
strange. First of all, it challenges everything we’ve known or been
taught. Second, it appears to be counter-intuitive, certainly to those
who have been trained in modern science. Third, it may appear
frightening or threatening. So let’s spell it out. You’re saying that the
events are always distinguishable, they have characteristics, they are
what we call happenings, and they’re the ones we’ve seized upon as
what transpires in the world, as the world’s business, so to speak.
Those – you’re saying – are secondary, derivative, and less important
than the absence of all that. And the absence of all that is emptiness,
silence.
Bohm
It would be the holomovement, you see, the ﬂowing movement.
But it goes beyond that. We could say that even at this level of
thought there is a way of looking at it in which emptiness is the
plenum, right? I’m saying that what we call real things are actually
tiny little ripples which have their place, but they have been usurping
the whole, the place of the whole.
150
Universal Orders

Weber
By “emptiness” we don’t mean a substantive emptiness like an
“empty” box. We’re talking about a plenum.
Bohm
It’s emptiness which is a plenum. Yes.
Weber
An emptiness which is a plenum. What does that mean?
Bohm
This is a well-known idea even in physics. If you take a crystal
which is at absolute zero it does not scatter electrons. They go
through it as if it were empty and as soon as you raise the tempera-
ture and [produce] inhomogeneities, they scatter. Now, if you used
those electrons to observe the crystal (e.g. by focusing them with an
electron lens to make an image), all you would see would be these
little inhomogeneities and you would say they are what exists and the
crystal is what does not exist. Right? I think this is a familiar idea,
namely to say that what we see immediately is all there is or all that
counts and that our ideas must simply correlate what we see
immediately.
Weber
From that, of course, it would follow that history and all
multiplicity of objects and events are just ripples.
Bohm
Yes. They’re merely ripples and their meaning depends on
understanding what underlies the ripples.
Weber
And you’re saying what underlies the ripples is the true and
profound source.
Bohm
Yes.
Weber
And you’ve also said that man can connect with that
emptiness.
[Bohm then makes the point that the human mind as it ordinarily func-
tions cannot understand “emptiness,” which lies beyond three-
dimensional consciousness.]
Bohm
It’s not enough to say we are going to consider a consciousness
which is more than this limited three-dimensional kind. The trouble
is that we are still using the three-dimensional consciousness to guide
us in that.
Weber
To talk about it?
Bohm
To talk about it. The point of meditation would be to stop
doing that.
Weber
What you have been saying sounds like mysticism – that we
are grounded in something inﬁnite. How does it differ from what the
great mystics have said?
Bohm
I don’t know that there’s necessarily any difference. What is
mysticism? The word “mysticism” is based on the word “mystery,”
The Super-Implicate Order
151

implying something hidden. Perhaps the ordinary mode of con-
sciousness which elaborately obscures its mode of functioning from
itself and engages in self-deception might more appropriately be
called “mysticism.” Or we could call it “obscurantism,” and say there’s
an opposite mode that we could term “transparentism” (although I
don’t really like the sufﬁx “ism” in any form).
Weber
A transparence with respect to the whole.
Bohm
Yes, as opposed to obscuring the whole.
Weber
Kierkegaard had a wonderful phrase for that. He said true
religion is “to be grounded transparently in the power that constitutes
one.”
Bohm
Yes, that’s exactly what it would mean.
Weber
Speaking of mysticism, there is one important idea that I
would like to discuss and understand and that is the idea of light.
That is especially important to me because you are a physicist. Light
has been used as the privileged metaphor in the language of mysti-
cism and experimental religions, going back to the Greeks and the
east. In all these, light is the symbol of our union with the divine.
They talk about a light without shadow, an all-suffusing light, and it
comes up as the central metaphor in near-death experiences. Do you
have any hypothesis as to why light has been singled out as the
privileged metaphor?
Bohm
If you want to relate it to modern physics (light and more
generally anything moving at the speed of light, which is called
the null-velocity, meaning null distance), the connection might be
as follows. As an object approaches the speed of light, according
to relativity, its internal space and time change so that the clocks
slow down relative to other speeds, and the distance is shortened.
You would ﬁnd that the two ends of the light ray would have
no time between them and no distance, so they would represent
immediate contact. (This was pointed out by G. N. Lewis, a physical
chemist, in the 1920s.) You could also say that from the point of view
of present ﬁeld theory, the fundamental ﬁelds are those of very high
energy in which mass can be neglected, which would be essentially
moving at the speed of light. Mass is a phenomenon of connecting
light rays which go back and forth, sort of freezing them into a
pattern.
So matter, as it were, is condensed or frozen light. Light is not
merely electromagnetic waves but in a sense other kinds of waves
that go at that speed. Therefore all matter is a condensation of light
into patterns moving back and forth at average speeds which are less
152
Universal Orders

than the speed of light. Even Einstein had some hint of that idea. You
could say that when we come to light we are coming to the funda-
mental activity in which existence has its ground, or at least coming
close to it.
Weber
Why is speed the determinant?
Bohm
Well, let’s turn it around. If you look at Piaget and young
children, movement is primary in perception. They see movement
ﬁrst and its unfoldment as time, and only perceive distance later.
They have a tendency to say that if something went further it must
have been going faster. They only learn later how to do it right. They
are carrying some deeper perception into the ordinary explicate
level, where it is inappropriate. In the deeper perception, movement
is the primary reality in perception. The thing that is not moving is
the result of the cancellation of movement. We say that there is no
speed at all at light. To call it speed is merely using ordinary lan-
guage. In itself, when it is self-referential, there’s no time, no space,
no speed.
Weber
 What is it?
Bohm
 It’s just a primary conception. As you move faster and faster
according to relativity your time rates slow down and the distance
gets smaller, so as you approach very high speeds your own internal
time and distance become less, and therefore if you were at the speed
of light you could reach from one end of the universe to the other
without changing your age at all.
Weber
 Isn’t that saying that it’s approaching a timeless state?
Bohm
 That’s right. We’re saying that existentially speaking or logic-
ally speaking, time originates out of the timeless.
Weber
 This is primary and time is derivative of it, cutting it down,
freezing it, arresting it.
Bohm
 Yes, arresting it to a certain extent, not absolutely, but to a
large extent.
Weber
 When mystics use the visualization of light they don’t use it
only as a metaphor, to them it seems to be a reality. Have they tapped
into matter and energy at a level where time is absent?
Bohm
 It may well be. That’s one way of looking at it. As I’ve sug-
gested the mind has two-dimensional and three-dimensional modes
of operation. It may be able to operate directly in the depths of the
implicate order where this [timeless state] is the primary actuality.
Then we could see the ordinary actuality as a secondary structure that
emerges as an overtone on the primary structure. It’s again the busi-
ness of what is emphasized and what is secondary – the two kinds of
The Super-Implicate Order
153

music. The ordinary consciousness is one kind of music, and the
other kind of consciousness is the other kind of music.
Weber
The ordinary music can become noise, cacophony and dis-
harmony. The music from the deep-structure cannot.
Bohm
The ordinary music is harmonious only in a limited area.
Weber
It’s harmonious when it properly expresses this deeper har-
mony – Pythagoras’ harmony of the spheres – but that other music is
never disharmonious.
Bohm
We might propose that. Let’s say there are two poles where we
can operate. We could operate from that extreme pole all the way to
the ordinary pole, but we have accepted the distorted view that we
can only operate at one pole, or very near it.
Weber
We have already closed the gate when we needn’t do so.
Bohm
Yes.
Weber
For the mystics there is always light. The primary clear light in
the Tibetan Book of the Dead is the ﬁrst thing the dying person is
aware of. If he doesn’t move towards it or away from it or feel awe or
fear or manipulate it in any way as if it were outside himself, then he
merges with it and is liberated, enlightened. Christ says: “I am the
light,” and so on. I’ve always asked myself, why light? You’re saying
that from the point of view of a physicist, it has to do with the
absence of speed and the closeness of contact.
Bohm
Light is what enfolds all the universe as well. For example, if
you’re looking at this room, the whole room is enfolded into the light
which enters the pupil of your eye and unfolds into the image and
into your brain. Light in its generalized sense (not just ordinary light)
is the means by which the entire universe unfolds into itself.
Weber
Is this a metaphor for you or an actual state?
Bohm
It’s an actuality. At least as far as physics is concerned.
Weber
Light is energy, of course.
Bohm
It’s energy and it’s also information – content, form and struc-
ture. It’s the potential of everything.
Weber
Physicists are not satisﬁed that they have understood light up
to now because of the particle-wave paradox, right?
Bohm
Yes, I think that to understand light we’ll have to understand
the structure underlying time and space more deeply. You can see
that these issues are related in the sense that light transcends the
present structure of time and space and we will never understand it
properly in that present structure.
Weber
How would implicate order philosophy handle light?
Bohm
It could handle it more naturally, mathematically speaking,
154
Universal Orders

because it doesn’t commit itself to the idea of separate points in
space; but it may say that the underlying reality is something which is
not localized, and light is also something which is not localized. One
view says that light moves from one place to another through a series
of positions, and the other view says it doesn’t do that at all. Rather,
light exists, it just simply is.
Weber
It is at all points?
Bohm
Points are deﬁned by the intersections of different rays of
light. That’s the way we actually do it in perception. We infer a point
from the fact that many light rays are coming from it, say a star or any
point. In this view, points would be understood as the intersection of
many light rays. The light is fundamental, the null ray. That’s a tech-
nical term that shows the recognition of this fact in ordinary physics.
Weber
It’s where every particle of matter is in contact without the
slightest gap between them.
Bohm
Yes, it’s possible to have that contact without a gap.
Weber
So light is one continuous, unbroken, undivided whole?
Bohm
You would have to look at it that way, yes; especially if you
consider the quantum theory of it which says the action in it is
undivided as well. What G. N. Lewis had in mind was to explain the
quantum in that way. It was very mysterious to say that light is a wave
which spreads continuously through space and yet that a single quan-
tum of energy goes from one point to another. How could that hap-
pen? G. N. Lewis said this wave was some sort of an abstraction,
and he said what actually happened in each ray was that there was
an immediate contact from the source to the absorber. One under-
stood the quantum in that way, that there was no spreading out of
energy.
Weber
It therefore takes no time, no transmission, no distance. There
isn’t any, is what you’re saying.
Bohm
That is the view I’m proposing. The ordinary view is another
map of it. You can take many maps of the world; one of them is
Mercator’s projection, which is quite good near the equator but it says
near the poles that the space is inﬁnite. So maps can have the wrong
structure. We can say that the ordinary space-time is a map which
holds fairly well for ordinary speeds, but when you get to the speed of
light it’s as wrong in structure as Mercator’s projection is at the pole.
Weber
We say light is clarity, light illumines, light is energy, some
mystics have said light is love, compassion, understanding, light can
make whole or heal. If light is the background of everything, what
would be its relationship to the foreground?
The Super-Implicate Order
155

Bohm
Light is this background which is all one but its information-
content has the capacity for immense diversity. Light can carry
information about the entire universe. The other point is that light, by
interactions of different rays (as ﬁeld theory in physics is investigat-
ing today), can produce particles and all the diverse structures of
matter.
Weber
You’ve stressed information and that has to do with knowing
the universe.
Bohm
A kind of knowing.
Weber
The other aspect would have to do with its being. Maybe
there’s an undifferentiated realm of light and when it radiates
itself as being, as particles, those might be its “shadows” or ﬁnite
expression.
Bohm
They are expressions but they are ripples on this vast ocean of
light. This ocean of energy could be thought of as an ocean of light.
But the information-content may be such as to predispose certain
light rays to combine so that they move back and forth rather than
moving straight ahead, and thus forming particles.
Weber
Are those ripples, those particles, the silhouette of that light?
Bohm
Implicit in the information-content of the light – you could say
that. About silhouette, I don’t know. Something would have to throw
the shadow. What is going to do that? The light, as it were, determines
itself to make particles.
Weber
In order to do what?
Bohm
I don’t know. But we’re proposing that this allows for a richer
universe.
Weber
To be consistent one might have to say that the light trans-
forms aspects of itself into particles in order that those particles will
reveal the light.
Bohm
That’s right, they will reveal the potential of the light in a new
way. So the light and the particles together make a higher unity. Most
physicists subtract off this inﬁnity and say it doesn’t count and
what’s left over are the particles, and they claim that these are all that
count.
Weber
But you’re claiming that’s incorrect and shallow because it’s
subtracting off the very thing in which these particles have their roots
and being.
Bohm
That’s why I say present physics doesn’t understand it, it’s
merely a system of computing and getting empirical results.
Weber
We’ve given light a cosmological, a physical, and a meta-
physical interpretation. What about the psychological and spiritual
156
Universal Orders

interpretation? Why do people who tap into that realm of light feel a
rare peace and happiness even though light is considered neutral and
value-free by physics?
Bohm
The mind may have a structure similar to the universe, and in
the underlying movement we call empty space there is actually a
tremendous energy, a movement. The particular forms which appear
in the mind may be analogous to the particles, and getting to the
ground of the mind might be felt as light. The essential point is not
that it’s light but rather this free, penetrating movement of the whole.
Weber
Somehow the energy it triggers in the experiencer is an inte-
grated whole and that perhaps is what accounts for this profound
sense of peace.
Bohm
Yes. The analogy has often been made that even though the
ocean is all stirred up and quite stormy on the surface, if you get to
the bottom it is peaceful.
The Super-Implicate Order
157

5
SOMA-SIGNIFICANCE AND THE ACTIVITY OF
MEANING (1985)
In this chapter Bohm outlines the nature of soma-signiﬁcant and signa-
somatic activity. Here “soma” refers to the body, and by extension to any
material structure or process, while “signiﬁcance” refers to mind or meaning.
These terms are meant to suggest complementary aspects of one indivisible
process, rather than two qualitatively distinct domains. With this model Bohm
furthers his argument that there is no essential difference between reciprocal
processes in the objective world (Chapter 1) and reciprocal processes in the
perception and cognition of human beings (Chapter 2), suggesting that active
meaning is enfolded and unfolded throughout the whole of existence. Soma-
signiﬁcant and signa-somatic processes are thus seen as aspects of the
dynamics of implicate and explicate orders.
Two examples indicate the scope of soma-signiﬁcant processes. In the
human realm, a somatic form, e.g., a trafﬁc light, presents a signiﬁcance to a
driver. This signiﬁcance is developed throughout increasingly subtle somatic
structures – the visual system, the nervous system, and the brain of the driver
(a soma-signiﬁcant ﬂow). These levels of somatic subtlety have corresponding
meanings, and a cumulative signiﬁcance for the driver – in this case, “stop.”
This signiﬁcance becomes active, and the process then moves in an “out-
ward” direction. The brain produces an intention to stop, which works its way
out through increasingly “manifest” levels of soma – the nervous system and
the musculature – resulting in stopping the car (a signa-somatic ﬂow).
At the quantum level of matter, says Bohm, soma-signiﬁcant processes
Extract from Chapter 3 of D. Bohm, Unfolding Meaning: A Weekend of Dialogue, ed. Donald Factor,
Routledge and Kegan Paul, London ([1985], 1987).
158
Universal Orders

also occur. In Bohm’s version of quantum theory (Chapters 4 and 6), a “pilot
wave” reads the somatic form of the environment and conveys this form to its
accompanying particle (a soma-signiﬁcant ﬂow). The subtler somatic struc-
ture of the particle – which Bohm suggests is at least as complex as a radio
receiver – develops a cumulative “orientational” signiﬁcance from this
information. When this signiﬁcance is fully developed it also becomes out-
wardly active, giving rise to speciﬁc movements on the part of the particle (a
signa-somatic ﬂow).
For Bohm, the pilot wave model is not merely analogous to human soma-
signiﬁcance. He sees each of these examples as abstracted nodes in a
continuum that includes the quantum level, the human domain, and the large-
scale evolution of the cosmos. As a magnet divided into multiple parts will
always exhibit positive and negative poles in each part, so also will any aspect
of reality we select for examination show somatic and signiﬁcant aspects. It
is not possible to ﬁnd an independent somatic phenomenon, or an independ-
ent signiﬁcant phenomenon. Anywhere we make a cut in the fabric of reality,
we will ﬁnd this mutual interpenetration of soma and signiﬁcance.
The implication of this perspective is central to Bohm’s overall world
view: meaning is not an exclusively human activity. We typically think of
meaning as subjective attribution: “My wife means a lot to me.” “That was a
meaningful conversation.” “What is the meaning of the universe?” The
human mind is thus tacitly understood to be the exclusive source and reposi-
tory for meaning. But Bohm’s model turns this view on its head, seeing human
meaning as a particular case of active, soma-signiﬁcant meaning in the
universe at large. From this perspective, we may have meaning for the uni-
verse. Further still, the universe may be meaningful to itself, with or without
the presence of humans. A ﬁeld of daisies, a cluster of galaxies, or the inner
structure of an electron are understood as being actively engaged in soma-
signiﬁcant and signa-somatic processes. For Bohm the operative question
and subsequent inquiry then becomes: How are our human meanings related
to those of the universe as a whole?
I want to introduce a new notion of meaning which I call soma-
signiﬁcance, and also a notion of the relationship between the physical
and the mental. This relationship has been widely considered under the
name psycho-somatic. “Psyche” comes from a Greek word meaning
mind or soul and “soma” means the body. If we generalize soma to
mean the physical, the term psycho-somatic suggests two different kinds
of entities, each existent in itself – but both in mutual interaction. In my
view such a notion introduces a split, a fragmentation, between the
Soma-Signiﬁcance and the Activity of Meaning
159

physical and the mental that doesn’t properly correspond to the actual
state of affairs. Instead I want to suggest the introduction of a new term
which I call “soma-signiﬁcance.” This emphasizes the unity of the two,
and more generally, with meaning in all its implications and aspects.
That is, “signiﬁcance” goes on to “meaning,” which is a more general
word.
In this approach meaning is clearly being given a key role in the
whole of existence. However any attempt at this point to deﬁne the
meaning of meaning would evidently presuppose that we already know
at least something of what meaning is, even if perhaps only non-
verbally or subliminally. That is, when we talk we know what meaning
is; we could not talk if we didn’t. So I won’t attempt to begin with an
explicit deﬁnition of meaning, but rather, as it were, unfold the mean-
ing of meaning as we go along, taking for granted that everyone has
some intuitive sense of what meaning is.
The notion of soma-signiﬁcance implies that soma (or the physical)
and its signiﬁcance (which is mental) are not in any sense separately
existent, but rather that they are two aspects of one over-all reality. By an
aspect we mean a view or a way of looking. That is to say, it is a form in
which the whole of reality appears – it displays or unfolds – either in
our perception or in our thinking. Clearly each aspect reﬂects and
implies the other, so that the other shows in it. We describe these
aspects using different words; nevertheless we imply that they are
revealing the unknown whole of reality, as it were, from two different
sides.
You can obtain a good illustration in physics for the unbroken
wholeness underlying the aspects that are, nevertheless, distinguished,
by contrasting the relationship of electrical poles or charges and mag-
netic poles. Electrical charges are regarded as separately existent and
connected by a ﬁeld; but magnetic poles are not that way. They are
really one unbroken magnetic ﬁeld. That is, if you take a magnet with a
north and south pole, you may consider that there is a ﬁeld going
around the magnet from the north to the south pole. You may have seen
this illustrated with iron ﬁlings (see Figure 5.1).
Now the point is that if you take this magnet and break it, you get
two magnets, each of which has a north and a south pole (see Figure 5.2).
So you can see that there is actually no separate magnetic pole. In
fact you may consider that even when it is not broken, every part is a
superposition of north and south poles, and you may then understand
the relationship as ﬂowing.
With the aid of this concept of opposing pairs of magnetic poles, we
160
Universal Orders

can contribute in a signiﬁcant way to expressing and understanding the
basic relationships in the overall magnetic ﬁeld. I propose to look at
soma-signiﬁcance in a similar way. That is to say, I regard them as two
aspects distinguished only in thought, which will help us to express and
understand relationships in the “ﬁeld” of reality as a whole.
To bring out how soma and signiﬁcance are related, I might note
that each particular kind of signiﬁcance is based on some somatic order,
arrangement, connection and organization of distinguishable elements
– that is to say, structure. For example, the printed marks on this piece of
paper carry a meaning which is apprehended by a reader. In a television
set the movement of electrical signals communicated to an electron
beam carries meaning to a viewer. Modern scientiﬁc studies indicate
that such meanings are carried somatically by further physical, chemical
Figure 5.1
Figure 5.2
Soma-Signiﬁcance and the Activity of Meaning
161

and electrical processes into the brain and the rest of the nervous system
where they are apprehended by ever higher intellectual and emotional
levels of meaning.
As this takes place, these meanings, along with their somatic con-
comitants, become ever more subtle. The word “subtle” is derived from
the Latin sub-texere, meaning woven from underneath, ﬁnely woven.
The meaning is: rariﬁed, delicate, highly reﬁned, elusive, indeﬁnable,
intangible. The subtle may be contrasted with the manifest, which
means literally, what can be held in the hand. My proposal then is that
reality has two further key aspects, the subtle and the manifest, which
are closely related to soma and signiﬁcance. As I pointed out, each
somatic form, such as a printed page, has a signiﬁcance. This is clearly
more subtle than the form itself. But in turn such a signiﬁcance can be
held in yet another somatic form – electrical, chemical and other activity
in the brain and the rest of the nervous system – that is more subtle than
the original form that gave rise to it.
This distinction of subtle and manifest is only relative, since what is
manifest on one level may be subtle on another. Thus the relatively
subtle somatic form of thought may have a meaning that can be grasped
in still higher and more subtle somatic processes. And this may lead on
further to a grasp of a vast totality of meanings in a ﬂash of insight.
This sort of action may be described as the apprehension of the
meaning of meanings, which may in principle go on to indeﬁnitely
deep and subtle levels of signiﬁcance. For example in physics, reﬂection
on the meanings of a wide range of experimental facts and theoretical
problems and paradoxes eventually led Einstein to new insights con-
cerning the meaning of space, time, and matter, which are at the founda-
tion of the theory of relativity. Meanings are thus seen to be capable of
being organized into ever more subtle and comprehensive over-all struc-
tures that imply, contain and enfold each other in ways that are capable
of indeﬁnite extension – that is, one meaning enfolds another, and so
on. So you can see that the meaning of the implicate order must be
closely related. The implicate order is a way of illustrating the way
meaning is organized.
In terms of the notion of soma-signiﬁcance there is no point to the
attempt to reduce one level of subtlety in any structure completely to
another. For example, if you meet a certain content on one level and
then on another, the relationship between these levels is the essential
content of yet another level. So it is clear that no ultimate reduction is
possible. As the level under consideration is changed, the particular
content of what is somatic (or manifest) and what is signiﬁcant (or
162
Universal Orders

subtle) has always therefore to be changing. Nonetheless it is clear that
it is necessary for both roles to be present in each concrete instance of
experience. You see, it is like the magnetic poles. Wherever you cut the
magnet you have a North and a South pole, and wherever you make a
cut in experience and abstract something, and say, “This is the experi-
ence” (which is a bigger context) you have soma-signiﬁcance. It would
be impossible to have all the content on the side of soma or on that of
signiﬁcance.
I have emphasized so far, the signiﬁcance of soma – that is, that
each somatic conﬁguration has a meaning – and that it is such meaning
that is grasped at more subtle levels of soma. I call this the soma-
signiﬁcant relation, which is one side of the over-all process. I would
now call attention to the inverse, signa-somatic relation. This is the
other side of the same process in which every meaning at a given level is
seen actively to affect the soma at a more manifest level. Consider for
example, a shadow seen in a dark night. Now if it happens, because of
the person’s past experience, that this means an assailant, the adrenalin
will ﬂow, the heart will beat faster, the blood pressure will rise and he
will be ready to ﬁght, to run or to freeze. However if it means only a
shadow, the response of the soma is very different. So quite generally
the total physical response of the human being is profoundly affected by
what physical forms mean to him. A change of meaning can totally
change your response. This meaning will vary according to all sorts of
things, such as your ability or background, conditioning, and so on.
This is different from psycho-somatic, because with psycho-somatic
you say that mind affects matter as if they were two different sub-
stances – mind substance affects material substance. Now I am saying
there is only one ﬂow, and a change of meaning is a change in that ﬂow.
Therefore any change of meaning is a change of soma, and any change
of soma is a change of meaning. So we don’t have this distinction.
As a given meaning is carried into the somatic side, you can see that
it continues to develop the original signiﬁcance. If something means
danger, then not only adrenalin, but a whole range of chemical sub-
stances will travel through the blood, and according to modern scien-
tiﬁc discoveries, these act like “messengers” (carriers of meaning) from
the brain to various parts of the body. That is, these chemicals instruct
various parts of the body to act in certain ways. In addition there are
electrical “signals” – they are not really signals – carried by the nerves,
which function in a similar way. And this is a further unfoldment of the
original signiﬁcance into forms that are suitable for “instructing” the
body to carry out the implications of what is meant.
Soma-Signiﬁcance and the Activity of Meaning
163

From each level of somatic unfoldment of meaning there is then a
further movement leading to activity on a yet more manifestly somatic
level, until the action ﬁnally emerges as a physical movement of the
body that affects the environment. So one can say that there is a two-
way movement of energy in which each level of signiﬁcance acts on the
next more manifestly somatic level, and so on, while perception carries
the meaning of the action back in the other direction (see Figure 5.3).
As in cutting a magnet it does not mean that these lines represent
distinct levels; they are merely abstracted in our mind.
I want to emphasize here that nothing exists in this process except
as a two-way movement, a ﬂow of energy, in which meaning is carried
inward and outward between the aspects of soma and signiﬁcance, as
well as between levels that are relatively subtle and those that are rela-
tively manifest. It is this over-all structure of meaning (a part of which
I’ve drawn in this diagram) that is grasped in every experience. We can
see this by following the process in the two opposing directions. For
example, as light strikes the retina of the eye, carrying meaning in the
form of an image, the meaning is transformed into a chemical form by
the rods and the cones. They in turn are transformed into electro-
chemical movements in the nerves, and so on into the brain at higher
and higher levels. Then in the other direction, higher meanings are
carried electrically and chemically into the structures of reﬂexes and thus
onward toward ever more manifestly somatic levels.
I have been discussing what you might call the normal soma-
signiﬁcant and signa-somatic process. Usually psycho-somatic processes
are discussed in terms of some disorder, and you can see here that you
Figure 5.3
164
Universal Orders

can also get signa-somatic disorder. For example, normally the heart will
beat faster when something means danger. One realizes that that is the
signa-somatic response to the meaning of danger. But it could also mean
that something is wrong with the heart, in which case the danger will be
indicated by the rate of the beating of the heart. In that case every time
the heart beats faster it ﬁlls the person with more of the meaning of
danger and causes the heart to beat faster still. So you get a runaway
loop, and that could be an important component of neurotic disorders –
the normal process gets caught in a loop that goes too far.
You can see that ultimately the soma-signiﬁcant and signa-somatic
process extends even into the environment. Meaning thus can be con-
veyed from one person to another and back through sound waves,
through gestures carried by light, through books and newspapers,
through telephone, radio, television and so on, linking up the whole
society in one vast web of soma-signiﬁcant and signa-somatic activity.
You can say society is this thing; this activity is what makes society.
Without it there would be no society. Therefore communication is this
activity.
Similarly even simple physical action may be said to communicate
motion and form to inanimate objects. Most of the material environ-
ment in which we live – houses, cities, factories, farms, highways, and so
on – can be described as the somatic result of the meaning that material
objects have had for human beings over the ages. Going on from there,
even relationships with nature and with the cosmos ﬂow out of what
they mean to us. These meanings fundamentally affect our actions
toward nature, and thus indirectly, the action of nature back on us is
affected. Indeed as far as we know it and are aware of it and can act on
it, the whole of nature, including our civilization which has evolved
from nature and is still a part of nature, is one movement that is both
soma-signiﬁcant and signa-somatic.
Some of the simpler kinds of soma-signiﬁcant and signa-somatic
activity are just reﬂexes that are built into the nervous system, or
instincts that express the accumulated experience of the species. But
these go on to ever ﬁner and more variable responses. Even the
behaviour of creatures as simple as bees can be seen to be so organized
in a very subtle way by a kind of meaning, in this case through a dance
indicating the direction and distance of sources of nectar. Though they
might not be conscious of it, there is a meaning going on. With the
higher animals this operation of meaning is more evident, and in man it
is possible to develop conscious awareness, and meaning is then most
central and vital.
Soma-Signiﬁcance and the Activity of Meaning
165

In these higher levels this soma-signiﬁcant and signa-somatic activ-
ity shows up most directly. In fact the word “meaning” indicates not
only the signiﬁcance of something to us, but also our intention toward
it. Thus “I mean to do something” means “I intend to do it.” This double
meaning of the word “meaning” is not just an accident of our language,
but rather it implicitly contains an important insight into the structure
of meaning.
To bring this out I would ﬁrst note that an intention generally
arises out of a previous perception of the meaning or signiﬁcance of a
certain total situation. This gives all of the relevant possibilities and
implies reasons for choosing which of these is better. Ultimately this
choice is determined by the totality of signiﬁcance at that moment. The
source of this activity includes not only perception and abstract or
explicit knowledge, but what Polanyi calls tacit knowledge – that is,
knowledge containing concrete skills and reactions that are not speciﬁ-
able in language, such as riding a bicycle.
Ultimately it is the whole signiﬁcance that gives rise to intention,
which we sense as a feeling of being ready to act in a certain way. For
example, if we see a situation meaning “the door is open,” we can form
the intention to walk through it, but if it means “the door is closed,” we
don’t. But even the intention not to act is still an intention. The whole
signiﬁcance helps to determine it. The important point is that the
intention is a kind of implicate order; the intention unfolds from the
whole meaning. It doesn’t just come out of nothing. Therefore a person
cannot form intentions except on the basis of what the situation means
to him, and if he misses the mark on what it means, he will form the
wrong intentions.
Of course, most of the meaning is implicit. Indeed, whatever we say
or do, we cannot possibly describe in detail more than a very small part
of the total signiﬁcance that we sense in any given moment. Moreover,
when such signiﬁcance gives rise to an intention, it too will be almost
entirely implicit, at least at the beginning. For example, as I said, I have
an intention to speak at this moment, and it is implicit what I am going
to say; I don’t know what I’m going to say exactly, but it comes out. Now
the words are not chosen one by one, but rather are unfolded in some
way.
Meaning and intention are therefore inseparably related as two
sides or aspects of one activity. This is the same as we discussed with
soma and signiﬁcance, and the subtle and the manifest. We are saying
that there is one whole of activity abstracted at a certain point con-
ceptually – we make a cut in it – and we say it always has two sides. One
166
Universal Orders

of the two sides is meaning, and the other would be intention. But they
don’t exist separately.
Intentions are commonly thought to be conscious and deliberate.
But you really have very little ability to choose your intentions. Deeper
intentions generally arise out of the total signiﬁcance in ways of which
one is not aware, and over which one has little or no control. So you
usually discover your intentions by observing your actions. These in fact
often contain what are felt to be unintended consequences leading one
to say, “I didn’t mean to do that. I missed the mark.” In action, what is
actually implicit in what one means is thus more fully revealed. That is
the importance of giving attention.
To learn the full meaning of our intentions in this way can very
often be costly and destructive. What we can do instead is to display the
intention along with its expected consequences through imagination,
and in other ways. The word “display” means “unfold,” but for the sake
of revealing something other than the display itself. As such a display is
perceived one can then ﬁnd out whether or not one still intends going
on with the original intention. If not, the intention is modiﬁed, and the
modiﬁcation is in turn displayed in a similar way. Thus to a certain
extent, by means of trying it out in the imagination, you can avoid
having to carry it out in reality and having to suffer the consequences,
although that is rather limited.
So intention constantly changes in the act of perception of the fuller
meaning. Even perception is included within this over-all activity. What
one perceives is not the thing in itself, which is unknown or unknow-
able, but however deep or shallow one’s perceptions, all one perceives is
what it means at that moment, and then intention and action develop in
accordance with this meaning.
The point is that as you act according to your intention, and as the
perception comes in, there can arise an indeﬁnite extension of inward
signa-somatic and soma-signiﬁcant activity. That is, you go to more and
more subtle levels and the thing is, as it were, looking at itself at differ-
ent levels ever more deeply.
Such activity is roughly what is meant by the mental side of experi-
ence. When something is going on that is not strongly coupled with
the outer physical manifestation of some soma-signiﬁcant and signa-
somatic activity in which it is looking at itself, then we call that the
mental side of experience. Now this is only a side. Once again I want to
repeat that there is no separation between the mental and the physical.
When it gets to the other side where it is primarily concerned with
actions it just gets more physical.
Soma-Signiﬁcance and the Activity of Meaning
167

Now we can look at this in terms of the implicate or enfolded order,
for all these levels of meaning enfold each other and may have a signiﬁ-
cant bearing on each other. Within this context, meaning is a constantly
extending and actualizing structure – it is never complete and ﬁxed. At
the limits of what has at any moment been comprehended there are
always unclarities, unsatisfactory features, failures of intention to ﬁt
what is actually displayed or what is actually done. And the yet deeper
intention is to be aware of these discrepancies and to allow the whole
structure to change if necessary. This will lead to a movement in which
there is the constant unfoldment of still more comprehensive meanings.
But of course each new meaning has some limited domain in which
the actions ﬂowing out of it may be expected to ﬁt what actually hap-
pens. These limits may in principle be extended indeﬁnitely through
further perceptions of new meanings. But no matter how far this pro-
cess goes there will still be limits of some kind, which will be indicated
by the discovery of yet further discrepancies and disharmonies between
our intentions, as based on these meanings, and the actual consequences
that ﬂow out of these intentions. At any stage the perception of new
meanings may dissolve these discrepancies, but there will still continue
to be a limit, so that the resulting knowledge is still incomplete.
What this implies is that meaning is capable of an indeﬁnite exten-
sion to ever greater levels of subtlety as well as of comprehensiveness –
in which there is a movement from the explicate toward the implicate.
This can only take place however when new meanings are being per-
ceived freshly from moment to moment. But if signiﬁcance comes
solely from memory and not from fresh perceptions it will be limited to
some ﬁnite depth of subtlety and inwardness.
Memory, being some kind of recording, necessarily has a certain
stable quality which cannot transform its structure in any fundamental
way, and has only a limited capacity to adapt to new situations – for
example, by forming new combinations of known principles, either
through chance or through rules already established in memory. Mem-
ory is thus necessarily bounded both in scope and in the subtlety of its
content. Any structure arising solely out of memory will be ﬁnite, and
will be able to deal with some ﬁnite limited domain; but of course, to go
beyond this, a fresh perception of new meanings is needed. And in fact,
when you have a fresh perception you may also see new meanings of
your memories. In other words, memory may cease to be so limited
when there is fresh perception. To go on in this way to new meanings
that are not arbitrarily limited requires a potentially inﬁnite degree of
inwardness and subtlety in our mental processes. And I am suggesting
168
Universal Orders

that these processes have access to an, in principle, unlimited depth in
the implicate order.
Thus far I have suggested reasons why meaning is capable of inﬁn-
ite extension to ever greater levels of subtlety and reﬁnement. However,
it might seem at ﬁrst sight that in the other direction – of the manifest
and the somatic – there is a clear possibility of a limit in the sense that
one might arrive at a “bottom level” of reality. This could be, for
example, some set of elementary particles out of which everything
would be constituted such as quarks, or perhaps yet smaller particles. Or
in accordance with currently accepted views of modern physics it might
be a fundamental ﬁeld, or set of ﬁelds, that was the “bottom level.”
What is of crucial importance is that its meaning would be in principle
unambiguous. In contrast, all higher order forms in this supposedly
basic structure of matter are ambiguous – that is, their meaning is
incomplete. There is an inherent ambiguity in any concrete meaning.
That is to say, how the meanings arise and what they signify depends to
a large extent on what a given situation means to us, and this may vary
according to our interests and motivations, our background of know-
ledge, and so on. But if for example, there were a “bottom level” of
reality, these meanings would be exactly what they were, and anybody
who looked correctly could ﬁnd them. They would be a reality that was
just simply there, independent of what it meant to us.
Of course you also have to keep in mind that all scientiﬁc know-
ledge is limited and provisional so that we cannot be certain that what
we think is the “bottom level” is actually so. For example, possibly some-
thing other than the present theories will come to reveal a “bottom
level.” But this uncertainty of knowledge cannot of itself prevent us
from believing in the existence of some kind of “bottom level” if we
wish to do so. It is not commonly realized however that the quantum
theory implies that no such “bottom level” of unambiguous reality is
possible.
Now this is a bit difﬁcult to make clear in this short time, but Niels
Bohr, one of the founders of modern physics, has made one of the most
consistent interpretations of the quantum theory given thus far, and
which has been accepted by most physicists (though few probably have
studied it deeply enough to appreciate fully the revolutionary implica-
tions of what he has done). To understand this point, ﬁrst we have to
say that while the quantum theory contradicts the previously existent
classical theory, it does not explain this theory’s basic concepts as an
approximation or a simpliﬁcation of itself, but it has to presuppose the
classical concepts at the same time that it has to contradict them. The
Soma-Signiﬁcance and the Activity of Meaning
169

paradox is resolved in Bohr’s point of view by saying that the quantum
theory introduces no new basic concepts at all. Rather what it does is to
require that concepts such as position and momentum, which are in
principle unambiguous in classical physics, must become ambiguous in
quantum mechanics. But ambiguity is just a lack of well-deﬁned mean-
ing. So Bohr, at least tacitly, brings in the notion of meaning as crucial to
the understanding of the content of the theory.
Now this is a radically new step, and he is doing this not just for its
own sake, but he is forced to do something like this by the very form of
the mathematics which so successfully predict the quantum properties
of matter. This mathematics gives only statistical predictions. It not only
fails to predict what will happen in a single measurement, it cannot
even provide an unambiguous concept or picture of what sort of process
is supposed to take place. So for Bohr the concepts are ambiguous, and
the meaning of the concepts depends on the whole context of the
experimental arrangement. The meaning of the result depends on the
large scale behaviour which was supposed to be explained by the par-
ticles themselves. So in some sense you do not have a “bottom level” but
rather you ﬁnd that, to a certain extent, the meaning of these particles
has the same sort of ambiguity that we ﬁnd in mental phenomena
when we are looking at meaning.
This kind of situation is what is pervasively characteristic of mind
and meaning. Indeed the whole ﬁeld of meaning can be described as
subject to a distinction between content and context which is similar to
that between soma and signiﬁcance, and between subtle and manifest.
Content and context are two aspects that are inevitably present in any
attempt to discuss the meaning of a given situation. According to the
dictionary, the content is the essential meaning – for example, the con-
tent of a book. But any speciﬁable content is abstracted from a wider
context which is so closely connected with the content that the meaning
of the former is not properly deﬁned without the latter. However, the
wider context may in turn be treated as a content in a yet broader
context, and so on. The signiﬁcance of any particular level of content is
therefore critically dependent on its appropriate context, which may
include indeﬁnitely higher and more subtle levels of meaning – such as
whether a given form seen in the night means a shadow or an assailant
depends on what one has heard about prowlers, what one has had to eat
and drink, and so on. So you see, this sort of context-dependence is just
what is found in physics with regard to matter, as well as in consider-
ations of mind or meaning.
Now I believe Bohr’s interpretation of quantum theory is consistent,
170
Universal Orders

and he has produced a very deep insight at this point; but it is still not
clear why matter should have this context-dependence. He just says that
the quantum theory gives rise to it.
However, in terms of the implicate order, an alternative interpret-
ation is possible in which one can ascribe to phenomena a deeper reality
unfolding, which gives rise to them. This reality is not mechanical;
rather its basic action and structure are understood through enfoldment
and unfoldment. What is important here is that the law of the total
implicate order determines certain sub-wholes which may be abstracted
from it as having relative independence. The crucial point is that the
activity of these sub-wholes is context-dependent, so that the larger
content can organize the smaller context into one greater whole. The
sub-wholes will then cease to be properly abstractable as independent
and autonomous. The implicate order makes it possible to discuss the
notion of reality in a way that does not require us to bring in the
measuring apparatus, which Bohr does. He makes the context very
much dependent on the apparatus; but he does so by making nature
generally context-dependent. That is to say, the situation of any part of
nature is context-dependent in a way that is similar to the way that
meaning is dependent on its context – that is, as far as the laws of
physics are concerned.
That would suggest that in a natural way one might extend some
notion similar to meaning to the whole universe. It is implied that each
feature of the universe is not only context-dependent fundamentally,
but also that the grosser, manifest features depend on the subtler
aspects in a way that is very analogous to soma-signiﬁcant and signa-
somatic activity. So something similar to meaning is to be found even in
the somatic or physical side.
Now as I said, this holds for us both mentally and physically. It
would suggest that everything, including ourselves, is a generalized
kind of meaning. Now I am not thereby attributing consciousness to
nature. You see, the meaning of the word “consciousness” is not terribly
clear. In fact, without meaning I think that there would be no con-
sciousness. The most essential feature of consciousness is consciousness
of meaning. Consciousness is its content; its content is the meaning.
Therefore it might be better to focus on meaning rather than conscious-
ness. So I am not attributing consciousness as we know it to nature, but
you might say that everything has a kind of mental side, rather like the
magnetic poles. In inanimate matter the mental side is very small, but as
we go deeper into things the mental side becomes more and more
signiﬁcant.
Soma-Signiﬁcance and the Activity of Meaning
171

All of this implies that one can consistently understand the whole of
nature in terms of a generalized kind of soma-signiﬁcant and signa-
somatic activity that is essentially independent of man, and that indeed
it is more consistent to do this than to suppose that there is an
unambiguous “bottom level” at which these considerations have no
place. I would say that the crucial difference between this and a
machine is that nature is inﬁnite in its potential depths of subtlety and
inwardness, while a machine is not. Although to a certain extent, a
machine such as a computer has something similar. So it is in principle
possible in this view to encompass both the outward universe of matter
and the inward universe of mind.
In this approach, the three basic aspects arise:
Soma
Signiﬁcance
Energy
To repeat, soma-signiﬁcance means that the soma is signiﬁcant to
the higher or more subtle level. Signa-somatic means that that signiﬁ-
cance acts somatically toward a more manifest level.
Now I’m going to look at physical action in a similar way – to say
that in the unfoldment of matter there is a kind of soma-signiﬁcance;
that the soma may be signiﬁcant to a deeper level. So let’s say that
something unfolds and has a signiﬁcance, and as a result something
else unfolds.
In explaining this I should ﬁrst discuss the work of the well-known
psychologist Piaget, who has carefully observed and studied the growth
of intelligent perception in infants and in young children. This led him
to say that this perception ﬂows out of what is in effect a deep initial
intention to act toward the object. You can see the soma-signiﬁcance
coming in here. This action may initially be based partly on a kind of
signiﬁcance that objects have, which is grounded in the whole accumu-
lated instinctive response to the experience of the species, and partly on
a kind of signiﬁcance that is grounded in his own past experience.
Whatever its origin may be, Piaget says, what this action does is to
incorporate or assimilate its object into a cycle of inward and outward
activity. He moves out, he sees it, he acts on it and that changes his
perception, and he acts again. His intention is implicitly in at least some
conformity with what he expects the object to be, but it might be vague.
The action comes back to the extent to which the object ﬁts or doesn’t
ﬁt his intention. Then this brings about a modiﬁed intention with
172
Universal Orders

correspondingly modiﬁed outward action. This process is continued
until a satisfactory ﬁt is obtained between intentions and their con-
sequences, after which it may remain very stable until further discrep-
ancies appear.
Piaget points out, however, that the initial intention need not be
directed primarily toward incorporating the object into a cycle of activ-
ity in order to produce a desired result such as enjoyment or satisfac-
tion. Instead it might be directed mainly at perception of the object.
For example, the child may initiate movements aimed at exploring and
observing the object, such as turning it around, bringing it closer to
look at it, and so on. From such an intention it is possible for him to
begin with all sorts of provisional feelings as to what the object might
be, and to allow these to unfold into actions which come back as
perceptions of ﬁtting or non-ﬁtting. This leads to a corresponding
modiﬁcation of the detailed content of the intention behind these
movements until the outgoing actions and incoming perceptions are in
accord. This is a very important development of intentional activity
which makes possible an unending movement of learning and dis-
covering what has not been known before. So we want to say that this
soma-signiﬁcant and signa-somatic activity, constantly going back and
forth, is what is involved in learning. And we can say that this is going
on, not only in regard to outward objects, but inwardly – that is, for
example, with regard to thought. And there may be another level which
picks up the meaning of the thought and takes an action toward that
thought while thinking another thought to see if it is consistent. If it is
not, then the intention changes until we get a consistent relationship
between the thought which arises from the deeper intention and the
thought that was ﬁrst being looked at. You see, you may have a
thought that you want to look at, and there may be a deeper intelli-
gence which is able to grasp the meaning of that thought in a broader
context and take an action toward it by, as it were, thinking again and
seeing whether the thought which comes out is coherent with the
thought with which you started. And if it’s not, then you can start to
change that action until it is. Or you can change the thought. Change
can occur at various levels.
So all of these levels of meaning enfold each other and have a
certain bearing on each other. This whole process is always soma-
signiﬁcant and signa-somatic, going to ever deeper levels. When I talk
of these processes I don’t only mean going outward into the manifest
world, but also the deeper mental processes being explored by still more
subtle mental processes. So you could say that the mind has available in
Soma-Signiﬁcance and the Activity of Meaning
173

principle an unlimited depth of subtlety, and learning can take place at
all these levels.
Now what is important is not only what to think but how to think.
But if we ask how we think, it may be just as difﬁcult to answer as, how
do you ride a bicycle? It is at the tacit level of knowing, or at the subtle
level, that how to think takes place. You cannot say how to think but you
can learn, as I have just been describing, through signa-somatic and
soma-signiﬁcant activity.
To sum up what I’ve just been saying, a somewhat similar view can
be applied within matter in general. So one may think of the whole
thing as one process – as an extended idea of meaning and an extended
idea of soma. That is, meaning and matter may not have the same sort of
consciousness that we have, but there is still a mental pole at every level
of matter, and there is some kind of soma-signiﬁcance. And eventually,
if you go to inﬁnite depths of matter, we may reach something very
close to what you reach in the depths of mind. So if you consider it, we
no longer have this division between mind and matter.
Now we have in this whole process these three aspects: soma and
signiﬁcance and an energy which carries the signiﬁcance of soma to a
subtler level and gives rise to a backward movement in which the sig-
niﬁcance acts on the soma. Modern physics has already shown that
matter and energy are two aspects of one reality. Energy acts within
matter, and even further, energy and matter can be converted into each
other, as we all know.
From the point of view of the implicate order, energy and matter are
imbued with a certain kind of signiﬁcance which gives form to their
over-all activity and to the matter which arises in that activity. The
energy of mind and of the material substance of the brain are also
imbued with a kind of signiﬁcance which gives form to their over-all
activity. So quite generally, energy enfolds matter and meaning, while
matter enfolds energy and meaning.
You can see in Figure 5.4 how the middle term enfolds the other
two.
Figure 5.4
174
Universal Orders

But also meaning enfolds both matter and energy. The way we ﬁnd
out about matter and energy is by seeing what they mean (see Figure
5.5).
So each of these basic notions enfolds the other two. It is through
this mutual enfoldment that the whole notion obtains unity. So we can
put all these relationships together (see Figure 5.6).
However in some sense the enfoldment by meaning seems to be
more fundamental than the enfoldment of the other types, because we
can discuss the meanings of meaning. In some sense meanings enfold
meanings. But we cannot have the matter of matter, or the energy of
energy. There seems to be no intrinsic enfoldment relation in matter-
energy. Matter enfolds energy, and energy enfolds matter, according to
this view, by way of signiﬁcance. But meaning refers to itself directly,
and this is in fact the basis of the possibility of that intelligence which
can comprehend the whole, including itself. On the other hand, matter
and energy obtain their self-reference only indirectly, ﬁrstly through
meaning. That is, we can refer matter back to itself by ﬁrst seeing what
it means to us, and then going back. Or we can refer matter to energy, or
energy to matter, by seeing what they mean. We refer them to each
other reﬂexively, but only through their meaning.
Generally we have this problem of thought referring to something
else, thus creating division and dualism. Even the thought that the uni-
verse is one unbroken whole in ﬂowing movement refers to a universe
Figure 5.5
Figure 5.6
Soma-Signiﬁcance and the Activity of Meaning
175

which is one whole unbroken movement, and beside that there is the
thought. So we therefore have two nevertheless. What we would like is a
view in which the thought itself is part of the reality.
Usually we think of thought in correspondence with some object;
the features of the thought correspond to some object. But as soon as
you say a thought corresponds to an object, you immediately have,
tacitly, a division between the object and the thought. In reality, we are
saying that the thought is a part of the soma-signiﬁcance and cannot be
absolutely distinct from the object. Only in certain limited areas is the
distinction useful or correct – that is, where the thought has a negligible
effect on the object. This is the area of all practical activity, technology,
and so on.
The modern mechanistic approach says that this area covers every-
thing: but what I am saying is that it is a small area within a much vaster
ﬁeld. So we are not denying that kind of thought; we are saying it is
only valid in a limited area.
The problem of conceiving of a universe that can refer consistently
to itself has long been a difﬁcult one that has not been resolved in a
really adequate way. But the ﬁeld of meaning can refer to itself, and of
course, it also presupposes the context of the universe to which it also
refers. Meaning, though, has nevertheless been regarded as peculiar to
our own minds and not as a proper part or aspect of the objective
universe. However if there is a generalized kind of meaning intrinsic to
the universe, including our own bodies and minds, then the way may be
opened to understanding the whole as self-referential through its
“meaning for itself” – in other words, by whatever reality is. And the
universe as we now conceive it may not be the whole thing.
The aspect of soma cannot be divided from the aspect of signiﬁ-
cance. Whatever meanings there may be “in our minds,” these are, as we
have seen, inseparable from the totality of our somatic structures and
therefore from what we are. So what we are depends crucially on the
total set of meanings that operates “within us.” Any fundamental
change in meaning is a change in being for us. Therefore any trans-
formation of consciousness must be a transformation of meaning. Con-
sciousness is its content – that is its meaning. In a way, we could say that
we are the totality of our meanings.
If we trace some of these meanings to their origins, we ﬁnd that
most of them have come from society as a whole. Each person takes up
his own particular combination of the general mixture that is available
in a society. And so at least in this way, every person is different. Yet the
underlying basis is characterized mainly by the fundamental similarity
176
Universal Orders

over the whole of mankind, while the differences are relatively second-
ary. And insofar as man has the capacity to get beyond that, that also is
common.
These meanings change as human beings live, work, communicate
and interact. These changes are based for the most part on adaptation of
existent meanings. But it has also been possible from time to time for
new meanings to be perceived and realized – in other words, made real.
Perceptions of this kind have generally occurred when someone became
aware that certain sets of older meanings no longer made any sense.
This may be understood as a vast extension of what happens in the
development of intelligence in young children. That is, as they see some-
thing about which they are puzzled, they have to see its meaning in a
new way.
Now we can say that we are puzzled about the whole of life, and we
have to see it with a new meaning. If you look at life as a whole it
doesn’t seem to make that much sense – the way we live, and so on. The
childlike attitude would ask, “Well, what does it mean?” And some as
yet incompletely formed notion of a new meaning that removes the
contradictions in the older meanings may begin to penetrate a person’s
intentions. As I explained, the actions unfolding from the intentions
would be displayed, for example, in the imagination, and the discrepan-
cies between what is displayed and what is intended would lead to a
change of intention aimed at decreasing this discrepancy, and so on. In
this way a greater clariﬁcation of the meaning would occur along with a
possibility of realizing it through a change in intention, because it is
only when one’s purpose or intention changes that a new meaning can
be realized. Then, often in a ﬂash that seems to take no time at all, a
coherent new whole of meaning is formed, within which the older
meanings may be comprehended as having a limited validity within
their proper context.
Now if meaning is an intrinsic part of not only our reality but reality
in general, then I would say that a perception of a new meaning consti-
tutes a creative act. As their implications are unfolded, when people take
them up, work with them, and so on, the new meanings that have been
created make their corresponding contributions to this reality. And
these are not only in the aspect of signiﬁcance but also in the aspect of
soma. That is, the situation changes physically as well as mentally.
Therefore each perception of a new meaning by human beings
actually changes the over-all reality in which we live and have our exist-
ence – sometimes in a far-reaching way. This implies that this reality is
never complete. In the older view, however, meaning and reality were
Soma-Signiﬁcance and the Activity of Meaning
177

sharply separated. Reality was not supposed to be changed directly by
perception of a new meaning. Rather it was thought that to do this was
merely to obtain a better “view” of reality that was independent of what
it meant to us, and then to do something about it. But once you actually
see the new meaning and take hold of your intention, reality has
changed. No further act is needed.
Seeing something intellectually or abstractly, though, will not
change your intention. You may say that you need an act of will to
change it, but I think that when you really see something deeply with
great energy, no further act of will is needed. If you really see a new
meaning to be true, then your intention will change – unless there is
something blocking it, such as your conditioning, or the “program.” And
if something is blocking it, then the will is not going to help, because
you don’t know what the block is. Therefore you have to see the mean-
ing of the block. So choice and will are of limited signiﬁcance – valid in
certain areas. But I think something deeper is needed if you are discuss-
ing the transformation of mind or consciousness or matter – they really
all change together.
You see, the deep change of meaning is a change in the deep
material structure of the brain as well, and this unfolds into further
changes. Every time you think, the blood distribution all over the brain
changes; every emotion changes it. Between thinking and the somatic
activity there is also a tremendous connection with the heartbeat and
the chemical constitution of the blood, and so on. The new meaning will
produce different thought and therefore possibly an entirely different
functioning of the brain.
We already know that certain meanings can greatly disturb the
brain, but other meanings may organize it in new ways. And when the
brain comes to a new state, new ideas become possible. But the new
meaning is what organizes the new state. If the brain holds the old
meanings, then it cannot change its state. The mental and the physical
are one. A change in the mental is a change in the physical, and a change
in the physical is a change in the mental. In fact, there has been some
discussion of what is called subtle brain damage in animals in which no
physical abnormality can be found; but some disturbance of function
takes place when the animals are put under stress. So you see, we could
say that living as we do, we probably have a great deal of subtle brain
damage. In other words, the brain is damaged at a subtle level that
might not show up at the cellular level, but deep in the implicate order.
Eventually of course, it shows up in the cellular level too. So instead of
saying that when we see a new meaning we make a choice and then act,
178
Universal Orders

we say that the perception and realization of the new meaning in our
intention is already the change.
This point is crucially signiﬁcant for understanding psychological
and social change. For if meaning is something separate from human
reality, then any change must be produced by an act of will or choice,
guided perhaps by our new perception of meaning. But if meaning itself
is a key part of reality, then once society, the individual and their rela-
tionships are seen to mean something different from what they did
before, a fundamental change has already taken place. So social change
requires a different, socially accepted meaning, such as in the change
from feudalism to the forms that followed it, or from autocracy to dem-
ocracy, or to communism, and so on. According to the meanings
accepted, the entire society went.
These meanings may have been correct or incorrect. But once the
meanings become ﬁxed, the whole thing must gradually go wrong. Or
to put it differently, what man does is an inevitable signa-somatic con-
sequence of what the whole of his experience, inward and outward,
means to him. For example, once the world came to mean a set of
disjointed mechanical fragments, one of which was himself, people
could not do other than begin to act accordingly and engage in the kind
of ceaseless conﬂict that this meaning implies. The meaning of fragmen-
tation includes conﬂict and self-centredness – in other words, not cre-
ative tension but meaningless conﬂict.
However if mankind could sustain a perception and realize this
perception signifying that the world is an unbroken whole with a
multiplicity of meanings, some of which are ﬁtting and harmonious
and some of which are not, a very different state of affairs could unfold.
For then there could be an unending creative perception of new mean-
ings that encompass the older ones in broader and more harmonious
wholes which would unfold in a corresponding transformation of the
over-all reality that was thus encompassed.
Here it is worth noting that our civilization has been suffering from
what may be called a failure of meaning. Indeed from earliest times
people have felt this as a kind of “meaninglessness” of life. Whether this
is more prevalent today, I don’t know, but people say it is. But in this
sense, meaning also signiﬁes value. That is to say, a meaningless life has
no value; it is not worth living. But of course it is impossible for any-
thing to be totally free of meaning. For as we have explained earlier, the
notion of generalized soma-signiﬁcance, regarded as valid for the whole
of life, implies that each thing is its total meaning – which of course
must include all of its relevant context. What I intend by “meaningless”
Soma-Signiﬁcance and the Activity of Meaning
179

therefore is that there is a meaning, but that it is inadequate because it is
mechanical and constraining and is hence of little value and not cre-
ative. A change in this is possible only if new meaning is perceived that
is not mechanical. Such a new meaning, sensed to have a high value, will
arouse the energy needed to bring a whole new way of life into being.
You see, only meaning can arouse energy.
At present people don’t seem to have the energy to face this sea of
troubles that threatens to overwhelm us, generally speaking. If we take a
mechanical meaning, it tends to deaden the energy so that people
remain indeﬁnitely as they have been, or at best allows change in
limited directions, such as the continuation of the development of tech-
nology, and so on. So I am saying that meaning is fundamental to what
life actually is.
Now you can extend this to the cosmos as a whole. We can say that
human meanings make a contribution to the cosmos, but we can also
say that the cosmos may be ordered according to a kind of “objective”
meaning. New meanings may emerge in this over-all order. That is, we
may say that meaning penetrates the cosmos, or even what is beyond
the cosmos. For example, there are current theories in physics and cos-
mology that imply that the universe emerged from the “big bang.” In
the earliest phase there were no electrons, protons, neutrons, or other
basic structures. None of the laws that we know would have had any
meaning. Even space and time in their present, well-deﬁned forms
would have had no meaning. All of this emerged from a very different
state of affairs. The proposal is that, as happens with human beings, this
emergence included a creative unfoldment of generalized meaning.
Later, with the evolution of new forms of life, fundamentally new steps
may have evolved in the creative unfoldment of further meanings. That
is, we may say that some evolutionary processes occur which could be
traced physically, but we cannot really understand them without look-
ing at some deeper meaning which was responsible for the changes. The
present view of the changes is that they were random, with selection of
those traits that were suited for survival, but that does not explain the
complex, subtle structures that actually occurred.
The question is how our own meanings are related to those of the
universe as a whole. We could say that our action toward the whole
universe is a result of what it means to us. Now since we are saying that
everything acts according to a similar principle, we can say that the rest
of the universe acts signa-somatically to us according to what we mean
to it.
These meanings do not all ﬁt harmoniously, but if we are perceptive
180
Universal Orders

of the disharmony, we may continually be bringing about an increase in
harmony. That is to say, there is no ﬁnal meaning or no ﬁnal harmony,
but a continual movement of creativity – or of destruction. In the long
run, only those meanings which allow changes that tend to bring about
accord between us and the rest of the universe will be possible. We can
say that that is true for the universe as a whole, and that nature is
experimenting with all sorts of meanings. Some of them will not be
consistent, and they will not survive. So anything that has survived for
quite a long time is bound to have a tremendous degree of coherence
with the rest of the universe.
We are proposing that this holds for both living beings and for
matter in general. We may say then that the harmony is never complete
and cannot be so. Even now a further creation of meaning is going on in
a process that includes mankind as part of itself. Not merely man’s
physical development but a constant creation of new meanings that is
essential for the unfoldment of society and human nature itself. Even
time and space are part of the total meaning and are subject to a con-
tinual evolution. As I indicated, at the beginning of the “big bang,” time
and space did not mean what they now mean. In this evolution,
extended meaning as “intention” is the ultimate source of cause and
effect, and more generally, of necessity – that which cannot be
otherwise.
Rather than to ask what is the meaning of this universe, we would
have to say that the universe is its meaning. As this changes, the uni-
verse changes along with all that is in it. What I mean by “the universe”
is “the whole of reality” and what is beyond. And of course, we are
referring not just to the meaning of the universe for us, but its meaning
“for itself,” or the meaning of the whole for itself.
Similarly there is no point in asking the meaning of life, as life too is
its meaning, which is self-referential and capable of changing, basically,
when this meaning changes through a creative perception of a new and
more encompassing meaning.
You could also ask another question: What is the meaning of cre-
ativity itself? But as with all other fundamental questions we cannot
give a ﬁnal answer, but we have to constantly see afresh. For the present
we can say that creativity is not only the fresh perception of new mean-
ings, and the ultimate unfoldment of this perception within the mani-
fest and the somatic, but I would say that it is ultimately the action of
the inﬁnite in the sphere of the ﬁnite – that is, this meaning goes to
inﬁnite depths.
What is ﬁnite is, of course, limited. These limits may be extended
Soma-Signiﬁcance and the Activity of Meaning
181

in any number of ways, but however far you go, they are still limited.
What is limited in this way is not true creativity. At most it leads to a
kind of mechanical rearrangement of the kinds of elements and con-
stituents that are possible within those limits. One may think of any-
thing ﬁnite as being suspended in a kind of deeper inﬁnite context or
background. Therefore the ﬁnite must ultimately be dependent on the
inﬁnite. And if it is open to the inﬁnite then creativity can take place
within it. So the inﬁnite does not exclude the ﬁnite, but enfolds within
it and includes and overlaps it. Every ﬁnite form is somewhat ambigu-
ous because it depends on its context. This context goes on beyond all
limits, and that is why creativity is possible. Things are never exactly
what they mean; there is always some ambiguity.
182
Universal Orders

6
THE CAUSAL-ONTOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION
AND IMPLICATE ORDERS (1987)
In the following selections, Bohm gives concise descriptions of three aspects
of his alternative to the standard interpretation of quantum mechanics,
referred to here as the “causal interpretation” (later to become Bohm and
Hiley’s “ontological interpretation”). He goes on to explain in some detail the
manner in which this interpretation is related to the implicate order.
To grasp the signiﬁcance of the causal interpretation, it is useful to
understand two aspects of the standard (Copenhagen) interpretation. The
ﬁrst of these is that particles, such as an electron in a laboratory, have only
potential existence until they are observed. Once observed (e.g. with a meas-
uring device), this potentiality “collapses” down into the concrete manifest-
ation of the actual particle. Second, when not manifesting as a particle, the
state of potentiality is represented by a mathematical wave form known as
the “wave function.” This wave function is understood to be mathematical
only – there is no “real” wave there behind the numbers.
In the early causal interpretation, Bohm proposes that the particle is an
objectively existing entity that does not depend on observation to bring it into
existence. Further, the wave phenomenon also is understood to have objective
existence – every objective particle has an objective wave which accompanies
it. From this perspective there is no collapse from a (mathematical) wave
state into a manifest particle. There is always the simultaneous objective
existence of wave and particle, with no observer required for their
actualization.
Extract from Chapter 2 of D. Bohm, Science, Order, and Creativity (with F. David Peat), Routledge
([1987], 2000).
The Causal-Ontological Interpretation
183

Of central importance in the causal interpretation is the relationship
between the particle and the wave. The wave is understood to carry complex
but passive information about the form of the environment that surrounds the
particle. Through the quantum potential – a feature unique to Bohm and
Hiley’s interpretation – the information contained in the wave is transmitted
to the particle. This information – now active rather than passive – is “pro-
cessed” by the particle and subsequently directs its movement. This relation-
ship between wave and particle is analogous to radar waves directing a ship
on automatic pilot – in both cases, a self-sufﬁcient energy (the particle; the
ship) is “informed” and directed by a wave whose form, rather than its inten-
sity, is signiﬁcant. This process can be understood as yet another variation of
the “two-way” reciprocal relations discussed in Chapters 1 and 2, and of the
soma-signiﬁcant relations of Chapter 5.
The above features are characteristic of the wave-particle relation in an
isolated, “one particle” system. Extended to a “many particle” system, the
causal interpretation provides a framework for considering non-local connec-
tions between distant particles when they are in an “entangled” state; in such
a state the whole system has primacy over the behavior of its parts. When the
interpretation is applied to quantum ﬁeld theory, further novel features
emerge, particularly the super-quantum potential, which has the capacity to
inform the sub-structures of the entire universe. Of equal signiﬁcance, the
super-quantum potential (equivalent to the super-implicate order as dis-
cussed in Chapter 4) coordinates the movement of quantum waves in a man-
ner that allows for the very creation of “particle-like manifestations” in the
ﬁrst instance.
In this latter version of the causal interpretation there is a clear con-
vergence with the perspective of the implicate order. The particle is no longer
seen as a purely objective entity, but as a relatively autonomous and stable
unfoldment from the implicate order, governed in its activity and creation by
the super-quantum potential. Bohm thus outlines a coherent model in which
the mechanically limited analogies of the glycerine and the hologram (Chap-
ter 3) are given a more complete theoretical underpinning, while at the same
time accounting for the organizational principles of whole and sub-whole in
the universe at large.
There are several reasons for including a discussion of this theory
within this chapter. To begin with, it provides a relatively intelligible
and intuitively graspable account of how an actual quantum process
may take place. Moreover it does not require a conceptual or formal
separation between the quantum system and its surrounding “classical”
184
Universal Orders

apparatus. In other words there is no fundamental “incommensur-
ability” between classical and quantum concepts and, therefore, a
greater unity between the formal and informal languages used in its
exposition. In addition, this theory has never before been presented in a
non-technical way and it may be of interest to the reader to learn of a
quite novel approach to the quantum theory.
Although the interpretation is termed causal, this should not be
taken as implying a form of complete determinism. Indeed it will be
shown that this interpretation opens the door for the creative operation
of underlying, and yet subtler, levels of reality. The theory begins, in
its initial form, by supposing the electron, or any other elementary par-
ticle, to be a certain kind of particle which follows a causally determined
trajectory. (In the later, second quantized form of the theory, this direct
particle picture is abandoned.) Unlike the familiar particles of Newto-
nian physics, the electron is never separated from a certain quantum
ﬁeld which fundamentally affects it, and exhibits certain novel features.
This quantum ﬁeld satisﬁes Schrödinger’s equation, just as the elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld satisﬁes Maxwell’s equation. It, too, is therefore
causally determined.
Within Newtonian physics, a classical particle moves according to
Newton’s laws of motion and the forces that act on the particle are
derived from a classical potential V. The basic proposal of the causal
interpretation is that, in addition to this classical potential, there also
acts a new potential, called the quantum potential Q. Indeed, all the new
features of the quantum world are contained within the special features
of this quantum potential. The essential difference between classical
and quantum behavior, therefore, is the operation of this quantum
potential. Indeed, the classical limit of behavior is precisely that for
which the effects of Q become negligible.
(For the mathematically minded, the quantum potential is given by:
Q = −h2
2m
∇2|ψ|2
|ψ|2
where ψ is the quantum ﬁeld or “wave function” derived from
Schrödinger’s equation, h is Planck’s constant, and m is the mass of the
electron or other particle. Clearly the quantum potential is determined
by the quantum wave ﬁeld, or wave function. But what is mathematic-
ally signiﬁcant in the above equation is that this wave function is found
in both the numerator and the denominator. The curious effects that
The Causal-Ontological Interpretation
185

spring from this relationship will be pointed out in the following
paragraphs.)
At ﬁrst sight, it may appear that to consider the electron as some
kind of particle, causally effected by a quantum ﬁeld, is to return to
older, classical ideas which have clearly proved inadequate for under-
standing the quantum world. However, as the theory develops, this elec-
tron turns out not to be a simple, structureless particle but a highly
complex entity that is effected by the quantum potential in an
extremely subtle way. Indeed the quantum potential is responsible for
some novel and highly striking features which imply qualitative new
properties of matter that are not contained within the conventional
quantum theory.
The fact that ψ is contained both in the numerator and the
denominator for Q means that Q is unchanged when ψ is multiplied
by an arbitrary constant. In other words, the quantum potential Q is
independent of the strength, or intensity, of the quantum ﬁeld but
depends only on its form. This is a particularly surprising result. In
the Newtonian world of pushes and pulls on, for example, a ﬂoating
object, any effect is always more or less proportional to the strength or
size of the wave. But with the quantum potential, the effect is the
same for a very large or a very small wave and depends only on its
overall shape.
By way of an illustration, think of a ship that sails on automatic
pilot, guided by radio waves. The overall effect of the radio waves is
independent of their strength and depends only on their form. The
essential point is that the ship moves with its own energy but that the
information within the radio waves is taken up and used to direct the
much greater energy of the ship. In the causal interpretation, the elec-
tron moves under its own energy, but the information in the form of
the quantum wave directs the energy of the electron. Clearly the term
causal is now being used in a very new way from its more familiar
sense.
The result is to introduce several new features into the movement of
particles. First, it means that a particle that moves in empty space, with
no classical forces acting on it whatsoever, still experiences the quantum
potential and therefore need not travel uniformly in a straight line. This
is a radical departure from Newtonian theory. The quantum potential
itself is determined from the quantum wave ψ, which contains contri-
butions from all other objects in the particle’s environment. Since Q
does not necessarily fall off with the intensity of the wave, this means
that even distant features of the environment can effect the movement
186
Universal Orders

in a profound way. As an example, consider the famous double slit
experiment. This is generally taken as the key piece of evidence of the
wave-particle duality of quantum particles. When electrons are sent
through the double slit, they exhibit a wavelike interference pattern on
the other side which is quite “incommensurable” with the classical
behavior of particles (see Figure 6.1). How does the explanation work in
the causal interpretation?
Figure 6.1 The Double Slit Experiment: an electron from the source
encounters the double slits and ends up being registered on the screen
behind. After very many of such individual events a pattern begins to build
up on the screen. The conventional interpretation is that this interference
pattern is evidence of the wavelike nature of the electron. In the causal
interpretation, however, the pattern is a direct result of the complex quan-
tum potential.
The Causal-Ontological Interpretation
187

The electron travels toward a screen containing two slits. Clearly it
can go through only one slit or the other. But the quantum wave can
pass through both. On the outgoing side of the slit system, the quantum
waves interfere to produce a highly complex quantum potential which
does not generally fall off with the distance from the slits. The potential
is illustrated in Figure 6.2.
Note the deep valleys and broad plateaus. In those regions where
the quantum potential changes rapidly, there is a strong force on the
particle which is deﬂected, even though there is no classical force operat-
ing. The movement of the electron is therefore modiﬁed to produce the
scattering pattern shown below. In this case, the wave-like properties do
not arise in any essential duality of the quantum particle but from the
complex effects of the quantum potential (see Figure 6.3).
The explanation of the quantum properties of the electron given
above emphasized how the form of the quantum potential can dominate
Figure 6.2 The quantum potential for the two-slit system.
188
Universal Orders

behavior. In other words, information contained within the quantum
potential will determine the outcome of a quantum process. Indeed it is
useful to extend this idea to what could be called active information. The
basic idea of active information is that a form, having very little energy,
enters into and directs a much greater energy. This notion of an original
Figure 6.3 A collection of trajectories for the electron as it passes through
the two-slit system.
The Causal-Ontological Interpretation
189

energy form acting to “inform,” or put form into, a much larger energy
has signiﬁcant applications in many areas beyond quantum theory.
Consider a radio wave, whose form carries a signal – the voice of an
announcer, for example. The energy of the sound that is heard from the
radio does not in fact come from this wave but from the batteries or
power plug. This latter energy is essentially “unformed,” but takes up its
form from the information within the radio wave. This information is
potentially active everywhere but only actually active when its form
enters the electrical energy of the radio.
The analogy with the causal interpretation is clear. The quantum
wave carries “information” and is therefore potentially active every-
where, but it is actually active only when and where this energy enters
into the energy of the particle. But this implies that an electron, or any
other elementary particle, has a complex and subtle inner structure that
is at least comparable with that of a radio. Clearly this notion goes
against the whole tradition of modern physics, which assumes that as
matter is analyzed into smaller and smaller parts, its behavior grows
more elementary. By contrast, the causal interpretation suggests that
nature may be far more subtle and strange than was previously
thought.
But this inner complexity of elementary matter is not as implausible
as it may appear at ﬁrst sight. For example, a large crowd of people can
be treated by simple statistical laws, whereas individually their behavior
is immensely subtler and more complex. Similarly, large masses of mat-
ter reduce to simple Newtonian behavior whereas atoms and molecules
have a more complex inner structure. And what of the subatomic par-
ticles themselves? It is interesting to note that between the shortest
distance now measurable in physics (10−16 cm) and the shortest distance
in which current notions of space-time probably have meaning (10−33
cm), there is a vast range of scale in which an immense amount of yet
undiscovered structure could be contained. Indeed this range is roughly
equal to that which exists between our own size and that of the elem-
entary particles.
A further feature of the causal interpretation is its account of what
Bohr called the wholeness of the experimental situation. In, for example,
the double slit experiment, each particle responds to information that
comes from the entire environment. For while each particle goes
through only one of the slits, its motion is fundamentally affected by
information coming from both slits. More generally, distant events and
structures can strongly affect a particle’s trajectory so that any experi-
ment must be considered as a whole. This [causal interpretation] gives a
190
Universal Orders

simple and tangible account of Bohr’s wholeness, for since the effects of
structures may not fall off with distance, all aspects of the experimental
situation must be taken into account . . .
*
When one looked at the many-particle system, this new kind of whole-
ness became much more evident, for the quantum potential was now a
function of the positions of all the particles which (as in the one-particle
case) did not necessarily fall off with the distance. Thus, one could at
least in principle have a strong and direct (non-local) connection
between particles that are quite distant from each other. This sort of
non-locality would, for example, give a simple and direct explanation of
the paradox of Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen, because in measuring
some property of one of a pair of particles with correlated wave func-
tions, one will alter the “non-local” quantum potential so that the other
particle responds in a corresponding way.
Because the above response is instantaneous, however, it would
seem at ﬁrst sight to contradict the theory of relativity, which requires
that no signals be transmitted faster than the speed of light. At the time
of proposing these notions I regarded this as a serious difﬁculty, but I
hoped that the problem would ultimately be resolved with the aid of
further new orders. This indeed did happen later in connection with the
application of the causal interpretation to the quantum mechanical
ﬁeld theory, but as this question is not relevant to the subject of the
present paper, I shall not discuss it further here.1 Meanwhile, however, I
felt that the causal interpretation was affording valuable insight into a
key difference between classical and quantum properties of matter.
Classically, all forces are assumed to fall off eventually to zero, as par-
ticles separate, whereas in the quantum theory the quantum potential
may still strongly connect particles that are even at macroscopic orders
of distance from each other. In fact, it was just this feature of the quan-
tum theory, as brought out in the causal interpretation, that later led
Bell2 to develop his theorem, demonstrating quite precisely and gener-
ally how quantum non-locality contrasts with classical notions of
locality.
As important as this new feature of non-local connection is, how-
ever, the quantum potential implies a further move away from classical
concepts that is yet more radical and striking. This is that the very form
Extract from Chapter 2 of B. J. Hiley and F. D. Peat (eds), Quantum Implications: Essays in Honour of
David Bohm, Routledge, London (1987).
The Causal-Ontological Interpretation
191

of the connection between particles depends on the wave function for
the state of the whole. This wave function is determined by solving
Schrödinger’s equation for the entire system, and thus does not depend
on the state of the parts. Such a behaviour is in contrast to that shown in
classical physics, for which the interaction between the parts is a pre-
determined function, independent of the state of the whole. Thus, clas-
sically, the whole is merely the result of the parts and their preassigned
interactions, so that the primary reality is the set of parts while the
behaviour of the whole is derived entirely from those parts and their
interactions. With the quantum potential, however, the whole has an
independent and prior signiﬁcance such that, indeed, the whole may be
said to organize the activities of the parts. For example, in a super-
conducting state it may be seen that electrons are not scattered because,
through the action of the quantum potential, the whole system is
undergoing a coordinated movement more like a ballet dance than like a
crowd of unorganized people. Clearly, such quantum wholeness of activ-
ity is closer to the organized unity of functioning of the parts of a living
being than it is to the kind of unity that is obtained by putting together
the parts of a machine . . .
During the 1960s, I began to direct my attention toward order,
partly as a result of a long correspondence with an American artist,
Charles Biederman, who was deeply concerned with this question. And
then, through working with a student, Donald Schumacher, I became
strongly interested in language. These two interests led to a paper3 on
order in physics and on its description through language. In this paper I
compared and contrasted relativistic and quantum notions of order,
leading to the conclusion that they contradicted each other and that new
notions of order were needed.
Being thus alerted to the importance of order, I saw a program on
BBC television showing a device in which an ink drop was spread out
through a cylinder of glycerine and then brought back together again, to
be reconstituted essentially as it was before. This immediately struck me
as very relevant to the question of order, since, when the ink drop was
spread out, it still had a “hidden” (i.e. non-manifest) order that was
revealed when it was reconstituted. On the other hand, in our usual
language, we would say that the ink was in a state of “disorder” when it
was diffused through the glycerine. This led me to see that new notions
of order must be involved here.
Shortly afterwards, I began to reﬂect on the hologram and to see that
in it, the entire order of an object is contained in an interference pattern
of light that does not appear to have such an order at all. Suddenly, I was
192
Universal Orders

struck by the similarity of the hologram and the behavior of the ink
drop. I saw that what they had in common was that an order was
enfolded; that is, in any small region of space there may be “informa-
tion” which is the result of enfolding an extended order and which
could then be unfolded into the original order (as the points of contact
made by the folds in a sheet of paper may contain the essential relation-
ships of the total pattern displayed when the sheet is unfolded).
Then, when I thought of the mathematical form of the quantum
theory (with its matrix operations and Green’s functions), I perceived
that this too described just a movement of enfoldment and unfoldment
of the wave function. So the thought occurred to me: perhaps the
movement of enfoldment and unfoldment is universal, while the
extended and separate forms that we commonly see in experience are
relatively stable and independent patterns, maintained by a constant
underlying movement of enfoldment and unfoldment. This latter I
called the holomovement. The proposal was thus a reversal of the usual
idea. Instead of supposing that extended matter and its movement are
fundamental, while enfoldment and unfoldment are explained as a
particular case of this, we are saying that the implicate order will have to
contain within itself all possible features of the explicate order as poten-
tialities, along with the principles determining which of these features
shall become actual. The explicate order will in this way ﬂow out of the
implicate order through unfoldment, while in turn it “ﬂows back”
through further enfoldment. The implicate order thus plays a primary
role, while the explicate order is secondary, in the sense that its main
qualities and properties are ultimately derived in its relationship with
the implicate order, of which it is indeed a special and distinguished
case.
This approach implies, of course, that each separate and extended
form in the explicate order is enfolded in the whole and that, in turn, the
whole is enfolded in this form (though, of course, there is an asymmetry,
in that the form enfolds the whole only in a limited and not completely
deﬁned way). The way in which the separate and extended form
enfolds the whole is, however, not merely superﬁcial or of secondary
signiﬁcance, but rather it is essential to what that form is and to how it
acts, moves and behaves quite generally. So the whole is, in a deep sense,
internally related to the parts. And, since the whole enfolds all the parts,
these latter are also internally related, though in a weaker way than they
are related to the whole.
I shall not go into great detail about the implicate order4,5 here; I
shall assume that the reader is somewhat familiar with this. What I
The Causal-Ontological Interpretation
193

want to emphasize is only that the implicate order provided an image, a
kind of metaphor, for intuitively understanding the implication of
wholeness which is the most important new feature of the quantum
theory. Nevertheless, it must be pointed out that the speciﬁc analogies
of the ink drop and the hologram are limited, and do not fully convey all
that is meant by the implicate order. What is missing in these analogies
is an inner principle of organization in the implicate order that deter-
mines which sub-wholes shall become actual and what will be their
relatively independent and stable forms. Indeed, in both these models,
the order enfolded in the whole is obtained from pre-existent, separate
and extended elements (objects photographed in the hologram or ink
drops injected into the glycerine). It is then merely unfolded to give
something similar to these elements again. Nor is there any natural
principle of stability in these elements; they may be totally altered or
destroyed by minor further disturbances of the overall arrangement of
the equipment.
Gradually, throughout the 1970s, I became more aware of the limita-
tions of the hologram and ink droplet analogies to the implicate order.
Meanwhile, I noticed that both the implicate order and the causal inter-
pretations had emphasized this wholeness signiﬁed by quantum laws,
though in apparently very different ways. So I wondered if these two
rather different approaches were not related in some deep sense – espe-
cially because I had come at least to the essence of both notions at
almost the same time. At ﬁrst sight, the causal interpretation seemed to
be a step backwards toward mechanism, since it introduced the notion
of a particle acted on by a potential. Nevertheless, as I have already
pointed out, its implication that the whole both determines its sub-
wholes and organizes their activity clearly goes far beyond what
appeared to be the original mechanical point of departure. Would it not
be possible to drop this mechanical starting point altogether?
I saw that this could indeed be done by going on from the quantum
mechanical particle theory to the quantum mechanical ﬁeld theory.
This is accomplished by starting with the classical notion of a continu-
ous ﬁeld (e.g., the electromagnetic) that is spread out through all space.
One then applies the rules of the quantum theory to this ﬁeld. The
result is that the ﬁeld will have discrete “quantized” values for certain
properties, such as energy, momentum, and angular momentum. Such a
ﬁeld will act in many ways like a collection of particles, while at the
same time it still has wave-like manifestations such as interference,
diffraction, etc.
Of course, in the usual interpretation of the theory, there is no way
194
Universal Orders

to understand how this comes about. One can only use the mathemat-
ical formalism to calculate statistically the distribution of phenomena
through which such a ﬁeld reveals itself in our observations and
experiments. But now one can extend this causal interpretation to the
quantum ﬁeld theory. Here, the actuality will be the entire ﬁeld over
the whole universe. Classically, this is determined as a continuous solu-
tion of some kind of ﬁeld equation (e.g., Maxwell’s equations for the
electromagnetic ﬁeld). But when we extend the notion of the causal
interpretation to the ﬁeld theory, we ﬁnd that these equations are
modiﬁed by the action of what I called a super-quantum potential. This
is related to the activity of the entire ﬁeld as the original quantum
potential was to that of the particles. As a result, the ﬁeld equations are
modiﬁed in a way that makes them, in technical language, non-local
and non-linear.
What this implies for the present context can be seen by consider-
ing that, classically, solutions of the ﬁeld equations represent waves that
spread out and diffuse independently. Thus, as I indicated earlier in
connection with the hologram, there is no way to explain the origination
of the waves that converge to a region where a particle-like manifest-
ation is actually detected, nor is there any factor that could explain the
stability and sustained existence of such a particle-like manifestation.
However, this lack is just what is supplied by the super-quantum poten-
tial. Indeed, as can be shown by a detailed analysis,6 the non-local fea-
tures of this latter will introduce the required tendency of waves to
converge at appropriate places, while the non-linearity will provide for
the stability of recurrence of the whole process. And thus we come to a
theory in which not only the activity of particle-like manifestations, but
even their actualization, e.g. their creation, sustenance, and annihilation,
is organized by the super-quantum potential.
The general picture that emerges out of this is of a wave that
spreads out and converges again and again to show a kind of average
particle-like behaviour, while the interference and diffraction properties
are, of course, still maintained. All this ﬂows out of the super-quantum
potential, which depends in principle on the state of the whole universe.
But if the “wave function of the universe” falls into a set of independent
factors, at least approximately, a corresponding set of relatively
autonomous and independent sub-units of ﬁeld function will emerge.
And, in fact, as in the case in the particle theory, the wave function will
under normal conditions tend to factorize at the large-scale level in an
entirely objective way that is not basically dependent on our knowledge
or on our observations and measurements. So now we see quite
The Causal-Ontological Interpretation
195

generally that the whole universe not only determines and organizes its
sub-wholes, but also that it gives form to what has until now been called
the elementary particles out of which everything is supposed to be
constituted. What we have here is a kind of universal process of con-
stant creation and annihilation, determined through the super-quantum
potential so as to give rise to a world of form and structure in which all
manifest features are only relatively constant, recurrent and stable
aspects of this whole.
To see how this is connected with the implicate order, we have only
to note that the original holographic model was one in which the whole
was constantly enfolded into and unfolded from each region of an elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld, through dynamical movement and development of
the ﬁeld according to the laws of classical ﬁeld theory. But now, this
whole ﬁeld is no longer a self-contained totality; it depends crucially on
the super-quantum potential. As we have seen, however, this in turn
depends on the “wave function of the universe” in a way that is a
generalization of how the quantum potential for particles depends on
the wave function of a system of particles. But all such wave functions
are forms of the implicate order (whether they refer to particles or to
ﬁelds). Thus, the super-quantum potential expresses the activity of a
new kind of implicate order. This implicate order is immensely more
subtle than that of the original ﬁeld, as well as more inclusive, in the
sense that not only is the actual activity of the whole ﬁeld enfolded in it,
but also all its potentialities, along with the principles determining
which of these shall become actual.
I was in this way led to call the original ﬁeld the ﬁrst implicate
order, while the super-quantum potential was called the second impli-
cate order (or the super-implicate order). In principle, of course, there
could be a third, fourth, ﬁfth implicate order, going on to inﬁnity, and
these would correspond to extensions of the laws of physics going
beyond those of the current quantum theory, in a fundamental way. But
for the present I want to consider only the second implicate order, and
to emphasize that this stands in relationship to the ﬁrst as a source of
formative, organizing, and creative activity.
It should be clear that this notion now incorporates both of my
earlier perceptions – the implicate order as a movement of outgoing and
incoming waves, and of the causal interpretation of the quantum theory.
So, although these two ideas seemed initially very different, they proved
to be two aspects of one more comprehensive notion. This can be
described as an overall implicate order, which may extend to an inﬁnite
number of levels and which objectively and self-actively differentiates
196
Universal Orders

and organizes itself into independent sub-wholes, while determining
how these are interrelated to make up the whole.
Moreover, the principles of organization of such an implicate order
can even deﬁne a unique explicate order, as a particular and dis-
tinguished sub-order, in which all the elements are relatively independ-
ent and externally related.7 To put it differently, the explicate order itself
may be obtainable from the implicate order as a special and determinate
sub-order that is contained within it.
All that has been discussed here opens up the possibility of con-
sidering the cosmos as an unbroken whole through an overall implicate
order. Of course, this possibility has been studied thus far in only a
preliminary way, and a great deal more work is required to clarify and
extend the notions that have been discussed in this paper.
Notes
1
For further discussion of this point, see Bohm, D., Physical Review, 85, 180 (1952); see also Bohm
and Hiley, B. J., Foundations of Physics, 14, 255 (1984), where this question is discussed in more
detail.
2
Bell, J., Review of Modern Physics, 38, 447 (1966); see also Foundations of Physics, 12, 989 (1982).
3
Bohm, D., Foundations of Physics, 1, 359 (1971).
4
Bohm, D., Foundations of Physics, 3, 139 (1973).
5
See Chapter 3 of this volume; also Bohm, D., Wholeness and the Implicate Order, Routledge and
Kegan Paul, London (1980).
6
See note 1 (above).
7
Bohm, D., “Claremont Conference,” in Physics and the Ultimate Signiﬁcance of Time, ed. David R.
Grifﬁn, State University of New York Press, Albany (1986).
The Causal-Ontological Interpretation
197


Part Two – Individual Orders
7
STRUCTURE-PROCESS AND THE EGO (1958–
1967)
In this selection of letters to his brother-in-law Yitzhak Woolfson (addressed
herein as “Isidore”), Bohm lays the foundation for his views of the ego, which
he continued to develop and reﬁne for some thirty years. The time-frame and
content of the letters coincide signiﬁcantly with Bohm’s early meetings with
the Indian philosopher J. Krishnamurti, whose inﬂuence in this area Bohm is
quick to acknowledge. At the same time, Bohm brings his own perspective and
unique investigative skills to the issue at hand, generating material essential
to his subsequent considerations of soma-signiﬁcance (Chapter 5) and pro-
prioception (Chapters 8 and 12).
Very much like his critique of the notion of substantial “things” in Chap-
ter 1, Bohm suggests that the ego is in actuality a dynamic “structure-
process” which displays varying degrees of stability, regularity, and novelty,
but on sustained examination is found to be without any inherent existence.
The fact that the notion of a substantial ego has been reiﬁed over thousands
of years – and never more so than in contemporary culture – is testament to
the illusion-generating nature of the structure-process itself, rather than evi-
dence that there is any actual entity which the term “ego” stands for.
At the core of this ego process, says Bohm, is an ordered array of
unperceived contradictions, which result in endemic psychological and social
confusion. Normalized through cultural and personal assimilation, these
unperceived contradictions generate the conceptual superstructure for what
we consider to be reality. Like the analogy of the single ﬁsh which appears as
two separate entities (Chapter 3), the structure-process of the ego displays
Previously unpublished personal letters, courtesy of Yitzhak Woolfson.
Structure-Process and the Ego
199

experience in abstracted fragments: “I” and “me,” thought and feeling,
pleasure and pain, self and world, secure and insecure, and so on. We ten-
aciously identify with certain of these aspects, and strive to control or elimin-
ate others. But if “thought,” for example, struggles against “feeling” – while
both are more deeply a single movement – we cannot help but exist in a state
of confusion arising from a failure to recognize the contradictory nature of
what is occurring.
Seamlessly woven into this reﬂexive structure of fragmentation, suggests
Bohm, is the active operation of memory. While memory is essential for prac-
tical functioning, it has an insidious tendency to permeate and ﬁlter the
whole of experience. Any prospect of authentic participation in the immedi-
ate present is thus generally overridden and replaced by a complex simulation,
comprised primarily of “playbacks” of past experience. The fusion of such
memory with the structural fragmentation outlined above yields a complete
virtual world – one which seems to meet our criteria for “reality,” but is
nonetheless a tenuous construction, perpetually at risk of being undermined
by its own inherent contradictions. Co-emergent with this world, and insepar-
able from it, is the “ego” – the sense of an inner entity which also seems stable
and real, but is ultimately based on the same simulations as the world it
appears to inhabit.
Bohm proposes that this entire process is sustained by a dysfunctional
feedback loop between the thalamus (the reptilian aspect of the brain) and
the cortex (the mammalian aspect of the brain). The cortex, with its immense
capacity for memory storage and its ability to generate vivid images based on
this memory, ﬂoods the thalamus with signals and images that overwhelm
those coming from the natural world. The rudimentary ﬁght–ﬂight and
pleasure–pain mechanisms with which the thalamus formerly engaged the
natural world begin to run amok, triggered now by the milieu of cortical
images, rather than by the direct stimuli of nature. In this way a loop is
created, with the thalamus sending confused, overstimulating signals to the
cortex, while the cortex generates an abnormal profusion of memories,
images, and thoughts in an attempt to assuage the unnatural demands of the
thalamus. The pervasive ﬂow of neurophysiological energy generated by this
looping serves to further substantiate a feeling of underlying “reality,” thus
bringing the process of fragmentation and simulation full circle.
Nonetheless, suggests Bohm, this feedback loop is not impenetrable.
Through intentional recall of incidents where the sense of ego has been pro-
voked or disturbed, there exists the possibility of seeing the entire structure-
process at work, without being fully caught in its projections. In this way we
may access and understand the concrete structure-process of the ego – the
implicate order of consciousness as outlined in the remaining chapters of this
200
Individual Orders

volume. It is direct engagement with the whole of this order – fragmentation,
identiﬁcation, the simulations of memory, and the somatic manifestations of
these processes – that holds open the possibility of a creative movement
outside the loop.
Reﬂecting on his exchange of letters with Bohm, Yitzhak Woolfson
comments:
The letters that appear here are part of a personal correspondence with
my brother-in-law, David Bohm, between the years 1957 to 1980. It could
be said that this correspondence began during the summer of 1956,
because events that were taking place in Israel at that time affected the
content of the letters I wrote. The early letters particularly reveal David’s
concern about the welfare of the family in Israel and his worry regarding
the dangerous situation developing all over the world.
This correspondence has a special value for me because it is a sort of
continuation of the many talks we had while walking together in England
and in Israel, whenever it was possible for the family to be together.
While staying with them in their home in Edgware, Dave and I would
walk in the evenings through the quiet suburban streets around their
house and talk. Dave did most of the talking about his work. He said that
he was able to think more clearly while walking and his ideas and the
explanation of them ﬂowed from him with great energy. From time to
time, as though worried that he might be losing me, he would ask if I were
still with him, if I understood. When I asked for clariﬁcation, he would
explain the point in different words and, with great patience, make sure
that I too could see the concept clearly before continuing. Dave had a
natural gift as a teacher.
In reading the letters I always hear Dave’s quiet patient voice, choos-
ing his words with great care to make sure that they indicated clearly
and coherently the direction he was going. Dave showed me how to listen
to the silence, which contains all sounds. How to understand about the
silence of the mind, which is always there beyond the turbulence and
confusion of the ego. And as in so much that he said and wrote, one can
almost feel his conviction that in that silence when insight is uncluttered
and true, the structure of thought will open like a ﬂower in the clear light
of the sun and reveal its inner depth.
These letters also show how Dave’s concepts and ideas do not belong
to any particular time or place. In the light of the difﬁculties we are
presently witnessing in the efforts to make peace between nations, Dave’s
words in his letter of May 24, 1967 sound almost prophetic. The letters
Structure-Process and the Ego
201

are as pertinent today as they were when he began writing them and will
no doubt continue to be so until man can understand the need to change
his way of thinking radically.
Jerusalem, May 27, 2001
Sept. 9, 1958
Dear Isidore,
To continue the previous letter, what is now essential is that people
must begin to think, to face the “real reality” and not just the superﬁcial
momentary aspects of reality that each meets, in his day to day experi-
ences, within his narrow and limited sphere. To do this, man needs a
general over-all philosophical point of view, which orients him in the
chaos of shifting and unstable appearances that present themselves,
when he focuses only on what is momentary and narrow. And I
believe that my work in physics gives at least some elements of such a
philosophy. For I am beginning to see that even in the apparently
lifeless world of so-called “inert” matter, each thing, each particle (e.g.,
electron, proton, etc.) is not what it at ﬁrst seems to be, i.e., a separate
point in space, indifferent in its inner being to all the others, remain-
ing always only just what it is, and interacting only externally with all
the others.
Rather, each entity is continually being formed from the inﬁnite
background and falls back into the background, to be regenerated again
and again (as long as it continues to exist). Thus each thing has its roots
in the totality and falls back into the totality. Yet, it still remains a thing
having a certain degree of independent being. And this is possible
because each thing contains in itself, its own special image of the totality
(cosmos) out of which it formed itself, and into which it is always dis-
solving (and re-forming). The apparent separateness of things as we see
them immediately is that each thing has a certain degree of relative
indifference to the others. But this indifference does not belong to it
alone. For it is the cosmos itself which determines this indifference and
which also determines the limits of this indifference.
If the above is true for the most elementary and inert kinds of
things, it is much more true for more organized things, such as living
beings, man and his consciousness and society. Each man draws his
being from the totality and his effects fall back into the totality. His
separateness, loneliness, indifference to the others are only relative, and
determined by his relation to the totality (in this case, society). Change
202
Individual Orders

this relation and you bring out the deeper essential relations between
man and man.
I will write more later.
Dave
September 25, 1962
Dear Isidore,
I have been seeing things a bit more clearly since you left. I would say
that our concepts are like mirrors that we hold up to reality. If they are
distorting mirrors, they may present many apparently different reﬂec-
tions of one thing. Thus, if I try to study my own ego, there appears the
“me” with all its qualities, and an “I” that seems to be observing them.
Yet we know logically that an “I” and “me” must be one entity. How
then do we come to see them as two? I suggest that consciousness is a
distorting mirror, which is able, in effect, to give two apparently differ-
ent but related and interacting reﬂections of one process. In reality there
is neither “I” nor “me,” but the individual in his totality (individual =
undivided). On the other hand, the ego process with the “I–me” division
could be called the “dividual.” In the individual, perception is “going on”
without the need for a “perceiver” to do the job. Our language forces us
to say that a subject is acting on an object. Thus, we say, “It is raining.”
But where is the “it” that is doing the raining? Similarly, we say, “I am
observing.”
Also, one can ask, “Is there really an ‘I’ that is ‘doing’ the observing
or is there not just a process of observing that is going on?” When a
person is serious about what he is doing, the ego falls away, and the
individual as a whole is perceiving and acting. For instance, suppose
that he is playing music. When he is ﬁnished, the ego process comes
back into existence, and takes the credit. But in reality, the ego process
never does anything at all, except to get in the way. Imagine trying to
play music, while the ego is saying, “I am now playing music. Isn’t it
wonderful what I can do?”
So it seems to me that at all times, when the ego exists, the indi-
vidual is in a state of confused perception. In this state he sees “the
world,” and also, he hears the words “this is ‘I,’” along with a feeling of
ownership or possession of a whole set of qualities, memories, urges,
relations, desires, etc. This latter feeling can be called “identiﬁcation.”
The individual also has the illusory perception of a process in which the
centralized collection of qualities is initiating actions. But in reality, it is
Structure-Process and the Ego
203

the individual as a whole who acts. The confusion is that the individual
is seeing the process as if it were the separate ego that was acting, as in a
moving picture we see the image of a person as if it were “doing” things.
I would say that as a man perceives, so he is. Here I include in
perception, all of seeing, hearing, feeling, sensing, going on up to under-
standing, and the seeing of what is true and false. This latter is very
important. If a man is confused in his vision of what is false and what is
true, then nothing else that he does can mean much. Thus, if he wants to
do good, he may nevertheless do evil, since he cannot see whether what
he does is truly good or not. Probably even Hitler saw himself as doing
good, but his vision was very confused. Similarly, an insane man may be
responding in a natural way to his confused vision of the world. When a
man sees differently (i.e., understands), then he is different. A man with
a confused perception must act in a confused way, and therefore he is
confused. As soon as his vision is really clear (not just in words, but in
his whole being), then he turns away from confusion, and he is a differ-
ent man. So the transformation of man must come through a new
vision, a new understanding. Only the individual can do this. So it is the
individual who can change, and not the collective.
The importance of perception by the whole man cannot be
emphasized too much. Suppose that a man sees what he takes for sugar,
but suddenly, he reads the label “Potassium Cyanide.” His whole being
immediately sees that this is poison, and he turns away from it without
further ado, because he wants to live. His intellect, his emotions, his
nerves and muscles, etc., are all aware that “this is poison,” and each
does its job in carrying out the appropriate action. Now, if we really had
a corresponding total perception of the ego at work, we would see that it
is as poisonous as cyanide. However, what may happen is that the intel-
lect says, “This is poison,” while the emotions, being more conservative
and attached to memory, say, “No – it is sugar.” So we are confused, we
are in a state of contradiction. While we are in that state, all our
thoughts and actions are confused, and each step only tangles us up
worse. It is as if a scientist were to say, “3 = 2.” Then he would feel
uncomfortable because of the contradiction. Every idea that he intro-
duced to resolve the contradiction would only make it worse, as long as
he accepted the notion that “3 = 2.”
When one is in a state of confusion, one can do nothing (as when
one is lost in the woods, it is urgent to stop and try to understand rather
than go around in circles). We cannot believe anything that is in our
own minds, because it may only be an idea brought in to cover up our
confusion. But there is one thing that one can see, and this is “I am
204
Individual Orders

confused.” Here, one starts with the truth, and goes on from there. It is
an objective fact that I am confused, as objective as “the temperature is
now 65°F.”
Then one must see the source of the confusion. This is of course
often quite difﬁcult. But here, it is helpful to ask the question, “Is there
anything more important than seeing what is true and what is false?” If
your mind puts forth some emotional demand as more important, then
you will see, on asking this question, that here is one of the sources of
your confusion. For it is plain to see that nothing can really be more
important than to see what is true and what is false (not even the need
to save your life, because if you mistake truth for falsity, you will act in a
confused way, and will be more likely to lose your life than if you saw
clearly).
It is clear now that it is no use to ﬁght the ego, to “do” something
“positive” about it. For this would only be a confused process, in which
the ego tried to improve itself, not noticing that the ego process is the
essence of the illness. When you understand confusion (i.e., see it
deeply), then this perception will act of its own accord, and you will turn
away from confusion, without further ado. The ego need do nothing at
all. Indeed, if it acts, it must get in the way. If I confuse my image in a
mirror with another man who is imitating me, then everything that I do
to stop this man from imitating me will only confuse me more. When I
understand that this is only a reﬂection of me in the mirror, then the
whole problem disappears. As long as I do not understand the problem,
it is insoluble, because it is based on confusion. As soon as I understand,
there is no problem. And this is what happens with all the problems
created by the ego process. They are all based on confusion, hence
insoluble, until one understands. But when one understands there is no
problem.
I would like to go a bit into the origin of the confusion that is
responsible for the ego process. Now, an infant begins by not being able
to recall to memory (in an internal image) an object that is absent. But
he can still recognize it when he experiences it (this is often true even of
an adult). How does it happen?
It seems to me that every experience leaves a kind of “negative
trace” or imprint in the mind. When the experience is repeated, it ﬁts
this imprint as a key ﬁts a lock. In this way one can recognize it. One
can also produce an internal image in the imagination, which is recog-
nized in the same way that direct perceptions are recognized, i.e.,
against the “negative trace.” So memory is a positive internal imita-
tion (in the imagination) of something that was once perceived, while
Structure-Process and the Ego
205

recognition precedes imitation in the development of the infant,
because it is basically a simpler procedure.
One can compare recognition to a set of grooves and scratches
impressed by past experience on the mind, while memory is like the
“play-back” of the record as internal images, sounds, etc.
It is important to notice that both recognition and memory involve
the emotions as well as factual records of what happened outwardly.
Thus, if the infant has a certain experience that is pleasant, his recogni-
tion traces start to demand a repetition. He tries to ﬁnd a way to repeat
it. But if they are unpleasant, he tries to ﬁnd a way to avoid it. Here is
the real beginning of the ego process. Evidently when the memory
“play-back” develops later in the child, it too will be accompanied by
emotional demands for or against the experience in question. Since
thought is based on recognition and memory, it is clear that thought and
feeling cannot be separated. They are two aspects of the one process,
which is the response of recognition and memory to new perceptions.
Out of thought is then born desire, the urge to continue, to enhance,
to possess, to make secure that which is pleasant and to guarantee the
avoidance of what is unpleasant. Desire attaches itself to an object of the
imagination, in order to attain permanence. But the object of desire is
always changing. Firstly, the real object changes in one way, while the
object imagined in desire changes in another way. We then discover
when we get the object of our desire that it isn’t what we expected; we
soon encounter satiety and boredom. Other objects soon seem more
attractive to desire. Besides, objects of desire change in unexpected
ways, grow old, and even pass out of existence. So the attachment of
desire to an object leads to contradiction (contradictory desires), and out
of this comes confusion.
Religious people and moralists then tell us to suppress desire, shape
it, control it, direct it to God or to the triumph of Communism. Psycho-
logists and others tell us to sublimate it. But doing this only heightens
the contradiction and confusion. Then comes fear that one will never
achieve satisfaction of desire, a state of anxiety and despair, alternating
with periods of hope, when there is the momentary belief that one can
escape into a new job, a new religion, a new hobby, a new marriage, etc.
So we see that the ego process, with its attachment of desire to an
object, is inherently in a state of confusion. What is the origin of this
confusion? It is very simple. We mistake the demands made in the
“play-back” of memory for true feelings. True feelings arise only in fresh
perception of what is new. This perception is understanding on the
intellectual side, and it has the wholeness of feeling sometimes called
206
Individual Orders

love on the emotional side. It can also be called creativity. But this
creativity refers to creative living, and not just to the expression of
creation in art, science, music, etc. It is essential to understand that the
play-back of memory and the recognition “scratches” are not creative in
this sense. They have their utility as factual memory to guide you in
your life or your job (how to get home, etc). Memory is, like ﬁre, “a good
servant but a bad master.” And as soon as you take the play-back of
emotions seriously, you are the slave of memory, since your actions will
then be only a response to these “memory scratches,” and not to reality
as it actually is from moment to moment. Since the “memory scratches”
cannot ﬁt reality (because reality is always changing), one comes into a
state of contradiction between demands based on memory and reality,
as well as between the different aspects of memory demands that con-
tradict each other. So the ego is inherently in a state of confusion and
contradiction.
What is to be done about all this? The answer is, as I said before,
nothing at all. Whatever action is born of desire will also be self-
contradictory (e.g., the desire to end desire which in fact only continues
desire in another form). But the question is, “Why do anything at all
about desire?” Desire seems to be necessary to mental life. It is like a
many-colored ﬂame, very beautiful and full of energy, always changing.
When it is attached to something, it falls into contradiction and confu-
sion – the ﬂame turns into dense smoke. But if you understand the
futility of doing anything at all about desire (satisfying it, attaching it to
an object, shaping it, suppressing it, choosing “good” desires and getting
rid of “bad” desires), then you will just turn away from these efforts, and
let desire do what it will, to die as to unfold in its own natural way. Then
there will be no contradiction. Desire does no harm if it is not attached.
In other words, desire is something different, when you understand it.
For recall, “As man sees, so he is.” If you see desire in a new way, then
desire is different in its operation in you.
If you don’t let desire determine your actions, then what should do
this? The answer is: The perception of what is true and what is false will
operate by itself, if it is deep enough. For example, when one sees the
poison, one simply leaves it alone, without bringing in a struggle
between the desire on one side to live and on the other side to continue
to take the poison. Also, when you see the truth – that you are confused,
and the falsity of ideas that arise in the state of confusion – then this
perception acts, and your mind is already starting to clear itself, without
any effort by the ego to bring this about. You must ask yourself, “Is it
possible for there to be such an extensive and deep perception of what
Structure-Process and the Ego
207

is true and what is false, that the ego process as a whole will drop
away like a dead leaf?” There is no way to answer this in words. It
is foolish to try. The answer can only come by looking at the problem
concretely.
Finally, it is interesting to compare all this with various forms of
psychoanalysis, which also assert that self-understanding can lead to
integration of the personality. The main difference is that they all urge
us to adjust to the “normal” life in society. But this “norm” is confused
and self-contradictory. So we are asked to adjust to confusion. Imagine a
physicist who was asked to adjust to the assumption that “2 = 3.” He
would end up by going mad. Perhaps a similar fate awaits the one who
tries to adjust to society. What is needed is to see through it as inher-
ently confused.
Saral and I send you our love, also to Sheila and the children.
Yours, Dave
Nov. 12, 1962
Dear Isidore,
I was very glad to receive your letter, and to hear that all is well. I think
that the problems you refer to are really very important ones today.
To see the totality of understanding, i.e., to understand the act of
understanding itself, is indeed a difﬁcult thing to do. Let us try to go
into the question a bit.
First of all, it is clearly of no use to try to deﬁne the totality of
understanding in terms of words. Rather, as we communicate, words are
merely marks, showing the course of the process of awareness in the
writer or the speaker. The hearer or the reader must, in effect, always be
answering the question, “What could the writer or speaker be perceiv-
ing, thinking, feeling, that makes him put out these words?” And the
answer will not be in words. Rather, it will come into being as perceived
in the awareness process of the reader or hearer. Moreover, there are
some questions that we can ask ourselves, whose answer is not in words,
but only in the coming into awareness of what is referred to. Thus, when
you ask, “What is the totality of understanding?”, you must see that you
do not and cannot “know” the answer, in terms of what can be recog-
nized from the past. It must be fresh and new, what one has never seen.
And even if one should see it some day, the memory of it will be false in
the next moment, when in truth, the question must be answered by a
fresh perception again.
208
Individual Orders

What does it mean to see anything in its totality? As Krishnamurti
points out, we can see a tree, or a river, ﬁrst as a totality. We see the
“treeness,” the basic quality of all trees, which comes into our awareness
as a sort of general structure and process; and then we particularize
down to a given tree, then to a branch, or a leaf, if we wish. But if we
started with the details, we could never get the totality by putting them
together. It may be said that the part must be seen as abstracted from a
totality. We can never abstract the whole from the parts, as this would
be an absurdity. Nevertheless, it is a habit that we have, to try to do the
impossible. Thus, we begin with various ﬁelds of specialization, and
express the pious hope that some day these ﬁelds will automatically
amalgamate to make human knowledge into a whole.
Now, understanding is the act of seeing experience as an integrated
totality ﬁrst. Then we may abstract down to a part. We do not accept
experience as a bunch of separated fragments, but rather, we see it as a
whole. This means that we must see ourselves too, since the “inner” and
“outer” are inseparable, as aspects of experience. We experience the
“outer” and “inner” worlds inseparably, on one ﬁeld of total experi-
encing. Each one inﬂuences the interpretation of the other. So the whole
truth cannot be understood by one who does not perceive his own
motivations, along with the falsity of all motivation. For if you have a
motive, then it is a certain result that you are mainly interested in, and
not truth. There is no reason why your preconceived result should be
fully compatible with the truth, and generally, it is not.
So to see the whole truth, you must not be in a state of conﬂict
between “what is” and a motivation as to “what should be.” What
should be is always an illusion, which prevents you from looking at
what is. When you see what is (psychologically speaking) it starts to
change, and problems start to dissolve away, as one perceives that they
all come from what should be – which begins by projecting what is
illusory. Usually, our problems are insoluble because they result from
contradictory demands of the ego process. As soon as one sees that these
demands result from “the machine at work,” one ceases to be fooled by
them. As with the magician’s trick that has been exposed, we are not
deceived again.
So one has to see that the ego process is always engaged in setting
up the illusion of “what should be,” dressing it up in alluring colors, and
pushing away “what is,” hiding it in frightening and ugly disguises. But
nothing can be done without our understanding what is, in its totality, at
least as far as we are experiencing it. As soon as we push aside a certain
part of what is in our experiencing, in favor of the illusion of what
Structure-Process and the Ego
209

should be, we are in a state of contradiction, which leads immediately to
an internal conﬂict. We then try to escape the conﬂict because it is very
unpleasant, seeking to cover it up by introducing confused ideas and
feelings, and by distracting our attention, drawing it to something else
instead. But then our escapes, being confused, lead to even more and
more conﬂicts, which in turn must be escaped. Thus, the whole process
tangles up, in a sort of cancerous growth of contradiction, conﬂict,
escape, and confusion, until it ﬁlls the whole mind. This is the typical
state of most human beings in “civilized” society (and probably in
“primitive” societies as well).
So if we wish to see the totality of understanding, we cannot be in a
state of contradiction and conﬂict, as this destroys all understanding.
Conﬂict fragments the mind, and is therefore incompatible with a state
of understanding, in which the mind sees a totality, by functioning as a
totality. People do not realize the importance of this. Some people
imagine that one can have a true “intellectual” understanding, while the
emotions are in a twisted and tangled state, while others (sentimental-
ists) think that one can be full of love and good feelings, while the
intellect is totally mixed up. Actually there is no thought without feel-
ings (including motivation) and no feeling without thought. Thus, some
artists think that they appreciate a picture by feeling and not by intellect
also. But if this were the case, why should one picture have a different
effect than another? Is it not evident that there is a complex mental
process of seeing the picture? This process is probably too rapid for
such a viewer to appreciate, so that all he sees is a sort of afterglow of
emotion. But then he makes the mistake of supposing that this emotion
is all there is. So he becomes confused about his way of viewing
pictures.
Understanding evidently requires a state of truth in emotion, in
intellect, and in the whole mind. It takes the mind in its totality to
perceive the totality of anything. The fragmented mind inevitably sees
in parts, while the person who begins with the part thereby fragments
his mind. In a sense, to perceive the totality of understanding, one must
be a totality. This requires that one see through the totality of illusion.
Perhaps a man who is doing this will naturally, without any further
action on his part, enter a state in which his mind is a totality. Therefore
he will realize the totality of understanding, and in this way, he will
perceive it.
Now, why is there illusion? The possibility of creating illusion is the
precondition of intelligence. Thus, if we look into a mirror, we may ﬁrst
perceive a man. A partial perception (rays reﬂected in a certain pattern
210
Individual Orders

from the mirror) awakens a perception of the whole man in our minds.
In this regard, we create our perceptions, which always look real at the
moment that they are created (as they do also for the insane or drugged
man, who perceives very convincing delusions). But then a healthy man
is always trying also to perceive the truth and falsity of his perceptions.
Thus, one very quickly sees that the man behind a mirror cannot be real
because he is “imitating” us too closely. So in a fraction of a second, we
no longer see another man. Instead, we see a mirror that is reﬂecting
ourselves. We have seen the true meaning of the illusion. But some
illusions are so good that we don’t see through them. They may there-
fore lead us into confused and idiotic behavior.
It is clear then that the most important perception of all is the
perception of what is true and what is false. Without this, all else
becomes meaningless and confused. But this is just what society is
always trying to destroy, by saying that certain things (religion,
authority, family, nationalism, etc.) are too sacred or important to be
questioned. As long as a person thinks that something else is more
important than to see what is true and what is false, freshly from
moment to moment, then that person is evidently very badly con-
fused. Such confusion must lead to contradiction, conﬂict, and escape,
with unlimited spreading of further confusion through his whole life.
And a society constituted of such people leads to confusion to the
power of 2000 million, which is a correct description of our world
today.
The major source of illusion is the response of memory. We not only
remember pictures and words, but our memories are also accompanied
by active emotions. Thus, if I am angry at X, when I see him again (or a
man who reminds me of him), then the memory is accompanied by a
little nervous signal that arouses the reﬂex of anger. I suggest that you
watch for it next time you are angry. The powerful emotions of anger,
fear, envy, and many others can be seen mechanically to be following
little signals, as if a switch were being pressed. So the illusion is that we
are seeing actual experience, when the fact is that it is mostly a “replay”
of past experience, adjusted somewhat to present circumstances. This
replay is then recorded again, to add to the previous memory, thus
cutting the “grooves” deeper. The more we experience in this way, the
deeper we get stuck in illusion. And all the while, we are confused into
thinking that we are basing our actions on “experience itself.” The older
a man is, the more “experienced” he is in this way, and the more sure he
is that he “knows” what he is doing. So the essence of his life is now
constituted of a series of illusions.
Structure-Process and the Ego
211

One sees through this illusion as one sees the illusory character of a
mirror image – it lacks independence. As the image follows its object, so
our false emotions follow these little signals. It is only necessary to be
fully aware and attentive, and then the illusion loses its power. For no
man will base his actions on an illusion that he has really seen through
(i.e., if the whole of him has seen through it). Perhaps it is like a movie
theatre. As long as your eyes are only on the screen, you “identify” with
the characters, and feel that they are winning, losing, good, bad, etc. But
on broadening your vision, you see that they are shadows on a screen.
The same is true about the whole ego process.
Ego begins with the creation of illusion. How does this happen?
Man evolved from an animal. His thalamus (central brain) is not so
different from that of animals. Now, the animal’s brain is more or less
adequate for his normal surroundings. Thus, if he is afraid, he runs. If he
is angry, he ﬁghts. But in man this thalamus is now surrounded by an
intelligent cortex that can create illusions. These illusions can either be
pleasant or frightening to the thalamus. When they are pleasant, the
thalamus sends a signal to the cortex to produce some more of the same.
When they are frightening, an urgent and disturbing signal is sent out,
and the cortex is unable to function properly. Confusion results, and the
cortex gets busy creating new illusions until the thalamus is satisﬁed.
But reality is always bursting in, so that a man in the state of illusion is
always being presented with crisis after crisis, and eventually tends to
get into a state of chronic fear or anxiety.
It is no use blaming the poor thalamus, as it was never prepared for
living in an environment consisting mainly of the cortex. Nor can the
cortex help it, because it cannot function properly if the thalamus is
always sending out urgent signals that mix it up. Thus, it no longer tries
to see what is true and what is false.
Perhaps the above problem can be solved only if the whole mind
understands what is happening, and sees through the mechanical char-
acter of the signals from the thalamus, as well as the illusory character of
what the cortex “cooks up” to keep the thalamus quiet. To see this will
amount to a psychological mutation in man. In other words, man is
already a totality, physically speaking, in his mind. But because he does
not realize this in his awareness, the thalamus and cortex each operate
as if they were independent “minds,” presented with problems from
“outside.” In this way, each confuses the other, in contrast to an animal
without much cortex where the thalamus by itself functions sensibly.
When man realizes his actual totality, then he will be a totally different
being, since the thalamus and cortex will work together in an integrated
212
Individual Orders

whole, giving rise to a feeling of love, and an act of understanding. (This
may perhaps be the totality of understanding.)
Saral and I send our regards to you, to Sheila and the girls.
Yours, Dave
P.S. Thanks for returning the manuscript on Understanding in Science.
Dec. 3, 1962
Dear Isidore,
Thank you very much for your last letter. There is little that I can add to
what you said about the “I–me” problem, as well as about fear as the
reaction to losing something with which one is identiﬁed as pleasant,
desirable, necessary, etc. Perhaps the main point that I could stress is the
illusory character of the division between “I” and “me.” If you are suf-
ﬁciently aware, you will sense a “signal” to which you react with fear,
envy, desire, etc. That is to say, in the “play-back” of memory, there is a
little signal, which means, “This is terribly important, urgent, and essen-
tial.” It is this signal that creates the illusion of the ego process. For we
react with emotions, just as if we were electronic machines. Each reac-
tion is “recorded” in memory, thus strengthening the signal, effectively
“cutting the grooves deeper.”
Now once the emotion gets started, the signal is drowned out. But
you can become aware of the signal, either in a real reaction of the ego
process, or in an “experimental” reaction. By the latter, I refer to an
experiment as follows: Begin with some ego characteristic that you note
is common in your life. For example, one may have a sense that one
needs the approval of other people. Just to see what happens, imagine to
yourself that someone who is important to you is expressing disap-
proval of you (better yet, try to remember such a situation). You will
probably discover every kind of emotional reaction, from anger and fear
to the urge to defend yourself. If you can think of a problem on which
you really did make a mistake, you will discover your mind fabricating
every kind of confused justiﬁcation, trying to prove that you really did
right. Besides, there will be a cloud of ﬂuctuating urges whose meaning
is: “This is a dreary, boring, unpleasant, frightening, unimportant sub-
ject. There are many other things that should be done ﬁrst, before
coming to this.” Before you know it, you are liable to ﬁnd yourself
thinking of something else.
The value of such an experiment is to reveal the process-structure of
Structure-Process and the Ego
213

confusion, as it actually operates in the mind, below the level of rational
thought. Freud has spoken of “repression” of unwanted desires, but I
think that a better description is that they are smothered in a buzzing
cloud of confused ideas and feelings, in which they can be mistaken for
something that is less alarming. Even “deeply” repressed feelings fre-
quently come out in momentary “jabs” and “jibs” that dig and needle us,
setting us off on new trains of thought, action, and mood, without our
realizing why we are doing it. The reason we don’t realize this is that
what we are really doing is quickly covered up by such a cloud of
confusion.
The value of a detailed awareness of this process, without approval
or disapproval, is that we can see that the whole process is an absolute
sham and illusion. We do this, in effect, by working the “buttons” that
control the creation of the illusion. We can see that when we purposely
imagine a certain situation of disapproval, the “signal” is produced, and
then the whole complex of emotions and blatantly false ideas follows.
The signal may be felt as a peculiar nervous tension that is hard to
describe in words (a sort of uncomfortable, tense, dissatisﬁed sensation,
vibrating a bit in a peculiar way). You can learn to recognize it by seeing
that the emotions and ideas always follow variations in the signals as if
they were mechanical reactions to pressing a button.
If you are sufﬁciently aware of the mechanicalness of the process,
recognizing the signal, and being intensely conscious of each little emo-
tion in all the nervous tensions, how the thought process shamelessly
invents thousands of ﬁctions in order to assuage the urgent and
unpleasant signal, then you will ﬁnd the process changing. It will
unfold its true character, “ﬂowering,” and then “dying away” like a leaf
falling from a tree. But you must keep this awareness up, as the mind
contains millions of such “weeds” and new ones are always being intro-
duced by experience. I would like to compare the process described
above to a modern “weed killing chemical” that makes weeds die by
forcing them to grow so fast that they exhaust themselves.
Now very often in such investigations, you will ﬁnd that the mind
is trying to resist or disapprove of or get rid of something that is very
unpleasant or frightening. But despite all efforts, it just won’t go away. If
you become intensely aware of each little nervous tension, pang of fear,
feeling of annoyance, etc., as it ﬂuctuates and changes, you will begin to
sense a relationship, between these and various ideas and feelings ﬂitting
through the back of your mind. Slowly, the “hard-centered” something
that you want to get rid of begins to unfold and reveal its structure. As it
opens up, you always see something amazing. You yourself are sending
214
Individual Orders

in little signals of desire that are keeping the whole conﬂict going. What
happens is that there is something you want – call it A. This something
entails B. But you don’t want B. Nevertheless, the ego process, being
childish, tries to get rid of B while keeping A. Thus, it sends tremendous
disapproval and negations against B. But this starts to get rid of A too. So
it then sends in more urgent signals to hold onto A as well. This is all
possible because, through confusion one loses sight of the relationship
between A and B, as well as of the signal that is keeping A going and
thus generating B. This buzzing cloud of confusion is generated by the
mind, in response to another urgent signal, with which one reacts to the
unpleasant fact that you can’t have A without B. A great many conﬂicts
have this childishly elementary structure.
In this connection, it is important to distinguish between the word
and its meaning. A word is only a noise or a set of marks that evokes
various memories, associations, desires, and so on. As long as you are
only “thinking in words,” you are really playing with a symbolic prob-
lem. After reasoning it out, one can feel satisﬁed that it is “solved.” But
actually, the emotional tangle and confusion is going on as before,
except that one has added the further confusion that verbal reasoning
has solved the problem. What is needed is that the words shall awaken
the real feelings, the real process-structure of the ego, so that one can be
aware of it in concrete reality. In this process, the words should drop
away, as they tend to become an illusory substitute for real perception.
After going this far, one can observe a conﬂict of the type just
described. Then you can say to yourself, “This conﬂict that is being
observed has evidently only an illusory separation from the ‘I’ that
seems to be observing it.” Then you can ask yourself, “Is it possible to
see that I am the buzzing cloud of confusion and conﬂict that is going
on?” You may get an extraordinary sense of dissolving of all that is
perceived. But I ﬁnd that the process tends to be limited because a kind
of fear and unwillingness to allow complete dissolution of the ego sets in.
It is interesting to speculate on the probable origin of the ego pro-
cess in the human race. There is evidence that modern man, with essen-
tially his present brain capacity, came on the scene not more than 30,000
years ago. At this stage, the poor creature was ignorant. The animal is
ignorant too, but it does not possess a cortex that can remind it of
unpleasant dangers, real and imaginary, as well as death, while at other
times creating wonderful illusions of satisfactions, apparently to be
obtained by certain actions, and so on. So the animal can sit peacefully
until there is actual danger, in which case it either runs or ﬁghts. But
our poor primal “Homo-sapiens” must experience fear of the known
Structure-Process and the Ego
215

and the unknown as well as desire for satisfaction of a kind that never
would enter the animal’s brain. Being confused, he starts to invent
imaginary “magical” means of dealing with dangers, and bringing him
these satisfactions. At ﬁrst, this is not so different from what a child
does in his day-dreams. But eventually, man’s imagination runs away
with him. The magical forces that he has invented seem to escape him,
and disclose themselves as even more dangerous than the unknown
dangers that he ﬁrst wanted to escape. So he must propitiate them. He
confuses his mind even more, now being afraid even to look at what he
has termed “taboo.” But he doesn’t see that it is all a game that he is
playing with himself. How can he? After all, magical dangers are easily
confused with real dangers that abound in his life, and there is no easy
way at his disposal to study the problem properly.
Gradually man starts to accumulate tools, techniques, knowledge,
language, weapons, etc. He develops agriculture, aggregates himself into
stable communities, smelts metals, is able to guard against hunger by
storing food, etc. This apparently happened in North Africa about 9000
years ago to 6000 years ago. V. Gordon Childe, in his It Happened In
History, suggests that this was a great period of creative development in
man.
Now up to this time, war had not developed, beyond occasional
raids and quarrels. Slavery wasn’t worth it, as a man consumed almost
as much as he could produce. But with growing wealth, plunder became
inviting. Weapons made raids practicable and slavery was now technic-
ally feasible. At some time, there began to occur to some people the
brilliant idea that they could live off others. Thus started the modern age
of war, plunder, slavery, and exploitation of man by men. Childe gives
evidence that for thousands of years following this change, creativity
almost dried up, as man began to look up to the “hero,” the conqueror,
the slave-holder, while technique and the arts were left to the despised
slave. Even in Greek and Roman times, there was the same tendency,
and only much later was there a change, allowing a self-respecting man
seriously to interest himself in arts and techniques. Childe suggests that
except for slavery, man could have reached modern technical levels long
before the time of the Greeks.
It seems to me that the development of plunder, slavery, and
exploitation as man’s main mode of life determined the modern form of
the ego process. Even when slavery was given up, exploitation remained
the essential feature of man’s relation to man, which it still is today.
Once this mode was started, man was doomed to ever increasing confu-
sion, for he had to justify his mode of life to himself. This is in fact
216
Individual Orders

impossible, except by continual recourse to confusion. For how else can
you justify the arbitrary authority of some people over others? You can
pretend that God or nature ordered it, that the others are inferior, that
we are superior, etc. But once you start on this line, you can never allow
yourself to think straight again, for fear that the truth will come out. You
must glorify the “hero” who murders and plunders, while on the other
hand, you tell the child that he must be honest, treat people fairly, and so
on. Just this one point is enough to destroy the minds of most children.
How can you square up the emotion of love and truth with that of
plundering an enemy, stealing his wealth, murdering helpless people,
and enslaving others? No wonder even brilliant people like Aristotle
regarded slaves as basically inferior. How else could they stand life in
their society?
The basic character of the ego process is to continue in the midst of
superﬁcial change. At its core is the desire to be satisﬁed. Since man
began to project his satisfaction into an imagined future, he also needed
to feel secure. For he is always seeing causes, real or imagined, that
threaten his projected satisfactions and promise projected pains and
dangers instead. The fear reﬂex is thus set in motion. This confuses the
mind, which looks urgently for solutions. Usually these solutions put
man in an ultimately more dangerous position than he was to begin
with. For what else can be expected of a confused mind? Then his fear
reﬂexes are activated again with still greater intensity. In this way, society
has been developing into a situation of ever mounting fear. The move-
ment is zigzag, with alleviations and improvements from time to time.
But on the whole, each move of man to increase his security has brought
him ﬁnally to greater insecurity than ever, until today, the “security” of
atomic weapons threatens man with annihilation.
I would say that man is suddenly entering a situation where the
whole idea of this mode of life is evidently absurd. It always was absurd,
but many men had the illusion that they could get satisfaction out of it.
It usually took a man 30 or 40 or 50 years to ﬁnd out that this is false,
and that life is “vanity” after all. But today, even the young people feel it,
perhaps even more keenly than the older ones. Mankind has been in a
chronic state of crisis for 6000 years or more. Now the crisis is acute,
general, and inescapable. The old illusions don’t seem to work very well
any more, nor do the new illusions either. So mankind is presented with
a unique opportunity to drop the ego process. This opportunity arises
out of a unique danger. He may annihilate himself or degenerate to the
level of a confused beast if he does not drop the ego process in a reason-
able period of time.
Structure-Process and the Ego
217

Best regards to you and to Sheila and the girls. Saral will be there in a
few days to talk directly with you.
As ever, Dave
Dec. 10, 1962
Dear Isidore
I am continuing the letter I sent you a few weeks ago.
The ﬁrst thing I would like to do is to bring in the idea of structure-
process. Structure is the static aspect of process (a kind of projection).
Thus, every animal has a skeletal structure, which is the outcome of a
long process of evolution of the species, as well as of growth of the
individual from the embryo. This structure is in turn a basis for further
movement and development in the process of the animal’s life, and in
the life of the species. So process and structure are two aspects of one
movement and existence. Besides, structure is maintained by a balance
of process at a lower level. Thus, the bone material is always wearing out
and being replaced, but the bone-structure continues in the process,
with a slow general change as the animal gets older.
All structures are based on a repetition of similar elements, in def-
inite relationships. These elements are subject to variations so that there
is not, in general, a perfect symmetry. Even in physics, with its crystal
structure of ideally repetitious and symmetrical molecular cells, there is
in reality a set of dislocations, which constitute variations, irregularities,
changes in the crystal. Real crystals are always a repetition of similar
elements with differences and variations.
The relationships of elements are important in a structure. Basically,
they must ﬁt together, one element against another, to form an inte-
grated totality, that continues to be a totality as it functions, operates,
and moves. This is evident for the skeleton of an animal. In a crystal,
elements ﬁt well enough to form a solid body, all of whose parts are
integrated so that it behaves as a whole, and not as a collection of
disjoint elements.
Each structure has a kind of order, a set of sequences of elements
that are naturally most immediately related, as well as breaks as vari-
ations in this order. These variations open up a tremendous range of
potentialities for the structures that can be built out of a limited number
of kinds of similar elements. The patterns that are in the structures have
a tendency to repetition, but also to breaks and changes, and to surpris-
ing new aspects.
218
Individual Orders

Now, this structure is but an aspect of the over-all process of inner
and outer movement, by which it develops, maintains itself, and eventu-
ally falls apart (or “dies”). Thus, the process has a set of related stages in
a natural order, with breaks and variations opening up new potential-
ities. There is a tendency to a pattern of repetitious cycles (e.g., in the
successive generations of animal life), but the pattern breaks, opening
up new directions of living for the individual, and evolution for the
species. The basic process is always creating, maintaining, and eventu-
ally destroying various aspects of a structure, ultimately replacing them
with something new. On the other hand, the existence of structure
expresses the fact that the process is not utterly chaotic, but can be
understood in a natural way, if we can somehow begin with the basic
principle of relationship, order, potentiality, repetition, and breaks in the
process, and then go on to elaborate and articulate the structure in our
minds. This is an important aspect of understanding a structure-process,
rather than simply to deal with disjointed and arbitrary fragments
“plastered” or “cemented” together in an ill-digested conglomeration.
The problem of structure is basic to my work in physics. In essence,
I am trying to ﬁnd the general principle of the process-structure that
can abstract as time-space. If I can do this, then the laws of physics, the
nature of the so-called “elementary” particles, their modes of interaction,
and many other things will be understood, in the elaboration and articu-
lation of this general principle.
Now, what I want to discuss here is the structure-process of the ego.
We already saw that the ego is not a permanent entity, but a process,
with continually changing and mutually contradictory aspects. But it
evidently also has a structure, in the sense described above. There are
basic elements in the process, related in certain ways, in a natural order,
with breaks giving rise to many potentialities, with patterns of repeti-
tious cycles, and changes into new structures.
Firstly, we must note that the process-structure level of the ego is
not generally perceived with our usual training and conditioning, which
leads one to regard the ego as an entity, or better, an “identity,” with
permanent or perhaps slowly changing features. In my previous letter, I
indicated some experiments by which one might see this process-
structure, below the illusory “entity-level” of the ego.
The illusion of the ego as an entity is based on confusion. Now,
confusion may be explained roughly as unperceived contradiction. How
is it possible for us not to perceive contradiction? I think that we do it by
a process of identiﬁcation and fragmentation. This goes in a number of
stages. Let us take as an example a person who gets angry, and goes into
Structure-Process and the Ego
219

a ﬁt of resentment, rage, pique, self-justiﬁcation, and what not. The
stages are roughly these:
(a) At ﬁrst, there is a “signal” producing a very powerful total reac-
tion of anger and rage. This signal has the effective meaning that “This
is terribly, overwhelmingly important. You can’t treat me in this way. I
am a special creature with rights of his own. I am not like other people,
but my desires, my habits, my urges, my self-esteem must have special
consideration and I shall engage in every manner of violent activity
until I get what is due to me.” This is the ﬁrst stage of confusion. The
person introduces a false fragmentation of the whole problem, into his
rights and other people’s rights, etc., along with a false identiﬁcation of
all his desires and urges, seeing them as if he were really wholeheartedly
and single-mindedly devoted to the object of his anger. As yet, however,
there is no conﬂict, because the “anger signal” produces such a powerful
response that the person is not yet aware of the rest of his being, not all
of which agrees with the implications of the emotion of anger.
(b) In the next stage, the person begins to glimpse that in his anger,
he may destroy a great deal that he values, and wants to keep. So he is in
a state of conﬂict. He wants to hold onto his anger, while rejecting certain
inevitable consequences of this anger. This is a continuation of the
childish “magical” notions, whereby one can exorcise what one doesn’t
want while keeping what one does want. In this way, he hopes to get rid
of the painful conﬂict.
(c) He starts to look for solutions which give the appearance of
keeping his anger while he gets rid of the bad consequences. Thus, his
mind invents thousands of reasons justifying his anger as “natural,” as
“righteous indignation,” and so forth. He says he will “teach the other
fellow a lesson.” He imagines that he is powerful enough to overcome all
obstacles. Or he plots revenge in an imagined future. A buzzing cloud of
confused ideas and feelings develops, in which he can get lost, mixing
up the dangerous implications of his anger with something else that is
less alarming. He has thus “escaped” his conﬂict. But now he must pro-
tect his escape. He must keep on proving to himself the false thesis that
he is righteous, strong enough to have his own way, etc.
So here I have given a part of the process-structure of the ego.
Fragmentation with identiﬁcation lead to a narrowing of attention, on
the basis of which the individual as a whole can throw himself into one
aspect of the ego’s desires. But soon, he glimpses contradictory aspects,
which are not compatible with the realization of the implications of the
aspect with which he is identiﬁed. He enters a painful, unpleasant
conﬂict. Powerful signals confuse his mind, leading him to invent false
220
Individual Orders

and illusory escapes, eventually giving rise to a twisted, tangled, buzzing
cloud of confused ideas and feelings in which the conﬂict is almost lost
(except for vague and disquieting feelings of anxiety, guilt, fear, regret,
annoyance, frustration, boredom, etc.).
Now, in this way the whole structure has been described in words
and thoughts. But this is only a reﬂection, a “shadow image” of the real
process-structure. One of the biggest confusions is that we identify the
real problem with its “word image.” One “solves” the “word image”
problems, but one pays no attention to the unpleasant fact that the real
problem is going on as before, only worse, because one has added to the
previous general confusion the additional confusion between the word
image of confusion and the real process-structure of confusion. So one is
confused about confusion. In this way, by identifying oneself in an
imaginary and illusory way with the word image in the process of
thought, one in reality fragments oneself into the active but unseen
“emotional” side, producing effective signals, along with an inactive but
visible “intellectual” side, in which all is rationality, sweetness and light,
and pure love for humanity.
A further confusion that can arise is the notion that there exists an
entity “confusion,” a sort of “beast” against which the ego is battling. In
fact, it is the individual as a whole who is confused. Confusion has no
more of a “positive” existence as a separate entity than do arrivals and
departures of railway trains, apart from the process-structure of the
railway system as a whole. The fact is that there is an individual who is
carrying out an ego process. In this process, the whole mind produces
signals that excite the reﬂexes of conﬂict and confusion, along with the
illusion that there is an “observing, choosing ego,” with a “will,” who is
battling against a confusion that has some origin external to it. So con-
fusion is just an aspect of the individual carrying out his ego process.
(Incidentally, I think it is instructive to say “the individual carrying out
his ego process.” This stresses that there is no separate ego process, but
that it is more like an “act” or a compulsive ritual that the individual is
in the habit of carrying out.)
Basically, the further process-structure of the ego is then that in the
awareness, there is an illusion that there is an independently existing
conﬂict, against which the “observing, controlling ego” is battling. In
fact, if you will watch for the signals, you will see that the conﬂict is only
a response to the signals, as the electric light responds to pressing the
switch. In a similar way, the illusion of an observing, controlling ego is
also projected into the awareness, in response to another aspect of the
same set of signals, that sets the reﬂexes of conﬂict going. But one can
Structure-Process and the Ego
221

become aware of the character of the whole business, by understanding
its process-structure.
When this happens, the process-structure begins naturally, of its
own accord, to fade away, without the need for any actions by the illu-
sory ego. Indeed, the awareness never acts. Rather, the individual, with
his body and mind, is in fact a totality, which responds naturally and of
its own accord (at least when the nervous system and brain are not
damaged) to the total extent of the awareness. If the awareness is con-
fused, the response will be likewise confused. A clear awareness
requires no further action, for the individual naturally acts clearly if he
is clearly aware of all that is relevant in relation to what he is doing.
If there did not exist a natural way by which the mind could become
aware of its own confusion, thus bringing the latter to an end, then
humanity would have no way out. For it is evidently impossible that the
ego process can bring its own confusion to an end, by an act of will. To
try to do this is only to continue and enhance the confusion, which is in
essence that there exists an ego that can make “choices” and exert its
“will.”
It is very important then to get below the usual level of thoughts,
words, and feelings, coming to a direct awareness of the process-
structure of the ego. This one obtains by learning the relationships of
various feelings and thoughts (what is the signal, what is the reﬂex reac-
tion to this signal), what is the order (how cause becomes effect and
effect becomes cause), what is the break (a sudden needling, nagging,
jabbing, nervous tension can switch you from one aspect of desire to a
contradictory aspect), what are the repetitious cyclic patterns (going
back to childhood), what are the breaks in the patterns (something for-
merly pleasant develops a painful conﬂict, etc.). You see the illusions
behind our emotions and thoughts exposed, perceiving, for example,
that one is engaged in a sham struggle against confusion, conﬁned only
to the verbal and intellectual level, while the real process of confusion is
allowed to go on as before.
Soon you begin to wonder if words and thoughts really mean any-
thing at all. Actually, they very often do not (the same holds for feelings).
Our words function as a sort of “living card index system,” such that
when the right “button” is pressed, the memory projects pictures,
sounds, smells, and feelings in such a profusion that we easily confuse
them with real perceptions. These projections include “action” signals,
and signals that lead us to mistake what is desired for what is true. So
what happens is that we respond to fresh experience by trying to
accommodate it into our “card index system,” not noticing that we have
222
Individual Orders

replaced actuality with a fantasy having a superﬁcial resemblance to
what is really there.
Now, the proper function of words and thoughts is either to reﬂect
what is actually perceived or to awaken an actual perception.
Unfortunately, we often use words and thoughts as a substitute for
perception in the manner described above (as a bureaucrat might tend
to identify people with the data about them in his card index system).
So the important point is to notice that there is a level below words and
thoughts (a structure-process level) in which action, thought, and feeling
are determined.
We must see this ﬁrst, and then try to reﬂect it in words (if we wish
to communicate what we see). So words are only an abstract reﬂection of
the structure-process level. It is wrong to allow them to become the
“buttons” that set up the signals based on memory, which lead to further
thought and feeling, and to action. For this in reality leads only to
confusion, since in fact action is always determined at the structure-
process level. Hence, it is only an illusion if we imagine that our words
and thoughts are determining action. What actually happens in this
case is that remembered signals at the structure-process level are “re-
played” and determine action in a way that usually escapes conscious
notice. So we “say one thing and do another.” This common habit is not
the outcome of viciousness, but rather, of the very general kind of con-
fusion described above.
The deepest aspect of the structure-process of the ego is the desire
for what is pleasant, secure, self-expansive, and dislike of the unpleas-
ant, the insecure, the uncertain, that which decreases the self. One would
like to have a permanent state of pleasure, peace, gratiﬁcation, interest-
ing things going on, etc. All of this is united in an automatic reﬂex. As I
indicated in earlier letters, there is probably a signal from the primitive
“animal-like” brain in the center (the thalamus), going to the outer cor-
tex, and tending to identify with the pleasant aspects of the ideas and
images produced there, and against the unpleasant ones, thus starting a
movement of fragmentation of the functioning of the cortex. But it is
not really fragmented. Rather, the cortex is always actually a totality, and
indeed thalamus and cortex together are always a totality. But because of
lack of a broad and deep attention with understanding, the individual is
not aware of this totality, but only of the aspects as fragments, within
which are identiﬁed further aspects that are in reality quite abstract.
Now, the whole thought, feeling, and action of the individual
responds to this whole awareness. Because the latter is wrong, the
response is confused. Thus, if I imagine that the reﬂection of the world in
Structure-Process and the Ego
223

a pool signiﬁes an “upside-down world,” and if I go to explore this
upside-down world, I will get a nasty shock as I enter the water. Simi-
larly, if I imagine that the pleasant aspects of the images and feelings
produced by the cortex can be separated from the unpleasant ones, and
permanently identiﬁed, “taped,” and “secured,” then I am in for some
even more nasty shocks than in the case of the illusion of an upside-
down world. For soon it will turn out that the more the thalamus sends
in signals building up the pleasant aspects, the more the unpleasant
aspects will also be built up. As the thalamus sends in signals to
decrease or destroy the unpleasant aspects of the thoughts and feelings
of the cortex, it will interfere with the pleasant aspects, because in real-
ity the two are inseparably connected. Then I will have to strive all the
harder in favor of the pleasant aspects. As the conﬂict builds up, there
will be an extremely unpleasant sensation of effort frustrated; but here,
the thalamus sends in signals that start the cortex cooking up escapes
that alleviate the pain, thus creating still more confusion.
Now just as it is an illusion to separate the pleasant from the
unpleasant, the secure from the insecure, so it is an illusion to separate
the urges of the thalamus from the activities of the cortex. The thalamus
is stimulated by the creations of the cortex, and these are in turn stimu-
lated by the signals from the thalamus. In the cortex, the idea is pro-
duced that the signals that one feels are the operation of one’s “very
self,” something that it would be senseless and meaningless to deny or
question. And the reason for this is clear. For the thalamus cannot
“force” the cortex to do anything. Rather, in the presence of these sig-
nals, the cortex responds naturally, and inevitably, of its own accord.
Similarly, in the presence of cortical illusions, the thalamus very natur-
ally starts to send out signals for and against various aspects of these
illusions. So there is an appearance of complete spontaneity, as if the
individual could not conceivably do otherwise. And indeed, without an
integrated awareness, all of this behavior is natural.
But what is unnatural is the separation of thought and feeling, of
the content of the mind from the thalamic urges that try to fragment
this content, by identifying for and against various of its aspects. If this
is the relationship projected into the awareness, then the natural
response of the whole mind to the wrong “picture” will be to increase
the confusion even more. In this way, a person can get lost in confusion.
But as he understands and perceives the real process-structure of the
illusion, it is this understanding that is present in the awareness. As a
result, the whole mind responds naturally, by ceasing to stimulate the
thalamic urges and by ceasing to create cortical illusions accompanied
224
Individual Orders

by an urgent signal meaning “this is the truth.” So the mind will natur-
ally start to clear up its own confusion, which latter will die away like a
dead leaf. When this happens, the mind will function of its own accord,
as a totality. The creations of the cortex will be accompanied by a per-
ception of the truth and falsity, along with an understanding that pleas-
ure and pain are not very relevant. The thalamus will send in signals to
build up the true creations, and make the false creations die out. This is
the intellectual aspect of the feeling of love, which attaches to nothing at
all, for or against, and which wants only the truth.
If that happens, then fears will come to an end. For fear is a reﬂex
that is set in movement when something that is identiﬁed as so neces-
sary by the thalamic signals is seen to be threatened. The fear reﬂex
causes the whole person to seek every possible means of protecting
what is regarded as necessary, or failing this, to create illusions of escape
from the approaching danger. Thus, fear confuses, corrodes and cor-
rupts the mind.
It is worth experimenting with fear. Bring to mind any real fear that
bothers you (death, illness, loneliness, etc.). Be intensely aware of all the
pangs, nervous vibrations, variations of nervous tensions, the racing
heart, and so forth. This is the process-structure level of fear. Be aware of
the relationships of these pangs to thoughts that ﬂit through the back of
your mind. This will help expose the process-structure in all its detail. Be
aware of the order of the fear-feelings, how one tends to give rise to
another, of the breaks in the feeling, its recurrent repetitious pattern,
and the changes in this pattern. Gradually, you will understand how
mechanical it all is. Sometimes, there may be a literal “explosion” of fear
sensations, creating a “hole” in the middle of the sensations. This “hole”
expands, and the fear is dead. But as you return to the word “fear,” to the
memory and recognition of fear, the old signals get to work and it comes
to life again. But after an hour or two of this, you will learn a great deal
about what fear really is, how it is united in the mechanical response of
protection of what is desired, and of how attachment to desire is also a
mechanical process.
Now, this brings us to the problem of thought. If you watch yourself
thinking, you will ﬁnd that it does not go in a simple straightforward
way. Suppose you have a problem, and the answer is not clear. You will
ﬁnd that the memory is being searched. But soon you may realize that
the answer is not directly available. Perhaps it has to be reasoned out
from what you already know. Watch this reasoning process. The mind is
experimenting, creating trial solutions and seeing if they work, if they
are logical, etc. But you will notice that the choice of these solutions is
Structure-Process and the Ego
225

largely determined by emotional signals. Is this idea pleasant or proﬁt-
able to you? Is it too disturbing? Does it reﬂect well on you? Does it do
what you want? Does it create a feeling of security? Or does it make you
uncertain, doubtful? Does it suggest that you did wrongly, that you are
stupid, selﬁsh, cowardly, or mistaken?
Long before the mind has time to apply “logical” tests, you will see
that it rejects the unpleasant ideas, and builds up a buzzing cloud of
confused feelings and further thoughts supporting the pleasant ideas.
Thus, thought proceeds tortuously – and it must do so, because ﬁrstly, it
is based on motivation. Any motivation is a thalamic urge, identifying
for certain things and against others, quite indifferently to the question
of truth or falsity, as well as logical coherence. Thus all motivation must
limit the range of truth. No matter how wide this range is, it must be
limited. Indeed, no thought is possible without some kind of motivation.
Every motive is an arbitrary intrusion into the process, which will
ﬁnally lead to contradiction (since as we have seen, there are always
hidden connections between what we want and what we don’t want, so
that our motivation must ﬁnally make what we originally wanted come
out as what we also do not want).
The confusing role of motivation can be seen in another way, as
suggested by Krishnamurti. Every unsolved problem is felt by the indi-
vidual as a challenge. He responds to the challenge out of his condition-
ing. In other words, his “active memories” determine what he will
regard as the problem and what he regards as a satisfactory solution. For
example, if I am a government ofﬁcial, I may be presented with the
problem of how much money doctors should spend in the Health Ser-
vice. If my conditioning tells me “to save money is the main point,” I
will cut down what is spent on drugs. That is my solution, my response
to the challenge. But then, as a result many people may become ser-
iously ill. There may be much misery, and even worse, money will be
lost in the long run. My response to the challenge was therefore too
narrow. It was determined by my motivation, which is the outcome of
my conditioning. So my thought did not go “straight”; it proceeded
tortuously to get a result that would satisfy my conditioning, rather than
solve the real problem. And all thought has similar limitations, however
broad, deep, natural, or precise it may be. It is only in the moment of
understanding that these limitations cease to operate. But usually, if our
ego will consent to get out of the way for a moment (after a long struggle
that convinces us that the answer is not to be found by “talking it
through”), it quickly returns to utilize the result of understanding in
order to realize its old motivations once again. Our problem is whether
226
Individual Orders

we can have a sustained state of “non-thinking,” i.e., of understanding. It
is only this that can solve the problems of the modern world, which are
no longer mainly the mechanical ones of ﬁnding means of surviving in
comfort. These problems have in essence already been solved. So under-
standing is what is called for.
Now, thought is inherently involved in the process of time. One
begins to think because of a challenge, a problem that one senses. The
previous adjustments of the ego process are perceived to be inadequate,
life batters down our old refuges, etc. So something must be done. The
ﬁrst stage is to perceive or sense a problem. Here, it is important to see
the real problem. In science, for example, an experiment in effect “asks a
question of nature.” Half the battle is over when you ask the right
questions. If you ask irrelevant questions, you will get answers that
confuse you or mix you up. But the whole of life is that way.
Now, what determines how we see the problem? As I have indi-
cated earlier, it is the response of your conditioning, the active memor-
ies playing back these emotions and stimulating confused ideas, which
tell us that we must retain certain essential relationships, pleasures, and
securities. So in this way, we respond to the challenge with a demand
(often felt only implicitly rather than expressed explicitly). Then
thought begins, as a process of seeking a means of satisfying this
demand. This process goes on over a period of time, while the demand
continues. First, the memory is searched for such a means. If this is of
no avail, associative thinking is tried. “A” calls up “B” which calls up
“C,” etc. A more sophisticated person then tries logical thinking. He
organizes, classiﬁes all his knowledge, formulates relationships, and
theoretically works out what is entailed by these formulations. If this
doesn’t work, he gives up for a while, but hopes someone else will
suggest something, or that there will be an inspiration or a new
discovery.
If the problem is really mechanical, these methods will probably
eventually turn up a solution. But in life, the problem is seldom basically
mechanical. Usually the problem is not external to the person, but really
arises in the demands of the ego process themselves, which are self-
contradictory, and therefore incapable of being satisﬁed.
Thought is incapable of understanding the demands that are its
motive power, and that determine both the questions and the kind of
answers to them that will be regarded as suitable. Even if the demands
are questioned, this is done only on the basis of new demands (e.g., for
peace, coherence, new kind of satisfaction). So if the problem is not
mechanical, thought is necessarily confused, not being able to see that
Structure-Process and the Ego
227

its basic assumptions are what create an insoluble problem. This can be
seen only when the process of thought ceases, i.e., in understanding.
One can see that time is the factor that brings in confusion in
thought. Out of the demand of the ego, one projects the essential fea-
tures of what would constitute a solution. This projection is onto an
aspect of the mind which we label “the future,” and which evokes feel-
ings of expectation, possibility, potentiality (being a part of our “feel-
ings”). In reality, it is all of course in the present, but it is the future that
we expect and hope for. This is the ﬁrst confusion in the time process –
to split a part of the mind off, and to call it “the future,” with the
implication that striving and effort are needed to bridge the gap
between what is and this so-called future. In fact, there is no such gap,
since this “future” exists now, but it is in reality only an illusory
projection.
The next step is that the mind engages in a process that takes time.
This is the second factor of confusion. For as time goes on, one con-
tinues to strive for what seems to be the same goal. But because of the
inherently contradictory character of our demands, this goal will tend to
change. Partly as a result of what is turned up in the process of thought
itself, new aspects of our demands, previously hidden in buzzing clouds
of confusion, will begin to emerge more clearly. Thus, even if by good
logical reasoning, we produce a “solution” to what seems to be the initial
demand, we ﬁnd that it doesn’t satisfy the demand in its more
developed form. Yet, we think this demand is only a continuation of
what it was. We still give it the same name. We still think that it is the
“same” demand. Thus, our confusion is always on the increase. This is
characteristic of the process of time. We identify our past and present
goals, and in order to do this, we must fragment something else that is
really one. For example, as a man gets older, his taste for the pleasures in
life alters, but he does not notice this. So instead he may say, “Things
aren’t what they used to be.” Or else he may say that the “eternal ver-
ities” are the same, but the younger generation is not as good as the
older one was.
When is the thought process correct? It is correct when the condi-
tions of the problem and the goals do not alter signiﬁcantly while the
thinking process is going on – either because of external factors, or
because of the results of thought themselves. For example, if I want to
get from A to B, I can try to ﬁnd the best means with the aid of thought.
This is possible only as long as A, B, the means available, and my goal do
not signiﬁcantly change while I am thinking. In practical life and in
scientiﬁc research, many of our problems do have this character. But as
228
Individual Orders

we approach the frontiers of knowledge, things become more confused.
It is not clear what the proper goal is. Our idea of the goal may alter, as
we do our work. What is called for here is a creative process of under-
standing, rather than to begin with a demand that is the outcome of past
experience and conditioning. Creativity does not accept the demands
that motivate thinking; but it allows the question itself to be one of the
things that must be understood. To be creative, therefore, one must not
be responding to a challenge through one’s conditioning. Rather, one
must be in a state in which this conditioning itself has ceased to operate,
because it too is understood.
This brings us to your question of “understanding of understand-
ing.” It seems to me that such an understanding must be the natural
outcome of the proper function of the mind, which, when it is not
confused, will probably understand understanding without any special
action by the ego process. So the key problem that we can start on is to
“understand non-understanding,” that is, to see the totality of contradic-
tion, conﬂict, escape, and confusion. This process, being mechanical, can
be reﬂected into thought. When it is understood, the process will stop.
Then the mind will be in a new state of totality, in which one can
become aware of the totality of understanding.
By the time you get this, Saral will be in Israel. She would like to talk
these things over with you.
Regards to Sheila and the girls, also to Saral, and to you.
As ever
Dave
P.S. I expect eventually to write an article on this topic; so could you
please save these letters.
P.P.S. It has just occurred to me that one could consider the identiﬁca-
tion of the ego itself as part of the process of confusion, as described in
this letter. One wants to feel that there is a permanent ego, and one
“identiﬁes” it with various feelings, desires, ambitions, possessions,
achievements, relationships, etc. In reality, these are changing from
moment to moment. But the ego cannot admit this, as it would destroy
the “act” on which the whole process is based. So the ego identiﬁes
itself as “ﬁxed and permanent” or else “slowly changing and develop-
ing.” But because the ego is so different from moment to moment, its
reaction to aspects of the world that are not essentially different will
also have changed. To explain these, and thus to maintain the illusion of
Structure-Process and the Ego
229

the permanence of the ego, one will have to fragment the world wrongly
and artiﬁcially, introducing false differentiation (e.g., “Today is not as
nice as yesterday” really means I don’t feel as well about today as about
yesterday). These false differentiations lead to false categories, and
therefore to further false identiﬁcations, projected onto the structure of
the world. Because I neglect my charges and identify myself as Ameri-
can, British, Israeli, Brazilian, etc., I will falsely ascribe great importance
to nationality and other differences in people, which are really only a
reﬂection of my own attitude, and I will falsely identify different resi-
dents of a given state. This projection of the ego process into one’s
perception of the world extends into every phase of life.
May 24, 1967
Dear Isidore
The news is very disturbing and we are very concerned as to what is
happening in the Middle East. We do hope the crisis will pass very soon.
Meanwhile we can only wait and see. The ﬂames of nationalism are
beginning to build up. Every Arab gets great pleasure out of identifying
with the victory of the Arabs, and pain out of their “humiliation” by the
Jews. So his mind is ready to accept any illusion, if he can only get
pleasure rather than pain. The Jews are the same, at bottom. After all,
the Jewish nation is also only an idea in the minds of various people,
that gives them a satisfying and pleasing sense of identity and security.
Any Jewish baby raised as an Arab would get great pleasure in Arab
victories, and vice versa. It is all a matter of mechanical conditioning.
The same is true of American, Russian, Chinese, or any other national-
ism. Each nation is thought of as supreme. So if two nations disagree, in
the end, there is nothing for it but war. Nationalism makes brutal and
destructive wars inevitable. The idea of peace between nations is mean-
ingless. The very existence of a nation implies a state of mind that
makes war unavoidable in the long run. And politicians, along with their
followers, are like drunken people, whose minds are befuddled with
clouds of illusions. They don’t really see what they are doing. The whole
world depends on this “tight rope walk by drunken men.” All we can
hope for is that it won’t explode in ﬂames. Perhaps if it doesn’t, people
will some day see the absurdity of the whole structure, which will col-
lapse like a bad dream.
Meanwhile, we have somehow to live, and not to get caught in
confusion by identifying with what is happening. This is often a dif-
ﬁcult and worrying thing. We do hope that all of you are all right in
230
Individual Orders

Israel. Here, in England, people may worry more, because they don’t
know what is happening. Saral called up Betty, who is very worried
about her mother, especially her reaction to leaving all of you in such a
state.
If there is anything that we can do to help, please let us know. Don’t
hesitate to write, telegraph, or telephone.
The more one watches, the more one sees how meaningless the
whole of human political action is. It is all based on a state of mind that
is not only lost in illusion, but that is the generator of illusions. This is
the state of mind that mistakes thought-induced pleasure for real joy
and creativity. I have been looking at the way it works. It is roughly like
this: All thought has a primitive or infantile component, in which a part
of its own structure is a set of sensations of pleasure and pain, along
with a tendency to present these as the basic substance of reality, at least
at the psychological level. Now, all thought, including healthy thought,
contains a tendency to formulate challenges and to seek to respond to
them, by referring to further thought. Thus, if a machine is not working,
one senses that something is wrong. This gives rise to a challenge. The
mind begins to think. Perhaps one already knows the answer in mem-
ory. Perhaps someone else knows it or it is in a book. Perhaps one can
ﬁgure it out logically from what one observes, etc. Such a challenge can
give rise to an intense feeling of urgency, and this is only natural and
proper, when there is an urgent problem to be solved.
However, when thought mistakes a part of its own structure for real
pleasure and pain in the very “substance” of one’s being, this too is
inevitably sensed as an urgent problem. Thought will explore how to
“solve” it (i.e., increase the pleasure and get rid of the pain). But in this
exploration is inevitably a structure of confusion. For the “problem” is
entirely due to thought itself. If thought stopped, the problem would
vanish. And any thought is bound to have pleasure and pain com-
ponents, therefore a similar problem. So as long as you are thinking, the
“problem” is insoluble, and as soon as you stop, there is no problem.
The difﬁculty is that when thought gets an inkling of this fact, the
“pleasure structure” begins to die out. Another level of thought, to
which the brain is at the moment not paying attention, then goes into
automatic and mechanical operation. The level of thought is like a
machine, “set” to defend what appears to be the basic substance of one’s
being. So it causes thought to manipulate itself, not to reﬂect truth and
fact, but rather, to preserve and enhance what appears to be the pleasure
in the very center of one’s being. It will do this by suppressing aware-
ness of anything that would expose the emptiness of this mode of
Structure-Process and the Ego
231

thought and therefore of the whole structure of pleasure itself. This
suppression process involves not only feelings of dullness and deadness,
but also rabbit-like darting from one subject to another, intense excite-
ment that ﬁlls the brain and destroys clear discrimination, and the
acceptance of every kind of false thought as true (i.e., fantasy, illusion,
and delusion). So one sees that the illusion of a false pleasure-center in
the mind is also the generator of an independently proliferating series
of illusions. It is an “illusion-generating illusion.” The key to sanity is to
see through this basic illusion-generating illusion. It is no use merely to
see through some of the particular illusions that arise in this process, as
long as the “root” that generates all the illusions is not touched. But to
see this root is very difﬁcult, because the state of mind that wants to see
it is already lost in illusion. So what it will actually see is an illusion
about the root of all illusions. This will be worse than useless.
One reason this happens is that when there is internal conﬂict,
thought projects the illusion of a “self” who is “observing” the conﬂict
and trying to resolve it. Actually this “self” is only a cover-structure for
the total process of generation of illusions. To see this, note that each
idea “stands for” some concrete reality (e.g., the idea of the desk stands
for the desk that can be touched). What does the idea of the “self” stand
for? If you observe, you will see that it stands for what seems to be the
“very substance of your being.” But this in turn is nothing but the whole
illusion-generating process. So it is necessary to realize that “I am the
conﬂict, the process of generating illusions.” Therefore, it is meaningless
for me to try to “do” something about it. Whatever “I” do, the result will
be to stir up the whole process even more.
Indeed, even when “I” seems to be “only looking” at the process, it is
being stirred up. What is actually going on is that the brain is thinking
about the process, while at the same time, its thought is governed by the
pleasure principle, which puts pleasure ﬁrst, ahead of factuality and
logic. So the brain is throwing up a swarm of illusions about its conﬂicts.
It is as if I were trying to look at something, while I stirred up a gigantic
cloud of dust, so dense that I could not even see how my hands were
stirring up the dust. I would say that I am “looking,” trying to “pene-
trate” the dust. But to say this would be meaningless, as long as I did not
understand that the dust was being stirred up entirely by my own
action. The ﬁrst step would be to stop doing anything and to let the dust
settle. Then I would look without trouble. Similarly, if the brain can
refrain from “trying” to resolve its conﬂicts, these will vanish of their
own accord, spontaneously and naturally, leaving the “emptiness” in
which clear perception takes place. Whatever one tries to “do” is based
232
Individual Orders

on the root of all illusion and is therefore just an extension of the very
problem that one wants to get rid of.
Nevertheless, it is urgent that something be done. For we cannot go
on as we are. It is just another illusion simply to cease to be aware of the
problem, or not to pay serious attention to it. We must be intensely
aware of how the mind is working, without attempting to do anything
about it. This awareness is enough. Real awareness already is action,
without the need for a “choice” by the “self” to do something. Thus, as
soon as you are aware that something is poison, you have already
stopped trying to eat it. No choices, decisions, or efforts are needed. But
the “illusion-generating illusion” covers up and suppresses awareness of
its poisonous character. To really see deeply the nature of this illusion is
action enough. For in the light of this perception, it has to collapse.
Whatever you do beyond this just stirs up the cloud of dust.
Even when one begins to see through the false role of the “self,”
there remain deep tacit assumptions about thought. We have been
trained to believe that thought is always necessary. Of course, it is neces-
sary in certain external problems. But in internal problems, it is the very
source of the trouble. Nevertheless, we tacitly assume that the thought
that is “looking” at an internal problem is different from and independ-
ent of the problem that it is “looking at.” This is not true. Both the
problem and the thought that “looks” at it have the same root in the
generator of all illusions – i.e., the pleasure principle.
One can understand this better by noting that in addition to pleas-
ure and pain, all thought contains a component consisting of active
reﬂexes. In young children, this is the main component. Thus, children
ﬁrst learn to think of something by imitating it. This imitation requires
a set of reﬂexes. Later, the activation of the corresponding reﬂexes can
“stand for” the thing, without the physical act of imitation. Later still,
images and words stand for the reﬂexes. But the reﬂexes are always there.
The trouble is that they are confused with an active functioning reality,
that would be at the core of one’s being. This is because they are
intensely active and deep within, therefore seeming to be vital, alive,
and central.
A similar imitation occurs in emotional questions. Thus, children
learn attitudes by imitating the emotional reﬂexes of other people, and
later, these reﬂexes, dynamic and active, seem to be the very core of one’s
own being. One doesn’t note that they are mechanically set into action
by words and thoughts. (e.g., “Arab humiliation” leads to a set of reﬂexes
in everyone, but especially in people who identify themselves as Arabs).
Similarly, when we try to think about our own internal problems
Structure-Process and the Ego
233

(e.g., to get rid of the illusion-generating illusion), then the very thought
with which we “recognize” the problem contains a set of active reﬂexes
that imitate those out of which the problem is constituted. But this
imitation of the problem is the same as the problem. It is dynamically
active. Thus, the thought with which we think of the “generator of
illusions” itself has the same structure as the generator of illusions, and
is in fact only an extension of the latter. (Just as the thought of “Arab
humiliation” is the feeling of being humiliated, and then applied to the
word “Arab,” so that if I am an Arab, this thought is my humiliation,
with all its inevitable reactions that demand revenge.)
There is, however, an entirely different mental activity that does not
imitate the structure of what is seen. Rather, it reﬂects this latter struc-
ture, but in itself, it has the structure that moves toward truth and
factuality. Thus, when one understands brutality, one is not imitating a
brutal structure in the mind. Rather, one’s structure has to be based on
love, truth, factuality. Within this is reﬂected the complete meaning and
structure of brutality. We perhaps tacitly imagine that this is what we
are doing when we think of brutality. But it is not so. Thus, it has been
shown that one who watches a ﬁlm of brutality sees it in terms of his
own brutal feelings, which act dynamically to make him behave with
brutality in other contexts. The trouble is that he sees brutality through
the thought of brutality, which is based on a kind of internal imitation of
the structure of brutality.
When one internally imitates an illusion-generating structure, one
is thereby immediately lost in illusion, so that whatever he does is worse
than useless. Therefore, what is called for is an ending of the response of
thought, which is too mechanical. Rather, what is needed is response
from the emptiness, which sees the structure of illusion generation,
without imitating this structure.
Saral and I send all our love and best wishes to you, to Sheila, and the
children. We do hope that all turns out well.
Dave
234
Individual Orders

8
UNFOLDING THE SELF–WORLD IMAGE (1987)
In the following conversation, Bohm explores the manner in which implicit
values and assumptions actively constitute both our image of our self and our
image of the world. Normally, assumptions and values do not present them-
selves as such in our experience; rather, they appear simply as “the way
things are” and “the way things must be.” Thus unexamined, values and
assumptions tend to generate conﬂict that is fueled by great “soma-
signiﬁcant” energy (Chapter 5), particularly when issues of supreme value
are at stake.
The logical solution to this problem – to acknowledge the limitations
of our assumptions and modify them accordingly – usually involves a
structure of experience in which “I” am examining some part of “me” (in
this case my values and assumptions). The difﬁculty with this approach,
suggests Bohm, is that the “I” that ostensibly observes the values is
itself subtly infected with those very values. Any change that occurs
through this process is likely to be topical, modifying but leaving intact the
essential nature of the values in question. Consequently, ethical injunctions,
arising from a reservoir of cultural mores and manifesting through the “I,”
may reconﬁgure or suppress behavior, but rarely change it at a fundamental
level.
As an alternative to this reﬂexively ingrained mode of self-observation,
Bohm points out that we have recourse to the body as an immediate display
of the actual movement of values and assumptions. It is through the body that
we can experience values and assumptions as concrete processes, rather than
as purely abstract ideas. In this way we discover, as a very intimate example
Previously unpublished interview, courtesy of Saral Bohm and Lee Nichol.
Unfolding the Self–World Image
235

of soma-signiﬁcance, that the ideational aspect of a value or assumption is
inextricably linked to neurophysiological activity. From this perspective the
information displayed in the body can be considered a bridge between the
collective “implicate” nature of society and the individual “explicate” nature
of the self.
This approach to experience – in which the symbiotic nature of idea and
energy is suspended and displayed throughout the entire organism, rather
than just in “the mind” – has the potential to engender proprioception. Typ-
ically, proprioception refers to the body’s capacity to instantly comprehend
and orient its own movement in a coherent manner. However, says Bohm, our
thought process currently lacks the capacity to grasp the whole of its own
activity, largely because it does not recognize its inseparability from the
energy patterns that motivate us on a daily basis. But through suspension and
display of values and assumptions, we may come to the threshold of a new
mode of proprioceptive awareness in which the conﬂicts of socio-cultural
injunction and the limitations of “I” observing “me” are resolved at a funda-
mental level.
Nichol
In attempting to understand the nature of the self, it seems
that one can spend a great deal of time and energy, yet still make
fundamental mistakes with regard to observation.
Bohm
Yes. You see the whole ﬁeld is very deceptive. Things are not
what they appear to be. The structures are a lot different from what
they seem. For example, one of the basic assumptions that we make is
that one can look at the mind as if one were a separate observer,
looking at something different, as I, for example, can look at the chair
and see that my thought is one thing and the chair is another. The
chair is independent of my thought, and my thought can move
independently of the chair. We may make a similar assumption as we
look at our own internal processes, but this is not true. Our thought
profoundly affects the emotion and the whole state of the body, which
in turn profoundly affects thought in a cycle, a feedback loop that
tends to build up. This is one of the basic mistakes. If you thus start
with a false assumption, your whole enquiry may make things worse,
and add more complications to those already there. There are many
such false assumptions that are operating within our sociocultural
context.
You see, if the assumption of the separation of observer and
observed were correct (which it isn’t), it would make sense to project,
to ﬁnd out what is the problem and try to bring about some desired
236
Individual Orders

result as a goal. In such an approach, which is suitable, for example, in
practical affairs, you may change your goal through further insight,
but the basic idea of having some kind of a goal to direct you is always
there. On the other hand, within the mind, this approach may be
totally out of place because there is no separation of the kind that has
been assumed. The goal you project is therefore fantasy, with arbi-
trary features of certain ideas that you are simply trying to impose on
top of the confusion that’s already there, about which you’re actually
doing nothing.
Nichol
It seems that part of the difﬁculty is that we may read this or
hear it, and in some ways it seems quite clear. Then we assume that
we can move on to more important issues – but without having really
gotten to the bottom of this basic question of how we observe
ourselves.
Bohm
Yes, it’s not so easy to clear it up, you see, because we’re caught
up in it. One can say that one of the problems is, that we may have
insight into this issue on a certain level, but that then there is still
the problem of distraction. In this connection, I have a friend who
was studying young children. There has been a belief, based on
the work of Piaget, that children learn certain concepts such as
conservation of water, at a certain age. But my friend has shown
that such learning has to do with the function of distracting factors.
If you can reduce the distracting factors, they can learn it much
earlier. And if you increase the distracting factors, there may be
delays. Or to put it differently, attention is required to learn, and
distracting factors may draw the attention elsewhere. Similarly, at an
intellectual level, you may see fairly clearly that the problem that
we are talking about here is that of the observer and the observed,
but when the time comes to look in another context, there are a lot of
distracting factors. One of these is the ability of the mind to create
very powerful, vivid, convincing images that are experienced as real,
especially when they move very fast. Thus, if we take a television set
and there is a telephone bell ringing, when we look into the image
and see a telephone, we experience that telephone ringing in the
image though there is no telephone, nothing there except spots of
light. But on the other hand, if it doesn’t look consistent – for
example, if nobody answers it – we may think it’s the telephone in the
next room and experience it that way. So the way we experience
depends on attribution.
A basic property of thought is to attribute a quality or a property
to something. And then it’s experienced as intrinsic to that thing,
Unfolding the Self–World Image
237

right? So I suggest that once you have the assumption of the obser-
ver and the observed, the mind can create an image of an observer
looking at the observed, as you could have in the television set. You
could have some man looking at something and you could say
there’s the observer, and there’s the observed – but nothing is going
on at all of that nature. And similarly, in the mind, there will seem
to be the observer and the observed, and various little things indi-
cating that combination. Thought attributes the whole of the pro-
cess to the observer who is looking at the observed, and who says
that thought comes out of the thinker. What actually happens, how-
ever, is that thought creates the image of the thinker, and then it
attributes its origin to that image. Thought then behaves as if it
were being produced by a thinker, but in fact, thought is producing
an image which it calls the thinker and attributes itself to that. The
thinker and the thought, and the observed and the observer are just
different phases of one thing, one process. And therefore, as a per-
son is thinking, very often tacitly and implicitly without knowing
that he’s thinking, all of this is attributed to a thinker, which gives it
great authority.
Nichol
It seems that this separation is well-hidden.
Bohm
What is covered up is the true nature of the whole process.
Actually there is no real separation, but the assumed separation is
attributed to an image, and the resulting experience is regarded as
proof that there is a real separation. That is to say, the image is experi-
enced as if it were real, and that is taken as proof that the assumption
is correct. This is part of the way in which the real nature of the
process is covered up.
Nichol
All that you’re describing is generally an unconscious process.
Bohm
We’ll call it unconscious, implicit, tacit. The thought behind it
is implicit.
Nichol
If this process of obscuration is implicit or unconscious, it
seems that it would take something more than conscious, analytic
thinking to reveal the actual dynamics.
Bohm
Yes. You may say consciously and rationally and logically this
is what’s the case, but if your whole feeling and whole experience and
sensation are telling you otherwise, you really can’t be deeply con-
vinced by it, right?
Nichol
So there are two things going on – an intellectual recognition
that something may be operating in one way, but at the same time, a
deeper set of sensations and experiences apparently indicating some-
thing very different.
238
Individual Orders

Bohm
We wouldn’t necessarily say deeper, but different. It is a set of
experiences that don’t agree with your intellectual conclusions, even
though your intellectual conclusions are probably right; you’ve prob-
ably had a real intellectual insight at that level. So we mustn’t decry
the intellect or say it is never of any value in this context.
Nichol
Instead of viewing the contradiction that you’ve just described
as a further difﬁculty, perhaps that contradiction, properly attended
to, could actually lead to a deeper understanding of the whole pro-
cess.
Bohm
Yes, you have to give attention to this contradiction – that’s
quite right. And the question, then, is how. For this whole process of
covering up and deception is going on. There’s a constant “show”
being put on, implying that all this is real, and that the intellectual
stuff is not real. For example, the person may well say, “I’m not an
intellectual, that’s just a lot of ideas. My real gut feeling is that it’s the
other way.” And, “I don’t go in for this intellectualism,” so I ignore all
that you say, right? What I wanted to say is that this gut feeling is
what is deceptive. There are true deep feelings, you know, you may get
all sorts of responses if somebody dies that you’re close to, or if you
look at nature, seeing the beauty and so on. But then I say there are
also feelings which appear to be deep feelings, but are not, because
they are produced by thought.
Nichol
But they have all the attributes of such feelings.
Bohm
They don’t have all of the attributes or else we could never get
out of it. But they have enough attributes to get by, to be accepted by
us as real. The point is, now, to be able to see that this is what’s going
on – that we are producing feelings out of thought. Everybody knows
you can whip up feelings by certain shouts and cries and clamors and
marches and songs, political rallies, etc. It’s well known that feelings
can in this way be whipped up, essentially by actions directed by
thought, so that such a response need not be a surprise. What about
this sort of feeling as compared with deep feelings? At the moment
that it is happening a person might not be able to tell the difference.
You have a crowd shouting and screaming and a great leader in front
of them shouting and screaming and driving and urging them on, and
so on. So that establishes the principle that feelings can be produced
artiﬁcially. But what I was talking about is much more common than
this. It doesn’t require a demagogue or some unusual set of shouts,
screams, and cries to do it. Rather, one simply has to notice that the
meaning of a thought tends to be carried out in terms of feelings all
over the body.
Unfolding the Self–World Image
239

In order to demonstrate this, you may take the case of getting
angry. This is a feeling that is not as difﬁcult to look at as say fear
or pleasure – deceptive feelings of pleasure – which you know too
can be produced by thought, a seductive thought. You see, a person
may ﬁrst get an outburst of anger and then cool down – it sim-
mers down, but it’s still there. You may put it in abeyance because
something more important comes up, but it’s still there ready to
come up. My suggestion is to call it up on purpose by trying to
ﬁnd the words that express the reason for being angry. Thus, you
may say, “I’m angry, and I have good reason because he did this and
that and that.” You will ﬁnd that you are getting still angrier. Usu-
ally you’ll say, “I shouldn’t get angry, so I’d better stop this.” But
now we’re going to use this on purpose, not for the sake of getting
angry, because we’re going to suspend the angry feelings, neither by
stopping them, nor letting them come out. Is that clear what I
mean?
Nichol
Yes, but there are some difﬁculties with suspending.
Bohm
Well you see, it’s not being done right in the heat of your
original outburst of anger, but still, you’re not calling it up to get rid of
the angry feelings. Your ﬁrst impulse might be to try and go out and
insult the person and do something, and in earlier times you might
even have hit the person. And now you don’t do any of those things,
but let the feelings come up and watch what’s going on. We’re regard-
ing it as a sort of test display of the process, you understand? So then
you’ll see these angry feelings which will produce tension in the solar
plexus and the belly and the chest, and affect your breathing, and
heartbeat, and all sorts of things. You’ll be able to see a sort of move-
ment of responses all over the body, such as a tension of the jaw, in
the neck.
Nichol
Even if one waits a bit beyond the heat of the moment, there
still comes up a very strong resistance to acknowledging that one is
actually in this state.
Bohm
Yes, that’s part of our socio-cultural conditioning, which says
that you shouldn’t be angry. And not only that, you yourself have seen
by clear thought that it’s leading you astray. You see, both reason and
society . . . everything is telling you that you shouldn’t be angry. Now
there’s a serious mistake in there. Of course, it’s right that you
shouldn’t be angry, if only because it is very destructive to your
deeper interests. But the attempt to say you just shouldn’t be angry is
simply not affecting the anger, it’s just trying to impose another pat-
tern on top of the anger. This will come out as we go along, but the
240
Individual Orders

ﬁrst point is to realize that such resistance is false and that this
falseness will come out as we go through this process and pay atten-
tion to it.
Nichol
The falseness of the socio-cultural as well as the personal
judgment.
Bohm
Yes. This is very tricky, because in some ways the judgment
appears to be right. But there’s a fundamental, deeper falseness in it.
So we also have to give attention to our tendency to say, “I shouldn’t
be angry, I must stop being angry,” and we will see that this too has to
be suspended. In this process one will begin to get certain feelings, at
ﬁrst perhaps very faintly because of all the resistance, and later more
strongly – you’ll see the play of these feelings over the body, because
the action is being suspended. If you actually did something, you
would no longer notice the feelings. If you went out and hit some-
body or punched him in the nose, or insulted him, or otherwise tried
to get redress for your anger, you might momentarily feel a lot better,
because the tension would go away (until the other person retaliated
in a similar way). But now, when action is suspended, you can see that
the words are calling up the feelings, and you’ll be able to get a sense
that there’s some sort of mechanical connection between the words
and the feelings.
For example, you may ﬁnd that the words may be, “He shouldn’t
have done this; he shouldn’t treat me that way; he hasn’t due regard
for me, he’s always doing that; he’s never taking my rights into
account. It’s not the ﬁrst time.” So you may notice the feelings com-
ing up rather mechanically, and that those feelings are producing
mechanical pressure, making it very hard to look at those thoughts
and see whether they’re right or not.
Nichol
Now it seems that there’s a very thin line here, because when
you do what you suggest, if it’s really activating these responses
you’re talking about, they don’t feel mechanical.
Bohm
No, but you can see a certain mechanical quality in the sense
that the word is followed by the feeling. And you’ll see there is a little
something also in that pressure of the feeling to avoid examining
the meaning of the words, to avoid seeing whether you really have a
good reason to be angry. You see, if it were really a straightforward
process, there would be no resistance to examining it. Now you
can begin to suspect that it looks a little mechanical. Here you can
use a certain amount of knowledge which has come from biofeed-
back. You have a device, the so-called lie detector, with which you
attach an electrode to your ﬁnger, and this measures the activity of
Unfolding the Self–World Image
241

the autonomic nervous system. When the autonomic nervous system
is aroused, you’ll get the solar plexus and heartbeat and the adrena-
line and all those things acting. When somebody says something
disturbing, or you think something disturbing that arouses you in this
way, then roughly three seconds later the needle jerks. If it’s not very
disturbing, you may be hardly aware that anything has happened, yet
the needle jerks. So it does look very mechanical when you look at it
that way.
This process takes three seconds. We could say that your thought
is in the pipeline for three seconds, but you don’t pay attention to
this. Then suddenly the emotional response appears. It suddenly
appears in this way as if it were spontaneous. However, there’s
been another thought in the background all the time saying that
everything which appears suddenly like that is deep gut feeling, so
that it’s really very important. That produces more thought which
goes into the pipeline, and three seconds later there comes another
jerk, and the whole process thus builds up. The thought that this is a
deep gut feeling is now taken as further proof that you have good
reason to be angry. See, the original proof was that he’s always doing
this, right? Now you have an additional proof – the deep gut feeling –
saying, “I have a deep feeling which is instinctive. I’ve been badly
treated.”
In the case of fear, that’s even more clear. You can similarly pro-
duce a response of fear by thinking of danger, and a short time later,
you have this sinking sensation in the solar plexus. You now say I
have an instinctive feeling of danger. The animal would get just that
feeling as the ﬁrst sense of danger, right? Or you yourself might be in
a very dangerous situation and get it. So that could be a real warning
of danger. But the assumption is that it’s always a warning of danger.
This ignores the fact that it could be an entirely false warning arranged
by thought mechanically.
Nichol
Why would you think there is resistance to looking at the
mechanical nature of this process?
Bohm
Because it has gotten tied up with the self-world image.
One feels uneasy about saying that one’s deep gut feelings may
have no meaning because it begins to threaten the notion of the
self-identity. For you identify yourself, among other things, with
those deep gut feelings. So if you begin to think these deep gut
feelings may have no meaning, and you have depended on them
for the foundation of a lot of your life, you begin to worry about your
whole self, right? There’s a thought behind it that’s ready to defend
242
Individual Orders

the self by not allowing this to be seen. It’s really defending the self-
image. We don’t know what the self is, nobody has ever managed
to look at the self, but what we have is a kind of an image of a
self with an image of a world in which it lives. This image creates
a wide range of neurophysiological effects, implying that this is all a
reality of very great signiﬁcance. We have already discussed some
of these effects. And if this image is altered, the whole neuro-
physiological system goes into chaos, so that there’s then a response
from the body and from the brain to do something to restore equi-
librium. The most immediate way to do that would be to produce
thoughts which would change those responses toward equilibrium.
But then that would be a mechanical way of thinking, which is false.
So you get mechanical feelings and mechanical thoughts working on
each other.
Nichol
It seems that this apparently simple notion of observation,
pursued in the way that you’ve described it, will at least initially lead
one into difﬁculty, and not necessarily clarity. For the act of looking
at the connections in the way that you’ve indicated will eventually
lead to this very point of questioning the meaning of one’s deepest
feelings.
Bohm
Yes, and also one’s deepest thoughts.
Nichol
This is not a particularly comfortable position to ﬁnd oneself
in. Perhaps this is one reason that observation never penetrates
beyond a certain point.
Bohm
Yes, I think that there’s a kind of defense which is based on
the assumption that whenever this whole system starts getting
too disturbed, it’s best to keep away from whatever is disturbing
it. The whole body reacts instinctively that way to pain, moving
away from the pain, and then that same reaction is carried up
into the higher functions of the brain by some movement of thought,
away from the issue which is disturbing it. It moves in such a way as
to ease the system. And that’s not an intelligent way for thought to
operate.
I think the idea is to ﬁnd a certain skill of pushing this to the
point where you can observe, and yet not to push too much, because
that’s really more mechanical action again. You need insight, you see,
and the whole point of suspension is merely to get insight, not to
produce predetermined results. Only the insight can change you. The
insight that this process is mechanical will change you. It will
decrease the importance of the process in your mind, and therefore,
the whole thing will change.
Unfolding the Self–World Image
243

But there’s always a danger that you haven’t gone far enough in
doing this, because there’s more to the process. There’s all sorts of
deeper things you haven’t touched yet, and you are beginning to
shake them, too. But all I’m saying is: Don’t go too fast. Start with
anger, where people generally realize that the thing is destructive, so
that you are able to work on it. It doesn’t shake you too much to
discover these things about anger. You might then work on fear,
because fear has a similar structure. And so do desire and pleasure –
they all have a similar structure. In fact, desire comes from projecting
in the imagination, the thing you want, and anticipating the satisfac-
tion of pleasure, or whatever. And fear is the same thing except you
anticipate all the pain and trouble that’s coming. So between desire
and fear, there’s very little difference; it’s just that you anticipate
something nice or something bad. Anticipation is a function you
need, but in this context it’s begun to go wrong, because you’re
anticipating the internal state of the mind and not realizing it’s just
an image.
In exploring this, a person will ﬁnd that as certain issues come
up in relationship, that they’re distracting. In this way, he loses sight
of the insight because of powerful distractions. Then he needs to get
insight into that distraction in a similar way. What Krishnamurti once
said was “there is no distraction” – every distraction is just a part of
the process, which helps to reveal the process. We call it distraction,
and the assumption that it is a distraction makes it a distraction.
Now this misleads you. If it’s a “distraction” you’re going to say,
“Well, my job is to get back on line.” But your job is not to get back
“on line.” You see, the “line” is the distraction. Your job is to look at
the distraction, not to say, “I was looking at fear before, and now I’m
looking at something else. I’d better get back to fear.” But rather,
you now say, “I’d better get on to the fact that I’m distracted, and ﬁnd
out the thoughts that are distracting.”
Nichol
In that respect, everything is a basis for observation.
Bohm
Everything that happens is part of the process. There really is
no genuine distraction in this process. Every one of those distractions
is just part of the cover-up, you see. If there were no cover-up, the
process couldn’t exist, right? I mean, it’s too absurd to go on with if
it’s not covered up and given a false interpretation.
Now all this anger and fear and pleasure and desire is part of
the constitution of the self and its relation to the world. These are part
of the values which move you. “Value” has the same root as valor
and valiant. It means strength. And values, or things of high value,
244
Individual Orders

give great strength to what we do, and give it high priority. Now we
have a vast set of values which thus moves us. Some respond to one
situation and some to another. We are moved by the values much
faster than we can think. You see, if somebody is prejudiced, he’s
got a value judgment which he may not be conscious of – for
example, that people of a certain group are bad. Now he experiences
this not as a thought, but rather as an apparent perception of the
badness which is projected into a particular person who is being
perceived at a given moment – the same as the telephone in the
television set.
Nichol
So it has the full appearance of reality.
Bohm
Yes. All sorts of value judgments of that kind affect your per-
ception and your intentions at the same time. You see, people have
the notion of freedom of choice and freedom of will. But these values
operate very fast, and people think they have chosen, but they
haven’t.
Nichol
How are these values related to the self?
Bohm
The self is determined by the values with which it’s identiﬁed,
for example the supreme value of your religion or your country or
your money or fame or power or ambition or your family, or whatever
it is. Or your body, your security, your comfort. Whatever has highest
value will override the other values. And this generally leads to con-
tradiction, you see. Thus you may have the value of honesty and truth,
and so on. But if your value is also comfort and security of the self, or
if your country comes ﬁrst no matter what else is at stake, then when
the time comes, such values may take over. And though you profess
the right values of honesty and truth, they’re not really the dominant
values. So the self is determined, in a way, by the whole set of values
which are as much socio-cultural as individual.
Nichol
Is this all there is to the self?
Bohm
Well, it is a dominant feature. If the values were not there,
the self would collapse, would have no energy. It would be like
something which is inﬂated. When someone removes the air, it
collapses.
Nichol
When you say a dominant feature, do you mean, as well, an
essential feature?
Bohm
Yes, it’s a moving essential power. There may be some other
assumptions behind it, but these values are the moving essential
power without which the self would have no power. It would be
just an image. You may ask, “How could an image ever get power?”
Thus the telephone in the television set never does anything except
Unfolding the Self–World Image
245

produce a pattern of light. Why should the image of the self
have such power? Because there are tremendous values which are
attributed to it. Whatever has value, the whole system must try to act
on it. That is an absolute necessity and the way it works.
Nichol
So we can suspend these values . . .
Bohm
Well, not so easily. They come very fast, you see. We have value
judgments, such as in prejudice or prejudgment. Suppose you’re very
prejudiced against a certain group of people and you immediately
react against a particular member of this group. The way it goes is like
this. There is a thought in the background, an implicit thought, which
you don’t know about: all people of this group are inferior. You may
never have overtly thought it, because you picked it up non-verbally,
implicitly, by the way people behaved toward that group. Now you
come along and say that this is a person of that group, therefore, he’s
inferior. As I’ve already pointed out, you don’t actually think that, it
just comes out immediately as a perception of inferiority, apparently.
Our immediate experience of that person is of inferiority, seen as
inhering in that person. So that’s a value judgement. The value judg-
ment operates implicitly. The implicit is more active than the explicit.
With an explicit thought, it’s going to take time before you act on it.
Therefore you can examine it. But normally you can’t really examine
an implicit thought.
You see, the implicit thought is organized in the sense that there
is in it a certain kind of order. The order is that one thought entrains
the other, and that sometimes these lines of entrainment meet and
entangle, forming a kind of web. Each person is caught in that web.
The web is as much sociocultural as it is individual, if not more. For
example, as a child, almost everybody may feel weak or isolated or not
properly supported by his parents or his environment, and he also
feels that he can only gain their love by ﬁtting in with their assump-
tions. So one of his basic assumptions may be that “whatever they
assume, I must assume too, or else I’ll be out.” He doesn’t have the
feeling that he can stand being rejected in this way. If he had felt, for
some reason, very strong within himself, then he could have said,
“Okay, I’m out.” He may, for example, have felt that at least at home
he will be all right, so that he can have the strength not to accept the
assumptions that are false from the other children or the rest of
society. But in the home, it’s the same. He must accept their assump-
tions or else he’ll be in terrible trouble. So wherever he looks, that’s
the way it is.
Nichol
It seems that if one took every singular value, every singular
246
Individual Orders

feeling and tried to deduce from that a root cause, that may not
work.
Bohm
That may not work, and yet it may be useful to get familiar
with that structure. You’re not trying to deduce the cause, but just as
with anger, to see how the structure works. Can we suspend the
activity of the structure sufﬁciently to see it working? This will be
far more convincing to the system than just talking about it. Rather,
see how it works non-verbally as well as verbally, as we saw anger
working. The value system works in a rather similar way. The
difﬁculty is that it is based on implicit assumptions. Actually the
anger was basically implicit, too, but it’s a little bit easier to get at.
Thus you say, “I have good reason to be angry” – that was a value
judgement, because the word “good” means a value judgement. What
was the “goodness” of the good reason, for example, “He’s always
doing this”? There are implicit assumptions that somebody always
treats me in such and such a way – and that is a good reason to be
angry. This person is doing that and therefore I have a good reason to
be angry at him. And that works immediately. So a value judgment is
involved in getting angry or in becoming frightened. It is similar
when we say, “I have good reason to be afraid or good reason to be
pleased.” The point of this is that we didn’t really get to the bottom of
the anger when we saw the process of anger going between the head
and the gut feelings, for we didn’t see the value judgement that fuels
the whole process. As soon as the “goodness” of the good reason is
gone, the process collapses.
There are all sorts of implicit assumptions of this nature. The
thing is to go further and just experiment with trying to verbalize, in
order to make explicit the implicit assumptions and see how they
affect the process. You’ll see, for example, that a certain assumption
already implicitly contains anger and all the other reactions. More-
over it contains the assumption that there is “me,” who is experi-
encing whatever is going on, and it attributes all of the activity to
“me,” right? Now if you suspend that whole process and keep repeating
the verbal expression of the value judgment for a while, that begins to
be more visible as a non-verbal process, which involves both thoughts
and feelings.
Nichol
It seems that the common feature in each of these experi-
ments is the picture of “me.”
Bohm
Yes, the image of “me” divides into the observer and the
observed. Or you could say “I” and “me.” “I” am the subject, the active
subject who has the intention and the perception, and “me” is that
Unfolding the Self–World Image
247

same entity considered as the object. There was a fellow I knew who
believed in solipsism. and he argued for its validity. His basic state-
ment was that “I” become “me.” You understand what that means?
Whatever was in the subject which he regarded as sort of a creative
source crystallizes into the “me.” So the assumption was that the
subject is the unlimited creative source, and that this created the “me”
as the object. The implication was that you could always do this in
any way whatsoever, but actually you can’t. The actual fact is that the
“me” will be found to control the “I.” Thus, if you have created anger,
in the next step you are compelled to justify it. You’re then no longer
free to say, “Okay, I’m not going to be angry.” In this way the “me”
constricts the “I,” and the whole process goes in a cycle.
Nichol
You’re suggesting that this “me” is in fact nothing more than a
picture.
Bohm
Yes, and the “I” too. I’m not saying that there’s nothing left;
I’m saying what you experience as the “me” and the “I” is a picture.
Perhaps there’s some sort of “me” or some sort of true being which
we don’t actually perceive.
Nichol
What we normally think of as “me” may simply be the sum
total of a certain number of values.
Bohm
Values and assumptions along with a general picture that goes
with them, a picture of something having supreme value as the “me.”
You see, the “me” and the “I” are taken as of essentially unlimited
value. Therefore they will tend to override all other values. The “me”
may be identiﬁed with money or power, or the country or the
religion, but it’s still the same process. And whatever is attributed to
the “me” takes unlimited value. It’s mine, you see. Suppose you’re
looking at some land. You may ﬁrst say it’s land, but then suppose
you suddenly say, “It’s mine.” It then takes on a tremendous value and
the meaning is totally different. Or if you say, “It’s his but it ought to
be mine,” still again, it’s different. Notice the tremendous power in
that judgment, in which a very special kind of value is given the land
when it is sensed as mine or yours or his.
Nichol
Well, the difﬁculty seems to be in coming to terms with
whether or not this image of the “me” is true. That is to say, is the
“me” something substantial, tangible, that lives and breathes here and
now and possibly whose soul will continue after death and so on, or is
the “me” not of that nature?
Bohm
That’s the question. Perhaps a human being is of the nature of
the “me” as we know it, or he or she may have another nature. If a
true self does exist, it’s surely hidden by, or made inactive by, this
248
Individual Orders

“me” process that seems to ﬁll the whole system. It’s like the lights of
the city which shine brighter than the stars, so that you don’t see the
universe. That holds also, for the world-image as well as the self-
image. Is the world just as we experience it, or is reality something
different? That we don’t know.
Nichol
Are you suggesting that the self, and the world that we experi-
ence, are not different?
Bohm
I am suggesting that they are not different. It’s one image. You
see, it’s the image of the self, and of the world in which the self lives.
No self could exist without a world in which to live, and therefore, the
image of the world is arranged according to the needs of the self. And
thereafter, the self has to try to adjust somehow to this world.
Nichol
Perhaps the notion of absolute value is tied to the notion of a
solid, ﬁxed self.
Bohm
Yes, it’s identiﬁed. “Identity” means being always the same.
The self is assumed to have an identity. Certain features are thought
to remain essentially the same, though it may change in other fea-
tures that are superﬁcial. But there’s an essence that remains always
the same. And we would like it to go on forever, after death. Moreover,
it is implied that it has always gone on. Thus people think of reincar-
nation, and so on. It would be hard to understand what it could mean
for the self suddenly to emerge into existence at birth. How could you
say exactly when? Indeed, a common concept of the self is that it is
eternal in its essence, though its superﬁcial features change. This
implies that it is unlimited in its value. And you see, for all we know
there could be such a self, but what we are now experiencing as the
self is an image. We won’t say anything about whether that notion of
the self is right or wrong since we have no knowledge of what the real
self would be, but we can see that what we are now experiencing as
the self is an image mistaken for reality. And the activity of the organ-
ism guided by that image gives it an apparent power in reality. Just as
the telephone bell coming out of the image makes the image seem
very active.
Nichol
As an image, then, the “me” has no substantial reality.
Bohm
Well, it has a kind of substantial reality in the sense that
because the image has been established, the whole nervous system is
affected. This involves a certain kind of reality, but no reality
independent of the image.
Nichol
Somehow this must be put to the test.
Bohm
That’s why I suggested these experiments of watching anger
and watching the value judgment originate and trying to produce
Unfolding the Self–World Image
249

these results by thinking the thought again, and by making it explicit.
You see, in order to test this, you’ve got to see the connection between
thought and the rest of the activity. That’s the key task. But if thought
is implicit you don’t see it, or else even when you see it, you don’t see
the connection to the rest. And then you’re going to make this mis-
take again and again. So even in the attempt to test it, you’ll make the
same mistake.
So you keep at it, you sustain the work. What you are really
aiming for is an analogue to what is called proprioception in the body.
The word “proprioception” has two parts. “Proprio” means “self” in
Latin and “ception” is like perception. So it means self-perception.
Now that’s a technical term used by people discussing the body,
physiology, to describe the fact that the body knows immediately its
own being; it knows its own movement; so it can tell right away its
movement without thinking, and can distinguish it from movements
that originate independently. That is necessary for survival. Now the
mind doesn’t seem to have this. Thus, we can think something and
suddenly there appears a gut feeling but we don’t see that the thought
produced the gut feeling. If your hand suddenly moved, and you
didn’t know you moved it, you would be in a bad way. For example
you might hit somebody in the nose and say, “I didn’t know I did it, it
happened by itself.”
Nichol
If one enters into these experiments with the wrong kind of
observation, most likely they would be fruitless.
Bohm
What would be the wrong kind?
Nichol
Observing with the intention of modifying.
Bohm
Yes, the right intention is to reveal that which is, rather than to
modify it. Thus, if you said, “I am angry,” then you’re implicitly sep-
arating yourself that way from the anger. It will then follow immedi-
ately that it makes sense to want to change the anger, by saying for
example, “I shouldn’t be angry.” This is a contradiction, because you
also have another implicit thought which is, “I have good reason to be
angry.” So if you superimpose the two thoughts, “I have good reason
to be angry,” and the other, “I don’t want to be angry,” or “I shouldn’t
be angry,” that’s crazy. We must make it very clear why we shouldn’t
want to modify anger because in many other contexts modiﬁcation is
a perfectly rational activity. But here it is not rational because you
have the implicit thought, “I have good reason to be as I am.” And at
the same time you say, “I want to change.” Evidently that doesn’t
make sense. But the trouble is that the thought that I have good
reason to be as I am is basically implicit, you don’t see you’ve got it.
250
Individual Orders

So it seems to make sense to say, “I’m going to modify all this,”
because you see the whole result coming out without seeing the
implicit thought that is constantly maintaining the present state of
affairs. All this is a result of the lack of proprioception. Thus, once
you know that you moved your hand, you can stop moving it if it’s
doing the wrong thing. But if your hand moved without your know-
ing it, say because the nerves telling that your hand is moving are
gone, you could not initiate an intelligent action by trying to control
your hand.
Nichol
Allowing this contradiction to expose itself seems to be
necessary.
Bohm
Yes. Otherwise there could be panic because “I must hold onto
what I am” would be one implicit thought, and another thought
would be “I must change it.” This could create a great fear. I
might think that if I don’t hold on to what I am, I’ll go to pieces, and
this would be one implicit thought. The other thought would be
“I must change what I am.” Then you have the thought, “I may go to
pieces.” These thoughts make it impossible to take any meaningful
action.
Nichol
Both thoughts, “I must stay the way that I am” and “I must
change the way that I am” lead to further confusion.
Bohm
Yes. Especially because both are there together and they are
both conﬂicting with each other. You may not know it, but you already
have the opposing implicit thought. When you say, “I must change,”
you would never even have that thought, except you’ve also got the
implicit thought, “I must not change. I have good reason to remain as
I am.” So it’s urgent to ﬁnd these implicit thoughts. It’s very import-
ant to make them explicit, to ﬁnd out what your thoughts are by
putting them in words and seeing how they work. If the thoughts are
not put into words, you generally won’t know you’ve got them.
Maybe eventually you’ll get so subtle you won’t need the words. But
in the beginning, the mind is not able to do that. To put the same
point again in order to emphasize it, you have a thought and you
don’t know you’ve got it because it’s implicit. So it apparently makes
sense to put in another thought saying, “I should change,” because
you don’t know you’ve got the thought, “I have good reason to remain
as I am. It’s absolutely necessary to remain as I am.”
Therefore you don’t realize the contradiction because one of the
thoughts, at least, and very often both, are implicit. That’s the lack of
proprioception. The implicit thought does not appear in conscious-
ness at all. Only by its effect does it show itself, unless you make
Unfolding the Self–World Image
251

it conscious by expressing it somehow explicitly to yourself or to
others.
The point is that you’ve got to see this contradictory movement
there and express it, but not for the purpose of doing anything about
it, because that would be just the same mistake again. Thus another
implicit thought would be, “I can avoid this contradiction.” But rather
than resolving in this way to keep this contradictory thought out,
I need simply to be aware of the thought and all of its effects, all
through the body and so on. However, the only way I can see to be
aware of it is ﬁrst to make it explicit. There may come a time when
there is another way, but I am trying to say this is a way to begin to
loosen up the mind. And the word is thus being used, neither for
analysis, nor for its content, but simply to make the process visible.
Not that you believe or disbelieve the word – the meaning of the word
is not really at stake. That’s not of any basic importance – it’s really
what the word is doing that’s interesting in this context. The word
is part of a non-verbal process. Fundamentally, the actual activity of
the word is non-verbal. It’s a real activity based on all sorts of nervous
processes, sounds, and so forth. As for the meaning, we want to see
what the meaning does, not so much what the meaning is.
Nichol
The word itself is just the tip of the iceberg.
Bohm
Yes, but the point is, at least to have a tip. You see, if somebody
could chop off all the tips of icebergs, then ships would be sinking all
the time. We try to get rid of the problem by chopping off the tip, and
it’s all there beneath. Then we collide with it.
252
Individual Orders

9
FREEDOM AND THE VALUE OF THE INDIVIDUAL
(1986)
In this essay Bohm addresses a series of issues at the heart of the Western
cultural value system. Foremost among these are the questions of free choice,
free will, and the nature of the individual. It is Bohm’s view that in general we
do not exhibit genuine free will, and thus do not rise to the original deﬁnition
of “individual” – one who is undivided.
A systemic limitation on free will springs from a fundamental misunder-
standing of knowledge itself. Pervasive and active in our experience, know-
ledge is typically a mechanical projection from the past, whether from three
seconds ago, or from a thousand years ago. As such, suggests Bohm, it is
incapable of meeting the rich and complex nature of the living present – the
very milieu in which true free will would necessarily act. Ignorance of how
knowledge functions leads us to believe that we can freely choose our will,
while in fact the parameters of this will have already been set in place by the
crystallized predispositions of accumulated knowledge.
Bohm proposes that it is only by fully comprehending the activity of
knowledge that we have any real prospect of expressing free will. This com-
prehension cannot be strictly abstract or intellectual, but is acquired through
direct engagement with the concrete implicate order of knowledge. Here, the
movement of past knowledge may be seen at its generative source, from a
perspective other than that of its own self-referencing content.
In Bohm’s view, consciousness that is dominated by knowledge echoes
the conservative nature of matter, where stability, repetition, and relative
Extract from Appendix to Chapter 13 of D. Grifﬁn (ed.), Physics and the Ultimate Signiﬁcance of Time:
Bohm, Prigogine and Process Philosophy, State University of New York Press, Albany (1986).
Freedom and the Value of the Individual
253

invariance are at a premium. By loosening these conservative restrictions, we
may begin to discern our inherent link to the holomovement – the unknown
timeless present, the qualitative inﬁnity of nature at the experiential level. In
this way we embody true individuality, manifesting our creative potential
through participation in – rather than objectiﬁcation of – a total ﬁeld of
experience.
Freedom has been commonly identiﬁed (especially in the West)
with free will or with the closely associated notion of freedom of choice.
In these terms, the basic question is: Is will actually free, or are our
actions determined by something else (such as our hereditary constitu-
tion, our conditioning, our culture, our dependence on the opinions of
other people, etc.)? Alternatively, can we or can we not choose freely
among whatever courses of action may be possible?
Such a way of putting the question presupposes that the mind is
always able to know what are the various alternative possibilities and
which of these is the best. Evidently, however, if one does not have
correct knowledge of the consequences of one’s actions, freedom of will
and choice have little or no meaning. It must be admitted that, in most
of human life, lack of knowledge of what will actually ﬂow out of one’s
choice prevails.
In order to deal with this, we try constantly to improve our know-
ledge. But as we have seen, reality is inﬁnite both in its depth and in its
extension. Although relatively independent contexts do exist, such
independence is always limited. Very often the question of what these
limits are is obscured not only by ignorance but also by the sheer com-
plexity of the entangled web of interrelationships on which the con-
sequences of our decisions may depend. It often does not seem to be at
all likely that we will be able by increasing our knowledge alone even to
keep up with this ever-expanding and agglomerating mass of inter-
dependent processes, especially in the ﬁeld of human relations (con-
sider, for example, what is happening today in politics and in
economics).
There has been an enormous expansion of scientiﬁc knowledge,
especially in the last century, along with a ﬂood of many other kinds of
knowledge (this has been called the “information explosion”). But has
all this knowledge contributed to our general freedom in any signiﬁ-
cant way? Or has it not, in many ways, led to yet further unresolvable
entanglements in the problem of trying to establish orderly and har-
monious human relations? One can mention here the obvious example
254
Individual Orders

of how knowledge of nuclear physics has brought us to the need to
make all sorts of decisions in situations in which there is little or no
reliable information about how human beings will behave (or, even
about all the signiﬁcant physical consequences of our nuclear devices).
Without such knowledge no sensible choice is possible. But even if we
consider medical knowledge, which is on the whole beneﬁcial (except
for the growing number of cases of “iatrogenic” disease), this too is
leading to situations in which we have to decide many questions with-
out an adequate basis for making such decisions (e.g., shall terminally ill
people be kept alive against their expressed wishes?). In such contexts
what do free will and free choice actually mean? This is one of the
questions that I hope can be discussed.
Thus far, we have considered lack of knowledge of what may be
called the “external world” as a serious limitation on meaningful free-
dom. But there is a much more serious limitation, a lack of what may be
called “self-knowledge.” Schopenhauer has, at least implicitly, already
called attention to this area when he said that though we may perhaps
be free to choose as we will, we are not free to will the content of the will.
Evidently, this content is a key factor determining what sort of person
one actually is, and yet it appears somehow to be “given.” The signiﬁ-
cance of this question becomes especially clear when we note that
people so often seem to be unable actually to do the good things that
they have (apparently freely) resolved to do. No person can be said to be
free who is for reasons of internal confusion unable consistently to
carry out his or her chosen aims and purposes, for evidently such a
person is driven by inner compulsions of which he or she is unaware.
This inner lack of freedom is far more serious than a lack arising from
external constraints or a lack of adequate knowledge of external
circumstances.
The problem has often been approached with the aid of moralistic
injunctions, telling people to “pull themselves together” and to choose,
once and for all, what is right and good. But to those who are unaware of
what is actually determining the content of their wills (which includes,
in many cases, a content that divides and weakens the will), such advice
has little meaning. Moreover, the content is ultimately based on overall
self-world views that the individuals have usually not chosen for them-
selves. These include general notions not only of the sort of world we
live in, but also of models of what constitutes a normal right-thinking
good human being, of how such human beings are to be related, and of
what are their duties and obligations, etc. This all-pervasive web of
shared thoughts and feelings, propagated not only explicitly but also by
Freedom and the Value of the Individual
255

tacit and subtle clues picked up since the time of one’s birth, operates in
most people as an almost overwhelmingly powerful limit on freedom, of
which they are essentially ignorant. Indeed, this web not only deter-
mines what will generally be thought or felt to be the right choice. Much
more important is that it determines what is regarded as the correct
range of alternative possibilities in any actual situation. If something is
not considered a real possibility, there is no chance at all that it will
appear among one’s choices. Is there any meaning to freedom of will
when the content of this will is thus determined by false knowledge of
what is possible, false knowledge that we do not even know we possess
(or, more accurately, that possesses us)?
The problem is seen to be even sharper if one considers that the
question of choosing what is right and good so often arises in circum-
stances in which one’s desire is in some other direction. Indeed, if some-
thing is clearly seen to be right and good, and if one has no desire to do
otherwise, it hardly seems that any particular act of choice is ever
needed. Will one then not spontaneously have the urge to act according
to what one has perceived to be right and good? But often, as has been
mentioned above, one ﬁnds that one has an irresistible desire in some
other direction. One has by no means chosen this desire. Rather, it also
arises from the totality of remembrances, reactions, and “knowledge”
accumulated over the past, which responds to present “needs” as over-
whelmingly urgent in ways of which one is not aware.
The attempt of will to struggle against such desire has no meaning,
for this sort of desire contains in it a movement of self-deception, along
with a further movement aiming to conceal this self-deception and to
conceal the fact that concealment is taking place. Thus, one will often
accept as true any false thought that makes one feel better (or more
secure) or that makes one believe that the object of one’s desire can be
realized. This is, for example, the basis of the activity of the conﬁdence
trickster, who paints a false picture of satisfying greed that the victim
cannot resist accepting as true. As long as one is ignorant of how this
sort of self-deceptive desire operates, what can it mean to talk of free-
dom of any kind?
It appears, then, that the principal barrier to freedom is ignorance,
mainly of “oneself” and secondarily of the “external world.” This ignor-
ance is also the main barrier to true individuality. For any human being
who is governed by opinions and models unconsciously picked up from
the society is not really an individual. Rather, as has been made very
clear, especially by Krishnamurti, such a person is a particular manifest-
ation of the collective consciousness of humankind. He or she may have
256
Individual Orders

special peculiarities, but these too are drawn from the collective pool of
thoughts and feelings (here we may usefully consider the word idio-
syncracy, which, in its Greek root, means “private mixture”). A genuine
individual could only be one who was actually free from ignorance of
his or her attachment to the collective consciousness. Individuality and
true freedom go together and ignorance (or lack of awareness) is the
principal enemy of both.
It is important to note that the main kind of ignorance that destroys
freedom and prevents true individuality is ignorance of the activity of
the past. As has been brought out earlier, although the past is gone, it
nevertheless continues to exist and to be active in the present, as a
nested structure of enfoldments, going into even the distant past, which
are carried along (with modiﬁcations) from one moment to the next. (I
have treated these as projections of various kinds.) Here I have been
indicating how this activity of the past can interfere with freedom and
individuality as long as one is not aware of this past.
The past is also absolutely necessary in its proper area (as, for
example, it contains essential knowledge of all sorts), but when the past
operates outside awareness it gets caught up in absurdities of every kind
and becomes something like the sorcerer’s apprentice, which just keeps
on functioning mechanically and unintelligently, to bring about destruc-
tive consequences one does not really want.
This brings us to the question: can the past contain adequate know-
ledge of its actual activity in the present? As I have already pointed out,
the content of knowledge (which is necessarily of the past) cannot catch
up with the immediate and actual present, which is always the
unknown. Since the activity of the past is actually taking place in the
present, this too is inherently unknown. Thus, knowledge cannot
“know” what it is actually doing right now. As an example, one may
“know” from hearsay or from general conclusions drawn from particu-
lar experiences that people of a certain race are inferior. When this
“knowledge” responds to a particular member of this race, one’s
immediate perception is shaped, colored, and twisted so as to present
that person as inferior. One is not aware of just how all this is actually
taking place, as it happens very rapidly and in very subtle ways. More-
over, the whole process is accompanied by a great deal of distortion and
self-deception. For example, as one perceives the “inferiority” of the
other person, thus implying one’s own “superiority,” one experiences a
short, sharp burst of intense pleasure. To sustain the pleasure the mind
continues with further false thoughts along this line while concealing
from itself the fact that it is doing do. Clearly, because the response from
Freedom and the Value of the Individual
257

accumulated knowledge always lags behind actuality and because, in
cases such as this, the mind is caught up in feeling the need to distort, it
is not possible through such knowledge alone thoroughly to free the
mind of such prejudices.
How, then, is it possible for there to be the self-awareness that is
required for true freedom? Along the lines of what has been said in this
[book], I propose that self-awareness requires that consciousness sink
into its implicate (and now mainly unconscious) order. It may then be
possible to be directly aware, in the present, of the actual activity of past
knowledge, and especially of that knowledge which is not only false but
which also reacts in such a way as to resist exposure of its falsity. Then
the mind may be free of its bondage to the active confusion that is
enfolded in its past. Without freedom of this kind, there is little mean-
ing even in raising the question as to whether human beings are free, in
the deeper sense of being capable of a creative act that is not determined
mechanically by unknown conditions in the untraceably complex inter-
connections and unplumbable depths of the overall reality in which we
are embedded.
This leads us to a more fundamental question of what the relation-
ship is between the truly free human being and the totality that goes
beyond the explicate order, beyond the implicate order, and beyond time
and space. To pose this question is of course itself subject to question-
ing, since one may ask whether one has properly laid the ground for
doing so by giving serious and sustained attention to the actual activity
of past knowledge in one’s own mind. Is one sufﬁciently free of this
past meaningfully to inquire into the inﬁnite totality? Any real inquiry
of this kind must have such attention in it from the very beginning, or
else one’s mind may be so bound by preconceptions and desires
enfolded in one’s past that true inquiry at this depth is not actually
possible.
Nevertheless, there may be a possibility of usefully engaging, at
least to some extent, in a meaningful discussion of this question, even
though one inevitably begins from the common state of collective con-
sciousness, which is not properly aware of the actual activity in the
present of that false and self-deceptive “knowledge” which is part of its
base.
In doing this, the ﬁrst question to be discussed is: just what is it in
our past that binds us, misleads us, deceives us, and thus prevents true
freedom? I suggest that what limits us is the attempt to identify oneself
with a certain part of one’s past that is regarded as essential to what one
is. As we have seen, we are primarily the present, which is the unknown.
258
Individual Orders

The past is, in its actuality, merely a part of this present that is also
active in the present, and therefore it too is the unknown. All that we
know is the content (i.e., the meaning) of the past that is gone (and this
resembles the actual present only for those contexts in which changes
are slow and regular enough so that the difference between past and
present makes no signiﬁcant difference).
If we are the unknown, which is the present, then time can be seen
in its proper meaning only in the context of that which is beyond time
(i.e., the holomovement or eternity). Any attempt to treat the whole
meaning of existence in terms of time alone will lead to arbitrary and
chaotic limitation of this existence, which then takes on the quality of
being rather mechanical. If we are to be creative rather than mechanical,
our consciousness has to be primarily in the movement beyond time.
Implicitly, this is well known to us. No one will be creative who does not
have an intense interest in what one is doing. With such an interest, one
can see that one will be at most only dimly conscious of the passage of
time. That is to say, though physical time still goes on, consciousness is
not organized mainly in the order of psychological time; rather, it acts
from the holomovement. On the other hand, if the mind is constantly
seeking the goal of ﬁnishing its task and reaching its aim (so that it is
organized in terms of psychological time) it will lack the real interest
needed for true creativity.
Given that a human being may be creative when his or her con-
sciousness arises directly from the “timeless” holomovement, we come
to another question: is the creative human being merely an instrument
or a projection of the creative action of totality? Or does one act from
one’s own being independently? I suggest that this is a wrong question,
as it presupposes a separation of the human being from the totality,
which I have denied at the very outset of this inquiry. A better question
is: can we be free to participate in the creativity of the totality at a level
appropriate to our own potential?
The need for this question becomes clear if we note that ultimately
everything is participating creatively in the action of the totality. For
matter in its grosser levels, this creative participation consists of con-
tinuing to re-create its past forms, with modiﬁcations, in a way that is
approximately mechanical. (This was implied in the statement that each
moment is created with its past as a projection containing a further
projection of the past of previous moments.) Such creation of a sus-
tained but ever-changing existence of matter at the grosser (mechanical)
levels opens the way for the action of higher levels of creativity, such as
life and mind.
Freedom and the Value of the Individual
259

But once these higher levels are possible, why are they not always
fully and harmoniously realized? I have proposed that, at least in part,
this is because of ignorance. Such ignorance leads the mind to continue
its past, mechanically, through identiﬁcation rather as if it were a form
of matter at a grosser level. The mind is trying in a confused way to
realize the kind of creativity appropriate to such grosser levels of matter.
In doing so, it is clearly unable to realize the kind of creativity appropri-
ate to its own level.
Ending this state of ignorance may then open a new possibility for
the mind to be creative at its own level. When it does this, it is still
participating in the universal creativity, but now it is realizing its proper
potential.
I suggest that this is the essence of freedom, to realize one’s true
potential, whatever the source of the potential may be. It is unimportant
whether it is grounded in the whole or in some part (e.g., the individual
human being). And, indeed, as has been said earlier, the attempt even to
raise the question of whether creativity originates in the totality or in
the individual presupposes a kind of separateness of the two that we
have already denied. So I propose that the question of freedom has to be
looked at in a different way.
This new way ﬂows out of giving sustained and serious attention to
how unfreedom arises basically from identiﬁcation with the past, in
which the mind commits itself to act as if it were determined mechanic-
ally in the ways in which grosser levels of matter are determined. We
have to use the past, but to determine what we are from it is the mistake.
To do this implies that such grosser mechanical existence in time has
supreme value and that the main function of the mind is to sustain this
sort of existence by continuing the past with modiﬁcations. The clear
perception that we are the unknown, which is beyond time, allows the
mind to give time its proper value, which is limited and not supreme.
This is what makes freedom possible, in the sense of realizing our true
potential for participating harmoniously in universal creativity, a cre-
ativity that also includes the past and future in their proper roles.
260
Individual Orders

Part Three – Collective Orders
10 KNOWLEDGE AS ENDARKENMENT (1980)
The following small-group discussion highlights Bohm’s view of knowledge as
the central factor in the “endarkenment” of human consciousness, exploring
at length the overview of knowledge ﬁrst outlined in Chapter 9. Bohm claims
that an active, self-sustaining pool of human knowledge – accumulated and
reﬁned through millennia – is thoroughly infected with misinformation, thus
polluting human experience at its generative source. In going to this genera-
tive source, the problems of humanity may be resolved in radically new ways.
Attending to particular problems, while clearly necessary, will not signiﬁ-
cantly affect the conﬂicts and challenges we face in the world today.
To illustrate the meaning of a generative source, consider the term
“roses.” At one level this is a sheerly abstract category which, in our concepts,
distinguishes roses from rhinoceroses, tangerines, and so forth. Bohm desig-
nates such a category as the abstract general. But there is another aspect –
the concrete general – which indicates a living, generative process. This
concrete general is the actual emergence of rose after rose after rose, and is
not just “in our concepts.” In this context, any single rose is the concrete
particular, a temporary manifestation derived from the more fundamental
generative process. Our attention is usually split between the concrete par-
ticular rose and the abstract category “roses”; we rarely attend to the con-
crete generative process from which all roses emerge.
Similarly, when we think of “knowledge” as residing in minds, books,
computers, and so on, this is the abstract general aspect of knowledge. We
thus categorically distinguish “knowledge” from oceans, trucks, or roses. But
knowledge also has its concrete general aspect – a living pool of collective
Previously unpublished seminar, courtesy of Saral Bohm.
Knowledge as Endarkenment
261

meaning that gives rise to our perceptions, emotions, dispositions, thoughts,
and actions. Bohm asserts that this pool of generative knowledge produces all
forms of particular knowledge, including the experience of an apparently
concrete particular ego. Such a perspective inverts the common view wherein
the self or ego acquires, possesses, and applies knowledge.
These category confusions between ego and knowledge, between
abstract and concrete, and between general and particular, are but a few
examples of the misinformation coded into the generic activity of knowledge.
And since all variety of such information permeates human experience, the
appearance of genuinely creative knowledge is sporadic at best. What is thus
called for, says Bohm, is sustained investigation into the concrete general
movement of knowledge, rather than the reﬂexive application of strictly
abstract knowledge.
Bohm
We’ve said the world is in this terrible state. I think you can see
that everyone is following his own ego, his own individual or collect-
ive ego, and that’s why nothing can be done. You cannot get people to
agree; it’s obvious what should be done and yet nothing can be done.
For twenty years people have known there would be an oil shortage.
For seven years it was extremely obvious, but in this seven years no
one was able to get together and do anything. They couldn’t agree.
Different people had different ideas, or even the same person had
contradictory ideas. People would like to say there’s plenty of energy.
To many people, there is no oil shortage and they believe we can go on
with our customary driving habits. So clearly there is self-deception
or distortion. People don’t see the fact because they would prefer not
to. That is, it would make people too uncomfortable – or at least they
think it would become too uncomfortable – if they saw this fact about
the oil shortage, or about anything: about the fact that the world is
falling apart economically or about the fact that we are ready to
thoroughly annihilate the world. Every alternative is dangerous.
Atomic energy would be quite safe if everybody were very
rational, but since people are not very rational, it’s not very safe. Even
a small mistake can cause a plant to blow up and devastate an area the
size of Pennsylvania, and make it radioactive for thousands of years.
If there were a nuclear war every one of these radioactive plants could
be counted on to blow up. But nobody thinks about that. On the one
hand they’re preparing for nuclear war, and on the other they’re
building nuclear plants; these are two inconsistent approaches. So in
one compartment we have a nuclear-plant-building requirement, and
262
Collective Orders

in the other compartment the preparation for nuclear war. They’re
not allowed to meet, you see. If they did meet, there would be too
much of a disturbance. Somebody facing this would feel that he
might go to pieces.
Now, what is the origin of all this? We’ve said the “self,” but that
doesn’t get us very far, because the self has been with us for as long as
we know. Nobody knows what to do with it. People may say, “Let’s get
rid of the ego,” but then it’s the ego saying, “Let’s get rid of the ego.”
Therefore, it doesn’t mean anything. So is there something deeper,
some source, some generating process that is really responsible for all
this? That’s the question I want to consider.
I want to say that the word “general” means “to gather together
everything that is important, to put things together abstractly into a
general class.” But it also comes from the root “to generate.” You see,
the “genus” of a species is that which shares a common generating
process. People feel more closely related when they say that they’ve
been generated from a common source. The word “relative” means
“common source of generation.” Now if you understand the process
of generation, you can make things like agriculture possible. But to do
that you must study the general abstractly and gather the relevant
facts, and that leads you to a perception of the generating source of
the whole thing. Is that clear? Similarly, in chemistry you ﬁnd all the
elements and you classify them abstractly into categories and so on,
and that shows how to generate all sorts of chemical compounds. Or
in physics, we can see that from the general laws of physics we have
come to the generative source of energy, and so on.
Similarly, perhaps, in the mind we tend to look at particular prob-
lems one after another. You may have trouble being angry, being
fearful, being jealous; we have political problems, economic prob-
lems, military problems, social problems – you can go on endlessly.
You won’t learn very much if you deal with them one after another.
The next one will surprise you, and you will be caught in it once
again. From a particular problem treated as particular you cannot
learn very much. But if you can see these things as general – as not
only belonging to you, general to you, but general to all mankind over
all history or even before history began, perhaps even including the
animals in some cases, then this may lead you to the generative
source of the difﬁculties.
To know the generation of plants they did not know all the details
about plants. It was careful observation that showed people that the
seeds are what control the growth of plants. It didn’t mean they knew
Knowledge as Endarkenment
263

every detail about every plant. It requires careful observation, intelli-
gent observation to see what to abstract in the abstract general. You
see, the general is both abstract and concrete – it’s abstract when you
form a class and it’s concrete when you see the generating process
itself. Now the important point is to see what to abstract that will lead
you to the concrete general. With plants, it’s the seeds; in chemistry
it’s understanding the elements; in physics they hope to understand
the elementary particles to see how matter is generated.
In society people thought you could treat each person as an atom,
and in that way you would understand how society is generated.
That’s been a common idea that obviously breaks down. A person is
not an atom. He has a tremendous amount inside of him – he cannot
be treated as an atom. So that theory of generation is wrong. It
doesn’t mean that you’ll have to know everything about everything,
but you’ll have to be observant to ﬁnd out what is the important
point. If you have particular problems you may get overwhelmed by
one after another – that’s just what’s happening to us. There are so
many particular problems that you feel they can never be solved. In
fact, they can’t.
By seeing the general source of all this, we may ﬁnd things sim-
pliﬁed. It would take some time to explain how to get over this, but I
think that Krishnamurti has been suggesting that knowledge is the
general source of our difﬁculty. He calls it “thought” at times, but it
would perhaps be better to call it “knowledge,” which includes
thought, but includes a bit more. It’s dominated by thought, but
knowledge goes further than thought, further than abstract thought.
You see, when we talk about thought, the tendency is to think of
something rather abstract. Knowledge may be much more concrete.
The Latin languages have two words for knowledge. One is the
abstract, as in the French “savoir”; the other is “connaître,” which is
the concrete knowing. The English “recognize” is that same root;
when you recognize something you don’t have time to think.
Also, skill is knowledge. You use skill in driving your car; that is,
you got the knowledge and it became part of you. Many other things
are knowledge. Knowledge acts through various dispositions of the
body. If you’re walking down stairs, your body is set to walk in a
certain way. I remember I was walking in the dark, not expecting that
the stairs would end, and the body was set wrongly. In other words, it
was the knowledge that these were stairs that produced the set of the
body. The knowledge that there are no more stairs means changing
that set. And you have other knowledge of that kind – if you know
264
Collective Orders

that some person is your enemy, you will be disposed to him in a
certain way. He will see that you are his enemy, and he will make the
same disposition. The thing will be set. So knowledge is involved in
enmity, right? If you didn’t know he was your enemy, I don’t know
how it would work.
I read a science ﬁction story a long time ago – in the Thirties –
where a scientist invented a machine that would remove people’s
memories altogether, immediately, all over the world. Hitler was
talking and he suddenly forgot he was Hitler. People had to rediscover
how to do everything. It shows that all those political problems
were in the form of knowledge. These people knew they were Nazis
and they knew what they had to do. Other people know they are
communists and this and that. So because of what people know,
not only abstractly but concretely, they’re faced with all these
problems. It seems silly to have problems based on what you know.
That is, knowledge includes not only information but misinforma-
tion; it also includes confused information and it includes nonsense.
It’s mixed with all sorts of useful and correct things. Even an idea
which is correct in one context becomes nonsense in another. You
can’t so easily ﬁx it.
So, you could say that knowledge is not just something in the
library that you can look up any time you want. It’s not just sitting
there waiting for you to refer to it. That’s one picture of knowledge –
that it is entirely abstract, sitting there in the computer waiting for
you to use it, and then you choose to use it when you want to and give
it up when you don’t want to. But that doesn’t work, you see. If you
know this fellow is your enemy, you can’t give it up. If you know
you’re in danger, you can’t give it up. Suppose we take people getting
angry at each other. You can see that knowledge is involved, because
somebody can say, “I was just sitting here peacefully and he attacked
me,” or, “He’s always doing this; he does it to annoy me.” That know-
ledge will produce anger, right? From there on, your thought is no
longer clear, because once the anger has been created, then your
thought is directed toward justifying the anger. You’ll only look at the
evidence that justiﬁes your side and not the other side – or you’ll
even invent evidence. Also, you may ﬁnally say, “I shouldn’t be
angry,” but that’s rather silly, because one part of your knowledge
says, “I should be angry,” and the other part says, “I mustn’t be angry,”
and you can’t stop it, right? Why can’t I just wipe out the knowledge
that says I should be angry? Then I don’t have to ﬁght with the other
knowledge that says I shouldn’t be angry. But when you carry on this
Knowledge as Endarkenment
265

ﬁght, you just get more confused and worn out. The brain cells
perhaps start to break down.
Participant
Also, it can be projected into the future as fear: it may
happen again.
Bohm
Yes, I know it may happen again. Or else two people come
together and somebody says, “I know I’m right.” Now that’s not only
abstract knowledge, it’s concrete knowledge. You get that feeling of
rightness concretely, which happens immediately. The other person
says, “No, I know I’m right.” Or else the other person says, “Yes, you’re
right, I’ll just do what you say.” Either of those responses produce
trouble. That feeling that I know – you base everything on it, right?
But that feeling “I know” may be properly founded, or it may not be.
Now how does this come about? That is, you feel you know when
there’s nothing underneath it at all. But still you’re quite conﬁdent
and you get a very strong feeling that you know. You see, the feeling
that “I know” is immediate, concrete; it is not just an abstraction. If it
were only an abstraction, there wouldn’t be any trouble with it. You
could just say, “How do I know?” You would soon ﬁnd out whether
you know or don’t know. These people in Iran know that they’re right;
the people in Washington also know that they’re right, so there’s no
way to meet. Now, if you analyze it you could say each one shows
what the other has been doing wrong. And if you just listen to one
side you would say, “Yes, that’s terrible, they shouldn’t have done
that.” Then you go to the other side and listen and you’re apt to
say the same thing. But they can’t drop all this. Both sides say,
“Yes, we will stick to this no matter what happens. It may lead to
nuclear annihilation, but still we’ll stick to it. We can’t do otherwise.”
There seems to be something very powerful there, and yet if that
science ﬁction machine I described were to operate, the thing would
evaporate, right? There wouldn’t be any problem. The ayatollah
would forget who he was, so where would the problem be?
So evidently one important form of knowledge is that we know
what we are, we know who we are. It’s very important, right? But how
do we know? Do we really know? Therefore, knowledge, as I say, is
not just this abstract thing; it is a whole process that is autonomous
and moves on its own. We don’t choose to apply it; it applies us. The
knowledge of who we are, what we are, and what we’ve got to do
determines this whole future, and we’re going to be driven by it to
prepare for nuclear war or whatever. Perhaps not – perhaps we’ll do
something else according to further knowledge. But it’s entirely out of
our hands. We have no control over this knowledge; it controls us.
266
Collective Orders

Participant
The distinction you began by making was that ﬁrst we
may think of knowledge as something in a book, but you’re pointing
out that it’s the way we set our bodies, it’s who we think we are.
Bohm
It’s also our emotions. Knowledge produces emotions, like
anger, fear, pleasure, pain.
Participant
But when you say that it drives us rather than we drive it,
it’s getting less clear to me who the “we” is that is different from this
knowledge.
Bohm
As human beings we are driven by knowledge; we are domin-
ated by knowledge, let’s put it that way. We may imagine that we
control this knowledge, that we can select it and use it according to
our convenience. And in some areas we can. But fundamentally, it
drives us. There are some areas of technical knowledge where we
might select, but that only makes it more dangerous. You see, in a
certain limited area we can be in control and be very rational, but this
rationality is in the service of wild irrationality. The aims towards
which this knowledge is used are determined entirely by the
irrational parts of the knowledge. The more rational you are, the more
dangerous it gets.
Participant
That pressure of the past, basically.
Bohm
Well, whatever it is. We say the pressure from knowing who
you are and what you are. That is the past, but why should the past
press on you? Where is it? It isn’t making sense. At ﬁrst you may
want to put it, “Who are we?” That’s the way people think: “I am
such-and-such a person, I am religious, I am this, I am that, I belong to
this group, I belong to that group.” That’s the way people start out.
Participant
Is this knowledge synonymous with the term
“conditioning”?
Bohm
It includes conditioning, yes. We can say conditioning, like
knowledge, has two sides. Knowledge may be useful, and it’s neces-
sary for us to exist. Then there’s another kind which is driving us to
disaster. So we’re not understanding knowledge, you see. That is, we
know all sorts of things – not “we,” but knowledge knows all sorts of
things. We’re saying that knowledge is moving autonomously – it
passes from one person to another. There is a whole pool of know-
ledge for the whole human race, like different computers that share a
pool of knowledge. There’s one pool of knowledge that’s been going
on many thousands of years, developing and so on, and this know-
ledge is full of all sorts of content. It has gone on to great achieve-
ments of technological and scientiﬁc content, but at the same time it
is leading us to disaster. This knowledge knows all those things, but it
Knowledge as Endarkenment
267

doesn’t know what it is doing. This knowledge knows itself wrongly:
it knows itself as doing nothing. But what this knowledge also knows
is that there is somebody else there called “me” or “us” who are using
it. So this knowledge says, “I am not responsible. I’m just here for you
to use.”
Participant
But actually it’s driving.
Bohm
It’s driving. It says, “You are doing it.”
Participant
But actually it’s us.
Bohm
But who are the “us”?
Participant
The “I” that started the whole thing.
Bohm
But was there an “I” that starts it? This knowledge tells us that
an “I” started it, but how do we know? Maybe knowledge produced
the “I.” If there were no knowledge, where would this ego be?
Participant
But isn’t that like the chicken and the egg?
Bohm
Well, not necessarily. It might be conceivable that man would
be free of this ego and still have knowledge, right?
Participant
Right, but the kind of knowledge you’re talking about is
not factual. It is an interpretation of . . .
Bohm
But interpretation arises in all good knowledge too. You can’t
do science without a certain amount ot interpretation. Knowledge is
there, and somehow it went wrong. One could put it like this. Perhaps
in the distant past, man took a wrong turn and began to develop
knowledge in the wrong way. We could speculate that it then got
worse and worse.
Participant
This knowledge that you’re talking about – the “wrong
turn” – is that something we’ve absorbed or something we conjure
up?
Bohm
We haven’t found out yet. We don’t know. It’s important in
this inquiry not to assume what you don’t know. One of the things
that knowledge has been doing wrong is taking for absolute truth
things it has never known.
Participant
Couldn’t we also say, as you suggested, that somewhere
in the past this has gone wrong? Maybe one could also put it the other
way around: we are taking the wrong turn all the time. So we have to
ﬁnd out where we are taking this wrong turn all the time.
Bohm
Yes, it’s both. That is, possibly in the past we made a wrong
turn, and that wrong turn was such as to be continually repeated, and
we are continually doing the wrong turn. If we could discover that
wrong turn, then it might change.
Now let’s say a few things about the structure of knowledge. First
of all, we have the abstract knowledge. Then we have something more
268
Collective Orders

concrete, which we call “imagination,” that displays this abstract
knowledge in a more concrete form. You can imagine not only what
things look like, but what they feel like – what it feels like to be such-
and-such a person and so on. It produces in your nervous system a set
of excitations similar to what might be produced by an actual occa-
sion, but different because it’s being produced in the memory, like a
tape recording. In addition to imagination, our knowledge includes
direct sense impressions and feelings and so on. Let’s distinguish
between the two forms of knowledge, which we could call “immedi-
ate” and “non-immediate,” which is mediated. If we take thinking, we
say, ﬁrst of all, we have the immediate necessity. You begin with your
sense experience, which we can call “immediate,” right? Then you
start thinking, and that introduces mediation between you and that
fact. It tells you this is a table, you can use it to write on, it’s made of
wood – you know, thousands of items of information which will be
useful and necessary.
That’s the way it begins. It appears there are two sides to know-
ledge: the immediate, which is concrete, and the mediated, which is
abstract. Now “abstract” means “to take out.” The power of thought is
that it can abstract; it abstracts what’s important. If you had to do
every part of this in concrete detail, you couldn’t handle it. By means
of thought, people have found out how to abstract that which is
important in various cases, put it together and make it general rather
than particular, so it would apply in a tremendous range of cases. So a
general concept such as “table,” you know what it means, you know
all sorts of tables. You know many kinds of tables you’ve never seen
before; you could even say there’s a table mountain, and so on. That’s
the general concept, you see, the general notion, which is abstract.
That abstraction abstracts what is important and shows the general
signiﬁcance. The word “concrete” comes from the Latin “concrecere,”
which means “to grow together; all grown together.” It’s like a jungle
that has so much in it that you would never ﬁnd your way through it.
Nonetheless, the abstract must come from the concrete. That is, if you
generate abstractions out of pure imagination, they don’t mean very
much, as a rule. Ultimately, they must be connected with the concrete.
So, the concrete is one side, the abstract is another. They don’t
exist separately; it’s an abstraction to use those two words. It’s like the
two sides of a coin – the two sides of a coin have no existence as such.
They are entirely an abstraction, but nevertheless they have a mean-
ing. You could never have the sides of the coins standing by them-
selves, you know, with the coin somewhere else. So the concrete also
Knowledge as Endarkenment
269

is not separated from the abstract, but both the concrete and the
abstract are abstractions. They are also both concrete, as we’ll see
later.
The same is true of what is mediated and what is immediate. We
begin by saying, “This is immediate,” and we form an abstraction.
The abstraction process takes time by thinking. It takes you time to
make that abstraction and apply it, right? But now that past process –
this is where conditioning comes in – that past process of abstract
thought being put down in memory and generalized now comes out
in the concrete reality as the way you see it and the way you react to it.
We said that in the case of skill, the abstract knowledge of driving
a car becomes concrete. You don’t think about it; you move right
away. All that you’ve seen about road signs and so on comes up
immediately – you don’t have to think, right? Similarly, you know
that this is a table, you feel it immediately. You don’t think, “This is a
table, therefore I can write on it,” but you immediately start to write,
if that’s what you want to do. Similarly you say, “That’s my enemy.”
That’s immediate, right? You don’t say, “I’ve been thinking that’s my
enemy – that’s an abstraction,” but rather you concretely feel him
immediately as the enemy. Therefore the way you feel, the way you
see, the way you move, the way you act concretely now, contains the
effect of past abstractions.
Participant
What I have a picture of is a sequence in time which
begins with the concrete, the sensation, the immediate thing, the
conditioned abstraction which operates . . .
Bohm
It may be unconditioned or conditioned, you see; it might be a
creative acting. Now, part of our knowledge – we’ll call it “misinfor-
mation,” which mankind seems to have accepted – is that the con-
crete is quite different from the abstract, divided from it; also, that the
immediate is quite divided from mediation. We say, “There is non-
thought and thought.” I have my “immediate” experiences and I say
that thinking is something entirely different. Now that leads to con-
fusion. Confusion arises when you mix one thing up with another, or
when you take two things and call them one or one thing and call it
two. It’s a failure of your categories, of your classiﬁcation.
Participant
But the funny thing about this is that once I set up this
structure, I ﬁnd evidence all the time that this structure is correct. So
I cannot really check it anymore.
Bohm
Well, that’s the difﬁculty. We haven’t found out yet why the
mind starts to distort around this structure and produce only evi-
dence that it’s correct, and failing to notice evidence that it’s not.
270
Collective Orders

Participant
It’s also important to point out what’s wrong with
abstractions.
Bohm
I say they are very good.
Participant
Yes, they are very good in certain ways. For instance,
when one wants to read a road sign, it’s very good to remember the
principle feature of a certain road sign being triangular, for instance. It
has then a very good function as being an instant response, because
you know it. In the psychological ﬁeld this becomes very dangerous.
Bohm
That’s right. You could begin by thinking about the outward
and the inward. Outwardly, we deal with the material world, and
though we can become confused about it, that process of the abstract
and the concrete, or the immediate and the mediate, is absolutely
necessary. It’s the way by which we have learned how to deal with the
world, right? Without it we would be lost. Even animals do it; they
make abstractions of what’s general. They know what’s good for them
and what’s not.
Then the thing comes inward, because we are able, through the
imagination, to produce inward experiences similar to what might be
produced by an outward fact. This can cause confusion, because we
will fail to see the difference between an experience produced by
memory and an experience coming from an outward fact. In fact,
they are generally fused and they should be fused. They merge
together; the outward and the inward merge in the experience, and
that’s the way it has to be. I mean, there’s no other way. But still, there
is the danger of confusion. They can never be separated, and yet
somehow we must be able to keep clear these two sources. The whole
mechanism of the brain, whatever it may be, does this. The recording
combined with the senses produce consciousness, an experience of
consciousness in which these two are fused inseparably. You cannot
tell at that immediate moment what came from what.
The important point is, that is part of the function of knowledge.
Knowledge is not just what’s in the library or on the tape recording.
Knowledge is all that. If you didn’t have that knowledge, it would be
of no signiﬁcance. It would be a sheer abstraction that you could
keep in the library; it would never have any signiﬁcance.
So knowledge is this process of the abstract and the concrete, the
mediate and the immediate, the outward and the inward. It’s all
one process, but knowledge does not know this, generally speaking.
Knowledge knows itself as not being this one process, but as being
split up into the abstract and the concrete, the mediate and the
immediate, and so on. That’s the way people think of it, right? Since
Knowledge as Endarkenment
271

people have thought of it that way, that thought is going to be
recorded, and that thought will react, immediately, and people will
then experience the outward as the mere outward and the inward as
the mere inward. Therefore the experience will be wrong.
Now people say, “Whatever I experience is the source of what I
know.” So knowledge gets caught in a trap, because it produces
experience, and then knowledge says, “I must depend on experience
to know what I know.” But knowledge produces an experience and
then proves itself to be correct. Knowledge produces that sense of
truth. It produces a thought which produces the sense of truth, and a
feeling which produces that sense of concrete, immediate experience.
So knowledge has lost track of the fact that it’s doing that. You see, if
knowledge knew that it was doing that, it wouldn’t make a fool of
itself.
Participant
Is there some sort of corrective device, a mechanism . . .
Bohm
With knowledge, no mechanism is able to do anything. The
only mechanism – which is not a mechanism – would be to see what’s
happening. If you don’t see what’s happening, then knowledge can do
nothing. Knowledge is in the dark.
Participant
Is knowledge capable of learning?
Bohm
Of course it’s capable of learning; it’s learned all these things.
It’s capable of learning, it’s capable of mislearning, it’s capable of all
sorts of things.
Participant
Unlearning?
Bohm
That’s a question we must come to. It can unlearn some things,
but it ﬁnds it very hard to unlearn the structure we’re discussing, as
we’ll see. It gets caught. Once knowledge took this wrong turn, it got
caught in something it doesn’t know how to get out of. Now know-
ledge says, “Whatever I do I must base on knowledge.” That’s the way
knowledge has been thinking and working. Knowledge says, “I have
nothing to go on but what I know. I don’t know any way out of this. I
only know what I know, and I’m in the dark about these things.”
Participant
Is knowledge, as you use the term, distinguishable from
thought?
Bohm
Thought is part of knowledge.
Participant
But is there knowledge outside of thought?
Bohm
Yes, the unconscious knowledge by which you do all sorts of
things, react to all sorts of things. It’s been based on thought, and it’s
been built up by thought, but it happens without your thinking.
You’re not conscious of thinking. You may be thinking unconsciously,
but it won’t help you to say that.
272
Collective Orders

Participant
But essentially you’re saying it all comes out of the same
movement.
Bohm
Yes, it’s one movement: knowledge, which includes thought
feeling, desire, will, physical reaction, tensions, and all sorts of things.
You know how to fool yourself as well as knowing how to do all sorts
of useful things. It’s one movement. It cannot be separated any more
than the concrete can be separated from the abstract.
I’m trying to draw a map here by saying that knowledge has this
structure. The reason I’m doing this is because knowledge already
knows it has a structure, and what it knows is misinformation.
Knowledge knows that the concrete is different from the abstract.
That the inside is different from the outside, that the immediate
is different from the mediated, and so on. And knowledge not
only knows it, but experiences it that way. It says, “I know what I
experience and I experience what I know.” Is that clear? Therefore,
knowledge already knows this and the mere abstract statement
otherwise – that knowledge doesn’t know – isn’t good enough for me:
“I need concrete proof that it’s different, otherwise I won’t change.
You don’t want me to take any airy-fairy abstraction and just follow
that.” Knowledge says, “I’m good and hard-headed and I stick to the
concrete” – except when there’s a concrete fact that tells us we must
go back to the abstract.
Participant
What are we doing as we are listening to this? What is
knowledge doing as it listens to this conversation about knowledge?
Bohm
That’s the question. Knowledge is listening. One part of know-
ledge says, “Yes, very interesting, quite logical,” and the other part
says, “This is nothing but an abstraction; I can’t count on that.”
Participant
Why is it that we’ve created this division, this concrete/
abstract, inward/outward division? Maybe if we could observe the
point at which the mind sets that up . . .
Bohm
Well, it’s necessary to do this, you see. Look, man began to
think. There are psychologists like Piaget who claims that sometimes,
or even frequently, young children just beginning to think, having
strong imaginations, cannot distinguish their thoughts from real
things. They expect other people will see their thoughts standing in
the middle of the room, like they do. Then later on they learn it’s
otherwise, so how are they going to explain it? They say, “There’s a
real thing out there and it’s concrete, and in here is some sort of
abstraction, which we call thought.” The child has got to do that. I
mean, nobody can see your thoughts; we can all see the table, so we
say that it is concrete, factual, and actual. And we say, besides that,
Knowledge as Endarkenment
273

that we have thoughts, which are quite abstract and somewhere in
your head. Not necessarily in the head, though. You see, the ancient
Greeks said that the heart was the seat of the mind; they deduced
because of the many folds in the brain that it was a good organ for
cooling the blood. Hence the phrase, “a warm heart and a cool head.”
Anyway, they probably thought that thoughts were taking place
somewhere around the heart. Knowledge doesn’t know where it’s
taking place, right?
Participant
What’s the seat of the awareness that can be aware and
still not be caught in this trap?
Bohm
Well, we’ll say, “Is knowledge all there is?” is the question you
are asking. Knowledge says, “Knowledge is all I know.” But then the
next question is, is knowledge all there is? You can see rationally that
it can’t be all there is. The whole thing would be meaningless if
knowledge were all there is. There must be something beyond know-
ledge, some kind of reality, at least, some kind of truth. From the
senses we often get information that shows us our knowledge is
wrong, and we’re usually ready to drop it, outwardly. Now, can we get
information from within showing us our knowledge is wrong? That’s
the question.
We’re asking whether new information can come. Knowledge
assumes that its information is coming basically from somewhere
beyond knowledge, from some reality, let us say, beyond knowledge.
In the case of the senses we seem to get quite a bit of evidence of
that. When we discover things that contradict our knowledge, we
drop it. Things happen that are entirely surprising, that we don’t
expect, and are quite contradictory to our knowledge. Therefore
we can see a reality which appears to be independent of our
knowledge, or at least substantially so, although we can affect it by
our knowledge.
Participant
In the physical world there are illusions. For instance,
there might be a painting of a violin, and when people reach for
it, they can’t get it. So their senses tell them that in fact it’s not
a real violin, it’s a painting. Your interpretation then has to be
changed on the basis of your senses. But the experience you have of
anger or another inward experience, there’s not a comparable
feedback.
Bohm
Somehow we don’t have it, but that doesn’t mean we can’t
have it. By and large, people haven’t had it; they get no feedback
inwardly, and they have no way of knowing that this whole construc-
tion of experience is entirely a construction of the imagination. It
274
Collective Orders

looks very real, it feels very real. All the signs of reality are carefully
imitated: solid, strong, fast, necessary, and so on. Whatever test you
have for reality is produced inside. You see, this table resists being
changed; and your feeling of anger resists being changed. This table
remains stable; your feeling of anger does also. Any test for reality
you propose is satisﬁed by your feeling of anger. But I propose that
this satisfaction is part of the illusion, that the illusion is so con-
structed as to satisfy all your tests. Now, knowledge knows how to do
that because knowledge is what knows all the tests in the ﬁrst place,
so it can also know what tests have got to be satisﬁed and know how
to satisfy them. You can’t fool knowledge . . .
Participant
It’s got all the cards.
Bohm
It’s got more cards than you’ve got!
In any event, we could say that the brain has to deal with itself
differently than it deals with, say, a chair. But in fact mankind has
fallen into the trap of implicitly treating the brain in the same way
that it treats the chair.
Participant
It’s quite interesting, ﬁrst of all, to realize the ﬂow
between the inward and the outward. This might be a starting point
for a new observation.
Bohm
Yes, I think that would be a way. Now, I think we should
clarify a little bit on what we mean by “inward.” In the beginning,
“inward” might mean just what’s inside the skin, but then we ﬁnd
that’s not exactly what we mean, because the stomach is inside
the skin, but it can be treated outwardly by pills or operations. When
you open up the body you see that it’s just the same as the outward;
it just happens to be inside. If something is inside a box, that
doesn’t mean it’s inward. That’s not what we mean by “inward,”
right? Rather, “inward” has a deeper meaning in the sense of
going deep into the depths of consciousness, where you can’t say
where it is.
Participant
Inside of me – isn’t that the notion?
Bohm
Yes, inside me, but what do I mean by “me”? You see, I might
mean the body sometimes, or the soul or the spirit, but it means
something at the very depth of things, at the very innermost source,
rather than just something inside a box or inside a certain region of
space which is covered by the skin. But even what happens inside the
skin is highly affected by what goes on outside. Not only temperature
and pressure and all that, but other people affect you; they give you a
pain in the neck, or they stir up your blood – all sorts of things
happen. Somebody did an experiment with radioactive tracers in the
Knowledge as Endarkenment
275

blood, and he watched the distribution of blood in the brain. Every
thought produced a radical redistribution of blood in the brain. So in
that sense even the physical outward and the mental inward are not
separated; what happens in the one happens in the other. If you
change the distribution of the blood in the brain, it will change the
whole way the brain works. If you change the way the brain is work-
ing, it will change the blood. So they are really one, but still we’re
getting a notion of what we mean by “inward.”
Now, if you are in a close personal relationship – or even with
nature, seeing a beautiful scene outwardly – you can see that the
beauty of that takes place inwardly. Or seeing something ugly out-
wardly, the ugliness is taking place inwardly, probably both physically
and mentally.
The whole tradition of the human race has been that this is not
so; our language is built that way, and we experience it that way.
Knowledge, which goes by experience, logic, and reason, has no way
out of this. It says, “I can only start from what I experience.” But now
we say experience cannot be counted on, and furthermore not even
reason, because reason gets distorted when you’re angry – your rea-
son cannot be trusted. So neither experience nor reason can be
trusted in this area. Even when scientists get angry at each other, their
reason can no longer be trusted, nor their choice of facts.
We have to ask: How are we going to get at this and perhaps
something beyond all this? That’s really one of the questions we
must keep coming back to. One of the points, then, is to look in
more detail at how experience is formed. We accept experience by
saying, “That’s experience – nothing more can be said about it.
That’s where we start.” But now we’re saying it can’t be that way; we
know experience is mediated by the past. I’ve said this abstractly,
right? You can see by reason that it must be so. Reason can work from
the abstraction and draw necessary conclusions. But then the rest of
the mind doesn’t pay any attention to reason unless it has the concrete
along with the abstract. In a way that makes sense, because reason
could produce all sorts of nonsense if it starts from something wrong.
For that reason alone, the mind is reluctant to go any further, and
perhaps for other reasons which are even stronger. So you sort of get
stuck there.
Participant
When you say the outward and the inward are the same,
is there a difference between saying that, and saying the outward
affects the inward?
Bohm
Yes. Anybody can see the outward and inward affect each
276
Collective Orders

other, but ultimately there can be no distinction, because the con-
sciousness of the outward is inward, right? Whatever you see
outwardly is being projected from the inward movement of the
brain.
Participant
And the inward affects the outward as well?
Bohm
Yes, it obviously affects the outward, but your “outward” is the
“inward.” You see, we may say there is some abstract outward which
nobody knows about, which is just outward. It’s pure reality, right?
But any reality that man knows is inward as well as outward. The
reality that man doesn’t know might as well not even be there as far
as he’s concerned, unless he has some sign of it. Therefore, the reality
that man experiences is both outward and inward at the same time,
inseparably.
Participant
Do you mean, in as much as he is storing his outward
experience inwardly?
Bohm
No, the very experience is an inward one. You see, if you
cut the nerves going to the brain, there’s no experience. It may
be taking place outwardly, but if you put an anesthetic in there,
nothing happens inwardly and you say no experience has taken
place, right? Experience is an inseparable fusion of the outward and
inward. If there’s no consciousness, there’s no knowledge. The
word “conscious” means “knowledge”; it’s “conscience”; “ponsciare”
means “to know.” “Conscience” would mean “to know it all together.”
In ancient times, when the word was formed, it did mean what
everybody knew, all together. Consciousness was inherently belong-
ing to everybody. Since then we have gotten the idea of private
consciousness, that each person is a separate individual whose
consciousness is entirely separate. And that’s the way he experiences
it because that’s what he knows. On the other hand you can ask,
Is it truly private? Isn’t it formed from the general consciousness,
which passes on the pool of information? I could refer to the
Greek word “idiosyncrasy”; its root means “private mixture.” The
idiosyncrasies of a person are his particular mixture of the general
ingredients.
That’s the suggestion: that this consciousness is general, and by
looking at the general consciousness we get to the generating root of
consciousness. If we try to look at our own consciousness, we’re look-
ing way up on a top branch somewhere, and we won’t be anywhere
near the root.
Participant
Usually we think of each individual having a mind and
his own thoughts and so forth, and the sum of those thoughts making
Knowledge as Endarkenment
277

up a consciousness. But you’re really suggesting ﬂipping it around,
saying, in fact, that there’s a general consciousness which contains
the appearance of these individual . . .
Bohm
Yes, the manifestation as particular individuals. It’s like say-
ing, basically, that all trees of a certain kind are one tree, really.
Like the Eskimos used to think there was only one seal that they
were continually hunting, and they prayed that the seal should
reappear.
Participant
And is that consciousness also thoughts, feelings, and
emotions?
Bohm
That’s right. We want to go into that – it’s thought, feeling,
desire, will, and so on. Now we have to go into this carefully, because
we have said that our ordinary way of experiencing things ﬁnds
that thought is different from feeling, they’re both different from
will (possibly desire is more feeling, but they’re all different from
will), and then physical action and so on. All this fragmentation has
been introduced by knowledge. We say we know that thought is
different from feeling, both concretely and abstractly. We know that
will is something else again. When I say “know,” you get the feeling
of knowing it, really. I know this is a table. It’s not just abstract. I
experience it concretely through the senses and also abstractly;
they’re fused. That sense of certainty in knowledge comes from this
fusion of the concrete and the abstract. If I only had abstract know-
ledge, I’d say, “Well, yes, that’s an abstraction; it may be so, possibly
so.”
There is some sort of illusion generated by this knowledge, and
it’s very persistent and pervasive. This knowledge does not belong to
anybody – it is general consciousness, which manifests in each
human being.
Participant
Is that a collective subconscious?
Bohm
We could call it that, but even to call it “subconscious.” . . . You
see, Freud introduced the idea of the conscious and the unconscious,
or the subconscious. That suggests a division in saying that some-
where in another layer is the unconscious, and you’ve got to probe
into that other layer. Now, what I’m going to propose is that if you
introduce the division of conscious and unconscious, it’s like dividing
the two sides of a coin.
Participant
In other words, it’s just collective consciousness.
Bohm
Yes, it’s common consciousness, as the original root of the
word meant. And perhaps people in primitive times had a sense of
that, but since then we have come to know otherwise.
278
Collective Orders

Participant
We have increasingly come to know in fragments.
Bohm
Yes, we have come to know that it cannot be as “simple” as a
common consciousness; it’s got to be this and this and this. And we
concretely know it, not just abstractly. We experience it. We feel that
since a lot of progress has happened between then and now, surely
our knowledge must be better than theirs. If they knew it otherwise,
then they have just made a mistake, right?
Participant
Well, I certainly experience my individual consciousness,
and I’m asking: On what are you basing this notion of a general
consciousness?
Bohm
I’m just proposing it now for your consideration.
Participant
As an idea.
Bohm
Yes, as an abstraction, but in order to counteract some of the
other abstractions and concrete knowledge that you have, to propose
this as another possible knowledge.
Participant
Are you saying that the notion of the individual, the
experience of the individual consciousness, is part of this general
consciousness?
Bohm
Yes, the general idea in the general consciousness is that you
are a separate individual. That very idea produces the experience of a
separate individual. You didn’t invent that idea – you got it from all
around you.
Participant
We’re very involved in ﬁnding an identity these days.
It’s very important to do that.
Bohm
But it always has been, except when it was simple – when you
identiﬁed with the whole community, or whatever. But still you had
to have your own identity. Being exiled was the greatest tragedy,
because you lost your identity then. If you have a different source of
identity it won’t bother you so much to be exiled, right? But that’s all
relative, that’s all on the surface.
Participant
So where does consciousness come from? If there’s a
consciousness that says, “Let’s prepare for war,” where do two-thirds
of us get that notion? Do we hook into the mass consciousness of
“Let’s have a war” somehow?
Bohm
Well, look, you can see how it happens. There was a ﬁlm
on the BBC about the way people were just before the First World
War, and as the war was approaching, you could see people talking
about it, saying “We’ve got to go into the army, we’ve got to be
patriotic.” People who would ordinarily be level-headed were just
carried away into a wonderful feeling. I read elsewhere that people
were elated; they were almost in ecstacy. They felt they were giving
Knowledge as Endarkenment
279

up the ordinary, meaningless dullness of everyday life for a great
purpose.
That, evidently, is one of the things – we feel the need of a great
purpose or meaning. Ordinary life doesn’t give that, and in the col-
lective consciousness there is this idea that life doesn’t have much
meaning in this fragmentary mode. So deep down we are waiting and
waiting for this great purpose. It’s even more than the collective – it’s
universal. The universal always has the supreme power, right? We’ll
see that in a moment.
Take Hitler shouting “Sieg Heil!” or whatever it is – all those
other phrases. The people would shout back, and they had a sense of
complete and perfect identity. They didn’t know what they were
being led into. Nor did the English people know before the First
World War that they were going to be slaughtered in the millions in
these trenches. They thought the war would be over in a month. It
would be a glorious affair, and everybody would come back a hero. So
you can see collective delusion forming just as individual delusion
forms. They all experienced this. You couldn’t walk up to them
and say, “Look, this is just an idea.” They would say, “No, you’re an
intellectual. You’re just talking intellectually but we’re having the real
feeling. You’re just cold and intellectualizing, just analyzing this
glorious thing.”
Participant
There seems to be something very basic about the
enjoyment of the feeling that we are one, that we belong together, that
this is my identity. It seems to be a very basic need to move in that
direction.
Bohm
Well, that seems so, but again I’m questioning experience. I’m
saying that it’s not always what it seems to be.
Participant
Well, it seems like an essential part of that is the sense
of individual consciousness, or country or group consciousness.
The essential similarity is that you’re set apart from somebody
else.
Bohm
Together with certain ones and apart from other ones. That’s
the way it goes; it groups certain people together and others apart.
That’s the whole way thought works. The ﬁrst step in thought is to
put together what belongs together and keep apart what belongs
apart, so you can’t criticize that in itself. It’s just merely a mistake in
application of that principle. How do you come about this mistake in
application? Because by the time you’ve done it, you apparently get
proof – you experience your togetherness with your group and your
division from another group. Then you say, “I’m not inventing it. I’m
280
Collective Orders

not just classifying. My classiﬁcation is based on real experience.”
See the difﬁculty: knowledge says, “How else can I do it? If I can’t
count on experience, what do you want me to count on? I can’t count
on your pure intellectual abstractions.”
Participant
But isn’t that the very nature of thought?
Bohm
But that view won’t help us. If that’s the nature, then we’re
stuck. You’re going to be forced to think, to do practical jobs, and
you can’t separate it; it slips over from practical life into the inward
life.
Participant
If I can watch it do this . . .
Bohm
But now comes this question, Who are “you” who are going to
be different from it? This is what we must look at. Are you different
from it?
Participant
Why do I have to be different? Why don’t I watch this
process going on?
Bohm
Can you do it without being affected by it? A man who
is angry can say, “Let me watch,” but his watching will be affected
by the anger and he will see evidence, for example, to justify why
he should be angry, or else to prove he shouldn’t be angry. With
fear and pleasure it’s the same. That is, a certain thing gives
intense pleasure, and then you will tend to see whatever will help
to sustain that pleasure. You see, the watcher is the same as the
watched. This is the important point. Or the knower is the same as
the known.
Participant
But can’t there be an observation of that without the
watcher?
Bohm
You can imagine it, but is there one? Knowledge can easily get
to know about this and imagine it.
Participant
I mean even without the watcher. There’s no question
that thought continues on. Isn’t there a possibility of observing that
without judging it – just seeing it?
Bohm
It may be possible, but if we start out by assuming it is pos-
sible, that will be knowledge. You may know it’s possible, but what
about other people? Do they take your word? They may feel it’s
impossible. You see, we’ve got to get deeper.
I think we should explain a little more to show how difﬁcult this
problem is. Let’s try to go into this relation of thinking and feeling,
or thinking and will. You can see in the case of anger that words
produce feelings. You know this abstractly, but you don’t see it
actually happening, as a rule. What happens is that words slowly pile
up some state of the brain, and it suddenly explodes into a feeling. It
Knowledge as Endarkenment
281

happens so fast that the next thought comes along and says, “That
wasn’t due to thought; that was independent. That was just a feeling
which tells me the state of my reality, and therefore I must deal with
it. I must make my reality better.” Similarly with fear.
Now, I want to compare this to a wave. You watch the waves
slowly coming across the ocean towards the shore, and suddenly the
wave breaks on the shore and crashes. If you didn’t see the wave
coming in, you would say that something is happening on the shore-
line, right? Then you would say, “To change that, I must work on the
shoreline.” You would never get anywhere. Then you would say, “This
problem seems to be impossible, hopeless.” But we’re saying that you
don’t notice the wave coming up, which crashes on the shore, goes
back out, and starts the next wave going. This is the way thought and
feeling work. Thought goes slowly; it makes a wave. As I said before, a
large part of our thought is hardly noticed at all; it’s become fairly
automatic, and should be, a lot of it. But it’s slowly building up certain
conditions which suddenly explode. That explosion goes through the
mind – it disturbs everything, it confuses everything, and thought
then comes along and says, “What was that explosion? What shall I
do about it?”
Now you see further confusion developing, because in the very
act of doing that, thought has implicitly taken the disposition that it is
something other than itself producing that explosion. If something
is due to me, that’s called proprioception – I know it’s due to me. Now
when certain nerves are damaged, the person doesn’t know that,
right? We know somebody who had her nerves damaged. She hit
herself in the back of the head and said, “Who has hit me?” She didn’t
know she was moving her hand.
So with thought there’s a failure of proprioception. Thought
moves along building up certain conditions inside the brain which
suddenly explode, and then thought comes along and says, “What
was that explosion?”, taking the attitude that it was something quite
different from thought. Thought then says, “Therefore I must think
what it was, and then decide if I can do something about it.” Then you
say, “Yes, that was me exploding. That was me way deep down inside,
who was hurt so badly by what happened that anybody would have
exploded.” That makes it general and universal, right?
What always happens and what everybody would do is regarded
as necessary. Therefore you say that it is necessary to explode that
way. “Universal” implies necessity. Whether it’s always the case in
time or whether everybody does it, it’s both. What you mean when
282
Collective Orders

you say that everybody does it, is that everybody would always do it.
Anybody at anytime would do it, so it would always happen.
Now there may be, besides that, true feelings, which show some-
thing deeper, but unless you can tell which is which, you get very
confused. One feeling may reveal the depths of the soul, and the other
feeling may be nothing but thought exploding. But you make a mis-
take – you didn’t see the thought building up, therefore the concrete
experience you had was that something happened suddenly, with
no cause that was visible, as if a new feeling had come in. Then you
say, “This feeling is very disturbing. I must do something with it.
I must ﬁrst get to know what it is.” That seems harmless enough,
but it isn’t. Knowledge is a very dangerous thing, or, as they say,
a little knowledge. The point is that you say, “This is me exploding
in anger.” Or desire – desire is another explosion. The picture of
desire that is given by both the ancient Greek culture and the ancient
Hindu culture is that the arrow pierces the heart. Cupid, right? So
suddenly there is that piercing thing that causes an explosion, the
explosion of desire, which is not so different from the explosion of
anger or fear.
So this sudden explosion is the general thing that’s the cause of
the trouble. It’s as if somebody had piled up all the explosives and
gotten the wires ready, and after hiding himself somewhere in
the background he touched off this explosion. Then the person
suddenly becomes conscious of this explosion and says, “That’s me
exploding. Anybody would have done it; I am justiﬁed.” Or else
saying, “I’ve done this so often and it was never any use. I’m going to
try to stop this thing, these explosions from now on.” It’s like some-
body saying, “This surf has been wearing away the beach. I’m going
to try to stop it.” But again, since he doesn’t know the source, it has no
meaning.
Participant
Usually we say the source is outside. Behaviorists will
say that it’s a stimulus-response . . .
Bohm
Yes, but without that thought that connected the stimulus with
the response, it wouldn’t happen. If you didn’t have that period of
thought that built up the anger, saying, “He treated me wrongly. I was
sitting quietly and he did this. He’s always doing this. He does it on
purpose” (the various thoughts have been deposited over many
years), it wouldn’t happen. Between the stimulus and the response is
a mechanism which thought has prepared.
After a while you may begin to notice what you’re doing. What
you can do, to begin with, is to use these words in connection with
Knowledge as Endarkenment
283

some event that happened, and watch what happens. You’ll see the
machine at work. You see, this is something you can observe beyond
the experience that is created by the word. Which is, to use the words,
saying, “I’m not interested in the content of the words but in their
effect.”
Participant
But I’m likely to see that only after the effect.
Bohm
Don’t worry about it; I’m saying do it ﬁrst. Use those words
and perhaps you will see yourself doing it before, after a while.
Participant
I think there is one typical thing in what you just said.
We try to think something out instead of actually doing it. We think it
out and say it’s impossible. Then you try to prove that it can’t be done.
Bohm
If you say it’s impossible to look, that conclusion of what’s
necessary and what’s possible has a big effect. If something is neces-
sary, then you will have the will to do it. Is that clear? You do not
choose the content of your will, but the content of your will is
immediately and inevitably whatever you regard as necessary and
possible. If it’s not possible, it’s also not the content of your will. Like
the fox and the sour grapes – as soon as he sees that it’s not possible,
he doesn’t want the grapes. And not only that, he says the grapes are
sour. He distorts to feel better!
Participant
I’ve experienced many times the anger, and then, looking
back, I say things like, “He said that, and I got angry.” It’s a very
common experience. I can’t imagine – maybe I’m saying that I don’t
think it’s possible – that I would notice the words before the anger. I
can’t even imagine why I would notice the words.
Bohm
Well, because you notice other things. Suppose you say, “I’ve
been having the dangerous habit of lighting matches near gasoline
tanks, because I light matches whenever I’ve felt like it. Then I began
to notice that every time I lit a match . . .”
Participant
Are you saying that the words would become a cue? I
would become aware that those kind of words . . .
Bohm
. . . are the same as matches that are lighting the gasoline that
has already been poured out.
Participant
And I would notice that before I felt the emotion?
Bohm
Yes. Now, it’s easy to see this happening in someone else. You
can see somebody else whipping himself up with words. You’ve just
got to watch ﬁlms of Adolph Hitler talking to those masses, and
you’ll say, “What are they doing? He’s whipping them up, they’re
allowing themselves to be whipped up, and there it is.” You can see
that emotions are being generated by words. But if you were in that
group or if you were Adolph Hitler, you wouldn’t feel that way.
284
Collective Orders

Participant
Are you suggesting that what’s needed ﬁrst is to see that
something is necessary and possible, rather than to try and create the
will directly?
Bohm
More than that. You have to see that your will is entirely cre-
ated out of the thought of what is necessary and possible. This has
tremendous implications, because, for example, we in the western
world have a long tradition of saying the will is free. You choose
everything you will to do. Therefore people have to be punished very
badly when they do the wrong thing. It’s even part of the Christian
tradition to say that Adam willfully chose evil, and therefore mankind
had original sin, and that people have to be punished for it. This
approach has been followed for thousands of years, but it doesn’t do
any good, obviously. It’s like trying to turn back the waves at the
shore.
Participant
From what you are pointing out – particularly that know-
ledge catches itself in a trap from which it cannot get out – that is
what the state of the world is like. Now, there seem to be two things
which that entity which causes that trouble – which is us, the indi-
vidual – does. First, it applies a mechanical process; it has mechanical
reactions to whatever is happening. The other thing is that there is
time involved. It never approaches things in any sort of instantaneous
or immediate way, but always goes through the process of thinking, of
abstractions.
Bohm
No, that’s the trouble, that it apparently is producing the
immediate. You see, knowledge says, “I know about that already.” But
it fools itself. Knowledge says, “What you say is right, therefore I’m
going to look for the immediate.” This is the point I think we’ve got to
watch out for. Certain thought always involves time and other
thought is taking place slowly and unnoticed, and suddenly it pro-
duces an apparently immediate experience. Even a sense of insight or
a ﬂash of truth could be produced that way, right? Some people delude
themselves; they think they’ve had great insights. The difﬁculty is
that we have gone through a long process of saying that thought takes
time, and people have said, “Okay, I won’t trust thought. I’ll trust my
immediate intuition.” The immediate intuition is the product of
thought, but it happens with a sudden movement, right?
Participant
So, is that what we should thoroughly examine?
Bohm
Yes, that’s what we have to examine: how thought and
immediate intuition are connected. And also how the will is con-
nected to that, and to desire, fear, and time. These are all related.
All these are involved in the mess mankind is in. But this is the
Knowledge as Endarkenment
285

generative source which is common to all mankind – every race,
every culture as far back as we know. When we study this we are
beginning to get into the generative source of the problem. It is not
merely thought, but it is the whole ﬁeld of knowledge – its concrete
as well as its abstract features. It’s the whole ﬁeld of knowing. I’m
saying that the ﬁeld of knowing is what is involved in the source.
That knowing may be immediate and intuitive, though it also may not
be, and therefore many people feel they have an intuitive appre-
hension of things, which is still, I’m trying to say, thought. But
they experience it as knowing: they say, “I know this – I haven’t
thought it.”
Now there may be a kind of knowing in which knowledge is
infused with creative insights – you see something for the ﬁrst time,
or you get to know certain things. I think we have to be careful not to
close everything, to make conclusions, because the thing that thought
is doing constantly is to make conclusions and closing the issue, say-
ing this is possible or this is not possible. And that very feeling of
possibility and impossibility creates the will either to try, or to keep
away. So you will ﬁnd yourself experiencing the will not to bother
because of what thought has done a minute ago or an hour ago. Then
you say that will is spontaneous. Now, that’s confused. It’s very
important not to go beyond the fact that is actually before us.
I’m trying to say with regard to anything beyond that fact, we
simply say maybe so, maybe not. We just don’t know, right? One of
the points about knowledge that we were talking about is that in the
beginning, knowledge said, “I only can do what I know.” Knowledge
says, “I’ve got to know, and I only know knowledge and that’s all I can
do.” Therefore it seems to be stuck in a circle. That very thought
would create the will just to go on with knowledge. So you will
experience not knowledge, but the will to do this or that, and you say,
“That’s not knowledge, that’s my immediate response.” Knowledge
says that’s what it is. Knowledge is now apparently reﬂecting on some-
thing else, which is independent, and knowledge says, “That’s my
immediate response.” So a very complex illusion is created. Now if
knowledge gets to understand some of the structure of knowledge,
then it may at least open the way to observe. But knowledge is now so
fast, and producing apparent observations all the time, that it is very
hard to observe it.
Participant
You are saying that knowledge has, in a sense, split itself
into two and taken that which it has learned – and to which it reacts
most quickly – and called that part of itself . . .
286
Collective Orders

Bohm
. . . experience or intuition.
Participant
It has elevated that and called it “true” or “truth.”
Bohm
It may call it truth, or experience, or intuition, or something
like that.
Participant
So by itself it has somehow separated itself.
Bohm
Yes, it has produced this false separation, and this separation
then comes out as the separation of the observer and the observed,
or the thinker and the thought, the knower and the known. You
see, the difﬁculty of saying “observe” is this: you say, “You must
observe,” but knowledge says, “I’m already observing.” It doesn’t
even say it – it just produces the illusion of observation. But
then when it comes to reﬂect on it, it says, “That’s exactly what I’ve
been doing.”
The difﬁculty is that knowledge produces the appearance or illu-
sion of observation and reﬂects on it, and calls that observation. There-
fore, the injunction to observe has no effect, because knowledge says
that’s just what’s been happening. That explains why people can go
into this for endless years and nothing much happens.
Now we can either say we know all about this, or we can say that
this is a proposal which is to be tested, so we don’t introduce the same
illusion. The trouble with knowledge is that it says, “I know” when it
doesn’t. It says, “I know with absolute certainty,” when it doesn’t. The
knowledge with absolute certainty, or for always, is very dangerous.
We’ll have to discuss that, because that produces the experience of
absolute certainty, and therefore there is nothing to be questioned.
Then the whole questioning stops and you’re just satisﬁed with
illusion.
Participant
In the physical world that certainty is useful. I mean, I
am dead certain that the ﬂoor is going to hold me up, so I don’t worry
about it anymore.
Bohm
That’s right, though it may have a hole in it, and you may trip.
But if it trips you, you don’t keep on insisting that the ﬂoor is holding
you up. But if something similar happens inwardly, we have the
insistence that this “inward” is still reliable and certain – even
absolutely certain. It is this absolute certainty of the inward – which
tends to focus on the inward – that is the kind of knowledge
which may produce darkness. That knowledge of what you are, who
you are, what sort of person you’ve got to be, to whom you belong,
what your desires are, what your fears are, what you can do, what you
can’t do . . .
Participant
My self-identity.
Knowledge as Endarkenment
287

Bohm
Yes, and your collective identity as well.
Participant
You’re saying that that’s the kind of knowledge which is
endarkening.
Bohm
Yes, it endarkens the brain.
Participant
As distinct from, say, the knowledge of how to repair a
jet engine.
Bohm
Yes, or knowledge of where you’re going and all sorts of know-
ledge of science and what not. One can say – remembering that know-
ledge is inseparable from the physical changes in the brain, especially
this knowledge that produces these big explosions – that knowledge
literally disrupts the brain physically.
Participant
I’m having a bit of trouble with that, because the phys-
ical type of knowledge, just sheer pragmatic knowledge like stepping
down the stairs too many times after you’ve already reached the last
step, that, in a sense, is endarkenment, too. It’s a mistake.
Bohm
I’m glad you brought that up. I’m trying to make it clear what
the mistake is. We will inevitably make mistakes. It is in the very
nature of knowledge that it’s incomplete, and when it’s extended we
will ﬁnd that we make a mistake. Now the point is, knowledge is the
whole function, not just one item. The function of knowledge is to
admit your mistake, drop it, and learn, right?
You could say that where man took a wrong turn was, he got a
certain kind of knowledge which was not only a mistake but which
led him to make more mistakes to justify this mistake and hold on to
it. That was where he began to go wrong, and where he’s continually
going wrong. We make a certain mistake about ourselves. Why is it
so hard for a person to say, “I’ve made a mistake on an important
point”? He doesn’t say, “I’ve made a mistake.” No, he says, “Somebody
else made a mistake,” or “It wasn’t a mistake.” So he makes a second
mistake and a third mistake and a fourth; it goes on piling up. That’s
endarkenment. That is not only mental endarkenment, but it is a
physical disruption of the brain.
288
Collective Orders

11  DIALOGUE AS A NEW CREATIVE ORDER (1987)
In introducing the notion of a generative source for the turbulence in human
consciousness (Chapter 10), Bohm was anticipating the more developed con-
cept of generative order put forth with F. David Peat in Science, Order, and
Creativity. In its barest form, a generative order is a process whereby a
limited number of simple components generate a diverse structure, as in the
case of fractal geometry. A generative order may also be an implicate order,
particularly if the whole is relevant to the creation of the parts, or if processes
of enfoldment and unfoldment are present. Such an example is Bohm’s causal
interpretation as applied to quantum ﬁeld theory (Chapters 4 and 6). In this
model, particle-like structures (an explicate order) unfold from a latent ﬁeld
(a ﬁrst-level implicate order). Yet active information is required for this
unfoldment to occur, which comes from a super-implicate, or generative order
(a second-level implicate order).
Bohm proposes that a similar generative order can be discerned in the
consciousness of society. All of a society’s overt activities, artifacts, and indi-
viduals are its explicate order. Its ﬁrst-level implicate order is the latent,
relatively passive content of the entire culture – the pool of knowledge it has
accumulated for millennia, as well as the somatic correlates of this knowledge.
Its second-level implicate order – its generative order – is the values and
meanings that inform the pool of knowledge with speciﬁcity and order, giv-
ing rise to dispositions, intentions, and actions that unfold into the explicate
social order. This model, while not exhaustive of Bohm’s view of the implicate
nature of consciousness – which goes on to include the holomovement as a
Extract from Chapter 6 of D. Bohm, Science, Order, and Creativity (with F. David Peat), Routledge
([1987], 2000).
Dialogue as a New Creative Order
289

generative order – nonetheless provides a reference point for exploring
Bohm’s view of dialogue.
To effectively resolve the conﬂicts and contradictions in the structure of
human experience, Bohm claims that values and meanings must be trans-
formed at their concrete generative level. This view, expressed in various ways
throughout this book, has primarily been discussed in the context of indi-
vidual inquiry. Bohm, for example, in his 1958 letter to Yitzhak Woolfson,
claims that it is “only through the individual and not through the collective
that change can occur.” And indeed, it remained Bohm’s view that the indi-
vidual, through his or her inherent link to implicate consciousness, does have
the capacity to diminish the “pollution” in the generative order, albeit to a
limited extent.
But Bohm’s views of transformation at the concrete generative level were
continually evolving, and the possibility of a collective approach to this issue
captured his imagination in his later years. He came to feel that the efforts of
scattered individuals would have only marginal effect on the generative
social order, and that any enduring impact would require a collective
approach, which carries the potential for exponential change.
Through dialogue, Bohm felt that a profound and generally unrealized
creativity could be released in the generative order, thus shaping and inform-
ing the whole of society. To release this creativity, the “tacit infrastructure” of
society – assumptions and values held rigidly but often outside the scope
of conscious awareness – must be brought to light and understood in all its
implications. In a dialogue context, this requires not only “suspending” one’s
own concrete values and assumptions (Chapters 7 and 8), but now extending
this suspension to the values and assumptions expressed by others.
Bohm suggests that when a critical mass of participants in a dialogue is
engaged in such mutual suspension, the mind is freed to move in new ways.
Assumptions are held less rigidly, and with greater awareness. Meaning
becomes a rich domain on its own terms, outside the restrictions of utilitarian
application; it can follow the pathways opened via mutual suspension, and
thus be shared in new and unexpected ways. And signiﬁcantly, new orders
can emerge, through questioning rigid deﬁnitions of “individual” and “col-
lective,” and encouraging the exploration of orders of consciousness between
these traditional extremes.
Creativity, in almost every area of life, is blocked by a wide range of
rigidly held assumptions that are taken for granted by society as a
whole. Some of these have already been discussed,1 but in addition,
every society holds additional assumptions that are of such a shaky
290
Collective Orders

nature that they are not even admitted into discussion. There is there-
fore an unspoken requirement that everyone must subscribe to these
assumptions, but that no one should ever mention that any such
assumptions indeed exist. They are tacitly denied as operating within
society, and even this denial is denied. The overall effect is to lead
people to collude in “playing false” so they constantly distort all sorts of
additional thoughts in order to protect these assumptions. Such bad
faith enters deep into the overall generative order of society.
These rigidities and ﬁxed assumptions, many of which must not be
mentioned but must nevertheless be defended, may be compared with a
kind of pollution that is constantly being poured into the stream of the
generative order of society. It makes no sense to attempt to “clean up”
parts of this pollution farther downstream while continuing to pollute
the source itself. What is needed is either to stop the pollution at its
source, or to introduce some factor into the stream that naturally “cleans
up” pollution.
In the body a similar problem arises. As a person grows older,
through infection, allergies, contaminants, misadventure, and the pro-
cesses of aging, considerable “misinformation” or irrelevant informa-
tion accumulates in the system. Indeed it is possible to look at a disease
like cancer as arising from misinformation in the structure of DNA.
Viruses also introduce misinformation, in the sense that DNA from the
virus acts to replace some of the DNA in the host cell and therefore
causes this cell to replicate foreign DNA rather than serving the needs of
the body.
There are basically three ways of dealing with this problem of
misinformation in the body. The ﬁrst is to avoid the introduction of
misinformation in the ﬁrst place, for example, by keeping away from
infection through good sanitation and a careful diet. Second, where
misinformation exists, it may be possible to do something to remove it
through various kinds of medical intervention. But more signiﬁcantly,
the third option involves the body itself, which possesses an immune
system which is able to “clear up” misinformation in a natural way.
This is indeed the body’s main mode of dealing with misinforma-
tion. This can be clearly seen from the fact that drugs are of little use in
treating a disease like AIDS, which destroys this immune system itself.
Furthermore, the whole practice of immunization relies on activating
the immune system and so avoiding the onset of particular diseases.
The immune system itself is particularly complex and contains a
very subtle kind of information that can respond to the whole “mean-
ing” of what is happening to the order of the body. In this way it is able
Dialogue as a New Creative Order
291

to distinguish misinformation from information needed for the body’s
healthy operation. It can be compared to a kind of “intelligence” that
works within the body. Moreover there is evidence that this sort of
“intelligence” can respond to the higher levels that are usually associ-
ated with thought and feeling. It is well known that depressing thoughts
can inhibit the activity of the immune system, with the result that a
person becomes more susceptible to infections. Indeed there is much
evidence that a vigorous, creative state of mind and a strong “will to
live” are conducive to general health and even to recovery from danger-
ous illnesses.2 More generally, it could be said that good health is basic-
ally a manifestation of the overall creative intelligence, working in con-
cert with the body, through various means that include exercise, diet,
relaxation, and so on.
Returning to a consideration of society, clearly there is also a vast
amount of misinformation in circulation which acts toward society’s
degeneration. The media and various modern means of communication
have the effect of rapidly disseminating and magnifying this misinfor-
mation, just as they do with valid information. It should be clear that by
“misinformation” is meant a form of generative information that is
inappropriate, rather than simply incorrect statements of fact. In a simi-
lar way a small “mistake” in DNA can have disastrous consequences
because it forms part of the generative order of the organism and may
set the whole process in the wrong direction.
In society, the generative order is deeply affected by what has a very
general signiﬁcance. Indeed the generative order may be regarded as
the concrete activity of the general. This takes the form of general prin-
ciples, general aims, and generally accepted values, attitudes, and beliefs
of all kinds that are associated with the family, work, religion, and coun-
try. In going from these general principles to the universal, it is clear
that the effect on the generative order will become yet more powerful.
When a given principle is regarded as universally valid, it means that it
is taken as absolutely necessary. In other words, things cannot be other-
wise, under any circumstances whatsoever. Absolute necessity means
“never to yield.” To have something in the generative order that can
never give way, no matter what happens, is to put an absolute restriction
on free play of the mind, and thus to introduce a corresponding block to
creativity that is very difﬁcult to move.
Of course, both the individual and society require a certain stability,
and for this, thought must be able to hold itself ﬁxed within certain
appropriate limits and with a certain kind of relative necessity.
Over a limited period of time, certain values, assumptions, and
292
Collective Orders

principles may usefully be regarded as necessary. They are relatively
constant, although they should always be open to change when evidence
for the necessity of the latter is perceived. The major problem arises,
however, when it is assumed, usually tacitly and without awareness
and attention, that these values, assumptions, and principles have to
be absolutely ﬁxed, because they are taken as necessary for the sur-
vival and health of the society and for all that its members hold to be
dear.
We have argued elsewhere3 that science, which is in principle dedi-
cated to the truth, tends to be caught up in necessity, which then leads to
false play and a serious blockage of creativity. It is now clear that the
assumptions of absolute necessity, with their predispositions to unyield-
ing rigidity, are only part of a much broader spectrum of similar
responses that pervade society as a whole. General principles, values,
and assumptions, which are taken in this way to have absolute necessity,
are thus seen as a major source of the destructive misinformation that is
polluting the generative order of society.
As with the body, society attempts to deal with this sort of mis-
information by trying to prevent it from entering its fabric, or attempt-
ing to “cure” it with some form of therapy. For example, on a rather
superﬁcial level, there are laws to prevent false information and infor-
mation which may engender hatred, anger, and prejudice from being
spread about various races, religions, and groups. Writers, dramatists,
and ﬁlmmakers go some way to making people aware of prejudices and
rigidly ﬁxed attitudes. But in the long run, all these attempts are limited
by the overwhelming, and yet often very subtle, pressures within society
toward colluding to defend one’s own group and its ideas. In addition,
there is the whole problem of the intolerance and mistrust that have
grown up between nations, religions, ideologies, and other groups which
go all the way down to the family itself. To some extent psychotherapy
and group therapies can help to clear up individual misinformation of
this kind, which may go back to early childhood, or start in a later phase
of life. But these approaches have very little effect in the larger sphere of
society as a whole.
A particularly important piece of misinformation is the key
assumption that creativity is necessary only in specialized ﬁelds. This
assumption pervades the whole culture, but most people are generally
not aware of it; there is always a tendency for misinformation to defend
itself by leading people to collude in playing false, whenever such an
assumption is questioned. Assuming the restricted nature of creativity
is obviously of serious consequence for it clearly predetermines any
Dialogue as a New Creative Order
293

program that is designed to clear up the misinformation within society
and suggests that it cannot be creative.
All that seems to be left is to ask whether society contains some
kind of “immune system” that could spontaneously and naturally clear
up misinformation. If such a system exists, then it is certainly not obvi-
ous, nor does it appear to be in common operation within our society
today.
DIALOGUE AND CULTURE
In this section it is proposed that a form of free dialogue may well be
one of the most effective ways of investigating the crisis which faces
society, and indeed the whole of human nature and consciousness today.
Moreover, it may turn out that such a form of free exchange of ideas and
information is of fundamental relevance for transforming culture and
freeing it of destructive misinformation, so that creativity can be liber-
ated. However, it must be stressed that what follows is not given in the
spirit of a prescription that society is supposed to follow. Rather it is an
invitation to the reader to begin to investigate and explore in the spirit
of free play of ideas and without the restriction of the absolute necessity
of any ﬁnal goal or aim. For once necessity and absolute requirements
or directions enter into the spirit of this exploration, then creativity is
limited and all the problems that have plagued human civilization will
surface yet again to overwhelm the investigation.
To begin, it should be noted that many of the ideas to be explored
were ﬁrst investigated by Patrick de Maré, who is a psychiatrist work-
ing in England.4 De Maré has used his wide experience of dialogue in
therapeutic groups to support his arguments. However, it is essential to
emphasize that his ideas about dialogue are not concerned primarily
with psychotherapy, but rather with the transformation of culture, along
the general lines that have been indicated in this chapter.
We have previously shown5 how rigid conditioning of the tacit
infrastructure of scientiﬁc thought has led to a fragmentation in science
and to an essential breakdown in communication between areas which
are considered to be mutually irrelevant. Nevertheless a closer investi-
gation of actual cases suggested that there is nothing inherent in
science which makes such breaks in communication and fragmentation
inevitable. Indeed wherever fragmentation and failures in communica-
tion arise, this clearly indicates that a kind of dialogue should be
established.
The term dialogue is derived from a Greek word, with dia meaning
294
Collective Orders

“through,” and logos signifying “the word.” Here “the word” does not
refer to mere sounds but to their meaning. So dialogue can be con-
sidered as a free ﬂow of meaning between people in communication, in
the sense of a stream that ﬂows between banks.
A key difference between a dialogue and an ordinary discussion is
that, within the latter, people usually hold relatively ﬁxed positions and
argue in favor of their views as they try to convince others to change. At
best this may produce agreement or compromise, but it does not give
rise to anything creative. Moreover, whenever anything of fundamental
signiﬁcance is involved, then positions tend to be rigidly non-
negotiable and talk degenerates either into a confrontation in which
there is no solution, or into a polite avoidance of the issues. Both these
outcomes are extremely harmful, for they prevent the free play of
thought in communication and therefore impede creativity.
In dialogue, however, a person may prefer a certain position but
does not hold to it non-negotiably. He or she is ready to listen to others
with sufﬁcient sympathy and interest to understand the meaning of the
other’s position properly and is also ready to change his or her own
point of view if there is good reason to do so. Clearly a spirit of goodwill
or friendship is necessary for this to take place. It is not compatible with
a spirit that is competitive, contentious, or aggressive. In the case of
Einstein and Bohr,6 these requirements were evidently met, at least ini-
tially. However, because each felt that a different notion of truth and
reality was involved, which was not negotiable in any way at all, a real
dialogue could never take place.
This brings us to an important root feature of science, which is also
present in dialogue: to be ready to acknowledge any fact and any point
of view as it actually is, whether one likes it or not. In many areas of life,
people are, on the contrary, disposed to collude in order to avoid
acknowledging facts and points of view that they ﬁnd unpleasant or
unduly disturbing. Science is, however, at least in principle, dedicated to
seeing any fact as it is, and to being open to free communication with
regard not only to the fact itself, but also to the point of view from which
it is interpreted. Nevertheless, in practice, this is not often achieved.
What happens in many cases is that there is a blockage of
communication.
For example, a person does not acknowledge the point of view of
the other as being a reasonable one to hold, although perhaps not cor-
rect. Generally this failure arises when the other’s point of view poses a
serious threat to all that a person holds dear and precious in life as a
whole.
Dialogue as a New Creative Order
295

In dialogue it is necessary that people be able to face their dis-
agreements without confrontation and be willing to explore points of
view to which they do not personally subscribe. If they are able to
engage in such a dialogue without evasion or anger, they will ﬁnd that
no ﬁxed position is so important that it is worth holding at the expense
of destroying the dialogue itself. This tends to give rise to a unity in
plurality of the kind we have discussed elsewhere.7 This is, of course,
quite different from introducing a large number of compartmentalized
positions that never dialogue with each other. Rather, a plurality of
points of view corresponds to the earlier suggestion that science and
society should consist not of monolithic structures but rather of a
dynamic unity within plurality.
One of the major barriers to this sort of dialogue is the rigidity in
the tacit infrastructure of the individual and society. The tacit infra-
structure of society at large is contained in what is generally called
culture. Within each society, however, there are many subcultures which
are all somewhat different, and which are either in conﬂict with each
other, or more or less ignore each other as having mutually irrelevant
aims and values. Such subcultures, along with the overall culture, are
generally rigidly restricted by their basic assumptions, most of which
are tacit and not open to awareness and attention. Creativity is there-
fore, at best, an occasional occurrence, the results of which are quickly
absorbed in a fairly mechanical way into the general tacit infrastructure.
At present, a truly creative dialogue, in the sense that has been
indicated here, is not at all common, even in science. Rather the struggle
of each idea to dominate is commonly emphasized in most activities in
society. In this struggle, the success of a person’s point of view may have
important consequences for status, prestige, social position, and monet-
ary reward. In such a conditioned exchange, the tacit infrastructure,
both individually and culturally, responds very actively to block the free
play that is needed for creativity.
The importance of the principle of dialogue should now be clear. It
implies a very deep change in how the mind works. What is essential is
that each participant is, as it were, suspending his or her point of view,
while also holding other points of view in a suspended form and giving
full attention to what they mean. In doing this, each participant has also
to suspend the corresponding activity, not only of his or her own tacit
infrastructure of ideas, but also of those of the others who are participat-
ing in the dialogue. Such a thoroughgoing suspension of tacit individual
and cultural infrastructures, in the context of full attention to their con-
tents, frees the mind to move in quite new ways. The tendency toward
296
Collective Orders

false play that is characteristic of the rigid infrastructures begins to die
away. The mind is then able to respond to creative new perceptions
going beyond the particular points of view that have been suspended.
In this way, something can happen in the dialogue that is analogous
to the dissolution of barriers in the “stream” of the generative order, as
discussed previously.8 In the dialogue, these blockages, in the form of
rigid but largely tacit cultural assumptions, can be brought out and
examined by all who take part. Because each person will generally have
a different individual background, and will perhaps come from a differ-
ent subculture, assumptions that are part of a given participant’s
“unconscious” infrastructure may be quite obvious to another partici-
pant, who has no resistance to seeing them. In this way the participants
can turn their attention more generally to becoming aware, as broadly as
possible, of the overall tacit infrastructure of rigid cultural and sub-
cultural assumptions and bringing it to light. As a result, it becomes
possible for the dialogue to begin to play a part that is analogous to that
played by the immune system of the body, in “recognizing” destructive
misinformation and in clearing it up. This clearly constitutes a very
important change in how the mind works.
There is, however, another extremely important way in which the
operation of the mind can be transformed in such a dialogue. For when
the rigid, tacit infrastructure is loosened, the mind begins to move in a
new order. To see the nature of this order, consider ﬁrst the order that
has traditionally characterized cultures. Essentially this involves a
strong fragmentation between individual consciousness – “what the
individual knows all together” – and social consciousness – “what the
society knows all together.”
For the individual, consciousness tends to emphasize subjectivity in
the sense of private aims, dreams, and aspirations that are shared to
some extent with family and close friends, as well as a general search for
personal pleasure and security. In society, however, consciousness tends
to emphasize a kind of objectivity with common aims and goals, and
there is an attempt to put conformity and the pursuit of the common
welfare in the ﬁrst place. One of the principal conﬂicts in life arises
therefore in the attempt to bring these two fragments together har-
moniously. For example, as a person grows up, he (or she) may ﬁnd that
his individual needs have little or no place in society. And in turn, as
society begins to act on the individual consciousness in false and
destructive ways, people become cynical. They begin to ignore the
requirements of reality and the general good in favor of their own
interests and those of their group.
Dialogue as a New Creative Order
297

Within this generally fragmentary order of consciousness, the social
order of language is largely for the sake of communicating information.
This is aimed, ultimately, at producing results that are envisaged as
necessary, either to society or to the individual, or perhaps to both.
Meaning plays a secondary part in such usage, in the sense, for example,
that what are put ﬁrst are the problems that are to be solved, while
meaning is arranged so as to facilitate the solution of these problems. Of
course, a society may try to ﬁnd a common primary meaning in myths,
such as that of the invincibility of the nation or its glorious destiny. But
these lead to illusions, which are in the long run unsatisfactory, as well
as dangerous and destructive. The individual is thus generally left with a
desperate search for something that would give life real meaning. But
this can seldom be found either in the rather crude mechanical, uncar-
ing society, or in the isolated and consequently lonely life of the indi-
vidual. For if there is not common meaning to be shared, a person can
be lonely even in a crowd.
What is especially relevant to this whole conﬂict is a proper under-
standing of the nature of culture. It seems clear that in essence culture is
meaning, as shared in society. And here “meaning” is not only signiﬁ-
cance but also intention, purpose, and value. It is clear, for example, that
art, literature, science, and other such activities of a culture are all parts
of the common heritage of shared meaning, in the sense described
above. Such cultural meaning is evidently not primarily aimed at utility.
Indeed, any society that restricts its knowledge merely to information
that it regards as useful would hardly be said to have a culture, and
within it, life would have very little meaning. Even in our present soci-
ety, culture, when considered in this way, appears to have a rather small
signiﬁcance in comparison to other issues that are taken to be of vital
importance by many sectors of the population.
The gulf between individual consciousness and social conscious-
ness is similar to a number of other gulfs that have already been
described, for example, between descriptive and constitutive orders,
between simple regular orders of low degree and chaotic orders of
inﬁnite degree, and, of course, between the timeless and time orders.9
But in all these cases, broad and rich new areas for creativity can be
found by going to new orders that lie between such extremes. In the
present case, therefore, what is needed is to ﬁnd a broad domain of
creative orders between the social and individual extremes. Dialogue
therefore appears to be a key to the exploration of these new orders.
To see what is involved, note that as the above dialogue develops,
not only do speciﬁc social and cultural assumptions “loosen up,” but
298
Collective Orders

also much deeper and more general assumptions begin to be affected in
a similar way. Among these, one of the most important is the assump-
tion that between the individual consciousness and the social con-
sciousness there is an absolute gulf. This implies that the individual
must adjust to ﬁt into the society, that society must be remade to suit
the individual, or that some combination of both approaches must be
carried out. If, however, the dialogue is sustained sufﬁciently, then all
who participate will sooner or later be able to see, in actual fact, how a
creative movement can take place in a new order between these
extremes. This movement is present both externally and publicly, as
well as inwardly, where it can be felt by all. As with alert attention to a
ﬂowing stream, the mind can then go into an analogous order. In this
order, attention is no longer restricted to the two extreme forms of
individual and social. Rather, attention is transformed so that it, along
with the whole generative order of the mind, is in the rich creative
domain “between” these two extremes.
The mind is then capable of new degrees of subtlety, moving from
emphasis on the whole group of participants to emphasis on indi-
viduals, as the occasion demands. This is particularly signiﬁcant for
proper response to the strong emotional reactions that will inevitably
arise, even in the friendliest group, whenever fundamental assumptions
are disturbed. Because the mind is no longer rigidly committed to the
individual or to the social extremes, the basic issues that arise in a
disagreement between participants are to a considerable extent
“defused.” For the assumptions that are brought to the common atten-
tion are no longer implied to have absolute necessity. And as a result, the
“emotional charge” that is inevitably associated with an assumption that
is dear to one or more members of the group can be reduced to more
manageable proportions, so that violent “explosions” are not likely to
take place. Only a dialogue that can, at the same time, meet the challenge
both of uncovering the intellectual content of a rigidly held basic
assumption and of “defusing” the emotional charge that goes with it
will make possible the proper exploration of the new order of mental
operation that is being discussed here.
It is possible to have such dialogues in all sorts of circumstances,
with many or just a few people involved. Indeed even an individual may
have a kind of internal dialogue with himself or herself. What is essen-
tial here is the presence of the spirit of dialogue, which is, in short, the
ability to hold many points of view in suspension, along with a primary
interest in the creation of a common meaning. It is particularly import-
ant, however, to explore the possibilities of dialogue in the context of a
Dialogue as a New Creative Order
299

group that is large enough to have within it a wide range of points of
view, and to sustain a strong ﬂow of meaning. This latter can come about
because such a dialogue is capable of having the powerful nonverbal
effect of consensus. In the ordinary situation, consensus can lead to
collusion and to playing false, but in a true dialogue there is the possibil-
ity that a new form of consensual mind, which involves a rich creative
order between the individual and the social, may be a more powerful
instrument than is the individual mind. Such consensus does not
involve the pressure of authority or conformity, for it arises out of a
spirit of friendship dedicated to clarity and the ultimate perception of
what is true. In this way the tacit infrastructure of society and that of its
subcultures are not opposed, nor is there any attempt to alter them or to
destroy them. Rather, ﬁxed and rigid frames dissolve in the creative
free ﬂow of dialogue as a new kind of microculture emerges.
People who have taken part in such a dialogue will be able to carry
its spirit beyond the particular group into all their activities and rela-
tionships and ultimately into the general society. In this way, they can
begin to explore the possibility of extending the transformation of the
mind that has been discussed earlier to a broader sociocultural context.
Such an exploration would clearly be relevant for helping to bring about
a creative and harmonious order in the world. It should be clear by now
that the major barriers to such an order are not technical; rather they lie
in the rigid and fragmentary nature of our basic assumptions. These
keep us from changing in response to the actual situations and from
being able to move together from commonly shared meanings.
Notes
1
See Bohm, D., and Peat, F. D., Science, Order, and Creativity, Routledge, London (2000).
2
See, for example, Cousins, N., Anatomy of an Illness, Bantam, New York (1981).
3
See Bohm and Peat, Science, Order, and Creativity, Ch. 1.
4
A brief, but fairly comprehensive presentation of de Maré’s ideas can be found in Group Analysis,
vol. XVII, no. 78, Sage, London (1985).
5
See Bohm and Peat, Science, Order, and Creativity, Chs 1 and 2.
6
See ibid., Ch. 2.
7
See ibid., Ch. 3.
8
See ibid., Chs 4 and 5.
9
See ibid., Ch. 3.
300
Collective Orders

12 ON DIALOGUE AND ITS APPLICATION (1989)
While the material of Chapter 11 gives an overview of Bohm’s dialogue per-
spective, and in particular links dialogue to the larger theoretical scope of
Bohm’s work, this ﬁnal chapter provides a “nuts and bolts” approach to
dialogue. How many people should be in a dialogue group? What somatic
and organizational structures are optimal for facilitating dialogue? How
often should groups meet, and for how long should they continue? How does
the traditional role of leadership factor into a dialogue? How are the difﬁcul-
ties that inevitably arise in a dialogue – frustration, anxiety, fear, anger, role
identiﬁcation – most effectively incorporated? These questions and many
others are addressed in a clear and straightforward manner – not as ﬁxed
rules, but as recommendations based on considered observation and substan-
tial experimentation.
Bohm also outlines how suspension and proprioception can function at
the collective level, particularly the manner in which the physical body – both
group and individual – can be utilized as a mirror for the activity of values,
assumptions, and meanings. This leads into Bohm’s “vision of dialogue,” in
which a common, participatory consciousness can emerge from the group,
giving rise to a quality of impersonal fellowship which does not depend on
typical conventions of familiarity. Such a consciousness is seen by Bohm as
essential for true communion, which extends beyond the individual-collective
dichotomy to the unlimited ground – the holomovement – from which these
both arise.
One of the central themes that runs through all of Bohm’s work is that the
nature of the universe – including our experience of it – is more porous, ﬂuid,
Extract from Chapter 2 of D. Bohm, On Dialogue (ed. Lee Nichol), Routledge, London (1996).
On Dialogue and its Application
301

and inherently whole than we generally recognize. We can of course ignore
this dynamic wholeness, or objectify it in purely abstract terms. But if we wish
to embody and give expression to the whole, we face the challenge of working
through the fragmentation that currently deﬁnes our consciousness. For
Bohm, dialogue was one way of bringing this fragmentation to light in a
particularly direct and graphic manner, not an algorithm for creating novel
forms of social entertainment. Propositions and theories – including those in
this book – are essential for exposing us to new possibilities, but they can
easily ensnare us and provide a new framework for delusion and false
comfort.
At the end of the day, it may be that Bohm’s vision, and his challenge,
were deceptively simple. When books and speculations have served their
purpose, we are left with the unvarnished truths of who we are and how we
live in this world. Perhaps what matters then is that we take seriously
our capacity, as Bohm suggests, to “soften up,” to “open up the mind” – and to
allow for the possibility of that strange energy we call love.
The way we start a dialogue group is usually by talking about dialogue –
talking it over, discussing why we’re doing it, what it means, and so
forth. I don’t think it is wise to start a group before people have gone
into all that, at least somewhat. You can, but then you’ll have to trust
that the group will continue, and that these questions will come out
later. So if you are thinking of meeting in a group, one thing which I
suggest is to have a discussion or a seminar about dialogue for a while,
and those who are interested can then go on to have the dialogue. And
you mustn’t worry too much whether you are or are not having dialogue
– that’s one of the blocks. It may be mixed. So we will discuss dialogue
for a while – what is its nature?
I give a meaning to the word “dialogue” that is somewhat different
from what is commonly used. The derivations of words often help to
suggest a deeper meaning. “Dialogue” comes from the Greek word dial-
ogos. Logos means “the word,” or in our case we would think of the
“meaning of the word.” And dia means “through” – it doesn’t mean
“two.” A dialogue can be among any number of people, not just two.
Even one person can have a sense of dialogue within himself, if the
spirit of the dialogue is present. The picture or image that this deriv-
ation suggests is of a stream of meaning ﬂowing among and through us
and between us. This will make possible a ﬂow of meaning in the whole
group, out of which may emerge some new understanding. It’s some-
thing new, which may not have been in the starting point at all. It’s
302
Collective Orders

something creative. And this shared meaning is the “glue” or “cement”
that holds people and societies together.
Contrast this with the word “discussion,” which has the same root
as “percussion” and “concussion.” It really means to break things up. It
emphasizes the idea of analysis, where there may be many points of
view, and where everybody is presenting a different one – analyzing and
breaking up. That obviously has its value, but it is limited, and it will not
get us very far beyond our various points of view. Discussion is almost
like a ping-pong game, where people are batting the ideas back and forth
and the object of the game is to win or to get points for yourself. Possibly
you will take up somebody else’s ideas to back up your own – you may
agree with some and disagree with others – but the basic point is to win
the game. That’s very frequently the case in a discussion.
In a dialogue, however, nobody is trying to win. Everybody wins if
anybody wins. There is a different sort of spirit to it. In a dialogue, there
is no attempt to gain points, or to make your particular view prevail.
Rather, whenever any mistake is discovered on the part of anybody,
everybody gains. It’s a situation called win–win, whereas the other game
is win–lose – if I win, you lose. But a dialogue is something more of a
common participation, in which we are not playing a game against each
other, but with each other. In a dialogue, everybody wins.
Clearly, a lot of what is called “dialogue” is not dialogue in the way
that I am using the word. For example, people at the United Nations
have been having what are often considered to be dialogues, but these
are very limited. They are more like discussions – or perhaps trade-offs
or negotiations – than dialogues. The people who take part are not really
open to questioning their fundamental assumptions. They are trading
off minor points, like negotiating whether we have more or fewer
nuclear weapons. But the whole question of two different systems is not
being seriously discussed. It’s taken for granted that you can’t talk about
that – that nothing will ever change that. Consequently their discussions
are not serious, not deeply serious. A great deal of what we call “discus-
sion” is not deeply serious, in the sense that there are all sorts of things
which are held to be non-negotiable and not touchable, and people don’t
even want to talk about them. That is part of our trouble.
Now, why do we need dialogue? People have difﬁculty communi-
cating even in small groups. But in a group of thirty or forty or more,
many may ﬁnd it very hard to communicate unless there is a set pur-
pose, or unless somebody is leading it. Why is that? For one thing,
everybody has different assumptions and opinions. They are basic as-
sumptions – not merely superﬁcial assumptions – such as assumptions
On Dialogue and its Application
303

about the meaning of life; about your own self-interest, your country’s
interest, or your religious interest; about what you really think is
important.
And these assumptions are defended when they are challenged.
People frequently can’t resist defending them, and they tend to defend
them with an emotional charge. We’ll discuss that in more detail later,
but I’ll give an example now. We organized a dialogue in Israel a num-
ber of years ago. At one stage the people were discussing politics, and
somebody said, just in passing, “Zionism is creating a great difﬁculty in
good relations between Jews and Arabs. It is the principal barrier that’s
in the way.” He said it very quietly. Then suddenly somebody else
couldn’t contain himself and jumped up. He was full of emotion. His
blood pressure was high and his eyes were popping out. He said, “With-
out Zionism the country would fall to pieces!”
That fellow had one basic assumption, and the other person had
another one. And those two assumptions were really in conﬂict. Then the
question is, what can you do? You see, those are the kinds of assump-
tions that are causing all the trouble politically, all over the world. And
the case I just described is relatively easier than some of the assump-
tions that we have to handle in politics. The point is that we have all
sorts of assumptions, not only about politics or economics or religion,
but also about what we think an individual should do, or what life is all
about, and so forth.
We could also call these assumptions “opinions.” An opinion is an
assumption. The word “opinion” is used in several senses. When a doc-
tor has an opinion, that’s the best assumption that he can make based on
the evidence. He may then say, “Okay, I’m not quite sure, so let’s get a
second opinion.” In that case, if he is a good doctor he does not react to
defend his assumption. If the second opinion turns out to be different
from his, he doesn’t jump up with an emotional charge, such as the
fellow did on the question of Zionism, and say, “How can you say such
things?” That doctor’s opinion would be an example of a rational sort of
opinion. But most are not of that nature – mostly they are defended with
a strong reaction. In other words, a person identiﬁes himself with them.
They are tied up with his investment in self-interest.
The point is that dialogue has to go into all the pressures that are
behind our assumptions. It goes into the process of thought behind the
assumptions, not just the assumptions themselves.
304
Collective Orders

DIALOGUE AND THOUGHT
It is important to see that the different opinions that you have are the
result of past thought – all your experiences, what other people have
said, and what not. That is all programmed into your memory. You may
then identify with those opinions and react to defend them. But it
doesn’t make sense to do this. If the opinion is right, it doesn’t need such
a reaction. And if it is wrong, why should you defend it? If you are
identiﬁed with it, however, you do defend it. It is as if you yourself are
under attack when your opinion is challenged. Opinions thus tend to be
experienced as “truths,” even though they may only be your own
assumptions and your own background. You got them from your
teacher, your family, or by reading, or in yet some other way. Then for
one reason or another you are identiﬁed with them, and you defend
them.
Dialogue is really aimed at going into the whole thought process
and changing the way the thought process occurs collectively. We
haven’t really paid much attention to thought as a process. We have
engaged in thoughts, but we have only paid attention to the content, not
to the process. Why does thought require attention? Everything
requires attention, really. If we ran machines without paying attention
to them, they would break down. Our thought, too, is a process, and it
requires attention, otherwise it’s going to go wrong.
I’ll try to give some examples of the difﬁculty in thinking, in
thought. One of these difﬁculties is fragmentation, which originates in
thought – it is thought which divides everything up. Every division we
make is a result of how we think. In actuality, the whole world is
shades merging into one. But we select certain things and separate
them from others – for convenience, at ﬁrst. Later we give this separ-
ation great importance. We set up separate nations, which is entirely
the result of our thinking, and then we begin to give them supreme
importance. We also divide religions by thought – separate religions
are entirely a result of how we think. And in the family, the divisions
are in thought. The whole way the family is set up is due to the way we
think about it.
Fragmentation is one of the difﬁculties of thought, but there is a
deeper root, which is that thought is very active, but the process of
thought thinks that it is doing nothing – that it is just telling you the
way things are. Almost everything around us has been determined by
thought – all the buildings, factories, farms, roads, schools, nations, sci-
ence, technology, religion – whatever you care to mention. The whole
ecological problem is due to thought, because we have thought that the
On Dialogue and its Application
305

world is there for us to exploit, that it is inﬁnite, and so no matter what
we did, the pollution would all get dissolved away.
When we see a “problem,” whether pollution, carbon dioxide, or
whatever, we then say, “We have got to solve that problem.” But we are
constantly producing that sort of problem – not just that particular
problem, but that sort of problem – by the way we go on with our
thought. If we keep on thinking that the world is there solely for our
convenience, then we are going to exploit it in some other way, and we
are going to make another problem somewhere. We may clear up the
pollution, but may then create some other difﬁculty, such as economic
chaos, if we don’t do it right. We might set up genetic engineering, but if
ordinary technology can produce such vast difﬁculties, imagine the
kind of thing genetic engineering could get us into – if we go on with
the same way of thinking. People will be doing genetic engineering for
whatever suits their fancy and the way they think.
The point is that thought produces results, but thought says it didn’t
do it. And that is a problem. The trouble is that some of those results
that thought produces are considered to be very important and valuable.
Thought produced the nation, and it says that the nation has an
extremely high value, a supreme value, which overrides almost every-
thing else. The same may be said about religion. Therefore, freedom of
thought is interfered with, because if the nation has high value it is
necessary to continue to think that the nation has high value. Therefore
you’ve got to create a pressure to think that way. You’ve got to have an
impulse, and make sure everybody has got the impulse, to go on think-
ing that way about his nation, his religion, his family, or whatever it is
that he gives high value. He’s got to defend it.
You cannot defend something without ﬁrst thinking the defense.
There are those thoughts which might question the thing you want to
defend, and you’ve got to push them aside. That may readily involve
self-deception – you will simply push aside a lot of things you would
rather not accept by saying they are wrong, by distorting the issue, and
so on. Thought defends its basic assumptions against evidence that they
may be wrong.
In order to deal with this, we have got to look at thought, because
the problem is originating in thought. Usually when you have a prob-
lem, you say, “I must think about it to solve it.” But what I’m trying to
say is that thought is the problem. What, therefore, are we going to do?
We could consider two kinds of thought – individual and collective.
Individually I can think of various things, but a great deal of thought
is what we do together. In fact, most of it comes from the collective
306
Collective Orders

background; language is collective. Most of our basic assumptions come
from our society, including all our assumptions about how society
works, about what sort of person we are supposed to be, and about
relationships, institutions, and so on. Therefore we need to pay attention
to thought, both individually and collectively.
In a dialogue, people coming from different backgrounds typically
have different basic assumptions and opinions. In almost any group you
will probably ﬁnd a great many different assumptions and opinions of
which we are not aware at the moment. It is a matter of culture. In the
overall culture there are vast numbers of opinions and assumptions
which help make up that culture. And there are also sub-cultures that
are somewhat different from one another according to ethnic groups, or
to economic situations, or to race, religion, or thousands of other things.
People will come to such a gathering from somewhat different cultures
or sub-cultures, with different assumptions and opinions. And they may
not realize it, but they have some tendency to defend their assumptions
and opinions reactively against evidence that they are not right, or
simply a similar tendency to defend them against somebody who has
another opinion.
If we defend opinions in this way, we are not going to be able to
have a dialogue. And we are often unconsciously defending our opin-
ions. We don’t usually do it on purpose. At times we may be conscious
that we are defending them, but mostly we are not. We just feel that
something is so true that we can’t avoid trying to convince this stupid
person how wrong he is to disagree with us.
Now, that seems the most natural thing in the world – it seems that
that’s inevitable. Yet if you think of it, we can’t really organize a good
society if we go on that basis. That’s the way democracy is supposed to
work, but it hasn’t. If everybody has a different opinion, it will be merely
a struggle of opinions. And the one who is the strongest will win. It may
not necessarily be the right one; it may be that none of them are right.
Therefore, we won’t be doing the right thing when we try to get together.
This problem arises whenever people meet for dialogue, or legisla-
tors try to get together, or businessmen try to get together, or whatever.
If we all had to do a job together, we would likely ﬁnd that each one of
us would have different opinions and assumptions, and thus we would
ﬁnd it hard to do the job. The temperature could go way up. In fact,
there are people facing this problem in large corporations. The top
executives may all have different opinions, hence they can’t get
together. So the company doesn’t work efﬁciently, it starts to lose
money and goes under.
On Dialogue and its Application
307

There are some people who are trying to form groups where top
business executives can talk together. If politicians would do that, it
would be very good. Religious people would be the hardest to get
together. The assumptions of the different religions are so ﬁrmly
embedded that I don’t know of any case of two religions, or even sub-
groups of any given religion, where they ever got together once they had
split. The Christian church, for instance, has been talking about trying to
get together for ages and it stays about the same all the time. They talk
and they appear to get a little bit closer, and then it never happens. They
talk about unity and oneness and love and all that, but the other
assumptions are more powerful; they are programmed into us. Some
religious people are trying to get together; they are really sincere – they
are as serious as they can be – but it seems that they cannot do it.
Scientists also get into the same situation. Each one may hold to a
different view of the truth, so they can’t get together. Or they may have
different self-interests. A scientist who is working for a company that
produces pollution may have a certain self-interest in proving that the
pollution is not dangerous. And somebody else might have self-interest
in proving that it is dangerous. And perhaps then somewhere there is an
unbiased scientist who tries to judge it all.
Science is supposed to be dedicated to truth and fact, and religion is
supposed to be dedicated to another kind of truth, and to love. But
people’s self-interest and assumptions take over. Now, we’re not trying
to judge these people. Something is happening, which is that assump-
tions or opinions are like computer programs in people’s minds. Those
programs take over against the best of intentions – they produce their
own intentions.
We could say, then, that a group of about twenty to forty people is
almost a microcosm of the whole society – like the groups we have just
looked at, it has a lot of different opinions and assumptions. It is pos-
sible to have a dialogue with one person or with two, three, or four, or
you can have the attitude of the dialogue by yourself, as you weigh all
the opinions without deciding. But a group that is too small doesn’t
work very well. If ﬁve or six people get together, they can usually adjust
to each other so that they don’t say the things that upset each other –
they get a “cozy adjustment.” People can easily be very polite to each
other and avoid the issues that may cause trouble. And if there is a
confrontation between two or more people in such a small group, it
seems very hard to stop it; it gets stuck. In a larger group, we may well
start out politely. After a while, though, people can seldom continue to
avoid all the issues that would be troublesome. The politeness falls away
308
Collective Orders

pretty soon. In a group of less than about twenty it may not, because
people get to know each other and know the rough edges that they have
to avoid. They can take it all into account; it’s not too much. But in a
group of forty or ﬁfty it is too much.
So when you raise the number to about twenty, something differ-
ent begins to happen. And forty people is about as many as you can
conveniently arrange in a circle – or you might put two circles con-
centrically. In that size group, you begin to get what may be called a
“microculture.” You have enough people coming in from different sub-
cultures so that they are a sort of microcosm of the whole culture. And
then the question of culture – the collectively shared meaning – begins
to come in.
That is crucial, because the collectively shared meaning is very
powerful. The collective thought is more powerful than the individual
thought. As we said, the individual thought is mostly the result of col-
lective thought and of interaction with other people. The language is
entirely collective, and most of the thoughts in it are. Everybody does
his own thing to those thoughts – he makes a contribution. But very few
change them very much.
The power of the group goes up much faster than the number of
people. I’ve said elsewhere that it could be compared to a laser. Ordinary
light is called “incoherent,” which means that it is going in all sorts of
directions, and the light waves are not in phase with each other so they
don’t build up. But a laser produces a very intense beam which is coher-
ent. The light waves build up strength because they are all going in the
same direction. This beam can do all sorts of things that ordinary light
cannot.
Now, you could say that our ordinary thought in society is incoher-
ent. It is going in all sorts of directions, with thoughts conﬂicting and
canceling each other out. But if people were to think together in a
coherent way, it would have tremendous power. That’s the suggestion. If
we have a dialogue situation – a group which has sustained dialogue for
quite a while in which people get to know each other, and so on – then
we might have such a coherent movement of thought, a coherent
movement of communication. It would be coherent not only at the level
we recognize, but at the tacit level, at the level for which we have only a
vague feeling. That would be more important.
“Tacit” means that which is unspoken, which cannot be described –
like the knowledge required to ride a bicycle. It is the actual knowledge,
and it may be coherent or not. I am proposing that thought is actually a
subtle tacit process. The concrete process of thinking is very tacit. The
On Dialogue and its Application
309

meaning is basically tacit. And what we can say explicitly is only a very
small part of it. I think we all realize that we do almost everything by
this sort of tacit knowledge. Thought is emerging from the tacit ground,
and any fundamental change in thought will come from the tacit
ground. So if we are communicating at the tacit level, then maybe
thought is changing.
The tacit process is common. It is shared. The sharing is not merely
the explicit communication and the body language and all that, which
are part of it, but there is also a deeper tacit process which is common. I
think the whole human race knew this for a million years; and then in
ﬁve thousand years of civilization we have lost it, because our societies
got too big to carry it out. But now we have to get started again, because
it has become urgent that we communicate. We have to share our
consciousness and be able to think together, in order to do intelligently
whatever is necessary. If we begin to confront what’s going on in a
dialogue group, we sort of have the nucleus of what’s going on in all
society. When you are by yourself you miss quite a bit of that; even one-
on-one you don’t really get it.
ENGAGING IN DIALOGUE
A basic notion for a dialogue would be for people to sit in a circle. Such a
geometric arrangement doesn’t favor anybody; it allows for direct
communication. In principle, the dialogue should work without any
leader and without any agenda. Of course, we are used to leaders and
agendas, so if we were to start a meeting without a leader – start talking
and have no agenda, no purpose – I think we would ﬁnd a great deal of
anxiety in not knowing what to do. Thus, one of the things would be to
work through that anxiety, to face it. In fact, we know by experience that
if people do this for an hour or two they do get through it and start to
talk more freely.
It may be useful to have a facilitator to get the group going, who
keeps a watch on it for a while and sort of explains what’s happening
from time to time, and that kind of thing. But his function is to work
himself out of a job. Now, that may take time. It may be that people must
meet regularly and sustain the dialogue. That form might be to meet
week after week, or bi-weekly or whatever, and sustain it a long time – a
year or two or more. In that period, all those things we mentioned would
come out. And people would begin to learn really to depend less and less
on the facilitator – at least that’s the idea behind it. Now, the whole of
society has been organized to believe that we can’t function without
310
Collective Orders

leaders. But maybe we can. That’s the suggestion. Of course, it’s an
experiment. We can’t guarantee that it is going to happen. But that is
what takes place in any new venture – you consider all the evidence, you
consider what’s the best idea, what to say about it, what your theories
about it are, and then you go ahead and try it.
At the beginning of a dialogue we would not expect that personal
problems or questions would enter into it. If people sustained the dia-
logue week after week, or month after month, then maybe they could.
Everything can enter, but the people have to get to know each other and
trust each other and establish that relationship of sharing. It would be
too much to expect to start with that. And in fact, a personal problem
may not be all that important anyway, although if someone has one, the
group could consider it. There is no reason why they couldn’t. However,
I don’t think we would begin with that, at least not often. The group is
not mainly for the sake of personal problems; it’s mainly a cultural ques-
tion. But the personal could come into the group, because personal prob-
lems and culture get mixed up.
It is important to understand that a dialogue group is not a therapy
group of some kind. We are not trying to cure anybody here, though it
may happen as a byproduct. But that’s not our purpose. Dr. Patrick de
Maré, a friend of mine who has gone into this, calls it “socio-therapy,”
not individual therapy. The group is a microcosm of society, so if the
group – or anyone – is “cured,” it is the beginning of the larger cure. You
can look at it that way if you like. That’s limited, but still it’s a way to
look at it. Nor is this a so-called “encounter group,” which is aimed at a
particular type of therapy where people’s emotions, and so forth, can
come up. We are not particularly aiming for that, but we are not saying
that emotions should never come up, because in certain cases, if people
confront each other emotionally it will bring out their assumptions.
In the dialogue people should talk directly to one another, one to
one, across the circle. Then the time would come, if we got to know
each other a bit and could trust each other, when you could speak very
directly to the whole group, or to anybody in it.
Some time ago there was an anthropologist who lived for a long
while with a North American tribe. It was a small group of about this
size. The hunter-gatherers have typically lived in groups of twenty to
forty. Agricultural group units are much larger. Now, from time to time
that tribe met like this, in a circle. They just talked and talked and talked,
apparently to no purpose. They made no decisions. There was no leader.
And everybody could participate. There may have been wise men or
wise women who were listened to a bit more – the older ones – but
On Dialogue and its Application
311

everybody could talk. The meeting went on, until it ﬁnally seemed to
stop for no reason at all and the group dispersed. Yet after that, every-
body seemed to know what to do, because they understood each other so
well. Then they could get together in smaller groups and do something
or decide things.
In the dialogue group we are not going to decide what to do about
anything. This is crucial. Otherwise we are not free. We must have an
empty space where we are not obliged to do anything, nor to come to
any conclusions, nor to say anything or not say anything. It’s open and
free. It’s an empty space. The word “leisure” has that meaning of a kind
of empty space. “Occupied” is the opposite of leisure; it’s full. So we
have here a kind of empty space where anything may come in – and
after we ﬁnish, we just empty it. We are not trying to accumulate
anything. That’s one of the points about a dialogue. As Krishnamurti
used to say, “The cup has to be empty to hold something.”
We see that it is not an arbitrary imposition to state that we have no
ﬁxed purpose – no absolute purpose, anyway. We may set up relative
purposes for investigation, but we are not wedded to a particular pur-
pose, and are not saying that the whole group must conform to that
purpose indeﬁnitely. All of us might want the human race to survive,
but even that is not our purpose. Our purpose is really to communicate
coherently in truth, if you want to call that a purpose.
You could say that generally our culture goes in for large groups of
people for two reasons. One is for entertainment and fun. The other is to
get a useful job done. Now I’m going to propose that in a dialogue we
are not going to have any agenda, we are not going to try to accomplish
any useful thing. As soon as we try to accomplish a useful purpose or
goal, we will have an assumption behind it as to what is useful, and that
assumption is going to limit us. Different people will think different
things are useful. And that’s going to cause trouble. We may say, “Do we
want to save the world?” or “Do we want to run a school?” or “Do we
want to make money?” or whatever it may be. That’s also going to be
one of the problems in corporate dialogues. Will they ever give up the
notion that they are there primarily to make a proﬁt? If they could, this
would be a real transformation of mankind. I think that many business
executives in certain companies are feeling unhappy and really want to
do something – not merely to save the company. Just as we are, they are
unhappy about the whole world. It’s not the case that all of them are
money-grubbing or exclusively proﬁt-oriented.
When a dialogue group is new, in general people talk around the
point for a while. In all human relations nowadays, people generally
312
Collective Orders

have a way of not directly facing anything. They talk around things,
avoiding the difﬁculties. This practice will probably continue within a
dialogue group. If you keep the group going for a while though, that
tendency begins to break down. At a dialogue one evening a fellow
spoke up, saying, “Okay, we’re all talking about philosophy. Can I read
this nice bit of philosophy I brought?” And some people said “no,” so he
didn’t read it. It seemed a bit of a shock, but it worked out.
It all has to be worked out. People will come to a group with differ-
ent interests and assumptions. In the beginning they may have negoti-
ation, which is a very preliminary stage of dialogue. In other words, if
people have different approaches, they have to negotiate somehow.
However, that is not the end of dialogue; it is the beginning. Negotiation
involves ﬁnding a common way of proceeding. Now, if you only negoti-
ate, you don’t get very far, although some questions do have to be
negotiated.
A great deal of what nowadays is typically considered to be dialogue
tends to focus on negotiation; but as we said, that is a preliminary stage.
People are generally not ready to go into the deeper issues when they
ﬁrst have what they consider to be a dialogue. They negotiate, and
that’s about as far as they get. Negotiation is trading off, adjusting to
each other and saying, “Okay, I see your point. I see that that is import-
ant to you. Let’s ﬁnd a way that would satisfy both of us. I will give in a
little on this, and you give in a little on that. And then we will work
something out.” Now that’s not really a close relationship, but it begins
to make it possible to get going.
So the suggestion is that people could start dialogue groups in vari-
ous places. The point would not be to identify with the group, but rather,
what is important is this whole process. You might say, “This is a won-
derful group,” but it’s actually the process that counts.
I think that when we are able to sustain a dialogue of this sort you
will ﬁnd that there will be a change in the people who are taking part.
They themselves would then behave differently, even outside the dia-
logue. Eventually they would spread it. It’s like the Biblical analogy of
the seeds – some are dropped in stony ground and some of them fall in
the right place and they produce tremendous fruit. The thing is that you
cannot tell where or how it can start. The idea here, the communication
here, the kind of thought we’re having here, is a kind of seed which may
help this to come about. But we mustn’t be surprised if many of these
groups are abortive and don’t get going. That doesn’t mean it can’t
happen.
The point is not to establish a ﬁxed dialogue group forever, but
On Dialogue and its Application
313

rather one that lasts long enough to make a change. If you keep holding
it for too long it may become caught up in habits again. But you have to
keep it up for a while, or else it won’t work. It may be valuable to keep
the dialogue going for a year or two, as we said, and it is important to
sustain it regularly. If you sustain it, all these problems will arise; it
cannot avoid bringing out the deep assumptions of the people who are
participating. The frustration will arise, the sense of chaos, the sense
that it’s not worth it. The emotional charge will come. The fellow with
the assumptions about Zionism probably wanted to be very polite. But
suddenly somebody said something that outraged him, and he couldn’t
control himself. It’s going to happen that the deep assumptions will
come to the surface, if we stick with it. But if you understand that you do
nevertheless have to stick with it, then something new will come.
Now, dialogue is not going to be always entertaining, nor is it doing
anything visibly useful. So you may tend to drop it as it gets difﬁcult.
But I suggest that it is very important to go on with it – to stay with it
through the frustration. When you think something is important you
will do that. For example, nobody would climb Mount Everest unless for
some reason he thought it was important, as that could also be very
frustrating and not always entertaining. And the same is true if you
have to make money, or do all sorts of things. If you feel that they are
necessary, you do them.
I’m saying that it is necessary to share meaning. A society is a link
of relationships among people and institutions, so that we can live
together. But it only works if we have a culture – which implies that we
share meaning; i.e., signiﬁcance, purpose, and value. Otherwise it falls
apart. Our society is incoherent, and doesn’t do that very well; it hasn’t
for a long time, if it ever did. The different assumptions that people have
are tacitly affecting the whole meaning of what we are doing.
SUSPENDING ASSUMPTIONS
We have been saying that people in any group will bring to it their
assumptions, and as the group continues meeting, those assumptions
will come up. Then what is called for is to suspend those assumptions, so
that you neither carry them out nor suppress them. You don’t believe
them, nor do you disbelieve them; you don’t judge them as good or bad.
Normally when you are angry you start to react outwardly, and you may
just say something nasty. Now suppose I try to suspend that reaction.
Not only will I now not insult that person outwardly, but I will suspend
the insult that I make inside of me. Even if I don’t insult somebody
314
Collective Orders

outwardly, I am insulting him inside. So I will suspend that, too. I hold it
back, I reﬂect it back. You may also think of it as suspended in front of
you so that you can look at it – sort of reﬂected back as if you were in
front of a mirror. In this way I can see things that I wouldn’t have seen if
I had simply carried out that anger, or if I had suppressed it and said,
“I’m not angry” or “I shouldn’t be angry.”
So the whole group now becomes a mirror for each person. The
effect you have on the other person is a mirror, and also the effect the
other person has on you. Seeing this whole process is very helpful in
bringing out what’s going on, because you can see that everybody’s in
the same boat.
What’s required then is that we notice the connection between the
thoughts going on in the dialogue, the feelings in the body, and the
emotions. If you watch, you’ll see from the body language, as well as
from the verbal language, that everybody’s in much the same boat –
they’re just on opposite sides. The group may even polarize so that two
very powerful groups are against each other. But one of the things
we’re aiming for is that this should come out. We’re not trying to
suppress it.
Therefore, you simply see what the assumptions and reactions
mean – not only your own, but the other people’s as well. We are not
trying to change anybody’s opinion. When this meeting is over, some-
body may or may not change his opinion. This is part of what I consider
dialogue – for people to realize what is on each other’s minds without
coming to any conclusions or judgments. Assumptions will come up.
And if you hear somebody else who has an assumption that seems
outrageous to you, the natural response might be to get angry, or get
excited, or to react in some other way. But suppose you suspend that
activity. You may not even have known that you had an assumption. It
was only because he came up with the opposite one that you ﬁnd out
that you have one. You may uncover other assumptions, but we are all
suspending them and looking at them and seeing what they mean.
You have to notice your own reactions of hostility, or whatever, and
you can see by the way people are behaving what their reactions are.
You may ﬁnd, as with anger, that it could go so far that the meeting
could blow up. If temperatures do rise, then those who are not com-
pletely caught up in their particular opinions should come in to defuse
the situation a bit so that people could look at it. It mustn’t go so far that
you can’t look at it. The point is to keep it at a level where the opinions
come out, but where you can look at them. Then you may have to see
that the other person’s hostility provokes your own. That’s all part of the
On Dialogue and its Application
315

observation, the suspension. You become more familiar with how
thought works.
THE IMPULSE OF NECESSITY
We’ve been discussing dialogue and thought, and the importance of
giving attention to the whole process – not merely to the content of all
the different opinions and views – and to how we hold it all together.
Also we’re all watching the process of how it affects us, our feelings and
states of the body, and how other people are affected. This is really
something of crucial importance, to be listening and watching, observ-
ing, to give attention to the actual process of thought and the order in
which it happens, and to watch for its incoherence, where it’s not work-
ing properly, and so on. We are not trying to change anything, but just
being aware of it. And you can notice the similarity of the difﬁculties
within a group to the conﬂicts and incoherent thoughts within an
individual.
I think that as we do this we will ﬁnd that certain kinds of thoughts
play a greater role than other kinds. One of the kinds that is most
important is the thought of necessity. What is necessary cannot be
otherwise; it’s just got to be that way. It is interesting that the word
necessary has a Latin root, necesse, meaning “don’t yield.” It really
means “what cannot be turned aside.” Ordinarily as we go through life,
problems come up and they can be turned aside, or if they can’t be
turned aside then we turn aside, and that is the way we resolve things.
But then there may arise a necessity, as I said, which cannot be turned
aside; but we may have our own necessity which also cannot be turned
aside. Then we feel frustrated. Each necessity is absolute, and we have a
conﬂict of absolute necessities. Typically, it may come up that your own
opinion cannot be turned aside, nor can the other person’s, and you feel
the other person’s opinion working within you, opposing you. So each
person is in a state of conﬂict.
Necessity creates powerful impulses. Once you feel that something
is necessary, it creates an impulse to do it or not to do it, whatever it may
be. It may be very strong and you feel compelled, propelled. Necessity is
one of the most powerful forces – it overrides all the instincts eventu-
ally. If people feel something is necessary, they’ll even go against the
instinct of self-preservation and all sorts of things. In the dialogue, both
individually and collectively – this is important – the conﬂicts come up
around this notion of necessity. All the serious arguments, whether
in the family or in the dialogue, are about different views of what is
316
Collective Orders

absolutely necessary. Unless it takes that form, then you can always
negotiate it and decide what has ﬁrst priority, and adjust it. But if two
things are absolutely necessary you cannot use the usual way of negoti-
ation. That is the weak point about negotiation. When two different
nations come up and each one says, “I’m sovereign, and what I say has
to go, it’s absolutely necessary,” then there is no answer unless they can
change that.
The question is what to do if there is a clash of two absolute neces-
sities. The ﬁrst thing that happens is that we get this emotional charge
and we can build up powerful feelings of anger, hate, frustration, as I
described before. As long as that absolute necessity remains, nothing
can change it, because in a way each person says that they have a valid
reason to stick to what they’ve got, and they have a valid reason to hate
the other person for getting in the way of what is absolutely necessary:
“He rather obstinately and stupidly refuses to see this,” and so on. One
may say that it’s regrettable that we have to kill all these people, but it is
absolutely necessary, in the interests of the country, the religion, or
whatever it may be. So you see the power of that notion.
So in the dialogue we are expecting the notions of absolute neces-
sity to come up, to clash with each other. People avoid that, because they
know that there’s going to be trouble and they skirt those questions. But
if we sustain the dialogue it’s going to come up. The question is what
happens then.
We discussed previously that something can happen, if people will
stay with it, which will change their whole attitude. At a certain moment
we may have the insight that each one of us is doing the same thing –
sticking to the absolute necessity of his idea – and that nothing can
happen if we do that. If so, it may raise the question, “Is it absolutely
necessary? So much is being destroyed just because we have this notion
of it being absolutely necessary.” Now if you can question it and say, “Is
it absolutely necessary?” then at some point it may loosen up. People
may say, “Well, maybe it’s not absolutely necessary.” Then the whole
thing becomes easier, and it becomes possible to let that conﬂict go and
to explore new notions of what is necessary, creatively. The dialogue can
then enter a creative new area. I think this is crucial.
What about these notions of necessity which we have to set up or
discover? If an artist just puts on his paint in arbitrary places, you would
say there wasn’t anything to it; if he just follows somebody else’s order
of necessity, he’s mediocre. He’s got to create his own order of necessity.
Different parts of the form he is making must have an inner necessity or
else the thing has not really much of a value. This artistic necessity is
On Dialogue and its Application
317

creative. The artist has his freedom in this creative act. Therefore, free-
dom makes possible a creative perception of new orders of necessity. If
you can’t do that, you’re not really free. You may say you’re doing
whatever you like and that’s your impulse, but I think we’ve seen that
your impulses can come from your thoughts. For example, the thought
of what is necessary will make an impulse, and people who are in
international conﬂict will say, “Our impulse is to go to war and get rid of
these people who are in our way,” as if that were freedom. But it isn’t.
They’re being driven by that thought. So doing what you like is seldom
freedom, because what you like is determined by what you think and
that is often a pattern which is ﬁxed. Therefore we have a creative
necessity which we discover – you can discover individually or we can
do so collectively in the group – of how to operate in a group in a new
way. Any group which has problems really has got to solve them cre-
atively if they’re serious problems. It can’t just be by trade-offs and
negotiations of the old ways.
I think this is one of the key points, then – to realize when you come
to an assumption, that there is an assumption of absolute necessity
which you’re getting into, and that’s why everything is sticking.
PROPRIOCEPTION OF THOUGHT
You can see the whole scope of this question of dialogue giving atten-
tion to thought may look rather elementary or simple in the beginning,
but it actually gets to the root of our problems and opens the way to
creative transformation.
We come back to the realization that the thing which has gone
wrong with thought is basically, as I said before, that it does things and
then says or implies that it didn’t do them – that they took place
independently, and that they constitute “problems.” Whereas what you
really have to do is to stop thinking that way so that you stop creating
that problem. The “problem” is insoluble as long as you keep on pro-
ducing it all the time by your thought. Thought has to be in some sense
aware of its consequences, and presently thought is not sufﬁciently
aware of its consequences. That ties up with something similar in
neurophysiology called proprioception, which really means “self-
perception” – the body can perceive its own movement. When you
move the body you know the relation between intention and action. The
impulse to move and the movement are seen to be connected. If you
don’t have that, the body is not viable.
We know of a woman who apparently had a stroke in the middle of
318
Collective Orders

the night. She woke up and she was hitting herself. People came in and
turned on the light and that’s what they found. What happened was that
her motor nerves were working, but her sensory nerves were no longer
working. So she probably touched herself, but she didn’t know that
she’d touched herself, and therefore she assumed that somebody else
was touching her and interpreted that as an attack. The more she
defended, the worse the attack got. The proprioception had broken
down. She no longer saw the relation between the intention to move
and the result. When the light was turned on, proprioception was estab-
lished in a new way, by sight.
The question is: can thought be proprioceptive? You have the inten-
tion to think, which you’re not usually aware of. You think because you
have an intention to think. It comes from the idea that it is necessary to
think, that there’s a problem. If you watch, you’ll see an intention to
think, an impulse to think. Then comes the thought, and the thought
may give rise to a feeling, which might give rise to another intention to
think, and so on. You’re not aware of that, so the thought appears as if it
were coming by itself, and the feeling appears to be coming by itself,
and so on. That gives the wrong meaning, as in the case of the woman
we talked about just now. You may get a feeling that you don’t like from
a thought, and then a second later say, “I’ve got to get rid of that feeling,”
but your thought is still there working, especially if it’s a thought that
you take to be absolutely necessary.
In fact, the problems we have been discussing are basically all due
to this lack of proprioception. The point of suspension is to help make
proprioception possible, to create a mirror so that you can see the results
of your thought. You have it inside yourself because your body acts as a
mirror and you can see tensions arising in the body. Also other people
are a mirror, the group is a mirror. You have to see your intention. You
get an impulse to say something and you see it there, the result, at
almost the same time.
If everybody is giving attention, then there will arise a new kind of
thought between people, or even in the individual, which is propriocep-
tive, and which doesn’t get into the kind of tangle that thought gets into
ordinarily, which is not proprioceptive. We could say that practically all
the problems of the human race are due to the fact that thought is not
proprioceptive. Thought is constantly creating problems that way and
then trying to solve them. But as it tries to solve them it makes it worse
because it doesn’t notice that it’s creating them, and the more it thinks,
the more problems it creates – because it’s not proprioceptive of what
it’s doing. If your body were that way you would very quickly come to
On Dialogue and its Application
319

grief and you wouldn’t last very long. And it may be said that if our
culture were that way, our civilization would not last all that long, either.
So this is another way in which dialogue will help collectively to bring
about a different kind of consciousness.
COLLECTIVE PARTICIPATION
All of this is part of collective thought – people thinking together. At
some stage we would share our opinions without hostility, and we
would then be able to think together, whereas when we defend an opin-
ion we can’t. An example of people thinking together would be that
somebody would get an idea, somebody else would take it up, somebody
else would add to it. The thought would ﬂow, rather than there being a lot
of different people, each trying to persuade or convince the others.
In the beginning people won’t trust each other. But I think that if
they see the importance of the dialogue, they will work with it. And as
they start to know each other, they begin to trust each other. It may take
time. At ﬁrst you will just come into the group bringing all the prob-
lems of the culture and the society. Any group like this is a microcosm of
society – it has all sorts of opinions, people not trusting each other, and
so on. So you begin to work from there. People talk at ﬁrst in a perhaps
rather trivial way, and then later less trivially. Initially they talk about
superﬁcial issues, because they’re afraid of doing more, and then grad-
ually they learn to trust each other.
The object of a dialogue is not to analyze things, or to win an
argument, or to exchange opinions. Rather, it is to suspend your opin-
ions and to look at the opinions – to listen to everybody’s opinions, to
suspend them, and to see what all that means. If we can see what all of
our opinions mean, then we are sharing a common content, even if we
don’t agree entirely. It may turn out that the opinions are not really very
important – they are all assumptions. And if we can see them all, we
may then move more creatively in a different direction. We can just
simply share the appreciation of the meanings; and out of this whole
thing, truth emerges unannounced – not that we have chosen it.
If each of us in this room is suspending, then we are all doing the
same thing. We are all looking at everything together. The content of
our consciousness is essentially the same. Accordingly, a different kind
of consciousness is possible among us, a participatory consciousness –
as indeed consciousness always is, but one that is frankly acknowledged
to be participatory and can go that way freely. Everything can move
between us. Each person is participating, is partaking of the whole
320
Collective Orders

meaning of the group and also taking part in it. We can call that a true
dialogue.
Something more important will happen if we can do this, if we can
manage it. Everybody will be sharing all the assumptions in the group.
If everybody sees the meaning together, of all the assumptions, then the
content of consciousness is essentially the same. Whereas if we all have
different assumptions and defend them, each person is then going to
have a different content, because we won’t really take in the other per-
son’s assumptions. We’ll be ﬁghting them, or pushing them away, try-
ing to convince or persuade the other person.
Conviction and persuasion are not called for in a dialogue. The word
“convince” means to win, and the word “persuade” is similar. It’s based
on the same root as are “suave” and “sweet.” People sometimes try to
persuade by sweet talk or to convince by strong talk. Both come to the
same thing, though, and neither of them is relevant. There’s no point in
being persuaded or convinced. That’s not really coherent or rational. If
something is right, you don’t need to be persuaded. If somebody has to
persuade you, then there is probably some doubt about it.
If we could all share a common meaning, we would be participating
together. We would be partaking of the common meaning, just as people
partake of food together. We would be taking part and communicating
and creating a common meaning. That would be participation, which
means both “to partake of” and “to take part in.” It would mean that in
this participation a common mind would arise, which nonetheless
would not exclude the individual. The individual might hold a separate
opinion, but that opinion would then be absorbed into the group, too.
Thus, everybody is quite free. It’s not like a mob where the collect-
ive mind takes over – not at all. It is something between the individual
and the collective. It can move between them. It’s a harmony of the
individual and the collective, in which the whole constantly moves
toward coherence. So there is both a collective mind and an individual
mind, and like a stream, the ﬂow moves between them. The opinions,
therefore, don’t matter much. Eventually we may be somewhere
between all these opinions, and we start to move beyond them in
another direction – a tangential direction – into something new and
creative.
A NEW CULTURE
A society is a link of relationships that are set by people in order to work
and live together – rules, laws, institutions, and various things. It is done
On Dialogue and its Application
321

by thinking and agreeing that we are going to have them, and then we
do it. And behind that is a culture, which is shared meaning. Even to
say that we want to set up a government, people must agree to a com-
mon meaning of what kind of government they want, what’s good
government, what’s right, and so on. Different cultures will produce
different functions of government. And if some people don’t agree,
then we have political struggle. When it goes further, it breaks down
into civil war.
I am saying society is based on shared meanings, which constitute
the culture. If we don’t share coherent meaning, we do not make much
of a society. And at present, the society at large has a very incoherent set
of meanings. In fact, this set of “shared meanings” is so incoherent that
it is hard to say that they have any real meaning at all. There is a certain
amount of signiﬁcance, but it is very limited. The culture in general is
incoherent, and we will thus bring with us into the group – or micro-
cosm or microculture – a corresponding incoherence.
If all the meanings can come in together, however, we may be able
to work toward coherence. As a result of this process, we may natur-
ally and easily drop a lot of our meanings. But we don’t have to begin
by accepting or rejecting them. The important thing is that we will
never come to truth unless the overall meaning is coherent. All the
meanings of the past and the present are together. We ﬁrst have to
apprehend them, and just let them be; and this will bring about a
certain order.
If we can work this through, we will then have a coherent meaning
in the group, and hence the beginning of a new kind of culture – a
culture of a kind which, as far as I can tell, has never really existed. If it
ever did, it must have been very long ago – maybe in some groups in the
primitive Stone Age conditions. I am saying that a genuine culture could
arise in which opinions and assumptions are not defended incoherently.
And that kind of culture is necessary for the society to work, and ultim-
ately for the society to survive.
Such a group might be the germ or the microcosm of the larger
culture, which would then spread in many ways – not only by creating
new groups, but also by people communicating the notion of what it
means.
Also, one can see that it is possible that this spirit of the dialogue
can work even in smaller groups, or one-on-one, or within the indi-
vidual. If the individual can hold all of the meanings together in his own
mind, he has the attitude of the dialogue. He could carry that out and
perhaps communicate it, both verbally and non-verbally, to other
322
Collective Orders

people. In principle, this could spread. Many people are interested in
dialogue now. We ﬁnd it growing. The time seems to be ripe for this
notion, and it could perhaps spread in many different areas.
I think that something like this is necessary for society to function
properly and for society to survive. Otherwise it will all fall apart. This
shared meaning is really the cement that holds society together, and you
could say that the present society has some very poor-quality cement. If
you make a building with very low-quality cement, it cracks and falls
apart. We really need the right cement, the right glue, and that is shared
meaning.
DIFFICULTIES IN DIALOGUE
We have talked about the positive side of dialogue. However, this
attempt at dialogue can be very frustrating. I say this not only theoretic-
ally, but also from experience. We’ve mentioned some of the difﬁcul-
ties: it’s frustrating to have all these opinions; there may be anxiety.
Besides that, you will ﬁnd other problems in trying to have a dialogue
in a group of any size. Some people want to assert themselves; that’s
their way of going about things. They talk easily and they become dom-
inant. They may have an image of themselves as dominant, and they get
a certain amount of security out of it, a lift out of it. Other people,
however, do not have such great self-esteem in this area; they tend to
hold back, especially when they see somebody who is dominant. They
are afraid that they’ll make fools of themselves, or something of the
kind.
There are various roles that people adopt. Some people adopt the
dominant role, some adopt the role of the weak, powerless person who
can be dominated. They sort of work together, with each other. Those
“roles,” which are really based on assumptions and opinions, will also
interfere with the operation of dialogue. So a person has built some
assumptions about himself, whether it’s one way or the other. Also,
since his childhood people have told him that that’s what he is, that he is
this way or that way. He has had bad experiences or good experiences,
and it all built up. These are some of the problems which will arise when
we try to have a dialogue.
A further difﬁculty is you ﬁnd that very often there is an impulse
or pressure, a compulsion almost, to get in there quickly and get your
point of view across, particularly if you are one of the “talkers.” Even if
you’re not, you have that pressure, but you’re holding back because
you’re frightened. Therefore, there is no time for people to absorb what
On Dialogue and its Application
323

has been said, or to ponder it. People feel under pressure to get in, and
people feel left out. The whole communication breaks down for this
very elementary reason. This is nothing deep at all, but still we have got
to address it. Very often when you don’t give space in a group, every-
body jumps in right away with whatever he has in his mind. But at the
same time, you shouldn’t be mulling it over in your mind – picking on
one point and turning it over – while the conversation goes on to some-
thing else. If you stop to think about one point, by the time you have
thought about it the group has moved on, and what you were going to
say is now irrelevant. As you were thinking, “What does all that mean
and what shall I say about it?” it became too late, because the topic has
changed. So there is sort of a subtle situation in between, where you are
not jumping in too fast, nor holding back too much. There may be silent
periods, and so on.
So while we don’t have “rules” for the dialogue, we may learn cer-
tain principles as we go along which help us – such as that we must give
space for each person to talk. We don’t put this as a rule; rather we say
that we can see the sense of it, and we are learning to do it. So we see the
necessity or value of certain procedures that help.
Also, if someone wants the group to accomplish his idea or purpose,
it would probably start a conﬂict. The dialogue is aimed for those people
who can commonly agree that this is the way to go about it. If people
don’t agree that this is the way to go about it, then there is no reason to
be in it. Frequently you ﬁnd that as the dialogue goes on and the group
continues, some people leave and others come in. There are those who
feel, “Well, this is not for me.”
Now, how are you going to deal with the frustrations within the
group? As we said before, things may make you angry or frustrated or
may frighten you. Your assumptions may be revealed and challenged,
and you may ﬁnd the opinions of others to be outrageous. Also, people
may be frightened and anxious if there is no leader and no topic and
nothing “to do.” So you have to get through all of that.
These are the problems that are going to arise – that have arisen in
all the groups that I’ve seen. And you can expect that they are almost
inevitable, and may ask, “Then what is the point in going on with all of
this?” So we must explore that.
THE VISION OF DIALOGUE
Let me give what I call a “vision of dialogue.” You don’t have to accept it,
but it may be a way to look at it. Let’s suppose we stick with this, and we
324
Collective Orders

face the emotional charge – all this irritation, all this frustration – which
actually can develop into hate if very powerful assumptions are there.
We could say that hate is a neurophysiological, chemical disturbance of
a very powerful kind, which is now endemic in the world. Wherever you
look, you see people hating each other. So suppose you stick with this.
You may get an insight, a shared insight, that we’re all in the same
position – everybody has an assumption, everybody is sticking to his
assumption, everybody is disturbed neurochemically. The fundamental
level in people is the same; the superﬁcial differences are not so
important.
It’s possible to see that there’s a kind of “level of contact” in the
group. The thought process is an extension of the body process, and all
the body language is showing it, and so on. People are really in rather
close contact – hate is an extremely close bond. I remember somebody
saying that when people are in really close contact, talking about some-
thing which is very important to them, their whole bodies are involved –
their hearts, their adrenalin, all the neurochemicals, everything. They
are in far closer contact with each other than with some parts of their
own bodies, such as their toes. So, in some sense there is established in
that contact “one body.” And also, if we can all listen to each other’s
opinions, and suspend them without judging them, and your opinion is
on the same basis as anyone else’s, then we all have “one mind” because
we have the same content – all the opinions, all the assumptions. At that
moment the difference is secondary. Then you have in some sense one
body, one mind. It does not overwhelm the individual. There is no
conﬂict in the fact that the individual does not agree. It’s not all that
important whether you agree or not. There is no pressure to agree or
disagree.
The point is that we would establish, on another level, a kind of
bond, which is called impersonal fellowship. You don’t have to know
each other. In England, for example, the football crowds prefer not to
have seats in their football stands, but just to stand bunched against
each other. In those crowds very few people know each other, but they
still feel something – that contact – which is missing in their ordinary
personal relations. And in war many people feel that there’s a kind of
comradeship which they miss in peacetime. It’s the same sort of thing –
that close connection, that fellowship, that mutual participation. I think
people ﬁnd this lacking in our society, which gloriﬁes the separate
individual. The communists were trying to establish something else, but
they completely failed in a very miserable way. Now a lot of them have
adopted the same values as we have. But people are not entirely happy
On Dialogue and its Application
325

with that. They feel isolated. Even those who “succeed” feel isolated, feel
there’s another side they are missing.
I am saying that this is a reason for dialogue. We really do need to
have it. This reason should be strong enough to get us through all the
frustration we talked about. People generally seem ready to accept frus-
tration with anything that they regard as important. Doing your job or
making money, for example, is often frustrating; it produces anxiety, Yet
people will say, “That is important! We have to stick with it.” They feel
that way about all sorts of things. I’m saying that if we regard dialogue
as important, as necessary, we will say about it as well, “We will stick to
it.” But if we don’t think it is necessary, we might say, “Okay, what’s the
point? This is too much trouble. Let’s give it up. It’s not producing
anything.” You see, you have to explore anything new for a while. In
science, or anywhere, you usuallly have to go through a period where
you are not getting anywhere while you are exploring. It can, neverthe-
less, be very discouraging.
If we can all suspend carrying out our impulses, suspend our
assumptions, and look at them all, then we are all in the same state of
consciousness. And therefore we have established the thing that many
people say they want – a common consciousness. It may not be very
pleasant, but we have got it. People tend to think of common conscious-
ness as “shared bliss.” That may come; but if it does, I’m saying that the
road to it is through this. We have to share the consciousness that we
actually have. We can’t just impose another one. But if people can share
the frustration and share their different contradictory assumptions and
share their mutual anger and stay with it – if everybody is angry
together, and looking at it together – then you have a common
consciousness.
If people could stay with power, violence, hate, or whatever it is, all
the way to the end, then it would sort of collapse, because ultimately
they would see that we are all the same. And consequently they would
have participation and fellowship. People who have gone through that
can become good friends. The whole thing goes differently. They
become more open and trusting to each other. They have already gone
through the thing that they are aftaid of, so the intelligence can then
work.
There’s a story I would like to relate in this connection. I knew a
man in London who had been a child psychiatrist. He told me that
somebody once brought to him a girl about seven years old who was
very disturbed. She refused to talk to anybody. They brought her hoping
that he would help to get her talking. So he tried for about an hour and
326
Collective Orders

got nowhere. Finally, getting exasperated, he said, “Why don’t you talk
to me?” She answered, “Because I hate you.” He thought that he had to
bring time into this somewhere to defuse it. So he said, “How long will
you hate me?” She said, “I’ll hate you forever.” He was then a bit wor-
ried, so he brought time in again. He asked, “How long will you hate me
forever?” Then she burst out laughing and the whole thing was broken.
The energy which had been there was now available. The absurdity of
the thing was shown to her – that the thing was incoherent. She was
saying that she was going to hate him forever, and she could see that
that wouldn’t really be so; and if that’s not so, then the idea that she has
got to go on with the hatred is not necessary either.
When you have anger, it has a reason, or a cause. You say that you
are angry because of this, this, or that. It builds up to rage and hate, at
which point it no longer has a particular reason anymore – it just sus-
tains itself. That energy of hate is sort of locked up, and then it’s looking
for an occasion to discharge. The same holds with panic. You are usually
aware of a reason for your fear, but by the time you get to panic it goes
on by itself. However, the sort of energy that goes around at that level
may also in a vague way be the kind of energy we are talking about for
creativity – namely, an energy without a reason.
But there is a great deal of violence in the opinions that we are
defending. They are not merely opinions, they are not merely assump-
tions; they are assumptions with which we are identiﬁed – which we
are therefore defending, because it is as if we are defending ourselves.
The natural self-defense impulse, which we got in the jungle, has been
transferred from the jungle animals to these opinions. In other words,
we say that there are some dangerous opinions out there – just as there
might be dangerous tigers. And there are some very precious animals
inside us that have to be defended. So an impulse that made sense
physically in the jungle has been transferred to our opinions in our
modern life. And in a dialogue, we get to be aware of that in a collective
way.
As long as we have this defensive attitude – blocking and holding
assumptions, sticking to them and saying, “I’ve got to be right,” and that
sort of thing – then intelligence is very limited, because intelligence
requires that you don’t defend an assumption. There is no reason to
hold to an assumption if there is evidence that it is not right. The proper
structure of an assumption or of an opinion is that it is open to evidence
that it may not be right.
That does not mean that we are going to impose the opinions of the
group. In this way the collective can often be troublesome. The group
On Dialogue and its Application
327

may act like a conscience, inducing powerful guilt feelings in its mem-
bers, because we are all so built that we tend to regard what everybody
agrees on as true. Everybody may or may not have a different opinion –
it is not that important. It isn’t necessary that everybody be convinced
to have the same view. This sharing of mind, of consciousness, is more
important than the content of the opinions. And you may see that these
opinions are limited anyway. You may ﬁnd that the answer is not in the
opinions at all, but somewhere else. Truth does not emerge from opin-
ions; it must emerge from something else – perhaps from a more free
movement of the tacit mind. So we have to get meanings coherent if we
are going to perceive truth, or to take part in truth. That is why I say the
dialogue is so important. If our meanings are incoherent, how are we
going to participate in truth?
I think this new approach could open the way to changing the
whole world situation – ecologically, and in other ways. For instance, the
ecological movement, the “green movement,” is now in danger of frag-
menting and splitting, because many of those groups have different
opinions about how to deal with the problems. So they can wind up
ﬁghting each other as much as they ﬁght for the ecology. Consequently,
it seems particularly urgent that the green movement get into dialogue.
People concerned with the ecology are clearly aware of some of our
planetary problems, but I think that many of them may not be as aware
of their assumptions and tacit thought processes. I think it is important
to call attention to this explicitly in a clear way, so that it becomes clear
what the basic problem is. These kinds of activities go together. Clean-
ing up the rivers and planting trees and saving the whales should go
together with dialogue, and with seeing the general problem of thought.
They all belong together, because any one of those activities by itself is
not enough. If we all just talk about thought and think about thought for
a long while, the whole planet may be destroyed in the meantime. But I
think that dialogue will work in this tacit level of mental process, where
the most signiﬁcant things take place.
There are situations where people have differing assumptions and
opinions, where one faction is interested and the other isn’t. Still, some-
how, we have got to have a dialogue. Even if one faction won’t partici-
pate, we who are willing can participate in a dialogue between our
thought and their thought. We can at least dialogue among ourselves as
far as we can, or you may by yourself. That is the attitude of dialogue.
And the further this attitude could spread, the more I think it would
help to bring order. If we really could do something creative, it might
still affect other people on a tacit level. It would really communicate at
328
Collective Orders

the tacit level, both with words and beyond words. But if we keep on
repeating the same old story, then it won’t happen.
This notion of dialogue and common consciousness suggests that
there is some way out of our collective difﬁculties. And we have to begin
at the grass roots, as it were, not to begin at the top of the heap with the
United Nations or with the President. I know that there are people in the
US State Department who are familiar with this idea of dialogue, which
shows how these ideas do percolate and may even reach the highest
levels. This indicates that things can communicate very fast in this
modem world – though that may look very insigniﬁcant at ﬁrst. In
three to ﬁve steps it might reach all sorts of levels. Just as the destructive
things communicate, so this idea of dialogue could communicate, too.
As we ourselves stay with the frustrations of dialogue, the meaning
of what we are doing may be much more than will appear at ﬁrst sight.
In fact, we could say that instead of being part of the problem, we
become part of the solution. In other words, our very movement has the
quality of the solution; it is part of it. However small it is, it has the
quality of the solution and not the quality of the problem. However big
the larger movement is, it has the quality of the problem, not of the
solution. Accordingly, the major point is to start something which has
the quality of the solution. As I have said, we don’t know how fast or
slowly it would spread. We don’t know how fast a movement in the
mind – in the thought process and beyond the thought process, this
sharing together – will spread.
People sometimes say, “All we really need is love.” Of course, that’s
true – if there were universal love, all would go well. But we don’t appear
to have it. So we have to ﬁnd a way that works. Even though there may
be frustration and anger and rage and hate and fear, we have to ﬁnd
something which can take all that in.
To illustrate the point, here is a story about the two leading physi-
cists of this century, Albert Einstein and Niels Bohr. Einstein remem-
bered that when he ﬁrst met Bohr, he felt close to him. He wrote of a
feeling of love for him. They talked physics in a very animated way, and
so on. But they ﬁnally came upon a point where they had two different
assumptions, or opinions, about what was the way to truth. Bohr’s
judgments were based on his view of quantum theory, and Einstein’s on
his view of relativity. They talked it over again and again in a very patient
way, with all goodwill. It went on for years, and neither of them yielded.
Each one just repeated what he had been saying before. So ﬁnally they
found that they weren’t getting anywhere, and they gradually drifted
apart. They didn’t see each other for a long time after that.
On Dialogue and its Application
329

Then one year, both of them were at the Institute for Advanced
Study at Princeton, but they still didn’t meet each other. A mathemat-
ician named Herman Weyl said, “It would be nice if they got together.
It’s a pity that they don’t.” So he arranged a party to which Einstein and
Bohr and their respective students were invited. Einstein and his associ-
ates stayed at one end of the room, and Bohr and his associates stayed at
the other end. They couldn’t get together because they had nothing to
talk about. They couldn’t share any meaning, because each one felt his
meaning was true. How can you share if you are sure you have truth and
the other fellow is sure he has truth, and the truths don’t agree? How
can you share?
Therefore, you have to watch out for the notion of truth. Dialogue
may not be concerned directly with truth – it may arrive at truth, but it
is concerned with meaning. If the meaning is incoherent you will never
arrive at truth. You may think, “My meaning is coherent and somebody
else’s isn’t,” but then we’ll never have meaning shared. You will have the
“truth” for yourself or for your own group, whatever consolation that is.
But we will continue to have conﬂict.
If it is necessary to share meaning and share truth, then we have to
do something different. Bohr and Einstein probably should have had a
dialogue. I’m not saying that they could have had one, but in a dialogue
they might have listened properly to each other’s opinion. And perhaps
they both would have suspended their opinions, and moved out beyond
relativity and beyond quantum theory into something new. They might
have done that in principle, but I don’t think that this notion of dialogue
had occurred to scientists then.
Science is predicated on the concept that science is arriving at
truth – at a unique truth. The idea of dialogue is thereby in some way
foreign to the current structure of science, as it is with religion. In a
way, science has become the religion of the modern age. It plays the
role which religion used to play of giving us truth; hence different
scientists cannot come together any more than different religions
can, once they have different notions of truth. As one scientist, Max
Planck, said, “New ideas don’t win, really. What happens is that
the old scientists die and new ones come along with new ideas.” But
clearly that’s not the right way to do it. This is not to say that science
couldn’t work another way. If scientists could engage in a dialogue,
that would be a radical revolution in science, in the very nature of
science. Actually, scientists are in principle committed to the concepts
involved in dialogue. They say, “We must listen. We shouldn’t exclude
anything.”
330
Collective Orders

However, they ﬁnd that they can’t do that. This is not only because
scientists share what everybody else shares – assumptions and opinions
– but also because the very notion which has been deﬁning science
today is that we are going to get truth. Few scientists question the
assumption that thought is capable of coming to know “everything.” But
that may not be a valid assumption, because thought is abstraction,
which inherently implies limitation. The whole is too much. There is no
way by which thought can get hold of the whole, because thought only
abstracts; it limits and deﬁnes. And the past from which thought draws
contains only a certain limited amount. The present is not contained in
thought; thus, an analysis cannot actually cover the moment of analysis.
There are also the relativists, who say that we are never going to get
at an absolute truth. But they are caught in a paradox of their own. They
are assuming that relativism is the absolute truth. So it is clear that
people who believe that they are arriving at any kind of absolute truth
can’t make a dialogue, not even among themselves. Even different rela-
tivists don’t agree.
So we can see that there is no “road” to truth. What we are trying to
say is that in this dialogue we share all the roads and we ﬁnally see that
none of them matters. We see the meaning of all the roads, and there-
fore we come to the “no road.” Underneath, all the roads are the same
because of the very fact that they are “roads” – they are rigid.
We’ve said that in a dialogue there will be frustrations, but you
might become better friends if you can get through all that. Not that we
demand affection. We don’t demand friendship; we don’t demand any-
thing, though friendship may come. If you see other people’s thought, it
becomes your own thought, and you treat it as your own thought. And
when an emotional charge comes up, you share all the emotional charges,
too, if they affect you; you hold them together with all the thoughts.
Often, when there is an emotional charge somebody can come in to
defuse the issue a bit so that it doesn’t run away – as the child psych-
iatrist defused it with his asking, “How long will you hate me forever?”
Or some other sort of humor may defuse the issue, or something else –
some appropriate remark which you can’t foresee.
Sometimes you may ﬁnd that you are about to raise a question, but
someone else brings it up. In such a case, that thought is probably latent
in the group as a whole, implicit. And one person may say it, or some-
body else may say it. Then another person may pick it up and carry it
along. If the group is really working, that would be thinking together – a
common participation in thinking – as if it were all one process. That
one thought is being formed together. Then, if somebody comes up with
On Dialogue and its Application
331

another assumption, we all listen to that, we share that meaning. Now
that would be the “vision of dialogue.”
SENSITIVITY IN DIALOGUE
What we have been discussing has not been common in human society,
although it is really what is necessary if the society is to cohere. If people
would do this in government or in business or internationally, our soci-
ety would work differently. But then, that requires sensitivity – a certain
way of knowing how to come in and how not to come in, of watching all
the subtle cues and the senses and your response to them – what’s
happening inside of you, what’s happening in the group. People may
show what is happening to them in the stance of their body – by their
“body language” – as well as by what they say. They are not trying to do
this purposefully, but you will ﬁnd that it develops. That’s part of the
communication. It will be non-verbal as well as verbal. You’re not trying
to do it at all. You may not even be aware that it is happening.
Sensitivity is being able to sense that something is happening, to
sense the way you respond, the way other people respond, to sense the
subtle differences and similarities. To sense all this is the foundation of
perception. The senses provide you with information, but you have to
be sensitive to it or you won’t see it. If you know a person very well, you
may pass him on the street and say, “I saw him.” If you are asked what
the person was wearing, however, you may not know, because you didn’t
really look. You were not sensitive to all that, because you saw that
person through the screen of thought. And that was not sensitivity.
So sensitivity involves the senses, and also something beyond. The
senses are sensitive to certain things to which they respond, but that’s
not enough. The senses will tell you what is happening, and then the
consciousness must build a form, or create some sense of what it means,
which holds it together. Therefore, meaning is part of it. You are sensi-
tive to the meaning, or to the lack of meaning. It’s perception of mean-
ing, if you want to put it that way. In other words, it is a more subtle
perception. The meaning is what holds it together. As I said, it is the
“cement.” Meaning is not static – it is ﬂowing. And if we have the mean-
ing being shared, then it is ﬂowing among us; it holds the group together.
Then everybody is sensitive to all the nuances going around, not merely
to what is happening in his own mind. From that forms a meaning
which is shared. And in that way we can talk together coherently and
think together. Whereas generally people hold to their assumptions, so
they are not thinking together. Each one is on his own.
332
Collective Orders

What blocks sensitivity is the defense of your assumptions and
opinions. But if you are defending your opinions, you don’t judge your-
self and say, “I shouldn’t be defending.” Rather, the fact is that you are
defending, and you then need to be sensitive to that – to all the feelings
in that, all the subtle nuances. We are not aiming for the type of group
that condemns and judges, and so forth – we can all realize that that
would get in the way. So this group is not going to judge or condemn. It
is simply going to look at all the opinions and assumptions and let them
surface. And I think that there could then be a change.
Krishnamurti said that “to be” is to be related. But relationship can
be very painful. He said that you have to think/feel out all your mental
processes and work them through, and then that will open the way to
something else. And I think that is what can happen in the dialogue
group. Certain painful things can happen for some people; you have to
work it all out.
We once had a dialogue in Sweden, in which the group seemed to
divide itself into two factions. There were a lot of “New Age” people, and
from the beginning they began to talk about the virtues of love and the
fact that the place was full of love all around, that it was all love every-
where. Part of the group remained silent for a while, but in the next
hour they started to talk. They intimated that the love talk was all sen-
timental nonsense and didn’t mean anything. Then one fellow got so
excited that he couldn’t stand it, and he walked out. He eventually came
back, and they ﬁnally got together again. Polarization had taken place,
which is a typical difﬁculty that can arise. Someone noticed the polar-
ization happening and said with a bit of good humor, “There are two
groups here – the love group and the hate group.” That broke the ten-
sion a little, and the two sides could then begin to talk. They didn’t
necessarily convince each other, but each was able to see the meaning of
the other side’s position, and the two polarized groups were able to talk
to each other.
Now, that was a more important point than whether they convinced
each other. They might ﬁnd that they both have to give up their posi-
tions so that something else can come about. It was not important
whether one favored love or one favored hate or another favored being
suspicious and careful and somewhat cynical, or whatever. Really,
underneath they were similar, because they both had rigid positions.
Loosening that position, then, was the key change.
On the whole, you could say that if you are defending your opinions,
you are not serious. Likewise, if you are trying to avoid something
unpleasant inside of yourself, that is also not being serious. A great deal
On Dialogue and its Application
333

of our whole life is not serious. And society teaches you that. It teaches
you not to be very serious – that there are all sorts of incoherent things,
and there is nothing that can be done about it, and that you will only stir
yourself up uselessly by being serious. But in a dialogue you have to be
serious. It is not a dialogue if you are not – not in the way I’m using the
word.
There is a story about Freud when he had cancer of the mouth.
Somebody came up to him and wanted to talk to him about a point in
psychology. The person said, “Perhaps I’d better not talk to you, because
you’ve got this cancer which is very serious. You may not want to talk
about this.” Freud’s answer was, “This cancer may be fatal, but it’s not
serious.” And actually, of course, it was just a lot of cells growing. I think
a great deal of what goes on in society could be described that way – that
it may well be fatal, but it’s not serious.
LIMITED DIALOGUE
Sometimes people feel a sense of dialogue within their families. But a
family is generally a hierarchy, organized on the principle of authority
which is contrary to dialogue. The family is a very authoritative struc-
ture, based on obligation, and that sort of thing. It has its value, but it is a
structure within which it might be difﬁcult to get dialogue going. It
would be good if you could. Perhaps that could happen in some families.
In general it is difﬁcult, though, because there is no place in the
dialogue for the principle of authority and hierarchy. We want to be free
of hierarchy and authority as we move. You must have some authority
to “run” things; that’s why we say that if you have a “purpose,” then you
are bound to bring in some authority somewhere. But in dialogue, inso-
far as we have no purpose and no agenda and we don’t have to do
anything, we don’t really need to have an authority or a hierarchy.
Rather, we need a place where there is no authority, no hierarchy, where
there is no special purpose – sort of an empty place, where we can let
anything be talked about.
As we said, you can also have a dialogue in a more limited way –
perhaps with a purpose or a goal in mind. It would be best to accept the
principle of letting it be open, because when you limit it, you are accept-
ing assumptions on the basis of which you limit it, assumptions that
may actually be getting in the way of free communication. So you are
not looking at those assumptions.
However, if people are not ready to be completely open in their
communication, they should do what they can. I know some university
334
Collective Orders

professors who are interested in applying the principles of dialogue to
corporate problems. One of them recently had a meeting with the
executive ofﬁcers of a corporation that makes ofﬁce furniture. They
wanted to have this sort of meeting, because they knew that they were
not functioning efﬁciently and that they couldn’t agree. The higher
ofﬁcers had all sorts of assumptions that blocked everything. So they
asked the professor to come in. He started a dialogue which they
found very interesting, and now they want to have a whole series of
them.
Naturally, that sort of dialogue will be limited – the people involved
do have a deﬁnite purpose, which is limiting – but even so, it has
considerable value. The principle is at least to get people to come to
know each other’s assumptions, so they can listen to their assumptions
and know what they are. Very often people get into problems where
they don’t really know what the other person’s assumption is, and they
react according to what they think it is. That person then gets very
puzzled and wonders: what is he doing? He reacts, and it all gets very
muddled. So it is valuable if they can at least get to realize each other’s
assumptions.
The professor told me about two interesting cases. One involved a
company which had trouble with people in the higher executive
branches who were not very happy and were not getting on with each
other. The company’s usual way of solving it was to offer them a higher
salary, sort of a sweetener, and a lot of mediocre people were given the
very highest possible positions. It went on and on, and pretty soon there
were so many people with high salaries that the company couldn’t
afford it; they were failing. They said, “What can we do? Well, we’ve got
to have somebody who’s tough, who will tell these people, ‘You have to
accept another position.’” The negotiator that they used explained the
new policies by saying, “The company just can’t afford it.” But he was
avoiding the issue. He was not straightforwardly saying, “This whole
approach is wrong.” Now, if the company is to work efﬁciently, there
must be a mutual agreement that they are not going to give a person a
higher position just to alleviate a psychological problem between
people. That’s not a right way to proceed. Everybody should understand
that that is not the right way of working, otherwise the company won’t
succeed. Therefore, a dialogue was needed so that they could really
begin talking with each other in order to come to see clearly the salient
points: “That’s the way we are thinking, that’s where the problems are
coming from, and that’s the way we have to go.” So within the frame-
work of assuming that the company has to survive, there was a limited
On Dialogue and its Application
335

kind of dialogue – not the kind we ultimately want to have here, but still
it was good in some way.
Now, I am suggesting that the human race has got to do that. We
could say that the human race is failing for the same sort of reason that
the company was failing.
The second case involved the negotiating group itself, the university
people whose specialty it is to go into companies and help solve these
problems. They were organizing a meeting among themselves with the
same purpose – just so they could talk. They had a series of meetings
where it happened that two of their people could never quite meet on
any issue. One of them constantly had the assumption that the right
thing to do was to bring out the trouble – to confront somebody with it.
And the other person had the opposite assumption, which was that you
shouldn’t do that. He wanted other people to draw him out. He felt that
he couldn’t say something unless other people created the space for him
to talk, and drew him out. The ﬁrst fellow wouldn’t do that, he did the
opposite. So they couldn’t meet. The whole thing went on for a long
time in confusion, with the one person waiting to be drawn out, and the
other person not understanding that this was the case. Finally they got
to talking, and each one actually brought up childhood experiences
which were behind his assumptions, and then it opened up.
The fellow who was working as facilitator during this time did
very little. In fact, several of the people appealed to the facilitator and
said, “Why don’t you talk?” The facilitator may come in from time to
time and comment on what is going on, or on what it all means. In a
more general group he should eventually be able to be just a partici-
pant. Probably in the company group this wouldn’t work, though; he
couldn’t become just a participant – such a group has too limited an
objective.
This second example might be an illustration of when the personal
may have to come into the general, because in certain cases there are
blocks due to particular assumptions that the person got hold of in
childhood, or in some other way. And in this example, they were ﬁnally
able to uncover those assumptions. They weren’t trying to heal each
other, or to do therapy; nevertheless, it had a therapeutic effect. But
that’s a secondary thing.
Some people feel that that type of corporate dialogue is only further-
ing a corrupt system. However, there is a germ of something different. I
think that if you go into society, you will ﬁnd that almost everything is
involved in this corrupt game. So it doesn’t accomplish anything to
dismiss it all. The executives have got to make the company work; and
336
Collective Orders

in fact, if all these companies would work more efﬁciently we would all
be a lot better off. It’s partly because they are in such a mess that we are
in trouble, that society is inefﬁcient, that the whole thing is falling
apart. If the government and the companies could all work efﬁciently,
we wouldn’t be so wasteful, even though that by itself wouldn’t solve all
the problems.
For the society to be working right, all those things have got to work
efﬁciently and coherently. If we look at what is going on in the world
today, in this or in any country, we can say that it is not working coher-
ently. Most companies are not really working coherently. And slowly the
thing is sinking. I think that if you can get this notion across in what-
ever situation – the germ of the notion of dialogue – if you can get
people to look at it, it’s a step. You could say that heads of state are not
likely to have the kind of dialogue that we are talking about. But if they
will have any kind at all, if they’ll begin to accept this principle, it’s a
step. It may make a change; for instance, the kind of waste of energy
which is going on in the production of armaments could be cut down. If
we could stop the tremendous amount that’s being spent on armaments
– let’s say a trillion dollars a year – that could be used for ecological
regeneration and all sorts of constructive things. And possibly some of
that might happen. Those political ﬁgures who are more aware of the
ecological problem might, for instance, make the President more aware
of it, if they would really talk. Not that we can expect the politicians to
solve the problems we face. But I’m saying that if there’s a slight move-
ment toward something more open, the rate of destruction will slow
down. If we go on at this rate, we may have very little time to do
anything.
We can’t do anything at the level of presidents or prime ministers.
They have their own opinions. But the various ideas ﬁlter, as we’ve said.
Somehow the notion of something a little bit like dialogue has ﬁltered
to that level, and it may have an effect; that’s all I am saying. I think that
in the US government there are some people who are more this way, and
some people who are more the other way. We don’t know how it is
going to come out, but there is a certain movement toward something
more open. I don’t say that it is going to solve the whole thing; I am
saying that if it slows down the destruction, that’s important, because
unless the destruction is slowed down to give time for something new to
emerge, it will be too late.
There may be no pat political answer to the world’s problems. How-
ever, the important point is not the answer – just as in a dialogue, the
important point is not the particular opinions – but rather the softening
On Dialogue and its Application
337

up, the opening up of the mind, and looking at all the opinions. If there
is some sort of spread of that attitude, I think it can slow down the
destruction.
So we’ve said that it is crucial to be able to share our judgments, to
share our assumptions, to listen to each other’s assumptions. In the case
of Einstein and Bohr it didn’t lead to violence that they did not; but in
general, if somebody doesn’t listen to your basic assumptions you feel it
as an act of violence, and then you are inclined to be violent yourself.
Therefore, this is crucial both individually and collectively. Dialogue is
the collective way of opening up judgments and assumptions.
BEYOND DIALOGUE
We should keep in mind, nonetheless, that the dialogue – and in fact, all
that we’ve been talking about – is not only directed at solving the ills of
society, although we do have to solve those ills. We would be much
better off if we didn’t have them. If we survive and we want to have a
worthwhile life, we have to deal with those problems. But ultimately
that’s not the entire story. That’s only the beginning. I’m suggesting that
there is the possibility for a transformation of the nature of conscious-
ness, both individually and collectively, and that whether this can be
solved culturally and socially depends on dialogue. That’s what we’re
exploring.
And it’s very important that it happens together, because if one
individual changes it will have very little general effect. But if it happens
collectively, it means a lot more. If some of us come to the “truth,” so-
called, while a lot of people are left out, it’s not going to solve the
problem. We would have another conﬂict – just as there is conﬂict
between different parts of the Christian faith or the Muhammadan faith
or various others, even though they all believe in the same God, the same
prophet or the same savior.
Love will go away if we can’t communicate and share meaning. The
love between Einstein and Bohr gradually evaporated because they
could not communicate. However, if we can really communicate, then
we will have fellowship, participation, friendship, and love, growing and
growing. That would be the way. The question is really: do you see the
necessity of this process? That’s the key question. If you see that it is
absolutely necessary, then you have to do something.
And perhaps in dialogue, when we have this very high energy of
coherence, it might bring us beyond just being a group that could solve
social problems. Possibly it could make a new change in the individual,
338
Collective Orders

and a change in the relation to the cosmic. Such an energy has been
called “communion.” It is a kind of participation. The early Christians
had a Greek word, koinonia, the root of which means “to participate” –
the idea of partaking of the whole and taking part in it; not merely the
whole group, but the whole.
On Dialogue and its Application
339


BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bohm, David, Quantum Theory, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey (1951).
— Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia (1957) and
Routledge, London (1957).
— The Special Theory of Relativity, Routledge, London ([1965], 1996).
— Fragmentation and Wholeness, The Van Leer Jerusalem Foundation, Jerusalem (1976).
— Wholeness and the Implicate Order, Routledge, London (1980).
— The Ending of Time (with J. Krishnamurti), Harper and Row, San Francisco (1985).
— Unfolding Meaning: A Weekend Of Dialogue (ed. Donald Factor), Routledge, London ([1985], 1987).
— Science, Order, and Creativity (with F. David Peat), Routledge, London ([1987], 2000).
— Changing Consciousness: Exploring the Hidden Source of the Social, Political, and Environmental
Crises Facing Our World (with Mark Edwards), Harper, San Francisco (1991).
— The Undivided Universe: An Ontological Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics (with Basil Hiley),
Routledge, London (1993).
— Thought as a System, Routledge, London (1994).
— On Dialogue (ed. Lee Nichol), Routledge, London (1996).
— On Creativity (ed. Lee Nichol), Routledge, London (1998).
— The Bohm–Biederman Correspondence: Volume 1 – Creativity and Science (ed. Paavo Pylkkänen),
Routledge, London (1999).
— The Limits of Thought (with J. Krishnamurti) (ed. Ray McCoy), Routledge, London (1999).
Davies, P. C. W. and Brown, J. R. (eds), The Ghost in the Atom, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
([1986], 1999).
Grifﬁn, D. (ed.), Physics and the Ultimate Signiﬁcance of Time: Bohm, Prigogine and Process Philosophy,
State University of New York Press, Albany (1986).
Hiley, B. J. and Peat, F. D. (eds), Quantum Implications: Essays in Honour of David Bohm, Routledge,
London (1987).
Peat, F. D., Inﬁnite Potential: The Life and Times of David Bohm, Addison Wesley, Reading, Mass. (1997).
Pylkkänen, P. (ed.), The Search for Meaning, Thorsons, Wellingborough (1989).
Rosen, S. M., Science, Paradox, and the Moebius Principle, State University of New York Press, Albany
(1994).
Weber, R., Dialogues With Scientists and Sages: The Search for Unity, Routledge and Kegan Paul,
London (1986).
Wilber, K. (ed.), The Holographic Paradigm and Other Paradoxes: Exploring the Leading Edge of Science,
Shambhala, Boulder (1982).
Bibliography
341


INDEX
Aristotle 217; ideas of movement 128
art: socially informed 293
astronomy: abstracted knowledge
69–70; Big Bang 100; motion 26–7,
28, 30–1
atomic particles: “bottom-level” real-
ity 169, 170; de Broglie’s model
142–3, 144; dimensional reality
96–7; division into particles 81, 82;
enfoldment 91–2; holomovement
134–6; locality and non-locality
191; many particle system 184;
and meaning 180; movements 78;
non-local, non-causal relations
83–4; ontological interpretation
183; predictions and relations 25;
qualitative inﬁnity of nature
17–19; quantum process 83,
184–7; short term properties
34–5; standard Copenhagen
interpretation 183; structure of 9,
17–18; and waves 184, 193–7
autonomy: being 36; causal theory
21; deﬁning 136; extent of 23;
kinds of motion 29; reciprocal
relationships 24–5; stable
existence of things 20
background: causes and conditions
9–10; substructures 10
bees 165
being: abstract character of 32–6;
and autonomy 36; Heraclitus
and becoming 32; and light 156;
qualitative inﬁnity of natures
33–6
Bell, John 191
Biederman, Charles 192
biology: life and implicate order
101–2; misinformation 291–2;
motion 27
Bohm-Biederman Correspondence
(Pylkkänen) 6
Bohr, Niels: ambiguity and meaning
169–71; and de Broglie 142–3;
dialogue with Einstein 295,
329–30, 338; experimental
situation 190
body: as mirror in dialogue 315, 319
brain function: dysfunctional
feedback loop 200–1; holographic
model 79, 105–6; material
substance of 174; meaning 178–9;
neurophysiology of self-image
243; process-structure 223–4;
proprioception 236; thalamus 200;
totality 212
Broglie, Louis de 140, 141, 142
cancer 291
Cartesian grid 84
cause: active information 190–1;
non-locality 4; ontological
interpretation 183; Piaget’s theory
Index
343

and 44–5; qualitative inﬁnity of
nature 21–3; quantum process
185; standard Copenhagen
interpretation 183
change: abstract being 32–6;
common sense perceptions 41
chemistry: motion 27, 29–30
Childe, V. Gordon: What Happened in
History 216
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor 143–4
common sense: perception of world
41–2
communication: blockage 295; body
language 332; languages 298; tacit
level 309–10 see also dialogue
conﬂict: illusion-generation 232–4
consciousness 290; and the body
115–17; collective 320–1; common
ground and life 119–20; and
creativity 259; and dialogue 293,
301–2, 329–32; explicit and
implicit content 111; holographic
model of 105–6; and implicate
order 103–4; individual and social
297–9; instruments which record
115; and knowledge 277–80;
material process of 79–80, 104–5,
148, 174; and meaning 171–2;
moments of 114–15; music and
106–7, 108; Piaget’s theory 113;
and quantum theory 146–9;
representations of the world
112–14; three-dimensional 151;
and the unconscious 146, 238–9,
278; vision 107–8. see also
perception
cosmology 156; “big bang” 100, 180;
implicate order 97–101
creativity 229; consciousness beyond
time 259–60; and knowledge 286;
in living 297; and meaning 180–2;
and misinformation 293–4; social
infrastructure 296; tacit
infrastructure 290
culture: dialogue of 294–300,
321–3; meaning 321–3; pool of
knowledge 289; value and
assumptions 307
De Maré, Patrick 293; socio-therapy
of dialogue 311
Democritus 99
Descartes, René: Cartesian
coordinates 128, 130
desire: and confusion 206, 207–8,
213–14; and free will 256
dialogue: authority and hierarchy
334; collective participation
320–1; common consciousness
329–32; communion 338–9;
and consciousness 293, 301–2;
corporate 312, 335–7; and culture
294–300; deﬁning 294–5, 302–3;
and discussion 303; emotions 299,
327; engagement and facilitation
310–14; generative order 297;
limited 334–8; meaning 322–3;
mutual participation in 325–6;
and necessity 316–18; personal
frustration 323–4; political 337–8;
proprioception 318–20; sensitivity
332–4; structure of group 301;
values and assumptions 303–4,
314–16, 326–9
disease: body’s misinformation
291–2
Ditchburn, R. W.: visual perception
51–2
diversity: in nature 11; qualitative
inﬁnity of nature 15
Double Slit Experiment 187–91
ego: confusion 204–5, 213–17, 220–2,
228; and illusion 212; and
knowledge 262; and memory
200; the perceiving “I” 203–4,
213; process-structure 219–29;
and society 217, 262, 263;
structure-process 199; unperceived
contradictions 199–200
Einstein, Albert: changing
perceptions 65–6; dialogue with
Bohr 295, 329–30, 338; frame of
reference 39; and light 153;
locality experiment 83, 94, 96, 191;
questions mechanistic order 81–2;
reﬂections on meanings 162;
theory of relativity 41; uneasy
about particles 3; uniﬁed ﬁeld
theory 82
emotions: defused by dialogue 299;
dialogue 301, 327; and knowledge
344
Index

267, 281–6; mechanical 239–43
see desires; ego
energy: active information 189–90;
cosmic sea of 99–101, 102, 139;
dual aspect with matter 174–5;
and light 154; zero-point 97–9
enfoldment 139, 193; aspects of
holomovement 131–6; co-present
elements of 110–11; deﬁning
78–9, 129–30; glycerine and dye
experiment 87–91, 132–3, 135;
higher level 147–8; holograms 86;
matter and energy 174–5; particles
and structure 91–2; quantum
theory 78–9; super-implicate order
140–1
experience: attribution 237–8; “I”
and “me” 247–9; immediate
269–72; and knowledge 285; self-
observation 235; structure of 290
fear: process-structure 225
free will/freedom: and choice 254;
individuality 253, 256–7; inner
will 255; and knowledge 253,
254–7; realizing one’s potential
260; totality 258–60
Freud, Sigmund 334
Galileo Galilei: frame of reference 41;
motion 128
generative order: deﬁning 289;
dialogue 297; and society 292–4;
transformations 290; values and
assumptions 292–3
Gibson, J. G. 52, 63; structuring per-
ception 56–7; tactile perception 51
glycerine and dye experiment 87–91,
132–3, 135, 192–4
God: super-super-implicate order 147
good and evil: individual vision
204–8; value judgement 247
gravitational ﬁeld 98
Green movement: internal dialogue
328
Hebb 60
Heisenberg, Werner: microscope
experiment 127–8, 135;
uncertainty principle 72
Held, R. 52
Heraclitus: Becoming 32
Hiley, Basil J. 1, 183–4
Hitler, Adolf 204; ﬁctional memory
loss 265
HIV/AIDS 291–2
holograms 85–6, 192–3; method of
125–7; model of brain function
105–6; quantum waves 195–7;
super-implicate order 144–5;
theoretical implications of
127–8; three-dimensional
reality 97
holomovement 78, 87, 254, 289–90;
aspects of 131–6; consciousness
79–80; deﬁning 193; dye in gly-
cerine 132–3, 135; ﬂowing 150–1;
implicate order 93–4; law of
holonomy 136–7; life 102–3;
manifest reality 148–9;
timelessness 259
Hopkins, Gerard Manley v
human beings: confusion 215–17
identity: and change 249–52; and
dialogue 301; individual
consciousness 279–80; and
knowledge 287–8
imagination: abstract knowledge
268–9; children’s development
46–7, 67; higher-level abstraction
70; scientiﬁc investigation 141–4
implicate order 2, 78, 139; and
consciousness 103–4; deﬁning
128–30; epistemology 148; and
explicate order 86; and generative
order 289; intrinsic 91; and life
101–2; mathematics 144–5;
movement 110–11; multidimen-
sional 94–7; music 106–7, 108; not
manifest 93; quantum potential
184; soma-signiﬁcance 158;
structure 87–91, 111; super-
140–1; super-super 147; vision
107–8; wave function 193–7
individuals: confusion and truth
204–8; distraction 237, 244; and
free will 253, 256–7; “I” and
“me” 247–9; identity and change
249–52; illusion-generating
structures 232–4; mechanical
emotions 239–43; self-image 243;
Index
345

self-observation 235–6, 236–8;
value judgement 245–8 see also
ego
Inﬁnite Potential -- The Life and
Times of David Bohm (Peat) 1
information: active 159, 184, 186–90;
as signiﬁcance/meaning 161–9;
172–9
instruments: holograms 125–8;
shaping theory 124–5; tools of
consciousness 115
intention: cause and effect 181; and
meaning 166–8, 298; and soma-
signiﬁcance 172–3
Iran 266
Israel 201, 230; Zionism 304, 314
Jesus Christ 154
Kant, Immanuel: a priori knowledge
61–2, 63; understanding 148
Kierkegaard, Søren 152
knowledge: abstract and concrete
261–2, 264, 266–70, 276, 278;
conditioning 267–8; consciousness
277–80; and creativity 286;
cultural pool of 289; and emotions
267, 281–6; “endarkenment” 261,
288; and free will 253, 254–7;
function of 253, 271–2, 273–4;
“general” 263–5; higher level
abstractions 66–7, 69–70;
immediate experience 269–72,
285; inward and outward 271,
275–7, 287; Kant’s a priori
61–2, 63; and meaning 262;
misinformation 261, 265, 273;
past and present 257–9; process
of abstraction 67; scientiﬁc
accumulation 73–4; skill 264–5;
and structure of perceptions
74–6; tacit 166; and thought
272–3, 281–2; totality of under-
standing 208–13; and truth 272,
274, 287
Krishnamurti, Jiddu 148, 199; being
related 333; distraction 244; free
will and individuality 256–7;
knowledge as difﬁculty 264;
memories 226; totality of
understanding 209
language 192; collective nature of
307, 309; communication 298
laws, natural: “holonomy” 136–7;
limitations of 13–15; mechanistic
philosophy 9, 11–12; motion 10;
qualitative inﬁnity of nature 15
see also cause; Newton, Isaac
leadership: dialogue 301
Leibniz, Gottfried: monads 114
Lewis, G. N. 152, 155
life: common ground 119–20;
holomovement 102–3; implicate
order 101–2; origin of 27
light: and being 156; and energy 154;
frozen 140, 152; and mysticism
152–7; and vision 107–8
literature: socially informed 293
love: and communication 338–9; and
dialogue 302
magnetism: soma-signiﬁcance 159,
160–2
maps, geographical: Mercator’s
projection 155
maps, mental 39–40; children’s
development of 46–7, 68
mathematics: children’s develop-
ment 47–8, 67; fractal geometry
289; of quantum theory 170,
185–6, 193; super-implicate order
144–5
matter: the body 115–17; and con-
sciousness 104–5; conservative
nature of 253–4; dual aspect with
energy 174–5; life and 101–2;
structure of 87–91; transform-
ations 18–19, 33, 34 see also atoms
Maxwell, James Clerk 185
meaning: actualizing 168–9; arouses
energy 180; Bohr and ambiguity
169–71; consciousness 171–2;
creativity and 180–2; and dialogue
290; dialogue and group culture
321–3; Einstein’s reﬂections 162;
and intention 166–8, 298; and
knowledge 262; and meaning-
lessness 179–80; shared 330;
signa-somatic activity 179;
society and reality 176–82;
soma-signiﬁcance 159–60,
171–2
346
Index

mechanistic philosophy 9; Cartesian
grid 84; characteristics of 11–12;
criticism of 12–13; empirical
limits 13–15; implicate order 87;
qualitative inﬁnity of nature 15;
questioned 80, 81–6
memory 59; active 226; associative
thinking 227; ﬁlters 200; and
illusion 211–12; playing back
205–6, 213; process-structure 223;
and reality 207; stable and ﬁnite
168
Mercator, Gerhard 155
Michelson-Morley experiment 21
Minkowski diagram 46, 71
misinformation: bodily health and
291–2; and creativity 293–4; and
immune systems 292–4, 297;
and knowledge 261, 265, 273
motion/movement: action and
reaction 23; contradictory
tendencies 28–9; deﬁned 26;
enfoldment 80; holomovement 78;
implicate order 110–11; inﬁnity
of kinds 29–32; key feature of
quantum theory 83; new order of
128–9; Newton’s laws of 10, 12;
perception of 153; as points on a
line 108–10; relative invariance
54–6; in scientiﬁc processes 26–8
music 154; and consciousness 106–7,
108; and perception 57–8
mysticism 151–2; and light 152–7
nationalism 230
necessity: and dialogue 316–18
Newton, Isaac: frame of reference 39,
41; laws of motion 10, 12, 23, 65;
theory overthrown 14
nuclear power: rationality 262–3
objectivity 158; child’s development
and 46–8; mental maps 40;
particles and 183–4; perception
63–4
Opharin, Alexander Ivanovich 27, 31
order: accommodation and assimila-
tion 121–4; and complexity 10;
implicated 10; mechanistic view
questioned 80, 81–6 see also impli-
cate order
Parmenides 99
particles: “ultimate” 3
Peat, F. David 289; Inﬁnite Potential -
- The Life and Times of David
Bohm 1
perception: active process of 50–2;
attunement 60–1, 62; circular reﬂex
39–40, 43; correcting distortions
52–3; falsiﬁcation and conﬁrm-
ation 63–5; frames of reference
39; the “I” perceiver 203–4, 213,
215; illusions 210–12; “inner
show” 54–6, 62, 63–4, 68, 69, 76;
intention 172–3; interpreting
ambiguity 47; of movement 54–6,
153; objectivity and subjectivity
63–4; photography 84–5; Piaget’s
development theory 39, 42–5, 67;
proprioception 318–19; of rela-
tionships 71–3; relative invariance
50, 51–4; scientiﬁc research 65–6,
73–6; search for knowledge 66–7;
structure of 56–63, 64–5, 76;
and time 56–9; totality of
understanding 208–13;
vision 155
photography: holograms 85–6;
perception 84–5
physics: accommodation and
assimilation 121–4; Cartesian grid
84; classical 185; contradictions
within 12–13; empty space 99;
mechanistic view 81–5; motion 27,
28, 29; particles 92; perceiving
space-time 71; structure 219;
structured perceptions 65–7
Piaget, Jean 172; accommodation and
assimilation 121–2; attribution of
experience 237; causality 44–5;
circular reﬂex 43, 59–60; and
consciousness 113; development
of perception 39, 42–50, 61;
higher-order abstractions 67–8;
imagination 46–7, 273; and
movement 153; numbers and
amounts 47–9; objectivity and
subjectivity 46–8
Planck, Max 185, 330
pleasure structure 231–2
Podolsky, B. 83, 94, 96, 191
Polanyi, Michael 166
Index
347

Pribram, Karl: holographic brain
function 105–6
problem-solving 306–7
proprioception 199, 236; collective
level 301; dialogue 318–20;
knowledge and emotion 282–3;
self-perception 250–2
Pylkkänen, Paavo: Bohm-Biederman
Correspondence 6
Pythagoras 154
qualitative inﬁnity of nature: being
33–6; beyond mechanistic view
15–17; chance and cause 21–3;
reciprocal relationship 24–6; and
scientiﬁc method 16; structure of
matter 17–21
quantum theory: Bohr and ambiguity
169–71; challenges mechanistic
view 82–4; de Broglie’s model
142–3, 144; discontinuity 3–4;
Double Slit Experiment 187–91;
enfoldment 92; entanglement 4,
184; ﬁelds and particles 19;
generative order 289; holograms
195–7; holomovement 134–6;
imagination 141–4; level of
perception 72; locality and
non-locality 195; making facts
123; mathematics of 170, 185–6,
193; and mechanistic philosophy
12–13; multidimensional 94–7;
and Newtonian mechanics 14;
non-local, non-causal relations
83–4; particle movement 78; pro-
cess of 184–7; soma-signiﬁcance
158–9; structure of consciousness
146–9; super-quantum potential
184; three key features of 83,
183; and time 118; wave
behaviour 4, 193–7; zero-point
energy 97–9
radio waves 186, 190
reality: “bottom-level” 169, 170;
dimensions 95–7; and individuals
202; and knowledge 274;
manifest 148–9; of “me” 249; and
memory 200, 207; metaphysical
assumptions 5; society and
meaning 176–82
relationships, natural and social:
dimensions 95–7; elements’
non-local, non-causal 83–4;
human networks 254; matter and
consciousness 104–5; perception
of 71–3
relativity theory: chance and cause
21; frame of reference 41;
gravitational ﬁeld 98; locality and
non-locality 191; and mechanistic
philosophy 12; and Newtonian
mechanics 14; non-local, non-
causal relations 83–4; physical
time and 118; questions
mechanistic order 81–2
religion 206; and thought 305–6;
value and assumptions 308
Rosen, N. 83, 94, 96, 191
Schopenhauer, Arthur: the will 255
Schrödinger, Erwin 185, 192
Schumacher, Donald 192
science: and dialogue 295; necessity
293
scientiﬁc investigation: common
measures 123–4; empirical pay-off
and imagination 141–4; falsifying
hypotheses 66; instruments of
124–8; limits of empiricism 13–15;
looking for truth 331; and
perception 73–6; qualitative
inﬁnity of nature 16; self-interest
of scientists 308; structured
perceptions 65–7
self see ego; individuals
Shluker, Kevin 88
signa-somatic activity 158, 163–4,
165; learning 173–4; and meaning
171–2, 179
silence 201
slavery 216–17
society: collective thought 306–10;
consciousness 279–9; and
creativity 290; dialogue and
culture 294–300; and the ego
process 217; and meaning 176–82;
men and totality 202–3; mis-
information and immunity 292–4;
and soma-signiﬁcant activity 165;
value judgement 245–8
soma-signiﬁcance 40, 139, 158, 199;
348
Index

activity 164–8; and intention 167,
172–3; learning 173–4; magnetism
160–2; and meaning 159–60, 167,
171–2; process of 145–6; psycho-
somatic activity 163; quantum
level of matter 158–9; signa-
somatic relations 163–4, 165;
and society 165; the subtle and
manifest 162–3; values 235–6
space: cosmic sea of energy 99–101,
102, 117, 139; emptiness of 99,
150–1; enfoldment 79, 147–8;
gravitational ﬁeld 98; measure of
149–50; within and without 149
Spinoza, Baruch 146
structure: complexity of 9–10;
development of perception 44–50;
ego 199, 219–29; enfoldment 87,
91–2; generative order 289; of
human experience 290; illusion-
generation 232–4; implicate
order 111; of matter 17–21; of
perception 56–63, 64–5; pleasure
231–2; and process 218–19;
quantum theory and conscious-
ness 146–9; somatic order 161–2
subjectivity: child’s development and
46–8; mental maps 40; perception
63–4; soma-signiﬁcant meaning
159
suspension: of thought and assump-
tions 314–16
thought: circular reﬂex 40; fragmen-
tation 305–6; individual and
collective 306–10; problem-solving
306–7; relgions 305–6; screened
332
Tibetan Book of the Dead 154
time: and creativity 259–60; ﬂow of
150–1; gravitational ﬁeld 98;
higher level enfoldment 147–8;
new notions of 118; and
perception 56–9, 72; sequences of
moments 118–19; and timeless-
ness 148, 153
totality: and free will 258–60
transformations: generative order
290; matter 18–19, 33, 34; music
and consciousness 106–7, 108
truth: and knowledge 272, 287;
opinions expressed as 305;
scientiﬁc investigation 331; what
is and what should be 209
uncertainty principle 72
understanding: totality of 208–13
uniﬁed ﬁeld theory 82
United Nations: dialogue and
discussion 303
values and assumptions 290; culture
307; deﬁning 144–5; dialogue
303–4, 326–9; expressed as truth
305; generative order 292–3;
neurophysiological activity 235–6;
religions 308; and self 245–8;
suspending 314–16
vision: implicate order 107–8;
perception 155; soma-signﬁcance
process 164
Weber, Renée 139
Weyl, Herman 330
What Happened in History (Childe)
216
Whitehead, A. N.: “actual occasions”
114
Woolfson, Yitzhak (Isidore) 199,
201–2
Zeno of Elea 99; paradox of 108
Index
349

