
 Niebel’s Methods, Standards, 
and Work Design 
 Thirteenth Edition
  Andris  Freivalds 
 Professor of Industrial Engineering 
 The Pennsylvania State University 
 Benjamin W.  Niebel 
 Late Professor of Industrial Engineering 
 The Pennsylvania State University 
 
 

NIEBEL’S METHODS, STANDARDS, & WORK DESIGN, THIRTEENTH EDITION 
 Published by McGraw-Hill, a business unit of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., 1221 Avenue of the  Americas, 
New York, NY, 10020. Copyright © 2014 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Printed in 
the United States of America. Previous editions © 2003, 1999, and 1993. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the 
prior written consent of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., including, but not limited to, in any network or other 
electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning. 
 Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the 
United States. 
 This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOC/DOC 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 
 ISBN 978–0–07–337636–3 
 MHID 0–07–337636–1 
Senior Vice President, Products & Markets: Kurt L. Strand
Vice President, General Manager: Marty Lange
Vice President, Content Production & Technology Services: Kimberly Meriwether David
Managing Director: Thomas Timp
Editorial Director: Michael Lange
Publisher: Raghu Srinivasan
Marketing Manager: Curt Reynolds
Director, Content Production: Terri Schiesl
Senior Project Manager: Lisa A. Bruflodt
Buyer: Nicole Baumgartner
Media Project Manager: Prashanthi Nadipalli
Cover Designer: Studio Montage, St. Louis, Missouri
Cover Image: image 100/Punchstock; moodboard/Getty Images; Monty Rakusen/Getty Images; 
Photomondo/Getty Images; © Lubos Chlubny/Alamy; John A. Rizzo/Digital Vision/Getty Images
Compositor: S4Carlisle Publishing Services
Typeface: 10.5/12 Times
Printer: R. R. Donnelley Crawfordsville, IN
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Niebel, Benjamin W. 
  [Methods, standards, and work design] 
  Niebel’s methods, standards, and work design / Andris Freivalds, professor of Industrial Engineering, The 
Pennsylvania State University, Benjamin W. Niebel, late professor of Industrial Engineering, The Pennsylvania 
State University. —Thirteenth edition. 
    pages cm 
  Includes bibliographical references and index. 
  ISBN 978-0-07-337636-3 (acid-free paper)—ISBN 0-07-337636-1 (acid-free paper) 1. Work design. 
2. Human engineering. 3. Time study. 4. Motion study. I. Freivalds, Andris. II. Title. 
T60.8.N54 2013 
658.5’4—dc23 
2012036863
 www.mhhe.com 

 About the 
Authors 
 Andris Freivalds   is professor of industrial engineering at the Pennsylvania 
State University. He obtained a B.S. degree in science engineering and M.S. and 
Ph.D. degrees in bioengineering from the University of Michigan. After bio-
mechanics research at the Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory at Wright 
Patterson AFB, Ohio, and at the University of Nottingham, U.K., as a Fulbright 
Scholar, he shifted his focus to the reduction of work-related musculoskel-
etal injuries in U.S. industries. With the assistance of the Commonwealth of 
Pennsylvania in the development of the Center for Cumulative Trauma Dis-
orders (CTD), he has provided ergonomic and engineering design services to 
more than 75 Pennsylvania companies in controlling their workplace hazards 
and improving overall productivity. As part of these efforts, he was recognized 
by the Institute of Industrial Engineers with its Technical Innovation Award in 
1995. He is a Certified Professional Ergonomist and a Fellow of the Ergonomics 
Society. 
 Benjamin Niebel   received B.S., M.E., and P.E. degrees in industrial engi-
neering from the Pennsylvania State University. After heading the industrial 
engineering department at Lord Manufacturing Company, he became interested 
in engineering education. He returned to Penn State as a faculty member in 
1947 and then served as the head of the Department of Industrial Engineering 
from 1955 to 1979. During this time he wrote many textbooks, including the 
original  Motion and Time Study  in 1955, and consulted regularly with many 
industries. For his outstanding service to both the profession and Penn State, he 
was awarded the Frank and Lillian Gilbreth Award by the Institute of Industrial 
Engineers in 1976, the Outstanding Engineering Alumnus Award by the College 
of Engineering in 1989, and the Penn State Engineering Society Distinguished 
Service Award in 1992. He passed away at the distinguished age of 80 while on 
a consulting trip for industry. 

 To Benjamin W. Niebel (1918–1999), who reminded me to remember productivity while 
designing work for health and safety. 

 Brief Contents 
 
 Preface   x 
  1   Methods, Standards, and Work Design: Introduction   1 
   2   Problem-Solving Tools   21 
 3   Operation Analysis   73 
 4   Manual Work Design   129 
 5   Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design   181 
 6   Work Environment Design   235 
 7   Design of Cognitive Work   279 
  8   Workplace and Systems Safety   325 
 9   Proposed Method Implementation   379 
 10  Time Study   415 
 11   Performance Rating and Allowances   449 
 12   Standard Data and Formulas   485 
 13   Predetermined Time Systems    507 
 14   Work Sampling   555 
 15   Indirect and Expense Labor Standards  585 
  16   Standards Follow-up and Uses   611 
 17   Wage Payment   637 
  18   Training and Other Management Practices   661 
 
 Appendix 1:  Glossary    691 
 
 Appendix 2:  Helpful Formulas   711 
 
 Appendix 3:  Special Tables    713 
 
 Index  727 
 
v

 Table of 
Contents 
 Preface   x 
 Chapter 1  
Methods, Standards, and Work 
Design: Introduction    1 
 1.1 Productivity Importance   1 
 1.2 Methods and Standards Scope   4 
 1.3 Historical Developments   9 
 Summary   16 
 Questions   18 
 References   18 
 Websites   19 
 Chapter 2  
Problem-Solving Tools   21 
 2.1 Exploratory Tools   22 
 2.2 Recording and Analysis Tools   29 
 2.3  Quantitative Tools, Worker and Machine 
Relationships   41 
 Summary   63 
 Questions   64 
 Problems   65 
 References   71 
 Selected Software   71 
 Chapter 3 
 Operation Analysis    73 
 3.1 Operation Purpose   76 
 3.2 Part Design  77 
 3.3 Tolerances and Specifications   80 
 3.4 Material   83 
 3.5  Manufacture Sequence and 
Process    88 
 3.6 Setup and Tools   95 
 3.7 Material Handling   100 
 3.8 Plant Layout   110 
 3.9 Work Design   118 
 Summary   120 
 Questions   120 
 Problems   123 
 References   126 
 Selected Software   126 
 Selected Videotapes/DVDs   127 
 Chapter 4  
Manual Work Design    129 
 4.1 The Musculoskeletal System   130 
 4.2  Principles of Work Design: 
Human Capabilities and Motion 
Economy  132 
 4.3 Motion Study   149 
 4.4  Manual Work and Design 
Guidelines   154 
 Summary   175 
 Questions   175 
 Problems   176 
 References   178 
 Selected Software   180 
 Websites   180 
vi

 
 
T A BLE O F C O N T EN T S 
vii
 Chapter 5  
Workplace, Equipment, 
and Tool Design   181 
 5.1 Anthropometry and Design   181 
 5.2  Principles of Work Design: 
The Workplace    185 
 5.3  Principles of Work Design: 
Machines and Equipment    199 
 5.4 Cumulative Trauma Disorders   206 
 5.5 Principles of Work Design: Tools   212 
 Summary   224 
 Questions   226 
 Problems   227 
 References   231 
 Selected Software   234 
 Websites   234 
 Chapter 6  
Work Environment Design    235 
 6.1 Illumination   235 
 6.2 Noise   245 
 6.3 Temperature   253 
 6.4 Ventilation   258 
 6.5 Vibration   261 
 6.6 Radiation   264 
 6.7 Shiftwork and Working Hours   265 
 Summary  272 
 Questions   272 
 Problems   274 
 References   276 
 Selected Software   277 
 Websites   277 
 Chapter 7 
 Design of Cognitive Work    279 
 7.1 Information Theory   279 
 7.2 Human Information Processing Model   281 
 7.3  Coding of Information: General Design 
Principles    299 
 7.4  Display of Visual Information: 
Specific Design Principles    303 
 7.5  Display of Auditory Information: 
Specific Design Principles    308 
 7.6  Human-Computer Interaction: 
Hardware Considerations    309 
 7.7  Human-Computer Interaction: 
Software Considerations    314 
 Summary   317 
 Questions   317 
 Problems   318 
 References   323 
 Selected Software   324 
 Websites   324 
 Chapter 8  
Workplace and Systems Safety    325 
 8.1  Basic Philosophies of Accident 
Causation   326 
 8.2 Accident Prevention Process   333 
 8.3 Probability Methods   341 
 8.4 Reliability   343 
 8.5 Fault Tree Analysis   350 
 8.6  Safety Legislation and Workers’ 
Compensation   357 
 8.7  Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA)   360 
 8.8 Hazard Control  367 
 8.9 General Housekeeping   369 
 Summary   373 
 Questions  373 
 Problems   374 
 References   377 
 Websites   378 
 Chapter 9  
Proposed Method 
Implementation   379 
 9.1 Decision-Making Tools   380 
 9.2 Installation   394 

 9.3 Job Evaluation   397 
 9.4 Americans with Disabilities Act   406 
 9.5 Follow-Up   407 
 9.6 Successful Methods Implementations   407 
 Summary   409 
 Questions   410 
 Problems   410 
 References   412 
 Selected Software   413 
 Chapter 10  
Time Study    415 
 10.1 A Fair Day’s Work   416 
 10.2 Time Study Requirements   416 
 10.3 Time Study Equipment   418 
 10.4 Time Study Elements   423 
 10.5 Start of Study   426 
 10.6 Execution of Study   433 
 10.7 Calculating the Study   435 
 10.8 The Standard Time   437 
 Summary   443 
 Questions   444 
 Problems   445 
 References   447 
 Selected Software   448 
 Chapter 11 
 Performance Rating 
and Allowances    449 
 11.1 Standard Performance   450 
 11.2 Sound Rating Characteristics   451 
 11.3 Rating Methods   452 
 11.4 Rating Application and Analysis   457 
 11.5 Rating Training   460 
 11.6 Allowances   462 
 11.7 Constant Allowances   464 
 11.8 Variable Fatigue Allowances   465 
 11.9 Special Allowances   476 
 11.10 Applying Allowances   479 
 Summary   480 
 Questions  480 
 Problems   482 
 References   483 
 Selected Software   484 
 Chapter 12 
 Standard Data and Formulas    485 
 12.1  Standard Time Data Development  486 
 12.2  Formula Construction from Empirical 
Data    489 
 12.3 Analytical Formulas   495 
 12.4 Using Standard Data   500 
 Summary   501 
 Questions   502 
 Problems   502 
 References   504 
 Selected Software   505 
 Chapter 13  
Predetermined Time Systems    507 
 13.1 Methods-Time Measurement   508 
 13.2  Maynard Operation Sequence Technique 
(MOST)   532 
 13.3 Predetermined Time Application   542 
 Summary   547 
 Questions  548 
 Problems   548 
 References   552 
 Selected Software   553 
 Chapter 14  
Work Sampling   555 
 14.1 The Theory of Work Sampling   556 
 14.2 Selling Work Sampling   561 
 14.3 Planning the Work Sampling Study   562 
viii 
T A B L E  OF  C ON T E N T S

 
 
T A BLE O F C O N T EN T S 
ix
 14.4 Recording Observations   570 
 14.5 Machine and Operator Utilization   571 
 14.6 Determining Allowances   574 
 14.7 Determining Standard Time   574 
 14.8 Self-Observation   577 
 14.9 Work Sampling Software   579 
 Summary   579 
 Questions  579 
 Problems   580 
 References   583 
 Selected Software   583 
 Chapter 15  
Indirect and Expense 
Labor Standards    585 
 15.1 Indirect and Expense Labor Standards   586 
 15.2  Standard Indirect and Expense 
Labor Data   600 
 15.3 Professional Performance Standards   602 
 Summary   606 
 Questions  608 
 Problems    608 
 References   609 
 Chapter 16  
Standards Follow-Up 
and Uses  611  
 16.1 Maintaining Standard Times   612 
 16.2 Using Standards   614 
 16.3 Costing   622 
 16.4 Standards in Service Work   629 
 Summary   634 
 Questions   634 
 Problems   635 
 References   636 
 Chapter 17  
Wage Payment    637 
 17.1 Day Work Plans  638 
 17.2 Flexible Compensation Plans   638 
 17.3 Implementing Wage Incentives   650 
 17.4  Nonfinancial Performance 
Motivation Plans   655 
 Summary   656 
 Questions   657 
 Problems   658 
 References   660 
 Selected Software   660 
 Chapter 18  
Training and Other Management 
Practices   661 
 18.1 Operator Training   662 
 18.2 The Learning Curve   663 
 18.3 Employees and Motivation   668 
 18.4 Human Interactions  673 
 18.5 Communications   677 
 18.6 Modern Management Practices   682 
 Summary   687 
 Questions   687 
 Problems   688 
 References   689 
 Selected Software   690 
 Websites   690 
 Appendix 1:  Glossary    691 
 Appendix 2:  Helpful Formulas    711 
 Appendix 3:  Special Tables    713 
 Index   727 

 Preface 
 BACKGROUND 
  Faced with increasing competition from all parts of the world, almost every in-
dustry, business, and service organization is restructuring itself to operate more 
effectively. As downsizing and outsourcing become more common, these or-
ganizations must increase the intensity of cost reduction and quality improve-
ment efforts while working with reduced labor forces. Cost-effectiveness and 
product reliability without excess capacity are the keys to successful activity in 
all areas of business, industry, and government and are the end result of methods 
engineering, equitable time standards, and efficient work design. 
 Also, as machines and equipment grow increasingly complex and semi-
automated (if not fully automated), it is increasingly important to study both 
the manual components and the cognitive aspects of work as well as the safety 
of the operations. The operator must perceive and interpret large amounts of 
information, make critical decisions, and control these machines both quickly 
and accurately. In recent years, jobs have shifted gradually from manufactur-
ing to the service sector. In both sectors, there is increasingly less emphasis 
on gross physical activity and a greater emphasis on information processing 
and decision making, especially via computers and associated modern technol-
ogy. The same efficiency and work design tools are the keys to productivity 
improvement in any industry, business, or service organization, whether in 
a bank, a hospital, a department store, a railroad, or the postal system. Fur-
thermore, success in a given product line or service leads to new products 
and innovations. It is this accumulation of successes that drives hiring and the 
growth of an economy. 
 The reader should be careful not to be swayed or intimidated by the lat-
est jargon offered as a cure-all for an enterprise’s lack of competitiveness. Of-
ten these fads sideline the sound engineering and management procedures that, 
when properly utilized, represent the key to continued success. Today we hear 
a good deal about reengineering and use of cross-functional teams as business 
leaders reduce cost, inventory, cycle time, and nonvalue activities. However, 
experience in the past few years has proved that cutting people from the payroll 
just for the sake of automating their jobs is not always the wise procedure. The 
authors, with many years of experience in more than 100 industries, strongly 
x 

 
 
PREFA C E 
xi
recommend sound methods engineering, realistic standards, and good work de-
sign as the keys to success in both manufacturing and service industries.  
 WHY THIS BOOK WAS WRITTEN 
  The objectives of the thirteenth edition have remained the same as for the 
twelfth: to provide a practical, up-to-date college textbook describing engineer-
ing methods to measure, analyze, and design manual work. The importance of 
ergonomics and work design as part of methods engineering is emphasized, not 
only to increase productivity, but also to improve worker health and safety and 
thus company bottom-line costs. Far too often, industrial engineers have focused 
solely on increasing productivity through methods changes and job simplifica-
tion, resulting in overly repetitive jobs for the operators and increased incidence 
rates of musculoskeletal injuries. Any cost reductions obtained are more than 
offset by the increased medical and workers’ compensation costs, especially 
considering today’s ever-escalating health-care costs.  
 WHAT’S NEW IN THE THIRTEENTH EDITION 
  A new Section 16.4 on standards in service work has been added, showing 
application of work measurement to call centers and health care. Approximately 
10 to 15 percent more examples, problems, and case studies have been added. 
The thirteenth edition still provides a continued reliance on work design, work 
measurement, facilities layout, and various flow process charts for students en-
tering the industrial engineering profession, and serves as a practical, up-to-date 
source of reference material for the practicing engineer and manager. 
 HOW THIS BOOK DIFFERS FROM OTHERS 
  Most textbooks on the market deal strictly either with the traditional elements 
of motion and time study or with human factors and ergonomics. Few textbooks 
integrate both topics into one book or, for that matter, one course. In this day 
and age, the industrial engineer needs to consider both productivity issues and 
their effects on the health and safety of the worker simultaneously. Few of the 
books on the market are formatted for use in the classroom setting. This text in-
cludes additional questions, problems, and sample laboratory exercises to assist 
the educator. Finally, no text provides the extensive amount of online student 
and instructor resources, electronic forms, software tools, current information, 
and changes as this edition does.  
 ORGANIZATION OF THE TEXT 
AND COURSE MATERIAL 
  The thirteenth edition is laid out to provide roughly one chapter of material 
per week of a semester-long introductory course. Although there are a total of 

xii 
P R E F A C E
18 chapters, Chapter 1 is short and introductory, much of Chapter 7 on cogni-
tive work design and Chapter 8 on safety may be covered in other courses, and 
Chapter 15 on standards for indirect and expense work may not have to be cov-
ered in an introductory course, all of which leaves only 15 chapters to be covered 
in the semester. 
 A typical semester plan, chapter by chapter, using the first lecture number, 
might be as follows: 
 Chapter 
 Lectures 
 Coverage 
 1 
 1 
 Quick introduction on the importance of productivity and 
work design, with a bit of historical perspective. 
 2 
 3–6 
 A few tools from each area (Pareto analysis, job analysis/
worksite guide, flow process charts, worker– machine 
charts) with some quantitative analysis on worker–machine 
interactions. Line balancing and PERT may be covered in 
other courses. 
 3 
 4 
 Operation analysis with an example for each step. 
 4 
 4 
 Full, but can gloss over basic muscle physiology and 
 energy expenditure. 
 5 
 4 
 Full. 
 6 
 3–4 
 Basics on illumination, noise, temperature; other topics as 
desired may be covered in another course. 
  7 
 0–4 
 Coverage depends on instructor’s interest; may be 
covered in another course. 
 8 
 0–5 
 Coverage depends on instructor’s interest; may be 
covered in another course. 
 9 
 3–5 
 Three tools: value engineering, cost-benefit analysis, and 
crossover charts; job analysis and evaluation, and interaction 
with workers. Other tools may be covered in other classes.  
 10 
 3 
 Basics of time study. 
 11 
 3–5 
 One form of rating; first half of the allowances that are 
well established. 
 12 
 1–3 
 Coverage of standard data and formulas depends on 
instructor’s interest. 
 13 
 4–7 
 Only one predetermined time system in depth; the 
second may be covered in another course. 
 14 
 2–3 
 Work sampling. 
 15 
 0–3 
 Coverage of indirect and expense labor standards 
depends on instructor’s interest. 
 16 
 2–3 
 Overview and costing. 
 17 
 3–4 
 Day work and standard hour plan. 
 18 
 3–4 
 Learning curves, motivation, and people skills. 

 
 
PREFA C E 
xiii
 The recommended plan covers 43 lectures, with 2 periods for examinations. 
Some instructors may wish to spend more time on any given chapter, for which 
additional material is supplied, for example, work design (Chapters 4 to 7), and 
less time on traditional work measurement (Chapters 8 to 16), or vice versa. The 
text allows for this flexibility. 
 Similarly, if all the material is used (the second lecture number), there 
is enough material for one lecture course and one course with a lab, as is done 
at Penn State University. Both courses have been developed with appropriate 
materials such that they can be presented completely online. For an example 
of an online course using this text, go to  www.engr.psu.edu/cde/courses/ie327/ 
index.html 
 SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL AND ONLINE SUPPORT 
  The thirteenth edition of this text continues to focus on the ubiquitous use of PCs 
as well as the Internet to establish standards, conceptualize possibilities, evaluate 
costs, and disseminate information. A website, hosted by the publisher at  http://
highered.mcgraw-hill/sites/0073376310/ , furthers that objective by providing 
the educator with various online resources, such as an updated instructor’s man-
ual. DesignTools version 4.1.1, a ready-to-use software program for ergonomics 
analysis and work measurement, appears on the site as well. A special new fea-
ture of DesignTools is the addition of QuikTS, a time study data collection app 
for the iPad and iPhone. 
 The book’s website also links to a website hosted by the author at  www2.ie
.psu.edu/Freivalds/courses/ie327new/index.html,  which provides instructors 
with online background material, including electronic versions of the forms 
used in the textbook. Student resources include practice exams and solutions. 
Up-to-date information on any errors found or corrections needed in this new 
edition appear on this site as well. Suggestions received from individuals at 
universities, colleges, technical institutes, industries, and labor organizations 
that regularly use this text have helped materially in the preparation of this 
thirteenth edition. Further suggestions are welcome, especially if any errors 
are noticed. Please simply respond to the OOPS! button on the website or by 
email to  axf@psu.edu  
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
  I wish to acknowledge the late Ben Niebel for providing me with the opportunity 
to contribute to his well-respected textbook. I hope the additions and modifica-
tions will match his standards and continue to serve future industrial engineers 
as they enter their careers. Thanks to Mr. Jaehyun Cho for devoting so much of 

xiv 
P R E F A C E
his time at Penn State to programming QuikTS. Thanks also to the following 
reviewers for their invaluable input: 
 Dennis Field,  Eastern Kentucky University 
 Andrew E. Jackson,  East Carolina University 
 Terri Lynch-Caris,  Kettering University 
 Susan Scachitti,  Purdue University 
 Finally, I wish to express my gratitude to Dace for her patience and support. 
 Andris Freivalds 

 
1
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Increasing productivity drives U.S. industry. 
 •  Worker health and safety are just as important as productivity. 
 •  Methods engineering simplifies work. 
 •  Work design fits work to the operator. 
 •  Time study measures work and sets standards. 
 1.1  PRODUCTIVITY IMPORTANCE 
  Certain changes continually taking place in the industrial and business envi-
ronment must be considered both economically and practically. These include 
the globalization of both the market and the producer, the growth of the service 
sector, the computerization of all facets of an enterprise, and the ever-expanding 
applications of the Internet and Web. The only way a business or enterprise 
can grow and increase its profitability is by increasing its productivity. Pro-
ductivity improvement refers to the increase in output per work-hour or time 
expended. The United States has long enjoyed the world’s highest productiv-
ity. Over the last 100 years, productivity in the United States has increased 
approximately 4 percent per year. However, in the past two decades, the U.S. 
rate of productivity improvement has been greatly exceeded by that of China, 
at 13.4 percent. 
 The fundamental tools that result in increased productivity include meth-
ods, time study standards (frequently referred to as work measurement), and 
work design. Of the total cost of the typical metal products manufacturing en-
terprise, 12 percent is direct labor, 45 percent is direct material, and 43 percent 
is overhead. All aspects of a business or industry—sales, finance, production, 
 
  CHAPTER 
 
1 
 Methods, 
Standards, and 
Work Design: 
Introduction 

2 
C H A P T E R  1
engineering, cost, maintenance, and management—provide fertile areas for the 
application of methods, standards, and work design. Too often, people consider 
only production, when other aspects of the enterprise could also profit from 
the application of productivity tools. In sales, for example, modern information 
retrieval methods usually result in more reliable information and greater sales 
at less cost. 
 Today, most U.S. businesses and industries are, by necessity, restructuring 
themselves by downsizing, to operate more effectively in an increasingly com-
petitive world experiencing a prolonged recession. With greater intensity than 
ever before, they are addressing cost reduction and quality improvement through 
productivity improvement. They are also critically examining all nonvalue busi-
ness components, those that do not contribute to their profitability. 
 Traditional areas of opportunity for students enrolled in engineering, in-
dustrial management, business administration, industrial psychology, and 
 labor–management relations are (1) work measurement, (2) work methods and 
design, (3) production engineering, (4) manufacturing analysis and control, 
(5)  facilities planning, (6) wage administration, (7) ergonomics and safety, 
(8) production and inventory control, and (9) quality control. However, these 
areas of opportunity are not confined to manufacturing industries. They ex-
ist, and are equally important, in such enterprises as department stores, hotels, 
educational institutions, hospitals, banks, airlines, insurance offices, military 
service centers, government agencies, retirement complexes, and other service 
sectors. Today, in the United States, only about 10 percent of the total labor 
force is employed in manufacturing industries. The remaining 90 percent is 
engaged in service industries or staff-related positions. As the United States 
becomes ever more service-industry-oriented, the philosophies and techniques 
of methods, standards, and work design must also be utilized in the service sec-
tor. Wherever people, materials, and facilities interact to obtain some objective, 
productivity can be improved through the intelligent application of methods, 
standards, and work design. 
 The production area of an industry is key to success. Here materials are req-
uisitioned and controlled; the sequence of operations, inspections, and methods 
is determined; tools are ordered; time values are assigned; work is scheduled, 
dispatched, and followed up; and customers are kept satisfied with quality prod-
ucts delivered on time. 
 Similarly, the methods, standards, and work design activity is the key part 
of the production group. Here more than in any other place, people determine 
whether a product is going to be produced on a competitive basis, through effi-
cient workstations, tooling, and worker and machine relationships. Here is where 
they are creative in improving existing methods and products and maintaining 
good labor relations through fair labor standards. 
 The objective of the manufacturing manager is to produce a quality product, 
on schedule, at the lowest possible cost, with a minimum of capital investment 
and a maximum of employee satisfaction. The focus of the reliability and quality 

 
 C H A P T E R 1  Methods, Standards, and Work Design: Introduction 
3
control manager is to maintain engineering specifications and satisfy customers 
with the product’s quality level and reliability over its expected life. The produc-
tion control manager is principally interested in establishing and maintaining 
production schedules with due regard for both customer needs and the favor-
able economics obtainable with careful scheduling. The maintenance manager 
is primarily concerned with minimizing facility downtime due to unscheduled 
breakdowns and repairs. Figure 1.1 illustrates the relationship of all these areas 
and the influence of methods, standards, and work design on overall production. 
Sales
Manager
Controller
Manufacturing
Manager
Purchasing
Agent
Industrial
Relations
Manager
Production
Control
Manager
Maintenance
Manager
Reliability and
Quality
Control
Manager
Chief
Engineer
A
B
C
D
H
J
G
I
E
F
Manager
Methods
Standards, and
Work design
Manufacturing
Departments
General
Manager
 A— Cost is largely determined by manufacturing methods.
 B— Time standards are the bases of standard costs.
 C— Standards (direct and indirect) provide the bases for measuring the performance of production
 
 departments.
 D— Time is a common denominator for comparing competitive equipment and supplies.
 E— Good labor relations are maintained with equitable standards and a safe work environment.
 F— Methods work design and processes strongly influence product designs.
 G— Standards provide the bases for preventive maintenance.
 H— Standards enforce quality.
 I— Scheduling is based on time standards.
 J— Methods, standards, and work design provide how the work is to be done and how long it will take.
 Figure 1.1   
Typical organization chart showing the influence of methods, standards, and work 
design on the operation of the enterprise.  

4 
C H A P T E R  1
 1.2  METHODS AND STANDARDS SCOPE 
  Methods engineering includes designing, creating, and selecting the best man-
ufacturing methods, processes, tools, equipment, and skills to manufacture a 
product based on the specifications that have been developed by the product en-
gineering section. When the best method interfaces with the best skills available, 
an efficient worker–machine relationship exists. Once the complete method has 
been established, a standard time for the product must be determined. Further-
more, there is the responsibility to see that (1) predetermined standards are met; 
(2) workers are adequately compensated for their output, skills, responsibilities, 
and experience; and (3) workers have a feeling of satisfaction from the work that 
they do. 
 The overall procedure includes defining the problem; breaking the job down 
into operations; analyzing each operation to determine the most economical 
manufacturing procedures for the quantity involved, with due regard for operator 
safety and job interest; applying proper time values; and then following through 
to ensure that the prescribed method is put into operation. Figure 1.2 illustrates 
Total
time
of
operation
under
existing
conditions
or
under
future
conditions
when
methods
engineering,
standards,
and work
design
are not
practiced
Minimum
work content
of product
Goal of methods,
standards, and work design
Opportunities for savings through methods engineering,
standards, and work design
Work content added by defects in
design or specification of product,
including material specification, geometry
specification, tolerance and finish specification
1
2
3
4
Work content added by inefficient work design
and methods of manufacture or operation,
including setup, tools, working conditions,
workplace layout, and motion economy
Time added due to shortcomings of the
management, including poor planning, 
poor material and tool inventory control, 
poor scheduling, and weak supervision,
instruction, and training
Time added due to shortcomings of the
worker, including working at less than
normal pace, taking excessive allowances
 Figure 1.2   
Opportunities for savings through the applications of methods engineering and time 
study. 

 
 C H A P T E R 1  Methods, Standards, and Work Design: Introduction 
5
the opportunities for reducing the standard manufacturing time through the 
application of methods engineering and time study. 
 METHODS ENGINEERING 
 The terms  operation analysis, work design, work simplification, methods en-
gineering,  and  corporate reengineering  are frequently used synonymously. In 
most cases, the person is referring to a technique for increasing the production 
per unit of time or decreasing the cost per unit output—in other words, pro-
ductivity improvement. However, methods engineering, as defined in this text, 
entails analyses at two different times during the history of a product. First, the 
methods engineer is responsible for designing and developing the various work 
centers where the product will be produced. Second, that engineer must continu-
ally restudy the work centers to find a better way to produce the product and/or 
improve its quality. 
 In recent years, this second analysis has been called corporate reengineer-
ing. In this regard, we recognize that a business must introduce changes if it is 
to continue profitable operation. Thus, it may be desirable to introduce changes 
outside the manufacturing area. Often, profit margins may be enhanced through 
positive changes in such areas as accounting, inventory management, materials 
requirements planning, logistics, and human resource management. Information 
automation can provide dramatic rewards in all these areas. The more thorough 
the methods study during the planning stages, the less the necessity for addi-
tional methods studies during the life of the product. 
 Methods engineering implies the utilization of technological capability. 
Primarily because of methods engineering, improvements in productivity are 
never-ending. The productivity differential resulting from technological inno-
vation can be of such magnitude that developed countries will always be able 
to maintain competitiveness with low-wage developing countries. Research and 
development (R&D) leading to new technology is therefore essential to methods 
engineering. The 10 countries with the highest R&D expenditures per worker, as 
reported by the 2012 Global Innovation Index are Israel, Finland, Sweden, 
Japan, South Korea, Denmark, Switzerland, Germany, United States, and 
 Austria. These countries are among the leaders in productivity. As long as they 
continue to emphasize research and development, methods engineering through 
technological innovation will be instrumental in their ability to provide high-
level goods and services. 
 Methods engineers use a systematic procedure to develop a work center, 
produce a product, or provide a service (see Figure 1.3). This procedure is out-
lined here, and it summarizes the flow of the text. Each step is detailed in a later 
chapter. Note that steps 6 and 7 are not strictly part of a methods study, but are 
necessary in a fully functioning work center.  
 1.  Select the project. Typically, the projects selected represent either new 
products or existing products that have a high cost of manufacture and a 
low profit. Also, products that are currently experiencing difficulties in 

1. Select Project
2. Get and Present Data
3. Analyze Data 
4. Develop Ideal Method
5. Present and Install Method
6. Develop Job Analysis
7. Establish Time Standards
8. Follow Up
Verify savings
Assure that installation is correct
Keep everyone sold
Repeat methods procedure
Stopwatch time study
Standard data
Formulas
Predetermined time systems
Job analysis
Job descriptions
Accommodation of differently abled workers
Use decision-making tools
Develop written and oral presentation
Overcome resistance
Sell method to operator, supervisor, and management
Put method to work
Worker and machine process charts
Mathematical techniques
Eliminate, combine, simplify, rearrange steps
Principles of work design with respect to:
Motion economy, manual work, workplace
Equipment, tools, work environment, safety
Use 9 primary approaches to operation analysis
Question every detail
Use: why, where, what, who, when, how
Obtain production requirements
Procure engineering data
Procure manufacturing and cost data
Develop description and sketches of workstation and tools
Construct operation process charts
Construct flow process chart for individual items
New plants and plant expansion
New products, new methods
Products with high cost/low profit
Products unable to meet competition
Manufacturing difficulties
Bottleneck operations/exploratory tools
Systematic Procedure for Methods and Work Measurement
Work sampling
 Figure 1.3   
The principal steps in a methods engineering program. 
6

 
 C H A P T E R 1  Methods, Standards, and Work Design: Introduction 
7
maintaining quality and are having problems meeting competition are logi-
cal projects for methods engineering. (See Chapter 2 for more details.) 
 2.  Get and present the data. Assemble all the important facts relating to the 
product or service. These include drawings and specifications, quantity re-
quirements, delivery requirements, and projections of the anticipated life of 
the product or service. Once all important information has been acquired, 
record it in an orderly form for study and analysis. The development of 
process charts at this point is very helpful. (See Chapter 2 for more details.) 
 3.  Analyze the data. Utilize the primary approaches to operations analysis to 
decide which alternative will result in the best product or service. These 
primary approaches include purpose of operation, design of part, tolerances 
and specifications, materials, process of manufacture, setup and tools, 
working conditions, material handling, plant layout, and work design. (See 
Chapter 3 for more details.) 
 4.  Develop the ideal method. Select the best procedure for each operation, 
inspection, and transportation by considering the various constraints asso-
ciated with each alternative, including productivity, ergonomics, and health 
and safety implications. (See Chapters 3 to 8 for more details.) 
 5.  Present and install the method. Explain the proposed method in detail to 
those responsible for its operation and maintenance. Consider all details of 
the work center, to ensure that the proposed method will provide the results 
anticipated. (See Chapter 9 for more details.) 
 6.  Develop a job evaluation. Conduct a job analysis of the installed method 
to ensure that the operators are adequately selected, trained, and rewarded. 
(See Chapter 9 for more details.) 
 7.  Establish time standards. Establish a fair and equitable standard for the in-
stalled method. (See Chapters 10 to 15 for more details.) 
 8.  Follow up the method. At regular intervals, audit the installed method to 
determine if the anticipated productivity and quality are being realized, 
whether costs were correctly projected, and whether further improvements 
can be made. (See Chapter 16 for more details.) 
 In summary, methods engineering is the systematic close scrutiny of all di-
rect and indirect operations to find improvements that make work easier to per-
form, in terms of worker health and safety, and also allow work to be done in 
less time with less investment per unit (i.e., greater profitability). 
 WORK DESIGN 
 As part of developing or maintaining the new method, the principles of work 
design must be used to fit the task and workstation ergonomically to the hu-
man operator. Unfortunately, work design is typically forgotten in the quest 
for increased productivity. Far too often, overly simplified procedures result 
in machinelike repetitive jobs for the operators, leading to increased rates of 

8 
C H A P T E R  1
work-related musculoskeletal disorders. Any productivity increases and reduced 
costs are more than offset by the increased medical and workers’ compensation 
costs, especially considering today’s ever-escalating health-care trends. Thus, 
it is necessary for the methods engineer to incorporate the principles of work 
 design into any new method, so that it not only will be more productive but also 
will be safe and injury-free for the operator. (Refer to Chapters 4 to 8.) 
 STANDARDS 
 Standards are the end result of time study or work measurement. This technique 
establishes a time standard allowed to perform a given task, based on measure-
ments of the work content of the prescribed method, with due consideration for 
fatigue and for personal and unavoidable delays. Time study analysts use sev-
eral techniques to establish a standard: a stopwatch time study, computerized 
data collection, standard data, predetermined time systems, work sampling, and 
estimates based on historical data. Each technique is applicable to certain condi-
tions. Time study analysts must know when to use a given technique and must 
then use that technique judiciously and correctly. 
 The resulting standards are used to implement a wage payment scheme. In 
many companies, particularly in smaller enterprises, the wage payment activity 
is performed by the same group responsible for the methods and standards work. 
Also, the wage payment activity is performed in concert with those responsible 
for conducting job analyses and job evaluations, so that these closely related 
activities function smoothly. 
 Production control, plant layout, purchasing, cost accounting and control, 
and process and product design are additional areas closely related to both the 
methods and standards functions. To operate effectively, all these areas depend 
on time and cost data, facts, and operational procedures from the methods and 
standards department. These relationships are briefly discussed in Chapter 16. 
 OBJECTIVES OF METHODS, STANDARDS, 
AND WORK DESIGN 
 The principal objectives of methods, standards, and work design are (1) to in-
crease productivity and product reliability safely and (2) to lower unit cost, thus 
allowing more quality goods and services to be produced for more people. The 
ability to produce more for less will result in more jobs for more people for a 
greater number of hours per year. Only through the intelligent application of the 
principles of methods, standards, and work design can producers of goods and 
services increase, while, at the same time, the purchasing potential of all consum-
ers grows. Through these principles, unemployment and relief rolls can be mini-
mized, thus reducing the spiraling cost of economic support to nonproducers. 
 Corollaries to the principal objectives are as follows: 
 1.  Minimize the time required to perform tasks. 
 2.  Continually improve the quality and reliability of products and services. 

 
 C H A P T E R 1  Methods, Standards, and Work Design: Introduction 
9
 3.  Conserve resources and minimize cost by specifying the most appropriate 
direct and indirect materials for the production of goods and services. 
 4.  Consider the cost and availability of power. 
 5.  Maximize the safety, health, and well-being of all employees. 
 6.  Produce with an increasing concern for protecting the environment. 
 7.  Follow a humane program of management that results in job interest and 
satisfaction for each employee.  
 1.3  HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 THE WORK OF TAYLOR 
 Frederick W. Taylor is generally conceded to be the founder of modern time 
study in this country. However, time studies were conducted in Europe many 
years before Taylor’s time. In 1760, Jean Rodolphe Perronet, a French engineer, 
made extensive time studies on the manufacture of No. 6 common pins, while 
60 years later, an English economist, Charles W. Babbage, conducted time 
 studies on the manufacture of No. 11 common pins. 
 Taylor began his time study work in 1881 while associated with the Midvale 
Steel Company in Philadelphia. Although born into a wealthy family, he dis-
dained his upbringing and started out serving as an apprentice. After 12 years’ 
work, he evolved a system based on the “task.” Taylor proposed that the work of 
each employee be planned out by the management at least one day in advance. 
Workers were to receive complete written instructions describing their tasks in 
detail and noting the means to accomplish them. Each job was to have a standard 
time, determined by time studies made by experts. In the timing process, Taylor 
advocated breaking up the work assignment into small divisions of effort known 
as “elements.” Experts were to time these individually and use their collective 
values to determine the allowed time for the task. 
 Taylor’s early presentations of his findings were received without enthusi-
asm, because many of the engineers interpreted his findings to be a new piece-
rate system rather than a technique for analyzing work and improving methods. 
Both management and employees were skeptical of piece rates, because many 
standards were either typically based on the supervisor’s guess or inflated by 
bosses to protect the performance of their departments. 
 In June 1903, at the Saratoga meeting of the American Society of Mechani-
cal Engineers (ASME), Taylor presented his famous paper “Shop Management,” 
which included the elements of scientific management: time study, standard-
ization of all tools and tasks, use of a planning department, use of slide rules 
and similar timesaving implements, instruction cards for workers, bonuses for 
successful performance, differential rates, mnemonic systems for classifying 
products, routing systems, and modern cost systems. Taylor’s techniques were 
well received by many factory managers, and by 1917, of 113 plants that had 
installed “scientific management,” 59 considered their installations completely 
successful, 20 partly successful, and 34 failures (Thompson, 1917). 

10 
C H A P T E R  1
 In 1898, while at the Bethlehem Steel Company (he had resigned his post 
at Midvale), Taylor carried out the pig-iron experiment that came to be one of 
the most celebrated demonstrations of his principles. He established the correct 
method, along with financial incentives, and workers carrying 92-lb pigs of iron 
up a ramp onto a freight car were able to increase their productivity from an av-
erage of 12.5 tons/day to between 47 and 48 tons/day. This work was performed 
with an increase in the daily rate of $1.15 to $1.85. Taylor claimed that workmen 
performed at the higher rate “without bringing on a strike among the men, with-
out any quarrel with the men and were happier and better contented.” 
 Another of Taylor’s Bethlehem Steel studies that gained fame was the shov-
eling experiment. Workers who shoveled at Bethlehem owned their own shovels 
and would use the same one for any job—lifting heavy iron ore to lifting light 
rice coal. After considerable study, Taylor designed shovels to fit the different 
loads: short-handled shovels for iron ore, long-handled scoops for light rice coal. 
As a result, productivity increased, and the cost of handling materials decreased 
from 8 cents/ton to 3 cents/ton. 
 Another of Taylor’s well-known contributions was the discovery of the 
Taylor–White process of heat treatment for tool steel. Studying self-hardening 
steels, he developed a means of hardening a chrome–tungsten steel alloy without 
rendering it brittle, by heating it close to its melting point. The resulting “high-
speed steel” more than doubled machine cutting productivity and remains in use 
today all over the world. Later, he developed the Taylor equation for cutting metal. 
 Not as well known as his engineering contributions is the fact that in 1881, 
he was a U.S. tennis doubles champion. Here he used an odd-looking racquet he 
had designed with a spoon curved handle. Taylor died of pneumonia in 1915, at 
the age of 59. For more information on this multitalented individual, the authors 
recommend Kanigel’s biography (1997). 
 In the early 1900s, the country was going through an unprecedented infla-
tionary period. The word  efficiency  became passé, and most businesses and in-
dustries were looking for new ideas that would improve their performance. The 
railroad industry also felt the need to increase shipping rates substantially to 
cover general cost increases. Louis Brandeis, who at that time represented the 
eastern business associations, contended that the railroads did not deserve, or in 
fact need, the increase because they had been remiss in not introducing the new 
“science of management” into their industry. Brandeis claimed that the railroad 
companies could save $1 million/day by introducing the techniques advocated 
by Taylor. Thus, Brandeis and the Eastern Rate Case (as the hearing came to be 
known) first introduced Taylor’s concepts as “scientific management.” 
 At this time, many people without the qualifications of Taylor, Barth, Mer-
rick, and other early pioneers, were eager to make names for themselves in this 
new field. They established themselves as “efficiency experts” and endeavored 
to install scientific management programs in industry. They soon encountered a 
natural resistance to change from employees, and since they were not equipped 
to handle problems of human relations, they met with great difficulty. Anxious 
to make a good showing and equipped with only a pseudoscientific knowledge, 

 
 C H A P T E R 1  Methods, Standards, and Work Design: Introduction 
11
they generally established rates that were too difficult to meet. Situations be-
came so acute that some managers were obliged to discontinue the whole pro-
gram in order to continue operation. 
 In other instances, factory managers would allow the establishment of time 
standards by the supervisors, but this was seldom satisfactory. Once standards were 
established, many factory managers of that time, interested primarily in the reduc-
tion of labor costs, would unscrupulously cut rates if some employee made what 
the employer felt was too much money. The result was harder work at the same, 
and sometimes less, take-home pay. Naturally, violent worker reaction resulted. 
 These developments spread in spite of the many favorable installations started 
by Taylor. At the Watertown Arsenal, labor objected to such an extent to the new 
time study system that in 1910 the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) started 
an investigation of time study. Several derogatory reports on the subject influenced 
Congress to add a rider to the government appropriations bill in 1913, stipulat-
ing that no part of the appropriation should be made available for the pay of any 
person engaged in time study work. This restriction applied to the government-
operated plants where government funds were used to pay the employees. 
 It was not until 1947 that the House of Representatives passed a bill that re-
scinded the prohibition against using stopwatches and the use of time study. It is 
of interest that even today the use of the stopwatch is still prohibited by unions in 
some railroad repair facilities. It is also interesting to note that Taylorism is very 
much alive today, in contemporary assembly lines, in lawyer’s bills that are cal-
culated in fractional hours, and in documentation of hospital costs for patients. 
 MOTION STUDY AND THE WORK OF THE GILBRETHS 
 Frank and Lillian Gilbreth were the founders of the modern  motion-study tech-
nique,  which may be defined as the study of the body motions used in perform-
ing an operation, to improve the operation by eliminating unnecessary motions, 
simplifying necessary motions, and then establishing the most favorable mo-
tion sequence for maximum efficiency. Frank Gilbreth originally introduced his 
ideas and philosophies into the bricklayer’s trade in which he was employed. 
After introducing methods improvements through motion study, including an 
adjustable scaffold that he had invented, as well as operator training, he was able 
to increase the average number of bricks laid to 350 per worker per hour. Prior 
to Gilbreth’s studies, 120 bricks per hour was considered a satisfactory rate of 
performance for a bricklayer. 
 More than anyone else, the Gilbreths were responsible for industry’s recogni-
tion of the importance of a detailed study of body motions to increase production, 
reduce fatigue, and instruct operators in the best method of performing an opera-
tion. They developed the technique of filming motions to study them, in a tech-
nique known as micromotion study. The study of movements through the aid of 
the slow-motion moving picture is by no means confined to industrial applications. 
 In addition, the Gilbreths developed the cyclegraphic and chronocycle-
graphic analysis techniques for studying the motion paths made by an operator. 

12 
C H A P T E R  1
The cyclegraphic method involves attaching a small electric lightbulb to the fin-
ger or hand or part of the body being studied and then photographing the mo-
tion while the operator is performing the operation. The resulting picture gives 
a permanent record of the motion pattern employed and can be analyzed for 
possible improvement. The chronocyclegraph is similar to the cyclegraph, but its 
electric circuit is interrupted regularly, causing the light to flash. Thus, instead 
of showing solid lines of the motion patterns, the resulting photograph shows 
short dashes of light spaced in proportion to the speed of the body motion being 
photographed. Consequently, with the chronocyclegraph it is possible to com-
pute velocity, acceleration, and deceleration, as well as to study body motions. 
The world of sports has found this analysis tool, updated to video, invaluable as 
a training tool to show the development of form and skill. 
 As an interesting side note, the reader may wish to read about the extreme 
lengths to which Frank Gilbreth went to achieve maximum efficiency even in his 
personal life. His eldest son and daughter recount vignettes of their father shav-
ing with razors simultaneously in both hands or using various communication 
signals to assemble all the children, of which there were 12. Hence the title of 
their book  Cheaper by the Dozen  (Gilbreth and Gilbreth, 1948)! After Frank’s 
relatively early death at the age of 55, Lillian, who had received a Ph.D. in psy-
chology and had been a more than equal collaborator, continued on her own, 
advancing the concept of work simplification especially for the physically handi-
capped. She passed away in 1972 at the distinguished age of 93 (Gilbreth, 1988).  
 EARLY CONTEMPORARIES 
 Carl G. Barth, an associate of Frederick W. Taylor, developed a production slide 
rule for determining the most efficient combinations of speeds and feeds for cut-
ting metals of various hardnesses, considering the depth of cut, size of tool, and 
life of the tool. He is also noted for his work in determining allowances. He inves-
tigated the number of foot-pounds of work a worker could do in a day. He then 
developed a rule that equated a certain push or pull on a worker’s arms with the 
amount of weight that worker could handle for a certain percentage of the day. 
 Harrington Emerson applied scientific methods to work on the Santa Fe 
Railroad and wrote a book,  Twelve Principles of Efficiency,  in which he made 
an effort to inform management of procedures for efficient operation. He reorga-
nized the company, integrated its shop procedures, installed standard costs and a 
bonus plan, and transferred its accounting work to Hollerith tabulating machines. 
This effort resulted in annual savings in excess of $1.5 million and the recogni-
tion of his approach, termed  efficiency engineering. 
 In 1917, Henry Laurence Gantt developed simple graphs that would measure 
performance while visually showing projected schedules. This production control 
tool was enthusiastically adopted by the shipbuilding industry during World War I. 
For the first time, this tool made it possible to compare actual performance 
against the original plan, and to adjust daily schedules in accordance with capac-
ity, backlog, and customer requirements. Gantt is also known for his invention of 

 
 C H A P T E R 1  Methods, Standards, and Work Design: Introduction 
13
a wage payment system that rewarded workers for above-standard performance, 
eliminated any penalty for failure, and offered the boss a bonus for every worker 
who performed above standard. Gantt emphasized human relations and promoted 
scientific management as more than an inhuman “speedup” of labor. 
 Motion and time study received added stimulus during World War II when 
Franklin D. Roosevelt, through the U.S. Department of Labor, advocated estab-
lishing standards for increasing production. The stated policy advocated greater 
pay for greater output but without an increase in unit labor costs, incentive 
schemes to be collectively bargained between labor and management, and the 
use of time study or past records to set production standards. 
 EMERGENCE OF WORK DESIGN 
 Work design is a relatively new science that deals with designing the task, work-
station, and working environment to fit the human operator better. In the United 
States, it is more typically known as  human factors,  while internationally it is 
better known as  ergonomics,  which is derived from the Greek words for work 
( erg ) and laws ( nomos ). 
 In the United States, after the initial work of Taylor and the Gilbreths, the 
selection and training of military personnel during World War I and the indus-
trial psychology experiments of the Harvard Graduate School at Western Elec-
tric (see the Hawthorne studies in Chapter 9) were important contributions to the 
work design area. In Europe, during and after World War I, the British Industrial 
Fatigue Board performed numerous studies on human performance under vari-
ous conditions. These were later extended to heat stress and other conditions by 
the British Admiralty and Medical Research Council. 
 World War II, with the complexity of military equipment and aircraft, led 
to the development of the U.S. military engineering psychology laboratories and 
a real growth of the profession. The start of the race to space with the launch of 
 Sputnik  in 1957 only accelerated the growth of human factors, especially in the 
aerospace and military sectors. From the 1970s on, the growth has shifted to 
the industrial sector and, more recently, into computer equipment, user-friendly 
software, and the office environment. Other driving forces for the growth in hu-
man factors are the rise in product liability and personal injury litigation cases 
and also, unfortunately, tragic, large-scale technological disasters, such as the 
nuclear incident at Three-Mile Island and the gas leak at the Union Carbide Plant 
in Bhopal, India. Obviously, the growth of computers and technology will keep 
human factors specialists and ergonomists busy designing better workplaces and 
products and improving the quality of life and work for many years to come. 
 ORGANIZATIONS 
 Since 1911, there has been an organized effort to keep industry abreast of the lat-
est developments in the techniques inaugurated by Taylor and Gilbreth. Technical 
organizations have contributed much toward bringing the science of time study, 
work design, and methods engineering up to present-day standards. In 1915, the 

14 
C H A P T E R  1
Taylor Society was founded to promote the science of management, while in 1917 
the Society of Industrial Engineers was organized by those interested in produc-
tion methods. The American Management Association (AMA) traces its origins to 
1913, when a group of training managers formed the National Association of Cor-
porate Schools. Its various divisions sponsor courses and publications on produc-
tivity improvement, work measurement, wage incentives, work simplification, and 
clerical standards. Together with the American Society of Mechanical Engineers 
(ASME), AMA annually presents the Gantt Memorial Medal for the most distin-
guished contribution to industrial management as a service to the community. 
 The Society for the Advancement of Management (SAM) was formed in 
1936 by the merger of the Society of Industrial Engineers and the Taylor So-
ciety. This organization emphasized the importance of time study and methods 
and wage payment. Industry has used SAM’s time study rating films over a long 
period of years. SAM annually offers the Taylor key for the outstanding contri-
bution to the advancement of the science of management and the Gilbreth medal 
for noteworthy achievement in the field of motion, skill, and fatigue study. In 
1972, SAM combined forces with AMA. 
 The Institute of Industrial Engineers (IIE) was founded in 1948 with the 
purposes of maintaining the practice of industrial engineering on a professional 
level; fostering a high degree of integrity among the members of the industrial 
engineering profession; encouraging and assisting education and research in ar-
eas of interest to industrial engineers; promoting the interchange of ideas and 
information among members of the industrial engineering profession (e.g., pub-
lishing the journal  IIE Transactions ); serving the public interest by identifying 
persons qualified to practice as industrial engineers; and promoting the profes-
sional registration of industrial engineers. IIE’s Society of Work Science (the 
result of merging the Work Measurement and Ergonomics Divisions in 1994) 
keeps the membership up to date on all facets of this area of work. This society 
annually gives the Phil Carroll Award and M. M. Ayoub Award for achievement 
in work measurement and ergonomics, respectively. 
 In the area of work design, the first professional organization, the Ergonom-
ics Research Society, was founded in the United Kingdom in 1949. It started the 
first professional journal,  Ergonomics,  in 1957. The U.S. professional organiza-
tion, the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, was founded in 1957. In the 
1960s, there was rapid growth in the society, with membership increasing from 
500 to 3,000. Currently, there are well over 5,000 members organized in 20 dif-
ferent technical groups. Their primary goals are to (1) define and support human 
factors/ergonomics as a scientific discipline and in practice, with the exchange 
of technical information among members; (2) educate and inform business, in-
dustry, and government about human factors/ergonomics; and (3) promote hu-
man factors/ergonomics as a means for bettering the quality of life. The society 
also publishes an archival journal,  Human Factors,  and holds annual confer-
ences where members can meet and exchange ideas. 
 With the proliferation of national professional societies, an umbrella or-
ganization, the International Ergonomics Association, was founded in 1959 to 

 
 C H A P T E R 1  Methods, Standards, and Work Design: Introduction 
15
coordinate ergonomic activities at an international level. At present, there are 47 
individual societies encompassing over 15,000 members worldwide. 
 PRESENT TRENDS 
 Practitioners of methods, standards, and work design have come to realize that 
such factors as gender, age, health and well-being, physical size and strength, 
aptitude, training attitudes, job satisfaction, and motivation response have a di-
rect bearing on productivity. Furthermore, present-day analysts recognize that 
workers object, and rightfully so, to being treated as machines. Workers dislike 
and fear a purely scientific approach and inherently dislike any change from 
their present way of operation. Even management frequently rejects worthwhile 
methods innovations because of a reluctance to change. 
 Workers tend to fear methods and time study, for they see that the results are 
an increase in productivity. To them, this means less work and consequently less 
pay. They must be sold on the fact that they, as consumers, benefit from lower 
costs, and that broader markets result from lower costs, meaning more work for 
more people for more weeks of the year. 
 Some fears of time study today are due to unpleasant experiences with 
efficiency experts. To many workers, motion and time study is synonymous 
with the speedup of work and the use of incentives to spur employees to higher 
levels of output. If the new levels established were normal production, the 
workers were forced to still greater exertions to maintain their previous earn-
ing power. In the past, shortsighted and unscrupulous managers did resort to 
this practice. 
 Even today, some unions oppose the establishment of standards by measure-
ment, the development of hourly base rates by job evaluation, and the applica-
tion of incentive wage payment. These unions believe that the time allowed to 
perform a task and the amount that an employee should be paid represent issues 
that should be resolved by collective bargaining arrangements. 
 Today’s practitioners must use the “humane” approach. They must be well 
versed in the study of human behavior and accomplished in the art of commu-
nication. They must also be good listeners, respecting the ideas and thinking of 
others, particularly the worker at the bench. They must give credit where credit 
is due. In fact, they should habitually give the other person credit, even if there 
is some question of that person deserving it. Also, practitioners of motion and 
time study should always remember to use the questioning attitude emphasized 
by the Gilbreths, Taylor, and the other pioneers in the field. The idea that there is 
“always a better way” should be continually pursued in the development of new 
methods that improve productivity, quality, delivery, worker safety, and worker 
well-being. 
 Today, there is a greater intrusion by the government in the regulation 
of methods, standards, and work design. For example, military equipment 
 contractors and subcontractors are under increased pressure to document direct 
labor standards as a result of MIL-STD 1567A (released 1975; revised 1983 and 

16 
C H A P T E R  1
1987). Any firm awarded a contract exceeding $1 million is subject to MIL-STD 
1567A, which requires a work measurement plan and procedures; a plan to es-
tablish and maintain engineered standards of known accuracy and traceability; 
a plan for methods improvement in conjunction with standards; a plan for the 
use of the standards as an input to budgeting, estimating, planning, and perfor-
mance evaluation; and detailed documentation for all these plans. However, this 
requirement was cancelled in 1995. 
 Similarly, in the area of work design, Congress passed the OSHAct estab-
lishing the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), a 
research agency for developing guidelines and standards for worker health and 
safety, and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), an 
enforcement agency to maintain these standards. With the sudden increase in 
repetitive-motion injuries in the food processing industry, OSHA established the 
Ergonomics Program Management Guidelines for Meatpacking Plants in 1990. 
Similar guidelines for general industry slowly evolved into a final OSHA Ergo-
nomics Standard, signed into law by President Clinton in 2001. However, the 
measure was rescinded soon afterward by Congress. 
 With increasing numbers of individuals with different abilities, Congress 
passed the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) in 1990. This regulation has 
a major impact on all employers with 15 or more employees, affecting such em-
ployment practices as recruiting, hiring, promotions, training, laying off, firing, 
allowing leaves, and assigning jobs. 
 While work measurement once concentrated on direct labor, methods and 
standard development have increasingly been used for indirect labor and work-
ers in the service sector. This trend will continue as the number of traditional 
manufacturing jobs decreases and the number of service jobs increases in the 
United States. The use of computerized techniques will also continue to grow, 
for example, predetermined time systems such as MOST. Many companies have 
also developed time study and work sampling software, using electronic data 
collectors for compiling the information required. 
 Table 1.1 illustrates the progress made in methods, standards, and work 
design.  
 SUMMARY 
 Industry, business, and government are in agreement that the untapped poten-
tial for increasing productivity is the best hope for dealing with inflation and 
competition. The principal key to increased productivity is a continuing applica-
tion of the principles of methods, standards, and work design. Only in this way 
can greater output from people and machines be realized. The U.S. government 
has pledged itself to an increasingly paternalistic philosophy of providing for 
the disadvantaged—housing for the poor, medical care for the aged, jobs for 
minorities, and so on. To accommodate the spiraling costs of labor and govern-
ment taxes and still stay in business, we must get more from our productive 
 elements—people and machines. 

 
 C H A P T E R 1  Methods, Standards, and Work Design: Introduction 
17
 Table 1.1   Progress Made in Connection with Methods, Standards, and Work Design 
 Year 
 Event 
 1760 
 Perronet makes time studies on No. 6 common pins. 
 1820 
 Charles W. Babbage makes time studies on No. 11 common pins. 
 1832 
 Charles W. Babbage publishes  On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures.  
 1881 
 Frederick W. Taylor begins his time study work. 
 1901 
 Henry L. Gantt develops the task and bonus wage system. 
 1903 
 Taylor presents paper on shop management to ASME. 
 1906 
 Taylor publishes paper  On the Art of Cutting Metals. 
 1910 
 Interstate Commerce Commission starts an investigation of time study. 
 
 Gilbreth publishes  Motion Study. 
 
 Gantt publishes  Work, Wages, and Profits. 
 1911 
 Taylor publishes text  The Principles of Scientific Management. 
 1912 
 Society to Promote the Science of Management is organized. 
 
 Emerson estimates $1 million per day can be saved if eastern railroads apply 
scientific management. 
 1913 
 Emerson publishes  The Twelve Principles of Efficiency. 
 
 Congress adds rider to government appropriation bill stipulating that no part 
of this appropriation should be made available for the pay of any person en-
gaged in time study work. 
 
 Henry Ford unveils the first moving assembly line in Detroit. 
 1915 
 Taylor Society is formed to replace the Society to Promote the Science of 
Management. 
 1917 
 Frank B. and Lillian M. Gilbreth publish  Applied Motion Study. 
 1923 
 American Management Association is formed. 
 1927 
 Elton Mayo begins Hawthorne study at Western Electric Company’s plant 
in Hawthorne, IL. 
 1933 
 Ralph M. Barnes receives the first Ph.D. granted in the United States in the 
field of industrial engineering from Cornell University. His thesis leads to 
the publication of “Motion and Time Study.” 
 1936 
 Society for the Advancement of Management is organized. 
 1945 
 Department of Labor advocates establishing standards to improve productivity 
of supplies for the war effort. 
 1947 
 Bill is passed allowing the War Department to use time study. 
 1948 
 The Institute of Industrial Engineers is founded in Columbus, Ohio. 
 
 Eiji Toyoda and Taichi Ohno at Toyota Motor Company pioneer the concept 
of lean production.  
 1949 
 Prohibition against using stopwatches is dropped from appropriation language.  
 
 The Ergonomics Research Society (now The Ergonomics Society) is 
founded in the United Kingdom. 
 1957 
 The Human Factors and Ergonomics Society is founded in the United States.  
 
 E. J. McCormick publishes  Human Factors Engineering. 
 1959 
 International Ergonomics Association is founded to coordinate ergonomics 
activities worldwide. 
 1970 
 Congress passes the OSHAct, establishing the Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration. 
 1972 
 Society for the Advancement of Management combines with the American 
Management Association. 
 1975 
 MIL-STD 1567 (USAF), Work Measurement, is released. 
 1981 
 NIOSH lifting guidelines are first introduced. 
 1986 
 MIL-STD 1567A, Work Measurement Guidance Appendix, is finalized. 

18 
C H A P T E R  1
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  What is another name for  time study? 
 2.  What is the principal objective of methods engineering? 
 3.  List the eight steps in applying methods engineering. 
 4.  Where were time studies originally made and who conducted them? 
 5.  Explain Frederick W. Taylor’s principles of scientific management. 
 6.  What is meant by motion study, and who are the founders of the motion-study 
technique? 
 7.  Was the skepticism of management and labor toward rates established by “effi-
ciency experts” understandable? Why? 
 8.  Which organizations are concerned with advancing the ideas of Taylor and the 
Gilbreths? 
 9.  What psychological reaction is characteristic of workers when methods changes are 
suggested? 
 10.  Explain the importance of the humanistic approach in methods and time study 
work. 
 11.  How are time study and methods engineering related? 
 12.  Why is work design an important element of methods study? 
 13.  What important events have contributed to the need for ergonomics? 
 REFERENCES 
 Barnes, Ralph M.  Motion and Time Study: Design and Measurement of Work. 7th ed. 
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1980. 
 Eastman Kodak Co., Human Factors Section.  Ergonomic Design for People at Work. 
New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1983. 
 Gilbreth, F., and L. Gilbreth.  Cheaper by the Dozen. New York: T. W. Crowell, 1948. 
Table 1.1  (continued )
 Year 
 Event 
 1988 
 ANSI/HFS Standard 100-1988 for Human Factors Engineering of Visual 
Display Terminal Workstations is released. 
 1990 
 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) is passed by Congress. 
 
 Ergonomics Program Management Guidelines for Meatpacking Plants 
are established by OSHA. This serves as a model for developing an OSHA 
ergonomics standard. 
 1991 
 NIOSH lifting guidelines are revised. 
 1995 
 Draft ANSI Z-365 Standard for Control of Work-Related Cumulative 
Trauma Disorders is released. 
 1995 
 MIL-STD 1567A Work Measurement is canceled. 
 2001 
 OSHA Ergonomics Standard signed into law but rescinded soon afterward 
by Congress. 
 2006 
 50th Anniversary of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. 

 
 C H A P T E R 1  Methods, Standards, and Work Design: Introduction 
19
 Gilbreth, L. M.  As I Remember: An Autobiography. Norcross, GA: Engineering & 
 Management Press, 1988. 
 Kanigel, R.  One Best Way. New York: Viking, 1997. 
 Konz, S., and S. Johnson.  Work Design. 7th ed. Scottsdale, AZ: Holcomb Hathaway, 
2007. 
 Mundell, Marvin E.  Motion and Time Study: Improving Productivity. 5th ed. 
 Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1978. 
 Nadler, Gerald. “The Role and Scope of Industrial Engineering.” In  Handbook of 
 Industrial Engineering, 2d ed. Ed. Gavriel Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & 
Sons, 1992. 
 Niebel, Benjamin W.  A History of Industrial Engineering at Penn State. University 
Park, PA: University Press, 1992. 
 Salvendy, G., ed.  Handbook of Human Factors. 3d ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 
2006. 
 Saunders, Byron W. “The Industrial Engineering Profession.” In  Handbook of 
 Industrial Engineering. Ed. Gavriel Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 
1982. 
 Taylor, F. W.  The Principles of Scientific Management. New York: Harper, 1911. 
 Thompson, C. Bertrand.  The Taylor System of Scientific Management. Chicago: 
A. W. Shaw, 1917. 
 United Nations Industrial Development Organization.  Industry in the 1980s: Structural 
Change and Interdependence. New York: United Nations, 1985. 
 WEBSITES 
 The Ergonomics Society —http://www.ergonomics.org.uk/ 
 Human Factors and Ergonomics Society —http://hfes.org/ 
 Institute of Industrial Engineers —http://www.iienet.org/ 
 International Ergonomics Association —http://www.iea.cc/ 
 OSHA —http://www.osha.gov/ 

This page intentionally left blank

 
21
 
CHAPTER 
 
2 
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Select the project with the exploratory tools: Pareto analyses, fish dia-
grams, Gantt charts, PERT charts, and job/worksite analysis guides. 
 •  Get and present data with the recording tools: operation, flow, worker/
machine, and gang process charts, and flow diagrams. 
 •  Develop the ideal method with quantitative tools: worker–machine 
 relationships with synchronous and random servicing and line balancing 
calculations.  
 A
  good methods engineering program will follow an orderly process, start-
ing from the selection of the project and ending with the implementation 
of the project (see Figure 1.3). The first, and perhaps most crucial, step—
whether designing a new work center or improving an existing operation—is the 
identification of the problem in a clear and logical form. Just as the machinist 
uses tools such as micrometers and calipers to facilitate performance, so the 
methods engineer uses appropriate tools to do a better job in a shorter time. A 
variety of such problem-solving tools are available, and each tool has specific 
applications. 
 The first five tools are primarily used in the first step of methods analy-
sis,  select the project . Pareto analysis and fish diagrams evolved from Japanese 
quality circles of the early 1960s (see Chapter 18) and were quite successful in 
improving quality and reducing costs in their manufacturing processes. Gantt 
and PERT charts emerged during the 1940s in response to a need for better 
project planning and control of complex military projects. They can also be very 
useful in identifying problems in an industrial setting. 
 Typically, project selection is based on three considerations: economic 
(probably the most important), technical, and human. Economic considerations 
may involve new products, for which standards have not been implemented, or 
existing products that have a high cost of manufacturing. Problems could be 
large amounts of scrap or rework, excessive material handling, in terms of either 
cost or distance, or simply “bottleneck” operations. Technical considerations 
 Problem-Solving 
Tools 

22 
C H A P T E R  2
may include processing techniques that should be improved, quality control 
problems due to the method, or product performance problems compared to the 
competition. Human considerations may involve highly repetitive jobs, leading 
to work-related musculoskeletal injuries, high-accident-rate jobs, excessively fa-
tiguing jobs, or jobs about which workers constantly complain. 
 The first four exploratory tools are most typically used in the analyst’s office. 
The fifth tool, job/worksite analysis guide, helps identify problems within a partic-
ular area, department, or worksite and is best developed as part of a physical walk-
through and on-site observations. The guide provides a subjective identification 
of key worker, task, environmental, or administrative factors that may cause 
 potential problems. It also indicates appropriate tools for further, more quantitative 
evaluations. Use of the job/worksite analysis guide should be a necessary first step 
before extensive quantitative data are collected on the present method. 
 The next five tools are used to record the present method, and they comprise 
the second step of methods analysis,  get and present the data . Pertinent factual 
information—such as the production quantity, delivery schedules, operational 
times, facilities, machine capacities, special materials, and special tools—may 
have an important bearing on the solution of the problem, and such information 
must be recorded. (The data are also useful in the third step of methods analysis, 
 analyze the data .) 
 The final three tools are more useful as a quantitative approach in the fourth 
step of methods analysis,  develop the ideal method . Once the facts are presented 
clearly and accurately, they are examined critically, so that the most practical, 
economical, and effective method can be defined and installed. These tools 
should therefore be used in conjunction with the operational analysis techniques 
described in Chapter 3. Note that most of the tools from all four groupings can 
easily be utilized in the operational analysis phase of development. 
 2.1  EXPLORATORY TOOLS 
 PARETO ANALYSIS 
 Problem areas can be defined by a technique developed by the economist Vil-
fredo Pareto to explain the concentration of wealth. In  Pareto analysis , items 
of interest are identified and measured on a common scale and then are ordered 
in descending order, as a cumulative distribution. Typically 20 percent of the 
ranked items account for 80 percent or more of the total activity; consequently, 
the technique is sometimes called the  80-20 rule . For example, 80 percent of the 
total inventory is found in only 20 percent of the inventory items, or 20 percent 
of the jobs account for approximately 80 percent of the accidents (Figure 2.1), 
or 20 percent of the jobs account for 80 percent of the workers’ compensation 
costs. Conceptually, the methods analyst concentrates the greatest effort on the 
few jobs that produce most of the problems. In many cases, the Pareto distribu-
tion can be transformed to a straight line using a lognormal transformation, from 
which further quantitative analyses can be performed (Herron, 1976).   

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
23
 FISH DIAGRAMS 
 Fish diagrams , also known as  cause-and-effect diagrams , were developed by 
Ishikawa in the early 1950s while he was working on a quality control project 
for Kawasaki Steel Company. The method consists of defining an occurrence of 
a typically undesirable event or problem, that is, the  effect , as the “fish head” and 
then identifying contributing factors, that is, the  causes , as “fish bones” attached 
to a backbone and the fish head. The principal causes are typically subdivided 
into five or six major categories—the human, machines, methods, materials, en-
vironmental, administrative—each of which is further subdivided into subcauses. 
The process is continued until all possible causes are listed. A good diagram will 
have several levels of bones and will provide a very good overview of a problem 
and its contributing factors. The factors are then critically analyzed in terms of 
their probable contribution to the overall problem. Hopefully, this process will 
also tend to identify potential solutions. An example of a fish diagram used to 
identify operator health complaints in a cutoff operation is shown in Figure 2.2. 
 Fish diagrams have worked quite successfully in Japanese quality circles, 
where input is expected from all levels of workers and managers. Such diagrams 
may prove to be less successful in U.S. industry, where the cooperation between 
labor and management may be less effective in producing the desired solutions 
and outcomes (Cole, 1979).   
 Figure 2.1   Pareto distribution of industrial accidents 
 Twenty percent of job codes (CUP and ABY) cause approximately 80 percent of accidents. 

24 
C H A P T E R  2
 GANTT CHART 
 The  Gantt chart  was probably the first project planning and control technique 
to emerge during the 1940s in response to the need to better manage complex 
defense projects and systems. A Gantt chart simply shows the anticipated com-
pletion times for various project activities as bars plotted against time on the 
horizontal axis (Figure 2.3a). Actual completion times are shown by shading 
the bars appropriately. If a vertical line is drawn through a given date, you can 
easily determine which project components are ahead of or behind schedule. For 
example, in Figure 2.3a, by the end of the third month, mock-up work is behind 
schedule. A Gantt chart forces the project planner to develop a plan ahead of 
time and provides a quick snapshot of the progress of the project at any given 
time. Unfortunately, it does not always completely describe the interaction be-
tween different project activities. More analytical techniques, such as PERT 
charts, are required for that purpose. 
 The Gantt chart can also be utilized for sequencing machine activity on the 
plant floor. The machine-based chart can include repair or maintenance activity 
by crossing out the time period in which the planned downtime will occur. For 
example, in the job shop in Figure 2.3b, in the middle of the month, lathe work 
is behind schedule, while production on the punch press is ahead of schedule.  
 PERT CHARTING 
 PERT stands for Program Evaluation and Review Technique. A  PERT chart, 
also referred to as a network diagram or  critical path method,  is a planning and 
control tool that graphically portrays the optimum way to attain some predeter-
mined objective, generally in terms of time. This technique was employed by the 
Environment
Administrative
Methods
Machine
Human
Morale
Boredom
Age
Pay
Rest
Self-paced
Incentives
Work hardening
W
Skill
Training
T
Experience
Impurities
Type of alloy
T
Layout
Reach
Interference
Capacity
Visibility
V
Magnification
Stereoscope
Orientation
IndexingO
Alignment
Vibration
V
Precision
Foot pedal
Job enlargement
Intensity
Humidity
Temperature
T
Ventilation
V
Contrast
Visibility
V
Lighting
Noise
Frequency
Housekeeping
Job organization
Job rotation
Heads-up video
Activation
Gravity
Parts feed
Tweezers
T
Chucking
Fixture
Setup
Pretreatment
Thickness
Sheet gage
Stiffness
f
Employee
Complaints
Materials
Palm button
 Figure 2.2   Fish diagram for operator health complaints in a cutoff operation 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
25
U.S. military in the design of such processes as the development of the Polaris 
missile and the operation of control systems in nuclear-powered submarines. 
Methods analysts usually use PERT charting to improve scheduling through cost 
reduction or customer satisfaction. 
 Figure 2.3   Example of (a) project-based Gantt chart and (b) machine- or process-based Gantt chart 
(a)
(b)

26 
C H A P T E R  2
 In using PERT for scheduling, analysts generally provide two or three time 
estimates for each activity. For example, if three time estimates are used, they 
are based on the following questions: 
 1.  How much time is required to complete a specific activity if everything 
works out ideally (optimistic estimate)? 
 2.  Under average conditions, what would be the most likely duration of this 
activity? 
 3.  What is the time required to complete this activity if almost everything 
goes wrong (pessimistic estimate)? 
 With these estimates, the analyst can develop a probability distribution of the 
time required to perform the activity. 
 On a PERT chart, events (represented by nodes) are positions in time that 
show the start and completion of a particular operation or group of operations. 
Each operation or group of operations in a department is defined as an activ-
ity and is called an  arc.  Each arc has an attached number representing the time 
(days, weeks, months) needed to complete the activity. Activities that utilize no 
time or cost yet are necessary to maintain a correct sequence are called  dummy 
activities and are shown as dotted lines (activity  H in Fig 2.4.). 
 Dummy activities are typically used to indicate precedence or dependencies, 
because, under the rules, no two activities can be identified by the same nodes; 
that is, each activity has a unique set of nodes.  
 The minimum time needed to complete the entire project corresponds to the 
longest path from the initial node to the final node. Termed the  critical path in 
Figure 2.4, the minimum time needed to complete the project is the longest path 
5
2
D-1
J-2
C-3
F-4
H-0
B-2
N-1
M-4
K-5
O-4
P-2
A-4
G-3
3
6
8
10
11
12
9
27 Weeks
W
E-5
I-6
L-3
1
4
7
 Figure 2.4   Network showing critical path (heavy line) 
 Circled numbers are nodes that represent the beginning and ending of activities, which 
are represented as lines. The values above each line represent the normal duration of 
that activity in weeks. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
27
from node 1 to node 12. While there is always one such path through any project, 
more than one path can reflect the minimum time needed to complete the project. 
 Activities not on the critical path have a certain time flexibility. This time 
flexibility, or freedom, is referred to as  float  and is defined as the amount of time 
that a noncritical activity can be lengthened without delaying the project’s com-
pletion date. This implies that when the intent is to reduce the project completion 
time, termed  crashing , it is better to concentrate on activities that lie on the criti-
cal path than on those on other pathways. 
 Although the critical path can be found through trial and error, there is a for-
mal procedure for uniquely finding the critical path using various time concepts. 
These are (1) the earliest starting (ES) for each activity such that all precedence 
relationships are upheld and (2) the earliest finish (EF) for that activity, which is 
the earliest start plus the estimated time for that activity, or 
 EFij  ESij  tij 
 where  i and  j are the nodes. 
 These times are typically found by a forward pass through the network, as 
shown in the network table in Table 2.1. Note that for an activity that has two 
predecessor activities, the earliest start is computed as the maximum of the pre-
vious earliest finishes 
 ESij  max (EFij) 
 Similar to the earliest start and finish times are the latest start (LS) and latest 
finish (LF) times, which are found using a backward pass through the network. 
The latest start time is the latest time an activity can start without delaying the 
project. It is found by subtracting the activity time from the latest finish time. 
 LSij  LFij  tij  
 Table 2.1   Network Diagram 
 Activity 
 Nodes 
 ES 
 EF 
 LS 
 LF 
 Float 
 A 
 (1, 2) 
 0 
 4 
 5 
 9 
 5 
 B 
 (1, 3) 
 0 
 2 
 3 
 5 
 3 
 C 
 (1, 4) 
 0 
 3 
 0 
 3 
 0 
 D 
 (2, 5) 
 4 
 5 
 9 
 10 
 5 
 E 
 (3, 5) 
 2 
 7 
 5 
 10 
 3 
 F 
 (4, 6) 
 3 
 7 
 3 
 7 
 0 
 G 
 (5, 7) 
 7 
 10 
 10 
 13 
 3 
 H (Dummy) 
 (3, 6) 
 2 
 2 
 7 
 7 
 0 
 I 
 (6, 7) 
 7 
 13 
 7 
 13 
 0 
 J 
 (7, 8) 
 13 
 15 
 13 
 15 
 0 
 K 
 (8, 9) 
 15 
 20 
 15 
 20 
 0 
 L 
 (8, 10) 
 15 
 18 
 21 
 24 
 6 
 M 
 (9, 10) 
 20 
 24 
 20 
 24 
 0 
 N 
 (10, 11) 
 24 
 25 
 24 
 25 
 0 
 O 
 (9, 12) 
 20 
 24 
 23 
 27 
 3 
 P 
 (11, 12) 
 25 
 27 
 25 
 27 
 0 

28 
C H A P T E R  2
 Where two or more activities emanate from one node, the latest finish time is the 
minimum of the latest start times of the emanating activities. 
 LFij  min (LSij) 
 The network table for the network diagram in Fig 2.5 is given in Table 2.1. 
Float is formally defined as 
 Float  LS  ES 
 or 
 Float  LF  EF 
 Note that all activities with float equal to zero define the critical path, which for 
this example is 27 weeks. 
 Several methods can be used to shorten a project’s duration, and the cost 
of various alternatives can be estimated. For example, Table 2.2 identifies the 
normal times and costs as well as crash times and crash costs that would occur 
if the project shown in Fig 2.4 were shortened. Using this table, and the network 
diagram, and assuming that a linear relationship exists between time and the cost 
per week, various alternatives shown in Table 2.3 can be computed. 
 Note that at 19 weeks, a second critical path is developed through nodes 1, 
3, 5, and 7, and any further crashing would have to consider both paths.   
 JOB/WORKSITE ANALYSIS GUIDE 
 The  job/worksite analysis guide  (see Figure 2.5) identifies problems within a 
particular area, department, or worksite. Before collecting quantitative data, 
 Table 2.2   Cost and Time Values to Perform a Variety of Activities 
under Normal and Crash Conditions 
   
   
 Normal 
 Crash 
 Cost per Week 
 Activities 
 Nodes 
 Weeks 
 $ 
 Weeks 
 $ 
 $ 
 A 
 (1, 2) 
 4 
 4,000 
 2 
 6,000 
 1,000 
 B 
 (1, 3) 
 2 
 1,200 
 1 
 2,500 
 1,300 
 C 
 (1, 4) 
 3 
 3,600 
 2 
 4,800 
 1,200 
 D 
 (2, 5) 
 1 
 1,000 
 0.5 
 1,800 
 1,600 
 E 
 (3, 5) 
 5 
 6,000 
 3 
 8,000 
 1,000 
 F 
 (4, 6) 
 4 
 3,200 
 3 
 5,000 
 1,800 
 G 
 (5, 7) 
 3 
 3,000 
 2 
 5,000 
 2,000 
 H 
 (3, 6) 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 — 
 I 
 (6, 7) 
 6 
 7,200 
 4 
 8,400 
 600 
 J 
 (7, 8) 
 2 
 1,600 
 1 
 2,000 
 400 
 K 
 (8, 9) 
 5 
 3,000 
 3 
 4,000 
 500 
 L 
 (8, 10) 
 3 
 3,000 
 2 
 4,000 
 1,000 
 M 
 (9, 10) 
 4 
 1,600 
 3 
 2,000 
 400 
 N 
 (10, 11) 
 1 
 700 
 1 
 700 
 — 
 O 
 (9, 12) 
 4 
 4,400 
 2 
 6,000 
 800 
 P 
 (11, 12) 
 2 
 1,600 
 1 
 2,400 
 800 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
29
the analyst first walks through the area and observes the worker, the task, the 
workplace, and the surrounding working environment. In addition, the analyst 
identifies any administrative factors that may affect the worker’s behavior or 
performance. All these factors provide an overall perspective of the situation 
and help guide the analyst in using other, more quantitative tools for collecting 
and analyzing data. The example in Figure 2.5 shows the application of the 
job/worksite analysis guide to a hot-end operation in a television manufactur-
ing facility. Key concerns include the lifting of heavy loads, heat stress, and 
noise exposure.  
 2.2  RECORDING AND ANALYSIS TOOLS 
 OPERATION PROCESS CHART 
 The  operation process chart  shows the chronological sequence of all operations, 
inspections, time allowances, and materials used in a manufacturing or business 
process, from the arrival of raw material to the packaging of the finished prod-
uct. The chart depicts the entrance of all components and subassemblies to the 
main assembly. Just as a blueprint displays such design details as fits, tolerances, 
and specifications, the operation process chart gives manufacturing and business 
details at a glance. 
 Two symbols are used in constructing the operation process chart: a small 
circle denotes an operation, and a small square denotes an inspection. An 
 Table 2.3   Times and Costs for Various Alternatives for the Network Shown 
in Figure 2.4 and Data Given in Table 2.2 
 Schedule (weeks) 
 Least Expensive Alternative  
 Total Weeks 
Gained 
 Total Added 
Cost ($) 
 27 
 Normal duration of project 
 0 
 0 
 26 
 Crash activity M (or J) by one 
week for an added cost of $400 
 1 
 400 
 25 
 Crash activity J (or M) by one 
week for an additional cost of 
$400  
 2 
 800 
 24 
 Crash activity K by one week 
for an additional cost of $500  
 3 
 1,300 
 23 
 Crash activity K by another week 
for an additional cost of $500  
 4 
 1,800 
 22 
 Crash activity I by one week 
for an additional cost of $600  
 5 
 2,400 
 21 
 Crash activity I by another week 
for an additional cost of $600  
 5 
 3,000 
 20 
 Crash activity P by one week 
for an additional cost of $800  
 7 
 3,800 
 19 
 Crash activity C by one week 
for an additional cost of $1,200 
 8 
 5,000 

30 
C H A P T E R  2
 Figure 2.5   Job/worksite analysis guide for a hot-end job in a television 
manufacturing facility 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
31
operation takes place when a part being studied is intentionally transformed or 
when it is being studied or planned prior to productive work being performed on 
it. An inspection takes place when the part is examined to determine its confor-
mity to a standard. Note that some analysts prefer to outline only the operations, 
calling the result an  outline process chart .  
 Before beginning the actual construction of the operation process chart, ana-
lysts identify the chart with a title, Operation Process Chart, and other informa-
tion, such as the part number, drawing number, process description, present or 
proposed method, date, and name of the person doing the charting. Additional 
information may include such items as the chart number, plant, building, and 
department. 
 Vertical lines indicate the general flow of the process as work is accom-
plished, while horizontal lines feeding into the vertical flow lines indicate ma-
terial, either purchased or worked on during the process. Parts are shown as 
entering a vertical line for assembly or leaving a vertical line for disassembly. 
Materials that are disassembled or extracted are represented by horizontal mate-
rial lines drawn to the right of the vertical flow line, while assembly materials 
are shown as horizontal lines drawn to the left of the vertical flow line. 
 In general, the operation process chart is constructed such that vertical flow 
lines and horizontal material lines do not cross. If it becomes necessary to cross a 
vertical and a horizontal line, use conventional practice to show that no juncture 
occurs; that is, draw a small semicircle in the horizontal line at the point where 
the vertical line crosses it (see Figure 2.6).  
 
Junction
No Junction
Alternate Paths
Rework
Vertical flo
V
w line
Horizontal connecting line
Vertical flo
V
w line
Horizontal connecting line
01
0
 Figure 2.6   Flowcharting conventions 

32 
C H A P T E R  2
 Time values, based on either estimates or actual measurements, may be as-
signed to each operation and inspection. A typical completed operation process 
chart illustrating the manufacture of telephone stands is shown in Figure 2.7. 
 The completed operation process chart helps analysts visualize the present 
method, with all its details, so that new and better procedures may be devised. 
It shows analysts what effect a change on a given operation will have on the 
preceding and subsequent operations. It is not unusual to realize a 30 percent 
reduction in performance time by utilizing the principles of operations analysis 
(see Chapter 3) in conjunction with the operation process chart, which inevitably 
suggests possibilities for improvement. Also, because each step is shown in its 
Operation Process Chart
Manufacturing Type 2834421 T
T
elephone Stands--Present Method
T
Part 2834421 Dwg. No. SK2834421
Charted By B.W.N. 4-12-
W
Legs (4 Reg'd) Dwg. 2834421-3
2 1/2"x2 1/2"x16" White Maple
0-12
.09 Min.
Saw to Rough
Length
0-3 Joint Two
Edges
0-4
.32 "
Plane to
Size
0-5
.11 "
Saw to Finished
Length
0-16
.28 Min.
Sand All
Over
D.W.
Check Over-All
Dimensions
.30 "
Sills (4 Reg'd) Dwg. 2834421-2
1 1/2"x3"x12" Yello
Y
w Pine
0-6
.08 Min.
Saw to Rough
Length
0-7 Joint Two
Edges
0-8
.30 "
Plane to
Size
0-9
.10 "
Saw to Finished
Length
0-10
.25 Min.
Sand All
Over
D.W.
Check Over-All
Dimensions
8 Slotted Head 1 1/2" Wood Scre
W
ws
Pc. 416412
.15 "
Top Dwg. 2834421-1
T
1 1/2"x14"x14" White Maple
0-1
.13 Min.
Saw to Rough
Length
0-2 Joint Two
Edges
0-3
.32 "
Plane to
Size
0-4
.18 "
Saw to Finished
Length
0-5
.50 Min.
Sand All
Over
0-11
2.00 Min.
Assemble Four
Sills to Top
0-17
3.25 Min.
Assemble Legs
Complete
0-18
0-20
1.15 Min.
Spray One Coat
Clear Shellac
Spray One Coat
Lacquer
Inspect Finish
0-19
.75  "
1.15 Min.
Sand Complete
D.W.
W
D.W.
W
D.W.
W
Check Over-All
Dimensions
Ins.
4
Ins.
1
Ins.
2
Ins.
3
Ins.
5
Inspect 
Complete
.23 "
Clear Shellac #173-111
Gun Lacquer #115-309
Summary:
Event
Operations
Inspections
17.58 minutes
Day work
20
5
Number
Time
 Figure 2.7   Operation process chart illustrating manufacture of telephone stands 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
33
proper chronological sequence, the chart in itself is an ideal plant layout. Con-
sequently, methods analysts find this tool extremely helpful in developing new 
layouts and improving existing ones. 
 FLOW PROCESS CHART 
 In general, the  flow process chart  contains considerably greater detail than the 
operation process chart. Consequently, it is not usually applied to entire assem-
blies, but rather used for each component of an assembly. The flow process chart 
is especially valuable in recording nonproduction hidden costs, such as distances 
traveled, delays, and temporary storages. Once these nonproduction periods are 
highlighted, analysts can take steps to minimize them and hence their costs. 
 In addition to recording operations and inspections, flow process charts show 
all the moves and storage delays encountered by an item as it goes through the 
plant. Flow process charts therefore require several symbols in addition to the 
operation and inspection symbols used in operation process charts. A small arrow 
signifies transportation, which can be defined as moving an object from one place 
to another, except when the movement takes place during the normal course of an 
operation or inspection. A large capital D indicates a delay, which occurs when 
a part is not immediately permitted to be processed at the next workstation. An 
equilateral triangle standing on its vertex signifies a storage, which occurs when a 
part is held and protected against unauthorized removal. These five symbols (see 
Figure 2.8) are the standard set of process chart symbols (ASME, 1974). Several 
other nonstandard symbols may sometimes be utilized for clerical or paperwork 
operations and for combined operations, as shown in Figure 2.9. 
 Two types of flowcharts are currently in general use: product or material 
(see Figure 2.10, preparation of direct mail advertising) and operative or person 
(see Figure 2.11, service personnel inspecting LUX field units). The product 
chart provides the details of the events involving a product or a material, and 
the operative flowchart details how a person performs an operational sequence. 
 Like the operation process chart, the flow process chart is identified by a 
title, Flow Process Chart, and accompanying information that usually includes 
the part number, drawing number, process description, present or proposed 
method, date, and name of the person doing the charting. Additional data that 
may be valuable for completely identifying the job being charted include the 
plant, building, or department; chart number; quantity; and cost. 
 For each event in the process, the analyst writes a description of the event, 
circles the appropriate process chart symbol, and indicates the times for pro-
cesses or delays and distances for transportations. The analyst then connects 
succeeding event symbols with a vertical line. The right-hand column provides 
space for the analyst to enter comments or make recommendations for potential 
changes. 
 To determine the distance moved, the analyst need not measure each move 
accurately with a tape or a 6-ft rule. A sufficiently correct figure usually re-
sults by counting the number of columns that the material moves past and then 

34 
C H A P T E R  2
multiplying this number, less 1, by the span. Moves of 5 ft or less are usually not 
recorded; however, they may be if the analyst feels that they materially affect the 
overall cost of the method being plotted.  
 All delay and storage times must be included on the chart. The longer a part 
stays in storage or is delayed, the more cost it accumulates and the longer the 
customer must wait for delivery. It is therefore important to know how much 
time a part spends at each delay or storage. The most economical method of 
determining the duration of delays and storages is to mark several parts with 
chalk, indicating the exact time they went into a storage or were delayed. Then 
check the section periodically to see when the marked parts are brought back 
into production. By taking a number of cases, recording the elapsed time, and 
then averaging the results, analysts can obtain sufficiently accurate time values.  
Opeeration
A larrge circle indicates
an operation such as
Drive nail
Mix
Drill hole
Move material by truck
Move material
by conveyor
Move material by
)
carrying (messenger
Raw material in
bulk storage
Finished stock
stacked on pallets
Protective filing
of documents
Examine material for
i
i l f
quality or quantity
Read steam gauge
d
on boiler
Examine printed form
i
i
d f
for information
Wait for elevator
W
Material in truck
or on floor at bench
waiting to be processed
Papers waiting 
to be filed
An arrow indicates
a transportation, such as
A triangle indicates
a storage, such as
A large capital D
indicaates a delay, such as
A square indicates
i di
an inspection, such as
Trannsportation
T
Storage
Delay
Insppection
 Figure 2.8   The ASME standard set of process chart symbols 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
35
 The flow process chart, like the operation process chart, is not an end in and 
of itself; it is merely a means to an end. This tool facilitates the elimination or re-
duction of the hidden costs of a component. Because the flowchart clearly shows 
all transportations, delays, and storages, the information it provides can lead to 
a reduction of both the quantity and duration of these elements. Also, because 
distances are recorded on the flow process chart, the chart is exceptionally valu-
able in showing how the layout of a plant can be improved. These techniques are 
described in greater detail in Chapter 3. 
 FLOW DIAGRAM 
 Although the flow process chart gives most of the pertinent information related 
to a manufacturing process, it does not show a pictorial plan of the flow of work. 
Sometimes this information is helpful in developing a new method. For example, 
A record was created.
Information was
added to a record.
A decision was made.
An inspection was performed
in conjunction with an operation.
An operation and transportation
took place simultaneously.
 Figure 2.9   Nonstandard process chart symbols 

36 
C H A P T E R  2
before a transportation can be shortened, the analyst needs to see or visualize 
where room can be made to add a facility so that the transportation distance can 
be shortened. Likewise, it is helpful to visualize potential temporary and perma-
nent storage areas, inspection stations, and work points.  
 The best way to provide this information is to take an existing drawing of 
the plant areas involved and then sketch in the flow lines, indicating the move-
ment of the material from one activity to the next. A pictorial representation of 
the layout of floors and buildings, showing the locations of all activities on the 
 Figure 2.10   Flow process chart (material) for preparation of direct mail advertising 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
37
flow process chart, is a  flow diagram . When constructing a flow diagram, ana-
lysts identify each activity by symbols and numbers corresponding to those ap-
pearing on the flow process chart. The direction of flow is indicated by placing 
small arrows periodically along the flow lines. Different colors can be used to 
indicate flow lines for more than one part. 
 
 Figure 2.11   Flow process chart (worker) for field inspection of LUX 

38 
C H A P T E R  2
 Figure 2.12 illustrates a flow diagram made in conjunction with a flow pro-
cess chart to improve the production of the Garand (M1) rifle at Springfield 
 Armory. This pictorial representation, together with the flow process chart, 
 resulted in savings that increased production from 500 rifle barrels per shift to 
3,600—with the same number of employees. Figure 2.13 illustrates the flow 
diagram of the revised layout.  
 The flow diagram is a helpful supplement to the flow process chart because 
it indicates backtracking and possible traffic congestion areas, and it facilitates 
development of an ideal plant layout. 
 WORKER AND MACHINE PROCESS CHARTS 
 The  worker and machine process chart  is used to study, analyze, and improve 
one workstation at a time. The chart shows the exact time relationship between 
the working cycle of the person and the operating cycle of the machine. These 
facts can lead to a fuller utilization of both worker and machine time, and a bet-
ter balance of the work cycle. 
 Many machine tools are either completely automatic (the automatic screw 
machine) or semiautomatic (the turret lathe). With these types of facilities, the 
Inspection
bench
Barrel storage
Lift
Lift
Barrel storage
Barrel
storage
Drill
press
Polishing bench
Plating
tank
Burr
bench
Wiping
W
bench
A
B
Drain
Oil
tank
Parkerizing
tank
Polishing
bench
Bench
Barrel
storage
ng
Shippin
m
platform
Barrel storage
Barrel storage
Barrel storage
Platform
Rinse tank
1
5
6
2
8
3
4
7
C
 Figure 2.12   Flow diagram of the old layout of a group of operations on the 
Garand rifle 
 (Shaded section of plant represents the total floor space needed for the revised layout 
[Figure 2.13]. This represented a 40 percent savings in floor space.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
39
operator is often idle for a portion of the cycle. The utilization of this idle time 
can increase operator earnings and improve production efficiency.  
 The practice of having one employee operate more than one machine is 
known as  machine coupling. Because organized labor may resist this concept, 
the best way to sell machine coupling is to demonstrate the opportunity for added 
earnings. Because machine coupling increases the percentage of “effort time” 
during the operating cycle, greater incentive earnings are possible if a company 
is on an incentive wage payment plan. Also, higher base rates result when ma-
chine coupling is practiced, because the operator has greater responsibility and 
can exercise greater mental and physical effort. 
 When constructing the worker and machine process chart, the analyst must 
first identify the chart with a title such as Worker and Machine Process Chart. 
Additional identifying information would include the part number, drawing 
number, operation description, present or proposed method, date, and name of 
the person doing the charting. 
 Workers and machine charts are always drawn to scale, so the analyst 
 selects a distance in inches to conform with a unit of time such that the chart can 
be neatly arranged. The longer the cycle time of the operation being charted, the 
shorter the distance per decimal minute of time. Once exact values have been es-
tablished for the distance, in inches per unit of time, the chart is begun. The left 
side shows the operations and time for the worker, and the right side shows the 
working time and the idle time of the machine or machines. A solid line drawn 
vertically represents the employee’s working time. A break in the vertical work–
time line signifies idle time. Likewise, a solid vertical line under each machine 
heading indicates machine operating time, and a break in the vertical machine 
line designates idle machine time. A dotted line under the machine column indi-
cates loading and unloading machine time, during which the machine is neither 
idle nor productive (see Figure 2.14).  
 The analyst charts all elements of occupied and idle time for both the worker 
and the machine through the termination of the cycle. The bottom of the chart 
Platform
Parkerizing
tank
Hot
rinse
tank
Drill
press
Bench
inspection
A
B
Tank
T
Drain
Stamping
machine
Speed head
Polishing
machines
Glue pot
table
Emery wheel
drying oven
2
3
4
5
7
6
1
Roller conve
n
yor
 Figure 2.13   Flow diagram of the revised layout of a group of operations on the M1 
Garand rifle 

40 
C H A P T E R  2
shows the employee’s total working time and total idle time, as well as the total 
working time and idle time of each machine. The productive time plus the idle 
time of the worker must equal the productive time plus the idle time of each ma-
chine that the worker operates. 
 Accurate elemental time values are necessary before the worker and ma-
chine chart can be constructed. These time values should represent standard 
times that include an acceptable allowance for fatigue, unavoidable delays, and 
personal delays (see Chapter 11 for more details). The analyst should never use 
overall stopwatch readings in the construction of the chart. 
Work
W
er and Machine Process Chart
k
Subject Charted 
Chart No.
Drawing No. 
Part No.
P
Chart of Method
Chart Begins 
Charted by
Chart Ends 
Date
Sheet 
of
Subject Charted
Milling slot in re
g
gulator clamp
g
p
807
J-1492
J-1492-1
Proposed
p
Loading mchs. for milling
g
g
C.A. Anderson
Unloading milled clamps
g
p
8-27
1 
1
Element description
Operator
Machine 1
Machine 2
B.&S. Hor. Mill
Stop machine #1
Return table mch #1
5 inches
Loosen vise remove part
and lay aside (mch. #1)
Pickup part and tighten
vise mch. #1
Start machine #1
Advance table and engage
feed mch. #1
Walk to machine #2
W
Stop machine #2
Return table mch #2
5 inches
Loosen vise remove part
and lay aside (mch. #2)
Pick up part and tighten
vise mch. #2
Start machine #2
Advance table and engage
feed mch. #2
Walk to machine #1
W
Idle man time per cycle
.0000
Working man time per c
W
ycle
.0134
Man-hours per cycle
.0134
Idle hours machine #1
.0038
Productive hours mch. #1
.0096
Machine #1 cycle time
.0134
Idle hours machine #2
.0038
Productive hours mch. #2
.0096
Machine #2 cycle time
.0134
.0004
.0010
.0010
Unloading
.0024
Loading
.0032
Loading
.0032
Unloading
.0024
Mill slot .0040
Mill slot .0040
Idle
Idle
.0010
.0010
.0010
.0018
.0004
.0010
.0011
.0011
.0004
.0018
.0004
B.&S. Hor. Mill
 Figure 2.14   Worker and machine process chart for milling machine operation 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
41
 The completed worker and machine process chart clearly shows the areas in 
which both idle machine time and idle worker time occur. These areas are gener-
ally a good place to start in effecting improvements. However, the analyst must 
also compare the cost of the idle machine with that of the idle worker. It is only 
when total cost is considered that the analyst can safely recommend one method 
over another. Economical considerations are presented in the next section. 
 GANG PROCESS CHARTS 
 The  gang process chart  is, in a sense, an adaptation of the worker and machine 
chart. A worker and machine process chart helps determine the most economi-
cal number of machines one worker can operate. However, several processes 
and facilities are of such magnitude that instead of one worker operating several 
machines, several workers are needed to operate one machine effectively. The 
gang process chart shows the exact relationship between the idle and operating 
cycles of the machine and the idle and operating times per cycle of the workers 
who service that machine. This chart reveals the possibilities for improvement 
by reducing both idle operator time and idle machine time. 
 Figure 2.15 illustrates a gang process chart for a process in which a large 
number of idle work-hours exist, up to 18.4 h per 8-h shift. The chart also shows 
that the company is employing two more operators than are needed. By relocat-
ing some of the controls of the process, the company was able to reassign the 
elements of work so that four, rather than six, workers could effectively operate 
the extrusion press. A better operation of the same process is shown on the gang 
process chart in Figure 2.16. The savings of 16 h per shift was easily developed 
through the use of this chart.  
 2.3   QUANTITATIVE TOOLS, WORKER 
AND MACHINE RELATIONSHIPS 
  Although the worker and machine process chart can illustrate the number of facili-
ties that can be assigned to an operator, this can often be computed in much less 
time through the development of a mathematical model. A worker and machine re-
lationship is usually one of three types: (1) synchronous servicing, (2) completely 
random servicing, and (3) a combination of synchronous and random servicing. 
 SYNCHRONOUS SERVICING 
 Assigning more than one machine to an operator seldom results in the ideal case 
where both the worker and the machine are occupied during the whole cycle. 
Such ideal cases are referred to as  synchronous servicing,  and the number of 
machines to be assigned can be computed as 
 
n
l
m
l
=
 

GANG PROCESS CHART OF PRESEN
T
T METHOD
Hydraulic Extrusion      Press Dept. II       Bellefonte Pa. Plant
Charted by B.W.N.              4-15-               
W
Chart No. G-85
MACHINE
OPERATION
A
Elevate billet
.07
Extrude
.45
Unlock die
.06
Loosen & push
out shell
.10
Withdraw ram
W
& lock die in
head
.15
1.00 Min.
0      "
Working time
W
Idle time
Idle time = 2.30 Man-minutes per cycle = 18.4 man-hours per eight-hour day
Position billet
Position dummy
Build pressure
.08
.04
.05
TIME
OPERATION
A
TIME
OPERATION
A
TIME
OPERATION
A
TIME
OPERATION
TIME
OPERATION
A
TIME
OPERATION
TIME
PRESS OPERATO
A
R
Elevate billet
.07
Extrude
.45
Unlock die
.06
Loosen & push
out shell
.10
Withdraw ram
W
& lock die in
head
.15
Position billet
Position dummy
Build pressure
.08
.04
.05
FURNACE MAN
DUMMY KNOCKE
Y
R
1.00 Min.
0      "
.32 Min.
.68   "
.49 Min.
.51   "
ASSISTANT
T
PRESS OPERATO
A
R
.12
.68
.11
.05
.04
Grease die &
position back in
die head
Idle time
Run head &
shell out
Shear rod from
shell
Pull die off end
f
of rod
.20
.51
.19
.10
Rearrange billets
in furnace
Idle time
Open furnace
door & remove
billet
Ram billet from
furnace & close
furnace door
.57 Min.
.43   "
.12
.10
.12
.18
.43
.05
Press dummy
out of shell
Dispose of shell
Position shell
on small press
Dispose of dummy
and lay aside
tongs
Idle
Grab tongs &
move to position
PULL-OUT MAN
T
Pull rod toward
cooling rack
Walk back towar
W
d
press
Grab rod with
tongs and pull
out
Straighten rod
end with mallet
Hold rod while
die removed
at press
.20
.15
.11
.45
.09
1.00 Min.
0      "
ASSISTANT
T
DUMMY KNOCKE
Y
R
.32 Min.
.68   "
.12
.20
Move away from
small press
and lay aside tongs
.68
Idle time
Guide shell
from shear to
small press
 Figure 2.15   Gang process chart of the present method of operation of a hydraulic extrusion process 
42

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
43
 where  n  number of machines the operator is assigned 
l  total operator loading and unloading (servicing) time per machine 
 m  total machine running time (automatic power feed)  
 For example, assume a total cycle time of 4 min to produce a product, as 
measured from the start of the unloading of the previously completed product 
to the end of the machine cycle time. Operator servicing, which includes both 
the unloading of the completed product and the loading of the raw materials, is 
1 min, while the cycle time of the automatic machine cycle is 3 min. Synchro-
nous servicing would result in the assignment of 
 
n 
4 machines
1
3

1
 
 Graphically, this assignment would appear as shown in Figure 2.17, with the op-
erator moving to the second machine once the first machine is serviced. By the 
time the fourth machine is serviced, the operator would need to return to the first 
machine to service it, as that machine’s automatic cycle would have just ended.  
 If the number of machines in this example is increased, machine interfer-
ence takes place, and we have a situation in which one or more of the facilities 
sit idle for a portion of the work cycle. If the number of machines is reduced to 
GANG PROCESS CHART—PR
R
OPOSED METHOD
Hydraulic Extrusion Press Dept. II 
      Bellefonte, Pa. Plant
Charted by B.W.N              4-15                
W
Chart G-85
MACHINE
MACHINE
ASSISTANT
T
PRESS OPERATO
A
R
DUMMY
KNOCKER
PULL-OUT MAN
OPERATION
A
Elevate billet
.07
Extrude
.45
Unlock die
.06
Loosen & push
out shell
.10
Withdra
W
w ram
& lock die in
head
.15
1.00 Min.
0   
Working time
W
Idle time
Position billet
Position dummy
Build pressure
.08
.04
.05
TIME OPERATION
A
Elevate billet
.07
.12
.05
.20
.05
Extrude
.45
Unlock die
.06
Loosen & push
out shell
.10
Withdra
W
w ram
& lock die in
head
.15
1.00 Min.
0   
Position billet
Position dummy
Build pressure
.08
.04
.05
TIME OPERATION
A
Grease die &
position back in
die head
Rearrange
billets in
furnace
Walk to furnace
W
Return to press
.09
Idle time
Idle time
.19
Open furnace
door & remove
billet
.10
Ram billet from
furnace & close
furnace door
.11
Run head &
shell
.04
Shear rod from
shell
.05
Pull die off end
f
of rod
.91 Min.
.09 Min.
TIME OPERATION
A
Position shell
on small press
.10
Press dummy
out of shell
.12
Grab tongs &
move to position
.05
Guide shell
from shear
to small
press
.20
Dispose of shell
.18
Dispose of 
dummy and lay
aside tongs
.23
.12
.77 Min.
.23 Min.
TIME OPERATION
A
Pull rod
toward cooling
rack
.20
Walk back
W
toward press
Straighten rod 
end with mallet
.15
Grab rod
with tongs
and pull out
Hold rod while
die removed
at press
.45
.11
.09
1.00 Min.
0   
TIME
 Figure 2.16   Gang process chart of the proposed method of operation of a hydraulic 
extrusion process 

44 
C H A P T E R  2
some figure less than 4, then the operator is idle for a portion of the cycle. In 
such cases, the minimum total cost per piece usually represents the criterion for 
optimum operation. 
 An additional complication occurs because of less than ideal conditions. The 
operator may need to walk between machines or clean and adjust the machines. 
This worker time also has to be accounted for based on the cost of each idle ma-
chine and the hourly rate of the operator. 
 The number of machines that the operator should be assigned under realis-
tic conditions can be reestimated by the lowest whole number from the revised 
equation: 
w
 
n
l
m

l
1
 where  n 1  lowest whole number 
 w   total worker time (not directly interacting with the machine, typi-
cally walking time to the next machine) 
 The cycle time with the operator servicing  n 1 machines is  l   m,  since in 
this case, the operator is not busy the whole cycle, yet the facilities are occupied 
during the entire cycle. 
 Figure 2.17   Synchronous servicing assignment for one operator and four machines 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
45
 Using  n 1 , we can compute the total expected cost (TEC) as follows: 
(1)
K

l
n K
l
n
l
n
TEC
(
)
l
m

(
)
l
m

(
)
l
m

(
)
K
n

K
n
1
1
 n
(
)
l
m

2
1
1
1n

2
1
1 =
=
 where TEC   total expected cost in dollars per unit of production from one 
machine 
 K 1  operator rate, in dollars per unit of time 
 K 2  cost of machine, in dollars per unit of time 
 After this cost is computed, a cost should be calculated with  n 1  1 machines 
assigned to the operator. In this case, the cycle time is governed by the working 
cycle of the operator, since there is some idle machine time. The cycle time is now 
( n 1  1)( l   w ). Let  n 2   n 1  1. Then the total expected cost with  n 2 facilities is 
(2)
n
l

n
n
l
n
l
TEC
(
)
K (
)
n (
)

l
w
(
)
K
(n
)
n (
)

l
w
(
)
l
w

(
)
K
n

K
n
1
2
)(n
2
2
2
)(
)
n (n
2
1
2
n

2
2 =
=
 The number of machines assigned depends on whether  n 1 or  n 2 gives the 
lowest total expected cost per piece. 
Synchronous Srvicing 
 EXAMPLE 2.1 
 It takes an operator 1 min to service a machine and 0.1 min to walk to the next ma-
chine. Each machine runs automatically for 3 min, the operator earns $10.00/h and the 
machines cost $20.00/h to run. How many machines can the operator service? 
 The optimum number of machines that the operator can service is 
 n  (l  m)(l  w)  (1  3)(1  0.1)  3.6 
 The number being fractional, leaves two choices. The operator can be assigned 3 ma-
chines (option 1), in which case the operator will be idle some portion of the time. Or 
the operator can be assigned 4 machines (option 2), in which case the machines will 
be idle some portion of the time. The best choice may be based on the economics of 
the situation, that is, the lowest cost per unit. 
 In option 1, the expected production cost from Equation (1) is (divided by 60 so 
as to convert hours to minutes) 
 TEC3  (l  m) (K1  n1 K2)n1  (1  3)(10  3  20)(3  60)  $1.556/unit 
 An alternate approach is to calculate the production rate  R per hour: 
R
l
m


60
n1

46 
C H A P T E R  2
 The production rate is based on the machines being the limiting factor (i.e., the worker 
is idle at times) and the machines producing on one unit per machine per 4.0-min total 
cycle (1.0-min service time, 3.0. min of machine time). With 3 machines running 
60 min/h, the production rate is 
R 

60
3
4
 5 unit h
1
3

 The expected cost is then the cost of the labor and machines divided by the production 
rate: 
 TEC3  (K1  n1 K2)R  (10  3  20)45  $1.556/unit 
 In option 2, the expected production cost from Equation (2) is 
 TEC4  (1  w)(K1  n2 K2)  (1  0.1)(10  4  20)60  $1.65/unit 
 In the alternate approach, the production rate is based on the worker being the limiting 
factor (i.e., the machines are idle at times). Since the worker can produce one unit per 
1.1-min cycle (1.0. min service time and 0.1-min walk time), the production rate (R) 
per hour for the alternate approach is 
w
 


R
60
1
60
1.1
54.54 unit h
 The expected cost is then the cost of the labor and machines divided by the production 
rate: 
 TEC4  (K1  n1 K2)R  (10  4  20)54.54  $1.65/unit 
 Based on lowest cost, the setup with three machines is best. However, if there is 
market demand at a good sales price, profits can be maximized using a four-machine 
setup. Note also that in this example, with a walk time of 0.1 min, production de-
creases from the ideal of 60 units/min (see figure on page 48). 
 Note the effect of reducing loading/unloading time from 1. min to 0.9 min, a rela-
tively small amount. The optimum number of machines that the operator can service 
is now 
 n  (l  m)(l  w)  (0.9  3)(0.9  0.1)  3.9 
 Although the number is still fractional, it is very close to 4, the realistic amount. If 
the operator is assigned three machines (option 1), the operator will be idle a greater 
portion of the time, increasing from 0.7 to 0.9 min or to almost 25% of the time. The 
expected production cost from Equation (1) is (with 60 needed to convert hours to 
minutes) 
 TEC3  (l  m)(K1  n2 K2)n1  (0.9  3)(10  3  20)(3  60)
 $1.517/unit 
 The alternate approach yields a production rate 
 
R
l
m
n



n

60
60
3 9
3
4
 6 15
1
unit h
 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
47
 The expected cost is the cost of the labor and machines divided by the production rate: 
 TEC3  (K1  n1 K2)R  (10  3  20)46.5  $1.505/unit 
 If the worker is assigned the more realistic number of 4 machines (option 2), the more 
costly machine idle time decreases from 0.4 to 0.1 min. The expected production cost 
from Equation (2) is 
 TEC4  (1  w)(K1  n2 K2)  (0.9  0.1)(10  4  20)60  $1.50/unit 
 The alternate approach yields a production rate  R per hour of 
 
w
 


R
l
60
60
1.0
60 unit h
 
 The expected cost is the cost of the labor and machines divided by the production rate: 
 TEC4  (K1  n1 K2)R  (10  4  20)60  $1.50/unit 
 Based on lowest cost and minimum idle time, the setup with 4 machines is now best. 
Note that a 10% decrease in loading/unloading time (from 1 to 0.9 min) yielded sev-
eral positive improvements: 
 •  A 10% increase in production (60 compared to 54.54 units/h) 
 •  A reduction of idle time from 0.7 min for the operator (17.5% of cycle time) in 
the first scenario to 0.1 min for the machines in the second scenario 
 •  A 3.6% decrease in unit costs from $1.556 to $1.50 per unit 

48 
C H A P T E R  2
  
 
 
 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
49
 
 
 This demonstrates the importance of decreasing loading or setup time, to be discussed 
in greater detail in Chapter 3. Note also that decreasing the walk time by a comparable 
amount (0.1 min, which in this case eliminates it completely) results in the ideal case 
shown below or in Figure 2.17 with the same unit cost of $1.50.  
 RANDOM SERVICING 
 Completely  random servicing  situations are those cases in which it is not known 
when a facility will have to be serviced or how long servicing will take. Mean 
values are usually known or can be determined; with these averages, the laws of 
probability can provide a useful tool in determining the number of machines to 
assign to a single operator. 
 The successive terms of the binomial expansion give a useful approxima-
tion of the probability of 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . ,  n  machines down (where  n  is relatively 
small), assuming that each machine is down at random times during the day (due 
to servicing and machine interference) and that the probability of downtime is  p 
and the probability of runtime is  q  = 1 –  p . Each term of the binomial expansion 
can be expressed as a probability of  m (out of  n ) machines down: 
P
of
n
m
(
)
m of n
f
(
)
n
m !

!
!
−
p q
m
n m

50 
C H A P T E R  2
 As an example, let us determine the minimum proportion of machine time 
lost for various numbers of turret lathes assigned to an operator where the aver-
age machine runs unattended 60 percent of the time. Operator attention time 
(machine is down or requires servicing) at irregular intervals is 40 percent on 
average. The analyst estimates that three turret lathes should be assigned per op-
erator on this class of work. Under this arrangement, the probabilities of  m (out 
of  n ) machines down would be as follows: 
 Machines down m 
 Probability 
 0 
 


3!
0!(3
0)!
(0.4 )(0.6 )
(
 1)(1)(0.216)
0.216
0
3
)(0 6
 
 1 
 
3!
1!(3
1)!



( .
)( .
)
( )( . )( .
)
.
4. 1 0 6. 2
)( 4 0
)(
6
0 432
 
 2 
 


3!
2!(3
2)!
(0.4 )(0.6 )
(
 3)(0.16)(0.6)
0.288
2
1
)(0 6
 
 3 
 


3!
3!(3
3)!
(0.4 )(0.6 )
(
 1)(0.064)(1)
0.064
3
0
)(0 6
 
 By using this approach, the proportion of time that some machines are down 
may be determined, and the resulting lost time of one operator per three ma-
chines may be readily computed. In this example, we have the following: 
 No. of machines down 
 Probability 
 Machine hours lost per 8-h day 
 0 
 0.216 
   0 
 1 
 0.432 
  0* 
 2 
 0.288 
 (0.288)(8)    2.304 
 3 
 0.064 
 (2)(0.064)(8)   1.024 
   
 1.000 
   3.328 
 *Since only one machine is down at a time, the operator can be attending the down machine. 
 
Proportio
r
n of machine time lost
3.328
24.0
13.9


per
p cen
r
t
 
 Similar computations can be made for more or less machine assignments to 
determine the assignment resulting in the least machine downtime. The most sat-
isfactory assignment is usually the arrangement showing the least total expected 
cost per piece, when the total expected cost per piece for a given arrangement is 
computed by the expression 
 
 K
n
 K
R
TEC
1
2
n
 K
 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
51
 where  K 1  hourly rate of the operator 
 K 2  hourly rate of the machine 
 n  number of machines assigned 
 R  rate of production, pieces from  n machines per hour 
 The rate of production, in pieces per hour, from  n machines is computed 
with the mean machine time required per piece, the average machine servicing 
time per piece, and the expected downtime or lost time per hour. 
 For example, using the previous three-machine assignment to one opera-
tor, an analyst determined that the machining time per piece was 0.83 min, the 
machine servicing time per piece was 0.17 min, and the machine downtime was 
an average of 0.139 min per machine per min. Thus, each machine was avail-
able for production work only 0.89 min each min. The average time required to 
produce one piece per machine would be 
 
0 83
0 17
0 861
1 161
.
83
0
.
.

 
 Therefore, the three machines would produce 2.584 pieces per minute or 
155.04 pieces per hour. With an operator hourly rate of $10 and a machine 
hourly rate of $60, we have a total expected cost per piece of 
$
.00 

3($60.00)
2.584
$27.11
Random servicing 
 An operator is assigned to service three machines that have an expected downtime of 
40 percent. When running, each machine can produce 60 units/h. The operator is paid 
$10.00/h, and a machine costs $60.00/h to run. Is it worth hiring another operator to 
keep the machines running? 
 Case A - One operator 
 Machines down m  
  Probability  
 Machine hours lost per 8-h day  
 0 

3!
0! 3!
(0.4) (0.6)
0.216
0
3
(0 6)
 0 
 1 

3!
1! 2!
(0.4) (0.6)
0.432
1
2
(0 6)
 0 
 2 

3!
2!1!
(0.4) (0.6)
0.288
2
1
(0 6)
0 288
8
2 304
.
.
288
8
2
8
 3 
3
3 0
0 4 3 0 6 0
0 064
!
!
0
( .0 ) (
3
. )
6
.

0 064
16
1 024
.
.
064
16
1


16
16
 EXAMPLE 2.2 

52 
C H A P T E R  2
 Considering that a total of 3.328 production hours (2.304  1.024) are lost in an 8-h 
day, only 1,240.3 units [(24  3.328)  60] can be produced at an hourly average of 
155.04. The unit cost is 
 TEC  (10  3  60)155.04  $1.23/unit 
 Case B - Two operators 
 Machines down m  
 Probability  
 Machine hours lost per 8-h day 
 0 

3!
0! 3!
(0.4) (0.6)
0.216
0
3
(0 6)
 0 
 1 

3!
1! 2!
(0.4) (0.6)
0.432
1
2
(0 6)
 0 
 2 

3!
2!1!
(0.4) (0.6)
0.288
2
1
(0 6)
 0 
 3 

3!
3! 0!
(0.4) (0.6)
0.064
3
0
(0 6)
 0.064  8  0.512 
 There is a considerable improvement from case A. Since only 0.512 production hour 
is lost in an 8-h day, production increases to 1,409.28 units (23.488 × 60) or an hourly 
average of 176.16. The unit cost is 
 TEC  (2  10  3  60)176.16  $1.14/unit 
 Therefore it is more cost-efficient to hire another operator and keep the machines 
running. 
 Note that hiring a third operator to keep all three machines running all the time 
would not be cost-efficient. Although the total production increases marginally, the 
total cost increases more, and the unit cost becomes 
 TEC  (3  10  3  60)180  $1.17/unit 
 COMPLEX RELATIONSHIPS 
 Combinations of synchronous and random servicing are perhaps the most com-
mon type of worker and machine relationships. Here the servicing time is rela-
tively constant, but the machines are serviced randomly. Furthermore, the time 
between breakdowns is assumed to have a particular distribution. As the number 
of machines increases and the relationship between the operator and machines 
becomes more complex, machine interference and consequent delay times 
increase. In practice, machine interference predominantly occurs from 10 to 
30 percent of the total working time, with extremes of up to 50 percent. Various 
approaches have been developed to deal with such situations. 
 One such approach assumes an expected workload for the operator based 
on the number of machines assigned and mean machine running times and 
mean servicing times. Note that using 13.9 percent machine interference with 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
53
26.1 servicing percent time from the preceding example with three machines 
yields X  0.60.261  2.3 and an interference time percentage of approximately 
54 percent (0.1390.261). For up to six machines, the use of the empirical curves 
illustrated in Figure 2.18 is recommended.  
 For seven or more machines, Wright’s formula (Wright, Duvall, and Free-
man, 1936) can be used: 
 
I 

50
(
{
1
)

X

N
2
(

N
1
)
 X
N

}
2
⎡⎣
⎤⎦
 
 where I  interference, expressed as a percentage of the mean servicing time 
 X  ratio of mean machine running time to mean machine servicing time 
N  number of machine units assigned to one operator 
 An application of this formula is shown in Example 2.3. 
100
80
60
40
20
10
8
6
4
2
11
2
4
6
8 10
20
40
60 100
Machine interference as percentage
of servicing time (I)
Ratio of machine time
to servicing time (X)
N = 2
N = 3
N = 4
N = 5
N = 6
 Figure 2.18 
 Machine interference as a percentage of servicing time when the number of machines 
assigned to one operator is six or less.  
 Calculation of Machine Interference Time 
 In a quilling production, an operator is assigned 60 spindles. The mean machine running 
time per package, determined by stopwatch study, is 150 min. The standard mean ser-
vicing time per package, also developed by time study, is 3 min. The computation of the 
machine interference, expressed as a percentage of the mean operator attention time, is 
 EXAMPLE 2.3

54 
C H A P T E R  2






I
[
]

50{ [
2
(
] 
]
1
)

X

N
50
1
150
3.00
60
120
1
150
3.00
60
2
2
(
)


=
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
=


I
I
50
120
1,159%
2
(
)
1
5
 0
6
 0
(
)
1
5
 0
6
 0
=
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
=
 Thus, we would have 
 Machine running time 
 150.0 min 
 Servicing time 
 3.0 min 
 Machine interference time 
 11.6  3.0  34.8 min 
 Using queuing theory with the time between breakdowns assumed to have 
an exponential distribution, Ashcroft (1950) extended the above approach and 
developed tables to determine machine interference times. These are shown in 
Table A3-13 (Appendix 3) and provide values of machine running time and ma-
chine interference time for values of the service ratio k: 
 k  lm 
 where l  servicing time 
 m  machine running time 
 The total cycle time to produce one piece is 
 c  m  I  i 
 where c  total cycle time 
 i  machine interference time 
 Note that the values of machine running time and machine interference time in 
Table A3-13 are given as a percentage of total cycle time. Also, any walking or 
worker time w should be included as part of servicing time. Example 2.4 demon-
strates Ashcroft’s method for calculating machine interference time. 
 With reference to Example 2.3: 
 k  lm  3150  0.02
N  60 
Calculation of Machine Interference, Using Ashcroft’s Method 
 EXAMPLE 2.4 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
55
 LINE BALANCING 
 The problem of determining the ideal number of workers to be assigned to a 
production line is analogous to that of determining the number of workers to be 
assigned to a workstation; the gang process chart solves both problems. Perhaps 
the most elementary line balancing situation, yet one that is very often encoun-
tered, is one in which several operators, each performing consecutive operations, 
work as a unit. In such a situation, the rate of production is dependent on the 
slowest operator. For example, we may have a line of five operators assembling 
bonded rubber mountings prior to the curing process. The specific work assign-
ments might be as follows: Operator 1, 0.52 min; operator 2, 0.48 min; operator 
3, 0.65 min; operator 4, 0.41 min; operator 5, 0.55 min. Operator 3 establishes 
the pace, as is evidenced by the following: 
 From Table A3–13, Appendix 3, with exponential service time and k  0.02 and 
N  60, we have a machine interference time of 16.8 percent of the cycle time. We 
have Ti  0.168c, where c is the cycle time to produce one unit per spindle. Then 
 c  m  I  i 
 c 150  3.00  0.168c
0.832c  153
c  184 min 
 and 
 Ti  0.168c  30.9 min 
 The interference time computed by the equation (34.8 min, Example 2.3) closely 
agrees with that developed here by the queuing model. However, as  n  (the number 
of machines assigned) becomes smaller, the proportional difference between the two 
techniques increases. 
 Operator 
 Standard minutes to 
perform operation 
 Wait time based on 
slowest operator 
 Standard time 
(min) 
 1 
 0.52 
 0.13 
 0.65 
 2 
 0.48 
 0.17 
 0.65 
 3 
 0.65 
 — 
 0.65 
 4 
 0.41 
 0.24 
 0.65 
 5 
 0.55 
 0.10 
 0.65 
 Totals 
 2.61 
   
 3.25 
 The efficiency of this line can be computed as the ratio of the total actual 
standard minutes to the total allowed standard minutes, or 

56 
C H A P T E R  2





E
SM
AM
100
2.61
3.25
100
80%
1
5
1
5
∑
∑
 where  E  efficiency 
 SM  standard minutes per operation 
 AM  allowed standard minutes per operation 
 Details on standard times will be covered later in Chapter 9. 
 Some analysts prefer to consider percent idle time (%Idle): 
 %Idle  100  E  20% 
 In a real-life situation similar to this example, the opportunity for significant 
savings exists. If an analyst can save 0.10 min on operator 3, the net savings per 
cycle is not 0.10 min, but 0.10  5, or 0.50, min. 
 Only in the most unusual situations would a line be perfectly balanced; that 
is, the standard minutes to perform an operation would be identical for each 
member of the team. The “standard minutes to perform an operation” is not re-
ally a standard for the operator. The typical conscientious operator should have 
little difficulty in meeting or exceeding the standard time. However, the opera-
tors who have to wait for the output of the slowest operator are seldom observed 
as actually waiting. Instead, they reduce the tempo of their movements to utilize 
the number of standard minutes established by the slowest operator. 
 The number of operators needed for the required rate of production can be 
estimated by 
 
N
R
R
E

R


R
Σ
Σ
AM
SM
 
 where  N  number of operators needed in the line 
 R  desired rate of production 
 For example, assume that we have a new design for which we are establish-
ing an assembly line. Eight distinct operations are involved. The line must pro-
duce 700 units per day (or 700/480 = 1.458 units/min), and since it is desirable to 
minimize storage, we do not want to produce many more than 700 units/day. The 
eight operations involve the following standard minutes based on existing stan-
dard data: Operation 1, 1.25 min; operation 2, 1.38 min; operation 3, 2.58 min; 
operation 4, 3.84 min; operation 5, 1.27 min; operation 6, 1.29 min; operation 
7, 2.48 min; and operation 8, 1.28 min. To plan this assembly line for the most 
economical setup, we estimate the number of operators required for a given level 
of efficiency (ideally, 100 percent), as follows: 
 N  1.458  (1.25  1.38  2.58  3.84  1.27  1.29  2.48
 1.28)/1.00  22.4 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
57
 For a more realistic 95 percent efficiency, the number of operators becomes 
22.4/0.95  23.6. 
 Because it is impossible to have six-tenths of an operator, you would en-
deavor to set up the line utilizing 24 operators. An alternate approach would be 
to utilize part-time hourly workers. 
 Next, we estimate the number of operators to be utilized at each of the eight 
specific operations. Because 700 units of work are required a day, it will be nec-
essary to produce 1 unit in about 0.685 min (480/700). We estimate the number 
of operators needed on each operation by dividing the number of minutes 
allowable to produce one piece into the standard minutes for each operation, as 
follows (1.83  1.25/.685): 
 Operation 
 Standard minutes  Standard minutes Min/unit  No. of operators 
 Operation 1 
 1.25 
 1.83 
 2 
 Operation 2 
 1.38 
 2.02 
 2 
 Operation 3 
 2.58 
 3.77 
 4 
 Operation 4 
 3.84 
 5.62 
 6 
 Operation 5 
 1.27 
 1.86 
 2 
 Operation 6 
 1.29 
 1.88 
 2 
 Operation 7 
 2.48 
 3.62 
 4 
 Operation 8 
 1.28 
 1.87 
 2 
 Total 
 15.37 
   
 24 
 To identify the slowest operation, we divide the estimated number of opera-
tors into the standard minutes for each of the eight operations. The results are 
shown in the following table. 
 Operation 1 
 1.252  0.625 
 Operation 2 
 1.382  0.690 
 Operation 3 
 2.584  0.645 
 Operation 4 
 3.846  0.640 
 Operation 5 
 1.272  0.635 
 Operation 6 
 1.292  0.645 
 Operation 7 
 2.484  0.620 
 Operation 8 
 1.282  0.640 
 Thus, operation 2 determines the output from the line. In this case, it is 
 
2 worke
r
rs
60 min
1.38 standard min
87 pieces, or


696 pieces/day
 
 If this rate of production is inadequate, we would need to increase the rate of 
production of operator 2. This can be accomplished by 
 1.  Working one or both of the operators at the second operation overtime, 
thus accumulating a small inventory at this workstation. 

58 
C H A P T E R  2
 2.  Utilizing the services of a third part-time worker at the workstation of 
 operation 2. 
 3.  Reassigning some of the work of operation 2 to operation 1 or operation 3. 
(It would be preferable to assign more work to operation 1.) 
 4.  Improving the method at operation 2 to diminish the cycle time of this 
operation.  
 In the preceding example, given a cycle time and operation times, an ana-
lyst can determine the number of operators needed for each operation to meet a 
desired production schedule. The production line work assignment problem can 
also be to minimize the number of workstations, given the desired cycle time; 
or, given the number of workstations, assign work elements to the workstations, 
within the restrictions established, to minimize the cycle time. 
 An important strategy in assembly line balancing is work element sharing. 
Two or more operators whose work cycle includes some idle time might share 
the work of another station, to make the entire line more efficient. For example, 
Figure 2.19 shows an assembly line involving six workstations. Station 1 has 
three work elements—A, B, and C—for a total of 45 seconds (s). Note that 
work elements B, D, and E cannot begin until A is completed and that B, D, 
and E can occur in any order. It may be possible to share element H between 
stations 2 and 4, with only a 1-s increase in cycle time (from 45 to 46 s), while 
saving 30 s per assembled unit. We should note that element sharing may result 
Station 1 Station 2
Station 3
Station 4
Station 5
Station 6
20
10
15
16
15
40
16
27
30
10
20
A
G
C
B
F
D
E
H
J
K
I
 Figure 2.19   Assembly line involving six workstations 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
59
in an increase in material handling, as parts may have to be delivered to more 
than one location. In addition, element sharing may necessitate added costs for 
duplicate tooling.  
 A second possibility for improving the balance of an assembly line involves 
dividing a work element. Referring again to Figure 2.19, it may be possible to 
divide element H, rather than have one-half of the parts go to station 2 and the 
other half to station 4. 
 Many times, it is not economical to divide an element. An example would be 
driving home eight machine screws with a power screwdriver. Once the operator 
has located the part in a fixture, gained control of the power tool, and brought the 
tool to the work, it would usually be more advantageous to drive home all eight 
screws, rather than only a portion of them, leaving the rest for a different opera-
tor. Whenever elements can be divided, workstations may be better balanced as 
a result of the division. 
 The following procedure for solving an assembly line balancing problem is 
based on Helgeson and Birnie (1961). The method assumes the following: 
 1.  Operators are not able to move from one workstation to another to help 
maintain a uniform workload. 
 2.  The work elements that have been established are of such magnitude that 
further division would substantially decrease the efficiency of performing 
the work element. (Once established, the work elements should be identi-
fied with a code.)  
 The first step in the solution of the problem is to determine the sequence of 
individual work elements. The fewer the restrictions on the order in which the 
work elements can be done, the greater the probability that a favorable balance 
in the work assignments will be achieved. To determine the sequence of the work 
elements, the analyst determines the answer to the following question: What 
other work elements, if any, must be completed before this work element can be 
started? This question is applied to each element to establish a precedence chart 
for the production line under study (see Figure 2.20). Functional design, avail-
able production methods, floor space, and so on can all introduce constraints 
with respect to work element sequence. 
 A second consideration in the production line work assignment  problem is 
zoning restraints. A zone represents a subdivision that may or may not be physi-
cally separated or identified from other zones in the system. Confining certain 
work elements to a given zone may be justified, to congregate similar jobs, work-
ing conditions, or pay rates. Or zoning restraints may help to identify physically 
specific stages of a component, such as keeping it in a certain position while per-
forming certain work elements. As an example, all work elements related to one 
side of a component might be performed in a certain zone before the component 
is allowed to be turned over.  

60 
C H A P T E R  2
 Obviously, the more zoning restraints placed on the system, the fewer the 
combinational possibilities available for investigation. The analyst begins by 
making a sketch of the system and coding the applicable zones. Within each 
zone, the work elements that may be done in that area are shown. The analyst 
then estimates the production rate, using the expression 
Production per day
working min/day
cycle time of

system (min/unit)
 where the cycle time of the system is the standard time of the limiting zone or 
station. 
 Consider another assembly line with the following, the precedence chart: 
 
(00)
(02)
(05)
(06)
(01)
(03)
(04)
(07)
(08)
(09)
(10)
 
.258
033
1.111
017
1.418
002
.092
004
.181
001
.761
003
.81
021
.172
005
.420
011
.119
006
2.011
032
.142
007
.178
008
.180
009
 Figure 2.20   Partially completed precedence chart 
 Note that work elements 002 and 003 may be done in any sequence with respect to any 
of the other work elements and that 032 cannot be started until 005, 006, 008, and 009 
have been completed. Note also that after 004 has been finished, we may start 033, 017, 
021, 005, 011, 006, 007, 008, or 009. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
61
 This precedence graph shows that work unit (00) must be completed before 
(02), (03), (05), (06), (04), (07), (08), (09), and (10); and work unit (01) must 
be completed before (03), (04), (07), (08), (09), and (10). Either (00) or (01) can 
be done first, or they can be done concurrently. Also, work unit (03) cannot be 
started until work units (00) and (01) are completed, and so on. 
 To describe these relationships, the precedence matrix illustrated in Figure 2.21 
is established. Here the numeral 1 signifies a “must precede” relationship. For ex-
ample, work unit (00) must precede work units (02), (03), (04), (05), (06), (07), 
(08), (09), and (10). Also, work unit (09) must precede only work unit (10). 
 Now, a  positional weight  must be computed for each work unit. This is done 
by computing the summation of the given work unit and all the work units that 
must follow it. Thus, the positional weight for work unit (00) would be 
 











00, 02, 03, 04, 05, 06, 07, 08, 09, 10
0.46
0.25
0.22
1.10
0.87
0.28
0.72
1.32
0.49
0.55
6.26
Σ
Estimated
work unit
time
(minutes)
Work
W
unit
Work unit
W
00
00
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
0.46
0.35
0.25
0.22
1.10
0.87
0.28
0.72
1.32
0.49
0.55
6.61
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
 Figure 2.21   A precedence matrix used for a line balancing problem 

62 
C H A P T E R  2
 Listing the positional weights in decreasing order of magnitude gives the 
following: 
 Unsorted 
work elements 
 Sorted 
work elements 
 Positional 
weight 
 Immediate 
predecessors 
 00 
 00 
 6.26 
 — 
 01 
 01 
 4.75 
 — 
 02 
 03 
 4.40 
 (00), (01) 
 03 
 04 
 4.18 
 (03) 
 04 
 02 
 3.76 
 (00) 
 05 
 05 
 3.51 
 (02) 
 06 
 06 
 2.64 
 (05) 
 07 
 08 
 2.36 
 (04), (06) 
 08 
 07 
 1.76 
 (04) 
 09 
 09 
 1.04 
 (07), (08) 
 10 
 10 
 0.55 
 (09) 
 Work elements must then be assigned to various workstations. This process 
is based on the positional weights (i.e., those work elements with the highest 
positional weights are assigned first) and the cycle time of the system. The work 
element with the highest positional weight is assigned to the first workstation. 
The unassigned time for this workstation is determined by subtracting the sum of 
the assigned work element times from the estimated cycle time. If there is ade-
quate unassigned time, the work element with the next-highest positional weight 
is assigned, provided that the work elements in the “immediate predecessors” 
column have already been assigned. Once a workstation’s allotted time has been 
filled, the analyst moves on to the next workstation, and the procedure continues 
until all the work elements have been assigned. 
 As an example, assume that the required production per 450-min shift is 
300 units. The cycle time of the system is 450/300  1.50 min, and the final 
 balanced line is shown in Table 2.4. 
 Under the arrangement illustrated, with six workstations, we have a cycle time 
of 1.32 min (workstation 4). This arrangement produces 450/1.32  341 units, 
which more than meets the daily requirement of 300. 
 However, with six workstations, we also have considerable idle time. The 
idle time per cycle is 
0.04
0.22
0.17
0
0.11
0.77
1.31 min
1
6
∑



0.22
0.17


0.11

 For more favorable balancing, the problem can be solved for cycle times 
of less than 1.50 min. This may result in more operators and greater production 
per day, which may have to be stored. Another possibility involves operating 
the line under a more efficient balancing for a limited number of hours per day. 
 A variety of commercially available software packages, as well as De-
sign Tools, eliminate the drudgery of the calculations and perform these steps 
automatically.   

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
63
 SUMMARY 
 The various charts presented in this chapter are valuable tools for presenting and 
solving problems. Just as several types of tools are available for a particular job, 
so several chart designs can help solve an engineering problem. Analysts should 
understand the specific functions of each process chart and choose the appropri-
ate one for solving a specific problem and improving operations. 
 Pareto analyses and fish diagrams are used to select a critical operation and to 
identify the root causes and contributing factors leading to the problem. Gantt and 
PERT charts are project scheduling tools. The Gantt chart provides only a good 
overview, and the PERT chart quantifies the interactions between different activi-
ties. The job/worksite analysis guide is primarily used on a physical walk-through 
to identify key worker, task, environmental, and administrative factors that may 
cause potential problems. The operation process chart provides a good overview 
of the relationships between different operations and inspections on assemblies 
involving several components. The flow process chart provides more details for 
the analysis of manufacturing operations, to find hidden or indirect costs, such as 
delay time, storage costs, and material handling costs. The flow diagram is a use-
ful supplement to the flow process chart in developing plant layouts. The worker/
machine and gang process charts show machines or facilities in conjunction with 
Table 2.4  Balanced Assembly Line
 
Work 
 
 
Work 
Station time
 
 
Positional 
Immediate 
element 
Station 
Element 
weight 
predecessors 
time 
Cumulative 
Unassigned 
Remarks*
 
1 
00 
6.26 
— 
0.46 
.46 
1.04 
—
 
1 
01 
4.75 
— 
0.35 
.81 
0.69 
—
 
1 
03 
4.40 
(00), (01) 
0.22 
1.03 
0.47 
—
 
1 
04 
4.18 
(03) 
1.10 
2.13 
— 
N.A.
 
1 
02 
3.76 
(00) 
0.25 
1.28 
0.22 
—
 
1 
05 
3.51 
(02) 
0.87 
2.05 
— 
N.A.
 
2 
04 
4.18 
(03) 
1.10 
1.10 
0.40 
—
 
2 
05 
3.51 
(02) 
0.87 
1.97 
— 
N.A.
 
3 
05 
3.51 
(02) 
0.87 
0.87 
0.63 
—
 
3 
06 
2.64 
(05) 
0.28 
1.15 
0.35 
—
 
3 
08 
2.36 
(04), (06) 
1.32 
2.47 
— 
N.A.
 
4 
08 
2.36 
(04), (06) 
1.32 
1.32 
0.18 
—
 
4 
07 
1.76 
(04) 
0.72 
2.04 
— 
N.A.
 
5 
07 
1.76 
(04) 
0.72 
0.72 
0.78 
—
 
5 
09 
1.04 
(07), (08) 
0.49 
1.21 
0.29 
—
 
5 
10 
0.55 
(09) 
0.55 
1.76 
— 
N.A.
 
6 
10 
0.55 
(09) 
0.55 
0.55 
0.95 
—
*N.A. means not acceptable.
2.13 
2.05 
1.97 
2.47 
2.04 
1.76 

64 
C H A P T E R  2
the operator or operators, and are used to analyze idle operator time and idle ma-
chine time. Synchronous and random servicing calculations and line balancing 
techniques are used to develop more efficient operations through quantitative 
methods. 
 These 13 tools are very important for methods analysts. The charts are valu-
able descriptive and communicative aids for understanding a process and its related 
activities. Their correct use can aid in presenting and solving the problem, and in 
selling and installing the solution. Quantitative techniques can determine the opti-
mum arrangement of operators and machines. Analysts should be acquainted with 
sufficient algebra and probability theory to develop a mathematical model that pro-
vides the best solution to the machine or facility problem. Thus, they are effective in 
presenting improved methods to management, training employees in the prescribed 
method, and focusing pertinent details, in conjunction with plant layout work.  
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  What does the operation process chart show? 
 2.  What symbols are used in constructing the operation process chart? 
 3.  How does the operation process chart show materials introduced into the general 
flow? 
 4.  How does the flow process chart differ from the operation process chart? 
 5.  What is the principal purpose of the flow process chart? 
 6.  What symbols are used in constructing the flow process chart? 
 7.  Why is it necessary to construct process charts from direct observation, as opposed 
to information obtained from the foreman? 
 8.  In the construction of the flow process chart, what method can be used to estimate 
distances moved? 
 9.  How can delay times be determined in the construction of the flow process chart? 
Storage times? 
 10.  When would you advocate using the flow diagram? 
 11.  How can the flow of several different products be shown on the flow diagram? 
 12.  What two flowchart symbols are used exclusively in the study of paperwork? 
 13.  What are the limitations of the operation and flow process charts and the flow diagram? 
 14.  Explain how PERT charting can save a company money. 
 15.  What is the purpose of crashing? 
 16.  When is it advisable to construct a worker and machine process chart? 
 17.  What is machine coupling? 
 18.  In what way does an operator benefit through machine coupling? 
 19.   How does the gang process chart differ from the worker and machine process chart?  
 20.  In a process plant, which of the following process charts has the greatest 
application: worker and machine, gang, operation, flow? Why? 
 21.  What is the difference between synchronous and random servicing? 
 22.  Reducing which of the three times—worker, machine, or loading—would have the 
greatest effect on increasing productivity? Why?  

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
65
 PROBLEMS  
 1.  Based on the following crash cost table, what would be the minimum time to com-
plete the project described by Figure 2.4, whose normal costs are shown in Table 2.2. 
What would be the added cost to complete the project within this time period? 
   
 Crash Schedule 
   
 Weeks 
 $ 
 A 
 2 
 7,000 
 B 
 1 
 2,500 
 C 
 2 
 5,000 
 D 
 0.5 
 2,000 
 E 
 4 
 6,000 
 F 
 3 
 5,000 
 G 
 2 
 6,000 
 H 
 0 
    0 
 I 
 4 
 7,600 
 J 
 1 
 2,200 
 K 
 4 
 4,500 
 L 
 2 
 3,200 
 M 
 3 
 3,000 
 N 
 1 
  700 
 O 
 2 
 6,000 
 P 
 1 
 3,000 
 2.  The machining time per piece is 0.164 h, and the machine loading time is 0.038 h. 
With an operator rate of $12.80/h and a machine rate of $14/h, calculate the opti-
mum number of machines for lowest cost per unit of output. 
 3.  At Dorben Company, a worker is assigned to operate several machines. Each of 
these machines is down at random times during the day. A work sampling study 
indicates that, on average, the machines operate unattended 60 percent of the time. 
Operator attention time at irregular intervals averages 40 percent. If the machine 
rate is $20/h and the operator rate is $12/h, what would be the most favorable 
number of machines (from an economic standpoint) that should be operated by one 
operator? 
 4.  The analyst in the Dorben Company wishes to assign a number of similar facilities 
to an operator, based on minimizing the cost per unit of output. A detailed study of 
the facilities reveals the following: 
 Loading machine standard time  0.34 min
Unloading machine standard time  0.26 min
Walk time between two machines  0.06 min
Operator rate  $12.00/h
Machine rate (both idle and working)  $18.00/h
Power feed time  1.48 min 
 How many of these machines should be assigned to each operator? 

66 
C H A P T E R  2
 5.  A study reveals that a group of three semiautomatic machines assigned to one op-
erator operates unattended 80 percent of the time. Operator service time at irregular 
intervals averages 20 percent of the time on these three machines. What would be 
the estimated machine hours lost per 8-h day because of lack of an operator? 
 6.  Based upon the following data, develop your recommended allocation of work and 
the number of workstations. 
 Work unit 
 Estimated work 
unit time (min) 
 0 
 0.76 
 1 
 1.24 
 2 
 0.84 
 3 
 2.07 
 4 
 1.47 
 5 
 2.40 
 6 
 0.62 
 7 
 2.16 
 8 
 4.75 
 9 
 0.65 
 10 
 1.45 
 The minimum required production per day is 90 assemblies. The following precedence 
matrix was developed by the analyst. 
 
(0)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(7)
(8)
(6)
(
(9)
(10)
 
 7.  How many machines should be assigned to an operator for lowest-cost operations 
when  
 a.  Loading and unloading time on one machine is 1.41 min. 
 b.  Walking time to the next facility is 0.08 min. 
 c.  Machine time (power feed) is 4.34 min. 
 d.  Operator rate is $13.20/h. 
 e.  Machine rate is $18.00/h. 
 8.  What proportion of machine time would be lost in operating four machines when 
each machine operates unattended 70 percent of the time and the operator atten-
tion time at irregular intervals averages 30 percent? Is this the best arrangement for 
minimizing the proportion of machine time lost? 
 9.  In an assembly process involving six distinct operations, it is necessary to produce 
250 units per 8-h day. The measured operation times are as follows: 
 a.  7.56 min. 
 b.  4.25 min. 
 c.  12.11 min. 
 d.  1.58 min. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
67
 e.  3.72 min. 
 f.  8.44 min. 
 
 How many operators would be required at 80 percent efficiency? How many opera-
tors will be utilized at each of the six operations? 
 10.  A study reveals the following steps in the assembly of a truss (small triangle of 
three small pieces within a large triangle of three larger pieces): 
 
 Forklift delivers 2  4 pieces of pine from outside storage area (20 min). 
 
 Bandsaw operator cuts six pieces to appropriate length (10 min). 
 
 Assembler #1 gets three short pieces, bolts small triangle (5 min). 
 Assembler #2 gets three long pieces, bolts large triangle (10 min). 
 Assembler #3 gets one of each triangle and fastens into truss (20 min). 
 Supervisor inspects complete truss and prepares for delivery (5 min). 
 a.  Complete a flow process chart of the operation. 
 b.  What are the %Idle time and production for an unbalanced, linear assembly line?  
 c.  Balance the assembly line using appropriate workstations. What are the %Idle 
time and production now?  
 11.  The current operation consists of the following elements: 
 Operator removes pressed unit (0.2 min). 
 Operator walks to inspection area, checks for defects (0.1 min). 
 Operator files rough edges (0.2 min). 
 Operator places unit on conveyor for further processing and returns to press (0.1 min). 
 Operator cleans press die element with compressed air (0.3 min). 
 Operator sprays lubricant into die (0.1 min). 
 Operator places sheet metal into press, pushes START (0.2 min). 
 Press cycles automatically for 1.2 min. 
 Given that the operator is paid $10/h and that presses cost $15/hr to run, find and 
draw the worker-machine chart for the lowest-cost operation. What is the produc-
tion? What is the unit cost? 
 12.  Given the OSHA recordable (i.e., those that must be recorded on the OSHA 300 
log and open to inspection) injuries shown on the next page, what can you con-
clude about the injuries? Which job code would you study first? If you had limited 
resources, where would you allocate them? 
 13.  Exploratory analysis has identified the following job as a problem area. Complete a 
flow process chart (material type) for the following engine stripping, cleaning, and 
degreasing operation. 
 Engines are stored in the old-engine storeroom. When needed, an engine is picked 
up by an electric hoist on a monorail, transported to the stripping bay, and unloaded onto 
an engine stand. There the operator strips the engine, putting the engine parts into the 
degreasing basket. The basket is transported to the degreaser, loaded into the degreaser, 
degreased, and then unloaded from the degreaser. The basket with degreased engine 
parts is then transported to the cleaning area, where the parts are simply dumped on the 
ground for drying. After several minutes of drying, the parts are lifted to the cleaning 
benches and cleaned. The cleaned parts are collected in special trays to await transport. 
The parts are loaded onto a trolley and transported to the inspection station. There they 
are slid from the trays onto the inspection benches. 

68 
C H A P T E R  2
   
 Type of injury 
 Job Code 
 Strain/sprain 
 CTD 
 Other 
 AM9 
 1 
 0 
 0 
 BTR 
 1 
 2 
 0 
 CUE 
 2 
 0 
 1 
 CUP 
 4 
 4 
 19 
 DAW 
 0 
 0 
 2 
 EST 
 0 
 0 
 2 
 FAO 
 3 
 1 
 1 
 FAR 
 3 
 1 
 3 
 FFB 
 1 
 0 
 1 
 FGL 
 1 
 0 
 1 
 FPY 
 1 
 2 
 0 
 FQT 
 0 
 0 
 3 
 FQ9 
 2 
 0 
 3 
 GFC 
 0 
 0 
 1 
 IPM 
 4 
 1 
 16 
 IPY 
 1 
 0 
 0 
 IP9 
 1 
 0 
 0 
 MPL 
 1 
 0 
 0 
 MST 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 MXM 
 1 
 0 
 2 
 MYB 
 1 
 1 
 3 
 WCU 
 1 
 0 
 1 
 14.  Given the following operations and unit times in minutes (#1  1.5, #2  3, #3  1, 
#4  2, #5  4), balance the production line with the goal of producing 30 units/h. 
 
1
4
2
5
3
 
 15.  The following activities and times (in minutes) were recorded for a mold operator: 
■ 
Removes molded piece from die 
 0.6 
■ 
Walks 10 ft to a workbench 
 0.2 
■ 
Boxes widget and places on conveyor 
 1.0 
■ 
Walks back to molder 
 0.2 
■ 
Blows out dirt from mold 
 0.4 
■ 
Sprays oil into mold, pushes “GO” 
 0.2 
■ 
Mold cycles automatically 
 3.0 
 The cycle then repeats itself. The operator is paid $10.00/h, and it costs $15.00/h to run 
the molder. What is the optimum number of machines that can be assigned to the operator 
to produce the widgets at lowest cost? Draw a worker-machine chart. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
69
 16.  TOYCO produces toy shovels on a 20-ton press. The steps taken by the press 
operator to produce one shovel are: 
■ 
Remove finished shovel and put on conveyor 
 0.1 min 
■ 
Remove debris from the dies 
 0.2 min 
■ 
Spray dies with oil 
 0.1 min 
■ 
Check raw material (flat sheet) for defects 
 0.3 min 
■ 
Place flat sheet into press 
 0.1 min 
■ 
Press cycles automatically 
 1.0 min 
 
 The operator is paid $10/h, and the press costs $100/h to run. Raw material in shovel 
costs $1.00, and it sells for $4.00. What is the optimum number of presses for one 
operator for lowest unit cost? Draw the worker-machine chart for this situation.  
 17.  In the project shown below, activities are represented by arrows, and the number 
for each activity also indicates its normal duration (in days). 
 a.  Determine the critical path and the length of this project. 
 b.  Assume that each activity, except 1 and 2, can be crashed up to 2 days at a cost 
equal to the activity number. E.g., activity 6 normally takes 6 days, but could be 
crashed to 5 days for a cost of $6, or to 4 days for a total of $12. Determine the 
least-cost 26-day schedule. Show the activities that are crashed and the 
total crash costs. 
 
1
10
8
2
3
9
6
4
7
5
 
 18.  ToolCO manufactures Philips (P), Torx (T), and flathead (F) screwdrivers in dif-
ferent sizes (1, 2, 3, 4, 5). The IE manager is concerned about high product defect 
rates but has limited resources to address all the problems. Given the following 
data (defects per batch of 100), identify the product problems to be addressed first. 
Why” What procedures, tools, charts, diagrams, etc. should be used in this case? 
 Model 
 Philips 
 Torx 
 Flathead 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 2 
 1 
 0 
 1 
 3 
 0 
 1 
 0 
 4 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 5 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 19.  The following activities were observed for a mold operator: 
 a.  operator removes molded piece from die, 
 b.  walks to bench, puts the piece into a box, and then puts the box on a pallet, 

70 
C H A P T E R  2
 c.  returns to injection molder, 
 d.  blows out dirt from die (with compressed air), 
 e.  sprays oil into die, 
 f.  presses START button on molder and sits down, 
 g.  the machine closes the die, injects plastic into die and after set curing time of 
2 min opens die, 
 h.  cycle repeats itself 
 
 Complete a flow process chart for the mold operator. What is one major problem in 
the job and how can it be improved? 
 20.   Delpack manufactures l5 different wire harnesses for the Big 3 automakers (coded 
as B1, B2, and B3). The wire harnesses are also coded by their current draw in amps 
(A1, A2, A3, A4, and A5). Given the following defect data (defects per batch of 
100), indicate if there is a problem and where it is located. (AlBl  5, A2B2  0, 
A3B3  0, AlB2  3, A2B3  1, AlB3  4, A2Bl  1, A3B2  1, A4B3  0, 
A3Bl  0, A4B2  0; A5B3  0, A4B1  0, A5B1  0, A5B2  0)  
 21.  Complete a flow process chart for a press operator: 
 1.  removes completed widget from press 
 2.  feels widget edges for roughness 
 3.  walks to a workbench and gets file 
 4.  files rough edges on widget 
 5.  uses compressed air to blow away filings 
 6.  walks back to press, places widget on conveyor 
 7.  reaches for blank sheet and places the blank into the press 
 8.  presses “GO,” sits down for the I minute press cycle 
 9.  the sequence repeats itself 
 
 What are obvious problems in the job and how can they be improved? 
 22.  The following activities and times (in minutes) were recorded for a press opera-
tor: removes completed widget from press (0.1), files rough edges on widget (0.4), 
blows filings from widget (0.3), places widget on conveyor to next station (0.1), 
places raw blank into press and pushes “GO” (0.1), press cycles automatically 
for 3.0 min. The cycle then repeats itself. The operator is paid $10/h and it costs 
$15/h to run the press. What is the optimum number of presses that can be assigned 
to the operator to produce the widgets at lowest cost? Draw a worker-machine 
chart. What is the %Idle time? What is the unit cost? What is the productivity 
(widgets/h)? 
 23.  An injector machine goes down roughly 20% of the time (the injector gums up 
and needs to be cleaned, a quick process). One operator is assigned to service three 
identical such machines. Each machine can produce 100 parts/h if running properly 
(i.e., not down). The operator is paid $10/h and each machine costs $20/h to oper-
ate. What is the unit cost for this operation? Is it worth hiring another operator at 
the same rate to assist the first operator, in case more than one machine goes down 
at the same time? What is the unit cost now? 

 
 
C H A PT ER 2  Problem-Solving Tools 
71
 24.  The following activities and times (in minutes) were recorded for a press operator: 
 ■ 
removes completed widget from press, 
 0.1 
 ■ 
inspects widget, 
 0.4 
 ■ 
places widget on conveyor to next station, 
 0.2 
 ■ 
places raw blank into press and pushes “GO,” 
 0.1 
 ■ 
press cycles automatically, 
 2.0 
 
 The cycle then repeats itself. The operator is paid $10/h, the press costs $30/h to 
run. What is the optimum number of machines to ensure the lowest unit cost? Draw 
a worker-machine chart. What is the %Idle time? What is the unit cost? What is the 
productivity (widgets/h)? 
 25.  A not-so-well-maintained machine is down roughly 40% of the time. One operator 
is assigned to service four identical such machines. Each machine can produce 60 
widgets/h if running (i.e., not completely idle). The operator is paid $10/h and each 
machine costs $20/h for power and supplies. 
 a.  What is the actual production for the four machines supervised by one operator 
for an 8-h shift given the above conditions? 
 b.  What is the unit cost for each widget? 
 c.  Because there is so much lost production due to idle time, management is con-
sidering hiring another worker to assist the first operator in servicing these four 
machines. There are two approaches or choices: i) Assign Machines #l and #2 
to the first operator and Machines #3 and #4 to the second operator; or ii) have 
both operators help each other and service all four machines as needed. Which 
choice is best (i.e., lowest unit cost)?  
 REFERENCES 
 Ashcroft, H. “The Productivity of Several Machines under the Care of One Operator.” 
 Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B, 12, no. 1 (1950), pp. 145–51. 
 ASME.  ASME Standard—Operation and Flow Process Charts, ANSI Y15.3-1974. New 
York: American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 1974. 
 Cole, R.  Work, Mobility, and Participation: A Comparative Study of American and 
Japanese Industry. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1979. 
 Helgeson, W. B., and D. P. Birnie. “Assembly Line Balancing Using Ranked 
Positional Weight Technique.”  Journal of Industrial Engineering, 12, no. 6 (1961), 
pp. 394–98. 
 Herron, D. “Industrial Engineering Applications of ABC Curves.”  AIIE Transactions 8, 
no. 2 (June 1976), pp. 210–18. 
 Wright, W. R., W. G. Duvall, and H. A. Freeman. “Machine Interference.”  Mechanical 
Engineering, 58, no. 8 (August 1936), pp. 510–14. 
 SELECTED SOFTWARE 
 Design Tools (available from the McGraw-Hill text website at www.mhhe.com/niebel-
freivalds). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002.  

This page intentionally left blank

 
73
 CHAPTER
 
3 
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Use operation analysis to improve the method by asking  what. 
 •  Focus on the purpose of operation by asking  why. 
 •  Focus on design, materials, tolerances, processes, and tools by asking  how. 
 •  Focus on the operator and work design by asking  who. 
 •  Focus on the layout of the work by asking  where. 
 •  Focus on the sequence of manufacture by asking  when. 
 •  Always try to  simplify by eliminating, combining, and rearranging operations.  
 M
ethods analysts use operation analysis to study all productive and non-
productive elements of an operation, to increase productivity per unit of 
time, and to reduce unit costs while maintaining or improving quality. 
 When properly utilized, methods analysis develops a better method of doing the 
work by simplifying operational procedures and material handling and by utiliz-
ing equipment more effectively. Thus, firms are able to increase output and reduce 
unit cost; ensure quality and reduce defective workmanship; and facilitate opera-
tor enthusiasm by improving working conditions, minimizing operator fatigue, 
and permitting higher operator earnings. 
 Operation analysis is the third methods step, the one in which analysis takes 
place and the various components of the proposed method crystallize. It immedi-
ately follows obtaining and presenting facts using a variety of flow process charting 
tools presented in Chapter 2. The analyst should review each operation and in-
spection presented graphically on these charts and should ask a number of ques-
tions, the most important of which is  why : 
 1.  Why is this operation necessary? 
 2.  Why is this operation performed in this manner? 
 3.  Why are these tolerances this close? 
 4.  Why has this material been specified? 
 5.  Why has this class of operator been assigned to do the work? 
 Operation 
Analysis 

74 
C H A P T E R  3
 The question why immediately suggests other questions, including how, 
who, where, and when. Thus, analysts might ask, 
 1.  How can the operation be performed better? 
 2.  Who can best perform the operation? 
 3.  Where could the operation be performed at a lower cost or improved quality? 
 4.  When should the operation be performed to yield the least amount of mate-
rial handling?  
 For example, in the operation process chart shown in Figure 2.7, analysts 
might ask the questions listed in Table 3.1 to determine the practicability of 
the methods improvements indicated. Answering these questions helps initiate 
the elimination, combination, and simplification of the operations. In obtaining 
the answers to such questions, analysts also become aware of other questions 
that may lead to improvement. Ideas seem to generate more ideas, and experi-
enced analysts usually arrive at several improvement possibilities. Analysts must 
keep an open mind, so that previous disappointments do not discourage trying 
new ideas. Such opportunities for methods improvement usually appear in every 
plant, with consequent beneficial results. 
 In Chapter 3, the questions to be asked for methods improvement are 
organized around nine basic topics: (1) the purpose of the operation, (2) the 
design of the parts, (3) tolerances and specifications, (4) the materials to be used, 
(5) the sequences of the manufacturing processes, (6) setup and tooling, (7) ma-
terials handling, (8) the layout of the operations, and (9) work design (covered in 
Chapter 4–8). Note that much of this information is currently used in a repack-
aged format termed  lean manufacturing.  Lean manufacturing originated with the 
Toyota Motor Corporation as a means of eliminating waste in the aftermath of 
the 1973 oil embargo. It followed the footsteps of the Taylor system of scientific 
management but in much broader approach, targeting not only manufacturing 
costs, but also sales, administrative, and capital costs. Highlights of the Toyota 
Production System (TPS) included seven types of  muda  or waste (Shingo, 1987): 
(1) overproduction, (2) waiting for the next step, (3) unnecessary transportation, 
(4) inappropriate processing, (5) excess inventory, (6) unnecessary motion, and 
(7) defective products. The overlaps with traditional approaches are exemplified 
by the following: (1) waiting and transportation wastes are elements to be ex-
amined and eliminated within flow process charts analyses; (2) waste of motion 
summarizes the Gilbreths’ lifelong work in motion study, which culminated in 
the principles of work design and motion economy; (3) waste of overproduction 
and excess inventory are based on the additional storage requirements and mate-
rial handling requirements to move items into and out of storage; and (4) waste 
in defective products is an obvious waste producing scrap or requiring rework. 
 A corollary to the seven mudas is the 5S system to reduce waste and opti-
mize productivity by maintaining an orderly workplace and consistent methods. 
The 5S pillars are (1)  sort  (seiri), (2)  set in order  (seiton), (3)  shine (seiso), 
(4)  standardize  (seiketsu) and (5)  sustain  (shitsuke).  Sort  focuses on removing 

 Table 3.1   Questions to Ask in the Manufacture of End Tables 
 Question 
 Method Improvement 
 1.  Can fixed lengths of 1½  14 white maple be purchased at no extra 
square footage cost? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .
 Eliminate waste ends from lengths that are 14. 
 2. Can purchased maple boards be secured with edges smooth and parallel? . . . . . . . . .
 Eliminate jointing of ends (operation 2). 
 3.  Can boards be purchased to thickness size and have at least one side planed 
smooth? If so, how much extra will this cost? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 Eliminate planing to size. 
 4.  Why cannot two boards be stacked and sawed into 14 
sections simultaneously?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 Reduce time of 0.18 (operation 4). 
 5. What percentage of rejects do we have at the first inspection station? . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 If the percentage is low, perhaps this inspection can 
be eliminated. 
 6. Why should the top of the table be sanded all over? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 Eliminate sanding of one side of top and reduce time 
(operation 5). 
 7.  Can fixed lengths of 1½  3 yellow pine be purchased at no extra square . . . . . . . . .
footage cost? 
 Eliminate waste ends from lengths that are not 
multiples of 12 
 8. Can purchased yellow pine boards be secured with edges smooth and parallel? . . . . 
 Eliminate jointing of one edge. 
 9.  Can sill boards be purchased to thickness size and have one side planed 
smooth? If so, how much extra will this cost? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 Eliminate planing to size. 
 10.  Why cannot two or more boards be stacked and sawed into 14 sections 
simultaneously? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 Reduce time of 0.10 (operation 9). 
 11. What percentage of rejects do we have at the first inspection of the sills? . . . . . . . . . 
 If the percentage is low, perhaps this inspection can 
be eliminated. 
 12. Why is it necessary to sand the sills all over? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 Eliminate some sanding and reduce time (operation 10). 
 13.  Can fixed lengths of 2½   2½ white maple be purchased at no . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
extra square footage cost? 
 Eliminate waste ends from lengths that are not 
multiples of 16 
 14. Can a smaller size than 2½  2½ be used? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 Reduce material cost. 
 15.  Can purchased white maple boards be secured with edges smooth 
and parallel? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 Eliminate jointing of edges. 
 16.  Can leg boards be purchased to thickness size and have sides planed 
smooth? If so, how much extra will this cost? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 Eliminate planing to size. 
 17.  Why cannot two or more boards be stacked and sawed into 14 sections 
simultaneously? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 Reduce time (operation 15). 
 18. What percentage of rejects do we have at the first inspection of the legs? . . . . . . . . .
 If the percentage is low, perhaps this inspection can be 
eliminated. 
 19. Why is it necessary to sand the legs all over? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 Eliminate some sanding and reduce time (operation 16). 
 20. Could a fixture facilitate assembly of the sills to the top? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 Reduce assembly time (operation 11). 
 21.  Can a sampling inspection be used on the first inspection of the 
assembly? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 Reduce inspection time (operation 4). 
 22. Is it necessary to sand after one coat of shellac? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 Eliminate operation 19. 
 
75

76 
C H A P T E R  3
all unnecessary items from the workplace and leaving only the bare essentials. 
 Set in order  arranges needed items so that they are easy to find and use. Once 
the clutter is removed,  shine ensures further cleanliness and tidiness. Once the 
first three pillars have been implemented,  standardize  serves to maintain the 
order and consistent approach to housekeeping and the methods. Finally,  sustain 
maintains the full 5S process on a regular basis. 
 3.1  OPERATION PURPOSE 
  This is probably the most important of the nine points of operation analysis. The 
best way to simplify an operation is to devise some way to get the same or bet-
ter results at no additional cost. An analyst’s cardinal rule is to try to eliminate 
or combine an operation before trying to improve it. In our experience, as much 
as 25 percent of the operations being performed can be eliminated if sufficient 
study is given to the design and process. This also corresponds closely to elimi-
nating the muda of inappropriate processing. 
 Far too much unnecessary work is done today. In many instances, the task 
or the process should not be simplified or improved, but eliminated entirely. 
Eliminating an activity saves money on the installation of an improved method, 
and there is no interruption or delay because no improved method is being de-
veloped, tested, and installed. Operators need not be trained on the new method, 
and resistance to change is minimized when an unnecessary task or activity is 
eliminated. Similarly, before a form is developed for information transfer, the 
analysts should ask whether this form is really needed. Computerized systems 
should simplify paperwork and not generate additional forms. 
 Unnecessary operations frequently result from improper planning when the 
job is first set up. Once a standard routine is established, it is difficult to change, 
even if such a change would eliminate a portion of the work and make the job 
easier. When new jobs are planned, the planner may include an extra operation 
if there is any possibility that the product would be rejected without that extra 
work. For example, in turning a steel shaft, if there is some question whether to 
take two or three cuts to maintain a 40-microinch finish, the planner invariably 
specifies three cuts, even though proper maintenance of the cutting tools, supple-
mented by ideal feeds and speeds, would allow the job to be done with two cuts. 
 Unnecessary operations often develop because of the improper performance 
of a previous operation. A second operation must be done to “touch up” or make 
acceptable the work done by the first operation. In one plant, for example, arma-
tures were previously spray painted in a fixture, making it impossible to cover 
the bottom of the armature with paint because the fixture shielded the bottom 
from the spray blast. It was therefore necessary to touch up the armature bottoms 
after spray painting. A study of the job resulted in a redesigned fixture that held 
the armature and still allowed complete coverage. In addition, the new fixture 
permitted seven armatures to be spray painted simultaneously, whereas the old 
method called for spray painting one at a time. Thus, by considering that an un-
necessary operation may have developed bescause of the improper performance 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
77
of a previous operation, the analyst was able to eliminate the touch-up operation 
(see Figure 3.1). 
  As another example, in the manufacture of large gears, it was necessary to 
introduce a hand-scraping and lapping operation to remove waves in the teeth 
after they had been hobbed. An investigation disclosed that contraction and ex-
pansion, brought about by temperature changes in the course of the day, were 
responsible for the waviness in the teeth’s surfaces. By enclosing the whole unit 
and installing an air-conditioning system within the enclosure, the company was 
able to maintain the proper temperature during the whole day. The waviness 
disappeared immediately, and it was no longer necessary to continue the hand-
scraping and lapping operations. 
 Analysts should ask and answer the following question: Can an outside sup-
plier perform the operation more economically? In one example, ball bearings 
purchased from an outside vendor had to be packed in grease prior to assembly. 
A study of bearing vendors revealed that “sealed-for-life” bearings could be pur-
chased from another supplier at lower cost, thus eliminating an operation. 
 The examples given in this section highlight the need to establish the pur-
pose of each operation before endeavoring to improve the operation. Once the 
necessity of the operation has been determined, the remaining nine steps to op-
eration analysis should help to determine how it can be improved. 
 3.2  PART DESIGN 
 Methods engineers are often inclined to feel that once a design has been 
accepted, their only recourse is to plan its economical manufacture. Although 
introducing even a slight design change may be difficult, a good methods analyst 
 
 Figure 3.1   (a) Painted armature as removed from the old fixture ( left ) and as removed from the improved 
fixture ( right ). (b) Armature in spray painting fixture allowing complete coverage of the armature bottom. 
(a)
(b)

78 
C H A P T E R  3
should still review every design for possible improvements. Designs can be 
changed, and if improvement is the result and the activity of the job is signifi-
cant, then the change should be made. 
 To improve the design, analysts should keep in mind the following pointers 
for lower-cost designs on each component and each subassembly: 
 1.  Reduce the number of parts by simplifying the design. 
 2.  Reduce the number of operations and the length of travel in manufactur-
ing by joining the parts better and by making the machining and assembly 
easier. 
 3.  Utilize a better material. 
 4.  Liberalize tolerances and rely on key operations for accuracy, rather than 
on series of closely held limits. 
 5.  Design for manufacturability and assembly. 
 Note that the first two will help in reducing muda (waste) in inappropriate process-
ing, unnecessary transportation, and excess inventory. The General Electric Company 
summarized a variety of ideas for developing minimum-cost designs in Table 3.2. 
 The following examples of methods improvement resulted from considering 
a better material or process in an effort to improve the design. Conduit boxes 
were originally built of cast iron. The improved design, making a stronger, neater, 
lighter, and less expensive conduit box, was fabricated from sheet steel. A four-
step process was used to bend a part into the desired shape (see Figure 3.2). 
This was inefficient and stressed the metal at the bends. The design was slightly 
altered so that the less expensive process of extruding could be utilized. The 
extruded sections were then cut to the desired length. In the redesigned process, 
three steps were eliminated. 
 Design simplification through the better joining of parts was used in assem-
bling terminal clips to their mating conductors. The original practice required 
turning up the end of the clip to form a socket. The socket was filled with solder, 
and the wire conductor was then tinned, inserted into the solder-filled socket, 
and held there until the solder solidified. The altered design called for resistance 
welding the clip to the wire conductor, eliminating both the forming and dip-
ping operations. The original part was designed with three components that had 
to be assembled (see Figure 3.3). A significantly less costly approach utilized a 
one-piece design that could be machined as a solid piece, eliminating two com-
ponents and several operations. 
 Just as opportunities exist to improve productivity through better product 
design, similar opportunities exist to improve the design of forms (whether hard 
copy or electronic) used throughout an industry or business. Once a form is 
proved necessary, it should be studied to improve both the collection and flow of 
information. The following criteria apply to the development of forms: 
 1.  Maintain simplicity in the form design, keeping the amount of necessary 
input information at a minimum. 

 Table 3.2   Methods for Minimum-Cost Design 
 Castings      
 1.  Eliminate dry sand (baked-sand) cores. 
  2.  Minimize depth to obtain flatter castings. 
  3.  Use minimum weight consistent with suf-
ficient thickness to cast without chilling. 
 4.  Choose simple forms. 
  5.  Symmetrical forms produce uniform 
shrinkage. 
 6.  Liberal radii—no sharp corners. 
 7.  If surfaces are to be accurate with relation 
to each other, they should be in the same 
part of the pattern, if possible. 
 8.  Locate parting lines so that they will not 
affect looks and utility, and need not be 
ground smooth. 
 9.  Specify multiple patterns instead of single 
ones. 
 10.  Metal patterns are preferable to wood. 
 11.  Use permanent molds instead of metal 
patterns. 
 Moldings   
 1.  Eliminate inserts from parts. 
 2.  Design molds with smallest number of parts. 
 3.  Use simple shapes. 
 4.  Locate flash lines so that the flash does not 
need to be filed and polished. 
 5.  Minimize weight. 
 Punchings   
 1.  Use punched parts instead of molded, cast, 
machined, or fabricated parts. 
 2.  “Nestable” punchings economize on 
material. 
 3.  Holes requiring accurate relation to each 
other should be made by the same die. 
 4.  Design to use coil stock. 
 5.  Design punchings to have minimum sheared 
length and maximum die strength with few-
est die moves. 
      
Formed parts 
1.  Drawn parts instead of spun, welded, or 
forged parts. 
 2.  Shallow draws if possible. 
 3.  Liberal radii on corners. 
 4.  Bent parts instead of drawn. 
 5.  Parts formed of strip or wire instead of 
punched from sheet. 
 Fabricated parts   
 1.  Self-tapping screws instead of standard 
screws. 
 2.  Drive pins instead of standard screws. 
 3.  Rivets instead of screws. 
 4.  Hollow rivets instead of solid rivets. 
 5.  Spot or projection welding instead of 
riveting. 
 6.  Welding instead of brazing or soldering. 
 7.  Use die castings or molded parts instead of 
fabricated construction requiring several 
parts. 
 Machined parts   
 1.  Use rotary machining processes instead of 
shaping methods. 
 2.  Use automatic or semiautomatic machining 
instead of hand-operated. 
 3.  Reduce the number of shoulders. 
 4.  Omit finishes where possible. 
 5.  Use rough finish when satisfactory. 
 6.  Dimension drawings from same point as 
used by factory in measuring and inspecting.  
 7.  Use centerless grinding instead of between-
center grinding. 
 8.  Avoid tapers and formed contours. 
 9.  Allow a radius or undercut at shoulders. 
 Screw machine parts   
 1.  Eliminate second operation. 
 2.  Use cold-rolled stock. 
 3.  Design for header instead of screw machine. 
 4.  Use rolled threads instead of cut threads. 
 Welded parts 
 1.  Fabricated construction instead of castings 
or forgings. 
 2.  Minimum sizes of welds. 
 3.  Welds made in flat position rather than ver-
tical or overhead. 
 4.  Eliminate chamfering edges before welding. 
 5.  Use “burnouts” (torch-cut contours) instead 
of machined contours. 
 6.  Lay out parts to cut to best advantage from 
standard rectangular plates and avoid scrap. 
 7.  Use intermittent instead of continuous weld. 
 8.  Design for circular or straight-line welding 
to use automatic machines. 
 Treatments and finishes   
 1.  Reduce baking time to minimum. 
 2.  Use air drying instead of baking. 
 3.  Use fewer or thinner coats. 
 4.  Eliminate treatments and finishes entirely. 
 Assemblies   
 1.  Make assemblies simple. 
 2.  Make assemblies progressive. 
 3.  Make only one assembly and eliminate trial 
assemblies. 
 4.  Make component parts  right in the first 
place so that fitting and adjusting will not be 
required in assembly. 
 This means that drawings must be cor-
rect, with proper tolerances, and that parts 
must be made according to drawings. 
 General   
 1.  Reduce number of parts. 
 2.  Reduce number of operations. 
 3.  Reduce length of travel in manufacturing. 
 Source: Adapted from  American Machinist , reference sheets, 12th ed., New York: McGraw-Hill Publishing Co. 
 
79

80 
C H A P T E R  3
   2.  Provide ample space for each bit of information, allowing for different in-
put methods (writing, typewriter, word processor). 
 3.  Sequence the information input in a logical pattern. 
 4.  Color-code the form to facilitate distribution and routing. 
 5.  Confine computer forms to one page. 
 3.3  TOLERANCES AND SPECIFICATIONS 
  The third of the nine points of operation analysis concerns tolerances and speci-
fications that relate to the quality of the product, that is, its ability to satisfy 
 
(a) 
(b)
 Figure 3.3   Part redesign to eliminate multiple pieces 
 (a) Original part was designed in three pieces and had to be assembled. (Courtesy of 
Alexandria Extrusion Company.) (b) Improved one-piece design can be machined as a 
solid piece. (Courtesy of the Minister Machine Company.) 
      
(a) 
(b)
 Figure 3.2   Part redesign to eliminate three steps 
 (a) A four-step process was used to bend this piece into the desired shape. This is 
inefficient and stresses the metal at the bends. (Courtesy of Alexandria Extrusion 
Company.) (b) This piece was extruded in one step and will later be cut to appropriate 
lengths. (Courtesy of Alexandria Extrusion Company.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
81
given needs. Although tolerances and specifications are always considered when 
reviewing the design, this is usually not sufficient; they should be considered 
independently of the other approaches to operation analysis. 
 Designers may have a tendency to incorporate specifications that are more 
rigid than necessary when developing a product. This can be due to a lack of 
knowledge about cost and the thought that it is necessary to specify closer tol-
erances and specifications than are actually needed to have the manufacturing 
departments produce to the actual required tolerance range. 
 Methods analysts should be well versed in the details of cost and should 
be fully aware of what unnecessarily close tolerances and/or rejects can do to 
the selling price. Figure 3.4 illustrates the pronounced relationship between the 
increased cost of tighter machining tolerances. If designers are being needlessly 
tight in establishing tolerances and specifications, management should embark 
Tolerance inches
(plus or minus)
Fine machining
(± 0.001)
Standard machining
(± 0.005)
Rough machining
(± 0.030)
0.010
0.030
0.020
3
2
1
0
Approximate relative cost
 Figure 3.4   Approximate relationship between cost and machining tolerance 

82 
C H A P T E R  3
on a training program clearly presenting the economies of specifications. Devel-
oping quality products in a manner that actually reduces costs is a major tenet 
of the approach to quality instituted by Taguchi (1986). This approach involves 
combining engineering and statistical methods to achieve improvements in cost 
and quality by optimizing product design and manufacturing methods. This step 
corresponds to reducing the muda of inappropriate processing. 
 One manufacturer’s drawings called for a 0.0005-in (8.013-mm) tolerance 
on a shoulder ring for a DC motor shaft. The original specifications called for 
a 1.8105- to 1.8110-in (45.987- to 46.00-mm) tolerance on the inside diame-
ter. This close tolerance was deemed necessary because the shoulder ring was 
shrunk onto the motor shaft. Investigation revealed that a 0.003-in (0.076-mm) 
tolerance was adequate for the shrink fit. The drawing was immediately changed 
to specify a 1.809- to 1.812-in (45.949- to 46.025-mm) inside diameter. This 
change meant that a reaming operation was eliminated because someone ques-
tioned the absolute necessity of a close tolerance. 
 Analysts should also take into consideration the ideal inspection procedure. 
Inspection is a verification of quantity, quality, dimensions, and performance. 
Such inspections can usually be performed by a variety of techniques: spot in-
spection, lot-by-lot inspection, or 100 percent inspection. Spot inspection is a pe-
riodic check to ensure that established standards are being realized. For example, 
a nonprecision blanking and piercing operation set up on a punch press should 
have a spot inspection to ensure the maintenance of size and the absence of 
burrs. As the die begins to wear or as deficiencies in the material being worked 
begin to show up, the spot inspection would catch the trouble in time to make the 
necessary changes, without generating an appreciable number of rejects. 
 Lot-by-lot inspection is a sampling procedure in which a sample is examined 
to determine the quality of the production run or lot. The size of the sample de-
pends on the allowable percentage of defective unity and the size of the produc-
tion lot being checked. A 100 percent inspection involves inspecting every unit 
of production and rejecting the defective units. However, experience has shown 
that this type of inspection does not ensure a perfect product. The monotony of 
screening tends to create fatigue, thus lowering operator attention. The inspector 
may pass some defective parts, or reject good parts. Because a perfect product 
is not ensured under 100 percent inspection, acceptable quality may be realized 
by the considerably more economical methods of lot-by-lot or spot inspection. 
 For example, in one shop, a certain automatic polishing operation had a 
normal rejection quantity of 1 percent. Subjecting each lot of polished goods to 
100 percent inspection would have been quite expensive. Management therefore 
decided, at an appreciable saving, to consider 1 percent the allowable percentage 
defective, even though this quantity of defective material would go through to plat-
ing and finishing, only to be thrown out in the final inspection before shipment. 
 By investigating tolerances and specifications and taking action when desir-
able, the company can reduce the costs of inspection, minimize scrap, diminish 
repair costs, and keep quality high. Also the company is addressing the muda of 
defective products.  

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
83
 3.4  MATERIAL 
  One of the first questions an engineer considers when designing a new product 
is, What material shall be used? Choosing the correct material may be difficult 
because of the great variety available, so it is often more practical to incorporate 
a better and more economical material into an existing design. 
 Methods analysts should consider the following possibilities for the direct 
and indirect materials utilized in a process: 
 1.  Finding a less expensive and lighter material. 
 2.  Finding materials that are easier to process. 
 3.  Using materials more economically. 
 4.  Using salvage materials. 
 5.  Using supplies and tools more economically. 
 6.  Standardizing materials. 
 7.  Finding the best vendor from the standpoint of price and vendor stocking. 
 FINDING A LESS EXPENSIVE 
AND LIGHTER MATERIAL 
 Industry is continually developing new processes for producing and refining ma-
terials. Monthly publications summarize the approximate cost per pound of steel 
sheets, bars, and plates, and the cost of cast iron, cast steel, cast aluminum, cast 
bronze, thermoplastic and thermosetting resins, and other basic materials. These 
costs can be used as anchor points from which to judge the application of new 
materials. A material that was not competitive in price yesterday may be very 
competitive today. 
 One company used Micarta spacer bars between the windings of transformer 
coils. Separating the windings permitted the circulation of air between the wind-
ings. An investigation revealed that glass tubing could be substituted for the 
Micarta bars at a considerable savings. The glass tubing was less expensive, and 
it met service requirements better because the glass could withstand higher tem-
peratures. Furthermore, the hollow tubing permitted greater air circulation than 
did the solid Micarta bars. 
 Another company also used a less expensive material that still met service 
requirements in the production of distribution transformers. Originally, a porce-
lain plate separated and held the wire leads coming out of the transformers. The 
company found that a fullerboard plate stood up just as well in service, yet was 
considerably less expensive. Today, one of the many types of plastic available 
would provide an even cheaper solution. 
 Another concern for manufacturers, especially today with high transportation 
costs due to continual increases in crude oil prices, is the weight of the product 
itself. Finding a lighter material or decreasing the amount of raw material used is 
of prime concern. A good example is shown by the changing nature of beverage 
cans (see Figure 3.5). All steel cans in the early 1970s weighed 1.94 oz (55 gr) 

84 
C H A P T E R  3
(see Figure 3.5a). By replacing the top and bottom with aluminum discs, approx-
imately 0.25 oz (7 gr) in weight savings could be achieved (see Figure 3.5b). 
Going to an all-aluminum can decreased the total weight to 0.6 oz (17 gr) for 
considerable weight savings (see Figure 3.5c). However, the walls of the can be-
came so thin that the walls easily crumpled. This was solved by creating ribbing 
in the walls (see Figure 3.5d). 
 Methods analysts should remember that items such as valves, relays, air cyl-
inders, transformers, pipe fittings, bearings, couplings, chains, hinges, hardware, 
and motors can usually be purchased at less cost than they can be manufactured.  
 FINDING A MATERIAL THAT IS EASIER 
TO PROCESS 
 Some materials are usually more readily processed than others. Referring to 
handbook data on the physical properties usually helps analysts discern which 
material will react most favorably to the processes to which it must be sub-
jected in its conversion from raw material to finished product. For example, 
 Figure 3.5   Decreasing weight of beverage cans 
 (a) All-steel can from 1970 weighing 1.94 oz (55 gr) (b) Steel can with aluminum 
top and bottom from 1975 weighing 1.69 oz (48 gr) (c) All-aluminum can from 1980 
weighing 0.6 oz (17 gr) (d) All-aluminum ribbed can from 1992 weighing 0.56 oz 
(16 gr) (Courtesy R. Voigt, Penn State) .

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
85
machinability varies inversely with hardness, and hardness usually varies di-
rectly with strength. 
 Today the most versatile material is reinforced composites. Resin transfer 
molding can produce more complex parts advantageously from the standpoint of 
quality and production rate than most other metal and plastic forming procedures. 
Thus, by specifying a plastic made of reinforcing carbon fibers and epoxy, the 
analyst can substitute a composite for a metal part, at both a quality and a cost ad-
vantage. This step is also addressing the muda of inappropriate processing.  
 USING MATERIAL MORE ECONOMICALLY 
 The possibility of using material more economically is a fertile field for analysis. 
If the ratio of scrap material to that actually going into the product is high, then 
greater utilization should be examined. For example, if the material put into a 
plastic compression mold is preweighed, it may be possible to use only the exact 
amount required to fill the cavity; excessive flash can also be eliminated. 
 In another example, the production of stampings from sheet metal should 
utilize multiple dies carefully arranged to assure maximum use of material. 
Given consistent raw material and standard-sized dies, this typically is done 
through the use of CAD-assisted layout, yielding efficiencies exceeding 95 per-
cent (i.e., less than 5 percent scrap). Similar approaches are utilized in the gar-
ment industry in the layout of patterns on cloth and the glass industry for the 
cutting of different-sized windows. However, if the material is not consistent, 
then problems arise and the layout may still have to be performed by a human 
operator. The production of leather seats for automobiles requires layout of 
cutting dies on a tanned hide before entering a rolling press, which applies pres-
sure on the dies to cut the leather in appropriate patterns. The operator needs to 
be highly skilled in handling variably sized cow hides full of imperfections from 
brands and barbed wire, especially to maximize the usage of quite expensive 
leather (see Figure 3.6). 
 Many world-class manufacturers are finding it not only desirable, but abso-
lutely necessary, to take weight out of existing designs. For example, Ford engi-
neers are looking for a 40 percent weight reduction to achieve an 80 mi/gal fuel 
efficiency for the Taurus. This will require the cladding of stainless steel to high-
strength aluminum to replace chrome-plated steel bumpers, as well as a much 
greater use of plastics and structural composites to replace ferrous components. 
Similar weight reduction is taking place on many other well-known products, 
such as washing machines, video cameras, VCRs, suitcases, and TV sets. 
 Today, powder coating is a proven technology that is replacing many other 
methods of metal finishing. Coating powders are finely divided particles of or-
ganic polymers (acrylic, epoxy, polyester, or blends) that usually contain pig-
ments, fillers, and additives. Powder coating is the application of a suitable 
formulation to a substrate, which are then fused into a continuous film by the 
application of heat, forming a protective and decorative finish. In view of current 
environmental regulations affecting traditional metal finishing operations, such 

86 
C H A P T E R  3
as electroplating and wet painting, powder coating offers a safer and cleaner 
environment. The methodology can also provide a durable, attractive, cost-
effective finish for metal surfaces used in many commercial products, such as 
wire shelving, control boxes, trailer hitches, water meters, handrails, boat racks, 
office partitions, and snow shovels.   
 USING SALVAGE MATERIALS 
 Materials can often be salvaged, rather than sold as scrap. By-products from 
an unworked portion or scrap section can sometimes offer real possibilities for 
savings. For example, one manufacturer of stainless steel cooling cabinets had 
4- to 8-in-wide sections left as cuttings on the shear. An analysis identified elec-
tric light switchplate covers as a possible by-product. Another manufacturer, 
after salvaging the steel insert from defective bonded rubber ringer rolls, was 
able to utilize the hollow, cylindrical rubber rolls as bumpers for protecting 
moored motorboats and sailboats. 
 If it is not possible to develop a by-product, then scrap materials should 
be separated to obtain top scrap prices. Separate bins should be provided for 
tool steel, steel, brass, copper, and aluminum. Chip-haulers and floor sweepers 
should specifically be instructed to keep the scrap segregated. For electric light-
bulbs, for example, the brass socket would be stored in one area, and after the 
glass bulb is broken and disposed of, the tungsten filament is removed and stored 
separately for greatest residual value. Many companies save wooden boxes from 
 
 Figure 3.6   Layout of cutting dies on a tanned hide before entering a rolling press 
(note the careful layout of the dies to maximize the use of the expensive leather) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
87
incoming shipments, and then saw the boards to standard lengths for use in mak-
ing smaller boxes for outgoing shipments. This practice is usually economical, 
and it is now being followed by many large industries, as well as by service 
maintenance centers. 
 There are also a few interesting examples from the food industry. A manu-
facturer of tofu processes the beans, centrifuges out the edible protein material, 
and leaves behind tons of waste fiber. Rather than paying to haul it away to a 
landfill, the manufacturer gives it away to local farmers for hog feed, as long as 
they come and pick it up. Similarly, meatpackers utilize everything from a cow: 
hides, bones, even blood, all except the “moo.” 
 USING SUPPLIES AND TOOLS FULLY 
 Management should encourage full use of all shop supplies. One manufacturer 
of dairy equipment introduced the policy that no new welding rod was to be 
distributed to workers without the return of old tips under 2 in long. The cost 
of welding rods was reduced immediately by more than 15 percent. Brazing or 
welding is usually the most economical way to repair expensive cutting tools, 
such as broaches, special form tools, and milling cutters. If it has been company 
practice to discard broken tools of this nature, the analyst should investigate the 
potential savings of a tool salvage program. 
 Analysts can also find a use for the unworn portions of grinding wheels, 
emery disks, and so forth. Also, items such as gloves and rags should not be dis-
carded simply because they are soiled. Storing dirty items and then laundering them 
is less expensive than replacing them. Methods analysts can make a real contribution 
to a company by simply minimizing waste, one of the mudas in the TPS system.  
 STANDARDIZING MATERIALS 
 Methods analysts should always be alert to the possibility of standardizing ma-
terials. They must minimize the sizes, shapes, grades, and so on of each material 
utilized in the production and assembly processes. The typical economies result-
ing from reductions in the sizes and grades of the materials employed include: 
 ■ 
 Purchase orders are used for larger amounts, which are almost always less 
expensive per unit. 
 ■ 
 Inventories are smaller, since less material must be maintained as a reserve. 
 ■ 
 Fewer entries must be made in storage records. 
 ■ 
 Fewer invoices must be paid. 
 ■ 
 Fewer spaces are needed to house materials in the storeroom. 
 ■ 
 Sampling inspection reduces the total number of parts inspected. 
 ■ 
 Fewer price quotations and purchase orders are needed. 
 The standardization of materials, like other methods improvement techniques, 
is a continuing process. It requires the continual cooperation of the design, 
production planning, and purchasing departments and fits in nicely with the 
5S system. 

88 
C H A P T E R  3
 FINDING THE BEST VENDOR 
 For the vast majority of materials, supplies, and parts, numerous suppliers will 
quote different prices, quality levels, delivery times, and willingness to hold in-
ventories. It is usually the responsibility of the purchasing department to locate 
the most favorable supplier. However, the best supplier last year may not be the 
best one now. The methods analyst should encourage the purchasing department 
to rebid the highest-cost materials, supplies, and parts to obtain better prices 
and superior quality and to increase vendor stocking, where the vendors agree 
to hold inventories for their customers. It is not unusual for methods analysts to 
achieve a 10 percent reduction in the cost of materials and a 15 percent reduc-
tion in inventories by regularly pursuing this approach through their purchasing 
departments. 
 Perhaps the most important reason for continued Japanese success in the 
manufacturing sector is the  keiretsu . This is a form of business and manu-
facturing organization that links businesses together. It can be thought of as 
a web of interlocking relationships among manufacturers—often between a 
large manufacturer and its principal suppliers. Thus, in Japan such compa-
nies as Hitachi and Toyota and other international competitors are able to ac-
quire parts for their products from regular suppliers who produce to the quality 
called for and are continually looking for improvement so as to provide better 
prices for the firms in their network. Alert purchasing departments are often 
able to create relationships with suppliers comparable to the so-called produc-
tion keiretsu.  
 3.5  MANUFACTURE SEQUENCE 
AND PROCESS 
  As manufacturing technology in the twenty-first century eliminates labor-
intensive manufacturing in favor of capital-intensive procedures, the methods 
engineer will focus on multiaxis and multifunctioning machining and assembly. 
Modern equipment is capable of cutting at higher speeds on more accurate, rigid, 
and flexible machines that utilize both advanced controls and tool materials. Pro-
gramming functions permit in-process and postprocess gaging for tool sensing 
and compensation, resulting in dependable quality control. 
 The methods engineer must understand that the time utilized by the man-
ufacturing process is divided into three steps: inventory control and planning, 
setup operations, and in-process manufacturing. Furthermore, it is not unusual to 
find that these procedures, in aggregate, are only about 30 percent efficient from 
the standpoint of process improvement. 
 To improve the manufacturing process, the analyst should consider (1) rear-
ranging the operations; (2) mechanizing manual operations; (3) utilizing more 
efficient facilities on mechanical operations; (4) operating mechanical facilities 
more efficiently; (5) manufacturing near the net shape; and (6) using robots—all 
of which address the muda of inappropriate processing. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
89
 REARRANGING OPERATIONS 
 Rearranging operations often results in savings. As an example, the flange of 
a motor conduit box required four drilled holes, one in each corner. Also, the 
base had to be smooth and flat. Originally, the operator began by grinding the 
base, then drilling the four holes using a drill jig. The drilling operation threw 
up burrs, which then had to be removed in another step. By rearranging the 
operation so that the holes were drilled first and the base then ground, analysts 
eliminated the deburring operation. The base-grinding operation automatically 
removed the burrs. 
 Combining operations usually reduces costs. For example, a manufacturer 
fabricated the fan motor support and the outlet box of its electric fans. After paint-
ing the parts separately, operators then riveted them together. By having the outlet 
box riveted to the fan motor support prior to painting, analysts effected an appre-
ciable time savings for the painting operation. Similarly, using a more complex 
machine that combines several operations can reduce the time to produce the fin-
ished piece and increase productivity (see Figure 3.7). Although the machine may 
be more expensive, considerable savings are incurred by reduced labor costs. 
 In another example, the market for aluminum cylinder head castings is 
growing, and foundries are finding it cost-effective to go from the steel-mold 
casting process to the lost foam process. Lost foam is an investment casting 
   
(a) 
(b)
 
(c)
 Figure 3.7   Combining operations to 
eliminate steps. Stock material shown in 
(b) is cut to size and threaded in one step 
on the Citizen CNC lathe shown in (a) to 
yield the finished piece shown in (c).
(a) Citizen CNC lathe. (Courtesy of 
Jergens, Inc.) (b) Stock material. (Courtesy 
of Jergens, Inc.) (c) Finished piece. 
(Courtesy of Jergens, Inc.) 

90 
C H A P T E R  3
procedure that uses an expendable pattern of polystyrene foam surrounded by 
a thin ceramic shell. Steel-mold castings require considerable subsequent ma-
chining. In comparison, the lost foam process reduces the amount of machining 
and also eliminates the sand disposal costs usually associated with investment 
casting. 
 Before changing any operation, however, the analyst must consider possible 
detrimental effects on subsequent operations down the line. Reducing the cost 
of one operation could result in higher costs for other operations. For example, 
a change recommended in the manufacture of AC field coils resulted in higher 
costs and was therefore not practical. The field coils were made of heavy cop-
per bands, which were formed and then insulated with mica tape. The mica tape 
was hand-wrapped on the already coiled parts. The company decided to ma-
chine wrap the copper bands prior to coiling. This did not prove practical, as the 
forming of the coils cracked the mica tape, necessitating time-consuming repairs 
prior to product acceptance. 
 MECHANIZING MANUAL OPERATIONS 
 Today, any practicing methods analyst should consider using special-
purpose and automatic equipment and tooling, especially if production quantities 
are large. Notable among industry’s latest offerings are program-controlled, 
numerically-controlled (NC), and computer-controlled (CNC) machining and 
other equipment. These afford substantial savings in labor cost as well as the 
following advantages: reduced work-in-process inventory, less parts damage due 
to handling, less scrap, reduced floor space, and reduced production throughput 
time. For example (see Figure 3.8), whereas two operators are required for a 
manually operated machine tool, only one operator is required for a computer-
controlled machine tool. Use of a robotic arm operating a fully automated ma-
chine tool would not even require the one operator, considerably reducing labor 
costs (albeit with higher initial capital costs). 
 Other automatic equipment includes automatic screw machines; multiple-
spindle drilling, boring, and tapping machines; index-table machine tools; 
automatic casting equipment combining automatic sand-mold making, pouring, 
shakeout, and grinding; and automatic painting and plating finishing equipment. 
The use of power assembly tools, such as power nut- and screwdrivers, electric 
or air hammers, and mechanical feeders, is often more economical than the use 
of hand tools. 
 To illustrate, a company that produces specialty windows was using man-
ual methods to press rails over both ends of plate window glass that had been 
covered with a synthetic rubber wrap. The plates of glass were held in position 
by two pads that were pneumatically squeezed together. The operator would 
pick up a rail and position it over the end of the window glass and then pick 
up a mallet and hammer the rail into position over the glass. The operation 
was slow and it resulted in considerable operator work-related musculoskeletal 
disorders.  

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
91
 Furthermore, scrap was high because of glass breakage due to pounding the rails 
over the glass. A new facility was designed that pneumatically squeezed rails onto 
the window glass over the synthetic rubber wrap. Operators enthusiastically accepted 
the new facility because the work was much easier to perform; health problems dis-
appeared, productivity increased, and glass breakage dropped to near zero. 
 The application of mechanization applies not only to process operations, but 
also to paperwork. For example, bar coding applications can be invaluable to 
the operations analyst. Bar coding can rapidly and accurately enter a variety of 
data. Computers can then manipulate the data for some desired objective, such 
as counting and controlling inventory, routing specific items to or through a pro-
cess, or identifying the state of completion and the operator currently working on 
each item in a work-in-process. 
                             
(a) 
(b)
                       
(c) 
(d)
 Figure 3.8   Mechanizing manual operations can reduce labor costs 
 (a) Two operators are required for a manually operated machine tool. (b) A computer-
controlled machine tool requires only one operator. (c) A state-of-the-art computer-
controlled machine tool still requires one operator but performs more operations. (d) A 
robotic arm operating a fully automated machine tool requires no operators. [(a) © Yogi, 
Inc./CORBIS; (b) © Molly O’Bryon Welpott; (c) and (d) Courtesy of Okuma.] 

92 
C H A P T E R  3
 UTILIZING MORE EFFICIENT 
MECHANICAL FACILITIES 
 If an operation is done mechanically, there is always the possibility of a more 
efficient means of mechanization. At one company, for example, turbine blade 
roots were machined by using three separate milling operations. Both the cycle 
time and the costs were high. When external broaching was introduced, all three 
surfaces could be finished at once, for considerable time and cost savings. An-
other company overlooked the possibility of utilizing a press operation. This 
process is one of the fastest for forming and sizing processes. A stamped bracket 
had four holes that were drilled after the bracket was formed. By using a die 
designed to pierce the holes, the work could be performed in a fraction of the 
drilling time. 
 Work mechanization applies to more than just manual work. For exam-
ple, one company in the food industry was checking the weight of various 
product lines with a balance. This equipment required the operator to note the 
weight visually, record the weight on a form, and subsequently perform sev-
eral calculations. A methods engineering study resulted in the introduction of 
a statistical weight control system. Under the improved method, the operator 
weighs the product on a digital scale programmed to accept the product within 
a certain weight range. As the product is weighed, the weight information is 
transferred to a personal computer that compiles the information and prints the 
desired report.  
 OPERATING MECHANICAL FACILITIES 
MORE EFFICIENTLY 
 A good slogan for methods analysts is, “Design for two at a time.” Usually 
multiple-die operation in presswork is more economical than single-stage opera-
tion. Again, multiple cavities in die casting, molding, and similar processes are 
viable options when there is sufficient volume. On machine operations, analysts 
should be sure that proper feeds and speeds are used. They should investigate 
the grinding of cutting tools for maximum performance. They should check to 
see whether the cutting tools are properly mounted, whether the right lubricant is 
being used, and whether the machine tool is in good condition and is adequately 
maintained. Many machine tools are operated at a fraction of their possible out-
put. Endeavoring to operate mechanical facilities more efficiently nearly always 
pays dividends. 
 MANUFACTURING NEAR THE NET SHAPE 
 Using a manufacturing process that produces components closer to the final 
shape can maximize material use, reduce scrap, minimize secondary process-
ing such as final machining and finishing, and permit manufacturing with more 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
93
environmentally friendly materials. For example, forming parts with powder 
metals (PM) instead of conventional casting or forging often provides the manu-
facture of near-net shapes for many components, resulting in dramatic economic 
savings as well as functional advantages. In the case of forged PM connecting 
rods, it has been reported that they have reduced the reciprocating mass of com-
peting alternatives, resulting in less noise and vibration as well as major cost 
economies. 
 CONSIDERING THE USE OF ROBOTS 
 For cost and productivity reasons, it is advantageous today to consider the use 
of robots in many manufacturing areas (see Figure 3.9). For example, assembly 
areas include work that typically has a high direct labor cost, in some cases ac-
counting for as much as one-half of the manufacturing cost of a product. The 
principal advantage of integrating a modern robot in the assembly process is its 
inherent flexibility. It can assemble multiple products on a single system and 
can be reprogrammed to handle various tasks with part variations. In addition, 
robotic assembly can provide consistently repeatable quality with predictable 
product output. 
 A robot’s typical life is approximately 10 years. If it is well maintained and 
if it is used for moving small payloads, the life can be extended to up to 15 years. 
Consequently, a robot’s depreciation cost can be relatively low. Also, if a given 
robot’s size and configuration are appropriate, it can be used in a variety of op-
erations. For example, a robot could be used to load a die-casting facility, load 
a quenching tank, load and unload a board drop-hammer forging operation, load 
a plate glass washing operation, and so on. In theory, a robot of the correct size 
and configuration can be programmed to do any job. 
 In addition to productivity advantages, robots also offer safety advantages. 
They can be used in work centers where there is danger to the worker because 
of the nature of the process. For example, in the die-casting process, there can 
be considerable danger due to hot metal splashing when the molten metal is 
injected into the die cavity. One of the original applications for robots was 
die casting. In one company, a five-axis robot developed by Unimation, Inc., 
serves a 600-ton microprocessor-controlled die-casting machine. In the opera-
tion, the robot moves into position when the die opens, grasps the casting by 
its slug, and clears it from the cavity. At the same time, it initiates automatic 
die-lubrication sprays. The robot displays the casting to infrared scanners, then 
signals the die-casting machine to accept another shot. The casting is deposited 
by the robot on an output station for trimming. Here an operator, remote from 
the die-casting machine, safely trims the casting preparatory to subsequent 
operations. 
 Automobile manufacturers have placed particular emphasis on the use of 
robots in welding. For example, at Nissan Motors, 95 percent of the welds on ve-
hicles are made by robots; and Mitsubishi Motors reported that about 70 percent 

94 
C H A P T E R  3
Flow line
(a) Welding
(b) Die casting and press feeding
(c) Machining center
(d) Assembly
Elevator
Silo
Input conveyor
Transfer
conveyor
Supervisory
control
Washer
Output
conveyor
Deburring
station
Robot
Drilling
machine
Milling
and drilling
machine
Storage
pallet
Inspection
station
Flow
casting
input
 Figure 3.9   Illustration of a few common industrial robot applications 
 (a) One welding robot is shown, but typically a number of robots would be used along 
an automotive assembly line. (b) In a die-casting application, a robot unloads die-
casting machines, performs quench operations, and loads material into a press. (c) The 
production machining line is used for producing cam housings. (d) The assembly line 
uses a combination of robots, parts feeders, and human operators. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
95
of its welding is performed by robots. In these companies, robot downtime aver-
ages less than 1 percent.  
 3.6  SETUP AND TOOLS 
  One of the most important elements of all forms of work holders, tools, and 
setups is economics. The amount of tooling up that proves most advantageous 
depends on (1) the production quantity, (2) repeat business, (3) labor, (4) deliv-
ery requirements, and (5) required capital. 
 The most prevalent mistake of planners and toolmakers is to tie up money 
in fixtures that may show a large savings when in use, but are seldom used. For 
example, a savings of 10 percent in direct labor cost on a job in constant use 
would probably justify greater expense in tools than an 80 or 90 percent savings 
on a small job that appears on the production schedule only a few times a year. 
(This is an example of Pareto analysis, from Chapter 2.) The economic advan-
tage of lower labor costs is the controlling factor in determining the tooling; 
consequently, jigs and fixtures may be desirable, even when only small quan-
tities are involved. Other considerations, such as improved interchangeability, 
increased accuracy, or labor trouble reduction, may provide the dominant rea-
sons for elaborate tooling, although this is usually not the case. An example of 
the trade-off between fixturing and tooling costs is discussed in Chapter 9 in the 
section on break-even charts. 
 Once the needed amount of tooling has been determined (or if tooling al-
ready exists, once the ideal amount needed has been determined), specific 
considerations for producing the most favorable designs should be evaluated. 
These are outlined in the Setup and Tooling Evaluation Checklist shown in 
Figure 3.10. 
 Setup ties in very closely with tooling, because tooling invariably deter-
mines the setup and teardown time. When we speak of setup time, we usually 
include such items as arriving on the job; procuring instructions, drawings, tools, 
and material; preparing workstations so that production can begin in the pre-
scribed manner (setting up tools; adjusting stops; setting feeds, speeds, and cut 
depth; and so on); tearing down the setup; and returning tools to the crib. 
 Setup operations are especially important in the job shop where production 
runs tend to be small. Even if this type of shop has modern facilities and puts 
forth a high effort, it may still have difficulty meeting the competition if setups 
are too long because of poor planning and inefficient tooling. When the ratio of 
setup time to production runtime is high, a methods analyst can usually develop 
several possibilities for setup and tool improvement. One notable option is a 
group technology system. 
 The essence of group technology is the classification of the various com-
ponents of a company’s products, so that parts similar in shape and processing 
sequence are identified numerically. Parts belonging to the same family group, 
such as rings, sleeves, discs, and collars, are scheduled for production over the 
same time interval on a general-purpose line arranged in the optimal operational 

96 
C H A P T E R  3
 Figure 3.10   Setup and tooling evaluation checklist 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
97
sequence. Because both the size and shape of the parts in a given family vary 
considerably, the line is usually equipped with universal-type, quick-acting jigs 
and fixtures. This approach also fits in with eliminating the muda of excess in-
ventory and the 5S pillar of standardization.  
 As an example, Figure 3.11 illustrates a system grouping subdivided into 
nine classes of parts. Note the similarity of parts within each vertical column. If 
we were machining a shaft with external threads and a partial bore at one end, 
the part would be identified as Class 206. 
 REDUCE SETUP TIME 
 Just-in-time (JIT)  techniques, which have become popular in recent years, em-
phasize decreasing the setup times to the minimum by simplifying or eliminating 
them. The SMED (single minute exchange of die) System of the Toyota Produc-
tion System (Shingo, 1981) is a good example of this approach. A significant 
portion of setup time can often be eliminated by ensuring that raw materials 
are within specifications, tools are sharp, and fixtures are available and in good 
condition. Producing in smaller lots can often prove cost-effective. Smaller lot 
sizes can lead to smaller inventories, with reduced carrying costs and shelf-life 
problems, such as contamination, corrosion, deterioration, obsolescence, and 
theft. The analyst must understand that decreasing the lot size will result in an 
increase in total setup costs for the same total production quantity over a given 
period. Several points should be considered in reducing setup time: 
 1.  Work that can be done while the equipment is running should be done 
at that time. For example, presetting tools for numerical-control (NC) 
equipment can be done while the machine is running. 
 2.  Use the most efficient clamping. Usually, quick-acting clamps that employ 
cam action, levers, wedges, and so on are much faster, provide adequate 
force, and are usually a good alternative to threaded fasteners. When 
0 Without subforms
1 Set-off or shoulder
 
on one side
2 Set-offs or shoulder
 
on two sides
3 With flanges,
 
protuberances
4 With open or closed
 
forking or slotting
5 With hole
6 With hole and threads
7 With slots or knurling
8 With supplementary
 
extensions
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
 Figure 3.11   Subdivision of a system grouping for group technology 

98 
C H A P T E R  3
threaded fasteners must be used (for clamping force), C washers or slotted 
holes can be used so that nuts and bolts do not have to be removed from the 
machine and can be reused, reducing the setup time on the next job. 
 3.  Eliminate machine base adjustment. Redesigning part fixtures and using 
preset tooling may eliminate the need for spacers or guide-block adjust-
ments to the table position. 
 4.  Use templates or block gages to make quick adjustments to machine 
stops.  
 The time spent in requisitioning tools and materials, preparing the worksta-
tion for actual production, cleaning up the workstation, and returning the tools 
to the tool crib is usually included in setup time. This time is often difficult to 
control, and the work usually is performed least efficiently. Effective production 
control can often reduce this time. Making the dispatch section responsible for 
seeing that the tools, gages, instructions, and materials are provided at the cor-
rect time, and that the tools are returned to their respective cribs after the job has 
been completed, eliminates the need for the operator to leave the work area. The 
operator then only has to perform the actual setting up and tearing down of the 
machine. The clerical and routine function of providing drawings, instructions, 
and tools can be performed by those more familiar with this type of work. Thus, 
large numbers of requisitions for these requirements can be performed simulta-
neously, and setup time can be minimized. Here again, group technology can be 
advantageous. 
 Duplicate cutting tools should be available, rather than having the operators 
sharpen their tools. When the operators get new tools, the dull ones are turned in 
to the tool crib attendant and replaced with sharp ones. Tool sharpening becomes 
a separate function, and the tools can be standardized more readily. 
 To minimize downtime, each operator should have a constant backlog of 
work. The operators should always know what the next work assignment is. A 
technique frequently used to keep the workload apparent to the operator, super-
visor, and superintendent is a board over each production facility, with three 
wire clips or pockets to receive work orders. The first clip contains all work 
orders scheduled ahead; the second clip holds the orders currently being worked 
on; and the last clip holds the completed orders. When issuing work orders, the 
dispatcher places them in the work-ahead station. At the same time, the dis-
patcher picks up all completed job tickets from the work-completed station and 
delivers them to the scheduling department for recording. This system ensures 
the operators of continuous loads and makes it unnecessary for them to go to the 
supervisor for their next work assignments. 
 Making a record of difficult, recurring setups can save considerable setup 
time when repeat business is received. Perhaps the simplest and yet most effec-
tive way to compile a record of a setup is to take a photograph of the setup once 
it is complete. The photograph should either be stapled to and filed with the pro-
duction operation card, or placed in a plastic envelope and attached to the tooling 
prior to storage in the tool crib. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
99
 UTILIZE THE FULL CAPACITY OF THE MACHINE 
 A careful review of many jobs often reveals possibilities for utilizing a greater 
share of the machine’s capacity. For example, a milling setup for a toggle lever 
was changed so that the six faces were milled simultaneously by five cutters. 
The old setup required that the job be done in three steps, which meant that the 
part had to be placed in a separate fixture three different times. The new setup 
reduced the total machining time and increased the accuracy of the relationship 
between the six machined faces. 
 Analysts should also consider positioning one part while another is being 
machined. This opportunity exists on many milling machine jobs where it is pos-
sible to conventional mill on one stroke of the table and climb mill on the return 
stroke. While the operator is loading a fixture at one end of the machine table, a 
similar fixture is holding a piece being machined by power feed. As the table of 
the machine returns, the operator removes the first piece from the machine and 
reloads the fixture. While this internal work is taking place, the machine is cut-
ting the piece in the second fixture. 
 In view of the ever-increasing cost of energy, it is important to utilize the 
most economical equipment to do the job. Several years ago, the cost of energy 
was such an insignificant proportion of total cost that little attention was given 
to utilizing the full capacity of machines. There are literally thousands of op-
erations where only a fraction of machine capacity is utilized, with a resulting 
waste of electric power. In the metal trades industry today, the cost of power 
is more than 2.5 percent of total cost, with strong indications that the present 
cost of power will increase by at least 50 percent in the next decade. It is highly 
probable that careful planning to utilize a larger proportion of the capacity of a 
machine to do the work can effect a 50 percent savings in power usage in many 
of our plants. Typically, for most motors, if the percent of the rated full load is 
increased from 25 percent to 50 percent, as much as an 11 percent increase in 
efficiency could be realized. 
 INTRODUCE MORE EFFICIENT TOOLING 
 Just as new processing techniques are continually being developed, new and 
more efficient tooling should be considered. Coated cutting tools have dramati-
cally improved the critical wear-resistance/breakage-resistance combination. For 
example, TiC-coated tools have provided a 50 to 100 percent increase in speed 
over uncoated carbide where each has the same breakage resistance. Advantages 
include harder surfaces, thus reducing abrasive wear; excellent adhesion to the 
substrates; low coefficient of friction with most workpiece materials; chemical 
inertness; and resistance to elevated temperatures. 
 Carbide tools are usually more cost-effective than high-speed steel tools on 
many jobs. For example, one company realized a 60 percent savings by chang-
ing the milling operation of a magnesium casting. Originally, the base was milled 
complete in two operations, using high-speed steel milling cutters. An analysis 
resulted in the employment of three carbide-tipped fly cutters mounted in a special 

100 
C H A P T E R  3
holder to mill parts complete. Faster feeds and speeds were possible, and surface 
finish was not impaired. 
  Savings can often be achieved by altering tool geometries. Each setup has 
different requirements that can be achieved only by designing an engineered 
system that optimizes the feed range for chip control, cutting forces, and edge 
strength. For example, single-sided low-force geometries may be designed to 
provide both good chip control and force reduction. In this case, high positive 
rake angles are grouped to reduce the chip thickness ratio, providing a low cut-
ting force and cutting temperature. 
 While introducing more efficient tooling, the analyst should develop better 
methods for holding the work. The work must be held so that it can be positioned 
and removed quickly (see Figure 3.12). Although the loading of parts is still a 
manual operation, productivity, as well as equality, will be increased.  
 3.7  MATERIAL HANDLING 
  Material handling includes motion, time, place, quantity, and space constraints. 
First, material handling must ensure that parts, raw materials, in-process materi-
als, finished products, and supplies are moved periodically from location to loca-
tion. Second, as each operation requires materials and supplies at a particular time, 
 Figure 3.12   More efficient fixturing and tooling 
 (Courtesy of Jergens, Inc.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
101
material handling ensures that no production process or customer is hampered 
by either the early or late arrival of materials. Third, material handling must en-
sure that materials are delivered to the correct place. Fourth, material handling 
must ensure that materials are delivered at each location without damage and in 
the proper quantity. Finally, material handling must consider storage space, both 
temporary and dormant. 
 A study conducted by the Material Handling Institute revealed that between 
30 and 85 percent of the cost of bringing a product to market is associated with 
material handling. Axiomatically, the best handled part is the least manually 
handled part. Whether the distances of the moves are large or small, these moves 
should be scrutinized. The following five points should be considered for reduc-
ing the time spent in handling material: (1) reduce the time spent in picking up 
material; (2) use mechanized or automated equipment; (3) make better use of ex-
isting handling facilities; (4) handle material with greater care; and (5) consider 
the application of bar coding for inventory and related applications. 
 A good example of the application of these five points is the evolution of 
warehousing; the former storage center has become an automated distribution 
center. Today, the automated warehouse uses computer control for material 
movement, as well as information flow through data processing. In this type of 
automated warehouse, receiving, transporting, storing, retrieving, and control-
ling inventory are treated as an integrated function. 
 REDUCE THE TIME SPENT IN PICKING 
UP MATERIAL 
 Material handling is often thought of as only transportation, neglecting consid-
eration of positioning at the workstation, which is equally important. Because it 
is often overlooked, workstation positioning of material may offer even greater 
opportunities for savings than does transportation. Reducing the time spent in 
picking up material minimizes tiring, costly manual handling at the machine or 
the workplace. It gives the operator a chance to do the job faster with less fatigue 
and greater safety. 
 For example, consider eliminating loose piling on the floor. Perhaps the ma-
terial can be stacked directly on pallets or skids after being processed at the 
workstation. This can result in a substantial reduction of terminal transportation 
time (the time that material handling equipment stands idle while loading and 
unloading take place). Usually some type of conveyor or mechanical fingers can 
bring material to the workstation, thus reducing or eliminating the time needed 
to pick up the material. Plants can also install gravity conveyors, in conjunction 
with the automatic removal of finished parts, thus minimizing material handling 
at the workstation. Figure 3.13 shows examples of typical handling equipment. 
 Interfaces between different types of handling and storage equipment should 
be studied to develop more efficient arrangements. For example, the sketch in 
Figure 3.14 shows the order picking arrangements, depicting how materials can be 
removed from the reserve or staging storage either by a worker-aboard order picking 
vehicle (left), or manually (right). A lift truck can be used to replenish pallet racks. 

After the required items are removed from the flow rack, they are sent by con-
veyor to order accumulation and packaging operations.  
 USE MECHANIZED EQUIPMENT 
 Mechanizing the handling of material usually reduces labor costs, reduces ma-
terials damage, improves safety, alleviates fatigue, and increases production. 
However, care must be exercised in selecting the proper equipment and methods. 
Equipment standardization is important because it simplifies operator training, 
allows equipment interchangeability, and requires fewer repair parts. 
 The savings possible through the mechanization of material handling equip-
ment are typified by the following examples. In the original design of a cir-
cuit board assembly task, the operator would go to the storage crib, select the 
proper electronic components required for a specific board based on its “plug” 
Powerized 
hand lift truck
Tractor—4 wheel
Portable elevator
High lift platform
truck
Chain trolley
Portable gooseneck
crane
Bracket jib crane
Monorail electric
hoist
Casters—
swivel plate
Roller conveyor
Fork truck—
telescopic
type
Automatic grabs
Industrial crane
truck
Traveling crane
Straddle truck
Motor truck
mounted crane
 Figure 3.13   Typical handling equipment used in industry today 
 ( Source: The Material Handling Institute.) 
102 
C H A P T E R  3

Flat steel 
strapping tool
Pallets—
Four-way entry
Pallets—Box Type
Skids—Box types
Skid platform
Platform truck
Hand truck—
2 wheel
Screw conveyor
Wheel conveyor
Bridge plate
Gravity chute
Conveyor—Portable,
belt type
Platform lift
Hydraulic table
elevating
Low lift
platform truck
Low lift pallet truck
 Figure 3.13   (continued) 
Pallet
rack
Pallet
rack
Flow rack
Order
picking
vehicle
Mezzanine
deck
Take-away
conveyor
Lift
truck
 Figure 3.14   Schematic of efficient warehousing operations 
 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
103

104 
C H A P T E R  3
list, return to the workbench, and then proceed to insert the components into the 
board in accordance with the plug list. The improved method utilizes two auto-
mated, vertical storage machines, each with 10 carriers and four pullout drawers 
per carrier (see Figure 3.15). The carriers move up and around in a system that is 
a compressed version of a Ferris wheel. With 20 possible stop positions on call, 
the unit always selects the closest route—either forward or backward—to bring 
the proper drawers to the opening in the shortest possible time. From a seated 
position, the operator dials the correct stop, pulls open the drawer to expose 
the needed components, withdraws the proper one, and places it in the board. 
The improved method has reduced the required storage area by approximately 
50 percent, improved workstation layout, and substantially reduced populating 
errors by minimizing operator handling, decision making, and fatigue.  
 Often, an automated guided vehicle (AGV) can replace a driver. AGVs 
are successfully used in a variety of applications, such as mail delivery. Typi-
cally, these vehicles are not programmed; rather, they follow a magnetic 
or optical guide for a planned route. Stops are made at specific locations for 
 Figure 3.15   Work area of vertical storage machine used in the assembly of 
computer panels 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
105
a predetermined period, giving an employee adequate time for unloading and 
loading. By pressing a “hold” button and then pressing a “start” button at the 
conclusion of the loading/unloading operation, the operator can lengthen the 
dwell period at each stop. AGVs can be programmed to go to any location over 
more than one path. They are equipped with sensing and control instrumentation 
to avoid collisions with other vehicles. Also, when such guide path equipment is 
used, material handling costs vary little with distance. 
 Mechanization is also useful for manual materials handling, such as pallet-
izing. There are a variety of devices under the generic label of lift tables, which 
eliminate most of the lifting required of the operator. Some lift tables are spring-
loaded, which, when set with a proper spring stiffness, will adjust automatically to 
the optimal height for the operator as boxes are placed on a pallet on top of the lift. 
(See Chapter 4 for a discussion on the determination of optimal lifting heights.) 
Others are pneumatic (see Figure 3.16) and can be easily adjusted with a control, 
so that lifting is eliminated and material can be slid from one surface to another. 
Some tilt for easier access into bins, while others rotate, facilitating palletizing. In 
general, lift tables are probably the least expensive engineering control measure 
used in conjunction with the NIOSH 1 lifting guidelines (see Chapter 4). 
 1 NIOSH is the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health. 
 Figure 3.16   Pneumatic lift table used to minimize manual lifting 
 (Courtesy of Bishamon.) 

106 
C H A P T E R  3
 
 
 Figure 3.17   Typical forklift truck 
 Start by computing the torque rating by multiplying the distance from the center of the 
front axle to the center of the load (see Figure 3.17): 
 Load  torque rating / B 
 where B is distance  C   D , with  D   A /2. 
 If the distance  C  from the center of the front axle to the front end of the fork 
truck is 18 in and the length of pallet  A  is 60 in, then the maximum gross weight that 
a 200,000. in·lb fork truck should handle would be 

L
l


b
200,000
18
60 / 2
4,167
 By planning the pallet size to make full use of the equipment, the company can realize 
a greater return from the material handling equipment. 
 Maximum Net Load That Can Safely Be Handled by Fork Trucks 
EXAMPLE 3.1
 MAKE BETTER USE OF EXISTING 
HANDLING FACILITIES 
 To ensure the greatest return from material handling equipment, that equipment 
must be used effectively. Thus, both the methods and the equipment should be 
sufficiently flexible that a variety of material handling tasks can be accomplished 
under variable conditions. Palletizing material in temporary and permanent 
storage allows greater quantities to be transported faster than storing material 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
107
without the use of pallets, saving up to 65 percent in labor costs. Sometimes, 
material can be handled in larger or more convenient units by designing special 
racks. When this is done, the compartments, hooks, pins, or supports for holding 
the work should be in multiples of 10 for ease of counting during processing and 
final inspection. If any material handling equipment is used only part of the time, 
consider the possibility of putting it to use a greater share of the time. By relocat-
ing production facilities or adapting material handling equipment to diversified 
areas of work, companies may achieve greater utilization. 
 HANDLE MATERIAL WITH GREATER CARE 
 Industrial surveys indicate that approximately 40 percent of plant accidents 
happen during material handling operations. Of these, 25 percent are caused 
by lifting and shifting material. By exercising greater care in handling ma-
terial, and using mechanical means wherever possible for material handling, 
employees can reduce fatigue and accidents. Safety guards at points of power 
transmission, safe operating practices, good lighting, and good housekeeping 
are essential to making material handling equipment safer. Workers should in-
stall and operate all material handling equipment in a manner compatible with 
existing safety codes. 
 Better handling also reduces product damage. If the number of rejected parts 
is at all significant in the handling of parts between workstations, then this area 
should be investigated. Usually, part damage during handling can be minimized 
if specially designed racks or trays are fabricated to hold the parts immediately 
after processing. For example, one manufacturer of aircraft engine parts in-
curred a sizable number of damaged external threads on one component that was 
stored in metal tote pans after the completion of each operation. When two-
wheeled hand trucks moved the filled tote pans to the next workstation, the 
machined forgings bumped against one another and against the sides of the metal 
pan to such an extent that they became badly damaged. Someone investigated 
the cause of the rejects and suggested making wooden racks with individual 
compartments to support the machined forgings. This prevented the parts from 
bumping against one another or the metal tote pan, thereby significantly reduc-
ing the number of damaged parts. Production runs were also more easily con-
trolled because of the faster counting of parts and rejects. 
 Similar considerations apply to service industries and the health care sector, 
not only from the standpoint of the “product,” which in many cases is a person, 
but also with respect to the material handler. For example, patient handling in 
hospitals and personal care facilities is a major factor in low back and shoulder 
injuries of nurses. Traditionally, relatively immobile patients are moved from a 
bed to a wheelchair or vice versa with the use of a walking belt (see Figure 3.18a). 
However, these maneuvers require considerable amounts of strength and gener-
ate very high levels of low back compressive forces (see Section 4.4). Assist 
devices, such as the Williamson Turn Stand, require much less strength from the 
nurse and generate much less stress on the low back (see Figure 3.18b). How-
ever, the patient must have the leg strength to maintain body weight, with some 

108 
C H A P T E R  3
   
 Figure 3.18   Patient handling using three 
different assists 
 (a) Traditional walking belt requires considerable 
strength and generates very high low-back 
compressive forces. (b) The Williamson Turn 
Stand requires much less strength and is less 
stressful for the low back. (c) A Hoyer-type lift 
requires even less strength, but is considerably 
more expensive and cumbersome in small spaces. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
109
support. Finally, a Hoyer-type lift requires even less strength, but is considerably 
more expensive and cumbersome in small areas (see Figure 3.18c).  
 CONSIDER BAR CODING FOR INVENTORY 
AND RELATED APPLICATIONS 
 The majority of technical people have some familiarity with bar coding and bar 
code scanning. Bar coding has shortened queues at grocery and department store 
checkout lines. The black bars and white spaces represent digits that uniquely 
identify both the item and the manufacturer. Once this Universal Product Code 
(UPC) is scanned by a reader at the checkout counter, the decoded data are sent 
to a computer that records timely information on labor productivity, inventory 
status, and sales. The following five reasons justify the use of bar coding for 
inventory and related applications: 
 1.  Accuracy. Typically representative performance is less than 1 error in 
3.4 million characters. This compares favorably with the 2 to 5 percent 
error that is characteristic of keyboard data entry. 
 2.  Performance. A bar code scanner enters data three to four times faster than 
typical keyboard entry. 
 3.  Acceptance. Most employees enjoy using the scanning wand. Inevitably, 
they prefer using a wand to keyboard entry. 
 4.  Low cost. Because bar codes are printed on packages and containers, the 
cost of adding this identification is extremely low. 
 5.  Portability. An operator can carry a bar code scanner into any area of the 
plant to determine such things as inventories and order status, etc. 
 Bar coding is useful for receiving, warehousing, job tracking, labor report-
ing, tool crib control, shipping, failure reporting, quality assurance, tracking, 
production control, and scheduling. For example, the typical storage bin label 
provides the following information: part description, size, packing quantity, 
department number, storage number, basic stock level, and order point. Con-
siderable time can be saved by using a scanning wand to gather these data for 
inventory reordering. 
 Some practical applications reported by Accu-Sort Systems, Inc., include 
automatically controlling conveyor systems; diverting material to the location 
where it is needed; and providing material handlers with clear, concise instruc-
tions about where to take materials, automatically verifying that the proper ma-
terial is handled. If bar coding is incorporated into programmable controllers 
and   automatic packaging equipment, online real-time verification of packing 
labels with container contents can be used to avoid costly product recalls. 
 SUMMARY: MATERIAL HANDLING 
 Analysts should always be looking for ways to eliminate inefficient mate-
rial handling without sacrificing safety. To assist the methods analyst in this 

110 
C H A P T E R  3
endeavor, the Material Handling Institute (1998) has developed 10 principles of 
material handling. 
 1.  Planning principle. All material handling should be the result of a deliber-
ate plan in which the needs, performance objectives, and functional specifi-
cations of the proposed methods are completely defined at the outset. 
 2.  Standardization principle. Material handling methods, equipment, controls, 
and software should be standardized within the limits of achieving overall 
performance objectives and without sacrificing needed flexibility, modular-
ity, and throughput. 
 3.  Work principle. Material handling work should be minimized without sac-
rificing productivity or the level of service required of the operation. 
 4.  Ergonomic principle. Human capabilities and limitations must be recog-
nized and respected in the design of material handling tasks and equipment, 
to ensure safe and effective operations. 
 5.  Unit load principle. Unit loads shall be appropriately sized and configured 
in a way that achieves the material flow and inventory objectives at each 
stage in the supply chain. 
 6.  Space utilization principle. Effective and efficient use must be made of all 
available space. 
 7.  System principle. Material movement and storage activities should be fully 
integrated to form a coordinated, operational system that spans receiving, 
inspection, storage, production, assembly, packaging, unitizing, order 
selection, shipping, transportation, and returns handling. 
 8.  Automation principle. Material handling operations should be mechanized 
and/or automated where feasible, to improve operational efficiency, in-
crease responsiveness, improve consistency and predictability, decrease 
operating costs, and eliminate repetitive or potentially unsafe manual labor. 
 9.  Environmental principle. Environmental impacts and energy consumption 
are criteria to be considered when designing or selecting alternative equip-
ment and material handling systems. 
 10.  Life-cycle-cost principle. A thorough economic analysis should account 
for the entire life cycle of all material handling equipment and resulting 
systems.  
 To reiterate, the predominant principle is that the less a material is handled, 
the better it is handled, which fits in nicely with eliminating the mudas of un-
necessary transportation and unnecessary motions.  
 3.8  PLANT LAYOUT 
  The principal objective of effective plant layout is to develop a production sys-
tem that permits the manufacture of the desired number of products with the de-
sired quality at the least cost. Physical layout is an important element of an entire 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
111
production system that embraces operation cards, inventory control, material 
handling, scheduling, routing, and dispatching. All these elements must be care-
fully integrated to fulfill the stated objective. Poor plant layouts result in major 
costs. The indirect labor expense of long moves, backtracking, delays, and work 
stoppages due to bottlenecks in the transportation muda are characteristic of a 
plant with an antiquated and costly layout. 
 LAYOUT TYPES 
 Is there one type of layout that tends to be the best? The answer is no. A given 
layout can be best in one set of conditions and yet poor in a different set of 
conditions. In general, all plant layouts represent one or a combination of two 
basic layouts:  product  or  straight-line layouts  and  process  or  functional layouts. 
In the straight-line layout, the machinery is located such that the flow from one 
operation to the next is minimized for any product class. In an organization that 
utilizes this technique, it would not be unusual to see a surface grinder located 
between a milling machine and a turret lathe, with an assembly bench and plat-
ing tanks in the immediate area. This type of layout is quite popular for certain 
mass-production manufacture, because material handling costs are lower than 
for process grouping. 
 Product layout  has some distinct disadvantages. Because a broad variety of 
occupations are represented in a relatively small area, employee dissatisfaction 
can escalate. This is especially true when different opportunities carry a signifi-
cant money rate differential. Because unlike facilities are grouped together, op-
erator training can be more cumbersome, especially if an experienced employee 
is not available in the immediate area to train a new operator. The problem of 
finding competent supervisors is also exacerbated, due to the variety of facilities 
and jobs that must be supervised. Then, too, this type of layout invariably neces-
sitates a larger initial investment because duplicate service lines are required, 
such as air, water, gas, oil, and power. Another disadvantage of product group-
ing is the fact that this arrangement tends to appear disorderly and chaotic. With 
these conditions, it is often difficult to promote good housekeeping. In general, 
however, the disadvantages of product grouping are more than offset by the ad-
vantages, if production requirements are substantial. 
 Process layout  is the grouping of similar facilities. Thus, all turret lathes 
would be grouped in one section, department, or building. Milling machines, drill 
presses, and punch presses would also be grouped in their respective sections. This 
type of arrangement gives a general appearance of neatness and orderliness, and 
tends to promote good housekeeping. Another advantage of functional layout is 
the ease with which a new operator can be trained. Surrounded by experienced 
employees operating similar machines, the new worker has a greater opportunity 
to learn from them. The problem of finding competent supervisors is lessened, 
because the job demands are not as great. Because these supervisors need only be 
familiar with one general type or class of facilities, their backgrounds do not have 
to be as extensive as those of supervisors in shops using product grouping. Also, if 

112 
C H A P T E R  3
production quantities of similar products are limited and there are frequent “job” 
or special orders, a process layout is more satisfactory. 
 The disadvantage of process grouping is the possibility that long moves and 
backtracking will be needed on jobs that require a series of operations on diver-
sified machines. For example, if the operation card of a job specifies a sequence 
of drill, turn, mill, ream, and grind, the movement of the material from one sec-
tion to the next could prove extremely costly. Another major disadvantage of 
process grouping is the large volume of paperwork required to issue orders and 
control production between sections. 
 TRAVEL CHARTS 
 Before designing a new layout or correcting an old one, analysts must accumulate 
the facts that may influence that layout.  Travel or  from-to charts can be helpful in 
diagnosing problems related to the arrangement of departments and service areas, 
as well as the location of equipment within a given sector of the plant. The travel 
chart is a matrix that presents the magnitude of material handling that takes place 
between two facilities per time period. The unit identifying the amount of handling 
may be whatever seems most appropriate to the analyst. It can be pounds, tons, 
handling frequency, and so on. Figure 3.19 illustrates a very elementary travel 
chart from which the analyst can deduce that of all the machines, No. 4 W&S turret 
lathe and No. 2 Cincinnati Horizontal mill should be next to each other because of 
the high number of items (200) passing between the two machines.  
 MUTHER’S SYSTEMATIC LAYOUT PLANNING 
 A systematic approach to plant layout developed by Muther (1973) is termed 
systematic layout planning (SLP). The goal of SLP is to locate two areas with 
high frequency and logical relationships close to one another using a straightfor-
ward six-step procedure: 
 1.  Chart relationships. In the first step, the relationships between different 
areas are established and then charted on a special form called the  relation-
ship chart (or rel chart for short; see Figure 3.20). A relationship is the 
relative degree of closeness, desired or required, among different activi-
ties, areas, departments, rooms, etc., as determined from quantitative flow 
information (volume, time, cost, routing) from a from-to chart, or more 
qualitatively from functional interactions or subjective information. For ex-
ample, although painting may be the logical step between finishing and fi-
nal inspection and packing, the toxic materials and hazardous or flammable 
conditions may require that the paint area be completely separated from the 
other areas. The relationship ratings range in value from 4 to –1, based on 
the vowels that semantically define the relationship, as shown in Table 3.3. 
 2.  Establish space requirements. In the second step, space requirements 
are established in terms of square footage. These values can be calcu-
lated based on production requirements, extrapolated from existing areas, 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
113
projected for future expansion, or fixed by legal standards, such as the 
ADA or architectural standards. In addition to square footage, the kind and 
shape of the area being laid out, or the location with respect to required 
utilities, may be very important.  
 3.  Activity relationships diagram. In the third step, a visual representation 
of the different activities is drawn. The analyst starts with the absolutely 
important relationships (As), using four short, parallel lines to join the two 
areas. The analyst then proceeds to the Es, using three parallel lines ap-
proximately double the length of the A lines. The analyst continues this 
procedure for the Is, Os, etc., progressively increasing the length of the 
lines, while attempting to avoid crossing or tangling the lines. For undesir-
able relationships, the two areas are placed as far apart as possible, and 
a squiggly line (representing a spring) is drawn between them. (Some 
No. 4 W. & S.
Turret Lathe
20
45
80
32
6
2
4
6
8
4
2
3
22
22
14
4
4
18
120
10
4
2
5
3
1
6
60
12
2
0
1
15
15
15
8
Delta 17"
Drill Press
2-Spindle
L. & G. Drill
No. 2 Cinn.
Hor. Mill
No. 3B. & S.
Verticle Mill
Niagara 100Ton
Press
No. 2 Cinn.
Centerless
No. 3 Excello
Thd. Grinder
No. 4 W. & S.
Turret Lathe
Delta 17"
Drill Press
2-Spindle
L. & G. Drill
No. 2 Cinn.
Hor. Mill
No. 3B. & S.
Verticle Mill
Niagara 100Ton
Press
No. 2 Cinn.
Centerless
No. 3 Excello
Thd. Grinder
To
From
 
 Figure 3.19   The travel chart is a useful tool in solving material handling and plant layout 
problems related to process-type layouts. The chart enumerates the number of items (per 
given time period) or the volume (e.g., tons per shift) transported between the different 
machines 

114 
C H A P T E R  3
analysts may also define an extremely undesirable relationship with a –2 
value and a double squiggly line.)  
 4.  Layout space relationships. Next, a spatial representation is created by 
scaling the areas in terms of relative size. Once the analyst is satisfied with 
the layout, the areas are compressed into a floor plan. This is typically not 
as easy as it sounds, and the analyst may want to utilize templates. In ad-
dition, modifications may be made to layout based on material handling 
Relationship Chart
Page 1 of 1
Project: Construction of new office
Plant: Dorben Consulting
Date: 6-9-97
Charted By: AF
Reference:
M. Dorben Office (DOR) 
125
Engineering Office (ENG) 
120
Secretary (SEC) 
65
Foyer (FOY) 
50
Files (FIL) 
40
Copy Area (COP) 
20
Storeroom (STO) 
80
O
O
I
U
U
E
A
X
E
U
U
O
I
O
E
I
U
O
U
U
U
Activity
Area (ft2)
Remarks:
 Figure 3.20   Relationship chart for Dorben Consulting 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
115
requirements (e.g., a shipping or receiving department would necessarily 
be located on an exterior wall), storage facilities (perhaps similar exterior 
access requirements), personnel requirements (a cafeteria or restroom lo-
cated close by), building features (crane activities in a high bay area; fork-
lift operations on the ground floor), and utilities.  
 5.  Evaluate alternative arrangements. With numerous possible layouts, it 
would not be unusual to find that several appear to be equally likely possibil-
ities. In that case, the analyst will need to evaluate the different alternatives 
to determine the best solution. First, the analyst will need to identify factors 
deemed important: for example, future expansion capability, flexibility, flow 
efficiency, material handling effectiveness, safety, supervision ease, appear-
ance or aesthetics, etc. Second, the relative importance of these factors will 
need to be established through a system of weights, such as a 0-to-10 basis. 
Next, each alternative is rated for satisfying each factor. Muther (1973) sug-
gests the same 4 to –1 scale: 4 is almost perfect; 3, especially good; 2, impor-
tant; 1, ordinary result; 0, unimportant; and –1, not acceptable. Each rating is 
then multiplied by the weight. The products for each alternative are summed, 
with the largest value indicating the best solution.  
 6.  Select layout and install. The final step is to implement the new method. 
 Table 3.3   SLP Relationship Ratings 
 Relationship 
 Closeness 
Rating 
 Value 
 Diagram Lines 
 Color 
 A bsolutely necessary 
 A 
  4 
   
 Red 
 E specially important 
 E 
  3 
   
 Yellow 
 I mportant 
 I 
  2 
   
 Green 
 O rdinary 
 O 
  1 
   
 Blue 
 U nimportant 
 U 
 0 
   
   
 N ot desirable 
 X 
 –1 
   
 Brown 
EXAMPLE 3.2
 Plant Layout of Dorben Consulting Using SLP 
 The Dorben Consulting group would like to lay out a new office area. There are seven 
activity areas: M. Dorben’s office, engineering office (occupied by two engineers), 
secretarial area, foyer and waiting area for visitors, file area, copy area, and store-
room. The activity relationships are subjectively assessed by M. Dorben to be as 
shown in the rel chart in Figure 3.20. The chart also indicates space allotments for 
each area, ranging from a low of 20 ft 2  for the copy area to 125 ft 2  for M. Dorben’s 
office. For example, the relationship between M. Dorben and the secretary is deemed 
absolutely important (A), while the relationship between the engineering area and the 
foyer is deemed not desirable (X), so that the engineers are not disrupted in their work 
by visitors. 

116 
C H A P T E R  3
 A relatively good first attempt at an activity relationship diagram yields 
Figure 3.21. Adding in the relative size of each area yields the space relationship chart 
in Figure 3.22. Compressing the areas yields the final floor plan in Figure 3.23. 
 Dorben’s office and the engineering area are practically the same size so, they 
could easily be interchanged, leaving two alternative layouts. These are evaluated 
(Figure 3.24) on the basis of personnel isolation (which is very important to M. Dorben, 
yielding a high weight of 8), supplies movement, visitor reception, and flexibility. 
The big difference in the layouts is the closeness of the engineering area to the foyer. 
Thus, alternative B (shown in Figure 3.23) at 68 points, compared to 60 points for 
alternative A, turns out to be the preferred layout. 
FOY
STO
COP
SEC
DOR
FIL
ENG
           
SEC
ENG
DOR
FIL
COP
STO
FOY
 Figure 3.21   Activity 
relationship diagram for Dorben 
Consulting 
 
  
FOY
STO
COP
SEC
N
DOR
FIL
ENG
 Figure 3.23   Floor plan for Dorben Consulting 
 Figure 3.22  Space 
relationship layout for Dorben 
Consulting 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
117
 
Evaluating Alternatives
Factor/Consideration
Totals
60
Remarks:
Alternative B, with Dorben's office facing east and engineers' office facing west, lessens disruptions
of the engineers' work due to visitors.
68
Wt.
A
B
C
Ratings and Weighted Ratings
D
E
Comments
A
B
C
D
E
Alternatives
Page 1 of 1
Plant: Dorben Consulting
Project:
 New Office Construction
Date: 6-9-97
Isolation of personnel
Movement of supplies
Visitor reception
Flexibility
8
4
4
8
Dorben
office
facing
west
Dorben
office
facing
east
1
3
4
3
8
12
16
24
3
3
4
2
24
12
16
16
Analyst: AF
 Figure 3.24   Evaluating alternatives for Dorben Consulting 
   COMPUTER-AIDED LAYOUT 
 Commercially available software can help analysts develop realistic layouts 
rapidly and inexpensively. The Computerized Relative Allocation Facilities 
(CRAFT) program is one that has been used extensively. An activity center 
could be a department or work center within a department. Any one activity cen-
ter can be identified as fixed, freezing it and allowing freedom of movement in 

118 
C H A P T E R  3
those that can be readily moved. For example, it is often desirable to freeze such 
activity centers as elevators, restrooms, and stairways. Input data include fixed 
work center numbers and locations, material handling costs, interactivity center 
flow, and a block layout representation. The governing heuristic algorithm asks, 
What change in material handling costs would result if work centers were ex-
changed? Once the answer is stored, the computer proceeds in an iterative man-
ner until it converges on a good solution. CRAFT calculates the distance matrix 
as the rectangular distances from the department centroids. 
 Another layout program is CORELAP. The input requirements for 
CORELAP are the number of departments, the departmental areas, the de-
partmental relationships, and the weights for these relationships. CORELAP 
constructs layouts by locating the departments, using rectangular areas. The ob-
jective is to provide a layout with “high-ranking” departments close together. 
 ALDEP, still another layout program, constructs plant layouts by randomly 
selecting a department and locating it in a given layout. The relationship chart 
is then scanned, and a department that has a high closeness rating is introduced 
into the layout. This process continues until the program places all departments. 
ALDEP then computes a score for the layout, and repeats the process a specific 
number of times. The program also has the ability to provide multifloor layouts. 
 All these plant layout programs were originally developed for large main-
frame computers. With the advent of personal computers, the algorithms have 
been incorporated into PC programs, as have other algorithms. One such pro-
gram, SPIRAL, attempts to optimize the adjacency relationship by summing the 
positive relationships and deducting the negative relationships for adjacent areas. 
This is essentially a quantified Muther’s approach and is described in greater 
detail in Goetschalckx (1992). For example, entering the data for the Dorben 
Consulting example yields a slightly different layout, as shown in Figure 3.25. 
 Note that there is a tendency to generate long, narrow rooms, to minimize 
the distance between room centers. This is an especially big problem with 
CRAFT, ALDEP, etc. SPIRAL at least attempts to modify this tendency by add-
ing a shape penalty. Also, there is a tendency for many of these programs (i.e., 
those that are  improvement  programs, such as CRAFT, that build upon an ini-
tial layout) to reach a local minimum and not attain the optimum layout. This 
problem can be circumvented by starting with alternate layouts. This is less a 
problem with  construction  programs, such as SPIRAL, which generate a solu-
tion from scratch. A more powerful and useful program is FactoryFLOW, which 
inputs existing AutoCAD files of floor plans and creates very detailed layouts 
suitable for architectural planning.  
 3.9  WORK DESIGN 
 Because of the recent regulatory (i.e., OSHA) and health (i.e., rising medical and 
workers’ compensation costs) concerns, work design techniques will be covered 
in detail in separate chapters. Chapter 4 addresses manual work and the princi-
ples of motion economy; Chapter 5 addresses ergonomic principles of workplace 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
119
  a)
Figure 3.25  
SPIRAL input files:
 (a) DORBEN.DAT, 
(b) DORBEN.DEP, and 
(c) resulting layout for 
the DORBEN Consulting 
example.
 [project_name] 
DORBEN 
 [number_of_departments] 
7 
 [department_file_name] 
DORBEN.DEP 
 [building_width] 
25 
 [building_depth] 
20 
 [seed] 
12345 
 [tolerance] 
0.00010 
 [time_limit] 
120 
 [number_of_iterations] 
20 
 [report_level] 
2 
 [max_shape_ratio] 
2.50 
 [shape_penalty] 
500.00 
 b) 
 DOR 
0 
0 
125 
0 
0 
GREEN 
Dorben 
 ENG 
0 
0 
120 
0 
0 
BLUE 
Engineers 
 SEC 
0 
0 
65 
0 
0 
RED 
Secretary 
 FOY 
0 
0 
50 
0 
0 
YELLOW 
Foyer 
 FIL 
0 
0 
40 
0 
0 
BROWN 
Files 
 COP 
0 
0 
20 
0 
0 
GRAY 
Copy 
 STO 
0 
0 
80 
0 
0 
BLACK 
Storeroom 
 DOR ENG 1 
 DOR SEC 
4 
 DOR FOY 
1 
 DOR FIL 
2 
 ENG SEC 
1 
 ENG FOY 
-1 
 ENG FIL 
2 
 SEC 
FOY 
2 
 SEC 
FIL 
3 
 SEC 
COP 
1 
 SEC 
STO 
1 
 FOY 
STO 
3 
 COP 
STO 
3 
 OUT OUT 0  
 c)   
FOY
STO
COP
SEC
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
3
4
DOR
FIL
ENG
 

120 
C H A P T E R  3
and tool design; Chapter 6 covers working and environmental conditions; 
Chapter 7 presents cognitive work with respect to informational input from dis-
plays, information processing, and interaction with computers; and Chapter 8 
addresses workplace and systems safety.  
 SUMMARY 
 The nine primary approaches to operation analysis represent a systematic 
approach to analyzing the facts presented on the operation and flow process 
charts. These principles are just as applicable to the planning of new work as 
to the improvement of work already in production. While decreased waste, in-
creased output, and improved quality, consistent with lean manufacturing prin-
ciples, are the primary outcomes of operation analysis, it also provides benefits 
to all workers with better working conditions and methods. 
 A systematic method for remembering and applying the nine operation anal-
yses is offered by a checklist of pertinent questions, as shown in Figure 3.26. 
In the figure, the checklist demonstrates how its use resulted in a cost reduction 
on an electric blanket control knob shaft. Redesigning the shaft so that it could 
be economically produced as a die casting rather than a screw machine part re-
duced factory cost from $68.75 per 1,000 pieces to $17.19 per 1,000 pieces. This 
check sheet is also useful as an outline in providing methods training to factory 
foremen and superintendents. Thought-provoking questions, when intelligently 
used, help factory supervisors to develop constructive ideas and assist in opera-
tions analysis. 
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  Explain how design simplification can be applied to the manufacturing process. 
 2.  How is operations analysis related to methods engineering? 
 3.  How do unnecessary operations develop in an industry? 
 4.  Compare and contrast operations analysis with the lean manufacturing approach. 
 5.  What are the seven mudas? 
 6.  What are the 5S pillars? 
 7.  What is meant by “tight” tolerances? 
 8.  Explain why it may be desirable to “tighten up” tolerances and specifications. 
 9.  What is meant by lot-by-lot inspection? 
 10.  When is an elaborate quality control procedure not justified? 
 11.  What six points should be considered when endeavoring to reduce material cost? 
 12.  How does a changing labor and equipment situation affect the cost of purchased 
components? 
 13.  Explain how rearranging operations can result in savings. 
 14.  What process is usually considered the fastest for forming and sizing operations? 
 15.  How should the analyst investigate the setup and tools to develop better methods? 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
121
 Figure 3.26   Operations analysis checklist for manufacture of blanket control knob shaft. 

122 
C H A P T E R  3
 Figure 3.26   (continued) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
123
   16.  Give some applications of bar coding for the improvement of productivity. 
 17.  What are the two general types of plant layout? Explain each in detail. 
 18.  What is the best way to test a proposed layout? 
 19.  Which questions should the analyst ask when studying work performed at a 
specific workstation? 
 20.  Explain the advantages of using a checklist. 
 21.  In connection with automated guided vehicles, why do costs vary little with 
distance? 
 22.  On what does the extent of tooling depend? 
 23.  How can planning and production control affect setup time? 
 24.  How can a material best be handled? 
 25.  How is the travel chart related to Muther’s SLP? 
 26.  Why does the travel chart have greater application in process layout than in product 
layout? 
 27.  Explain the fundamental purpose of group technology. 
 28.  Explain how the conservation of welding rods can result in 20 percent material 
savings. 
 29.  Identify several automobile components that have been converted from metal to 
plastic in recent years. 
 30.  Where would you find application for a hydraulic elevating table? 
 31.  What is the difference between a skid and a pallet? 
 PROBLEMS  
 1.  The finish tolerance on the shaft in Figure 3.4 was changed from 0.004 in to 
0.008 in. How much cost improvement resulted from this change? 
 2.  The Dorben Company is designing a cast-iron part whose strength  T is a known 
function of the carbon content  C , where. T  2C 2  3/4C  C 3  k. To maximize 
strength, what carbon content should be specified? 
 3.  To make a given part interchangeable, it was necessary to reduce the tolerance 
on the outside diameter from 0.010 to 0.005 at a resulting cost increase of 
50 percent of the turning operation. The turning operation represented 20 percent of 
the total cost. Making the part interchangeable meant that the volume of this part 
could be increased by 30 percent. The increase in volume would permit production 
at 90 percent of the former cost. Should the methods engineer proceed with the 
tolerance change? Explain. 
 4.  The Dorben Group suite consists of five rooms, with areas and relationships as 
shown in Figure 3.27. Obtain an optimal layout, using Muther’s SLP. 
 5.   Using the from-to chart on page 122 showing the number of units handled from one 
area to another per hour and the desired size of each area (in square feet), develop 
an optimal layout using Muther’s SLP. Note that you will need to devise a relation-
ship scheme for the given flows. Also, * means an undesirable relationship. 

124 
C H A P T E R  3
 6.  Using Muther’s SLP and the data shown below for a small machine shop, develop 
the best final layout to scale within the outer walls of the building shown below. 
Areas in square feet are: RM  1,000; Saw  500, Lathe  500, Drill  500, 
Mill  500, Ins  1,000. Show all the steps in Muther’s SLP and draw your final 
layout in the empty floor plan. What is the adjacency value for your layout? What 
is the maximum adjacency value possible? 
 
3
3
8
8
8
8
11
X
X
X
X
5
To
From
R.M.
R.M.
Saw
Saw
Lathe
Lathe
Drill
Drill
Mill
Mill
Ins.
Ins.
5
5
 
Activity
Area (sq. ft.)
A
B
C
D
E
160
160
240
160
80
O
I
U
U
I
U
U
I
U
U
 Figure 3.27   Information for Problem 4 
Size
150
50
90
90
40
Area
A
B
C
D
E
A
—
0
20
0
0
B
1
—
5
1
0
C
20
30
—
2
11
D
8
0
40
—
0
E
1
8
20
*
—

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
125
 
 
   
 7.  a.  Using the following operations and elemental times (in minutes), develop a 
set of workstations that would most efficiently balance the production line and 
decrease the idle time. Management hopes to have 120 units produced per hour. 
  
 Op#l  0.3, Op#2  0.4, Op#3  0.3, Op#4  0.6, OP#5  0.4 
   
 What was the % Idle time for the unbalanced line? What is the % Idle time for 
the balanced line? What was the production rate on the unbalanced line? What 
happens to the assembly line, production, and idle time if the company loses one 
worker from the redesigned line? Be quantitative. 
 
1
2
3
5
4
   b.  How would the solutions in a) change if the assembly line changed to the one 
below? 
 
1
2
3
5
4
 8.  Using Muther’s SLP and the flow data shown below for a small machine shop, 
develop the best final layout to scale (use the grid) within the outer walls of the 
building shown below. Place your final layout in the empty floor plan (keeping the 
area, but not necessarily the shape, for each room the same). What is the adjacency 
value for your layout? What is the maximum adjacency value possible? 
 
40
29
E
39
10
10
40
A
C
D
B
F

126 
C H A P T E R  3
 REFERENCES 
  Bralla, James G.  Handbook of Product Design for Manufacturing.  New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1986. 
 Buffa, Elwood S.  Modern Production Operations Management. 6th ed. New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, 1980. 
 Chang, Tien-Chien, Richard A. Wysk, and Wang Hsu-Pin.  Computer Aided Manufac-
turing. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1991. 
 Drury, Colin G. “Inspection Performance.” In  Handbook of Industrial Engineering, 2d 
ed. Ed. Gavriel Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1992. 
 Francis, Richard L., and John A. White.  Facility Layout and Location: An Analytical 
Approach. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1974. 
 Goetschalckx, M. “An Interactive Layout Heuristic Based on Hexagonal Adjacency 
Graphs.”  European Journal of Operations Research, 63, no. 2 (December 1992), 
pp. 304–321. 
 Konz, Stephan.  Facility Design. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1985. 
 Material Handling Institute.  The Ten Principles of Material Handling. Charlotte, NC, 
1998. 
 Muther, R.  Systematic Layout Planning, 2d ed. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
1973. 
 Niebel, Benjamin W., and C. Richard Liu. “Designing for Manufacturing.” In  Hand-
book of Industrial Engineering, 2d ed. Ed. Gavriel Salvendy. New York: John 
Wiley & Sons, 1992. 
 Nof, Shimon Y. “Industrial Robotics.” In  Handbook of Industrial Engineering, 2d ed. 
Ed. Gavriel Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1992. 
 Shingo, S.  Study of Toyota Production System. Tokyo, Japan: Japan Management 
Assoc. (1981), pp. 167–182. 
 Sims, Ralph E. “Material Handling Systems.” In  Handbook of Industrial Engineering, 
2d ed. Ed. Gavriel Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1992. 
 Spur, Gunter. “Numerical Control Machines.” In  Handbook of Industrial Engineering, 
2d ed. Ed. Gavriel Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1992. 
 Taguchi, Genichi.  Introduction to Quality Engineering. Tokyo, Japan: Asian Productiv-
ity Organization, 1986. 
 Wemmerlov, Urban, and Nancy Lea Hyer. “Group Technology.” In  Handbook of 
Industrial Engineering, 2d ed. Ed. Gavriel Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & 
Sons, 1992. 
 Wick, Charles, and Raymond F. Veilleux.  Quality Control and Assembly, 4. Detroit, 
MI: Society of Manufacturing Engineers, 1987.  
 SELECTED SOFTWARE 
 ALDEP, IBM Corporation, program order no. 360D-15.0.004. 
 CORRELAP, Engineering Management Associates, Boston, MA. 
 CRAFT, IBM share library No. SDA 3391. 
 Design Tools, available from the McGraw-Hill text website at www.mhhe.com/niebel-
freivalds. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 3  Operation Analysis 
127
 FactoryFLOW, Siemens PLM Software, 5800 Granite Parkway, Suite 600, Plano, TX 
75024, USA; http://www.plm.automation.siemens.com/ 
 SPIRAL,  User’s Manual, 4031 Bradbury Dr., Marietta, GA, 30062, 1994. 
 SELECTED VIDEOTAPES/DVDS 
 Design for Manufacture and Assembly. DV05PUB2. Dearborn, MI: Society of 
Manufacturing Engineers, 2005. 
 Flexible Material Handling. DV03PUB104. Dearborn, MI: Society of Manufacturing 
Engineers, 2003. 
 Flexible Small Lot Production for Just-In-Time. DV03PUB107. Dearborn, MI: Society 
of Manufacturing Engineers, 2003. 
 Introduction to Lean Manufacturing. DV03PUB46. Dearborn, MI: Society of 
Manufacturing Engineers, 2003. 
 Quick Changeover for Lean Manufacturing. DV03PUB33. Dearborn, MI: Society of 
Manufacturing Engineers, 2003.  

This page intentionally left blank

 
129
 
CHAPTER 
 
4 
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Design work according to human capabilities and limitations. 
 •  For manipulative tasks: 
 •  Use dynamic motions rather than static holds. 
 •  Keep the strength requirement below 15 percent of maximum. 
 •  Avoid extreme ranges of motion. 
 •  Use the smallest muscles for speed and precision. 
 •  Use the largest muscles for strength. 
 •  For lifting and other heavy manual work: 
 •  Keep workloads below one-third of the maximum work capacity. 
 •  Minimize horizontal load distances. 
 •  Avoid twisting. 
 •  Use frequent, short work/rest cycles. 
 T
 he design of manual work was introduced by the Gilbreths through 
motion study and the principles of motion economy, and later scientifi-
cally developed by human factors specialists for military applications. 
The principles have traditionally been broken down into three basic subdivi-
sions: (1) the use of the human body, (2) the arrangement and conditions of 
the workplace, and (3) the design of tools and equipment. More important, al-
though developed empirically, the principles are in fact based on established 
anatomical, biomechanical, and physiological principles of the human body. 
They form the scientific basis for ergonomics and work design. Accordingly, 
some theoretical background will be presented so that the principles of mo-
tion economy can be understood better, rather than merely being accepted as 
memorized rules. Furthermore, the traditional principles of motion economy 
have been considerably expanded and are now called the principles of and 
 Manual Work 
Design 

130 
C H A P T E R  4
guidelines for work design. This chapter presents the principles related to the 
human body and the guidelines for the design of work as related to  physical 
activity. Chapter 5 covers those principles related to the design of worksta-
tions, tools, and equipment. Chapter 6 presents guidelines for the design of 
the work environment. Chapter 7 presents cognitive work design, which, 
though not traditionally included as part of methods engineering, is becoming 
an increasingly important aspect of work design. Chapter 8 covers workplace 
and systems safety. 
 4.1  THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM 
  The human body is able to produce movements because of a complex system 
of muscles and bones, termed the  musculoskeletal system.  The muscles are at-
tached to the bones on either side of a joint (see Figure 4.1), so that one or 
several muscles, termed  agonists , act as the prime activators of motion. Other 
muscles, termed  antagonists , counteract the agonists and oppose the motion. 
For elbow  flexion , which is a decrease in the internal joint angle, the biceps, 
the brachioradialis, and the brachialis form the agonists, while the triceps forms 
the antagonist. However, on elbow  extension , which is an increase in the joint 
angle, the triceps becomes the agonist, while the other three muscles become the 
antagonists.  
 There are three types of muscles in the human body: skeletal or striated 
muscles, attached to the bones; cardiac muscle, found in the heart; and smooth 
muscle, found in the internal organs and the walls of the blood vessels. Only 
the skeletal muscles (of which there are approximately 500 in the body) will be 
discussed here, because of their relevance to motion. 
 Each muscle is made up of a large number of muscle fibers, approximately 
0.004 in (0.1 mm) in diameter and ranging in length from 0.2 to 5.5 in (5 to 140 mm), 
depending on the size of the muscle. These fibers are typically bound together in 
bundles by connective tissue, which extends to the end of the muscle and assists 
Biceps
Triceps
Brachialis
Brachioradialis
 Figure 4.1   The musculoskeletal system of the arm. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
131
in firmly attaching the muscle and muscle fibers to the bone (see Figure 4.2). 
These bundles are penetrated by tiny blood vessels that carry oxygen and nutri-
ents to the muscle fibers, as well as by small nerve endings that carry electrical 
impulses from the spinal cord and brain.  
 Each muscle fiber is further subdivided into smaller  myofibrils  and ulti-
mately into the protein filaments that provide the contractile mechanism. There 
are two types of filaments:  thick filaments , comprised of long proteins with mo-
lecular heads, called myosin; and  thin filaments , comprised of globular proteins, 
called actin. The two types of filaments are interlaced, giving rise to the striated 
appearance and alternate name, as shown in Figure 4.2. This allows the muscle 
to contract as the filaments slide over one another, which occurs as molecular 
bridges or bonds are formed, broken, and reformed between the myosin heads 
and actin globules. This  sliding filament theory  explains how the muscle length 
can change from approximately 50 percent of its  resting length  (the neutral 
Fasciculus
Muscle
Myofibril
Myosin
Actin
Myofilaments
Group of
muscle fibres
 Figure 4.2   The structure of muscle. 
 ( From: Gray’s Anatomy, 1973, by permission 
of W. B. Saunders Co., London.) 

132 
C H A P T E R  4
uncontracted length at approximately the midpoint in the normal range of mo-
tion) at complete contraction to 180 percent of its resting length at complete 
extension (see Figure 4.3).   
 4.2   PRINCIPLES OF WORK DESIGN: HUMAN 
CAPABILITIES AND MOTION ECONOMY 
 ACHIEVE THE MAXIMUM MUSCLE STRENGTH 
AT THE MIDRANGE OF MOTION 
 The first principle of human capability derives from the inverted-U-shaped prop-
erty of muscle contraction shown in Figure 4.3. At the resting length, optimal 
bonding occurs between the thick and thin filaments. In the stretched state, there 
is minimal overlap or bonding between the thick and thin filaments, resulting in 
considerably decreased (almost zero) muscle force. Similarly, in the completely 
contracted state, interference occurs between the opposing thin filaments, again 
preventing optimum bonding and decreasing muscle force. This muscle prop-
erty is typically termed the  force–length relationship . Therefore, a task requir-
ing considerable muscle force should be performed at the optimum position. 
100
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
50
50
100
150
Length of contractile element (% of resting length)
Force
(% of maximum)
 Figure 4.3   Force–length relationship of skeletal muscle. 
 ( From: Winter , 1979, p. 114. Reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
133
For example, the neutral or straight position will provide the strongest grip 
strength for wrist motions. For elbow flexion, the strongest position would be 
with the elbow bent somewhat beyond the 90° position. For plantar flexion (i.e., 
depressing a pedal), again the optimum position is slightly beyond 90°. A rough 
rule of thumb for finding the midrange of motion is to consider the posture as-
sumed by an astronaut in weightless conditions when both agonist and antago-
nist muscles surrounding the joint are most relaxed and the limb attains a neutral 
position (see Figure 4.4).   
 ACHIEVE THE MAXIMUM MUSCLE STRENGTH 
WITH SLOW MOVEMENTS 
 The second principle of human capability is based on another property of the slid-
ing filament theory and muscle contraction. The faster the molecular bonds are 
formed, broken, and reformed, the less effective is the bonding and the less muscu-
lar force is produced. This is a pronounced nonlinear effect (see Figure 4.5), with 
maximum muscle force being produced with no externally measurable shortening 
90°
24° ± 5°
15° ± 2°
122° ± 24°
36° ± 19°
128° ± 7°
133° ± 8°
111° ± 6°
10°
Vertical
reference
Horizontal reference
Horizontal reference
One  g line of sight
Zero  g line of sight
 Figure 4.4   Typical relaxed 
posture assumed by people in 
weightless conditions. 
 ( From: Thornton, 1978, 
Fig. 16.) 

134 
C H A P T E R  4
(i.e., zero velocity or a static contraction), and minimal muscle force being pro-
duced at the maximum velocity of muscle shortening. The force is only sufficient 
to move the mass of that body segment. This muscle property is known as the 
 force–velocity relationship  and is especially important with respect to heavy man-
ual work.   
 USE MOMENTUM TO ASSIST WORKERS WHEREVER 
POSSIBLE; MINIMIZE IT IF IT IS COUNTERACTED 
BY MUSCULAR EFFORT 
 There is a trade-off between the second and third principles. Faster movements 
produce higher momentum and higher impact forces in the case of blows. 
Downward motions are more effective than upward motions, because of the 
assistance from gravity. To make full use of the momentum built up, worksta-
tions should allow operators to release a finished part into a delivery area while 
their hands are on their way to get component parts or tools to begin the next 
work cycle.  
 DESIGN TASKS TO OPTIMIZE HUMAN 
STRENGTH CAPABILITY 
 Human strength capability depends on three major task factors: (1) the type of 
strength, (2) the muscle or joint motion being utilized, and (3) posture. There are 
three types of muscle exertions, defined primarily by the way the strength of the 
exertion is measured. Muscular exertions resulting in body motions result from 
dynamic strength. These are sometimes termed  isotonic  contractions, because the 
load and body segments lifted nominally maintain a constant external force on 
the muscle. (However, the internal force produced by the muscle varies due to the 
geometry of the effective moment arms.) Because of the many variables involved 
100
50
Velocity
(% of maximum no-load velocity)
Force
(% of maximum)
50
100
00
 Figure 4.5   Force–velocity 
relationship of skeletal muscle. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
135
in such contractions, some variables necessarily must be constrained to obtain a 
measurable strength. Thus, dynamic strength measurements have typically been 
made using constant-velocity ( isokinetic ) dynamometers, such as the Cybex or 
the Mini-Gym (Freivalds and Fotouhi, 1987). In the case where the body motion 
is restrained, an  isometric  or static strength is obtained. As seen in Figure 4.5, an 
isometric strength is necessarily greater than a dynamic strength because of the 
Long
handle
Long
handle
Arm lifting strength test position
Leg lifting strength test position
Torso lifting strength test position
Short
handle
90˚
Frequency
100
200
Lbs.
Arm strength distribution
Females
x = 44.9
s = 17.6
Males
x = 85.8
s = 28.6
Frequency
100
200
300
Lbs.
Leg strength distribution
Females
x = 93.8
s = 44.4
Males
x = 211.8
s = 76.5
Frequency
100
200
300
Lbs.
Torso strength distribution
Females
x = 59.9
s = 31.0
Males
x = 122.4
s = 54.8
15
 Figure 4.6   Static strength positions and results for 443 males, 108 females 
(Chaffin et al., 1977.). 

136 
C H A P T E R  4
 Table 4.1   A. Static Muscle Strength Moment Data (ft·lb) for 25 Men and 22 Women Employed 
in Manual Jobs in Industry 
   
   
 Male (%ile) 
 Female (%ile) 
 Muscle Function 
 Joint Angles 
 5 
 50 
 95 
 5 
 50 
 95 
 Elbow flexion 
 90° Included to arm (arm at side) 
 31 
 57 
 82 
 12 
 30 
 41 
 Elbow extension 
 70° Included to arm (arm at side) 
 23 
 34 
 49 
 7 
 20 
 28 
 Medial humeral 
(shoulder) rotation  
 90° Vertical shoulder (abducted) 
 21 
 38 
 61 
 7 
 15 
 24 
 Lateral humeral 
(shoulder) rotation  
 5° Vertical shoulder (at side) 
 17 
 24 
 38 
 10 
 14 
 21 
 Shoulder horizontal flexion 
 90° Vertical shoulder (abducted) 
 32 
 68 
 89 
 9 
 30 
 44 
 Shoulder horizontal extension  
 90° Vertical shoulder (abducted) 
 32 
 49 
 76 
 14 
 24 
 42 
 Shoulder vertical adduction 
 90° Vertical shoulder (abducted) 
 26 
 49 
 85 
 10 
 22 
 40 
 Shoulder vertical abduction 
 90° Vertical shoulder (abducted) 
 32 
 52 
 75 
 11 
 27 
 42 
 Ankle extension 
(plantar flexion) 
 90° Included to shank 
 51 
 93 
 175 
 29 
 60 
 97 
 Knee extension 
 120° Included to thigh (seated) 
 62 
 124 
 235 
 38 
 78 
 162 
 Knee flexion 
 135° Included to thigh (seated) 
 43 
 74 
 116 
 16 
 46 
 77 
 Hip extension 
 100° Included to torso (seated) 
 69 
 140 
 309 
 28 
 72 
 133 
 Hip flexion 
 110° Included to torso (seated) 
 87 
 137 
 252 
 42 
 93 
 131 
 Torso extension 
 100° Included to thigh (seated) 
 121 
 173 
 371 
 52 
 136 
 257 
 Torso flexion 
 100° Included to thigh (seated) 
 66 
 106 
 159 
 36 
 55 
 119 
 Torso lateral flexion 
 Sitting erect 
 70 
 117 
 193 
 37 
 69 
 120 
 B. Static Muscle Strength Moment Data (N·m) for 25 Men and 22 Women Employed in Manual Jobs in Industry 
   
   
 Male (%ile) 
 Female (%ile) 
 Muscle Function 
 Joint Angles 
 5 
 50 
 95 
 5 
 50 
 95 
 Elbow flexion 
 90° Included to arm (arm at side) 
 42 
 77 
 111 
 16 
 41 
 55 
 Elbow extension 
 70° Included to arm (arm at side) 
 31 
 46 
 67 
 9 
 27 
 39 
 Medial humeral 
(shoulder) rotation  
 90° Vertical shoulder (abducted) 
 28 
 52 
 83 
 9 
 21 
 33 
 Lateral humeral 
(shoulder) rotation  
 5° Vertical shoulder (at side) 
 23 
 33 
 51 
 13 
 19 
 28 
 Shoulder horizontal flexion 
 90° Vertical shoulder (abducted) 
 44 
 92 
 119 
 12 
 40 
 60 
 Shoulder horizontal extension  90° Vertical shoulder (abducted) 
 43 
 67 
 103 
 19 
 33 
 57 
 Shoulder vertical adduction 
 90° Vertical shoulder (abducted) 
 35 
 67 
 115 
 13 
 30 
 54 
 Shoulder vertical abduction 
 90° Vertical shoulder (abducted) 
 43 
 71 
 101 
 15 
 37 
 57 
 Ankle extension 
(plantar flexion) 
 90° Included to shank 
 69 
 126 
 237 
 31 
 81 
 131 
 Knee extension 
 120° Included to thigh (seated) 
 84 
 168 
 318 
 52 
 106 
 219 
 Knee flexion 
 135° Included to thigh (seated) 
 58 
 100 
 157 
 22 
 62 
 104 
 Hip extension 
 100° Included to torso (seated) 
 94 
 190 
 419 
 38 
 97 
 180 
 Hip flexion 
 110° Included to torso (seated) 
 118 
 185 
 342 
 57 
 126 
 177 
 Torso extension 
 100° Included to thigh (seated) 
 164 
 234 
 503 
 71 
 184 
 348 
 Torso flexion 
 100° Included to thigh (seated) 
 89 
 143 
 216 
 49 
 75 
 161 
 Torso lateral flexion 
 Sitting erect 
 95 
 159 
 261 
 50 
 94 
 162 
 Source: Chaffin and Anderson, 1991. Reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
137
 EXAMPLE 4.1 
Elbow Flexion Torque 
 Consider the free-body diagram of the upper limb with the elbow at 90° in Figure 4.7. 
Three muscles are involved in elbow flexion: biceps brachii, brachioradialis, and bra-
chialis (see Figure 4.1). However, the biceps is the primary flexor, and for the purpose 
of this example, it is the only muscle depicted. It can also be considered an equivalent 
muscle combining the characteristics of all three muscles. (Note that a solution of all 
three muscles independently is not possible because of a condition termed  static inde-
terminancy. ) The equivalent muscle inserts approximately 2 in forward of the elbow 
point of rotation. The lower arm weighs approximately 3 lb for an average male, and 
the weight can be considered to act at the lower arm center of gravity, approximately 
4 in (0.33 ft) forward of the elbow. The hand bolds an unknown load  L  at a distance of 
11 in (0.92 ft) from the elbow. The maximum load that can be held is determined by 
maximum voluntary elbow flexion torque, which for a 50th percentile male is 57 ft·lb 
(see Table 4.1). In the static equilibrium position as shown in Figure 4.7, the 57 ft·lb 
counterclockwise torque is balanced by two clockwise torques, one for the weight of 
the lower limb and the other for the load: 
 57  0.33  3  0.92  L 
 Solving the equation yields  L  60.9 lb. Therefore the maximum load that an average 
male could lift through elbow flexion is approximately 61 lb. 
 It might be of interest to calculate how much force must be exerted by the equiv-
alent muscle to lift this load. The maximum voluntary torque is produced by an un-
known muscle force  F biceps acting through a 2-in (0.167-ft) moment arm. 
 57  0.167  F biceps 
 Then  F biceps equals 57/0.167, or 341.3, lb which means that the muscle must exert 
close to 5.6 (341.3/60.9) times as much force as the load lifted. One can conclude 
from this that the human body is built not for strength, but for range of movement. 
 
Fbiceps
2
2
7
L
3
 
Figure 4.7  

138 
C H A P T E R  4
more efficient bonding in the slower sliding muscle filaments. Some representa-
tive isometric muscle strengths for various postures are given in Table 4.1, and 
representative lifting strengths for 551 industrial workers in different postures are 
shown in Figure 4.6.  
 Most industrial tasks typically involve some movement; therefore, com-
pletely isometric contractions are relatively rare. Most typically, the movement 
range is somewhat limited, and the dynamic contraction is not a true isokinetic 
contraction, but a set of quasi-static contractions. Thus, dynamic strengths are 
very much task- and condition-dependent, and little is published regarding 
 dynamic strength data. 
 Finally, a third type of muscle strength capability,  psychophysical strength, 
has been defined for those situations in which the strength demands are required 
for an extended time. A static strength capability is not necessarily representa-
tive of what would be repetitively possible over an 8-h shift. Typically, the max-
imum acceptable load (determined by adjusting the load lifted or force exerted 
until the subject feels that the load or force would be acceptable on a repetitive 
basis for the given time period) is 40 to 50 percent less than a one-time static 
exertion. Extensive tables have been compiled for psychophysical strengths of 
various frequencies and postures (Snook and Ciriello, 1991). A summary of 
these values is provided in Tables 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4. 
 USE LARGE MUSCLES FOR TASKS 
REQUIRING STRENGTH 
 Muscle strength is directly proportional to the size of the muscle, as defined by 
the cross-sectional area [specifically, 87 psi (60 N/cm2) for both males and fe-
males] (Ikai and Fukunaga, 1968). For example, leg and trunk muscles should be 
 Table 4.2   Maximum Weights (in lb and kg) Acceptable to Average Males and Females Lifting Compact Boxes 
[14 in (34 cm) wide] with Handles 
   
 1 lift per 0.5 min 
 1 lift per 1 min 
 1 lift per 30 min 
   
 Males 
 Females 
 Males 
 Females 
 Males 
 Females 
 Task 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 Floor to knuckle height 
 42 
 19 
 26 
 12 
 66 
 30 
 31 
 14 
 84 
 38 
 37 
 17 
 Knuckle to shoulder height 
 42 
 19 
 20 
 9 
 55 
 25 
 29 
 13 
 64 
 29 
 33 
 15 
 Shoulder to arm reach 
 37 
 17 
 18 
 8 
 51 
 23 
 24 
 11 
 59 
 27 
 29 
 13 
 Note: For lowering, increase values by 6%. For boxes without handles, decrease values by 15%. Increasing the box size (away 
from body) to 30 in (75 cm) decreases values by 16%. 
 Source: Adapted from Snook and Ciriello, 1991. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
139
used in heavy load lifting, rather than weaker arm muscles. The posture factor, 
although somewhat confounded by geometric changes in the muscle moment or 
lever arm, is related to the resting length of the muscle fibers, being roughly mid-
range of motion for most joints as stated in the first principle of motion economy.    
 STAY BELOW 15 PERCENT OF MAXIMUM 
VOLUNTARY FORCE 
 Muscle fatigue is a very important but little utilized criterion in designing tasks 
appropriately for the human operator. The human body and muscle tissue rely 
primarily on two types of energy sources,  aerobic  and  anaerobic  (see later sec-
tion on Manual Work). Because the anaerobic metabolism can supply energy 
for only a very small time, the oxygen supplied to the muscle fibers via periph-
eral blood flow becomes critical in determining how long the muscle contrac-
tions will last. Unfortunately, the harder the muscle fibers contract, the more 
 Table 4.3   Push Forces (in lbs and kg) at Waist Height Acceptable to Average Males and Females 
(I  Initial, S  Sustained) 
   
 1 lift/min 
 1 lift per 30 min 
   
 Males 
 Females 
 Males 
 Females 
   
 I 
 S 
 I 
 S 
 I 
 S 
 I 
 S 
 Distance 
Pushed, ft (m)  
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb  kg 
 150 (45) 
 51 
 23 
 26 
 12 
 40 
 18 
 22 
 10 
 66 
 30 
 42 
 19 
 51 
 23 
 26  12 
 50 (15) 
 77 
 35 
 42 
 19 
 44 
 20 
 29 
 13 
 84 
 38 
 51 
 23 
 53 
 24 
 33  15 
 7 (2) 
 95 
 43 
 62 
 28 
 55 
 25 
 40 
 18 
 99 
 45 
 75 
 34 
 66 
 30 
 46  21 
 Note: For push forces at shoulder heights or knuckle/knee heights, decrease values by 11%. 
 Source: Adapted from Snook and Ciriello, 1991. 
 Table 4.4   Pull Forces (in lbs and kg) at Waist Height Acceptable to Average Males and Females 
(I  Initial, S  Sustained) 
   
 1 pull/min 
 1 pull per 30 min 
   
 Males 
 Females 
 Males 
 Females 
   
 I 
 S 
 I 
 S 
 I 
 S 
 I 
 S 
 Distance 
Pushed, ft (m)  
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb  kg 
 150 (45) 
 37 
 17 
 26 
 12 
 40 
 18 
 24 
 11 
 48 
 22 
 42 
 19 
 48 
 22 
 26  12 
 50 (15) 
 57 
 26 
 42 
 19 
 42 
 19 
 26 
 12 
 62 
 28 
 51 
 23 
 51 
 23 
 33  15 
 7 (2) 
 68 
 31 
 57 
 26 
 55 
 25 
 35 
 16 
 73 
 33 
 70 
 32 
 66 
 30 
 44  20 
 Note: For pull forces at knuckle/knee heights, increase values by 75%. For pull forces at shoulder heights, decrease 
values by 15%. 
 Source: Adapted from Snook and Ciriello, 1991. 

140 
C H A P T E R  4
the interlaced arterioles and capillaries are compressed (see Figure 4.2), and the 
more the blood flow and oxygen supplies are restricted, the faster the muscle 
fatigues. The result is the endurance curve in Figure 4.8. The relationship is 
very nonlinear, ranging from a very short endurance time of approximately 
6 s at a maximal contraction, at which point the muscle force rapidly drops off, 
to a rather indefinite endurance time at approximately 15 percent of a maximal 
contraction.  
 This relationship can be modeled by 
T  1.2/(f  0.15)0.618  1.21
 where  T  endurance time, min 
 f  required force, expressed as a fraction of maximum isometric strength 
 For example, a worker would be able to sustain a force level of 50 percent of 
maximum strength for only about 1 min: 
T  1.2(0.5  0.15)0.618  1.21  1.09 min
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Endurance time (min)
8
9
10
20
40
60
80
100 %
Exertion level (% maximum muscle force)
 Figure 4.8   Static muscle endurance–exertion level relationship with 1 SD ranges 
depicted. 
 ( From : Chaffin and Anderson, 1991). Reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
141
 The indefinite asymptote is due to early researchers stopping their experimen-
tation without reaching complete muscle fatigue. Later researchers suggested 
reducing this level of acceptable static force levels from 15 percent to below 
10 percent, perhaps even 5 percent (Jonsson, 1978). The amount of rest needed 
to recover from a static hold will be presented as a set of relaxation allowances 
that depend on the force exerted and the holding time (see Chapter 11). 
 USE SHORT, FREQUENT, INTERMITTENT 
WORK/REST CYCLES 
 Whether performing repeated static contractions (such as holding a load in el-
bow flexion) or a series of dynamic work elements (such as cranking with the 
arms or legs), work and recovery should be apportioned in short, frequent cycles. 
This is due primarily to a fast initial recovery period, which then tends to level 
off with increasing time. Thus, most of the benefit is gained in a relatively short 
period. A much higher percentage of maximum strength can be maintained if the 
strength is exerted as a series of repetitive contractions rather than one sustained 
static contraction (see Figure 4.9). However, if the person is driven to complete 
muscle (or whole body) fatigue, full recovery will take a fairly long time, per-
haps several hours. 
 DESIGN TASKS SO THAT MOST 
WORKERS CAN DO THEM 
 As can be seen in Figure 4.6, for a given muscle group, there is a considerable 
range of strength in the normal, healthy adult population, with the strongest be-
ing five to eight times stronger than the weakest. These large ranges are due to 
0
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
5
10
15
Contractions/min
Percent of maximum strength
20
25
30
 Figure 4.9   Percentage 
of maximum isometric 
strength that can be 
maintained in a steady 
state during rhythmic 
contractions. 
 Points are averages for 
finger muscles, hand 
muscles, arm muscles, 
and leg muscles, 
combined. Vertical lines 
denote  standard error. 
( From: Åstrand and 
Rodahl, 1986.) 

142 
C H A P T E R  4
individual factors that affect strength performance: gender, age, handedness, and 
fitness/training. Gender accounts for the largest variation in muscle strength, with 
average female strength ranging from 35 to 85 percent of average male strength, 
with an average effect of 66 percent (see Figure 4.10). The difference is greatest 
for upper extremity strengths and smallest for lower extremity strengths. How-
ever, this effect is primarily due to average body size (i.e., total muscle mass) 
and not strictly to gender; the average female is considerably smaller and lighter 
than the average male. Furthermore, with the wide distribution for a given muscle 
strength, there are many females who are stronger than many males.  
 In terms of age, muscle strength appears to peak in the mid-20s and then 
decreases linearly by 20 to 25 percent by the mid-60s (see Figure 4.10). The 
decrease in strength is due to reduced muscle mass and a loss of muscle  fibers. 
However, whether this loss is due to physiological changes of aging or just a 
gradual reduction in activity levels is not well known. It has definitely been 
shown that by starting a strength training program, a person can increase strength 
by 30 percent in the first several weeks, with maximum increases approach-
ing 100 percent (Åstrand and Rodahl, 1986). In terms of handedness, the non-
dominant hand typically produces about 90 percent of the dominant hand’s grip 
strength, with the effect being less pronounced in lefties, probably because they 
have been forced to adapt to a right-handed world (Miller and Freivalds, 1987). 
In any case, it is best to design tools and machines such that they can be used by 
either hand, to avoid placing any individual at a strength disadvantage. 
 USE LOW FORCE FOR PRECISE MOVEMENTS 
OR FINE MOTOR CONTROL 
 Muscle contractions are initiated by neural innervation from the brain and spi-
nal cord, which together comprise the central nervous system. A typical motor 
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
10
20
30
40
Age years
Percent variation in
muscle strength
50
60
70
 Figure 4.10   Changes in maximal isometric strength with age in women and men. 
 ( From: Åstrand and Rodahl, 1986.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
143
neuron, or nerve cell leading to the muscle from the central nervous system, 
may innervate or have connections with several hundred muscle fibers. The in-
nervation ratio of the number of fibers per neuron ranges from less than 10 in the 
small muscles of the eye to more than 1,000 for the large calf muscles, and can 
vary considerably even within the same muscle. Such functional arrangement is 
called a  motor unit  and has important implications in movement control. Once 
a neuron is stimulated, the electrical potential is transferred simultaneously to 
all the muscle fibers innervated by that neuron, and the motor unit acts as one 
contractile or motor control unit. Also, the central nervous system tends to re-
cruit these motor units selectively by increasing size as higher muscle forces are 
needed (Figure 4.11). The initial motor units recruited are small in size, with few 
muscle fibers and low produced forces. However, because these are small and 
low in tension, the change in force production from one to two or more motor 
units recruited is very gradual, and very fine precision in motor control can be 
produced. Near the end of motor recruitment, the total muscle force is high, and 
each additional motor unit recruited becomes a large increment in force, with 
little sensitivity in terms of precision or control. This muscle property is some-
times termed the  size principle .  
 The electrical activity of muscles, as recorded in  electromyograms (EMGs), 
is a useful measure of local muscle activity. Such activity is measured by placing 
recording electrodes on the skin surface over the muscles of interest, then modify-
ing and processing to the amplitude and frequency of the signal. For amplitude 
analysis, the signal is typically rectified and smoothed (with a resistor-capacitor 
circuit). The result has a reasonably linear relationship to the muscle force exerted 
(Bouisset, 1973). The frequency approach involves digitizing the signal and per-
forming a fast Fourier transform analysis to yield a frequency spectrum. As the 
muscle begins to fatigue, muscle activity shifts from high frequency (>60 Hz) to 
lower frequencies (<60 Hz) (Chaffin, 1969). Also, the EMG amplitude tends to 
increase with fatigue, for a given level of exertion.   
Force (% maximum) 
Motor units recruited (% of maximum)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0
25
50
75
100
 Figure 4.11   Muscle recruitment demonstrating size principle. 

144 
C H A P T E R  4
 DO NOT ATTEMPT PRECISE MOVEMENTS OR FINE 
CONTROL IMMEDIATELY AFTER HEAVY WORK 
 This is a corollary to the previous principle of human capability. The small mo-
tor units tend to be used continually during normal motion, and although more 
resistant to fatigue than the large motor units, they can still experience fatigue. A 
typical example where this principle is violated occurs when operators load their 
workstations before their shift or replenish parts during a shift. Lifting heavy 
parts containers requires the recruitment of the small motor units, as well as the 
later larger motor units, to generate the necessary muscle forces. During lifting 
and restocking, some of the motor units will fatigue and others will be recruited 
to compensate for the fatigued ones. Once the operator has restocked the bins 
and returned to more precise assembly work, some of the motor units, including 
the smaller precision ones, will not be available for use. The larger motor units 
recruited to replace the fatigued ones will provide larger increments in force 
and less-precise motor control. After several minutes, the motor units will have 
recovered and will be available, but in the meantime, the quality and speed of the 
assembly work may suffer. One solution would be to provide less-skilled labor-
ers to restock the bins on a regular basis. 
 USE BALLISTIC MOVEMENTS FOR SPEED 
 Through spinal reflexes, cross-innervation of agonists and antagonists always 
occurs. This minimizes any unnecessary conflict between the muscles as well 
as the consequent excess energy expenditure. Typically, in a short (less than 
200 ms), gross, voluntary motion, the agonist is activated and the antagonist 
is inhibited (termed  reciprocal inhibition ), to reduce counterproductive muscle 
contractions. In contrast, for precise movements, feedback control from both sets 
of muscles is utilized, increasing motion time. This is sometimes referred to as 
the  speed–accuracy trade-off . 
 BEGIN AND END MOTIONS WITH BOTH 
HANDS SIMULTANEOUSLY 
 When the right hand is working in the normal area to the right of the body and 
the left hand is working in the normal area to the left of the body, a feeling of 
balance tends to induce a rhythm in the operator’s performance, which leads to 
maximum productivity. The left hand, in right-handed people, can be just as ef-
fective as the right hand, and it should be used. A right-handed boxer learns to jab 
just as effectively with the left hand as with the right hand. A speed typist is just 
as proficient with one hand as the other. In a large number of instances, work-
stations can be designed to do “two at a time.” Using dual fixtures to hold two 
components, both hands can work at the same time, making symmetric moves 
in opposite directions. A corollary to this principle is that both hands should not 
be idle at the same time, except during rest periods. (This principle was the one 
followed by Frank Gilbreth in shaving with both hands simultaneously.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
145
 MOVE THE HANDS SYMMETRICALLY AND 
SIMULTANEOUSLY TO AND FROM THE CENTER 
OF THE BODY 
 It is natural for the hands to move in symmetric patterns. Deviations from sym-
metry in a two-handed workstation result in slow, awkward movements of the 
operator. The difficulty of patting the stomach with the left hand while rubbing 
the top of the head with the right hand is familiar to many. Another experiment 
that can readily illustrate the difficulty of performing nonsymmetric operations 
is to try to draw a circle with the left hand while trying to draw a square with the 
right hand. Figure 4.12 illustrates an ideal workstation that allows the operator 
to assemble a product by going through a series of symmetric, simultaneous mo-
tions away from and toward the center of the body. 
 USE THE NATURAL RHYTHMS OF THE BODY 
 The spinal reflexes that excite or inhibit muscles also lead to natural rhythms 
in the motion of body segments. These can be logically compared to second-
order mass–spring–dashpot systems, with the body segments providing mass 
and the muscle having internal resistance and damping. The natural frequency of 
the system will depend on all three parameters, but the segment mass will have 
the greatest effect. This natural frequency is essential to the smooth and auto-
matic performance of a task. Drillis (1963) has studied a variety of very common 
manual tasks and has suggested optimum work tempos, as follows: 
 Filing metal 
 60–78 strokes per minute 
 Chiseling 
 60 strokes per minute 
 Arm cranking 
 35 rpm 
 Leg cranking 
 60–72 rpm 
 Shoveling 
 14–17 tosses per minute 
 Figure 4.12   An ideal workstation 
that permits the operator to assemble 
a product by going through a series 
of symmetric motions made 
simultaneously away from and toward 
the center of the body. 

146 
C H A P T E R  4
 USE CONTINUOUS CURVED MOTIONS 
 Because of the nature of body segment linkages (typically approximating pin 
joints), it is easier for the human to produce curved motions, that is, to pivot 
around a joint. Straight-line motions involving sudden and sharp changes in direc-
tion require more time and are less accurate. This law is very easily demonstrated 
by moving either hand in a rectangular pattern and then moving it in a circular 
pattern of about the same magnitude. The greater amount of time required to make 
the abrupt 90° directional changes is quite apparent. To make a directional change, 
the hand must decelerate, change direction, and accelerate until it is time to de-
celerate again for the next directional change. Continuous curved motions do not 
require deceleration and are consequently performed faster per unit of distance. 
This is demonstrated very nicely in Figure 4.13, with subjects who made position-
ing movements with the right hand in eight directions in a horizontal plane from a 
center starting point. Motion from the lower left to the upper right (pivoting about 
the elbow) required 20 percent less time than the perpendicular motion from the 
lower right to upper left (additional awkward shoulder and arm line movements).  
 USE THE LOWEST PRACTICAL 
CLASSIFICATION OF MOVEMENT 
 Understanding the classifications of motions plays a major role in using this 
fundamental law of motion economy appropriately in methods studies. The clas-
sifications are as follows: 
 1.  Finger motions are made by moving the finger or fingers while the re-
mainder of the arm is kept stationary. They are first-class motions and 
Concentric circles represent
equal time intervals.
180˚
145˚
135˚
90˚
55˚
45˚
0˚
 Figure 4.13   Forearm motion is best 
while pivoting on elbow. 
 ( Source: Adapted from Schmidtke and 
Stier 1960.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
147
the fastest of the five motion classes. Typical finger motions are running 
a nut down on a stud, depressing the keys of a typewriter, or grasping a 
small part. There is usually a significant difference in the time required to 
perform finger motions with the various fingers, with the index finger be-
ing the fastest. Because repetitive finger motions can result in cumulative 
trauma disorders (see Chapter 5), finger forces should be kept low by using 
bar switches in place of trigger switches.   
 2.  Finger and wrist motions are made while the forearm and upper arm are 
stationary and are referred to as second-class motions. In the majority of 
cases, finger and wrist motions consume more time than strictly finger mo-
tions. Typical finger and wrist motions occur when a part is positioned in a 
jig or fixture, or when two mating parts are assembled. 
 3.  Finger, wrist, and lower arm motions are commonly referred to as forearm 
or third-class motions and include those movements made by the arm be-
low the elbow while the upper arm is stationary. Because the forearm in-
cludes relatively strong and nonfatiguing muscles, workstations should be 
designed to utilize these third-class motions, rather than fourth-class mo-
tions. However, repetitive work involving force with the arms extended can 
induce injury, and the workstation should be designed so that the elbows 
can be kept at 90° while work is being done. 
 4.  Finger, wrist, lower arm, and upper arm motions, commonly known as 
fourth-class or shoulder motions, require considerably more time for a 
given distance than the three classes previously described. Fourth-class 
motions are required to perform transport motions for parts that cannot be 
reached without extending the arm. To reduce static loading of shoulder 
motions, tools should be designed so that the elbow is not elevated while 
the work is being performed. 
 5.  Fifth-class motions include body motions such as of the trunk, which are 
the most time-consuming and should generally be avoided.  
 First-class motions require the least amount of effort and time, while fifth-
class motions are considered the least efficient. Therefore, always utilize the 
lowest practicable motion classification to perform the work properly. This will 
involve careful consideration of the location of tools and materials, so that ideal 
motion patterns can be arranged. 
 This classification of movement was shown experimentally by Langolf 
et al. (1976), in a series of positioning movements to and from targets, known as 
Fitts’ tapping task (Fitts, 1954), discussed in greater detail in Chapter 7. The 
movement time increases with the difficulty of the task (see Figure 4.14), but 
also increases with higher levels of classification; that is, the slope for the arm 
(105 ms/bit) is steeper than for the wrist (45 ms/bit), which in turn is steeper 
than for the finger (26 ms/bit). The effect is due simply to the added time re-
quired for the central nervous system to process additional joints, motor units, 
and receptors. 
  

148 
C H A P T E R  4
 WORK WITH BOTH HANDS 
AND FEET SIMULTANEOUSLY 
 Because the major part of work cycles is performed by the hands, it is economical 
to relieve the hands of work that can be done by the feet, but only if this work is 
performed while the hands are occupied. The hands are more skillful than the feet, 
so it would be foolish to have the feet perform elements while the hands are idle. 
Foot pedal devices that allow clamping, parts ejection, or feeding can often be 
 arranged, freeing the hands for other, more useful work and consequently reducing 
the cycle time (see Figure 4.15). When the hands are moving, the feet should not 
be moving, as simultaneous movement of the hands and feet is difficult. However, 
the feet can be applying pressure to something, such as a foot pedal. Also, the 
operator should be seated, as it is difficult to operate a foot pedal while standing, 
which would mean maintaining the full body weight on the other foot.  
 MINIMIZE EYE FIXATIONS 
 Although eye fixations or eye movements cannot be eliminated for most work, 
the location of the primary visual targets should be optimized with respect to the 
human operator. The normal line of sight is roughly about 15° below the hori-
zontal (see Figure 5.5), and the primary visual field is roughly defined as a cone 
15° in arc centered on the line of sight. The implication is that within this area, 
no head movements are needed and eye fatigue is minimized. 
 SUMMARY 
 The principles of human capabilities and motion economy are based on an 
elementary understanding of human physiology and should be very useful in 
800
600
400
200
0
0
2
4
Log2 (2D/W)
(Difficulty of task)
Movement time (msec)
6
8
 Arm
 Wrist
 Finger
 Figure 4.14   Classifications of 
movements. 
 ( Source: Data from Langolf et al., 
1976. Reproduced with permission 
of the McGraw-Hill Companies.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
149
applying methods analysis with the human operator in mind. However, the ana-
lyst need not be an expert in human anatomy and physiology to be able to apply 
these principles. In fact, for most task analysis purposes, it may be sufficient to 
use the Motion Economy Checklist, which summarizes most of the principles in 
a questionnaire format (see Figure 4.16).  
 4.3  MOTION STUDY 
 Motion study  is the careful analysis of body motions employed in doing a job. 
The purpose of motion study is to eliminate or reduce ineffective movements, 
and facilitate and speed effective movements. Through motion study, in conjunc-
tion with the principles of motion economy, the job is redesigned to be more ef-
fective and to produce a higher rate of output. The Gilbreths pioneered the study 
of manual motion and developed basic laws of motion economy that are still 
considered fundamental. They were also responsible for the development of de-
tailed motion picture studies, known as  micromotion studies , which have proved 
invaluable in studying highly repetitive manual operations. Motion study, in the 
 Figure 4.15   Foot-operated machine tool. 
 (Courtesy of Okuma.) 

 Figure 4.16   Motion Economy Checklist. 
150

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
151
broad sense, covers both studies that are performed as a simple visual analysis 
and studies that utilize more expensive equipment. Traditionally, motion picture 
film cameras were utilized, but today the videotape camera is used exclusively, 
because of the easy ability to rewind and replay sections, the freeze-frame capa-
bility in four-head videotape cassette recorders (VCRs), and the elimination of 
the need for film development. In view of its much higher cost, micromotion is 
usually practical only on extremely active jobs with high repetitiveness.  
 The two types of studies may be compared to viewing a part under a magni-
fying glass versus viewing it under a microscope. The added detail revealed by 
the microscope is needed only on the most productive jobs. Traditionally, mi-
cromotion studies were recorded on a  simultaneous motion (simo) chart, while 
motion studies are recorded on a  two-hand process chart . A true simo chart is 
hardly used today, but the term is sometimes applied to a two-hand process chart. 
 BASIC MOTIONS 
 As part of motion analysis, the Gilbreths concluded that all work, whether 
productive or nonproductive, is done by using combinations of 17 basic mo-
tions that they called  therbligs  (Gilbreth spelled backward). The therbligs 
can be either effective or ineffective. Effective therbligs directly advance 
the progress of the work. They can frequently be shortened, but typically 
cannot be completely eliminated. Ineffective therbligs do not advance the 
progress of the work and should be eliminated by applying the principles of 
motion economy. The 17 therbligs, along with their symbols and definitions, 
are shown in Table 4.5.  
 THE TWO-HAND PROCESS CHART 
 The  two-hand process chart,  sometimes referred to as an operator process chart, 
is a motion-study tool. This chart shows all movements and delays made by 
the right and left hands, and the relationships between them. The purpose of 
the two-hand process chart is to identify inefficient motion patterns and observe 
violations of the principles of motion economy. This chart facilitates changing a 
method so that a balanced two-handed operation, and a smoother, more rhythmic 
cycle that keeps both delays and operator fatigue to a minimum, can be achieved. 
 As usual, the analyst heads the chart Two-Hand Process Chart and adds all 
necessary identifying information, including the part number, drawing number, 
operation or process description, present or proposed method, date, and name of 
the person doing the charting. Immediately below the identifying information, 
the analyst sketches the workstation, drawn to scale. The sketch materially aids 
in presenting the method under study. Figure 4.17 shows a typical two-hand pro-
cess chart for a cable-clamp assembly, with the times for each therblig obtained 
from stopwatch timing. 
 Next the analyst begins constructing the two-hand process chart by observ-
ing the duration of each element and determining the amount of time to be repre-
sented on the chart drawn to scale. For example, in Figure 4.17, the first element, 
“Get U-bolt,” has a time of 1.00 min and one large or five small vertical spaces 

152
 Table 4.5   Gilbreths’ Therbligs 
 Effective Therbligs 
(Directly advance progress of work. May be shortened 
but difficult to eliminate completely.)  
 Therblig 
 Symbol 
 Description 
 Reach 
 RE 
  Motion of empty hand to or from object; time  depends 
on distance moved; usually preceded by  Release and 
followed by Grasp. 
 Move 
 M 
  Movement of loaded hand; time depends on distance, 
weight, and type of move; usually preceded by Grasp 
and followed by Release or Position.  
 Grasp 
 G 
  Closing fingers around an object; begins as the fingers 
contact the object and ends when control has been 
gained; depends on type of grasp; usually preceded by 
Reach and followed by Move.  
 Release 
 RL 
  Relinquishing control of object, typically the shortest 
of the therbligs. 
 Preposition 
 PP 
  Positioning object in predetermined location for later 
use; usually occurs in conjunction with Move, as in 
orienting a pen for writing.  
 Use 
 U 
  Manipulating tool for intended use; easily detected, as 
it advances the progress of work.  
 Assemble 
 A 
  Bringing two mating parts together; usually preceded 
by Position or Move; followed by Release.  
 Disassemble 
 DA 
  Opposite of Assemble, separating mating parts; usually 
preceded by Grasp and followed by Move or Release.  
Ineffective Therbligs
(Do not advance progress of work. Should be eliminated if possible.)
Therblig 
Symbol 
Description
Search 
S 
 Eyes or hands groping for object; begins as the eyes 
move in to locate an object.
Select 
SE 
 Choosing one item from several; usually follows 
Search.
Position 
P 
 Orienting object during work, usually preceded by 
Move and followed by Release (as opposed to prior to 
work for Preposition).
Inspect 
I 
 Comparing object with standard, typically with sight, 
but could also be with the other senses.
Plan 
PL 
 Pausing to determine next action; usually detected as a 
hesitation preceding Motion.
Unavoidable 
UD 
Beyond the operator’s control due to the nature of 
Delay 
 
 the operation, e.g., left hand waiting while right hand 
completes a longer Reach.
Avoidable Delay 
AD 
 Operator solely responsible for idle time, e.g., coughing.
Rest to Overcome 
R 
Appears periodically, not every cycle, depends on 
Fatigue 
 
the physical workload.
Hold 
H 
 One hand supports object while other does useful work.

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
153
are marked. Under the “Symbols” column RE (for reach) is written, indicating 
that an effective motion has been accomplished. Note also that a grasp (G) is 
involved, but is not measured separately, as it is not possible in most instances to 
time individual therbligs. Next, the analyst charts “Place U-bolt” and continues 
with the left hand. Usually it is less confusing to chart the activities of one hand 
completely before examining the other hand.    
Two-hand process chart
Page 1 of 1
Operation: Assemble cable clamps 
Part: SK-112 
Summary 
Left hand Right hand
Operator name and no.: J.B. #1157 
 
Effective time: 
2.7 
11.6
Analyst: G. Thuering 
Date: 6-11-98 
Ineffective time: 
11.6 
2.7
Method (circle choice)  Present 
Proposed 
Cycle time = 14.30 sec.
Sketch:
Assembled
units
U bolt
Clamp Note: Gravity feed
chutes for assembly
parts
Nuts
Man
14"
14"
Sym-
bol
Sym-
bol
Time
RE
G
1.00
M
RL
1.10
M
P
RE
G
M
P
RL
1.20
H
11.00
1.00
1.20
RE
G
M
P
1.00
1.20
U
RL
3.40
Time
Get U-bolt (10")
Get cable clamp (10")
RE
G
1.00
Get second nut (9")
Run down first nut
Place first nut (9")
Get first nut (9")
Place cable clamp (10")
M
P
1.20
Place second nut (9")
U
RL
3.40
Run down second nut
UD
0.90
Wait
Place U-bolt (10")
Hold U-bolt
Dispose of assembly
Left hand description
Right hand description
 Figure 4.17   Two-hand process chart for assembly of cable clamps  .

154 
C H A P T E R  4
 After the activities of both the right and the left hand have been charted, 
the analyst creates a summary at the bottom of the sheet, indicating the cycle 
time, pieces per cycle, and time per piece. Once the two-hand process chart has 
been completed for an existing method, the analyst can determine what improve-
ments can be introduced. Several important corollaries to the principles of mo-
tion economy should be applied at this point: 
 1.  Establish the best sequences of therbligs. 
 2.  Investigate any substantial variation in the time required for a given ther-
blig and determine the cause. 
 3.  Examine and analyze hesitations, to determine and then eliminate their 
causes. 
 4.  As a goal, aim for cycles and portions of cycles completed in the least 
amount of time. Study deviations from these minimum times to determine 
the causes.  
 In the example, the “delays” and “holds” are good places to begin. For ex-
ample, in Figure 4.17, the left hand acted as a holding device for almost the 
entire cycle. This would suggest the development of a fixture to hold the U-bolt. 
Further considerations to achieve balanced motions of both hands would suggest 
that when the fixture holds the U-bolts, the left hand and the right hand can be 
used simultaneously so that each completely assembles a cable clamp. Addi-
tional study of this chart might result in the introduction of an automatic ejector 
and gravity chute, to eliminate the final cycle element “dispose of assembly.” 
The use of the Therblig Analysis Checklist (see Figure 4.18) may also be helpful 
in this analysis.  
 4.4  MANUAL WORK AND DESIGN GUIDELINES 
  Although automation has significantly reduced the demands for human power in 
the modern industrial environment, muscular strength still remains an essential 
part of many occupations, particularly those involving manual materials handling 
(MMH) or manual work. In these activities, overexertion from moving heavy 
loads can highly stress the musculoskeletal system, resulting in nearly one-third 
of all occupational injuries. The low back alone accounts for almost one- quarter 
of these injuries and one-quarter of the annual workers’ compensation costs 
( National Safety Council, 2003). Back injuries are especially detrimental because 
they often result in permanent disorders, with considerable discomfort and limita-
tions for the employee as well as a large expense for the employer (an average 
case involving surgery may exceed $60,000 in direct costs). 
 ENERGY EXPENDITURE AND WORKLOAD GUIDELINES  
 Energy is required for the muscle contraction process. The molecule called  ATP 
(adenosine triphosphate) is the immediate energy source, which physically in-
teracts with the protein cross-bridging as one of ATP’s high-energy phosphate 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
155
bonds is broken. This source is very limited, lasting only several seconds, and 
the ATP must immediately be replenished from another molecule termed  CP 
(creatine phosphate). The CP source is also limited, less than 1 min of duration 
(see Figure 4.19), and must ultimately be regenerated by metabolism of the basic 
foods we eat: carbohydrates, fats, and proteins. This metabolism can occur in 
 Figure 4.18   Therblig Analysis Checklist. 

156 
C H A P T E R  4
two different modes:  aerobic,  requiring oxygen, and  anaerobic,  not using oxy-
gen. Aerobic metabolism is much more efficient, generating 38 ATPs for each 
 glucose  molecule (basic unit of carbohydrates), but it is relatively slow. Anaero-
bic metabolism is very inefficient, producing only 2 ATPs for each glucose mol-
ecule, but it is much quicker. Also, the glucose molecule is only partially broken 
down into two lactate molecules, which in the watery environment of the body 
Figure 4.18  (continued)

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
157
forms  lactic acid , a direct correlate of fatigue. Thus, during the first few minutes 
of heavy work, the ATP and CP energy sources are used up very quickly, and 
anaerobic metabolism must be utilized to regenerate the ATP stores. Eventually, 
as the worker reaches steady state, the aerobic metabolism catches up and main-
tains the energy output, as the anaerobic metabolism slows down. By warm-
ing up and starting heavy work slowly, the worker can minimize the amount of 
anaerobic metabolism and the concurrent buildup of lactic acid associated with 
feelings of fatigue. This delay of full aerobic metabolism is termed  oxygen defi-
cit  and must eventually be repaid by the  oxygen debt  of a cooling-down period, 
which is always larger than the oxygen deficit. 
 The energy expended on a task can be estimated by assuming that most of 
the energy is produced through aerobic metabolism and measuring the amount 
of oxygen consumed by the worker. The amount of inspired air is measured with 
a flowmeter and assumed to contain 21 percent oxygen. However, not all this 
oxygen is utilized by the body; therefore, the expired oxygen must also be mea-
sured. Typically, the volume of air inspired and expired is the same, and only the 
percentage of expired oxygen must be found, using an oxygen meter. A conver-
sion factor is included for a typical diet in which 4.9 kcal (19.6 Btu) of energy is 
produced for each liter of oxygen used in metabolism. 
E (kcal/min)  4.9 * V. (0.21  EO2)
 where   E  energy expenditure, kcal/min 
        V.  volume of air inspired, L/min 
     EO2  fraction of oxygen (O2) in expired air (roughly 0.17) 
100
2 (700)
1 (350)
%
50
0
1
2
Time (minutes)
Energy supply
O2 intake   liters/min (watts)
Anaerobic glycolysis
(lactic acid formation)
Aerobic metabolism
CP
ATP
3
4
 Figure 4.19   Sources of energy during the first few minutes of moderately heavy work.  
 High-energy phosphate stores (ATP and CP) provide most of the energy during the first 
seconds of work. Anaerobic glycolysis supplies less and less of the energy required as 
the duration of work increases, and aerobic metabolism takes over. 
( Source: Jones, Morgan-Campbell, Edwards, and Robertson, 1975.) 

158 
C H A P T E R  4
 The energy expended on a task varies by the type of task being performed, the 
posture maintained during the task, and the type of load carriage. Energy ex-
penditure data on several hundred different types of tasks have been collected, 
with the most common summarized in Figure 4.20. Alternatively, one may also 
estimate energy expenditure by using Garg’s (1978) metabolic prediction model. 
For manual materials handling, the manner in which the load is carried is most 
critical, with lowest energy costs for balanced loads held closest to the center of 
gravity of the body, which has the largest muscle groups. For example, a back-
pack supported by the trunk muscles is less demanding than holding an equal 
weight in two suitcases, one in each arm. Although balanced, the latter situation 
places the load far from the center of gravity and on the smaller arm muscles. 
Posture also plays an important role, with the least amount of energy expenditure 
for supported postures. Thus, a posture with the trunk bent over, with no arm 
support, will expend 20% more energy than a standing posture.  
 A 5.33-kcal/min (21.3-Btu/min) limit for acceptable energy expenditure 
for an 8-h workday has been proposed by Bink (1962). This number corre-
sponds to one-third the maximum energy expenditure of the average U.S. male 
[for females, it would be 1/3  12  4 kcal/min (15.9 Btu/min)]. If the overall 
1.6
2.2
4.2
5.0
6.8
7.7
16.2
10.2
9.0
8.5
8.0
2.7
3.0
4.0
2.5 mph
16lb
17 lb
22
 lb
27 ft/min
34 ft/min
115 lb
 Figure 4.20   Examples of energy costs of various types of human activity. Energy 
costs are given in kilocalories per minute. 
 ( Source: Passmore and Durnin, 1955, as adapted and presented by Gordon, 1957.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
159
workload is exceedingly high (i.e., exceeds the recommended limits), aerobic 
metabolism may not be sufficient to provide all the energy requirements, and the 
worker may rely on greater amounts of anaerobic metabolism, resulting in fa-
tigue and the buildup of lactic acid. Sufficient recovery must then be provided to 
allow the body to recover from fatigue and recycle the lactic acid. One guideline 
for rest allocation was developed by Murrell (1965): 
 R  (W  5.33)/(W  1.33) 
 where  R   time required for rest, as percent of total time 
 W  average energy expenditure during work, kcal/min 
 The value of 1.33 kcal/min (5.3 Btu/min) is the energy expenditure during rest. 
Consider a strenuous task of shoveling coal into a hopper, which has an energy 
expenditure of 9.33 kcal/min (37.0 Btu/min). Entering  W  9.33 into the equation 
yields  R  0.5. Therefore, to provide adequate time for recovery from fatigue, 
the worker would need to spend roughly one-half of an 8-h shift, or 4 h, resting. 
 The manner in which rest is also allocated is important. It serves no purpose 
to have the laborer work for 4 h straight at a rate of 9.33 kcal/min (37.0 Btu/min), 
suffer from extreme fatigue, and then rest for 4 h. In general, the duration of the 
work cycle is the primary determinant of fatigue buildup. With heavy work, 
blood flow tends to be occluded, further accelerating the use of anaerobic path-
ways. In addition, the recovery process tends to be exponential, with later times 
providing minimal incremental benefits. Therefore, short bursts (approximately 
1/2 to 1 min) of heavy work interspersed with short rest periods provide maxi-
mum benefit. During the 1/2 to 1 min periods, the immediate energy sources of 
ATP and CP get used up, but they can also be quickly replenished. Once lactic 
acid builds up during longer work periods, it becomes more difficult to remove. 
Micropauses of 1 to 3s are also useful for flushing any occluded blood vessels, 
and active breaks, during which the worker alternates hands or uses other mus-
cles, serve to relieve the fatigued muscles. Also, it is best for workers to decide 
when to take the breaks, whenever they feel the need for rest (self-paced), as op-
posed to prescribed (or machine-paced) breaks. In summary, the use of frequent, 
short work/rest cycles is highly recommended. 
 HEART RATE GUIDELINES 
 Unfortunately, the measurement of oxygen consumption and the computation 
of energy expenditure are both costly and cumbersome in an industrial work 
situation. The equipment costs several thousand dollars and interferes with the 
worker performing the job. An alternative indirect measure of energy expendi-
ture is the heart rate level. Because the heart pumps the blood carrying oxygen to 
the working muscles, the higher the required energy expenditure, the higher the 
corresponding heart rate (Figure 4.21). The instrumentation needed to measure 
heart rate is inexpensive (less than $100 for a visual readout, several hundred 
dollars for a PC interface) and relatively nonintrusive (worn regularly by athletes 
to monitor performance). The analyst must be careful, though, because heart rate 
measurement is most appropriate for dynamic work involving the large muscles 

160 
C H A P T E R  4
of the body at fairly high levels (40 percent of maximum) and can vary consider-
ably between individuals, depending on their fitness levels and age. In addition, 
heart rate can be confounded by other stressors including heat, humidity, emo-
tional levels, and mental stress. Limiting these external influences will result in 
a better estimate of physical workload. However, if the desired goal is to obtain 
the overall stress on the worker on the job, this may not be necessary.  
 A methodology for interpreting heart rate has been proposed by various 
 German researchers (cited in Grandjean, 1988). The average working heart rate 
is compared to the resting prework heart rate, with 40 beats/min being proposed 
as an acceptable increase. This increase corresponds very nicely with the recom-
mended working energy expenditure limits. The average increase in heart rate per 
increase in energy expenditure for dynamic work (i.e., the slope in Figure 4.21) is 
10 beats/min per 1 kcal/min. Thus, a 5.33-kcal/min workload (4 kcal/min above 
the resting level of 1.33 kcal/min) produces a 40-beat/min increase in heart rate, 
which is the limit for an acceptable workload. This value also corresponds closely 
to the heart rate recovery index presented by Brouha (1967). 
 The average heart rate is measured in two time periods (cross hatched 
 areas) during recovery after the cessation of work (see Figure 4.22): (1) between 
1/2 and 1 min after cessation and (2) between 2-1/2 and 3 min after cessation. 
Acceptable heart rate recovery (and therefore acceptable workload) occurs if the 
first reading does not exceed 110 beats/min and the difference between the two 
readings is at least 20 beats. Given a typical resting heart rate of 72 beats/min, 
the addition of the acceptable increment of 40 beats/min yields a working heart 
rate of 112 beats/min, which corresponds closely to Brouha’s first criterion.  
 As a final note on heart rate, it is very important to observe the course of heart 
rate during the working hours. An increase in heart rate during steady-state work 
(see upper curve in Figure 4.22), termed  heart rate creep,  indicates an increasing 
Heart rate (beats/min)
Energy expenditure (kcal/min)
0
50
100
150
200
0
5
10
15
 Figure 4.21   Linear increase in heart rate with physical workload, as measured by 
energy expenditure. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
161
buildup of fatigue and insufficient recovery during rest pauses (Brouha, 1967). 
This fatigue most likely results from the physical workload, but could also result 
from heat and mental stress, and a greater proportion of static rather than dynamic 
work. In any case, heart rate creep should be avoided by providing additional rest.  
 SUBJECTIVE RATINGS OF PERCEIVED EXERTION 
 An even simpler approach to estimating workload and the stress on the worker is 
the use of  subjective ratings of perceived exertion . These can replace the expen-
sive and relatively cumbersome equipment required for physiological measure-
ments with the simplicity of verbal ratings. Borg (Borg and Linderholm, 1967) 
developed the most popular scale for assessing the perceived exertion during 
dynamic whole-body activities—the  Borg Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE) 
scale.  The scale is constructed such that the ratings 6 through 20 correspond di-
rectly to the heart rate (divided by 10) expected for that level of exertion (Table 4.6). 
Verbal anchors are provided to assist the worker in performing the ratings. There-
fore, to ensure an acceptable heart rate recovery, based on the previous heart rate 
guidelines, the Borg scale should probably not exceed a rating of 11. 
 Note that the ratings, being subjective, can be affected by previous experience 
and the individual’s level of motivation. Therefore, the ratings should be used with 
caution and should perhaps be normalized to each individual’s maximum rating.    
 LOW BACK COMPRESSIVE FORCES 
 The adult human spine, or vertebral column, is an S-shaped assembly of 25 sepa-
rate bones ( vertebrae ) divided into four major regions: 7  cervical  vertebrae in 
the neck, 12  thoracic  vertebrae in the upper back, 5  lumbar  vertebrae in the low 
back, and the sacrum in the pelvic area (Figure 4.23). The bones have a roughly 
cylindrical body, with several bony processes emanating from the rear, which 
0
0
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
2
Resting
pulse
Working pulse
4 kcal/min
Work rate
Work
Rest
Recovery
Work rate
8 kcal/min
6
7
8
9
10
min
Heart rate: beats/min
Recovery pulse
Recovery pulse
Recovery pulse
 Figure 4.22   Heart rate for two different workloads. 
 The work rate of 8 kcal/min exhibits heart rate creep. The two marked time periods are 
used in Brouha’s criteria. 

162 
C H A P T E R  4
Cervical region
Thoracic region
Lumbar area
Sacrum
40˚
 Figure 4.23   Anatomy of the human spine. 
 ( From: Rowe, 1983.) 
 Table 4.6   Borg’s (1967) RPE Scale with Verbal Anchors 
 Rating 
 Verbal Anchor 
 6 
 No exertion at all 
 7 
 Extremely light 
 8 
   
 9 
 Very light 
 10 
   
 11 
 Light 
 12 
   
 13 
 Somewhat hard 
 14 
   
 15 
 Hard 
 16 
   
 17 
 Very hard 
 18 
   
 19 
 Extremely hard 
 20 
 Maximal exertion 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
163
serve as attachments for the back muscles, the  erector spinae.  Through the cen-
ter of each vertebra is an opening that contains and protects the spinal cord as it 
travels from the brain to the end of the vertebral column (Figure 4.24). At vari-
ous points along the way, spinal nerve roots branch off from the spinal cord and 
pass between the vertebral bones out to the extremities, heart, organs, and other 
parts of the body. 
 The vertebral bones are separated by softer tissue, the intervertebral  disks. 
These serve as joints, allowing a large range of motion in the spine, although 
most trunk flexion occurs in the two lowest joints, the one on the border between 
the lowest lumbar vertebra and the sacrum (termed the L5/S1 disk, where the 
numbering of vertebrae is top down by region), and the next one up (L4/L5 disk). 
The disks also act as cushions between the vertebral bones, and along with the 
S-shaped spine, they help to protect the head and brain from the jarring impacts 
of walking, running, and jumping. The disks are composed of a gellike center 
surrounded by onionlike layers of fibers, separated from the bone by a cartilage 
end plate. Considerable movement of fluid occurs between the gel center and 
4
2
(a)
(b)
(c)
1
3
5
 Figure 4.24   Anatomy of a vertebra and the process of disk degeneration. 
 (a) Normal state: (1) body of vertebra; (2) spinous process, serves as muscle attachment 
point; (3) intervertebral disk; (4) spinal cord; (5) nerve root. (b) Narrowing of the 
disk space, allowing the nerve root to be pinched. (c) Herniated disk, allowing the gel 
material to extrude and impinge upon the nerve root. (Adapted from Rowe, 1983.) 

164 
C H A P T E R  4
the surrounding tissue, depending on the pressure on the disk. Consequently, 
the length of the vertebral column (measured by change in overall stature) can 
change by as much as 1/2 to 1 in (1.3 to 2.5 cm) over the course of a workday 
and is sometimes used as an independent measure of an individual’s physical 
workload. (Interestingly, astronauts in space, removed from the effects of grav-
ity, can be as much as 2 in taller.) 
 Unfortunately, due to the combined effects of aging and heavy manual work 
exposure (these effects are hard to separate), the disks can weaken with time. 
Some of the enclosing fiber can become frayed, or the cartilage end plate can 
suffer microfractures, releasing some of the gelatinous material, reducing inner 
pressures, and allowing the center to start drying up. Correspondingly, the disk 
space narrows, allowing the vertebral bones to come closer together and even-
tually even touch, causing irritation and pain. Even worse, the nerve roots are 
impinged upon, leading to pain and sensory and motor impairments. As the fi-
bers lose integrity, the vertebral bones may shift, causing uneven pressure on the 
disks and even more pain. In more catastrophic cases, termed  disk herniation, or 
more commonly, a  slipped disk,  the fiber casings can actually rupture, allowing 
large amounts of the gel substance to extrude and impinge upon the nerve roots 
even more (Figure 4.24c). 
 The causes of low back problems are not always easy to identify. As with most 
occupational diseases, both job and individual factors are at play. The latter may 
include a genetic predisposition toward weaker connective tissues, disks, and liga-
ments, and personal lifestyle conditions, such as smoking and obesity, over which 
the industrial engineer has very little control. Changes can only be made with the 
job factors. Although epidemiological data are easily confounded with survivor 
population effects or individual compensatory mechanisms, it can be shown sta-
tistically that heavy work leads to an increase in low back problems. Heavy work 
includes more than just the frequent lifting of large loads; it also encompasses 
the static maintenance of forward-bending trunk postures for long periods. Long 
periods of immobility, even in sitting postures, and whole-body vibration are also 
contributing factors. Therefore, scientists have associated the buildup of high disk 
pressures with eventual disk failures and have resorted to biomechanical calcu-
lations or estimations of disk compressive forces from intra-abdominal or direct 
intradisk pressure measurements, neither of which are practical for industry. 
 A crude but useful analogy (Figure 4.25) considers a free-body diagram of 
the L5/S1 disk (where most trunk flexion and disk herniation occur) and models 
the components as a first-class lever, with the center of the disk acting as the 
fulcrum. The load acting through a moment arm determined by the distance from 
the center of the hands to the center of the disk creates a clockwise moment; the 
erector spinae muscle is modeled as a force acting downward through a very 
small moment arm [approximately 2 in (5 cm)], creating a counterclockwise 
moment barely sufficient to maintain equilibrium. Thus, the two moments must 
be equal, allowing calculation of the internal force of the erector spinae muscle:  
 2  F M  30  50 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
165
 where  FM  muscle force. Then  FM  1,500/2  750 lb (340 kg). Solving for 
the total compressive force  F comp exerted on the disk yields 
 F comp  F M  50  800 
 This disk compressive force of 800 lb (362.9 kg) is a considerable load, which 
may cause injury in certain individuals. 
 Note that this simple analogy neglects the offset alignment of the disks, 
weights of the body segments, multiple action points of erector spinae compo-
nents, and other factors, and probably underpredicts the extremely high com-
pressive forces typically obtained in the low back area. More accurate values 
for various loads and horizontal distances are presented in Figure 4.26. Due to 
the considerable individual variation in force levels resulting in disk failures, 
Waters (Waters, Putz-Anderson, & Garg,1994) recommended that a compres-
sive force of 770 lb (350 kg) be considered the danger threshold. 
 The hand calculation of such compressive forces through biomechanical 
modeling is exceedingly time-consuming and has led to the development of 
various computerized biomechanical models, the best known of which is the 3D 
Static Strength Prediction Program. 
 Note that although disk herniation may be the most severe of low back in-
juries, there are other problems, such as soft tissue injuries involving ligaments, 
muscles, and tendons. These are probably more common, resulting in the back-
ache that most people associate with manual work. Such pain, although uncom-
fortable, will probably recede over the course of several days with moderate rest. 
Physicians are currently recommending moderate daily activity to accelerate 
recovery, rather than the traditional complete bed rest. In addition, researchers 
are incorporating the soft tissue components in ever more complex back models.  
 NIOSH LIFTING GUIDELINES 
 Recognizing and attempting to control the growing problem of work-related back 
injuries, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) issued 
what is commonly referred to as the  NIOSH lifting guidelines  (Waters et al., 1994). 
Although these are only guidelines, OSHA uses them extensively in its workplace 
inspections and will issue citations based on these through the General Duty Clause. 
2"
30"
F  Fcomp
50
FM
30"
2"
L5/S1
L5/S1
50
 Figure 4.25   Back compressive forces modeled as a first-class lever. 

166 
C H A P T E R  4
 The key output is the  recommended weight limit  (RWL), which is based on the 
concept of an optimum weight, with adjustments for various factors related to task 
variables. The RWL is meant to be a load that can be handled by most workers:  
 1.  The 770-lb (350-kg) compression force on the L5/S1 disk, created by the 
RWL, can be tolerated by most young, healthy workers. 
 2.  More than 75 percent of women and more than 99 percent of men have the 
strength capability to lift a load described by the RWL. 
 3.  Maximum resulting energy expenditures of 4.7 kcal/min (18.6 Btu/min) 
will not exceed recommended limits.  
 Once the RWL is exceeded, musculoskeletal injury incidences and severity 
rates increase considerably. The formulation for RWL is based on a maximum 
load that can be handled in an optimum posture. As the posture deviates from  
 the optimum, adjustments for various task factors, in the form of multipliers, 
decrease the acceptable load. 
 RWL  LC * HM * VM * DM * AM * FM * CM 
 where  LC  load constant  51 lb 
  HM  horizontal multiplier  10/ H 
 VM  vertical multiplier  1 – 0.0075 |  V – 30 | 
 DM  distance multiplier  0.82  1.8/ D 
Load
lb
132
(kg)
(60)
88
(40)
44
(20)
Fcomp
2,000
1,750
1,500
1,250
H
1,000
750
500
250
0
5
Predicted L5/S1 compressive force, lb
Horizontal distance H in
10
15
20
25
30
35
 
 Figure 4.26   
Effect of weight of load and horizontal distance between the load center of gravity and 
the L5/S1 disk on the predicted compressive force on the L5/S1 disk. 
( Source: Adapted from NIOSH, 1981, Figs 3.4 and 3.5.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
167
 AM  asymmetry multiplier  1  0.0032* A 
 FM  frequency multiplier from Table 4.7 
 CM  coupling multiplier from Table 4.8 
 H   horizontal location of the load cg forward of the midpoint 
between the ankles, 10   H  25 in 
 V  vertical location of the load cg, 0   V  70 in 
 D   vertical travel distance between origin and destination of lift, 
10   D  70 in 
 A   angle of asymmetry between the hands and feet (degrees), 
0°   A  135°  
 Table 4.7   Frequency Multiplier (FM) Table 
   
 Work Duration 
   
  1 h 
 	1 but  2 h 
 	2 but  8 h 
 Frequency 
Lifts/min ( F )‡ 
 V 
 30† 
 V  30 
 V 
 30 
 V  30 
 V 
 30 
 V  30 
 
 0.2 
 1.00 
 1.00 
 0.95 
 0.95 
 0.85 
 0.85 
 
0.5 
 0.97 
 0.97 
 0.92 
 0.92 
 0.81 
 0.81 
 
1 
 0.94 
 0.94 
 0.88 
 0.88 
 0.75 
 0.75 
 
2 
 0.91 
 0.91 
 0.84 
 0.84 
 0.65 
 0.65 
 
3 
 0.88 
 0.88 
 0.79 
 0.79 
 0.55 
 0.55 
 
4 
 0.84 
 0.84 
 0.72 
 0.72 
 0.45 
 0.45 
 
5 
 0.80 
 0.80 
 0.60 
 0.60 
 0.35 
 0.35 
 
6 
 0.75 
 0.75 
 0.50 
 0.50 
 0.27 
 0.27 
 
7 
 0.70 
 0.70 
 0.42 
 0.42 
 0.22 
 0.22 
 
8 
 0.60 
 0.60 
 0.35 
 0.35 
 0.18 
 0.18 
 
9 
 0.52 
 0.52 
 0.30 
 0.30 
 0.00 
 0.15 
 
10 
 0.45 
 0.45 
 0.26 
 0.26 
 0.00 
 0.13 
 
11 
 0.41 
 0.41 
 0.00 
 0.23 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 
12 
 0.37 
 0.37 
 0.00 
 0.21 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 
13 
 0.00 
 0.34 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 
14 
 0.00 
 0.31 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 
15 
 0.00 
 0.28 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 0.00 
  
	15 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 † Values of  V are in inches. 
‡ For lifting less frequently than once per 5 min, set  F  0.2 lift/min. 
Table 4.8  Coupling Multiplier
 
Coupling Multiplier
 
V 
 30 in  
V  30 in 
Coupling Type 
(75 cm) 
(75 cm)
Good 
1.00 
1.00
Fair 
0.95 
1.00
Poor 
0.90 
0.90

168 
C H A P T E R  4
 More simply, 
 RWL (lb)  51(10/H) (1  0.0075 | V − 30 | ) (0.82  1.8D) 
(1  0.0032A)  FM  CM 
 Note that these multipliers range from a minimum value of 0 for extreme pos-
tures to a maximum value of 1 for an optimal posture or condition. Table 4.7 pro-
vides frequency multipliers for three different work durations and for frequencies 
varying from 0.2/min to 15/min. Work duration is divided into three categories:  
 1.  Short duration. One hour or less followed by a recovery time equal to 
1.2 times the work time. (Thus, even though an individual works for three 
1-h periods, as long as these work periods are interspersed with recovery 
times of 1.2 h, the overall work will still be considered of short duration.) 
 2.  Moderate duration. Between 1 and 2 h of work, followed by a recovery pe-
riod of at least 0.3 times the work time. 
 3.  Long duration. Anything longer than 2 h but less than 8 h. 
 The coupling multiplier depends on the nature of the hand-to-object interface. 
In general, a good interface or grip will reduce the maximum grasp forces required 
and increase the acceptable weight for lifting. In contrast, a poor interface will re-
quire large grasp forces and decrease the acceptable weight. For the revised NIOSH 
guidelines, three classes of couplings are used: good, fair, and poor (Table 4.8). 
 A good coupling is obtained if the container is of optimal design, such as 
boxes and crates with well-defined handles or hand-hold cutouts. An optimal 
container has a smooth, nonslip texture; is no greater than 16 in (40 cm) in the 
horizontal direction; and is no greater than 12 in (30 cm) high. An optimal handle 
is cylindrical, with a smooth, nonslip surface, 0.75 to 1.5 in (1.9 to 3.8 cm) in di-
ameter, more than 4.5 in (11.3 cm) long, and with 2 in (5 cm) clearance. For loose 
parts or irregular objects that are not found in containers, a good coupling would 
consist of a comfortable grip in which the hand can comfortably wrap around the 
object without any large wrist deviations (typically, small parts in a  power grip ). 
 A fair coupling results from less than optimal interfaces due to less than 
optimal handles or hand-hold cutouts. For containers of optimal design but with 
no handles or cutouts, or for loose parts, a fair coupling results if the hand cannot 
wrap all the way around but is flexed to only 90°. This would typically apply to 
most industrial packaging boxes. 
 A poor coupling results from containers of less than optimal design with no 
handles or hand-hold cutouts, or from loose parts that are bulky or hard to han-
dle. Any container with rough or slippery surfaces, sharp edges, an asymmetric 
center of gravity, or unstable contents, or one that requires gloves would result 
in a poor coupling, by definition. To assist in the classification of couplings, the 
decision tree shown in Figure 4.27 may be useful.  
 The multipliers for each variable act as simple design tools for fairly 
straightforward job redesign. For example, if HM  0.4, 60 percent of the po-
tential lifting capability is lost due to a large horizontal distance. Therefore, the 
horizontal distance should be reduced as much as possible. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
169
 NIOSH also devised a  lifting index  (LI) to provide a simple estimate of the 
hazard level of lifting a given load, with values exceeding 1.0 deemed to be haz-
ardous. Also, the LI is useful in prioritizing jobs for ergonomic redesign. 
 LI  load weightRWL 
 In terms of controlling the hazard, NIOSH recommends engineering controls, 
physical changes, or a job and workplace redesign rather than administrative con-
trols consisting of specialized selection and training of workers. Most common 
changes include avoiding high and low locations, using lift and tilt tables, using 
handles or specialized containers for handling loads, and reducing the horizontal 
distance by cutting out work surfaces and bringing loads closer to the body.  
 MULTITASK LIFTING GUIDELINES 
 For jobs with a variety of lifting tasks, the overall physical/metabolic load is in-
creased compared to the single lifting task. This is reflected in a decreased RWL 
and an increased LI, and there is a special procedure to handle such situations. 
Container
POOR
FAIR
GOOD
Optimal
container?
Optimal
handles?
Fingers
flexed
90 degrees?
Bulky
object?
Optimal
grip?
Loose object
Object Lifted
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
 Figure 4.27   Decision tree for coupling quality 

170 
C H A P T E R  4
The concept is a  composite lifting index  (CLI), which represents the collective 
demands of the job. The CLI equals the largest  single-task lifting index (STLI) 
and increases incrementally for each subsequent task. The multitask procedure 
is as follows: 
 1.  Compute a  single-task RWL (STRWL) for each task. 
 2.  Compute a  frequency-independent RWL (FIRWL) for each task by setting 
FM  1. 
 3.  Compute a  single-task LI (STLI) by dividing the load by STRWL. 
 4.  Compute a  frequency-independent LI (FILI) by dividing the load by FIRWL. 
 5.   Compute the CLI for the overall job by rank-ordering the tasks according to 
decreasing physical stress, that is, the STLI for each task. The CLI is then  
 CLI  STLI1  LI 
 where LI  FILI2 (1/FM1,2 – 1/FM1)  FILI3 (1/FM1,2,3 – 1/FM1,2)  . . . 
 Consider the three-task lifting job shown in Table 4.9. The multitask lifting 
 analysis is as follows: 
 1.  The task with the greatest lifting index is new task 1 (old task 2) with 
STLI  1.6. 
 2.  The sum of the frequencies for new tasks 1 and 2 is 1  2  3. 
 3.  The sum of the frequencies for new tasks 1, 2, and 3 is 1  2  4  7. 
 4.  From Table 4.7, the new frequency multipliers are FM1  0.94, FM1,2  
0.88, and FM1,2,3  0.70. 
 5.  The combined lifting index is therefore 
 CLI  1.6  1 (1/0.88  1/0.94)  0.67 (1/0.7  1/0.88)
 
 1.60  0.07  0.20  1.90   
NIOSH Analysis of Lifting a Box into the Trunk of a car 
 EXAMPLE 4.2 
 Before recent automotive design changes, it was not unusual to have to lean forward 
and extend the arms while placing an object into the trunk of a car (Figure 4.28). 
Assume the occupant lifts a 30-lb box from the ground into a trunk. Being lazy, the 
occupant simply twists 90° to pick up the box from the ground level ( V  0) at a short 
horizontal distance ( H  ~ 10 in). The vertical travel distance is the difference between 
the vertical location of the box at the destination (assume the bottom of the trunk is 
25 in from the ground) and the vertical location of the box at the origin ( V  0), yield-
ing  D  25. Assume that this is a one-time lift; therefore, FM  1. Also assume that 
the box is fairly small and compact, but has no handles. Thus, coupling is fair with 
CM  0.95. This yields the following calculation for the origin: 
 RWLORG  51(10/10) (1  0.0075|0  30|) (0.82  1.8/25)
 
 (1  0.0032 * 90) (1) (0.95) 
  51(1)(0.775) (0.892) (0.712) (1) (0.95)  23.8 
Figure 4.28  
Posture for trunk 
loading example.

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
171
 This procedure is facilitated by the NIOSH Multitask Job Analysis Worksheet 
(see Figure 4.29). However, once the number of tasks exceeds three or four, it 
becomes very time-consuming to calculate CLI by hand. A variety of software 
programs and websites are now available to assist the user in this effort, includ-
ing Design Tools. Of course, the best solution overall is to avoid manual materi-
als handling and use mechanical assist devices or completely automated material 
handling systems (see Chapter 3).   
 Assuming a larger reach ( H  25 in) into the trunk because of the bumper and high 
trunk lip, no twisting, the distance traveled remaining the same, and the coupling re-
maining fair, the calculation at the destination is 
 RWLDEST  51(10/25) (1  0.0075|25  30|)(0.82  1.8/25)
 
 (1  0.0032 * 0) (1) (0.95)
 
 51(0.4)(0.963) (0.892) (1) (1) (0.95)  16.6 
 and 
 LI  30/16.6  1.8 
 Thus, in the worst-case approach, only 16.6 lb could be lifted safely by most individu-
als, and the 30-lb box would create a hazard almost twice the acceptable level. The 
biggest reduction in capability is the horizontal distance at the destination, due to the 
trunk design. Decreasing the horizontal distance to 10 in would increase the  H factor 
to 10/10  1 and increase RWL to 41.5 lb. For most newer cars, this has been ac-
complished by the auto manufacturers by opening the front part of the trunk such that 
once the load is lifted to the lower lip, minimum horizontal lifting is needed; the load 
can be simply pushed forward. However, the limiting case is now the origin, which 
can be improved by moving the feet and eliminating the twist, increasing RWL to 
33.4 lb. Note that a two-step analysis is necessary if the occupant lifts the load from 
ground level to the lip of the trunk and then lowers the box into the trunk. This lift is 
also improved in newer-model cars because of a decrease in the vertical height of the 
lip, which also decreases the distance lifted. 
 Table 4.9   A Sample Three-Task Lifting Job’s Characteristics 
 Task Number 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 Load weight  L 
 20 
 30 
 10 
 Task frequency  F 
 2 
 1 
 4 
 FIRWL 
 20 
 20 
 15 
 FM 
 0.91 
 0.94 
 0.84 
 STRWL 
 18.2 
 18.8 
 12.6 
 FILI 
 1.0 
 1.5 
 0.67 
 STLI 
 1.1 
 1.6 
 0.8 
 New task number 
 2 
 1 
 3 

172 
C H A P T E R  4
 GENERAL GUIDELINES: MANUAL LIFTING 
 Although no one optimal lifting technique is suitable for all individuals or task 
conditions, several guidelines are generally appropriate overall (see Figure 4.30). 
First, plan the lift by evaluating the size and shape of the load, determining whether 
assistance is needed, and ascertaining what worksite conditions may interfere with 
the lift. Second, determine the best lifting technique. In general, a squat lift, keep-
ing the back relatively straight and lifting with the knees bent, is the safest in terms 
of low back compressive forces. However, bulky loads may interfere with the 
knees, and a stoop lift, in which the individual bends over and then extends the 
back, may be required. Third, spread the feet apart, both sideways and fore–aft, to 
maintain a good balance and stable posture. Fourth, secure a good grip on the load. 
These last two guidelines are especially important in avoiding sudden twisting 
and jerking movements, both of which are extremely detrimental to the low back. 
Fifth, hold the load close to the body to minimize the horizontal moment arm cre-
ated by the load and the resulting moment on the low back.  
 Avoiding twisting and jerky motions is critical. The first produces an asym-
metric orientation of the disks, leading to increased disk pressures, while the 
FILI3 (1/FM1,2,3 – 1/FM1,2)
FILI4 (1/FM1,2,3,4 – 1/FM1,2,3)
FILI5 (1/FM1,2,3,4,5 – 1/FM1,2,3,4)
CLI =
CLI =
Multitask job analysis worksheet
Step 1. Measure and record task variable data
Task no.
Department
Job title
Analyst's name
Date
Job description
Object
weight (lbs)
Task
no.
LC x  HM   x  VM  x  DM  x  AM  x  CM
51
51
51
51
51
STLI1, + Δ FILI2 + Δ FILI3 + Δ FILI4 + Δ FILI5
FILI2 (1/FM1,2 – 1/FM1)
FIRWL x FM
STRWL
F
FILI =
L/FIRWL
STLI =
L/STRWL
New
task no.
Origin
Dest.
Origin
Dest.
Lifts/min
Hrs
Hand location (in)
Vertical
distance (in)
D
Asymmetry angle (degs)
Frequency rate
Duration Coupling
C
F
A
A
H
V
H
L (avg.) L (max.)
V
Step 2. Compute multipliers and FIRWL, STRWL, FILI, and STLI for each task
Step 3. Compute the composite lifting index for the job (after renumbering tasks)
 Figure 4.29   Multitask Job Analysis Worksheet. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
173
a. 
Plan the lift.
b. 
Determine the best lifting
 
technique.
c. 
Get a secure grip.
d. 
Pull the load in close to
 
your body.
e. 
Alternate lifting and light 
 
work tasks.
 Figure 4.30   Safe lifting procedure. 
 (Available through S. H. Rodgers, Ph.D. P.O. Box 23446, Rochester, NY 14692.) 

174 
C H A P T E R  4
second generates additional accelerative forces on the back. One nonintuitive 
method for discouraging twisting in workers is actually to increase the travel 
distance between the origin and the destination. This will force the worker to 
take a step and, in so doing, turn the whole body, rather than twisting the trunk. 
Carrying uneven loads in both arms or an entire load in only one arm generates 
similar asymmetric disk orientations and should also be avoided. 
 The General Posture and Task Evaluation Checklist (see Figure 4.31) can be 
very useful in reminding the analyst of the basic principles of good work design.  
 BACK BELTS 
 A cautionary note should be given regarding back belts. Although commonly 
found on many workers and automatically prescribed in some companies, back 
belts are not the ultimate panacea and must be regarded with caution. The use 
of back belts originated from early studies of weightlifting, showing that for 
extreme loads, belts relieved 15 to 30 percent of low back compressive forces, 
as estimated   from back electromyograms (Morris et al., 1961). However, these 
studies were performed on trained weightlifters, lifting much larger loads, in a 
completely sagittal plane. Industrial workers lift much lighter loads, producing 
a much lower effect. Twisting because of misaligned muscles probably reduces 
this effect even further. There are also anecdotal data of the “superman” effect— 
industrial workers with back belts selecting heavier loads than those without back 
belts—and some workers having coronary incidents from the 10- to 15-mmHg 
increase in blood pressure due to the abdominal compression. 
 Figure 4.31   General Posture and Task Evaluation Checklist. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
175
 Finally, a longitudinal study of airline baggage handlers (Ridell et al., 1992) 
concluded that there was no significant difference in back injuries between 
workers using back belts and “control” workers without back belts. Surprisingly, 
a smaller group of workers, who for one reason or another (e.g., discomfort, 
heat) quit wearing the belts but continued in the study, had significantly higher 
injuries. This may be attributed to atrophy of the abdominal muscles, which 
should naturally provide an internal back belt but were weakened due to de-
creased stress. A positive approach may be to encourage workers to strengthen 
these abdominal muscles through abdominal crunches (modified sit-ups), regu-
lar exercise, and body weight reduction. Back belts should only be used with 
proper training and only after engineering controls have been attempted. 
 SUMMARY 
 Chapter 4 introduces some of the theoretical concepts of the human musculo-
skeletal and physiological systems as a means of providing a framework for 
a better understanding of the principles of motion economy and work design. 
These principles are presented as a set of rules to be utilized in redesigning man-
ual assembly work as part of the motion study. Hopefully, with a better under-
standing of the functioning of the human body, the analyst will view these rules 
as less arbitrary. These same concepts will be elaborated on in Chapter 5, for the 
discussions on the design of the workplace, tools, and equipment. 
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  What structural components are found in muscles? What do these components have 
to do with muscle performance? 
 2.  Explain the elements of static and dynamic muscle performance with the sliding 
filament theory. 
 3.  Describe the different types of muscle fibers and relate their properties to muscle 
performance. 
 4.  Why does a change in the number of active motor units not result in a proportional 
change in muscle tension? 
 5.  What does EMG measure? How is EMG interpreted? 
 6.  Explain why workstation designers should endeavor to have operators perform 
work elements without lifting their elbows. 
 7.  What viewing distance would you recommend for a seated operator working at a 
computer terminal? 
 8.  Define and give examples of the 17 fundamental motions, or therbligs. 
 9.  How may the basic motion Search be eliminated from the work cycle? 
 10.  What basic motion generally precedes Reach? 
 11.  What three variables affect the time for the basic motion Move? 
 12.  How does the analyst determine when the operator is performing the element 
Inspect? 
 13.  Explain the difference between avoidable and unavoidable delays. 

176 
C H A P T E R  4
 14.  Which of the 17 therbligs are classed as effective and usually cannot be removed 
from the work cycle? 
 15.  Why should fixed locations be provided at the workstation for all tools and 
materials? 
 16.  Which of the five classes of motions is preferred for industrial workers? Why? 
 17.  Why is it desirable to have the feet working only when the hands are occupied? 
 18.  In a motion study, why is it inadvisable to analyze both hands simultaneously? 
 19.  What task factors increase the index of difficulty in a Fitts’ tapping task? 
 20.  What factors affect back compressive forces during lifting? 
 21.  What factors influence the measurement of isometric muscle strength? 
 22.  Why do psychophysical, dynamic, and static strength capabilities differ? 
 23.  What methods can be used to estimate the energy requirements of a job? 
 24.  What factors change the energy expended for a given job? 
 25.  How does work capability vary with gender and age? 
 26.  What limits endurance in a whole-body manual task? 
 PROBLEMS  
 1.  What is the maximum load that can be raised by an outstretched stiff arm by a 
50th-percentile female? (For estimating anthropometry use Table 5.1.) 
 2.   In the packing department, a worker stands sideways between the end of a  conveyor 
and a pallet. The surface of the conveyor is 40 in from the floor, and the top of the 
pallet is 6 in from the floor. As a box moves to the end of the conveyor, the worker 
twists 90° to pick up the box, then twists 180° in the opposite direction and sets the 
box down on the pallet. Each box is 12 in on a side and weighs 25 lb. Assume the 
worker moves five boxes per minute for an 8-h shift and a horizontal distance of 
12 in. Using the NIOSH lifting equation, calculate RWL and LI. Redesign the task 
to improve it. What are the RWL and LI now?  
 3.  For Problem 2, calculate the low back compressive forces incurred in the perfor-
mance of this job, using the University of Michigan 3D Static Strength Prediction 
Program. 
 4.   A 95th-percentile male is holding a 20-lb load in his outstretched arm in 90° 
abduction. What is the voluntary torque required at the shoulder to be able to 
hold this load?  
 5.  A worker is shoveling sand at a rate of 8 kcal/min. How much rest does he need 
during an 8-h shift? How should the rest be allocated? 
 6.  A current problem in the U.S. Army is the neck/shoulder fatigue experienced by 
helicopter pilots. To be able to fly missions at night, the pilots wear night vision 
goggles, which are attached to the front of the helmet. Unfortunately, these are 
fairly heavy, causing a large downward torque of the head. This torque must be 
counteracted by the neck muscles, which then fatigue. To alleviate this problem, 
many pilots have started attaching random lead weights to the back of the helmet. 
Find the appropriate weight that would best balance the head and minimize neck 
fatigue. Assumptions: (a) cg of goggles is 8 in in front of neck pivot point; 
(b) goggles weigh 2 lb; (c) maximum volitional neck torque is 480 in·lb; (d) cg of 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
177
lead weight is 5 in behind neck pivot point; (e) bare helmet weighs 4 lb; and (f) cg 
of helmet is 0.5 in in front of neck pivot. 
 7.  The laborer on a palletizing operation has been complaining about fatigue and the 
lack of rest. You measure his heart rate and find it to be 130 beats/min and slowly 
increasing during work. When he sits down, his heart rates dropped to 125 beats/
min by the end of the first minute of rest and 120 beats/min by the end of the third 
minute. What do you conclude? 
 8.  A grievance has been filed by the union at Dorben Co. regarding the final inspec-
tion station, in which the operator slightly lifts a 20-lb assembly, examines all 
sides, and, if acceptable, sets it back down on the conveyor that takes the assembly 
to the packing station. On average, the inspector examines five assemblies per 
minute, at an energy expenditure level of 6 kcal/min. The conveyor is 40 in off the 
floor, and the assembly is roughly 20 in from the inspector while being inspected. 
Evaluate the job with respect to the NIOSH lifting guidelines and metabolic energy 
expenditure considerations. Indicate whether the job exceeds allowable limits. If it 
does, calculate how many assemblies the inspector may inspect per minute without 
exceeding acceptable guidelines. 
 9.  A relatively unfit worker with resting heart rate of 80 beat/min starts his job of pal-
letizing boxes. At the morning break, an industrial engineer quickly measures the 
worker’s heart rate and finds a peak value of 110 beats/min, a value of 105 beats/
min 1 min after stopping work, and a value of 95 beat/min 3 min after stopping 
work. What can you conclude about the workload for this worker? 
 10.  A standing inspector picks up 25 lb castings from a conveyor 50 in from the floor 
with a horizontal distance of 20 in. He then puts the casting on a work area 20 in 
lower than the conveyor and closer to the body (a minimum horizontal distance) for 
inspection. For good ones, he twists 90° to the right and sets it on another conveyor 
30 in from the floor with a minimum horizontal distance. For bad ones, he twists 
90° to the left and sets it on a third conveyor 30 in from the floor with a minimum 
horizontal distance. How many castings per minute can he inspect for an 8-h shift 
so as to be acceptable according to NIOSH guidelines? Redesign the job, at mini-
mal cost (i.e., no costly robotics or automation), so as to double production but still 
keep back strain to acceptable levels. 
 11.  Consider a worker standing on the ground lifting crates of vegetables (10 in high 
and 10 in deep, 30 lbs) from the ground to the flat bed of the truck where another 
worker will move the box and position it properly in the truck. Assume that the lift 
from the ground is fairly optimal, but that the reach onto the truck is fairly bad at 
a horizontal distance of 20 in. How many crates per minute can the worker on the 
ground load for an 8-h shift so as to be acceptable according to NIOSH guidelines? 
Redesign the job to maintain the expected quota of 10 crates per minute but still 
keep back strain to acceptable levels. Would back belts be an acceptable control 
measure? Why or why not? 
 12.   P&S has implemented a lift table for its soap box palletizing operation. The selected 
spring compresses itself with each row load so as to maintain a constant vertical 
height of 30 in. The conveyor surface was also raised to a 30 in height. In addition, 
each soap box (12 in  12 in  24 in, weight 20 lbs) is laid flat side down to avoid 
an extended horizontal reach to a second row (i.e., there are only two rows per level, 
each row accessed from each side of the custom 4  4 ft pallet, which rotates). 
The conveyor runs at a speed of 10 boxes/min for 7 h and 12 min (48 min allocated 

178 
C H A P T E R  4
for lunch and breaks). Evaluate whether the redesigned workplace is acceptable per 
the NIOSH Lifting Guidelines for one worker. Assume an abdominal depth of 5 in. 
If it is still not acceptable, redesign the job (at minimal cost, less than $5,000) to 
handle the required output of boxes.  
 REFERENCES 
 Åstrand, P. O., and K. Rodahl.  Textbook of Work Physiology. 3d ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1986. 
 Bink, B. “The Physical Working Capacity in Relation to Working Time and Age.” 
 Ergonomics, 5, no.1 (January 1962), pp. 25–28. 
 Borg, G., and H. Linderholm. “Perceived Exertion and Pulse Rate During Graded 
Exercise in Various Age Groups.”  Acta Medica Scandinavica, Suppl. 472 (1967), 
pp. 194–206. 
 Bouisset, S. “EMG and Muscle Force in Normal Motor Activities.” In  New 
 Developments in EMG and Clinical Neurophysiology. Ed. J. E. Desmedt. Basel, 
Switzerland: S. Karger, 1973. 
 Brouha, L.  Physiology in Industry. New York: Pergamon Press, 1967. 
 Chaffin, D. B. “Electromyography—A Method of Measuring Local Muscle Fatigue.” 
 The Journal of Methods-Time Measurement, 14 (1969), pp. 29–36. 
 Chaffin, D. B., and G. B. J. Anderson.  Occupational Biomechanics. New York: John 
Wiley & Sons, 1991. 
 Chaffin, D. B., G. D. Herrin, W. M. Keyserling, and J. A. Foulke.  Preemployment 
Strength Testing. NIOSH Publication 77-163. Cincinnati, OH: National Institute 
for Occupational Safety and Health, 1977. 
 Drillis, R. “Folk Norms and Biomechanics.”  Human Factors, 5 (October 1963), 
pp. 427–441. 
 Dul, J., and B. Weerdmeester.  Ergonomics for Beginners. London: Taylor & Francis, 
1993. 
 Eastman Kodak Co., Human Factors Section.  Ergonomic Design for People at Work. 
New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1983. 
 Fitts, P. “The Information Capacity of the Human Motor System in Controlling the 
Amplitude of Movement.”  Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47, no. 6 (June 
1954), pp. 381–391. 
 Freivalds, A., and D. M. Fotouhi. “Comparison of Dynamic Strength as Measured by 
the Cybex and Mini-Gym Isokinetic Dynamometers.”  International Journal of 
Industrial Ergonomics, 1, no. 3 (May 1987), pp. 189–208. 
 Garg, A. “Prediction of Metabolic Rates for Manual Materials Handling Jobs,” 
 American  Industrial Hygiene Association Journal , 39 (1978), pp. 661–674. 
 Gordon, E. “The Use of Energy Costs in Regulating Physical Activity in Chronic 
Disease.” A.M.A. Archives of Industrial Health, 16 (1957), pp. 437–441. 
 Grandjean, E.  Fitting the Task to the Man. New York: Taylor & Francis, 1988. 
 Gray, H.  Gray’s Anatomy. 35th ed. Eds. R. Warrick and P. Williams. Philadelphia: 
W.B. Saunders, 1973. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 4  Manual Work Design  
179
 Ikai, M., and T. Fukunaga. “Calculation of Muscle Strength per Unit Cross-Sectional 
Area of Human Muscle by Means of Ultrasonic Measurement.”  Internationale 
Zeitschrift für angewandte Physiologie einschließlich Arbeitsphysiologie, 26 
(1968), pp. 26–32. 
 Jones, N., Morgan-Campbell, E., Edwards, R., and Robertson, D. Clinical Exercise 
Testing, Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1975. 
 Jonsson, B. “Kinesiology.” In  Contemporary Clinical Neurophysiology (EEG Sup. 34). 
New York: Elsevier-North-Holland, 1978. 
 Langolf, G., D. G. Chaffin, and J. A. Foulke. “An Investigation of Fitt’s Law Using a 
Wide Range of Movement Amplitudes.”  Journal of Motor Behavior, 8, no. 2 
(June 1976), pp. 113–128. 
 Miller, G. D., and A. Freivalds. “Gender and Handedness in Grip Strength—A Double 
Whammy for Females.”  Proceedings of the Human Factors Society, 31 (1987), 
pp. 906–910. 
 Morris, J. M., D. B. Lucas, and B. Bressler. “Role of the Trunk in Stability of 
the Spine.”  Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, 43-A, no. 3 (April 1961), 
pp. 327–351. 
 Mundel, M. E., and D. L. Danner.  Motion and Time Study. 7th ed. Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1994. 
 Murrell, K. F. H.  Human Performance in Industry. New York: Reinhold Publishing, 
1965.  
 National Safety Council.  Accident Facts. Chicago: National Safety Council, 2003. 
NIOSH (National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health), A Work Practices 
Guide for Manual Lifting, TR# 81-122, U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, 
Cincinnatti, 1981.
 Passmore, R., and J. Durnin. “Human Energy Expenditure.” Physiological Reviews, 
35 (1955), pp. 801–875. 
 Ridell, C. R., J. J. Congleton, R. D. Huchingson, and J. T. Montgomery. “An 
Evaluation of a Weightlifting Belt and Back Injury Prevention Training Class 
for Airline  Baggage Handlers.”  Applied Ergonomics,  23, no. 5 (October 1992), 
pp. 319–329.  
 Rodgers, S. H.  Working with Backache. Fairport, NY: Perinton Press, 1983. 
 Rowe, M. L.  Backache at Work. Fairport, NY: Perinton Press, 1983. 
 Sanders, M. S., and E. J. McCormick.  Human Factors in Engineering and Design. 
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993. 
 Schmidtke, H. and Stier, F. “Der Aufbau komplexer Bewegungsablaufe aus 
Elementarbewegungen”. Forsch. des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen, 822 (1960), 
pp. 13–32. 
 Snook, S. H., and V. M. Ciriello. “The Design of Manual Handling Tasks: Revised 
Tables of Maximum Acceptable Weights and Forces.”  Ergonomics, 34, no. 9 
(September 1991), pp. 1197–1213. 
 Thornton, W. “Anthropometric Changes in Weightlessness.” In  Anthropometric Source 
Book, 1, ed. Anthropology Research Project, Webb Associates. NASA RP1024. 
Houston, TX: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1978. 

180 
C H A P T E R  4
 Waters, T. R., V. Putz-Anderson, and A. Garg.  Revised NIOSH Lifting Equation,  
Pub. No. 94-110, Cincinnati, OH: National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health, 1994.  
 Winter, D. A.  Biomechanics of Human Movement.  New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1979.   
 SELECTED SOFTWARE 
 3D Static Strength Prediction Program. University of Michigan Software, 475 
E. Jefferson, Room 2354, Ann Arbor, MI 48109. (http://www.umichergo.org) 
 Design Tools (available from the McGraw-Hill website at www.mhhe.com/neibel-
freivalds), New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002.  
 Energy Expenditure Prediction Program. University of Michigan Software, 475 
E. Jefferson, Room 2354, Ann Arbor, MI 48109. (http://www.umichergo.org) 
 Ergointelligence (Manual Material Handling). Nexgen Ergonomics, 3400 de 
 Maisonneuve Blvd. West, Suite 1430, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3Z 3B8. 
(http://www.nexgenergo.com/) 
 ErgoTRACK (NIOSH Lifting Equation). ErgoTrack.com, P.O. Box 787, Carrboro, NC 
27510. 
 WEBSITES 
 NIOSH Homepage–http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/homepage.html 
 NIOSH Lifting Guidelines–http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/94-110.html 
 NIOSH Lifting Calculator–http://www.industrialhygiene.com/calc/lift.html 
 NIOSH Lifting Calculator–http://tis.eh.doe.gov/others/ergoeaser/download.html  

 
181
 
CHAPTER 
 
5 
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Fit the workplace to the operator. 
 •  Provide adjustability. 
 •  Maintain neutral postures (joints in midrange). 
 •  Minimize repetitions. 
 •  Use power grips when force is required. 
 •  Use pinch grips for precision and not force. 
 D
 esigning the workplace, tools, equipment, and work environment to fit the 
human operator is called  ergonomics.  Rather than devoting a lot of space 
to the underlying theory of the physiology, capabilities, and limitations 
of the human, this chapter presents the principles of work design and appropriate 
checklists to facilitate the use of these design principles. With each design princi-
ple, a brief explanation of its origin or relationship to the human is provided. This 
approach will better assist the methods analyst in designing the workplace, equip-
ment, and tools to meet the simultaneous goals of (1) increased production and 
efficiency of the operation and (2) decreased injury rates for the human operator. 
 5.1  ANTHROPOMETRY AND DESIGN 
  The primary guideline is to design the workplace to accommodate most individu-
als with regard to structural size of the human body. The science of measuring the 
human body is termed  anthropometry  and typically utilizes a variety of caliperlike 
devices to measure structural dimensions, for example, stature and forearm length. 
Practically speaking, however, few ergonomists or engineers collect their own data, 
because of the wealth of data that has already been collected and tabulated. Close 
to 1,000 different body dimensions, for close to 100 mostly military population 
types, are available in the somewhat dated  Anthropometric Source Book (Webb 
Associates, 1978). More recently the CAESAR (Civilian American and European 
Surface Anthropometry Resource) project collected more than 100 dimensions 
 Workplace, 
Equipment, 
and Tool Design 

182 
C H A P T E R  5
Stature    
height (1)
Eye height (2)
Shoulder 
height (3)
Chest
depth
(13)
Elbow
rest
height
(8)
Sitting height, erect (6)
Eye height,
sitting (7)
Thigh clearance
height (9)
Elbow-to-elbow
breadth (14)
Hip breadth (15)
Knee height
(10)
Buttock -
knee 
length (11)
Popliteal
height (12)
Elbow     
height (4)
Knuckle   
height (5)
 
 Table 5.1   Selected Body Dimensions and Weights of U.S. Adult Civilians 
 
 
 Dimension (in) 
 Dimension (cm) 
 Body dimension 
 Sex 
 5th 
 50th 
 95th 
 5th 
 50th 
 95th 
 1. Stature (height)  Male 
 63.7 
 68.3 
 72.6 
 161.8 
 173.6 
 184.4 
 
 Female 
 58.9 
 63.2 
 67.4 
 149.5 
 160.5 
 171.3 
 2. Eye height 
 Male 
 59.5 
 63.9 
 68.0 
 151.1 
 162.4 
 172.7 
 
 Female 
 54.4 
 58.6 
 62.7 
 138.3 
 148.9 
 159.3 
 3. Shoulder height  Male 
 52.1 
 56.2 
 60.0 
 132.3 
 142.8 
 152.4 
 
 Female 
 47.7 
 51.6 
 55.9 
 121.1 
 131.1 
 141.9 
 4. Elbow height 
 Male 
 39.4 
 43.3 
 46.9 
 100.0 
 109.9 
 119.0 
 
 Female 
 36.9 
 39.8 
 42.8 
 93.6 
 101.2 
 108.8 
 5. Knuckle height  Male 
 27.5 
 29.7 
 31.7 
 69.8 
 75.4 
 80.4 
 
 Female 
 25.3 
 27.6 
 29.9 
 64.3 
 70.2 
 75.9 
 6. Height, sitting 
 Male 
 33.1 
 35.7 
 38.1 
 84.2 
 90.6 
 96.7 
 
 Female 
 30.9 
 33.5 
 35.7 
 78.6 
 85.0 
 90.7 
 7.  Eye height,
sitting   
 Male 
 28.6 
 30.9 
 33.2 
 72.6 
 78.6 
 84.4 
 Female 
 26.6 
 28.9 
 30.9 
 67.5 
 73.3 
 78.5 
 8.  Elbow rest 
height, sitting   
 Male 
 7.5 
 9.6 
 11.6 
 19.0 
 24.3 
 29.4 
 Female 
 7.1 
 9.2 
 11.1 
 18.1 
 23.3 
 28.1 
 9.  Thigh clearance 
height   
 Male 
 4.5 
 5.7 
 7.0 
 11.4 
 14.4 
 17.7 
 Female 
 4.2 
 5.4 
 6.9 
 10.6 
 13.7 
 17.5 
 10.  Knee height, 
sitting   
 Male 
 19.4 
 21.4 
 23.3 
 49.3 
 54.3 
 59.3 
 Female 
 17.8 
 19.6 
 21.5 
 45.2 
 49.8 
 54.5 
 11.  Buttock-knee 
distance, sitting   
 Male 
 21.3 
 23.4 
 25.3 
 54.0 
 59.4 
 64.2 
 Female 
 20.4 
 22.4 
 24.6 
 51.8 
 56.9 
 62.5 
 12.  Popliteal 
height, sitting   
 Male 
 15.4 
 17.4 
 19.2 
 39.2 
 44.2 
 48.8 
 Female 
 14.0 
 15.7 
 17.4 
 35.5 
 39.8 
 44.3 
 13. Chest depth 
 Male 
 8.4 
 9.5 
 10.9 
 21.4 
 24.2 
 27.6 
 Female 
 8.4 
 9.5 
 11.7 
 21.4 
 24.2 
 29.7 
 14.  Elbow-elbow 
breadth   
 Male 
 13.8 
 16.4 
 19.9 
 35.0 
 41.7 
 50.6 
 Female 
 12.4 
 15.1 
 19.3 
 31.5 
 38.4 
 49.1 
 15.  Hip breadth, 
sitting 
 Male 
 12.1 
 13.9 
 16.0 
 30.8 
 35.4 
 40.6 
 Female 
 12.3 
 14.3 
 17.2 
 31.2 
 36.4 
 43.7 
 X.  Weight 
(lb and kg) 
 Male 
 123.6 
 162.8 
 213.6 
 56.2 
 74.0 
 97.1 
 Female 
 101.6 
 134.4 
 197.8 
 46.2 
 61.1 
 89.9 
 Source: Kroemer, 1989. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment,  and Tool Design 
183
Probability Distributions and Percentiles 
 EXAMPLE 5.1 
 A  kth percentile  is defined as a value such that  k  percent of the data values (plotted in 
ascending order) are at or below this value and 100 –  k  percent of the data values are at 
or above this value. A histogram plot of U.S. adult male statures shows a bell-shaped 
curve, termed a  normal distribution,  with a median value of 68.3 in (see Figure 5.1). 
This is also the 50th percentile value; for example, one-half of all males are shorter 
than 68.3 in, while one-half are taller. The 5th percentile male is only 63.7 in tall, 
while a 95th percentile male is 72.6 in tall. The proof is as follows. 
 Typically, in a statistical approach, the approximately bell-shaped curve is nor-
malized by the transformation 
z  (x  )
 where    mean 
   standard deviation (measure of dispersion) 
 to form a standard normal distribution (also termed a  z distribution; see Figure 5.2). 
 Once normalized, any approximately bell-shaped population distribution will 
have the same statistical properties. This allows easy calculation of any percentile 
value desired, using the appropriate  k and  z values, as follows: 
 κth percentile  
 10 or 90 
 5 or 95 
 2.5 or 97.5 
 1 or 99 
 z value 
 1.28 
 1.645 
 1.96 
 2.33 
 kth percentile    z 
 Given that the mean stature for males in the United States is 68.3 in (173.6 cm), while 
the standard deviation is 2.71 in (6.9 cm) (Webb Associates, 1978), the 95th percen-
tile male stature is calculated as 
 68.3  1.645 (2.71)  72.76 in 
 and the 5th percentile male stature is 
 68.3  1.645 (2.71)  63.84 in 
 
63.7
68.3
72.6
Shaded area = 5%
 Figure 5.1   Normal distribution of U.S. adult male statures. 
 Note that the calculated values of 72.76 and 63.84 in are not exactly equal to the 
 actual values of 72.6 and 63.7 in. This is so because the U.S. male height distribution 
is not a completely normal distribution. 
(continued)

184 
C H A P T E R  5
on 5,000 civilians using three-dimensional body scans. A summary of useful 
dimensions that apply to the particular postures needed for workplace design 
for U.S. males and females is given in Table 5.1. Much of this anthropometric 
data is -included in computerized human models such as COMBIMAN, Jack, 
 MannequinPro, and Safeworks, which provide easy size adjustments and limita-
tions in ranges of motion or visibility as part of the computer-aided design process.  
 DESIGN FOR EXTREMES 
 Designing for most individuals is an approach that involves the use of one of three 
different specific design principles, as determined by the type of design problem. 
 Design for extremes  implies that a specific design feature is a limiting factor in 
determining either the maximum or minimum value of a population variable that 
will be accommodated. For example, clearances, such as a doorway or an entry 
opening into a storage tank, should be designed for the maximum individual, that 
is, a 95th percentile male stature or shoulder width. Then 95 percent of all males 
and almost all females will be able to enter the opening. Obviously, for doorways, 
space is usually not at a premium, and the opening can be designed to accom-
modate even larger individuals. In contrast, added space in military aircraft or 
submarines is expensive, and these areas are therefore designed to accommodate 
only a certain (smaller) range of individuals. Reaches, for such things as a brake 
pedal or control knob, are designed for the minimum individual, that is, a 5th 
percentile female leg or arm length. Then 95 percent of all females and practically 
all males will have a longer reach and will be able to activate the pedal or control.  
 DESIGN FOR ADJUSTABILITY 
 Design for adjustability  is typically used for equipment or facilities that can be 
adjusted to fit a wider range of individuals. Chairs, tables, desks, vehicle seats, 
steering columns, and tool supports are devices that are typically adjusted to ac-
commodate the worker population ranging from 5th percentile females to 95th 
percentile males. Obviously, designing for adjustability is the preferred method 
of design, but there is a trade-off with the cost of implementation. (Specific 
adjustment ranges for seat design are given later in Table 5.2.) 
 
z curve
0
1.645  5th percentile  z
.05
Shaded area  5%
Shaded area  5%
z
.05  95th percentile  1.645
 Figure 5.2   Standard normal distribution of male weights. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
185
 DESIGN FOR THE AVERAGE 
 Design for the average  is the cheapest but least preferred approach. Even 
though there is no individual with all average dimensions, there are certain 
situations in which it would be impractical or too costly to include adjustabil-
ity for all features. For example, most industrial machine tools are too large 
and too heavy to include height adjustability for the operator. Designing the 
operating height at the 50th percentile of the elbow height for the combined 
female and male populations (roughly the average of the male and female 50th 
percentile values) means that most individuals will not be unduly inconve-
nienced. However, the exceptionally tall male or very short female may experi-
ence some postural discomfort.  
 PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 Finally, the industrial designer should also consider the legal ramifications of 
design work. Due to the passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 
(see Section 9.6), reasonable effort must be made to accommodate individuals 
with all abilities. Special accessibility guidelines (U.S. Department of Justice, 
1991) have been issued regarding parking lots, entryways into buildings, assem-
bly areas, hallways, ramps, elevators, doors, water fountains, lavatories, restau-
rant or cafeteria facilities, alarms, and telephones. 
 It is also very useful, if practical and cost-effective, to build a full-scale 
mock-up of the equipment or facility being designed and then have the us-
ers evaluate the mock-up. Anthropometric measurements are typically made 
in standardized postures. In real life, people slouch or have relaxed postures, 
changing the effective dimensions and the ultimate design. Many costly errors 
have occurred during production, because of the lack of mock-up evaluations. 
In Example 5.2, the final design actually accommodates more than 95 percent 
of the population, yielding a rise height larger than necessary. The true design 
should have used the body dimensions for a combined male and female popula-
tion. However, such combined data are rarely available. The data can be created 
through statistical techniques, but the general design approach is sufficient for 
most industrial applications.  
 5.2   PRINCIPLES OF WORK DESIGN: 
THE WORKPLACE 
 DETERMINE WORK SURFACE HEIGHT 
BY ELBOW HEIGHT 
 The work surface height (whether the worker is seated or standing) should 
be determined by a comfortable working posture for the operator. Typically, 
this means that the upper arms are hanging down naturally and the elbows are 
flexed at 90° so that the forearms are parallel to the ground (see Figure 5.4). 
The elbow height becomes the proper operation or work surface height. If the 

186 
C H A P T E R  5
Designing Seating in a Large Training Room 
 EXAMPLE 5.2 
 This example shows the step-by-step procedures utilized in a typical design problem—
arranging seating in an industrial training room such that most individuals will have an 
unobstructed view of the speaker and screen (see Figure 5.3).  
 1.  Determine the body dimensions critical to the design—sitting height, erect; and 
eye height, sitting. 
 2.  Define the population being served—U.S. adult males and females. 
 3.  Select a design principle and the percentage of the population to be accommodated—
Designing for extremes and accommodating 95 percent of the population. The key 
principle is to allow a 5th percentile female sitting behind a 95th percentile male to 
have an unimpeded line of sight.  
 4.  Find appropriate anthropometric values from Table 5.1. The 5th percentile female 
seated eye height is 26.6 in (67.5 cm), while the 95th percentile male erect sitting 
height is 38.1 in (96.7 cm). Thus, for the small female to see over the large male, 
a rise height of 11.5 in (29.2 cm) is necessary between the two rows. This would 
be a very large rise height, which would create a very steep slope. Typically, 
therefore, the seats are staggered, so that the individual in the back is looking over 
the head of an individual two rows in front, decreasing the rise height by one-half. 
 5.  Add allowances and test. Many anthropometric measurements have been made 
on nude human bodies. Therefore, allowances for heavy clothing, hats, or shoes 
may be necessary. For example, if all the trainees will be wearing hard hats, an 
additional 2 to 3 in might be needed for the rise height. It would be much more 
practical to remove the hard hats in the training room. 
 
{
Rise
height
5th percentile female
95th percentile male
 Figure 5.3   Seating design in a large training room. 
work surface is too high, the upper arms are abducted, leading to shoulder 
fatigue. If the work surface is too low, the neck or back is flexed forward, lead-
ing to back fatigue.  

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
187
 ADJUST THE WORK SURFACE HEIGHT BASED 
ON THE TASK BEING PERFORMED 
 There are modifications to the first principle. For rough assembly involving 
the lifting of heavy parts, it is more advantageous to lower the work surface 
by as much as 8 in (20 cm) to take advantage of the stronger trunk muscles 
(see Figure 5.5). For fine assembly involving minute visual details, it is more 
advantageous to raise the work surface by up to 8 in (20 cm) to bring the details 
closer to the optimum line of sight of 15°(principle from Chapter 4). Another, 
perhaps better, alternative is to slant the work surface approximately 15° so that 
both principles can be satisfied. However, rounded parts then have a tendency 
to roll off the surface. 
 These principles also apply to a seated workstation. A majority of tasks, such 
as writing or light assembly, are best performed at the resting-elbow height. If the 
job requires the perception of fine detail, it may be necessary to raise the work to 
bring it closer to the eyes. Seated workstations should be provided with adjust-
able chairs and adjustable footrests (see Figure 5.6). Ideally, after the operator is 
comfortably seated with both feet on the floor, the work surface is positioned at 
the appropriate elbow height to accommodate the operation. Thus, the worksta-
tion also must be adjustable. Short operators whose feet do not reach the floor, 
even after adjusting the chair, should use a footrest to provide support for the feet.  
 PROVIDE A COMFORTABLE CHAIR 
FOR THE SEATED OPERATOR 
 The seated posture is important from the standpoint of reducing both the stress 
on the feet and the overall energy expenditure. Because comfort is a very in-
dividual response, strict principles for good seating are somewhat difficult to 
Tool height
Elbow height from
floor surface
90
Work height
 Figure 5.4   Graphic aid for determining correct work surface height. 
 ( From: Putz-Anderson, 1988.) 

188 
C H A P T E R  5
Side view
H
J
I
K
L
M
C
B
E
D
A
G N
F
 Figure 5.6   Adjustable chair (specific seat parameter values found in Table 5.2). 
Height of objects
Height of objects
being handled
being handled
Foot depth
clearance
5 in (13 cm)
Foot height
clearance
4 in (10 cm)
Height of
work
surface
Height of objects
being handled
Optimal
working
height
of the
hands
15
15
In from elbow rest height
(a)
(c)
(b)
Overhead
clearance
80 in 
(203 cm)
Knee
clearance
4 in (10 cm)
8
8
Floor level
4
4
0
 Figure 5.5   Recommended standing workplace dimensions. 
 (a) For precision work with armrest, (b) for light assembly, (c) for heavy work. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
189
define. Furthermore, few chairs will comfortably adapt to the many possible 
seating postures (see Figure 5.7). However, several general principles hold true 
for all seats. When a person is standing erect, the lumbar portion of the spine 
(the small of the back, approximately at the belt level) curves naturally inward, 
which is termed  lordosis.  However, as a person sits down, the pelvis rotates 
backward, flattening the lordotic curve and increasing the pressure on the disks 
in the vertebral column (see Figure 5.8). Therefore, it is very important to pro-
vide  lumbar support  in the form of an outward bulge in the seat back, or even a 
simple lumbar pad placed at the belt level. 
 Another approach to preventing flattening of the lordotic curve is to reduce the 
pelvic rotation by maintaining a large angle between the torso and thighs, via a for-
ward-tilting seat (kneeling posture in Figure 5.7). The theory is that this is a shape 
maintained by astronauts in the weightless environment of space (see Figure 4.4). 
The disadvantage of this type of seat is that it may put additional stress on the knees. 
The addition of a pommel to the forward-sloping seat, forming a saddlelike seat, 
may be a better overall approach, as it eliminates the need for knee supports and still 
allows for back support (see Figure 5.9).      
 Table 5.2   Recommended Seat Adjustment Ranges 
 Seat parameter 
 Design Value
[in (cm) unless
specified]  
 Comments 
 A–Seat height 
 16–20.5 (40–52)  Too high—compresses thighs; too 
low—disk pressure increases 
 B–Seat depth 
 15–17 (38–43) 
 Too long—cuts popliteal region, use 
waterfall contour 
 C–Seat width 
 	18.2 (	46.2) 
 Wider seats recommended for heavy 
individuals 
 D–Seat pan angle 
 10° 10° 
 Downward tilting requires greater 
friction in the fabric 
 E–Seat back to pan angle 
 
90° 
 
105° preferred, but requires work-
station modifications 
 F–Seat back width 
 
12 (
30.5) 
 Measured in the lumbar region 
 G–Lumbar support 
 6–9 (15–23) 
 Vertical height from seat pan to cen-
ter of lumbar support 
 H–Footrest height 
 1–9 (2.5–23) 
 
 I–Footrest depth 
 12 (30.5) 
 
 J–Footrest distance 
 16.5 (42) 
 
 K–Leg clearance 
 26 (66) 
 
 L–Work surface height 
 ~32 (~81) 
 Determined by elbow rest height 
 M–Work surface thickness 
 2 (5) 
 Maximum value 
 N–Thigh clearance 
 
8 (
20) 
 Minimum value 
 Note: A–G from ANSI (1988); H–M from Eastman Kodak (1983). 

190 
C H A P T E R  5
 Figure 5.7   Six basic seating 
postures. 
 ( From: Serber, 1990. Reprinted 
with permission of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society. 
All rights reserved.) 
 
Front
Support
Reclining
Kneeling
Kneeling
Kneeling
Traditional
Traditional
Traditional
Stool
Re-balance
Re-balance
Rebalance
 
Lordotic
inward
arch
(a) Standing
(b) Sitting
Kyphotic
outward
arch
 Figure 5.8   Posture of 
the spine when standing 
and sitting. 
 Lumbar portion of spine 
is lordotic when standing 
(a) and kyphotic when 
sitting (b). The shaded 
vertebrae are the lumbar 
portion of the spine. 
( Source: Grandjean 1988, 
Fig. 47.) 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
191
 Figure 5.9  Saddle chair.  
 (Courtesy: This version of the Nottingham Chair, called the Checkmate, is made by the 
Osmond Group: Photograph by Nigel Corlett. For further details of the Nottingham chair 
see Nottinghamchair.com; for the Checkmate see ergonomics.co.uk and search for the 
Checkmate chair.) 

192 
C H A P T E R  5
 PROVIDE ADJUSTABILITY IN THE SEAT 
 A second consideration is the reduction of disk pressure, which can increase 
considerably with a forward tilt of the trunk. Reclining the backrest from the 
vertical also has a dramatic effect in reducing disk pressures (Andersson et al., 
1974). Unfortunately, there is a trade-off. With increasing angles, it becomes 
more difficult to look down and perform productive work. 
 Another factor is the need to provide easy adjustability for specific seat pa-
rameters. Seat height is most critical, with ideal height being determined by the 
person’s popliteal height, which is defined in the figure accompanying Table 5.1. 
A seat that is too high will uncomfortably compress the underside of the thighs. 
A seat that is too low will raise the knees uncomfortably high and decrease trunk 
angle, again increasing disk pressure. Specific recommendations for seat height 
and other seat parameters (shown in Figure 5.6) are given in Table 5.2. 
 In addition, armrests for shoulder and arm support and footrests for shorter 
individuals are recommended. Casters assist in movement and ingress/egress 
from workstations. However, there may be situations in which a stationary chair 
is desired. In general, the chair should be slightly contoured, slightly cushioned, 
and covered in a breathable fabric to prevent moisture buildup. Overly soft cush-
ioning restricts posture and may restrict circulation in the legs. An overall opti-
mum working posture and workstation is shown in Figure 5.10. 
 ENCOURAGE POSTURAL FLEXIBILITY 
 The workstation height should be adjustable so that the work can be performed 
efficiently either standing or sitting. The human body is not designed for long 
periods of sitting. The disks between the vertebrae do not have a separate blood 
supply, and they rely on pressure changes resulting from movement to receive 
nutrients and remove wastes. Postural rigidity also reduces blood flow to the 
muscles and induces muscle fatigue and cramping. An alternate compromise is 
to provide a sit/stand stool so that the operator can change postures easily. Two 
key features for a sit/stand stool are height adjustability and a large base of sup-
port so that the stool does not tip, preferably long enough that the feet can rest on 
and counterbalance it (see Figure 5.11). 
 PROVIDE ANTIFATIGUE MATS 
FOR A STANDING OPERATOR 
 Standing for extended periods on a cement floor is fatiguing. The operators 
should be provided with resilient antifatigue mats. The mats allow small muscle 
contractions in the legs, forcing the blood to move and keeping it from tending 
to pool in the lower extremities.   
 LOCATE ALL TOOLS AND MATERIALS 
WITHIN THE NORMAL WORKING AREA 
 In every motion, a distance is involved. The greater the distance, the larger 
the muscular effort, control, and time. It is therefore important to minimize 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
193
distances. The normal working area in the horizontal plane of the right hand 
includes the area circumscribed by the arm below the elbow when it is moved 
in an arc pivoted at the elbow (see Figure 5.12). This area represents the most 
convenient zone within which motions may be made by that hand with a normal 
expenditure of energy. The normal area of the left hand may be similarly estab-
lished. Because movements are made in the third dimension, as well as in the 
horizontal plane, the normal working area also applies to the vertical plane. The 
Arms: When operator's 
hands are on keyboard, 
upper arm and forearm 
should form right angle; 
hands should be lined up 
with forearm; if hands are 
angled up from the wrist, try 
lowering or downward-tilting 
the keyboard; optional 
armrests should be 
adjustable.
Backrest:
Adjustable for 
occasional 
variations; shape 
should match 
contour of lower 
back, providing 
even pressure 
and support.
Posture: Sit all the 
way back into chair 
for proper back 
support; back, neck 
should be comfortably 
erect; knees should be 
slightly lower than hips; 
do not cross legs or shift 
weight one side; give 
joints, muscles a chance 
to relax; periodically, get 
up and walk around.
Desk: Thin work surface 
to allow leg room and 
posture adjustments; 
adjustable surface 
height preferable; table 
should be large enough 
for books, ﬁles, 
telephone while 
permitting different 
positions of screen, 
keyboard, mouse pad.
Telephone: Cradling 
telephone receiver 
between head and 
shoulder can cause 
muscle strain; headset 
allows head, neck to 
remain straight while 
keeping hands free.
Screen:
Positioned so that 
midscreen is 150 
down from eye 
level.
Keyboard:
Positioned to 
allow hands, 
forearms to 
remain straight, level.
Avoiding eye strain:
1. Get glasses that 
improve focus on screen; 
measure distance before 
visiting eye doctor.
2. Try to position screen or 
lamps so that lighting is 
indirect; do not have light 
shining directly at screen 
or into eyes.
Document holder: Same 
height and distance from 
user as the screen, so
eyes can remain focused as 
they look from one to the 
other.
3. Use a glare-reducing 
screen.
4. Periodically rest eyes
by looking into the distance.
Seat: Adjustable 
height, angle; ﬁrm 
cushion; "waterfall" 
front helps 
circulation to legs.
Feet: Entire 
sole should 
rest 
comfortably 
on ﬂoor or 
footrest.
 Figure 5.10   Properly adjusted workstation. 

194 
C H A P T E R  5
normal area relative to height for the right hand includes the area circumscribed 
by the lower arm in an upright position hinged at the elbow moving in an arc. 
There is a similar normal area in the vertical plane (see Figure 5.13). 
 FIX LOCATIONS FOR ALL TOOLS AND MATERIALS 
TO PERMIT THE BEST SEQUENCE 
 In driving an automobile, we are all familiar with the short time required to 
apply the foot brake. The reason is obvious: because the brake pedal is in a 
fixed location, no time is required to decide where the brake is located. The 
body responds immediately and applies pressure to the area where the driver 
knows the foot pedal is located. If the location of the brake foot pedal varied, the 
driver would need considerably more time to brake the car. Similarly, providing 
fixed locations for all tools and materials at the workstation eliminates, or at 
  
 Figure 5.11   Industrial sit/stand stools. 
 ( Courtesy: BioFit, Waterville, OH) 
12.4"
Normal
Length of arm 
28"
Length of forearm 
10"
Length of upper arm 
12"
Length of hand 
6.7"
Length of end joint 
0.9"
 
(2nd finger)
Maximum
Assembly
2"
1.3"
15.8"
24.3"
3.5"
 Figure 5.12   Normal and maximum working areas in the horizontal plane for women 
(for men, multiply by 1.09). 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
195
least minimizes, the short hesitations required to search for and select the objects 
needed to do the work. These are the ineffective Search and Select therbligs dis-
cussed in Chapter 4 (see Figure 5.14).   
 USE GRAVITY BINS AND DROP DELIVERY 
TO REDUCE REACH AND MOVE TIMES 
 The time required to perform both of the transport therbligs Reach and Move 
is directly proportional to the distance that the hands must move in performing 
these therbligs. Utilizing gravity bins, components can be continuously brought 
to the normal work area, thus eliminating long reaches to get these supplies (see 
Figure 5.15). Likewise, gravity chutes allow the disposal of completed parts 
within the normal area, eliminating the necessity for long moves to do so. Some-
times, ejectors can remove finished products automatically. Gravity chutes make 
a clean work area possible, as finished material is carried away from the work 
area, rather than stacked up all around it. A bin raised off the work surface (so 
that the hand can partially slide underneath) will also decrease the time required 
to perform this task by approximately 10 to 15 percent.   
 ARRANGE TOOLS, CONTROLS, AND OTHER 
COMPONENTS OPTIMALLY TO MINIMIZE MOTIONS 
 The optimum arrangement depends on many characteristics, both human 
(strength, reach, sensory) and task (loads, repetition, orientation). Obviously, not 
all factors can be optimized. The designer must set priorities and make trade-offs 
Normal for
forearm
Maximum for extended arm
28"
16.7"
 Figure 5.13   Normal and maximum working areas in the vertical plane for women (for 
men, multiply by 1.09). 

196 
C H A P T E R  5
in the layout of the workplace. However, certain basic principles should be fol-
lowed. First, the designer must consider the general location of components rela-
tive to other components, using the  importance  and  frequency-of-use principles. 
The most important, as determined by overall goals or objectives, or most fre-
quently used components, should be placed in the most convenient locations. 
For example, an emergency stop button should be placed in a readily visible, 
reachable, or convenient position. Similarly, a regularly used activation button, 
or the most often used fasteners, should be within easy reach of the operator. 
 Once the general location has been determined for a group of components, 
that is, the most frequently used parts for assembly, the principles of functional-
ity and sequence of use must be considered.  Functionality  refers to the grouping 
of components by similar function (for example, all fasteners in one area, all 
 Figure 5.14   Tool balancers provide fixed locations for tools. 
 (Courtesy of Packers Kromer.) 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
197
gaskets and rubber components in another area). Because many products are as-
sembled in a strict sequence, cycle after cycle, it is very important to place the 
components or subassemblies in the order that they are assembled, as this will 
have a very large effect on reducing wasteful motions. The designer should also 
consider using Muther’s Systematic Layout Planning (see Chapter 3) or other 
types of adjacency layout diagramming techniques, to develop a quantitative 
or relative comparison of the various layouts of components on a work surface. 
The relationships between components can be modified from traditional data on 
the flow from one area to another, and should include visual links (eye move-
ments), auditory links (voice communications or signals), and tactile and control 
motions. 
 These principles of work design for workstations are summarized in the 
Workstation Evaluation Checklist (see Figure 5.16). The analyst may find this 
useful in evaluating existing workstations or implementing new workstations.  
 Figure 5.15   A workstation utilizing gravity bins and a belt conveyor to reduce reach 
and move times. 
 The conveyor in the background carries other parts past this particular workstation. The 
operator is feeding the conveyor from under the platform by merely dropping assembled 
parts onto the feeder belt. (Source: Alden Systems Co.) 

198 
C H A P T E R  5
 Figure 5.16   Workstation Evaluation Checklist. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
199
 5.3   PRINCIPLES OF WORK DESIGN: 
MACHINES AND EQUIPMENT 
 TAKE MULTIPLE CUTS WHENEVER POSSIBLE BY 
COMBINING TWO OR MORE TOOLS IN ONE, OR BY 
ARRANGING SIMULTANEOUS CUTS FROM BOTH 
FEEDING DEVICES 
 Advanced production planning for the most efficient manufacture includes tak-
ing multiple cuts with combination tools and simultaneous cuts with different 
tools. Of course, the type of work to be processed and the number of parts to be 
produced determine the desirability of combining cuts, such as cuts from both 
the square turret and the hexagonal turret. 
 USE A FIXTURE INSTEAD OF THE HAND 
AS A HOLDING DEVICE 
 If either hand is used as a holding device during the processing of a part, then the 
hand is not performing useful work. Invariably, a fixture can be designed to hold 
the work satisfactorily, thus allowing both hands to do useful work. Fixtures not 
only save time in processing parts, but also permit better quality in that the work 
can be held more accurately and firmly. Many times, foot-operated mechanisms 
allow both hands to perform productive work. 
 An example will help clarify the principle of using a fixture, as opposed to 
the hands, for holding work. A company that produced specialty windows needed 
to remove a 0.75-in-wide strip of protective paper from around all four edges of 
both sides of Lexan panels. An operator would pick up a single sheet of Lexan 
and bring it to the work area. The operator would then pick up a pencil and square 
and mark the four corners of the Lexan panel. The pencil and square would be 
laid aside and a template would be picked up and located on the pencil marks. The 
operator would then strip the protective paper from around the periphery of the 
Lexan panels. The standard time developed by MTM-1 was 1.063 min per piece. 
 A simple wood fixture was developed to hold three Lexan panels while each 
was stripped of the 0.75-in-wide protective paper around the periphery. With 
the fixture method, the worker picked up three Lexan sheets and located them 
in the fixture (see Figure 5.17). The protective paper was stripped, the sheets 
were turned 180°, and the protective paper was removed from the remaining two 
sides. The improved method resulted in a standard of 0.46 min per panel, or a 
savings of 0.603 min of direct labor per panel.   
 LOCATE ALL CONTROL DEVICES 
FOR BEST OPERATOR ACCESSIBILITY 
AND STRENGTH CAPABILITY 
 Many of our machine tools and other devices are mechanically perfect, yet inca-
pable of effective operation, because the facility designer overlooked various hu-
man factors. Handwheels, cranks, and levers should be of such a size and placed 

200 
C H A P T E R  5
in such positions that operators can manipulate them with maximum proficiency 
and minimum fatigue. Frequently used controls should be positioned between 
elbow and shoulder height. Seated operators can apply maximum force to levers 
located at elbow level; standing operators, to levers located at shoulder height. 
Handwheel and crank diameters depend on the torque to be expended and the 
mounting position. The maximum diameters of handgrips depend on the forces 
to be exerted. For example, for a 10- to 15-lb (4.5- to 6.8-kg) force, the diameter 
should be no less than 0.25 in (0.64 cm) and preferably larger; for 15 to 25 lb 
(6.8 to 11.3 kg), a minimum of 0.5 in (1.3 cm) should be used; and for 25 lb 
(11.3 kg) or more, a minimum of 0.75 in (1.9 cm). However, diameters should 
not exceed 1.5 in (3.8 cm), and the grip length should be at least 4 in (10.1 cm), 
to accommodate the breadth of the hand. 
 Guidelines for crank and handwheel radii are as follows: light loads, radii 
of 3 to 5 in (7.6 to 12.7 cm); medium to heavy loads, radii of 4 to 7 in (10.2 to 
17.8 cm); very heavy loads, radii of more than 8 in (20.3 cm) but not in excess of 
20 in (50.8 cm). Knob diameters of 0.5 to 2 in (1.3 to 5.1 cm) are usually satisfac-
tory. The diameters of knobs should be increased as greater torques are needed.  
 USE SHAPE, TEXTURE, AND SIZE CODING 
FOR CONTROLS 
 Shape coding, using two- or three-dimensional geometric configurations, per-
mits both tactual and visual identification. It is especially useful under low-light 
conditions or in situations where redundant or double-quality identification is 
desirable, thus helping to minimize errors. Shape coding permits a relatively 
large number of discriminable shapes. An especially useful set of known shapes 
that are seldom confused is shown in Figure 5.18. Multiple rotation knobs are 
used for continuous controls in which the adjustment range is more than one 
full turn. Fractional rotation knobs are used for continuous controls with a range 
less than a full turn, whereas detent positioning knobs are for discrete settings. 
In addition to shape, the surface texture can provide cues for discrimination by 
3/4"
3/4"
Hinge
Lid
Lexan sheets
 Figure 5.17   Fixture for stripping ¾   -in-wide protection paper around periphery of 
Lexan sheets. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
201
touch. Typically, three textures are rarely confused: smooth, fluted, and knurled. 
However, as the number of shapes and textures increases, discrimination can 
be difficult and slow if the operator must identify controls without vision. If the 
operator is obliged to wear gloves, then shape coding is only desirable for visual 
discrimination, or for the tactual discrimination of only two to four shapes. 
 Size coding, analogous to shape coding, permits both tactual and visual iden-
tification of controls. Size coding is used principally where the controls cannot 
be seen by the operators. Of course, as is the case with shape coding, size coding 
permits redundant coding, as controls can be discriminated both tactually and 
visually. In general, try to limit the size categories to three or four, with at least a 
0.5-in (12-mm) size difference between controls. Operational coding requiring a 
Class A
Multiple rotation
Class B
Fractional rotation
Class C
Detent positioning
(b) Shape of knobs
(c) Texture of knobs
(a) Types of rotation
Smooth
Fluted
Knurled
A
B
C
D
E
 Figure 5.18   Examples of knob designs for three classes of use that are seldom confused by touch. 
 The diameter or length of these controls should be between 0.5 and 4.0 in (1.3 and 10.2 cm), except for class C, 
where 0.75 in (1.9 cm) is the minimum suggested. The height should be between 0.5 and 1 in (1.3 and 2.5 cm). 
(a&b) Adapted from Hunt, 1953 (c)  Source : Bradley, 1967. 

202 
C H A P T E R  5
unique movement (e.g., putting the gearshift into reverse) is especially useful for 
critical controls that shouldn’t be activated inadvertently. 
 USE PROPER CONTROL SIZE, DISPLACEMENT, 
AND RESISTANCE 
 In their work assignments, workers continually use various types and designs of 
controls. The three parameters that have a major impact on performance are con-
trol size, control-response ratio, and control resistance when engaged. A control 
that is either too small or too large cannot be activated efficiently. Tables 5.3, 
5.4, and 5.5 provide helpful design information about minimum and maximum 
dimensions for various control mechanisms. 
 Table 5.3   Control Size Criteria 
 
 
 
 Control size 
 Control 
 Dimension 
 
 Minimum 
(mm) 
 Maximum 
(mm) 
 Pushbutton 
 Fingertip 
 Diameter 
 13 
 * 
 
 Thumb/palm 
 Diameter 
 19 
 * 
 
 Foot 
 Diameter 
 8 
 * 
 Toggle switch 
 
 Tip diameter 
 3 
 25 
 
 
 Lever arm length 
 13 
 50 
 Rotary selector 
 
 Length 
 25 
 * 
 
 
 Width 
 * 
 25 
 
 
 Depth 
 16 
 * 
 Continuous adjustment
  knob 
 Finger/thumb  Depth 
 13 
 25 
 
 
 Diameter 
 10 
 100 
 
 Hand/palm 
 Depth 
 19 
 * 
 
 
 Diameter 
 38 
 75 
 Cranks 
 For rate 
 Radius 
 13 
 113 
 
 For force 
 Radius 
 13 
 500 
 Handwheel 
 
 Diameter 
 175 
 525 
 
 
 Rim thickness 
 19 
 50 
 Thumbwheel 
 
 Diameter 
 38 
 * 
 
 
 Width 
 * 
 * 
 
 
 Protrusion from
  surface 
 3 
 * 
 Lever handle 
 Finger 
 Diameter 
 13 
 75 
 
 Hand 
 Diameter 
 38 
 75 
 Crank handle 
 
 Grasp area 
 75 
 * 
 Pedal 
 
 Length 
 88 
 † 
 
 
 Width 
 25 
 † 
 Valve handle 
 
 Diameter 75 in per
 inch of valve size 
 
  
 * No limit set by operator performance. 
 † Dependent on space available. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
203
 The  control-response (C/R) ratio  is defined as the amount of movement in 
a control divided by the amount of movement in the response (see Figure 5.19). 
A low C/R ratio indicates high sensitivity, such as in the coarse adjustment of a 
micrometer. A high C/R ratio means low sensitivity, such as the fine adjustment 
on a micrometer. Overall control movement depends on the combination of the 
primary travel time to reach the approximate target setting and the secondary 
adjust time to reach the exact target setting accurately. The optimum C/R ratio 
that minimizes this total movement time depends on the type of control and task 
conditions (see Figure 5.20). Note that there is also a  range effect —the tendency 
to overshoot short distances and undershoot long distances. 
 Control resistance is important in terms of providing feedback to the opera-
tor. Ideally, it can be of two types: pure displacement with no resistance or pure 
 Table 5.4   Control Displacement Criteria 
 
 
  Displacement 
 Control 
 Condition 
 Minimum 
 Maximum 
 Pushbutton 
 Thumb/fingertip operation 
 3 mm 
 25 mm 
 
 Foot normal 
 13 mm 
 — 
 
 Heavy boot 
 25 mm 
 — 
 
 Ankle flexion only 
 — 
 63 mm 
 
 Leg movement 
 — 
 100 mm 
 Toggle switch 
 Between adjacent positions 
 30° 
 — 
 
 Total 
 — 
 120° 
 Rotary selector 
 Between adjacent detents: Visual 
 15° 
 — 
 
 Nonvisual 
 30° 
 — 
 
 For facilitating performance 
 — 
 40° 
 
 When special engineering is required 
 — 
 90° 
 Continuous 
adjustment knob 
 Determined by desired control/display ratio 
(mm of control movement for each 
mm of display movement) 
 Crank 
 Determined by desired control/display ratio 
 Handwheel 
 Determined by desired control/display ratio 90°–120°† 
 Thumbwheel 
 Determined by number of positions 
 Lever handle 
 Fore-aft movement 
 * 
 350 mm 
 
 Lateral movement 
 * 
 950 mm 
 Pedals 
 Normal 
 13 mm 
 — 
 
 Heavy boot 
 25 mm 
 — 
 
 Ankle flexion (raising) 
 — 
 63 mm 
 
 Leg movement 
 — 
 175 mm 
 *None established. 
 †Provided optimum control/display ratio is not hindered. 

204 
C H A P T E R  5
force with no displacement. The first has the advantage of being less fatiguing, 
while the second is a  deadman control,  that is, the control returns to zero upon 
release. Real-life controls are typically spring-loaded, incorporating the features 
of both. Faulty control aspects include high initial static friction, excessive vis-
cous damping, and  deadspace,  that is, control movement with no response. All 
three impair tracking and use performance. However, the first two are sometimes 
incorporated purposely to prevent inadvertent activation of the control (Sanders 
and McCormick, 1993). 
Table 5.5  Control Resistance Criteria
 
Resistance
 
 
Minimum  Maximum 
Control 
Condition 
(kg) 
(kg)
 
Fingertip 
0.17 
1.14
Pushbutton 
Foot: Normally off control 
1.82 
9.10
 
    Rested on control 
4.55 
9.10
Toggle switch 
Finger operation 
0.17 
1.14
Rotary selector 
Torque 
1 cm·kg 
7 cm·kg
Continuous  
Torque: Fingertip 1-in dia 
* 
0.3 cm·kg
adjustment knob 
Fingertip 
 1-in dia 
* 
0.4 cm·kg
 
Rapid, steady turning: 3-in radius 
0.91 
2.28
Crank 
                  5–8-in radius 
2.28 
4.55
 
Precise settings 
1.14 
3.64
 
Precision operation: 3-in radius 
* 
*
Handwheel† 
                 5–8-in radius 
1.14 
3.64
 
Resistance at rim: One-hand 
2.28 
13.64
 
               Two-hand 
2.28 
22.73
Thumbwheel 
Torque 
1 cm·kg 
3 cm·kg
 
Finger grasp 
0.34 
1.14
 
Hand grasp: One-hand 
0.91 
—
 
          Two-hand 
1.82 
—
 
Fore–aft: Along median plane:
Lever handle 
  One-hand—10 in forward SRP§ 
— 
13.64
 
          —16–24 in forward SRP 
— 
22.73
 
  Two-hand—10–19 in forward SRP 
— 
45
 
Lateral:
 
  One-hand—10–19 in forward SRP 
— 
9.09
 
  Two-hand—10–19 in forward SRP 
— 
22.73
 
Foot: Normally off control 
1.82 
—
Pedal 
     Rested on control 
4.55 
—
 
Ankle flexion only 
— 
4.55
 
Leg movement 
— 
80
* Not established.
† For valve handles/wheels: 25  cm·kg of torque/cm of valve size (8 cm·kg of torque/cm of 
handle diameter).
§ SRP  Seat reference point.

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
205
Large display
movement
Small display
movement
Small lever
movement
Limited movement
or
limited rotation
Large lever
movement
Large movement
or
several rotations
Low C/R ratio
(high sensitivity)
(high gain)
High C/R ratio
(low sensitivity)
(low gain)
 Figure 5.19   Generalized illustrations of low and high control–response ratios (C/R ratios) for lever and rotary 
controls. The C/R ratio is a function of the linkage between the control and the display. 
Time (seconds)
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Low
(High sensitivity)
High
(Low sensitivity)
Optimum
C/R ratio
Control - response ratio (C/R ratio)
A
d
j
u
st
 t
i
m
e 
Tr
av
el
 t
i
m
e
 
 Figure 5.20   Relationship between C/R ratio and movement time (travel time and  adjust time). 
 The specific C/R ratios are not meaningful out of their original context, so are omitted here. These data, however, 
very typically depict the nature of the relationships, especially for knob controls. 
 ( Source: Jenkins and Conner, 1949.) 

206 
C H A P T E R  5
 ENSURE PROPER COMPATIBILITY 
BETWEEN CONTROLS AND DISPLAYS 
 Compatibility  is defined as the relationship between controls and displays that 
is consistent with human expectations. Basic principles include  affordance, the 
perceived property results in the desired action;  mapping,  the clear relationship 
between controls and responses; and  feedback,  so that the operator knows that 
the function has been accomplished. For example, good affordance is a door with 
a handle that pulls open or a door with a plate that pushes open. Spatial mapping 
is provided on well-designed stoves. Movement compatibility is provided by 
direct drive action, scale readings that increase from left to right, and clockwise 
movements that increase settings. For circular displays, the best compatibility is 
accomplished with a fixed scale and moving pointer display (see Section 7.4). 
For vertical or horizontal displays,  Warrick’s principle,  which says that points 
closest on the display and control move in the same direction, provides the best 
compatibility (see Figure 5.19). For controls and displays in different planes, a 
clockwise movement for increases and the right-hand screw rule (the display 
advances in the direction of motion of a right-handed screw or control) are most 
compatible. For stick controls of a direct drive, the best approach is up results in 
up movement (Sanders and McCormick, 1993). 
 The principles of work design for machines and equipment are summarized 
in the Machine Evaluation Checklist (Figure 5.21). The analyst may find this 
useful in evaluating and designing machines or other equipment. 
 5.4  CUMULATIVE TRAUMA DISORDERS 
 The cost of work-related musculoskeletal disorders such as cumulative trauma 
disorders (CTDs) in U.S. industry, although not all due to improper work design, 
is quite high. Data from the National Safety Council (2003) suggest that 15 to 
20 percent of workers in key industries (meatpacking, poultry processing, auto as-
sembly, and garment manufacturing) are at potential risk for CTD, and 61 percent 
of all occupational illnesses are associated with repetitive motions. The worst indus-
try is manufacturing, while the worst occupational title is butchering, with 222 CTD 
claims per 100,000 workers. With such high rates, and with average medical costs 
of $30,000 per case, NIOSH and OSHA have focused on the reduction of incidence 
rates for work-related musculoskeletal disorders as one of their main objectives. 
 Cumulative trauma disorders  (sometimes called  repetitive motion injuries, 
or  work-related musculoskeletal disorders ) are injuries to the musculoskeletal 
system that develop gradually as a result of repeated microtrauma due to poor 
design and the excessive use of hand tools and other equipment. Because of the 
slow onset and relatively mild nature of the trauma, the condition is often ig-
nored until the symptoms become chronic and more severe injury occurs. CTDs 
are a collection of a variety of problems, including repetitive motion disorders, 
carpal tunnel syndrome, tendinitis, ganglionitis, tenosynovitis, and bursitis, with 
these terms sometimes being used interchangeably. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
207
 Figure 5.21   Machine Evaluation Checklist. 
(continued)

208 
C H A P T E R  5
 Four major work-related factors seem to lead to the development of CTD: 
(1) excessive force, (2) awkward or extreme joint motions, (3) high repetition, and 
(4) duration of work. The most common symptoms associated with CTD include pain, 
joint movement restriction, and soft tissue swelling. In the early stages, there may be 
few visible signs; however, if the nerves are affected, sensory responses and motor 
control may be impaired. If left untreated, CTD can result in permanent disability.  
 The human hand is a complex structure of bones, arteries, nerves, ligaments, 
and tendons. The fingers are controlled by the extensor carpi and flexor carpi 
muscles in the forearm. The muscles are connected to the fingers by tendons, 
which pass through a channel in the wrist, formed by the bones of the back of 
the hand on one side and the transverse carpal ligament on the other. Through 
this channel, called the carpal tunnel, also pass various arteries and nerves (see 
Figure 5.22). The bones of the wrist connect to two long bones in the forearm, 
the ulna and the radius. The radius connects to the thumb side of the wrist, and 
the ulna connects to the little-finger side of the wrist. The orientation of the wrist 
joint allows movement in two planes, at 90° to each other (see Figure 5.23). The 
first permits  flexion  and  extension.  The second movement plane permits  ulnar 
and  radial deviation.  Also, rotation of the forearm can result in  pronation with 
the palm down or  supination with the palm up. 
 Tenosynovitis,  one of the more common CTDs, is inflammation of the tendon 
sheaths due to overuse or unaccustomed use of improperly designed tools. If the 
inflammation spreads to the tendons, it becomes  tendinitis.  It is often experienced 
by trainees exposed to large ulnar deviations, coupled with supination of the 
wrist. Repetitive motions and impact shocks may further aggravate the condition. 
 Carpal tunnel syndrome  is a disorder of the hand caused by injury of the median 
nerve inside the wrist. Repetitive flexion and extension of the wrist under stress 
may cause inflammation of the tendon sheaths. The sheaths, sensing increased 
friction, secrete more fluid to lubricate the sheaths and facilitate tendon move-
ment. The resulting buildup of fluid in the carpal tunnel increases pressure, which 
 Figure 5.21   Machine Evaluation Checklist. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
209
in turn compresses the median nerve. Symptoms include impaired or lost nervous 
function in the first 3½   fingers, manifesting as numbness, tingling, pain, and loss 
of dexterity. Again, proper tool design is very important for avoiding these ex-
treme wrist positions. Extreme radial deviations of the wrist result in pressure 
between the head of the radius and the adjoining part of the humerus, resulting in 
tennis elbow, a form of tendinitis. Similarly, simultaneous extension of the wrist, 
concurrent with full pronation, is equally stressful on the elbow.  
 Trigger finger  is a form of tendinitis resulting from a work situation in which 
the distal phalanx of the index finger must be bent and flexed against resistance 
before more proximal phalanges are flexed. Excessive isometric forces impress a 
groove on the bone, or the tendon enlarges due to inflammation. When the tendon 
moves within the sheath, it may jerk or snap with an audible click.  White finger 
results from excessive vibration from power tools, inducing constriction of the 
arterioles within the digits. The resulting lack of blood flow appears as a blanch-
ing of the skin, with a corresponding loss of motor control. A similar effect can 
occur as a result of exposure to cold and is termed  Raynaud’s syndrome.  A very 
good introduction to these and other CTDs can be found in Putz-Anderson (1988). 
 Not all incidences are traumatic. Short-term fatigue and discomfort have 
also been shown to result from poor handle and work orientation in hammering, 
and improper tool shape and work height in work with screwdrivers. Typically, 
a poor tool grip design leads to the exertion of higher grip forces and to extreme 
wrist deviations, resulting in greater fatigue (Freivalds, 1996). 
Median
nerve
Ligament
Tendons
Bones
Ulnar
nerve
 Figure 5.22   A pictorial view of 
the carpal tunnel. 
 ( From: Putz-Anderson, 1988.) 

210 
C H A P T E R  5
 To evaluate the level of CTD problems in a plant, the methods analyst or 
ergonomist typically starts out by surveying the workers to determine their 
health   and discomfort at work. One common tool utilized for this purpose is the 
 body discomfort chart  (Corlett and Bishop, 1976; see Figure 5.24) in which the 
worker rates the level of pain or body discomfort for various parts of the body, 
on a scale from 0 (nothing at all) to 10 (almost maximum). The rating scale is 
based on Borg’s (1990)  category ratio scale (CR-10)  with verbal anchors shown 
in Figure 5.24. 
Ulnar
deviation
Neutral
Neutral
Neutral
Flexion
Pronation
Abduction
Supination
Adduction
Extension
Radial
deviation
 Figure 5.23   Positions of the hand and arm. 
 ( From: Putz-Anderson, 1988.) 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
211
 A more quantitative approach is the novel CTD risk analysis procedure that 
sums risk values for all three major causative factors into one risk score (see 
Figure 5.25; Seth et al., 1999). A frequency factor is determined by the number 
of damaging wrist motions and then scaled by a threshold value of 10,000. A 
posture factor is determined from the degree of deviation from the neutral pos-
ture for major upper-extremity motions. A force factor is determined from the 
relative percentage of maximum muscle exertion required for the task, and then 
scaled by 15 percent, the maximum allowed for extended static contractions (see 
Chapter 4). A final miscellaneous factor incorporates a variety of conditions that 
may have a role in CTD causation, such as vibration and temperature. They are 
weighted appropriately and then summed to yield a final CTD risk index. For 
relatively safe conditions, the index should be less than 1 (similar to the NIOSH 
lifting index, Chapter 4). 
 One example (see Figure 5.25) analyzes the CTD stress incurred on a highly 
repetitive cutoff operation described in greater detail in Example 8.1. Both the 
frequency factor of 1.55 and the force factor of 2.00 exceed the safety thresh-
old of 1.0, leading to a total risk value of 1.34, which also exceeds 1.0. Thus, 
the most cost-effective approach is to decrease the frequency by eliminating or 
combining unnecessary motions (which may or may not be possible) and de-
crease the force component by modifying the grasp utilized (the basis for meth-
ods change in Example 8.1). 
 The CTD index has proved to be quite successful at identifying injurious 
jobs, but it works much better on a relative basis, rather than an absolute ba-
sis, for example, rank-ordering critical jobs. Note that the CTD risk index also 
serves as both a useful checklist for identifying poor postures and a design tool 
for selecting key conditions to redesign.  
A
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
B
A
F
HH
H
HH
F
G
G
G
0    Nothing at all
.5   Extremely weak (just noticeable)
1    Very weak
2    Weak   
(light)
3    Moderate
4
5    Strong   
(heavy)
6 
7    Very strong
8
9
10  Extremely strong  (almost max)
•     Maximal
 Figure 5.24   Body discomfort chart. 
 (Adapted from Corlett and Bishop, 1976.) 

212 
C H A P T E R  5
 5.5  PRINCIPLES OF WORK DESIGN: TOOLS 
 USE A POWER GRIP FOR TASKS REQUIRING FORCE 
AND PINCH GRIPS FOR TASKS REQUIRING PRECISION 
 Prehension  of the hand can basically be defined as variations of grip between two 
extremes: a power grip and a pinch grip. In a  power grip, the cylindrical handle of 
the tool, whose axis is more or less perpendicular to the forearm, is held in a clamp 
 Figure 5.25   CTD risk index. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
213
formed by the partly flexed fingers and the palm. Opposing pressure is applied by 
the thumb, which slightly overlaps the middle finger (see Figure 5.26). The line of 
action of the force can vary with (1) the force parallel to the forearm, as in sawing; 
(2) the force at an angle to the forearm, as in hammering; and (3) the force acting on 
a moment arm, creating torque about the forearm, as in using a screwdriver. As the 
name implies, the power grip is used for power or for holding heavy objects. How-
ever, the more the fingers or the thumb deviate from the cylindrical grip, the less 
force is produced and the greater the precision that can be provided. For example, 
in holding a light hammer, as in tacking, the thumb may deviate from opposing the 
fingers to aligning with the handle. If the index finger also deviates to the tool axis, 
as in holding a knife for a precise cut, then a pinch grip is approached, with the 
blade being pinched between the thumb and index finger. This grip is sometimes 
called an internal precision grip (Konz and Johnson, 2000). A hook grip, used for 
holding a box or a handle, is an incomplete power grip in which the thumb counter-
force is not applied, thereby considerably reducing the available grip force.  
 The  pinch grip  is used for control or precision. In a pinch grip, the item is held 
between the distal ends of one or more fingers and the opposing thumb (the thumb 
is sometimes omitted). The relative position of the thumb and fingers determines 
how much force can be applied and provides a sensory surface for receiving the 
feedback necessary to give the precision needed. There are four basic types of pinch 
grips, with many variations (see Figure 5.26): (1) lateral pinch, thumb opposes the 
Power grip
Hook grip
Palm pinch 
Finger press 
Lateral pinch
External precision
Two-point pulp pinch
Internal precision
 Figure 5.26   Types of grip. 

214 
C H A P T E R  5
side of the index finger; (2) two- and three-point tip (or pulp) pinches, in which 
the tip (or palmar pad) of the thumb opposes to the tips (or palmar pads) of one or 
more fingers (for a relatively small cylindrical object, the three digits act as a chuck, 
resulting in a chuck grip); (3) palm pinch, the fingers oppose the palm of the hand 
without the thumb participating, as in glass windshield handling; and (4) finger 
press, the thumbs and fingers press against a surface, as in garment workers pushing 
cloth into a sewing machine. One specialized grip is an external precision or writing 
grip, which is a combination of a lateral pinch with the middle finger and a two-
point pinch to hold the writing implement (Konz and Johnson, 2000). 
 Complete gradation and naming of grips can be found in Kroemer (1986). 
Note the significantly decreased strength capability of the various pinch grips as 
compared to the power grip (see Table 5.6). Large forces should never be applied 
with pinch grips. 
 AVOID PROLONGED STATIC MUSCLE LOADING 
 When tools are used in situations in which the arms must be elevated or the tools 
must be held for extended periods, muscles of the shoulders, arms, and hands 
may be statically loaded, resulting in fatigue, reduced work capacity, and sore-
ness. Abduction of the shoulder, with corresponding elevation of the elbow, will 
occur if work must be done with a pistol-grip tool on a horizontal workplace. An 
in-line or straight tool reduces the need to raise the arm and also permits a neu-
tral wrist posture. Prolonged work with arms extended, as in assembly tasks done 
with force, can produce soreness in the forearm. Rearranging the work place so 
as to keep the elbows at 90° eliminates most of the problem (see Figure 5.4). 
Similarly, continuously holding an activation switch can result in fatigue of the 
fingers and reduced flexibility. 
 PERFORM TWISTING MOTIONS 
WITH THE ELBOWS BENT 
 When the elbow is extended, tendons and muscles in the arm stretch out and pro-
vide low force capability. When the elbow is bent 90° or less, the biceps brachii 
has a good mechanical advantage and can contribute to forearm rotation.  
 Table 5.6   Relative Strengths for Different Types of Grips 
 
 Male 
 Female 
 
 Grip 
 lb 
 kg 
 lb 
 kg 
 Mean % of 
Power Grip 
 Power 
 89.9 
 40.9 
 51.2 
 23.3 
 100 
 Tip pinch 
 14.6 
 6.6 
 10.1 
 4.6 
 17.5 
 Pulp pinch 
 13.7 
 6.2 
 9.7 
 4.4 
 16.6 
 Lateral pinch 
 24.5 
 11.1 
 17.1 
 7.8 
 29.5 
 Source: Adapted from An et al., 1986. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
215
 MAINTAIN A STRAIGHT WRIST 
 As the wrist is moved from its neutral position, a loss of grip strength oc-
curs. Starting from a neutral wrist position, pronation decreases grip strength 
by 12 percent, flexion/extension by 25 percent, and radial/ulnar deviation by 
15 percent (see Figure 5.27). Furthermore, awkward hand positions may result 
in soreness of the wrist, loss of grip, and, if sustained for extended periods, the 
occurrence of carpal tunnel syndrome. To reduce this problem, the workplace 
or tools should be redesigned to allow for a straight wrist; for example, lower 
work surface and edges of containers, and tilt jigs toward the user. Similarly, the 
tool handle should reflect the axis of grasp, which is about 78° from horizontal, 
and should be oriented such that the eventual tool axis is in line with the index 
finger; examples are bent plier handles and a pistol-grip knife (see Figure 5.28). 
 AVOID TISSUE COMPRESSION 
 Often, in the operation of hand tools, considerable force is applied by the hand. 
Such actions can concentrate considerable compressive force on the palm of the 
hand or the fingers, resulting in ischemia, which is the obstruction of blood flow 
to the tissues and eventual numbness and tingling of the fingers. Handles should 
100
Forearm position:
Supination (palm up)
Midposition
Pronation (palm down)
Neutral
Flexion
Extension
Wrist position
Radial
deviation
Ulnar
deviation
90
80
70
60
50
40
Grip strength as percentage of maximum
30
20
10
 Figure 5.27   Grip strength as a function of wrist and forearm position. 
 ( Source: Based on data from Terrell and Purswell, 1976, Table 1.) 

216 
C H A P T E R  5
be designed with large contact surfaces, to distribute the force over a larger area 
(see Figure 5.29) or to direct it to less sensitive areas, such as the tissue between 
the thumb and index finger. Similarly, finger grooves or recesses in tool handles 
should be avoided. Because hands vary considerably in size, such grooves would 
accommodate only a fraction of the population. 
 DESIGN TOOLS SO THAT THEY CAN BE USED 
BY EITHER HAND AND BY MOST INDIVIDUALS 
 Alternating hands allows the reduction of local muscle fatigue. However, in 
many situations, this is not possible, as the tool use is one-handed. Furthermore, 
if the tool is designated for the user’s preferred hand, which for 90 percent of 
the population is the right hand, then 10 percent are left out. Good examples of 
(a) Conventional handle
(b) Modified handle
 Figure 5.29   Handle design. 
 Shown here is a conventional paint scraper (a) that presses on the ulnar artery and a 
modified handle (b) that rests on the tough tissues between thumb and index finger and 
prevents pressure on the critical areas of the hand. Note that the handle extends beyond 
the base of the palm. ( Source: Tichauer, 1967.) 
(a)
(b)
 Figure 5.28   
(a) Conventional in-line 
knife. (b) Modified pistol 
grip knife. 
 ( From: Putz-Anderson, 
1988.) 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
217
right-handed tools that cannot be used by a left-handed person include a power 
drill with side handle on the left side only, a circular saw, and a serrated knife 
leveled on one side only. Typically, right-handed males show a 12 percent 
strength decrement in the left hand, while right-handed females show a 7 percent 
strength decrement. Surprisingly, both left-handed males and females had nearly 
equal strengths in both hands. One conclusion is that left-handed subjects are 
forced to adapt to a right-handed world (Miller and Freivalds, 1987). 
 Female grip strength typically ranges from 50 to 67 percent of male strength 
(Pheasant and Scriven, 1983); for example, the average male can be expected to 
exert approximately 110 lb (49.8 kg), while the average female can be expected 
to exert approximately 60 lb (27.3 kg). Females have a twofold disadvantage: an 
average lower grip strength and an average smaller grip span. The best solution 
is to provide a variety of tool sizes. 
 AVOID REPETITIVE FINGER ACTION 
 If the index finger is used excessively for operating triggers, symptoms of  trigger 
finger develop. Trigger forces should be kept low, preferably below 2 lb (0.9 kg) 
(Eastman Kodak, 1983), to reduce the load on the index finger. Two or three 
finger-operated controls are preferable (see Figure 5.30); finger-strip controls or 
a power grip bar is even better, because they require the use of more and stronger 
fingers. Absolute finger flexion strengths and their relative contributions to grip 
are shown in Table 5.7. 
 For a two-handled tool, a spring-loaded return saves the fingers from having 
to return the tool to its starting position. In addition, the high number of rep-
etitions must be reduced. Although critical levels of repetitions are not known, 
NIOSH (1989) found high rates of muscle–tendon disorders in workers exceed-
ing 10,000 motions per day. 
 USE THE STRONGEST WORKING FINGERS: 
THE MIDDLE FINGER AND THE THUMB 
 Although the index finger is usually the finger that is capable of moving the fast-
est, it is not the strongest finger (see Table 5.7). Where a relatively heavy load is 
involved, it is usually more efficient to use the middle finger, or a combination 
of the middle finger and the index finger. 
 DESIGN 1.5-IN HANDLE DIAMETERS 
FOR POWER GRIPS 
 Power grips around a cylindrical object should entirely surround the circumfer-
ence of the cylinder, with the fingers and thumb barely touching. For most in-
dividuals, this would entail a handle diameter of approximately 1.5 in (3.8 cm), 
resulting in minimum EMG activity, minimum grip endurance deterioration, and 
maximum thrust forces. In general, the upper end of the range is best for maxi-
mum torque, and the lower end is best for dexterity and speed. The handle diam-
eter for precision grips should be approximately 0.5 in (1.3 cm) (Freivalds, 1996).    

218 
C H A P T E R  5
 DESIGN HANDLE LENGTHS TO BE A MINIMUM OF 4 IN 
 For both handles and cutouts, there should be enough space to allow for all four 
fingers. Hand breadth across the metacarpals ranges from 2.8 in (7.1 cm) for a 
5th percentile female to 3.8 in (9.7 cm) for a 95th percentile male (Garrett, 1971). 
(a)  Thumb switch
(b)  Recessed finger strip
(c)  Three-finger trigger for power tools
 Figure 5.30   Thumb-operated 
and finger-strip-operated 
pneumatic tool. 
 Thumb operation (a) results in 
overextension of the thumb. 
Finger-strip control (b,c) allows 
all the fingers to share the load 
and the thumb to grip and guide 
the tool. 
 Table 5.7   Maximal Static Finger Flexion Forces 
 
 Max Force 
 
 
 Digit 
 lb 
 kg 
 % Force (of thumb) 
 % Contribution 
to Power Grip 
 Thumb 
 16 
 7.3 
 100 
 — 
 Index 
 13 
 5.9 
 81 
 29 
 Middle 
 14 
 6.4 
 88 
 31 
 Ring 
 11 
 5.0 
 69 
 24 
 Little 
 7 
 3.2 
 44 
 16 
 Source: Adapted from Hertzberg, 1973. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
219
Thus, 4 in (10 cm) may be a reasonable minimum, but 5 in (12.5 cm) may be 
more comfortable. If the grip is enclosed, or if gloves are used, even larger open-
ings are recommended. For an external precision grip, the tool shaft must be long 
enough to be supported at the base of the first finger or thumb. For an internal 
precision grip, the tool should extend past the palm, but not far enough to hit the 
wrist (Konz and Johnson, 2000).  
 DESIGN A 3-IN GRIP SPAN 
FOR TWO-HANDLED TOOLS 
 Grip strength and the resulting stress on finger flexor tendons vary with the size 
of the object being grasped. On a dynamometer with handles angled inward, a 
maximum grip strength is achieved at about 3 to 3.2 in (7.6 to 8.1 cm) (Chaffin 
and Andersson, 1991). At distances different from the optimum, the percent grip 
strength decreases (see Figure 5.31), as defined by 
 %Grip strength  100  0.28*S  65.8*S 2 
 where  S  is the given grip span minus the optimum grip span (3 in for females 
and 3.2 in for males). For dynamometers with parallel sides, this optimum span 
decreases to 1.8 to 2 in (4.6 to 5.1 cm) (Pheasant and Scriven, 1983). Because of 
the large variation in individual strength capacities, and the need to accommodate 
most of the working population (i.e., the 5th percentile female), maximal grip re-
quirements should be limited to less than 20 lb. A similar effect is found for pinch 
Maximum grip forces (lb)
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0
1
2
3
4
5 inches
Grip axis
50% Males
95% Males
50% Females
95% Females
Handle opening (at grip axis)
 Figure 5.31   Grip strength capability for various population distributions as a function 
of grip span. 
 ( From : Greenberg and Chaffin, 1976) 

220 
C H A P T E R  5
strength (see Figure 5.32). However, the overall pinch force is at a much more 
reduced force level (approximately 20 percent of power grip) and the optimum 
pinch span (for a 4-point pulp pinch) ranges from 0.5 to 2 in (1.3 to 5.1 cm) and 
then drops sharply for larger spans (Heffernan and Freivalds, 2000).  
 DESIGN APPROPRIATELY SHAPED HANDLES 
 For a power grip, design for maximum surface contact to minimize unit pressure 
of the hand. Typically, a tool with a circular cross-section is thought to give the 
largest torque. However, the shape may be dependent on the type of task and the 
motions involved (Cochran and Riley, 1986). For example, the maximum pull 
force and the best thrusting actions are actually obtained with a triangular cross-
section. For a rolling type of manipulation, the triangular shape is slowest. A 
rectangular shape (with corners rounded) with width to height ratios from 1:1.25 
to 1:1.5 appears to be a good compromise. A further advantage of a rectangu-
lar cross-section is that the tool does not roll when placed on a table. Also, the 
handles should not have the shape of a true cylinder, except for a hook grip. For 
screwdriver-type tools, the handle end should be rounded to prevent undue pres-
sure at the palm; for hammer-type tools, the handle may have some flattening 
curving, to indicate the end of the handle. 
 In a departure from the circular, cylindrically shaped handles, Bullinger and 
Solf (1979) proposed a more radical design using a hexagonal cross-section, 
shaped as two truncated cones joined at the largest ends. Such a shape fits the 
contours of the palm and thumb best, in both precision and power grips, and it 
yielded the highest torques in comparison with more conventional handles. A 
similar dual-truncated conical shape was also developed for a file handle. In this 
Female
Male
25
15
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Span (in)
Force (lb)
 Figure 5.32   Pulp pinch strength capability for various spans. 
 (From Heffernan and Freivalds, 2000.) 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
221
case, the heavily rounded square-shaped cross-section was found to be markedly 
superior to more conventional shapes. 
 A final note on shape is that T-handles yield a much higher torque (up to 
50 percent more) than straight screwdriver handles. The slanting of the T-handle 
generates even larger torques by allowing the wrist to remain straight (Saran, 1973).  
 DESIGN GRIP SURFACE TO BE COMPRESSIBLE 
AND NONCONDUCTIVE 
 For centuries, wood was the material of choice for tool handles. Wood is read-
ily available and easily worked. It has good resistance to shock and thermal 
and electrical conductivity, and it has good frictional qualities, even when wet. 
However, because wooden handles can break and stain with grease and oil, 
there has recently been a shift to plastic and even metal. However, metal should 
be covered with rubber or leather to reduce shock and electrical conductivity 
and increase friction (Fraser, 1980). Such compressible materials also dampen 
 vibration and allow a better distribution of pressure, reducing fatigue and hand 
tenderness (Fellows and Freivalds, 1991). However, the grip material should not 
be too soft; otherwise sharp objects, such as metal chips, will get embedded in 
the grip and make it difficult to use. The grip surface area should be maximized 
to ensure pressure distribution over as large an area as possible. Excessive local-
ized  pressure may cause pain sufficient to interrupt the work. 
 The frictional characteristics of the tool surface vary with the pressure ex-
erted by the hand, the smoothness and porosity of the surface, and the type of 
contamination (Bobjer et al., 1993). Sweat increases the coefficient of friction, 
while oil and fat reduce it. Adhesive tape and suede provide good friction when 
moisture is present. The type of surface pattern, as defined by the ratio of ridge 
area to groove area, shows some interesting characteristics. When the hand is 
clean or sweaty, the maximum frictions are obtained with high ratios (maximiz-
ing the hand–surface contact area); when the hand is contaminated, maximum 
frictions are obtained with low ratios (maximizing the capacity to channel con-
taminants away). 
 KEEP THE WEIGHT OF THE TOOL BELOW 5 LB 
 The weight of the hand tool will determine how long it can be held or used and 
how precisely it can be manipulated. For tools held in one hand with the elbow 
at 90° for extended periods, Greenberg and Chaffin (1976) recommend loads of 
no more than 5 lb (2.3 kg). In addition, the tool should be well balanced, with the 
center of gravity as close as possible to the center of gravity of the hand (unless 
the purpose of the tool is to transfer force, as in a hammer). Thus, the hand or 
arm muscles do not need to oppose any torque development by an unbalanced 
tool. Heavy tools used to absorb impact or vibration should be mounted on tele-
scoping arms or tool balancers to reduce the effort required by the operator. For 
precision operations, tool weights greater than 1 lb (0.45 kg) are not recom-
mended, unless a counterbalanced system is used. 

222 
C H A P T E R  5
 USE GLOVES JUDICIOUSLY 
 Gloves are often used with hand tools for safety and comfort. Safety gloves are 
seldom bulky, but gloves worn in subfreezing climates can be very heavy and 
can interfere with grasping ability. Wearing woolen or leather gloves may add 
0.2 in (0.5 cm) to the hand thickness and 0.3 in (0.8 cm) to the hand breadth at 
the thumb, while heavy mittens add 1 in (2.5 cm) and 1.6 in (4.1 cm), respec-
tively (Damon et al., 1966). More importantly, gloves reduce grip strength 10 
to 20 percent (Hertzberg, 1973), torque production, and manual dexterity per-
formance times. Neoprene gloves slow performance times by 12.5 percent over 
bare-handed performance, terry cloth by 36 percent, leather by 45 percent, and 
PVC by 64 percent (Weidman, 1970). A trade-off between increased safety and 
decreased performance with gloves must be considered. 
 USE POWER TOOLS SUCH AS NUT AND 
SCREWDRIVERS INSTEAD OF MANUAL TOOLS 
 Power hand tools not only perform work faster than manual tools, but also do the 
work with considerably less operator fatigue. Greater uniformity of product can 
be expected when power hand tools are used. For example, a power nut driver 
can drive nuts consistently to a predetermined tightness in inch-pounds, while 
a manual nut driver cannot be expected to maintain a constant driving pressure 
due to operator fatigue. 
 There is, however another trade-off. Powered hand tools produce vibration, 
which can induce white finger syndrome, the primary symptom of which is a 
reduction in blood flow to the fingers and hand due to  vasoconstriction  of the 
blood vessels. As a result, there is a sensory feedback loss and decreased per-
formance, and the condition may contribute to the development of carpal tun-
nel syndrome, especially in jobs with a combination of forceful and repetitive 
exertions. It is generally recommended that vibrations in the critical range of 
16 to 130 Hz (see Figure 6.19) or a slightly larger (but safer) range of 2 to 200 Hz 
(Lundstrom and Johansson, 1986) be avoided. The exposure to vibration can be 
minimized through a reduction in the driving force, the use of specially designed 
vibration damping handles (Andersson, 1990) or vibration-absorbing gloves, and 
better maintenance to decrease misalignments or unbalanced shafts. 
 USE THE PROPER CONFIGURATION 
AND ORIENTATION OF POWER TOOLS 
 In a power drill or other power tools, the major function of the operator is to hold, 
stabilize, and monitor the tool against a workpiece, while the tools perform the main 
effort of the job. Although the operator may at times need to shift or orient the tool, 
the main function for the operator is effectively to grasp and hold the tool. A hand 
drill is comprised of a head, body, and handle, with all three ideally being in line. 
The line of action is the line from the extended index finger, which means that in 
the ideal drill, the head is off-center with respect to the central axis of the body.  

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
223
 Handle configuration is also important, with the choices being pistol-grip, 
in-line, or right-angle. As a rule of thumb, in-line and right-angle are best for 
tightening downward on a horizontal surface, while pistol grips are best for tight-
ening on a vertical surface, with the aim being to obtain a standing posture with a 
straight back, upper arms hanging down, and the wrist straight (see Figure 5.33). 
For the pistol grip, this results in the handle being at an angle of approximately 
78° with the horizontal (Fraser, 1980). 
 Another important factor is the center of gravity. If it is too far forward in 
the body of the tool, a turning moment is created, which must be overcome by 
the muscles of the hand and forearm. This requires muscular effort additional to 
that required for holding, positioning, and pushing the drill into the workpiece. 
The primary handle is placed directly under the center of gravity, so that the 
body juts out behind the handle, as well as in front. For heavy drills, a secondary 
supportive handle may be needed, either to the side or preferably below the tool, 
so that the supporting arm can be tucked in against the body, rather than being 
abducted. 
 CHOOSE A POWER TOOL WITH 
THE PROPER CHARACTERISTICS 
 Power tools, such as nut-runners used to tighten nuts, are commercially available 
in a variety of handle configurations, spindle diameters, speeds, weights, shutoff 
mechanisms, and torque outputs. The torque is transferred from the motor to the 
Poor
Poor
Poor
Good
Good
Good
 Figure 5.33   Proper orientation 
of power tools in the workplace.
(From: Armstrong, 1983) 

224 
C H A P T E R  5
spindle through a variety of mechanisms, so that the power (often compressed 
air) can be shut off quickly once the nut or other fastener is tight. The simplest 
and cheapest mechanism is a direct drive, which is under the operator’s control, 
but because of the long time to release the trigger once the nut is tightened, direct 
drive transfers a very large reaction torque to the operator’s arm. Mechanical fric-
tion clutches will allow the spindle to slip, reducing some of this reaction torque. 
A better mechanism for reducing the reaction torque is the airflow shutoff, which 
automatically senses when to cut off the air supply as the nut is tightened. A still 
faster mechanism is an automatic mechanical clutch shutoff. Recent mechanisms 
include the hydraulic pulse system, in which the rotational energy from the motor 
is transferred over a pulse unit containing an oil cushion (filtering off the high- 
frequency pulses, as well as noise), and a similar electrical pulse system, both of 
which reduce the reaction torque to a large extent (Freivalds and Eklund, 1993). 
 Variations of torque delivered to the nut depend on several conditions in-
cluding: properties of the tool; the operator; properties of the joint, for example, 
the combination of the fastener and the material being fastened (ranging from 
soft, in which the materials have elastic properties, such as body panels, to hard, 
in which there are two stiff surfaces, such as pulleys on a crankshaft); and stabil-
ity of the air supply. The torque experienced by the user (the reaction torque) de-
pends on these factors plus the torque shutoff system. In general, using electrical 
tools at lower than normal rpm levels, or underpowering pneumatic tools, results 
in larger reaction torques and more stressful ratings. Pulse-type tools produce the 
lowest reaction torques, perhaps because the short pulses “chop up” the reaction 
torque. Other potential problems include noise from the pneumatic mechanism 
reaching levels as high as 95 dBA, vibration levels exceeding 132 dB(V), and 
dust or oil fumes emanating from the exhaust (Freivalds and Eklund, 1993). 
 USE REACTION BARS AND TOOL BALANCERS 
FOR POWER TOOLS 
 Reaction torque bars should be provided if the torque exceeds 53 in·lb (6 N·m) 
for in-line tools used for a downward action, 106 in·lb (12 N·m) for pistol-grip 
tools used in a horizontal mode, and 444 in·lb (50 N·m) for right-angled tools 
used in a downward or upward motion (Mital and Kilbom, 1992). 
 This information is summarized in an evaluative checklist for tools (see Fig-
ure 5.34). If the tool does not conform to the recommendations and desired fea-
tures, it should be redesigned or replaced.  
 SUMMARY 
 Many factors significantly affect both the productivity and the well-being of the 
operator at the workstation. Sound ergonomics technology applies to both the 
equipment being used and the general conditions surrounding the work area. 
For the equipment point and the workstation environment, adequate flexibility 
should be provided so that variations in employee height, reach, strength, reflex 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
225
 Figure 5.34   Tool Evaluation Checklist .

226 
C H A P T E R  5
time, and so on can be accommodated. A workbench that is 32 in (81.3 cm) high 
may be just right for a 75-in (190.5-cm) tall worker, but would definitely be too 
high for a 66-in (167.6-cm) tall employee. Adjustable-height workstations and 
chairs are desirable to accommodate the full range of workers, based on plus or 
minus two standard deviations from the norm. The better able we are to provide 
a flexible work center to accommodate the total range of the workforce, the bet-
ter will be the productivity results and worker satisfaction. 
 Just as there are significant variations in height and size in the workforce, 
there are equal or greater variations in visual capacity, hearing ability, feeling 
ability, and manual dexterity. The vast majority of workstations can be im-
proved. Applying ergonomic considerations along with methods engineering 
will lead to more efficient competitive work environments that will improve the 
well-being of the workers, the quality of the product, the labor turnover of the 
business, and the prestige of the organization. 
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  What seat width would accommodate 90 percent of adults? 
 2.  Compare and contrast the three different design strategies. 
 3.  Explain how a proper work surface height would be determined. 
 4.  What are the most critical features in a good ergonomic chair? Which should be 
adjustable? 
 5.  What is the principle behind the design of a saddle seat? 
 6.  What is lordosis and how does it relate to a lumbar pad? 
 7.  What is the principle behind antifatigue mats? 
 8.  What is the principle behind the proper layout of bins, parts, and tools on a work surface?  
 9.  Why is a fixture so important in workplace design? List as many reasons as pos-
sible. 
 10.  What does Warrick’s principle refer to in designing controls and displays? 
 11.  What is the optimum line of sight? 
 12.  List three principles for arranging components on a panel. 
 13.  What is the range effect? 
 14.  List the three principles for effective control–display compatibility. 
 15.  What is operational coding? 
 16.  What is the main disadvantage of tactile controls? 
 17.  What is “control movement without system response” known as? 
 18.  If the C/R ratio is increased from 1.0 to 4.0, what happens to travel time, adjust 
time, and total time? 
 19.  What are the three most important task factors leading to cumulative trauma disorders?  
 20.  What is the most important factor leading to white finger? 
 21.  What is trigger finger? 
 22.  Describe the progression of the disease state for carpal tunnel syndrome. 
 23.  Design an ergonomic handle, indicating all the principles used in the design. 
 24.  What are the key concerns in the design of a power tool? 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
227
 PROBLEMS  
 1.  Because of the Challenger disaster, and (more recently) the termination of the 
U.S. space shuttle program, NASA has convinced the consortium of countries 
behind the International Space Station to include a personal escape capability 
(i.e., a launch compartment) for each space station astronaut. Because space is at a 
premium, proper anthropometric design is crucial. Also, because of budget restric-
tions, the design is to be nonadjustable; for example, the same design must fit all 
present and future astronauts, both males and females. For each launch compart-
ment feature, indicate the body feature used in the design, the design principle 
used, and the actual value (in inches) to be used in its construction. 
 
1
Batteries
Heat
Shield
CONTROLS
CONTROLS
Controls
Oxygen
Propulsion
fuel
Parachute
7
5
4
2
3
6
 
 Launch Compartment 
Feature 
 Body Feature 
 Design Principle  
 Actual Value 
 1. Height of seat 
 
 
 
 2. Seat depth 
 
 
 
 3. Height of joystick 
 
 
 
 4. Height of compartment  
 
 
 5. Depth of foot area 
 
 
 
 6. Depth of leg area 
 
 
 
 7. Depth of chamber 
 
 
 
 8. Width of compartment  
 
 
 9. Weight limit 
 
 
 
 2.  You are asked to design a control/display panel for the space station escape launch. 
After the initial escape, propulsion is to be used to decelerate against the earth’s 
gravitational field. The parachute can be released only within a given, narrow 
altitude range. Arrange the seven displays/controls, using the same-sized dials as 
shown on the following control panel. Explain the logic for your arrangement. 

228 
C H A P T E R  5
 
30 above
30
20
20
A
B
C
D
E
F
up
G
10
10
Eye level
Left Shoulder
Right Shoulder
up
 
 Control/Display 
 % of Viewing 
Time 
 Importance 
 # Times Used 
 A Launch release 
 1 
 Critical 
 1 
 B Propulsion fuel level 
 20 
 Very important 
 10 
 C Air speed indicator 
 15 
 Important 
 5 
 D Oxygen pressure 
 1 
 Unimportant 
 2 
 E Electric power level 
 2 
 Important 
 3 
 F Altitude indicator 
 60 
 Critical 
 50 
 G Parachute release 
 1 
 Critical 
 1 
 3.  The Dorben Foundry uses an overhead crane with a magnetic head to load scrap 
iron into the blast furnace. The crane operator uses various levers to control the three 
degrees of freedom needed for the crane and its magnetic head. A control is used to 
activate/deactivate the magnetic pull of the head. The operator is above the operation 
and looking down much of the time. Operators frequently complain of back pain.  
 a. 
 Design an appropriate control system for the crane operator. Indicate the num-
ber of controls needed, their location (especially in reference to the operator’s 
line of sight), their direction of movement, and their type of feedback. 
 b. 
 Indicate an appropriate control-response ratio for these controls. 
 c. 
 What other factors may be important in designing these controls? 
 Lever 
 Throw Distance (in) 
 Crane Movement (ft) 
 Time to Target(s) 
 A 
 20 
 20 
 1.2 
 B 
 20 
 10 
 2.2 
 C 
 20 
 80 
 1.8 
 D 
 20 
 40 
 1.2 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
229
 4.  The following are data on two different control-response setups. Based on these 
data, what is the optimum C/R ratio for each setup? Which setup would you 
recommend as best? 
 Setup 
 C/R Ratio 
 Travel Time (s) 
 Adjust Time (s) 
 A 
 1 
 0.1 
 5 
 5 
 1 
 2 
 10 
 5 
 0.5 
 20 
 10 
 0.1 
 B 
 2 
 1 
 6 
 10 
 3 
 5 
 15 
 5 
 4 
 20 
 10 
 3 
 5.  In a small manufacturing plant, the soldering iron shown here is used to solder 
connections on a large vertical panel. Several musculoskeletal injuries have been 
reported on this job over the last year, in addition to many operator complaints. In 
general, it seems that 
 a. 
 It is difficult to see the point of application when using this tool. 
 b. 
 The operators are gripping the tool unnecessarily tightly. 
 c. 
 The power cord tends to get entangled. 
 d. 
 Operators complain about wrist pain. 
 
  Redesign the soldering iron to eliminate the problems outlined above. Point out the 
ergonomic or other special features that have been incorporated into the design. 
 
 
 6.  Use the CTD risk index to calculate the potential risk of injury for the right hand on 
the following jobs shown on the Web page: 
 a. 
 Stamping extrusions—assume a grip force of 30% MVC. 
 b. 
 Stamping end couplings—assume a grip force of 15% MVC. 
 c. 
 Flashlight assembly—assume a grip force of 15% MVC. 
 d. 
 Union assembly—assume a grip force of 15% MVC. 
 e. 
 Hospital bed rail assembly—assume a grip force of 30% MVC. 
 f. 
 Stitching (garments)—assume a grip force of 30% MVC. 
 g. 
 Labeling (garments)—assume a grip force of 15% MVC. 
 h. 
 Cut and tack (garments)—assume a grip force of 30% MVC. 

230 
C H A P T E R  5
 7.  The worker shown below is driving 4 screws into a panel with a powered driver. 
His production quota is 2,300 panels per 8-h shift. What specific ergonomic 
problems are found on this job? For each problem: (a) specify an ergonomics im-
provement that would correct the problem and (b) provide a specific work design 
principle to support this methods change. 
 
 
 8.  The worker shown below is using a 10-lb pneumatic nut runner to tighten nuts within 
a tractor cab compartment. What health and safety problems are likely to result from 
her job? Evaluate the job and the workstation, identifying both good and bad work 
design features. If good, indicate the principles of work design that justify its use; if 
bad, redesign the feature using a principle of work design to justify the change. Be as 
thorough as possible, coming up with as many design features as possible. 
 
 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
231
 9.  The worker shown below is grinding down the sharp metal edges resulting from 
punching out the metal frame for HP printers. The printer weighs 15 lbs and the 
standard time for her job is 0.2 min. 
 a. 
 What common health and safety problems are likely to result from her job? 
 b. 
 What are the four basic job factors that lead to such health problems? 
 c. 
 What methods changes would not only improve health and safety but also 
increase productivity? Provide specific work design principles that indicate 
why this change is appropriate.  
 
 
 REFERENCES 
 An, K., L. Askew, and E. Chao. “Biomechanics and Functional Assessment of Upper 
Extremities.” In  Trends in Ergonomics/Human Factors III. Ed. W. Karwowski. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1986, pp. 573–580. 
 Andersson, E. R. “Design and Testing of a Vibration Attenuating Handle.”  Interna-
tional Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 6, no. 2 (September 1990), pp. 119–125. 
 Andersson, G. B. J., R. Örtengren, A. Nachemson, and G. Elfström. “Lumbar Disc Pressure 
and Myoelectric Back Muscle Activity During Sitting. I, Studies on an Experimental 
Chair.”  Scandinavian Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine, 6 (1974), pp. 104–114.  
 ANSI (American National Standards Institute). ANSI Standard for Human Factors 
 Engineering of Visual Display Terminal Workstations. ANSI/HFS 100-1988. 
Santa Monica, CA: Human Factors Society, 1988. 

232 
C H A P T E R  5
 Armstrong, T. J.  Ergonomics Guide to Carpal Tunnel Syndrome. Fairfax, VA: Ameri-
can Industrial Hygiene Association, 1983. 
 Bobjer, O., S. E. Johansson, and S. Piguet. “Friction between Hand and Handle. 
Effects of Oil and Lard on Textured and Non-textured Surfaces; Perception of 
Discomfort.”  Applied Ergonomics, 24, no. 3 (June 1993), pp. 190–202. 
 Borg, G. “Psychophysical Scaling with Applications in Physical Work and the 
Perception of Exertion.”  Scandinavian Journal of Work Environment and Health, 
16, Supplement 1 (1990), pp. 55–58. 
 Bradley, J. V. “Tactual Coding of Cylindrical Knobs.” Human Factors, 9, no. 5 (1967), 
pp. 483–496. 
 Bullinger, H. J., and J. J. Solf.  Ergononomische Arbeitsmittel-gestaltung, II - 
Handgeführte Werkzeuge - Fallstudien. Dortmund, Germany: Bundesanstalt für 
Arbeitsschutz und Unfallforschung, 1979. 
 Chaffin, D. B., and G. Andersson.  Occupational Biomechanics. New York: John Wiley 
& Sons, 1991, pp. 355–368. 
 Cochran, D. J., and M. W. Riley. “An Evaluation of Knife Handle Guarding.”  Human 
Factors, 28, no. 3 (June 1986), pp. 295–301. 
 Corlett, E. N., and R. A. Bishop. “A Technique for Assessing Postural Discomfort.” 
 Ergonomics, 19, no. 2 (March 1976), pp. 175–182. 
 Damon, A., H. W. Stoudt, and R. A. McFarland.  The Human Body in Equipment 
Design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1966. 
 Eastman Kodak Co.  Ergonomic Design for People at Work. Belmont, CA: Lifetime 
Learning Pub., 1983. 
 Fellows, G. L., and A. Freivalds. “Ergonomics Evaluation of a Foam Rubber Grip for 
Tool Handles.”  Applied Ergonomics, 22, no. 4 (August 1991), pp. 225–230. 
 Fraser, T. M.  Ergonomic Principles in the Design of Hand Tools. Geneva, Switzerland: 
International Labor Office, 1980. 
 Freivalds, A. “Tool Evaluation and Design.” In  Occupational Ergonomics. Eds. 
A. Bhattacharya and J. D. McGlothlin. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1996, 
pp. 303–327. 
 Freivalds, A., and J. Eklund. “Reaction Torques and Operator Stress While Using 
Powered Nutrunners.”  Applied Ergonomics, 24, no. 3 (June 1993), pp. 158–164. 
 Garrett, J. “The Adult Human Hand: Some Anthropometric and Biomechanical 
Considerations.”  Human Factors, 13, no. 2 (April 1971), pp. 117–131. 
 Grandjean, E.  Fitting the Task to the Man (4th ed.). London: Taylor & Francis, 1998. 
 Greenberg, L., and D. B. Chaffin.  Workers and Their Tools. Midland, MI: Pendell 
Press, 1976. 
 Heffernan, C., and A. Freivalds. “Optimum Pinch Grips in the Handling of Dies.” 
 Applied Ergonomics, 31 (2000), pp. 409–414. 
 Hertzberg, H. “Engineering Anthropometry.” In  Human Engineering Guide to Equip-
ment Design. Eds. H. Van Cott and R. Kincaid. Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office, 1973, pp. 467–584. 
 Hunt, D. P.  The Coding of Aircraft Controls (Tech. Rept. 53–221). U. S. Air Force, 
Wright Air Development Center, 1953. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 5  Workplace, Equipment, and Tool Design  
233
 Jenkins, W., and Conner, M. B. “Some Design Factors in Making Settings on a Linear 
Scale.”  Journal of Applied Psychology, 33 (1949), pp. 395–409. 
 Konz, S., and S. Johnson.  Work Design, 5th ed. Scottsdale, AZ: Holcomb Hathaway 
Publishers, 2000. 
 Kroemer, K. H. E. “Coupling the Hand with the Handle: An Improved Notation of 
Touch, Grip and Grasp.”  Human Factors, 28, no. 3 (June 1986), pp. 337–339. 
 Kroemer, K. “Engineering Anthropometry.” Ergonomics, 32, no. 7 (1989), pp. 767–784.  
 Lundstrom, R., and R. S. Johansson. “Acute Impairment of the Sensitivity of Skin 
Mechanoreceptive Units Caused by Vibration Exposure of the Hand.”  Ergonomics, 
29, no. 5 (May 1986), pp. 687–698. 
 Miller, G., and A. Freivalds. “Gender and Handedness in Grip Strength.”  Proceedings 
of the Human Factors Society 31st Annual Meeting. Santa Monica, CA, 1987, 
pp. 906–909. 
 Mital, A., and Å. Kilbom. “Design, Selection and Use of Hand Tools to Alleviate 
Trauma of the Upper Extremities.”  International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 
10, no. 1 (January 1992), pp. 1–21. 
 National Safety Council.  Accident Facts . Chicago: National Safety Council, 2003. 
 NIOSH,  Health Hazard Evaluation-Eagle Convex Glass, Co. HETA-89-137-2005. 
Cincinnati, OH: National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 1989. 
 Pheasant, S. T., and S. J. Scriven. “Sex Differences in Strength, Some Implications for 
the Design of Handtools.” In  Proceedings of the Ergonomics Society. Ed. 
K. Coombes. London: Taylor & Francis, 1983, pp. 9–13. 
 Putz-Anderson, V.  Cumulative Trauma Disorders. London: Taylor & Francis, 1988. 
 Sanders, M. S., and E. J. McCormick.  Human Factors in Engineering and Design. 
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993. 
 Saran, C. “Biomechanical Evaluation of T-handles for a Pronation Supination Task.” 
 Journal of Occupational Medicine, 15, no. 9 (September 1973), pp. 712–716. 
 Serber, H. “New Developments in the Science of Seating.”  Human Factors Bulletin, 
33, no. 2 (February 1990), pp. 1–3. 
 Seth, V., R. Weston, and A. Freivalds. “Development of a Cumulative Trauma Disorder 
Risk Assessment Model.”  International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 23, 
no. 4 (March 1999), pp. 281–291. 
 Terrell, R., and J. Purswell. “The Influence of Forearm and Wrist Orientation on 
Static Grip Strength as a Design Criterion for Hand Tools.”  Proceedings of 
the Human Factors Society 20th Annual Meeting. Santa Monica, CA, 1976, 
pp. 28–32. 
 Tichauer, E. “Ergonomics: The State of the Art.”  American Industrial Hygiene 
Association Journal, 28 (1967), pp. 105–116. 
 U.S. Department of Justice.  Americans with Disabilities Act Handbook. EEOC-BK-19. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1991. 
 Webb Associates.  Anthropometric Source Book. II, Pub. 1024. Washington, DC: 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1978. 
 Weidman, B.  Effect of Safety Gloves on Simulated Work Tasks. AD 738981. 
Springfield, VA: National Technical Information Service, 1970.  

234 
C H A P T E R  5
 SELECTED SOFTWARE 
 COMBIMAN,  User’s Guide for COMBIMAN, CSERIAC. Dayton, OH: Wright-
Patterson AFB. (http://dtica.dtic.mil/hsi/srch/hsi5.html) 
 Design Tools (available from the McGraw-Hill text website at www.mhhe.com/
niebel-freivalds). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002. 
 Ergointelligence (Upper Extremity Analysis). 3400 de Maisonneuve Blvd. West, Suite 
1430, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3Z 3B8. 
 FactoryFLOW, Siemens PLM Software, 5800 Granite Parkway, Suite 600, Plano, TX 
75024, USA. (http://www.plm.automation.siemens.com/) 
 Job Evaluator ToolBox ™. ErgoWeb, Inc., P.O. Box 1089, 93 Main St., Midway, UT 
84032. 
 ManneQuinPRO. Nexgen Ergonomics, 3400 de Maisonneuve Blvd. West, Suite 1430, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3Z 3B8. (http://www.nexgenergo.com/) 
 Multimedia Video Task Analysis. Nexgen Ergonomics, 3400 de Maisonneuve Blvd. 
West, Suite 1430, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3Z 3B8.  
 WEBSITES 
 CTD News — http://ctdnews.com/ 
 ErgoWeb —http://www.ergoweb.com/ 
 Examples of bad ergonomic design —http://www.baddesigns.com/ 
 CAESAR —http://store.sae.org/caesar  

 
235
 M
 ethods analysts should provide good, safe, comfortable working condi-
tions for the operator. Experience has conclusively proved that plants 
with good working conditions outproduce those with poor conditions. 
The economic return from investment in an improved working environment is 
usually significant. In addition to increasing production, ideal working condi-
tions improve the safety record; reduce absenteeism, tardiness, and labor turn-
over; raise employee morale; and improve public relations. The acceptable levels 
for working conditions and the recommended control measures for problem ar-
eas are presented in greater detail in this chapter. 
 6.1 ILLUMINATION 
 THEORY 
 Visible light is a very narrow part of the electromagnetic spectrum that ranges 
from long radio waves to high-energy and extremely short wavelength gamma 
rays (see Figure 6.1). Light is captured by the human eye (see Figure 6.2) and 
processed into an image by the brain. It is a fairly complicated process with 
the light rays passing through the  pupil , an opening in the eye, and through the 
 cornea  and  lens , which focus the light rays on the retina at the back of the eye-
ball. The  retina  is composed of photosensitive receptors, the  rods , which are 
 
235
 
  CHAPTER 
 
6 
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Provide both general and task lighting—avoid glare. 
 •  Control noise at the source. 
 •  Control heat stress with radiation shielding and ventilation. 
 •  Provide both overall air movement and local ventilation for hot areas. 
 •  Dampen tool handles and seats to reduce vibration exposure. 
 •  Use rapid, forward-rotating shifts, if shiftwork can’t be avoided. 
 Work 
Environment 
Design 

236 
C H A P T E R  6
sensitive to black and white, especially at night, but have poor visual acuity; and 
the  cones , which are sensitive to colors in daylight and have good visual acuity. 
The cones are concentrated in the  fovea , whereas the rods are spread out over the 
retina. Electrical signals from the photoreceptors are collected and passed by the 
optic nerve to the brain where the light from external illumination is processed 
and interpreted.  
 The basic theory of illumination applies to a point source of light (such as 
a candle) of a given  luminous intensity , measured in  candelas  (cd) (see Fig-
ure 6.3). Light emanates spherically in all directions from the source with 1-cd 
sources emitting 12.57 lumens (lm) (as determined from the surface area of a 
sphere, 4 pr 2 ). The amount of light striking a surface, or a section of this sphere, 
is termed  illumination or  illuminance and is measured in  footcandles (fc). The 
amount of illumination striking a surface drops off as the square of the distance 
 d in feet from the source to the surface: 
 Illuminance  intensityd 2 
 Some of that light is absorbed and some of it is reflected (for translucent ma-
terials, some is also transmitted), which allows humans to “see” that object and 
provides a perception of brightness. The amount reflected is termed  luminance 
102
101
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
10–5
10–6
10–7
10–8
10–9
10–10
10–11
10–12
1
Radio
Waves
W
Micro-
Waves
W
Increasing Energy
Wavelength
W
(Meters)
Infrared
Visible Light
V
Ultraviolet
X-rays
Gamma
Rays
 Figure 6.1  The electromagnetic spectrum showing visible light. 
Fovea
Optic nerve
Lens
Pupil
Cornea
Aqueous humor
lris
Retina
Vitreous
humor
 
 Figure 6.2   The human eye. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
237
and is measured in  foot-lamberts  (fL). It is determined by the reflective proper-
ties of the surface, known as  reflectance: 
 Luminance  illuminance  reflectance 
 Reflectance is a unitless proportion and ranges from 0 to 100 percent. High-
quality white paper has a reflectance of about 90 percent, newsprint and concrete 
around 55 percent, cardboard 30 percent, and matte black paint 5 percent. The 
reflectances for various color paints or finishes are presented in Table 6.1.    
 VISIBILITY 
 The clarity with which the human sees something is usually referred to as  vis-
ibility . The three critical factors of visibility are  visual angle, contrast , and most 
important,  illuminance . Visual angle is the angle subtended at the eye by the 
target, and contrast is the difference in luminance between a visual target and its 
background. Visual angle is usually defined in arc minutes (1/60 of a degree) for 
small targets by  
 Visual angle (arc min)  3,438  hd 
 where  h  is the height of the target or critical detail (or stroke width for printed 
matter) and  d is the distance from the target to the eye (in the same units as  h ). 
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
1 m
radius
Spherical surface
1 m2 in area
Light source
1 cd or 12.57
lumens output
1 ft
radius
Spherical surface
1 ft2 in area
Illumination
1 fc or
1 lumen/ft2
    or 10.76 lux
Illumination
1 lux or
1 lumen/m2 or
0.0926 fc
 
 Figure 6.3   Illustration of the distribution of light from a light source following the inverse-
square law. 
 ( Source : General Electric Company, 1965, p. 5.) 

238 
C H A P T E R  6
 Contrast can be defined in several ways. A typical one is 
 Contrast  (L max − L min )L max 
 where  L  is luminance. Contrast, then, is related to the difference in maximum 
and minimum luminances of the target and background. Note that contrast is 
unitless. 
 Other less important factors for visibility are exposure time, target motion, 
age, known location, and training, which will not be included here. 
 The relationship between these three critical factors was quantified by Black-
well (1959) in a series of experiments that led to the development of the Illu-
minating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA, 1995) standards for 
illumination. Although the Blackwell curves (see Figure 6.4) as such are not often 
used today, they show the trade-off between the size of the object, the amount of 
illumination (in this case, measured as luminance reflected from the target), and 
the contrast between the target and background. Thus, although increasing the 
amount of illumination is the simplest approach to improving task visibility, it can 
also be improved by increasing the contrast or increasing the size of the target.   
 ILLUMINANCE 
 Recognizing the complexity of extending the point source theory to real light 
sources (which can be anything but a point source) and some of the uncertainties 
and constraints of Blackwell’s (1959) laboratory setting, the IESNA adopted a 
much simpler approach for determining minimum levels of illumination (IESNA, 
1995). The first step is to identify the general type of activity to be performed 
and classify it into one of nine categories, shown in Table 6.2. A more extensive 
list of specific tasks for this process can be found in IESNA (1995). Note that 
categories A, B, and C do not involve specific visual tasks. For each category, 
 Table 6.1   Reflectances of Typical Paint and Wood Finishes 
 Color or finish 
 Percent of
reflected light 
 Color or finish 
 Percent of
reflected light 
 White 
 85 
 Medium blue 
 35 
 Light cream 
 75 
 Dark gray 
 30 
 Light gray 
 75 
 Dark red 
 13 
 Light yellow 
 75 
 Dark brown 
 10 
 Light buff 
 70 
 Dark blue 
 8 
 Light green 
 65 
 Dark green 
 7 
 Light blue 
 55 
 Maple 
 42 
 Medium yellow 
 65 
 Satinwood 
 34 
 Medium buff 
 63 
 Walnut 
 16 
 Medium gray 
 55 
 Mahogany 
 12 
 Medium green 
 52 
 
 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
239
2
60
40
4
2
1
d (arc minutes)
1/3 second exposure
50% Accuracy
2
1
0
1
1
0
Log background luminance (f L)
Log target contrast
1
2
3
 
 Figure 6.4   Smoothed threshold contrast curves for disks of diameter  d. 
 ( Adapted from: Blackwell, 1959.) 
there is a range of illuminances (low, middle, high). The appropriate value is 
selected by calculating a weighting factor (–1, 0, 1) based on three task and 
worker characteristics, shown in Table 6.3. These weights are then summed to 
obtain the total weighing factor. Note that because categories A, B, and C do not 
involve visual tasks, the speed/accuracy characteristic is not utilized for these 
categories, and overall room surfaces are utilized in place of task background. If 
the total sum of the two or three weighting factors is –2 or –3, the low value of 
the three illuminances is used; if –1, 0, or 1, the middle value is used; and if 
2 or 3, the high value is used.  
 In practice, illumination is typically measured with a light meter (similar to 
one found on cameras, but in different units), whereas luminance is measured 
with a photometer (typically, a separate attachment to the light meter). Reflec-
tance is usually calculated as the ratio between the luminance of the target sur-
face and the luminance of a standard surface of known reflectance (e.g., a Kodak 
neutral test card of reflectance  0.9) placed at the same position on the target 
surface. The reflectance of the target is then 
 Reflectance  0.9  L target L standard 
 LIGHT SOURCES AND DISTRIBUTION 
 After determining the illumination requirements for the area under study, ana-
lysts select appropriate artificial light sources. Two important parameters related 
to artificial lighting are  efficiency  [light output per unit energy; typically, lumens 

240 
C H A P T E R  6
per watt (lm/W)] and  color rendering . Efficiency is particularly important, be-
cause it is related to cost; efficient light sources reduce energy consumption. 
Color rendering relates to the closeness with which the perceived colors of 
the object being observed match the perceived colors of the same object when 
illuminated by standard light sources. The more efficient light sources (high- and 
low-pressure sodium) have only fair to poor color rendering characteristics and 
consequently may not be suitable for certain inspection operations where color 
discrimination is necessary. Table 6.4 provides efficiency and color rendering 
information for the principal types of artificial light. Typical industrial lighting 
sources, that is, luminaires, are shown in Figure 6.5. 
 Table 6.2   Recommended Illumination Levels for Use in Interior Lighting Design 
 Category 
 Range of 
illuminance (fc)  
 Type of activity 
 Reference area 
 A 
 2-3-5 
 Public areas with dark surroundings. 
 
 B 
 5-7.5-10 
 Simple orientation for short temporary visits. 
 General lighting 
throughout room or 
area. 
 C 
 10-15-20 
 Working spaces where visual tasks are performed 
only occasionally. 
 
 D 
 20-30-50 
 Performance of visual tasks of high contrast or 
large size, e.g., reading printed material, typed 
originals, handwriting in ink and xerography; 
rough bench and machine work; ordinary inspec-
tion; rough assembly. 
 
 E 
 50-75-100 
 Performance of visual tasks of medium contrast 
or small size, e.g., reading medium pencil hand-
writing, poorly printed or reproduced material; 
medium bench and machine work; difficult inspec-
tion; medium assembly. 
 Illuminance on task. 
 F 
 100-150-200 
 Performance of visual tasks of low contrast or very 
small size, e.g., reading handwriting in hard pencil on 
poor-quality paper and very poorly reproduced mate-
rial; highly difficult inspection, difficult assembly.  
 
 G 
 200-300-500 
 Performance of visual tasks of low contrast and 
very small size over a prolonged period, e.g., fine 
assembly; very difficult inspection; fine bench and 
machine work; extra fine assembly. 
 
 H 
 500-750-1,000 
 Performance of very prolonged and exacting  visual 
tasks, e.g., the most difficult inspection; extra fine 
bench and machine work; extra fine assembly.  
 Illuminance on task 
via a combination of 
general and supple-
mentary local lighting. 
 I 
 1,000-1,500-2,000 
 Performance of very special visual tasks of ex-
tremely low contrast and small size, e.g., surgical 
procedures. 
 
 Source: Adapted from IESNA, 1995. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
241
 Table 6.3    Weighting Factors to Be Considered in Selecting Specific Illumination 
Levels Within Each Category of Table 6.2 
 
 Weight 
 Task and worker characteristics 
 1 
 0 
 1 
 Age 
 40 
 40–55 
 55 
 Reflectance of task/surface background 
 70% 
 30–70% 
 30% 
 Speed and accuracy (only for categories 
D – I) 
 Not important 
 Important 
 Critical 
 (Adapted from IESNA, 1995.) 
 Table 6.4   Artificial Light Sources 
 Type 
 Efficiency
(lm/W) 
 Color rendering 
 Comments 
 Incandescent 
 17–23 
 Good 
 A commonly used light source, 
but the least efficient. Lamp 
cost is low. Lamp life is typi-
cally less than 1 year. 
 Fluorescent 
 50–80 
 Fair to good 
 Efficiency and color rendering 
vary considerably with type of 
lamp: cool white, warm white, 
deluxe cool white. Significant 
energy cost reductions are pos-
sible with new energy-saving 
lamps and ballasts. Lamp life is 
typically 5–8 years. 
 Mercury 
 50–55 
 Very poor to fair 
 A very long lamp life (9–12 
years), but efficiency drops off 
substantially with age. 
 Metal halide 
 80–90 
 Fair to moderate 
 Color rendering is adequate for 
many applications. Lamp life is 
typically 1–3 years. 
 High-pressure 
sodium 
 85–125 
 Fair 
 Very efficient light source. 
Lamp life is 3–6 years at aver-
age burning rates, up to 12 h/
day. 
 Low-pressure 
sodium 
 100–180 
 Poor 
 The most efficient light source. 
Lamp life is 4–5 years at aver-
age burning rate of 12 h/day. 
Mainly used for roadways and 
warehouse lighting. 
 Source: Courtesy Human Factors Section, Eastman Kodak Co.
 Note: The efficiency (column 2), in lumens per watt (lm/W), and color rendering (column 3) of 
six frequently used light sources (column 1) are indicated. Lamp life and other features are given 
in column 4. Color rendering is a measure of how colors appear under any of these artificial light 
sources compared with their color under a standard light source. Higher values for efficiency indi-
cate better energy conservation. 

242 
C H A P T E R  6
 Luminaires for general lighting are classified in accordance with the percent-
age of total light output emitted above and below the horizontal (see Figure 6.6). 
 Indirect lighting  illuminates the ceiling, which in turn reflects light downward. 
Thus, the ceilings should be the brightest surface in the room (see Figure 6.7), 
with reflectances above 80 percent. The other areas of the room should reflect 
lower and lower percentages of the light as one moves downward from the ceil-
ing until the floor is reached, which should reflect no more than 20 to 40 percent 
of the light, to avoid glare. To avoid excessive luminance, the luminaires should 
be evenly distributed across the ceiling.   
 Direct lighting  deemphasizes the ceiling surface and places more of the light 
on the work surfaces and the floor. Direct–indirect lighting is a combination of 
both. This distribution of lighting is important, as IESNA (1995) recommends 
that the ratio of luminances of any adjacent areas in the visual field not exceed 
3/1. The purpose of this is to avoid glare and problems in adaptation.   
 Consider workers of all ages performing an important, medium-difficulty assembly on 
a dingy metal workstation with a reflectance of 35 percent. The appropriate weights 
would be age  1, reflectance  0, and accuracy  0. The total weight of 1 implies 
that the middle value of category E is utilized with a required illumination of 75 fc. 
Calculation of Required Illumination 
 EXAMPLE 6.1 
(d)
(c)
(b)
(a)
(g)
(f)
(e)
 
 Figure 6.5  
Types of industrial ceiling-mounted luminaires: (a,c) downlighting, (b,d) diffuse, 
(e) damp location, (f) high bay, (g) low bay. ( From: IESNA, 1995.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
243
 GLARE 
 Glare  is excessive brightness in the field of vision. This excessive light is scat-
tered in the cornea, lens, and even corrective lenses (Freivalds, Harpster, and 
Heckman, 1983), decreasing visibility so that additional time is required for the 
eyes to adapt from light to darker conditions. Also, unfortunately, the eyes tend 
to be drawn directly to the brightest light source, which is known as  phototro-
pism . Glare can be either direct, as caused by light sources directly in the field of 
view, or indirect, as reflected from a surface in the field of view. Direct glare can 
be reduced by using more luminaires with lower intensities, using baffles or dif-
fusers on luminaires, placing the work surface perpendicular to the light source, 
and increasing overall background lighting so as to decrease the contrast. 
 Reflected glare can be reduced by using nonglossy or matte surfaces and re-
orienting the work surface or task, in addition to the modifications recommended 
for direct glare. Also, polarizing filters can be used at the light source as part 
(a)
(b)
(c)
 
 Figure 6.6  
Luminaires for general lighting are classified in accordance with the percentage 
of total light output emitted above and below the horizontal. Three of the 
classifications are (a) direct lighting, (b) indirect lighting, and (c) direct–indirect 
lighting. ( From: IESNA, 1995.) 
Partitions:
40 – 70%
Furrniture:
25 – 45%
Floors:  20 – 40%
Ceilings: 80% or more
Walls:
W
50 – 70%
 Figure 6.7   Reflectances recommended for room and furniture surfaces in offices.  
 ( From: IESNA, 1995.) 

244 
C H A P T E R  6
of glasses worn by the operator. A special problem is the stroboscopic effect 
caused by the reflections from moving parts or machinery. Avoiding polished 
mirrorlike surfaces is important here. For example, the mirrorlike qualities of the 
glass screen on computer monitors is a problem in office areas. Repositioning 
the monitor or using a screen filter is helpful. Typically, most jobs will require 
supplementary task lighting. This can be provided in a variety of forms, depend-
ing on the nature of the task (see Figure 6.8). 
 COLOR 
 Both color and texture have psychological effects on people. For example, yel-
low is the accepted color of butter; therefore, margarine must be made yellow to 
appeal to the appetite. Steak is another example. Cooked in 45 s on an electronic 
grill, it does not appeal to customers because it lacks a seared, brown, “appetiz-
ing” surface. A special attachment had to be designed to sear the steak. In a third 
example, employees in an air-conditioned Midwestern plant complained of feel-
ing cold, although the temperature was maintained at 72°F (22.2°C). When the 
white walls of the plant were repainted in a warm coral color, complaints ceased.  
 Perhaps the most important use of color is to improve the environmental 
conditions of the workers by providing more visual comfort. Analysts use colors 
to reduce sharp contrasts, increase reflectance, highlight hazards, and call atten-
tion to features of the work environment. 
 Sales are also affected or conditioned by colors. People recognize a com-
pany’s products instantly by the pattern of colors used on packages, trademarks, 
letterheads, trucks, and buildings. Some research has indicated that color prefer-
ences are influenced by nationality, location, and climate. Sales of a product for-
merly made in one color increased when several colors suited to the differences 
in customer demands were supplied. Table 6.5 illustrates the typical emotional 
effects and psychological significances of the principal colors. 
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
(c)
(c)
(d)
(d)
(e)
(e)
 Figure 6.8   Examples of placement of supplementary luminaires. 
 (a) Luminaire located to prevent veiling reflections and reflected glare; reflected light 
does not coincide with angle of view. (b) Reflected light coincides with angle of view. 
(c) Low-angle (grazing) lighting to emphasize surface irregularities. (d) Large-area 
surface source and pattern are reflected toward the eye. (e) Transillumination from 
diffuse source. ( From: IESNA, 1995.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
245
 6.2 NOISE 
 THEORY 
 From the analyst’s point of view,  noise  is any unwanted sound. Sound waves 
originate from the vibration of some object, which in turns sets up a succession 
of compression and expansion waves through the transporting medium (air, wa-
ter, and so on). Thus, sound can be transmitted not only through air and liquids, 
but also through solids, such as machine tool structures. We know that the veloc-
ity of sound waves in air is approximately 1,125 ft/s (343 m/s). In viscoelastic 
materials, such as lead and putty, sound energy is dissipated rapidly as viscous 
friction.  
 Sound can be defined in terms of the frequencies that determine its tone and 
quality, along with the amplitudes that determine its intensity. Frequencies au-
dible to the human ear range from approximately 20 to 20,000 cycles per second, 
commonly called hertz and abbreviated Hz. The fundamental equation of wave 
propagation is 
 c  f 	 
 where  c  sound velocity (1,125 ft/s) 
 
  f  frequency (Hz) 
 
 λ  wavelength (ft) 
 Note that as the wavelength increases, the frequency decreases. 
 Table 6.5   The Emotional and Psychological Significance of the Principal Colors 
 Color 
 Characteristics 
 Yellow 
 Has the highest visibility of any color under practically all light-
ing conditions. It tends to instill a feeling of freshness and dry-
ness. It can give the sensation of wealth and glory, yet can also 
suggest cowardice and sickness. 
 Orange 
 Tends to combine the high visibility of yellow and the vitality 
and intensity characteristic of red. It attracts more attention than 
any other color in the spectrum. It gives a feeling of warmth and 
frequently has a stimulating or cheering effect. 
 Red 
 A high-visibility color having intensity and vitality. It is the 
physical color associated with blood. It suggests heat, stimula-
tion, and action. 
 Blue 
 A low-visibility color. It tends to lead the mind to thoughtfulness 
and deliberation. It tends to be a soothing color, although it can 
promote a depressed mood. 
 Green 
 A low-visibility color. It imparts a feeling of restfulness, cool-
ness, and stability. 
 Purple and violet 
 Low-visibility colors. They are associated with pain, passion, suf-
fering, heroism, and so on. They tend to bring a feeling of fragil-
ity, limpness, and dullness. 

246 
C H A P T E R  6
 The sound pressure waves are captured by the human ear (see Figure 6.9) 
through a complex process. The outer ear funnels the pressure waves onto the 
 eardrum  or  tympanic membrane , which starts vibrating. The membrane is at-
tached to three little bones (malleus, incus, and stapes), which transmit the vi-
brations to the oval window of the  cochlea . The cochlea is a coiled, fluid-filled 
structure split lengthwise by the  basilar membrane containing hair cells with 
nerve endings. The vibrations from the bones set the fluid into a wavelike mo-
tion, which then causes the hair cells to vibrate, activating these nerve endings, 
which transmit the impulses via the auditory nerve to the brain for further pro-
cessing. Note the series of energy transformations: the original pneumatic pres-
sure waves are converted to mechanical vibrations, then to hydraulic waves, back 
to mechanical vibrations, and finally to electrical impulses.   
 MEASUREMENT 
 Because of the very large range of sound intensities encountered in the normal 
human environment, the  decibel (dB) scale has been chosen. In effect, it is the 
logarithmic ratio of the actual sound intensity to the sound intensity at the thresh-
old of hearing of a young person. Thus, the sound pressure level  L in decibels is 
given by 
 L  20 log 10 P rms P ref 
 where  P rms  root-mean-square sound pressure [microbars (
bar)] 
 
  P ref   sound pressure at the threshold of hearing of a young person at 
1,000 Hz (0.0002 
bar) 
Malleus
Middle ear
Incus
Inner ear
Basilar membrane
Cochlea
Auditory
nerve
Outer
ear
Auditory
canal
Pinna
Stapes
Oval
window
Round
window
Eardrum
(tympanic
membrane)
 Figure 6.9   The human ear. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
247
 Because sound pressure levels are logarithmic quantities, the effect of the 
coexistence of two or more sound sources in one location requires that a loga-
rithmic addition be performed as follows: 
 LTOT  10 log10 (10L1/10  10L2/10  . . . ) 
 where    L TOT  total noise 
 L 1 and  L 2  two noise sources 
 The A-weighted sound level used in Figure 6.10 is the most widely accepted 
measure of environmental noise. The A weighting recognizes that from both the 
psychological and physiological points of view, the low frequencies (50 to 500 Hz) 
are far less annoying and harmful than sounds in the critical frequency range of 
1,000 to 4,000 Hz. Above frequencies of 10,000 Hz, hearing acuity (and therefore 
noise effects) again drops off (see Figure 6.11). The appropriate electronic network 
is built into sound level meters to attenuate low and high frequencies, so that the 
sound level meter can read in dBA units directly, to correspond to the effect on the 
average human ear.   
 HEARING LOSS 
 The chances of damage to the ear, resulting in “nerve” deafness, increase as the 
frequency approaches the 2,400- to 4,800-Hz range. This loss of hearing is a 
result of a loss of receptors in the inner ear, which then fail to transmit the sound 
waves further to the brain. Also, as the exposure time increases, especially where 
Very annoying
V
Painfully
loud
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
Common
sounds
Threshold
of hearing
Just
audible
Quiet
Intrusive
Whisper
Whisper
Whi p r
hi
Whisper
Train
T
Grinder
Grinder
Gri d r
Gri d r
Grinder
Lar
Prop ler Aircraft
Lar
La ge
propeller aircraft
l
Propeller Aircra
ropeller Aircr
propeller aircraft
Je
Aircraf
JettJe
aircraft
Aircra
Aircra
aircraft
R veti g Mac
e
Ri
Riveting machine
eting Machin
ti
M
hi
eting machine
Bedroom
Quiet
Neighborhood
Quiet
Q
neighborhood
Neighborhood
Neighborhood
neighborhood Air conditioning
Un
Air
conditioning
Air
d ti
Air
d i
conditioning
unit
unit
u
Traf
T
fi
f c
0
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
10
20
40
50
60
70
Very
V
quiet
30
 Figure 6.10   Decibel values of typical sounds (dBA). 

248 
C H A P T E R  6
higher intensities are involved, there will eventually be an impairment in hearing. 
Nerve deafness is most commonly due to excessive exposure to occupational 
noise. Individuals vary widely in their susceptibility to noise-induced deafness. 
 In general, noise is classified as either broadband noise or meaningful noise. 
Broadband noise is made up of frequencies covering a significant part of the 
sound spectrum. This type of noise can be either continuous or intermittent. 
Meaningful noise represents distracting information that affects the worker’s 
efficiency. In long-term situations, broadband noise can result in deafness; in 
day-to-day operations, it can result in reduced worker efficiency and ineffective 
communication. 
 Continuous broadband noise is typical of such industries as the textile indus-
try and an automatic screw machine shop, where the noise level does not devi-
ate significantly during the entire working day. Intermittent broadband noise is 
characteristic of a drop forge plant and a lumber mill. When a person is exposed 
to noise that exceeds the damage level, the initial effect is likely to be a tempo-
rary hearing loss from which there is complete recovery within a few hours after 
leaving the work environment. If repeated exposure continues over a long period, 
irreversible hearing damage can result. The effects of excessive noise depend on 
the total energy that the ear has received during the work period. Thus, reducing 
the time of exposure to excessive noise during the work shift reduces the prob-
ability of permanent hearing impairment.  
100
80
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
90
100
110
120
130
Octave
a
band sound pressure level
in decibels
140
200
500
1,000
2,000
4,000
8,000
Band center frequency in cycles per second
A – Weighted
W
Sound Level
 Figure 6.11   Equivalent sound level contours. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
249
 Both broadband and meaningful noise have proved to be sufficiently dis-
tracting and annoying to result in decreased productivity and increased employee 
fatigue. However, federal legislation was enacted primarily because of the pos-
sibility of permanent hearing damage due to occupational noise exposure. The 
OSHA (1997) limits for permissible noise exposure are contained in Table 6.6. 
 When noise levels are determined by  octave-band analysis  (a special filter 
attachment to the sound level meter that decomposes the noise into component 
frequencies), the equivalent A-weighted sound level may be determined as fol-
lows: Plot the octave-band sound pressure levels on the graph in Figure 6.11, and 
note the A-weighted sound level corresponding to the point of highest penetra-
tion into the sound level contours. This is the dBA value to be used in further 
calculations. 
 NOISE DOSE 
 OSHA uses the concept of  noise dose , with the exposure to any sound level 
above 80 dBA causing the listener to incur a partial dose. If the total daily ex-
posure consists of several partial exposures to different noise levels, then the 
several partial doses are added to obtain a combined exposure: 
 D  100  (C 1 T 1  C 2 T 2  . . .  C n T n )  100 
 where  D  noise dose 
 
  C  time spent at specified noise level (h) 
 
  T  time permitted at specified noise level (h) (see Table 6.6) 
 The total exposure to various noise levels cannot exceed a 100-percent dose.  
 Table 6.6   Permissible Noise Exposures 
 Duration per day (h) 
 Sound level (dBA) 
 8 
 90 
 6 
 92 
 4 
 95 
 3 
 97 
 2 
 100 
 1.5 
 102 
 1 
 105 
 0.5 
 110 
 0.25 or less 
 115 
 Note: When the daily noise exposure is composed of two or more periods of noise exposure of 
different levels, their combined effect should be considered rather than the individual effects of 
each. If the sum of the following fractions  C 1 / T 1   C 2 / T 2  . . .   C n /T n exceeds unity, then the 
mixed exposure should be considered to exceed the limit value.  C n indicates the total time of 
exposure at a specified noise level, and  T n equals the total time of exposure permitted during the 
workday. 
Exposure to impulsive or impact noise should not exceed 140-dB peak sound pressure level. 

250 
C H A P T E R  6
 Thus, 90 dBA is the maximum permissible level for an 8-h day, and any 
sound level above 90 dBA will require some noise abatement. All sound lev-
els between 80 and 130 dBA must be included in the noise dose computations 
(although continuous levels above 115 dBA are not allowed at all). Table 6.6 
provides only certain key times, but a computational formula can be used for 
intermediate noise levels: 
 T  82 (L − 90)5 
 where  L  noise level (dBA). 
 The noise dose can also be converted to an  8-h time-weighted average 
(TWA) sound level. This is the sound level that would produce a given noise dose 
if a worker were exposed to that sound level continuously over an 8-h workday. 
The TWA is defined by 
 TWA  16.61  log 10 (D100)  90 
 Thus, in the last example, a 137.5 percent dose would yield a TWA of 
 TWA  16.61  log 10 (137.5100)  90  92.3 dB 
 Today, OSHA also requires a mandatory hearing conservation program, 
including exposure monitoring, audiometric testing, and training, for all em-
ployees who have occupational noise exposures equal to or exceeding TWA of 
85 dB. Although noise levels below 85 dB may not cause hearing loss, they 
contribute to distraction and annoyance, resulting in poor worker performance. 
For example, typical office noises, although not loud, can make it difficult to 
concentrate, resulting in low productivity in design and other creative work. 
Also, the effectiveness of telephone and face-to-face communications can be 
considerably reduced by the distraction of noise levels less than 85 dB. 
 PERFORMANCE EFFECTS 
 Generally, performance decrements are most often observed in difficult tasks 
that place high demands on perceptual, information processing, and short-term 
memory capacities. Surprisingly, noise may have no effect, or may even improve 
performance, on simple routine tasks. Without the noise source, the person’s at-
tention may wander due to boredom.  
Calculation of OSHA Noise Dose 
 EXAMPLE 6.2  
 A worker is exposed to 95 dBA for 3 h and to 90 dBA for 5 h. Although each partial 
dose is separately permissible, the combined dose is not: 





D
100
3
4
5
8
137.5
100
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
251
 Annoyance is even more complicated and is fraught with emotional issues. 
Acoustic factors, such as intensity, frequency, duration, fluctuations in level, 
and spectral composition, play a major role, as do nonacoustic factors, such as 
past noise experience, activity, personality, noise occurrence predictability, time 
of day and year, and type of locale. There are approximately a dozen differ-
ent methods for evaluating annoyance aspects (Sanders and McCormick, 1993). 
However, most of these measures involve community-type issues with noise lev-
els in the 60- to 70-dBA range, much lower than could reasonably be applied in 
an industrial situation. 
 NOISE CONTROL 
 Management can control the noise level in three ways. The best, and usually the 
most difficult, is to reduce the noise level at its source. However, it would be 
very difficult to redesign such equipment as pneumatic hammers, steam forg-
ing presses, board drop hammers, and woodworking planers and joiners so that 
the efficiency of the equipment would be maintained while the noise level was 
being brought into a tolerable range. In some instances, however, more quietly 
operating facilities may be substituted for those operating at a high noise level. 
For example, a hydraulic riveter may be substituted for a pneumatic riveter, an 
electrically operated apparatus for a steam-operated apparatus, and an elastomer-
lined tumble barrel for an unlined barrel. Low-frequency noise at the source is 
effectively controlled at the source by using rubber mounts and better alignment 
and maintenance of the equipment. 
 If the noise cannot be controlled at its source, then analysts should investi-
gate the opportunity to isolate the equipment responsible for the noise; that is, 
control the noise that emanates from a machine by housing all or a substantial 
portion of the facility in an insulating enclosure. This has frequently been done 
in connection with power presses having automatic feeds. Ambient noise can 
frequently be reduced by isolating the noise source from the remainder of the 
structure, thus preventing a sounding board effect. This can be done by mounting 
the facility on a shear-type elastomer, thus damping the telegraphing of noise. 
Calculation of OSHA Noise Dose with Additional Exposures 
 EXAMPLE 6.3 
 A worker is exposed to 1 h at 80 dBA, 4 h at 90 dBA, and 3 h at 96 dBA. The worker 
is permitted 32 h for the first exposure, 8 h for the second exposure, and 
 T  82 (96−90)5  3.48 
 hours for the third exposure. The total noise dose becomes 
 D  100  (132  48  33.48)  139.3 
 Thus, for this worker, the 8-h noise exposure dosage exceeds OSHA requirements, 
and either the noise must be abated or the worker must be provided with a rest allow-
ance (see Chapter 11) to comply with OSHA requirements. 

252 
C H A P T E R  6
 In situations where enclosing the facility would not interfere with operation 
and accessibility, the following steps can ensure the most satisfactory enclosure 
design: 
 1.  Clearly establish design goals and the acoustical performance required of 
the enclosure. 
 2.  Measure the octave-band noise levels of the equipment to be enclosed, at 
3 ft (1 m) from the major machine surfaces. 
 3.  Determine the spectral attenuation of each enclosure. This is the difference 
between the design criteria determined in step 1 and the noise level deter-
mined in step 2. 
 4.  Select the materials from Table 6.7 that are popular for relatively small 
enclosures and will provide the protection needed. A viscoelastic damping 
material should be applied if any of these materials (with the exception of 
lead) is used. This can provide an additional attenuation of 3 to 5 dB.  
 Figure 6.12 illustrates the amount of noise reduction typically possible through 
various acoustical treatments and enclosures.   
 Note that some sounds are desirable in a work environment. For example, 
background music has been used in factories for many years to improve the work 
environment, especially where voice communications aren’t critical. The major-
ity of production and indirect workers (maintenance, shipping, receiving, etc.) 
enjoy listening to music while they work. However, first consult the employees 
on the type of music to be played. 
 The third level of noise control is with hearing protection, though in most 
cases OSHA accepts this as only a temporary solution. Personal protective 
Table 6.7   Octave-Band Noise Reduction of Single-Layer Materials Commonly 
Used for Enclosures
Octave-band  
center frequency 
125 
250 
500 
1,000 
2,000 
4,000
16-gage steel 
15 
23 
31 
31 
35 
41
7-mm steel 
25 
38 
41 
45 
41 
48
7-mm plywood 
 
 
 
 
 
  0.32 kg/0.1 m2 
11 
15 
20 
24 
29 
30
3/4-in plywood 
 
 
 
 
 
  0.9 kg/0.1 m2 
19 
24 
27 
30 
33 
35
14-mm gypsum board 
 
 
 
 
 
  1 kg/0.1 m2 
14 
20 
30 
35 
38 
37
7-mm fiberglass 
 
 
 
 
 
  0.23 kg/0.1 m2 
5 
15 
23 
24 
32 
33
0.2-mm lead 
 
 
 
 
 
  0.45 kg/0.1 m2 
19 
19 
24 
28 
33 
38
0.4-mm lead 
 
 
 
 
 
  0.9 kg/0.1 m2 
23 
24 
29 
33 
40 
43

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
253
equipment can include various types of earplugs, some of which are able to at-
tenuate noises in all frequencies up to sound pressure levels of 110 dB or more. 
Also available are earmuffs that attenuate noises to 125 dB above 600 Hz and 
up to 115 dB below this frequency. Earplug effectiveness is measured quanti-
tatively by a  noise reduction rating  (NRR), which is marked on the packaging. 
The equivalent noise exposure for the listener is equal to the TWA plus 7 minus 
the NRR (NIOSH, 1998). In general, insert-type (e.g., expandable foam) devices 
provide better protection than muff-type devices. A combination of an insert de-
vice and a muff device can yield NRR values as high as 30. Note that this is a 
laboratory value obtained under ideal conditions. Typically, in a real-world set-
ting, with hair, beards, eyeglasses, and improper fit, the NRR value is going to be 
considerably lower, perhaps by as much as 10 (Sanders and McCormick, 1993).  
 6.3 TEMPERATURE 
   Most workers are exposed to excessive heat at one time or another. In many 
situations, artificially hot climates are created by the demands of the particular 
industry. Miners are subjected to hot working conditions due to the increase of 
temperature with depth, as well as a lack of ventilation. Textile workers are sub-
jected to the hot, humid conditions needed for weaving cloth. Steel, coke, and 
aluminum workers are subject to intense radiative loads from open-hearth fur-
naces and refractory ovens. Such conditions, while present for only a limited part 
of the day, may exceed the climatic stress found in the most extreme, naturally 
occurring climates. 
(c)
(c)
(a+b+c)
(a+2b+2c)
(b)
(b)
(a)
(a)
30
20
75
Band level, decibels
Frequency band
75
150
150
300
300
600
600
1200
1200
2400
2400
4800
4800
9600
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Original
Octav
a e-band analysis of noise
 Figure 6.12   Illustrations of the possible effects of some noise control measures. 
 The lines on the graph show the possible reductions in noise (from the original level) 
that might be expected by vibration insulation,  a; an enclosure of acoustic absorbing 
material,  b; a rigid, sealed enclosure,  c; a single combined enclosure plus vibration 
insulation,  a   b   c ; and a double combined enclosure plus vibration insulation, 
 a  2 b  2 c . ( Adapted from : Peterson and Gross, 1978.) 

254 
C H A P T E R  6
 THEORY 
 The human is typically modeled as a cylinder with a shell, corresponding to the 
skin, surface tissues, and limbs, and with a core, corresponding to the deeper 
tissues of the trunk and head. Core temperatures exhibit a narrow range around 
a normal value of 98.6°F (37°C). At values between 100 and 102°F (37.8 and 
38.9°C), physiological performance drops sharply. At temperatures above 105°F 
(40.6°C), the sweating mechanism may fail, resulting in a rapid rise in core tem-
perature and eventual death. The shell tissues of the body, in contrast, can vary 
over a much wider range of temperatures without serious loss of efficiency, and 
can act as a buffer to protect core temperatures. Clothing, if worn, acts as a sec-
ond shell to insulate the core temperature further. 
 The heat exchanges between the body and its environment can be repre-
sented by the following heat balance equation: 
 S  M  C  R  E 
 where  M  heat gain of metabolism 
 C  heat gained (or lost) due to convection 
 R  heat gained (or lost) due to radiation 
 E  heat lost through evaporation of sweat 
 S  heat storage (or loss) of body 
 For thermal neutrality,  S  must be zero. If the summation of the various heat 
exchanges across the body results in a heat gain, the resulting heat will be stored 
in the tissues of the body, with a concomitant increase in core temperature and a 
potential heat stress problem. 
 A thermal comfort zone, for areas where 8 h of sedentary or light work is 
done, has been defined as the range of temperatures of from 66 to 79°F (18.9 to 
26.1°C), with a relative humidity ranging from 20 to 80 percent (see  Figure 6.13). 
Of course, the workload, clothing, and radiant heat load all affect the individual’s 
sense of comfort within the comfort zone.   
 HEAT STRESS: WBGT 
 Many attempts have been made to combine into one index the physiological 
manifestations of these heat exchanges with environmental measurements. Such 
attempts have centered on designing instruments intended to simulate the human 
body, or devising formulas and models based on theoretical or empirical data 
to estimate the environmental stresses or the resulting physiological strains. In 
the simplest form, an index consists of the dominant factor, such as the dry-bulb 
temperature, which is used by most people in temperate zones. 
 Probably the most commonly used index in industry today establishes heat 
exposure limits and work/rest cycles based on the  wet-bulb globe temperature , 
or WBGT (Yaglou and Minard, 1957), and the metabolic load. In slightly differ-
ent forms it is recommended by ACGIH (1985), NIOSH (1986), and ASHRAE 
(1991). For outdoors with a solar load, the WBGT is defined as 
 WBGT  0.7 NWB  0.2 GT  0.1 DB 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
255
 and indoors or outdoors with no solar load, the WBGT is 
 WBGT  0.7 NWB  0.3 GT 
 where NWB   natural wet-bulb temperature (measure of evaporative cooling, 
using a thermometer with a wet wick and natural air movement) 
 
 GT   globe temperature (measure of radiative load, using a ther-
mometer in a 6-in-diameter black copper sphere) 
 
 DB   Dry-bulb temperature  (basic ambient temperature; thermom-
eter shielded from radiation) 
 Note that NWB is different from a psychometric wet bulb, which uses 
maximum air velocity and is used in conjunction with DB to establish relative 
humidity and thermal comfort zones. 
in
Hg
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
B. Water vapor pressure
W
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
5
10
15
20
25
30
0.1
mm
Hg
Work = sedentary or light assembly
W
,
70–100 W (60–90 kcal/hr)
Air velocity = 0.2 m/sec (50 ft/min)
Clothing = 0.6 clo heat, 1.25 clo cold
No radiant heat
            = thermal comfort zone
F
C 15
15
20
25
30C
20
25
Dry-bulb temperature
30
35
60
65
70
75
80
85
85  F
80
75
70
65
60
90
95
10%
20%
20%
%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
C.  W
tur
et-bulb temper
t bulb tem
et-bulb temperature
W
A. Dry-bulb temperature
80%
60%
40%
20%
D. Relative humidi y
D. Relative humidi y
D. Relative humidity
 Figure 6.13  The thermal comfort zone. 
 ( Courtesy:  Eastman Kodak Co.) 

256 
C H A P T E R  6
 Once the WBGT is measured (commercially available instruments provide 
instantaneous weighted readings), it is used along with the metabolic load of the 
workers to establish the amount of time an unacclimatized worker and an accli-
matized worker are allowed to work under the given conditions (see Figure 6.14). 
These limits are based on the individual’s core temperature having increased by 
approximately 1.8°F (1°C) as calculated by the heat balance equation. The 1.8°F 
increase has been established by NIOSH (1986) as the upper acceptable limit for 
heat storage in the body. The appropriate amount of rest is assumed to be under 
the same conditions. Obviously, if the worker rests in a more comfortable area, 
less rest time will be needed. 
 CONTROL METHODS 
 Heat stress can be reduced by implementing either engineering controls, that 
is, modifying the environment, or administrative controls. Modifying the envi-
ronment follows directly from the heat balance equation. If the metabolic load 
RAL for unacclimatized
workers
REL for acclimatized
workers
104
100
200
300
400
349
465
1200
1600
500 kcal/h
580 Watts
W
2000 Btu/h
800
233
400
116
95
86
77
68
40
Ceiling
Environmental heat–WBGT
n
15 min/h REL
30 min/h REL
15 min/h RAL
30 min/h RAL
45 min/h RAL
60 min/h RAL
45 min/h REL
60 min/h REL
F C
35
30
25
20
Metabolic heat
 Figure 6.14   Recommended heat stress levels based on metabolic heat (1-h time-
weighted average), acclimatization, and work/rest cycle. 
 A rough approximation for metabolic heat from Figure 4.21 is  W  (HR – 50)  6. 
Temperature limits are 1-h time-weighted average WGBT. RAL  recommended alert 
limit for unacclimatized workers. REL  recommended exposure limit for acclimatized 
workers. ( From: NIOSH, 1986, Figs. 1 and 2.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
257
is a significant contributor to heat storage, the workload should be reduced by 
mechanization of the operation. Working more slowly will also decrease the 
workload, but will have the negative effect of decreasing productivity. The radia-
tive load can be decreased by controlling the heat at the source: insulating hot 
equipment, providing drains for hot water, maintaining tight joints where steam 
may escape, and using local exhaust ventilation to disperse heated air rising from 
a hot process. Radiation can also be intercepted before it reaches the operator, 
via radiation shielding: sheets of reflective material, such as aluminum or foil-
covered plasterboard, or metal chain curtains, wire mesh screens, or tempered 
glass, if visibility is required. Reflective garments, protective clothing, or even 
long-sleeved clothing will also help in reducing the radiative load.  
 Convective heat loss from the operator can be increased by increasing air 
movement through ventilation, as long as the dry-bulb temperature is less than 
skin temperature, which is typically around 95°F (35°C) in such environments. 
Convection is more effective over bare skin; however, bare skin also absorbs 
more radiation. Thus, there is a trade-off between convection and radiation. 
Evaporative heat loss from the operator can be improved by again increasing air 
movement and decreasing the ambient water vapor pressure, using dehumidifiers 
or air-conditioning. Unfortunately, the latter approach, although creating a very 
pleasant environment, is quite costly and is often not practical for the typical 
production facility. 
 Administrative measures, though less effective, include modifying work sched-
ules to decrease the metabolic load, using work/rest schedules per Figure 6.14, 
 acclimatizing workers (this may take close to two weeks, and the effect is lost over a 
similar time period), rotating workers into and out of the hot environment, and using 
cooling vests. The cheapest vests utilize ice frozen in small, plastic packets placed 
into numerous pockets in the vest (Kamon et al., 1986).  
 COLD STRESS 
 The most commonly used cold stress index is the  wind chill index . It describes 
the rate of heat loss by radiation and convection as a function of ambient tem-
perature and wind velocity. Typically, the wind chill index is not used directly, 
but is converted to an  equivalent wind chill temperature . This is the ambient 
temperature that, in calm conditions, would produce the same wind chill index 
as the actual combination of air temperature and wind velocity (Table 6.8). For 
the operator to maintain thermal balance under such low-temperature conditions, 
Calculation of WBGT and Heat Stress Level 
 EXAMPLE 6.4 
 Consider an unacclimatized worker palletizing a skid at 400 kcal/h (1,600 BU/h) with a 
thermal load of WBGT  77°F (25°C). This individual would be able to work for 45 min 
and would then need to rest. At this point, the worker must rest for at least 15 min in the 
same environment or a shorter time in a less stressful environment. 

258 
C H A P T E R  6
there must be a close relationship between the worker’s physical activity (heat 
production) and the insulation provided by protective clothing (see Figure 6.15). 
Here,  clo  represents the insulation needed to maintain comfort for a person sit-
ting where the relative humidity is 50 percent, the air movement is 20 ft/min 
(6.1 m/s), and the dry-bulb temperature is 70°F (21.1°C). A light business suit is 
approximately equivalent to 1 clo of insulation.   
 Probably the most critical effects for industrial workers exposed to outdoor 
conditions are decreased tactile sensitivity and manual dexterity due to vasodila-
tion and decreased blood flow to the hands. Manual performance may decrease 
as much as 50 percent as the hand skin temperature drops from 65 to 45°F (18.3 
to 7.2°C) (Lockhart, Kiess, and Clegg, 1975). Auxiliary heaters, hand warmers, 
and gloves are potential solutions to the problem. Unfortunately, as indicated in 
Chapter 5, gloves can impair manual performance and decrease grip strength. A 
compromise that protects the hands and minimally affects performance may be 
fingerless gloves (Riley and Cochran, 1984).   
 6.4 VENTILATION 
  If a room has people, machinery, or activities in it, the air in the room will de-
teriorate due to the release of odors, the release of heat, the formation of wa-
ter vapor, the production of carbon dioxide, and the production of toxic vapors. 
Ventilation must be provided to dilute these contaminants, exhaust the stale air, 
and supply fresh air. This can be done in one or more of three approaches: gen-
eral, local, or spot. General or displacement ventilation is delivered at the 8- to 
12-ft (2.4- to 3.6-m) level and displaces the warm air rising from the equipment, 
lights, and workers. Recommended guidelines for fresh air requirements, based 
 Table 6.8     Equivalent Wind Chill Temperatures (°F) of Cold Environments 
Under Calm Conditions 
 
 Actual thermometer reading (°F) 
 Wind 
speed(mi/h) 
 40 
 30 
 20 
 10 
 0 
 10 
 20 
 30 
 5 
 36 
 25 
 13 
 1 
 –11 
 –22 
 –34 
 –46 
 10 
 34 
 21 
 9 
 –4 
 –16 
 –28 
 –41 
 –53 
 15 
 32 
 19 
  6 
 –7 
 –19 
 –32 
 –45 
 –58 
 20 
 30 
 17 
 4 
 –9 
 –22 
 –35 
 –48 
 –61 
 30 
 28 
 15 
 1 
 –12 
 –26 
 –39 
 –53 
 –67 
 40 
 27 
 13 
 –1 
 –15 
 –29 
 –43 
 –57 
 –71 
 
 Little Danger: 
Exposed, dry flesh 
won’t freeze for 5 h. 
 Increasing Danger: 
Frostbite occurs 
within 30 mins. 
 Great Danger: 
Frostbite 
occurs within 
5 min. 
 Source: National Weather Service. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
259
on the room volume per person, are shown in Figure 6.16 (Yaglou, Riley, and 
Coggins, 1936). A rough rule of thumb is 300 ft 3  (8.5 m 3 ) of fresh air per person 
per hour. 
 In a building with only a few work areas, it would be impractical to venti-
late the whole building. In that case, local ventilation can be provided at a lower 
level, or perhaps in an enclosed area, such as a ventilated control booth or crane 
cab. Note that fan velocity drops rapidly with increasing distance from the fan (see 
Figure 6.17), and directionality of airflow is very critical. Acceptable air velocities 
at the worker are specified in Table 6.9 (ASHRAE, 1991). A rough rule of thumb is 
that at a distance of 30 fan diameters, the fan velocity drops to less than 10 percent 
of its face velocity (Konz and Johnson, 2000). Finally, in areas with localized heat 
sources, such as refractory ovens, spot cooling with a direct high-velocity airstream 
at the worker will increase convective and evaporative cooling. 
   
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
M = 1.3 (sleeping)
M = 1.6 (sitting quietly)
M = 2.5 (working at desk)
M = 3.2 (performing light work)
M = 4.8 (walking 2.5 mph — light to moderate work)
M = 6.3 (walking 3.5 mph — average work)
M = 9.5 (walking 3.5 mph with 20 kg load)
M 
100
00
80
80
60
40
20
Ambient temperature (F) 
Insulation required for comfort (CLO)
0
–20
–40
 Figure 6.15   Prediction  of the total insulation required as a function of the ambient tem-
perature for a 50th percentile male ( M  heat production in kcal/min). 
 ( From : Redrawn from Belding and Hatch, 1955.) 

260 
C H A P T E R  6
Very
strong
4
Limit
(moderate) 2
Definite
Volume of air per person (ft3)
Intensity of odors
1
0
None
3
Strong
100
200
300
500 700 1,000
5 ft3/min
10 ft3/min
20 ft3/min
30 ft3/min
Figure 6.16  Guidelines for 
ventilation requirements for 
sedentary workers given the 
available volume of room air.
(Flow rates are per person.) 
(Adapted from: Yaglou, Riley, 
and Coggins, 1936.)
Distance
Air velocity
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
Figure 6.17  Air ve-
locity versus distance 
for fan placement.
(From: Konz and 
Johnson, 2000.)

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
261
 6.5 VIBRATION 
  Vibration can have detrimental effects on human performance. Vibrations of high 
amplitude and low frequency have especially undesirable effects on body organs 
and tissue. The parameters of vibration are frequency, amplitude, velocity, ac-
celeration, and jerk. For sinusoidal vibrations, amplitude and its derivations with 
respect to time are 
 Amplitude s   maximum displacement from static 
position (in) 
 
Maximum velocity ds
dt
s
f
= 2π (s
)
f
/
in s
 
 
Maximum acceleration
2
d s
2
dt
s
f
2
2
2
f
2
4
= π (s
)
f 2
f
/
in s
 
 
Maximum jerk
i
r
n s
d s
dt
s
f
3
3
3
3
3
8π (s
)
f
/
 
 where  f  frequency 
       s  displacement amplitude 
 Displacement and maximum acceleration are the principal parameters used to 
characterize the intensity of vibration. 
 There are three classifications of vibration exposure: 
 1.  Circumstances in which the whole or a major portion of the body surface 
is affected, for example, when high-intensity sound in air or water excites 
vibration. 
 Table 6.9   Acceptable Air Motion at the Worker 
 Exposure 
 Air Velocity 
(ft/min) 
 Continuous 
 
 Air-conditioned space 
 50 to 75 
 Fixed workstation, general ventilation, or spot cooling 
 
 Sitting 
 75 to 125 
 Standing 
 100 to 200 
 Intermittent, spot cooling, or relief stations 
 
 Light heat loads and activity 
 1,000 to 2,000 
 Moderate heat loads and activity 
 2,000 to 3,000 
 High heat loads and activity 
 3,000 to 4,000 
 Source: Reprinted with permission from ASHRAE, 1991. 

262 
C H A P T E R  6
 2.  Cases in which vibrations are transmitted to the body through a support-
ing area, for example, through the buttocks of a person driving a truck, or 
through the feet of a person standing by a shakeout facility in a foundry. 
 3.  Instances in which vibrations are applied to a localized body area, for ex-
ample, to the hand when holding and operating a power tool.  
 Every mechanical system can be modeled using a mass, spring, and dashpot, 
which, in combination, result in the system having its own  natural frequency . 
The nearer the vibration comes to this frequency, the greater the effect on that 
system. In fact, if the forced vibrations induce larger-amplitude vibrations in the 
system, then the system is in  resonance . This can have dramatic effects, for ex-
ample, large winds causing the Tacoma Narrows bridge in Washington to oscil-
late and eventually collapse, or soldiers breaking step in crossing bridges. For a 
sitting person, the critical resonant frequencies are given in Table 6.10.  
 In contrast, oscillations in the body, or any system, tend to be dampened. 
Thus, in a standing posture, the muscles of the legs heavily dampen vibrations. 
Frequencies above 35 Hz are especially dampened. Amplitudes of oscillations 
induced in the fingers will reduce 50 percent in the hands, 66 percent in the el-
bows, and 90 percent in the shoulders. 
 The human tolerance for vibration decreases as the exposure time increases. 
Thus, the tolerable acceleration level increases with decreasing exposure time. 
The limits for whole-body vibration have been developed by the American 
Conference of Government Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH, 2003) and for hand 
vibration by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI, 1986) for trans-
portation and industrial applications. The standards specify limits in terms of 
acceleration, frequency, and time duration (Figures 6.18 and 6.19). The plotted 
lines show threshold value limits. 
 Low-frequency (0.2- to 0.7-Hz), high-amplitude vibrations are the principal 
cause of motion sickness in sea and air travel. Workers experience fatigue much 
more rapidly when they are exposed to vibrations in the range of 1 to 250 Hz. 
Early symptoms of vibration fatigue are headache, vision problems, loss of appe-
tite, and loss of interest. Later problems include motor control impairments, disk 
degeneration, bone atrophy, and arthritis. Vibrations experienced in this range 
are often characteristic of the trucking industry. The vertical vibrations of many 
 Table 6.10   Resonant Frequencies for Different Body Parts 
 Frequency (Hz) 
 Body part affected 
 3–4 
 Cervical vertebrae 
 4 
 Lumbar vertebrae (key for forklift and truck operators) 
 5 
 Shoulder girdle 
 20–30 
 Between head and shoulder 
 30 
 Fingers, hands, and arms (key for power tool operators) 
 60–90 
 Eyeballs (key for pilots and astronauts) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
263
 Figure 6.18   
Vertical acceleration 
threshold level values 
(TLVs) contained in 
ACGIH (2003). 
 Figure 6.19 
Vibration exposure 
zones for the 
assessment of hand-
transmitted vibration 
(contained in ANSI 
3.34-1986). 

264 
C H A P T E R  6
rubber-tired trucks when traveling at typical speeds over ordinary roads range 
from 3 to about 7 Hz, which are exactly in the critical range for resonances in 
the human trunk. 
 Power tools with frequencies of 40 to 300 Hz tend to occlude blood flow and 
affect nerves, resulting in the  white fingers syndrome . The problem is exacer-
bated in cold conditions, with the additional problem of cold-induced occlusion 
of blood flow, or  Raynaud’s syndrome . Better dampened tools, the exchange of 
detachable handles with special vibration-absorbing handles, and the wearing of 
gloves, especially those padded with vibration-absorbing gel, will help reduce 
the problem. 
 Management can protect employees against vibration in several ways. The 
applied forces responsible for initiating the vibration may be reduced by modi-
fying the speed, feed, or motion, and by properly maintaining the equipment, 
balancing and/or replacing worn parts. Analysts can place equipment on anti-
vibration mountings (springs, shear-type elastomers, compression pads) or alter 
workers’ body positions to lessen the disturbing vibratory forces. They can also 
reduce the time workers are exposed to the vibration by alternating work as-
signments within a group of employees. Last, they can introduce supports that 
cushion the body and thus dampen higher-amplitude vibrations. Seat suspension 
systems involving hydraulic shock absorbers, coil or leaf springs, rubber shear-
type mountings, or torsion bars may be used. In standing operations, a soft, elas-
tomer floor mat usually proves helpful. 
 6.6 RADIATION 
  Although all types of ionizing radiation can damage tissue, beta and alpha ra-
diation are so easy to shield that most attention today is given to gamma ray, 
X-ray, and neutron radiation. High-energy electron beams impinging on metal in 
vacuum equipment can produce very penetrating X-rays that may require much 
more shielding than the electron beam itself. 
 The absorbed dose is the amount of energy imparted by ionizing radia-
tion to a given mass of material. The unit of absorbed dose is the  rad , which is 
equivalent to the absorption of 0.01 joule per kilogram (J/kg) [100 ergs per gram 
(erg/g)]. The dose equivalent is a way of correcting for the differences in the bio-
logical effect of various types of ionizing radiation on humans. The unit of dose 
equivalent is the  rem , which produces a biological effect essentially the same as 
that of 1 rad of absorbed dose of X or gamma radiation. The  roentgen  (R) is a 
unit of exposure that measures the amount of ionization produced in air by X or 
gamma radiation. Tissue located at a point where the exposure is 1 R receives an 
absorbed dose of approximately 1 rad. 
 Very large doses of ionizing radiation—100 rads or more—received over 
a short time span by the entire body can cause radiation sickness. An absorbed 
dose of about 400 rads to the whole body would be fatal to approximately one-
half of adults. Small doses received over a longer period may increase the prob-
ability of contracting various types of cancers or other diseases. The overall risk 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
265
of a fatal cancer from a radiation dose equivalent of 1 rem is about 10 –4 ; that is, 
a person receiving a dose equivalent of 1 rem has about 1 chance in 10,000 of 
dying from a cancer produced by the radiation. The risk can also be expressed as 
the expectation of one fatal cancer in a group of 10,000 persons, if each person 
receives a dose equivalent of 1 rem. 
 Persons working in areas where access is controlled for the purpose of radia-
tion protection are generally limited to a dose equivalent of 5 rem/yr. The limit in 
uncontrolled areas is usually the same. Working within these limits should have 
no significant effect on the health of the individuals involved. All persons are 
exposed to radiation from naturally occurring radioisotopes in the body, cosmic 
radiation, and radiation emitted from the earth and building materials. The dose 
equivalent from natural background sources is about 0.1 rem/yr (100 mrem/yr). 
 6.7 SHIFTWORK AND WORKING HOURS 
 SHIFTWORK 
 Shiftwork , defined as working other than daytime hours, is becoming an ever- 
increasing problem for industry. Traditionally, the need for continuous services 
from police, fire, and medical personnel, or for continuous operations in the 
chemical or pharmaceutical industries, has required the use of shiftwork. More 
recently, however, the economics of manufacturing, that is, the capitalization or 
payback of ever more expensive automated machinery, are also increasing the 
demand for shiftwork. Similarly, just-in-time production and seasonal demands 
for products (i.e., decreased inventory space) have also required more shiftwork. 
 The problem with shiftwork is the stress on  circadian rhythms , which are 
the roughly 24-h variations in bodily functions in humans (as well as other 
organisms). The length of the cycle varies from 22 to 25 h, but is kept synchro-
nized into a 24-h cycle by various timekeepers, such as the daily light–dark 
changes, social contacts, work, and clock time. The most marked cyclic changes 
occur in sleep, core temperature, heart rate, blood pressure, and task perfor-
mance, such as critical tracking capability (see Figure 6.20). Typically, bodily 
functions and performance start increasing upon awakening, peak in midafter-
noon, then steadily decline to a low point in the middle of the night. There may 
also be a dip after midday, typically known as the  postlunch dip . Thus, individu-
als who are asked to work on night shift will exhibit a marked degradation in 
performance, from truck drivers falling asleep at the wheel to gas inspectors 
reading meters (Grandjean, 1988). 
 It could be assumed that night workers would adapt to night work because of 
the change in work patterns. Unfortunately, the other social interactions still play a 
very important role, and the circadian rhythm never truly shifts (as it would for indi-
viduals traveling to the other side of the globe for extensive periods) but rather flat-
tens, which some researchers consider to be a worse scenario. Thus, night workers 
also experience health problems, such as appetite loss, digestive problems, ulcers, 
and increased sickness rates. The problems become even worse as the worker ages.  

266 
C H A P T E R  6
 There are many ways to organize shiftwork. Typically, a three-shift system 
has an early (E) shift from 8  a.m.  to 4  p.m. , a late afternoon shift (L) from 4  p.m.  
to 12  p.m.  (midnight), and a night (N) shift from 12  p.m.  to 8  a.m . In the sim-
plest case, because of short-term increased production demands, a company may 
go from just an early shift to both an early and a late afternoon shift. Usually, 
3
3
Rectal temperature
% Change — amplitude
2
2
1
1
0
 Dinner
  Dinner
2
12
24
24
36
AVERA
A
GE 3 SUBJECTS,
3 DAYS EA
A
CH
 = 36.3 C
20
10
20
Time (hours)
Time (hours)
Critical tracking capability
% Change — amplitude
10
0
2
12
24
24
36
AVERA
A
GE OF ALL SUBJECTS,
ALL DAYS       
A
 = 819 
 Figure 6.20   Examples of circadian rhythms. 
 ( From: Freivalds, Chaffin, and Langolf, 1983.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
267
because of seniority, the early shift is requested by older, established workers, 
while new hires start on the late afternoon shift. The rotation of the two shifts on 
a weekly basis does not cause major physiological problems, as the sleep pattern 
is not disrupted. However, the social patterns can be considerably disrupted. 
 Progressing to a third, night shift becomes more problematic. Because there 
is difficulty adjusting to a new circadian rhythm, even over the course of several 
weeks, most researchers advocate a  rapid rotation , with shift changes every two 
or three days. This maintains the quality of sleep as well as possible and does not 
disrupt family life and social contacts for extended periods. The weekly rotation 
typically found in the United States is perhaps the worst scenario, because the 
workers never truly adjust to any one shift. 
 One rapid-rotation shiftwork system for a five-day production system (i.e., 
weekends off) is given in Table 6.11. However, in many companies, the night 
shift is mainly a maintenance shift with limited production. In that case, a full 
crew is not needed, and it may be simpler to rotate only the early and late af-
ternoon shifts and to operate a smaller, fixed night shift, which can be staffed 
primarily by volunteers who can better adapt to that shift. 
 For continuous round-the-clock operations, a rapid-rotation seven-day shift 
system is needed. Two plans commonly used in Europe are the 2-2-2 system, 
with no more than two days on any one shift (see Table 6.12), and the 2-2-3 sys-
tem, with no more than three days on any one shift (see Table 6.13). There are 
trade-offs with each of these systems. The 2-2-2 system provides a free weekend 
 Table 6.11   Eight-Hour Shift Rotation (Weekends Off) 
 Week 
 M 
 T 
 W 
 Th 
 F 
 S 
 Su 
 1 
 E 
 E 
 L 
 L 
 L 
 — 
 — 
 2 
 N 
 N 
 E 
 E 
 E 
 — 
 — 
 3 
 L 
 L 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 — 
 — 
 Note: E  early, L  late afternoon, N  night. 
 Table 6.12   The 2-2-2 Shift Rotation (8-h Continuous) 
 Week 
 M 
 T 
 W 
 Th 
 F 
 S 
 Su 
 1 
 E 
 E 
 L 
 L 
 N 
 N 
 — 
 2 
 — 
 E 
 E 
 L 
 L 
 N 
 N 
 3 
 — 
 — 
 E 
 E 
 L 
 L 
 N 
 4 
 N 
 — 
 — 
 E 
 E 
 L 
 L 
 5 
 N 
 N 
 — 
 — 
 E 
 E 
 L 
 6 
 L 
 N 
 N 
 — 
 — 
 E 
 E 
 7 
 L 
 L 
 N 
 N 
 — 
 — 
 E 
 8 
 E 
 L 
 L 
 N 
 N 
 — 
 — 
 Note: E  early, L  late afternoon, N  night. 

268 
C H A P T E R  6
only once in eight weeks. The 2-2-3 system provides a free three-day weekend 
once in four weeks, but requires workers to work seven days straight, which is 
not appealing. A basic problem in both systems is that with 8-h shifts, a total of 
42 h/week is worked. Alternative systems with more crews and shorter hours 
may be required (Eastman Kodak, 1986).  
 Another possible approach is to schedule 12-h shifts. Under these systems, 
workers either work 12-h day (D) shifts or 12-h night (N) shifts, on either a regu-
lar three days on and three days off schedule (see Table 6.14), or a more compli-
cated two or three days on or off, with every other weekend free (see Table 6.15). 
There are several advantages, in that there are longer rest periods between work-
days, and at least one-half of the rest days coincide with a weekend. Of course, 
the obvious disadvantage is having to work extended days or essentially regular 
overtime (see next section). 
 More complicated systems exist with reduced hours (40 or less) per week. 
These can be studied in further detail in Eastman Kodak (1986) or Schwarzenau 
et al. (1986). 
 Table 6.13   The 2-2-3 Shift Rotation (8-h Continuous) 
 Week 
 M 
 T 
 W 
 Th 
 F 
 S 
 Su 
 1 
 E 
 E 
 L 
 L 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 2 
 — 
 — 
 E 
 E 
 L 
 L 
 L 
 3 
 N 
 N 
 — 
 — 
 E 
 E 
 E 
 4 
 L 
 L 
 N 
 N 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 Note: E  early, L  late afternoon, N  night. 
 Table 6.14   A 12-h Shift Rotation (3 Days On, 3 Days Off) 
 Week 
 M 
 T 
 W 
 Th 
 F 
 S 
 Su 
 1 
 D 
 D 
 D 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 N 
 2 
 N 
 N 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 D 
 D 
 3 
 D 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 4 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 D 
 D 
 D 
 — 
 5 
 — 
 — 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 — 
 — 
 6 
 — 
 D 
 D 
 D 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 Note: D  day, N  night. 
 Table 6.15   A 12-h Shift Rotation (Every Other Weekend Off) 
 Week 
 M 
 T 
 W 
 Th 
 F 
 S 
 Su 
 1 
 D 
 — 
 — 
 N 
 N 
 — 
 — 
 2 
 — 
 D 
 D 
 — 
 — 
 N 
 N 
 3 
 N 
 — 
 — 
 D 
 D 
 — 
 — 
 4 
 — 
 N 
 N 
 — 
 — 
 D 
 D 
 Note: D  day, N  night. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
269
 In summary, definite health and accident risks are associated with shiftwork. 
However, if shiftwork is unavoidable, due to manufacturing process consider-
ations, the following recommendations should be considered: 
 1.  Avoid shiftwork for workers older than 50. 
 2.  Use rapid rotations as opposed to weekly or monthly cycles. 
 3.  Schedule as few night shifts (three or less) in succession as possible. 
 4.  Use forward rotation of shifts if possible (e.g., E-L-N or D-N). 
 5.  Limit the total number of working shifts in succession to seven or less. 
 6.  Include some free weekends, with at least two successive full days off. 
 7.  Schedule rest days after night shifts. 
 8.  Keep the plans simple, predictable, and equitable for all workers. 
 OVERTIME 
 Many studies have shown that changes in the length of the workday or work-
week have a direct effect on work output. Unfortunately, the result is not typically 
the direct proportionality expected. Note that in Figure 6.21, the theoretical daily 
performance is linear (line 1), but, in practice, is more S-shaped (curve 2). For 
example, there is an initial setup or preparatory period with little productivity 
(area A), a gradual warming up, a steeper section with greater than the theoretical 
productivity (area B), and gradual leveling off as the end of the shift approaches. 
In an 8-h shift, the two areas, subpar (area A) and excess productivity (area B), are 
equal, whereas in longer than 8-h shifts for heavy manual work (curve 3), the sub-
par productivity is greater than the excess productivity, especially with additional 
subpar performance (area C) in the last few hours (Lehmann, 1953).  
 The results of an old British survey (cited in Grandjean, 1988) found that 
 shortening  the working day resulted in a  higher  hourly output, with fewer rest 
pauses taken. This change in the working performance required at least several 
days (sometimes longer) before steady state was reached. Conversely, making the 
working day longer, that is, assigning overtime, causes productivity to fall, some-
times to the point that the total output over the course of the shift actually drops, 
even though the total hours worked are longer (see curve 3 in Figure 6.21). There-
fore, any expected benefit from increased hours is typically offset by decreased 
productivity. This effect depends on the level of the physical workload: the more 
strenuous the work, the greater the decrease in productivity, with the worker using 
more rest to pace himself or herself. 
 More recent data (cited in Eastman Kodak, 1986) indicate that the expected 
increase in output is approximately 10 percent for each 25 percent increase 
in hours worked. This definitely does not justify the time-and-a-half pay ex-
pended for overtime work. This discussion presumes a day work pay scale (see 
Chapter 17). With an incentive scheme throughout the extended hours, the fall 
in productivity may not be so great. Similarly, if the work is machine-paced, 
productivity is tied to that machine pace. However, the operator may reach 

270 
C H A P T E R  6
unacceptable fatigue levels, and additional rest per appropriate allowances (see 
Chapter 11) may be needed. A secondary effect of overtime is that excessive or 
continuous overtime is accompanied by increased accident rates and sick leave 
(Grandjean, 1988). 
 Scheduling overtime on a regular basis cannot be recommended. However, 
overtime may be necessary for transient short periods, to maintain production 
or alleviate temporary labor shortages. In such cases, the following guidelines 
should be followed: 
 1.  Avoid overtime for heavy manual work. 
 2.  Reevaluate machine-paced work for appropriate rest periods or lowered 
rates. 
 3.  For continuous or long periods of overtime, rotate the work among several 
workers, or examine alternate shift systems. 
 4.  In choosing between extending a series of workdays by 1 or 2 h versus 
extending the workweek by 1 day, most workers will opt for the former, to 
avoid losing a weekend day with the family (Eastman Kodak, 1986). 
 COMPRESSED WORKWEEK 
 A compressed workweek implies that 40 h is performed in fewer than 5 days. 
Typically, this occurs in the form of four 10-h days, three 12-h days, or four 9-h 
days with a half-day on Friday. From the management perspective, this con-
cept offers several advantages: reduced absenteeism, relatively less time spent 
on coffee or lunch breaks, and reduced start-up and shutdown costs (relative 
1
1
2
2
A
3
3
Subpar production
Excess production
1 = Theoretical productivity
2 =  Actual 8-hour productivity
3 = 12-hour productivity for
      heavy manual work
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Working hours on shift
W
Productivity (%)
20
0
40
60
80
100
120
%
B
C
 Figure 6.21   Productivity as a function of working hours. 
 ( Adapted from: Lehmann, 1953.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
271
to operating time). For example, heat treating, forging, and melting facilities 
require a significant amount of time, up to 15 percent of the 8-h workday or 
more, to bring the facility and material up to the required temperature before 
production can begin. By going to a 10-h day, the operation can gain an addi-
tional 2 h of production time with no additional setup time. Here, the economic 
savings from the longer workday can be significant. Workers also gain from 
increased leisure time, reduced commuter time (relative to working time), and 
lower commuting costs. 
 Nevertheless, based on the discussions on overtime, a compressed workweek 
essentially amounts to continuous overtime. Although the total hours worked are 
less, the hours worked on a given day are more. Therefore, many of the same 
disadvantages of overtime would apply to a compressed workweek (Eastman 
Kodak, 1986). Other objections to the 10-h day, 4-day week stem from members 
of management who state that they are obliged to be on the job not only 10 h for 
4 days, but at least 8 h on the fifth day. 
 ALTERNATIVE WORK SCHEDULES 
 With the greater influx of women, especially mothers with school-age children, 
single parents, older workers, and dual-career-family workers into the work-
force, and with the increased concerns for the cost and time of commuting and 
the value of quality of life, alternate work schedules are needed. One such sched-
ule is  flextime , where the starting and stopping times are established by the work-
ers, within limits set up by management. Various plans of this nature currently 
exist. Some require employees to work at least 8 h/day, others require a specified 
number of hours in a week or a month, and still others require all workers to be 
on site four or five middle hours of the shift. 
 There are many advantages to these plans for both employees and man-
agement. On the one hand, employees can work the morning or evening 
hours most conducive to their circadian rhythms, they can better handle fam-
ily needs or emergencies, and they can take care of personal business during 
business hours without requiring special leave from work. Management gains 
from reduced tardiness and sick leave. Even the surrounding community gains 
from decreased traffic congestion and better use of recreational and service 
facilities. On the other hand, flextime may have limited use in manufactur-
ing, machine-paced, and continuous-process operations, because of problems 
in scheduling and coordinating the labor force. However, in situations where 
work groups (see Chapter 18) are utilized, flextime may still be possible 
(Eastman Kodak, 1986). 
 Part-time employment and job sharing may be especially useful to single 
parents with children or to retirees seeking to supplement their retirement in-
comes. Both groups can provide considerable talent and services to a company, 
but may be limited by circumstances from performing traditional 8-h shifts. 
Although there may be problems regarding benefits or other fixed employee 
costs, these may be handled on a prorated or other creative basis. 

272 
C H A P T E R  6
 SUMMARY 
 A proper working environment is important not only from the standpoint of in-
creasing productivity and improving the physical health and safety of the work-
ers, but also for promoting worker morale and consequent reductions in worker 
absenteeism and labor turnover. Although many of these factors may seem intan-
gible or of marginal effect, controlled scientific studies have shown the positive 
benefits of improved illumination, decreased noise and heat stress, and better 
ventilation. 
 Visibility is directly dependent on the illumination provided, but is also 
affected by the visual angle of the target viewed and the contrast of the target 
with the background. Consequently, improvement in task visibility can be ac-
complished through various means and does not always depend on increasing 
the light source. 
 Extended exposures to loud noise, although not directly affecting productiv-
ity, can cause hearing loss and are definitely annoying. The control of noise (and 
vibration) is simplest at the source and typically becomes more costly farther 
away. Although using hearing protection may seem the simplest approach, it re-
quires the expense of continuous motivation and enforcement. 
 Similarly, the effect of climate on productivity is quite variable, depending 
on individual motivation. A comfortable climate is a function of the amount and 
velocity of air exchange, the temperature, and the humidity. For hot areas, the 
climate is controlled most easily through adequate ventilation to remove pollut-
ants and improve the evaporation of sweat. (Air-conditioning is more effective, 
but is also more expensive.) For cold climates, adequate clothing is the primary 
control. Shiftwork should utilize short, rapid, forward-rotating schedules with 
limited overtime. 
 To assist the methods analyst in utilizing the various factors discussed in this 
chapter, they have been summarized in the Work Environment Checklist shown 
in Figure 6.22. 
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  What factors affect the quantity of light needed to perform a task satisfactorily? 
 2.  Explain the color rendering effect of low-pressure sodium lamps. 
 3.  What is the relationship between contrast and visibility? 
 4.  What footcandle intensity would you recommend 30 in above the floor in the com-
pany washroom? 
 5.  Explain how sales may be influenced by colors. 
 6.  What color has the highest visibility? 
 7.  How is sound energy dissipated in viscoelastic materials? 
 8.  A frequency of 2,000 Hz would have approximately what wavelength in meters? 
 9.  What would be the approximate decibel value of a grinder being used to grind a 
high-carbon steel? 
 10.  Distinguish between broadband noise and meaningful noise. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
273
o
N
s
e
Ye
n
oit
a
n
i
m
u
llI
1. ls the illumination sufficient for the task, per IESN
f
A recommendations
N
?
a.
To increase illumination, are more luminaires provided, rather than 
increasing the wattage of existing ones?
2. Is there general lighting as well as supplementary lighting?
3. Are the workplace and lighting arranged so as to avoid glare?
a.
Are direct luminaires placed away from the field of vision?
f
b. Do the luminaires have
a
baffles or dif
f
fusers
f
?
c.
Are work surfaces laid out perpendicular to the luminaires?
d. Are surfaces matted or nonglossy?
4. If necessary, are screen filters 
f
available for computer monitors?
o
N
s
e
Ye
t
a
e
H
—
s
n
oiti
d
n
o
c
la
m
r
e
h
T
1. Is the worker within the thermal comfort zone?
a.
If not within the thermal comfort zone, has the WBGT of the working 
environment been measured?
n
2. Are the thermal conditions within ASHRAE guidelines?
a.
If not within guidelines, is sufff icient reco
f
very time provided?
3. Are procedures in place for control of potential heat stress conditions?
a.
Is the escape of heat controlled at the source?
b. Are radiation shields in place?
c.
Is ventilation provided?
d. Is the air dehumidified?
f
e.
Is air-conditioning provided?
o
N
s
e
Ye
d
lo
C
—
s
n
oiti
d
n
o
c
la
m
r
e
h
T
1. Is the worker adequately clothed for the equivalent wind chill temperature?
2. Are auxiliary heaters provided?
3. Are gloves provided?
Ventilation
V
Yes
No
1. Are ventilation levels acceptable per guidelines?
a. Is a minimum of 300 ft3/h/per person provided?
2. If necessary, are local fans provided for workers?
a.
Are these tans within a distance of 30 times the fan diameter?
3. For local heat sources, is spot cooling provided?
o
N
s
e
Ye
sle
v
e
L
e
sio
N
1. Are noise levels below 90 dBA?
a.
If the noise levels exceed 90 dBA, is there sufficient rest such that
f
the 8-h dose is less than 100%?
2. Are noise control measures in place?
a.
Is the noise controlled at the source with better maintenance, 
mufflers, and rubber mounts?
f
b. Is the noise source isolated?
c.
Are acoustical treatments being utilized?
d. As a last resort, are earplugs (or earmuffs) being used properly?
f
Vibration
Yes
No
1. Are vibration levels within acceptable ANSI standards?
2. If there is vibration, can the vibration-causing sources be eliminated?
3. Have
a
 specially dampened seats been installed on vehicles?
4. Have
a
 vibration-absorbing handles been attached to power tools?
5. Have
a
 resilient, fatigue-resistant mats been supplied to standing operators?
 Figure 6.22   Work Environment Checklist. 

274 
C H A P T E R  6
 11.  Would you advocate background music at the workstation? What results would you 
anticipate? 
 12.  According to the present OSHA law, how many continuous hours per day of a 
100-dBA sound level would be permissible?   
 13.  What three classifications have been identified from the standpoint of exposure to 
vibration? 
 14.  In what ways can workers be protected from vibration? 
 15.  What is meant by the  environmental temperature ? 
 16.  Explain what is meant by the  thermal comfort zone . 
 17.  What is the maximum rise in body temperature that analysts should allow? 
 18.  How would you go about estimating the maximum length of time that a worker 
should be exposed to a particular heat environment? 
 19.  What is WBGT? 
 20.  What is the WBGT with a dry-bulb temperature of 80°F, a wet-bulb temperature of 
70°F, and a globe temperature of 100°F? 
 21.  Which type of radiation is given the most attention by the safety engineer? 
 22.  What is meant by  absorbed dose of radiation ? What is the unit of absorbed dose? 
 23.  What is meant by  rem ? 
 24.  What steps would you take to increase the amount of light in the following assem-
bly department by about 15 percent? The department currently uses fluorescent fix-
tures, and the walls and ceiling are painted a medium green. The assembly benches 
are a dark brown. 
 25.  What color combination would you use to attract attention to a new product being 
displayed? 
 26.  When would you advocate that the company purchase aluminized clothing? 
 27.  Are possible health hazards associated with electron beam machining? With laser 
beam machining? Explain. 
 28.  Explain the impact of noise levels below 85 dBA on office work. 
 29.  What environmental factors affect heat stress? How can each be measured? 
 30.  How would you determine if a job places an excessive heat load on the worker? 
 PROBLEMS  
 1.  A work area has a reflectivity of 60 percent, based on the color combinations of the 
workstations and the immediate environment. The seeing task of the assembly work 
could be classified as difficult. What would be your recommended illumination? 
 2.  What is the combined noise level of two sounds of 86 and 96 dB? 
 3.  In the Dorben Company, an industrial engineer designed a workstation where 
the seeing task was difficult because of the size of the components going into the 
assembly. The desired brightness was 100 fL, and the workstation was painted a 
medium green with a reflectance of 50 percent. What illumination in footcandles 
would be required at this workstation to provide the desired brightness? Estimate 
the required illumination if you repainted the workstation with a light cream paint. 
 4.  In the Dorben Company, an industrial engineer (IE) was assigned to alter the work 
methods in the press department to meet OSHA standards relative to permissible 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
275
noise exposures. The IE found a time-weighted average sound level of 100 dBA. 
The 20 operators in this department wore earplugs provided by Dorben with an 
NRR value of 20 dB. What improvement resulted? Do you feel that this department 
is now in compliance with the law? Explain. 
 5.  In the Dorben Company, an all-day study revealed the following noise sources: 
0.5 h, 100 dBA; 1 h, less than 80 dBA; 3.5 h, 90 dBA; 3 h, 92 dBA. Is this company 
in compliance? What is the dose exposure? What is the TWA noise level? 
 6.  In Problem 5, consider that the last exposure is in the press room, which currently 
has five presses operating. Assuming that Dorben Company can eliminate some 
of the presses and transfer production to the remaining presses, how many presses 
should Dorben eliminate so as not to exceed 100 percent dose exposure for the 
workers? 
 7.  What is the illumination on a surface 6 in from a 2-cd source? 
 8.  What is the luminance of a surface having a 50 percent reflectance and 4-fc illumi-
nation? 
 9.   What is the contrast created by black text (reflectance  10 percent) on white paper 
(reflectance  90 percent)? 
 10.  How much louder is an 80-dB noise than a 60-dB noise? 
 11.  What is the increase in decibels of a noise that doubles in intensity? 
 12.  A supervisor is sitting at her desk illuminated by a 180-cd source 3 ft above it. 
She is writing with green ink (reflectance  30 percent) on a yellow notepad 
(reflectance  60 percent). What is the illumination on the notepad? Is that 
sufficient? If not, what amount of illumination is needed? What is the contrast of 
the writing task? What is the luminance of the notepad? 
 13.  How much ventilation would be recommended for a classroom of area 1,000 ft 2 
with 12-ft ceilings? Assume that the class size may reach 40 students. 
 14.  John Smith experiences an 8-h noise dose of 120 percent by spending 4 h in Room 
#1 with a known noise level of 92 dBA and another 4 h in Room #2 with an un-
known noise level. What is the noise level in Room #2? What should the noise level 
be in Room #2 for John Smith’s environment to remain OSHA-compliant? Given 
that Room #2 has two identical machines, how many of these must be removed to 
achieve OSHA compliance? 
 15.   A student is studying for the IE 327 exam. A small lamp (10 candelas or 25 lumens) 
is located about 24 in above a textbook and the student’s eyes are about 20 in from 
the textbook. The textbook page has a reflectance of 80 percent. The 10-pt typeface 
is 3/16 in high. What is the visual angle for reading the text? Is this possible for the 
student, assuming normal (20/20) vision? Is there sufficient lighting? What is the 
minimum amount of light needed for this task?  
 16.  A field worker in Florida is loading crates of oranges into trucks. It is quite hot and 
humid, with wet-bulb temperature  82°F, globe temperature  87°F, and dry-bulb 
temperature  82°F. It is estimated that each lift of the 30-lb box requires 0.67 kcal 
of energy. The worker is expected to load 10 boxes/min. What is the WBGT? What 
is the relative humidity? Is this an acceptable workload? Redesign the task (keeping 
the standard crate size/load the same) so that this would be acceptable work and 
also so that the worker is most productive. 
 17.  The following environmental conditions were measured at a palletizing operation 
worksite. Evaluate the situation and calculate how long a worker can safely perform 

276 
C H A P T E R  6
the task. Assume that box loading requires about 5 kcal/min in energy. Illumination 
 20 fc; noise level  92 dBA; air temperature  90ºF; wet-bulb temperature  
80ºF; globe temperature  90ºF. 
 REFERENCES 
 ACGIH.  TLVs and BEIs. Cincinnati, OH: American Conference of Government Indus-
trial Hygienists, 2003. 
 ANSI.  American National Standard Guide for the Measurement and Evaluation of 
Human Exposure to Vibration Transmitted to the Hand, S.3.34. New York: 
Acoustical Society of America, 1986. 
 ASHRAE.  Handbook, Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning Applications . Chapter 25. 
Atlanta, GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning 
Engineers, 1991. 
 Belding, H. S., and T. F. Hatch. “Index for Evaluating Heat Stress in Terms of 
 Physiological Strains.”  Heating, Piping and Air Conditioning , 27 (August 1955), 
pp. 129–136. 
 Blackwell, H. R. “Development and Use of a Quantitative Method for Specification of 
Interior Illumination Levels on the Basis of Performance Data.”  Illuminating 
Engineer , 54 (June 1959), pp. 317–353. 
 Eastman Kodak Co.  Ergonomic Design for People at Work , vol. 1. New York: Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, 1983. 
 Eastman Kodak Co.  Ergonomic Design for People at Work , vol. 2. New York: Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, 1986. 
 Freivalds, A., D. B. Chaffin, and G. D. Langolf. “Quantification of Human Performance 
Circadian Rhythms.”  Journal of the American Industrial Hygiene Association , 44, 
no. 9 (September 1983), pp. 643–648. 
 Freivalds, A., J. L. Harpster, and L. S. Heckman. “Glare and Night Vision Impairment in 
Corrective Lens Wearers,”  Proceedings of the Human Factor Society , (27th Annual 
Meeting, 1983), pp. 324–328. 
 General Electric Company.  Light Measurement and Control (TP-118). Nela Park, 
Cleveland, OH: Large Lamp Department, G.E., March 1965. 
 Grandjean, E.  Fitting the Task to the Man . 4th ed. London: Taylor & Francis, 1988. 
 IESNA.  Lighting Handbook , 8th ed. Ed. M. S. Rea. New York: Illuminating Engineering 
Society of North America, 1995, pp. 459–478. 
 Kamon, E., W. L. Kenney, N. S. Deno, K. J. Soto, and A. J. Carpenter. “Readdressing 
Personal Cooling with Ice.”  Journal of the American Industrial Hygiene Associa-
tion , 47, no. 5 (May 1986), pp. 293–298. 
 Konz, S., and S. Johnson.  Work Design , 5th ed. Scottsdale, AZ: Holcomb Hathaway 
Publishers, 2000. 
 Lehmann, G.  Praktische Arbeitsphysiologie . Stuttgart: G. Thieme, 1953. 
 Lockhart, J. M., H. O. Kiess, and T. J. Clegg. “Effect of Rate and Level of Lowered 
Finger-Surface Temperature on Manual Performance.”  Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy , 60, no. 1 (February 1975), pp. 106–113. 
 NIOSH.  Criteria for a Recommended Standard . . . Occupational Exposure to Hot En-
vironments, Revised Criteria . Washington, DC: National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health, Superintendent of Documents, 1986. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 6  Work Environment Design   
277
 NIOSH.  Occupational Noise Exposure, Revised Criteria 1998 . DHHS Publication No. 
98-126. Cincinnati, OH: National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 
1998. 
 OSHA.  Code of Federal Regulations—Labor. (29 CFR 1910) . Washington, DC: Office 
of the Federal Register, 1997. 
 OSHA.  Ergonomics Program Management Guidelines for Meatpacking Plants . OSHA 
3123. Washington, DC: The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc., 1990. 
 Peterson, A., and E. Gross, Jr.  Handbook of Noise Measurement , 8th ed. New Concord, 
MA: General Radio Co., 1978. 
 Riley, M. W., and D. J. Cochran. “Partial Gloves and Reduced Temperature.” In  Pro-
ceedings of the Human Factors Society 28th Annual Meeting . Santa Monica, CA: 
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 1984, pp. 179–182. 
 Sanders, M. S., and E. J. McCormick.  Human Factors in Engineering and Design , 7th 
ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993. 
 Schwarzenau, P., P. Knauth, E. Kiessvetter, W. Brockmann, and J. Rutenfranz. “Algo-
rithms for the Computerized Construction of Shift Systems Which Meet Ergo-
nomic Criteria.”  Applied Ergonomics , 17, no. 3 (September 1986), pp. 169–176. 
 Yaglou, C. P., and D. Minard. “Control of Heat Casualties at Military Training Centers.” 
 AMA Archives of Industrial Health , 16 (1957), pp. 302–316. 
 Yaglou, C. P., E. C. Riley, and D. I. Coggins. “Ventilation Requirements.”  American 
Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers Transactions , 
42 (1936), pp. 133–158. 
 SELECTED SOFTWARE 
 DesignTools (available from the McGraw-Hill text website at www.mhhe.com/niebel-
freivalds). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002. 
 WEBSITES 
 American Society for Safety Engineers —http://www.ASSE.org/ 
 CalOSHA Standard —http://www.ergoweb.com/Pub/Info/Std/calstd.html 
 National Safety Council —http://www.nsc.org/ 
 NIOSH homepage —http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/homepage.html 
 OSHA homepage —http://www.osha.gov/ 
  OSHA Proposed Ergonomics Standard —http://www.osha-slc.gov/FedReg_osha_data/
FED20001114.html 

This page intentionally left blank

 
279
 Design of 
Cognitive Work 
 
279
 
CHAPTER
 
 7 
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Minimize informational workload. 
 •  Limit absolute judgments to 7  2 items. 
 •  Use visual displays for long, complex messages in noise areas. 
 •  Use auditory displays for warnings and short, simple messages. 
 •  Use color, symbols, and alphanumerics in visual displays. 
 •  Use color and flashing lights to get attention. 
 T
 he design of cognitive work has not traditionally been included as part 
of methods engineering. However, with ongoing changes in jobs and the 
working environment, it is becoming increasingly important to study not 
only the manual components of work but also the cognitive aspects of work. 
Machines and equipment are becoming increasingly complex and semiauto-
mated, if not fully automated. The operator must be able to perceive and inter-
pret large amounts of information, make critical decisions, and control these 
machines quickly and accurately. Furthermore, there has been a gradual shift of 
jobs from manufacturing to the service sector. In either case, there typically will 
be less emphasis on gross physical activity and a greater emphasis on informa-
tion processing and decision making, especially via computers and associated 
modern technology. Thus, this chapter explains information theory, presents a 
basic conceptual model of the human as an information processor, and details 
how best to code and display information for maximum effectiveness, especially 
with auditory and visual displays. Also, a final section outlines both software 
and hardware considerations regarding human interaction with computers. 
 7.1  INFORMATION THEORY 
  Information, in the everyday sense of the word, is knowledge received regarding 
a particular fact. In the technical sense, information is the reduction of uncer-
tainty about that fact. For example, the fact that the engine (oil) light comes on 

280 
C H A P T E R  7
when a car is started provides very little information (other than the fact that the 
lightbulb is functioning) because it is expected. In contrast, when that same light 
comes on when you are driving down a road, it conveys considerable informa-
tion about the status of the engine, because it is unexpected and a very unlikely 
event. Thus, there is a relationship between the likelihood of an event and the 
amount of information it conveys, which can be quantified through the math-
ematical definition of information. Note that this concept is irrespective of the 
importance of the information; that is, the status of the engine is quite a bit more 
important than whether the windshield washer container is empty. 
 Information theory  measures information in bits, where a  bit  is the amount 
of information required to decide between two equally likely alternatives. The 
term  bit  came from the first and last part of the words  b inary dig it  used in com-
puter and communication theory to express the on/off state of a chip or the 
polarized/reverse-polarized position of small pieces of ferromagnetic core used 
in archaic computer memory. Mathematically this can be expressed as 
 H  log 2 n 
 where  H  the amount of information 
       n  the number of equally likely alternatives 
 With only two alternatives, such as the on/off state of a chip or the toss of an 
unweighted coin, 1 bit of information is presented. With 10 equally likely alter-
natives, such as the numbers from 0 to 9, 3.322 bits of information can be con-
veyed (log 2 10  3.322). An easy way of calculating log 2  is to use the following 
formula: 
 log 2 n  1.4427  In  n 
 When the alternatives are not equally likely, the information conveyed is 
determine.d by 
 H  pi  log2 (1pi)
 where  p i  probability of  i th event 
               i  alternatives from 1 to  n 
 As an example, consider a coin weighted so that heads comes up 90 percent 
of the time and tails only 10 percent of time. The amount of information con-
veyed in a coin toss becomes 
 H  0.9  log 2 (10.9)  0.1  log 2 (10.1)  0.9  0.152  0.1  3.32
      0.469 bit 
 Note that the amount of information (0.469) conveyed by a weighted coin is 
less than the amount of information conveyed by an unweighted coin (1.0). The 
maximum amount of information is always obtained when the probabilities are 
equally likely. This is so because the more likely an alternative becomes, the 
less information is being conveyed (i.e., consider the engine light upon starting 
a car). This leads to the concept of  redundancy  and the reduction of information 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
281
from the maximum possible due to unequal probabilities of occurrence. Redun-
dancy can be expressed as 
 % redundancy  (1  H/H max )  100 
 For the case of the weighted coin, the redundancy is 
 % redundancy  (1  0.4691)  100  53.1% 
 An interesting example relates to use of the English language. There are 
26 letters in the alphabet (A through Z) with a theoretical informational content 
for a randomly chosen letter of 4.7 bits (log 2 26  4.7). Obviously, with the 
combinations of letters into words, considerably more information can be pre-
sented. However, there is a considerable reduction in the amount of information 
that can be actually presented due to the unequal probabilities of occurrence. For 
example, letters s, t, and e are much more common than q, x, and z. It has been 
estimated that the redundancy in the English language amounts to 68 percent 
(Sanders and McCormick, 1993). Nevertheless, redundancy has some important 
advantages that will be discussed later with respect to designing displays and 
presenting information to users. 
 One final related concept is the  bandwidth  or  channel capacity , the maxi-
mum information processing speed of a given communication channel. In terms 
of the human operator, the bandwidth for motor-processing tasks could be as 
low as 6 to 7 bits/s or as high as 50 bits/s for speech communication. For purely 
sensory storage of the ear (i.e., information not reaching the decision-making 
stage), the bandwidth approaches 10,000 bits/s (Sanders and McCormick, 1993). 
The latter value is much higher than the actual amount of information that is 
processed by the brain in that time, because most of the information received by 
our senses is filtered out before it reaches the brain.  
 7.2   HUMAN INFORMATION 
PROCESSING MODEL 
  Numerous models have been put forward to explain how people process in-
formation. Most of these models consist of black boxes (because of relatively 
incomplete information) representing various processing stages. Figure 7.1 pre-
sents one such generic model consisting of four major stages or components: 
perception, decision and response selection, response execution, and memory, 
with attentional resources distributed over various stages. The decision-making 
component, when combined with working memory and long-term memory, can 
be considered the central processing unit; the sensory store is a very transient 
memory, located at the input stage (Wickens, Gordon, and Liu, 1997).  
 PERCEPTION AND SIGNAL DETECTION THEORY 
 Perception  is the comparison of incoming stimulus information with stored 
knowledge to categorize the information. The most basic form of perception 

282 
C H A P T E R  7
is simple  detection , that is, determining whether the stimulus is actually pres-
ent. It becomes more complicated if the person is asked to indicate the type of 
stimulus or the stimulus class to which it belongs and then gets into the realm 
of identification and recognition with the use of prior experiences and learned 
associations. The consequent linkage between long-term memory and perceptual 
encoding is shown in Figure 7.1. This latter, more complex perception can be ex-
plained in terms of feature analysis, breaking down objects into component geo-
metric shapes or text into words and character strings, and, simultaneously, of 
top-down or bottom-up processing to reduce the amount of information entering 
central processing. Top-down processing is conceptually driven using high-level 
concepts to process low-level perceptual features, whereas bottom-up processing 
is data-driven and guided by sensory features. 
 The detection part of perceptual encoding can be modeled or, in fairly sim-
ple tasks, even quantified through  signal detection theory  (SDT). The basic con-
cept of SDT is that in any situation, an observer needs to identify a signal (i.e., 
Attentional
resources
Short-term
sensory
store
Stimuli
Responses
Memory
Feedback
Response
execution
Perception
Long-term
memory
Working
memory
Decision and
response
selection
 Figure 7.1   A model of human information processing. 
 ( Source : Wickens, 1984, Fig. 1.1. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
283
whether it is present or absent) from confounding noise. For example, a quality 
inspector in an electronics operation must identify and remove defective chip 
capacitors from the good capacitors being used in the assembly of printed-circuit 
boards. The defective chip capacitor is the signal, which could be identified by 
excessive solder on the capacitor that shorts out the capacitor. The good capaci-
tors, in this case, would be considered noise. Note that one could just as easily 
reverse the decision process and consider good capacitors as the signal and de-
fective capacitors as noise. This would probably depend on the relative propor-
tions of each. 
 Given that the observer must identify whether the signal is present and that 
only two possible states exist (i.e., the signal is either there or not there), there 
are a total of four possible outcomes: 
 1.  Hit —saying there is a signal when the signal is present 
 2.  Correction rejection —saying there is no signal when no signal is present 
 3.  False alarm —saying there is a signal when no signal is present 
 4.  Miss —saying there is no signal when the signal is present 
 Both the signal and noise can vary over time, as is the case with most industrial 
processes. For example, the soldering machine may warm up and initially expel 
a larger drop of solder on the capacitors, or there may be simply “random” varia-
tion in the capacitors with no cause yet determined. Therefore both the signal 
and noise form distributions of varying solder quantity from low to high, which 
typically are modeled as overlapping normal distributions (Figure 7.2). Note that 
the distributions overlap because excessive solder on the body of the capacitor 
would cause it to short out, causing a defective product (in this case a signal). 
However, if there is excessive solder, but primarily on the leads, the capacitor 
may not short out and thus is still a good capacitor (in this case noise). With ever-
shrinking electronic products, chip capacitors are smaller than pinheads, and the 
visual inspection of these is not a trivial task. 
 When a capacitor appears, the inspector needs to decide if the quantity of 
solder is excessive and whether to reject the capacitor. Either through instruc-
tions and/or sufficient practice, the inspector has made a mental standard of 
judgment, which is depicted as the vertical line in Figure 7.2 and termed the 
 response criterion . If the detected quantity of the solder, which enters the visual 
system as a high level of sensory stimulation, exceeds the criterion, the inspector 
will say there is a signal. If, however, the detected quantity is small, a smaller 
level of sensory stimulation is received, landing below the criterion, and the 
inspector will say there is no signal. 
 Related to the response criterion is the quantity  beta . Numerically, beta is the 
ratio of the height of the two curves (signal to noise) in Figure 7.2 at the given 
criterion point. If the criterion shifts to the left, beta decreases with an increase 
of hits but at the cost of a corresponding increase of false alarms. This behavior 
on the part of the observer is termed  risky . If the criterion were at the point where 
the two curves intersect, beta would be 1.0. In contrast, if the criterion shifts 

284 
C H A P T E R  7
to the right, beta increases with a decrease of both hits and false alarms. This 
behavior on the part of the observer would be termed  conservative .  
 The response criterion (and beta) can easily change depending on the mood 
or fatigue of the visual inspector. It would not be unexpected for the criterion to 
shift to the right and the miss rate to increase dramatically late Friday afternoons 
shortly before quitting times. Note that there will be a corresponding decrease 
in the hit rate because the two probabilities sum to 1. Similarly, the probabilities 
of a correct rejection and false alarms also sum to 1. The change in the response 
criterion is termed  response bias  and could also change with prior knowledge or 
changes in expectancy. If it were known that the soldering machine was malfunc-
tioning, the inspector would most likely shift the criterion to the left, increasing 
the number of hits. The criterion could also change due to the costs or benefits 
associated with the four outcomes. If a particular batch of capacitors were being 
sent to NASA for use in the space shuttle, the costs of having a defect would be 
very high, and the inspector would set a very low criterion, producing many hits 
but also many false alarms with corresponding increased costs (e.g., losing good 
products). In contrast, if the capacitors were being used in cheap give-away cell 
phones, the inspector might set a very high criterion, allowing many defective 
capacitors to pass through the checkpoint as misses. 
 A second important concept in SDT is that of  sensitivity  or the resolution of 
the sensory system. In SDT, sensitivity is measured as the separation between 
the two distributions shown in Figure 7.2 and labeled as  d '. The greater the 
separation, the greater the observer’s sensitivity and the more correct responses 
Beta = b/a
Say "no signal"
Say "signal"
Signal + noise
distribution
Noise only
distribution
b
low
criterion
Intensity of "sensory activity"
high
a
Probability of occurrence
d'
CORRECT
REJECTION
HIT
MISS
FALSE ALARM
 Figure 7.2   Conceptual illustration of signal detection theory. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
285
 Signal Detection Theory as Applied to the Inspection of Glass 
 EXAMPLE 7.1
 A good application of signal detection theory was detailed by Drury and Addi-
son (1973) in the visual inspection of glass. The inspection was in two stages: 
(1) 100 percent general inspection in which each item was either accepted or rejected 
and (2) a sample inspection by special examiners who reexamined the previous results 
and provided feedback to the general inspectors. Considering the quality of the items 
being inspected, a proportion was good and the rest was bad. The general inspector 
could make only two decisions: accept or reject. The proper responses would be the 
acceptance of a good item (hit) and the rejection of a bad item (correct rejection). 
However, some good items could be rejected (misses), and some bad items could be 
accepted (false alarms). Consider four different cases of varying conditions. 
 Case 1—Conservative Inspector   A conservative inspector sets the criterion far 
to the right (Figure 7.3a). In such a situation, the probability of hits (saying yes to the 
signal of good glass) is low (e.g., 0.30). The probability of false alarms (saying yes 
to the noise of bad glass) is even lower (e.g., 0.05). Beta is determined by the ratio of 
the ordinates of the signal curve over the noise curve at the criterion. The ordinate for 
a standard normal curve is 
 

y
e
2
z /2
2
π
−
 
 For the signal curve, a probability of 0.30 yields a  z  of 0.524 and an ordinate of 0.348. 
For the noise curve, a probability of 0.05 yields a  z  of 1.645 and an ordinate of 0.103. 
Beta then becomes 3.38 (0.348/0.103). Note that the probability of hits and misses 
equals 1.0 (i.e., 0.30 + 0.70  1.0). The same is true for false alarms and correct 
rejections. 
 Case 2—Average Inspector   If the inspector is average—neither conservative 
nor risky—the probability of hits roughly equals the probability of correct rejections 
(Figure 7.3b). The curves intersect symmetrically, resulting in the same ordinate val-
ues and a value of 1.0 for beta. 
 Case 3—Risky Inspector   A risky inspector (Figure 7.3c) sets the criterion far to 
the left, increasing the probability of hits (e.g., 0.95) at the cost of a high probability of 
false alarms (e.g., 0.70). In this case, for the signal curve, a probability of 0.95 yields a 
(more hits and more correct rejections) and fewer errors (fewer false alarms and 
misses) are made. Usually sensitivity will improve with greater training and 
alertness (e.g., through more frequent rest breaks) on the part of the inspector, 
better illumination at the workstation, and a slower rate of signal presentation 
(which has the trade-off of decreasing productivity). Other factors that may help 
increase sensitivity involve supplying visual templates of the defective parts, 
providing redundant representations or clues for the defective parts, and pro-
viding knowledge of results. Note that providing incentives will help increase 
hit rates. However, this is typically due to a shift of the response bias (not an 
increase in sensitivity) with a corresponding increase in false-alarm rates. Simi-
larly, introducing “false signals” to increase alertness will again have a greater 
tendency to shift the response bias. More information on signal detection theory 
can be found in Green and Swets (1988).   

286 
C H A P T E R  7
 Figure 7.3   Signal detection theory as applied to inspection: (a) conservative inspector, (b) average inspector, 
(c) risky inspector, and (d) increased sensitivity. 
0.30
0.70
Yes
No
0.05
Signal
Noise
High β
0.95
0.70
0.30
Yes
No
0.30
Signal
Noise
β = 1
0.70
0.95
0.05
Yes
No
0.70
Signal
Noise
0.30
Low β
0.90
0.10
Yes
No
0.10
Signal
Noise
β = 1
0.90
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
 z of –1.645 and an ordinate of 0.103. For the noise curve, a probability of 0.70 yields 
a  z of –0.524 and an ordinate of 0.348. Beta then becomes 0.296 (0.103/0.348). 
 Case 4—Increased Sensitivity   Sensitivity can be calculated as the difference 
of the  z value for the same abscissa for both signal and noise curves (Figure 7.3): 
 d′  z(1  false alarms)  z(1–hits) 
 Using the criterion of case 1, 
 d′  1.645  0.524  1.121 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
287
 MEMORY 
 Once the stimulus has been perceptually encoded, it goes into  working memory , one 
of the three components of the human memory system. The other two are sensory 
store and long-term memory. Each sensory channel has a temporary storage mecha-
nism that prolongs the stimulus so it can be properly encoded. This storage is very 
short, on the order of 1 or 2 s depending on the sensory channel, before the stimulus 
representation disappears. It is also fairly automatic, in that it doesn’t require much 
attention to maintain it. However, very little can be done to maintain this storage or 
increase the length of the time period. Note also from Figure 7.1 that although there 
may be a vast amount of stimuli, which could be represented on the order of mil-
lions of bits of information entering the sensory storage, only a very small portion 
of that information is actually encoded and sent on to working memory. 
 As opposed to long-term memory, working memory is a means of tempo-
rarily storing information or keeping it active while it is being processed for a 
response. Thus, it sometimes is termed  short-term memory . Looking up a phone 
number and retaining it until the number has been dialed, or finding a process-
ing code from a list and entering it into the control pad of a machine, are good 
examples of working memory. Working memory is limited in both the amount of 
information and the length of time that information can be maintained.  
 The upper limit for the capacity of working memory is approximately 7  2 
items, sometimes known as  Miller’s rule  after the psychologist who defined it 
(Miller, 1956). For example, the 11 digits 12125551212 would be very difficult, 
 The same is found from the criterion in case 3: 
 d′   0.524  ( 1.645)  1.121 
 If the signal can be better separated from the noise, the probability of hits will 
increase (e.g., up to 0.90), while the probability of false alarms will remain fairly 
low (e.g., 0.10). Using the criterion as the comparison point, the probability of 
hits is 0.90 with a corresponding  z  value of –1.283 and an ordinate of 0.175. The 
probability of false alarms is 0.10, with a corresponding  z  value of 1.283 and an 
ordinate of 0.175. The sensitivity then becomes 
 d′  1.283  ( 1.283)  2.566 
 With increased sensitivity there is better performance in identifying defective 
parts. Sometimes, the hit rate is plotted against the false alarm rate to yield a re-
ceiver operator characteristic curve in which the deviation of the curve from the 
45-degree slope indicates sensitivity. 
 In the Drury and Addison (1973) case study, weekly data on glass inspection 
were collected from which the value  d ' was calculated. A change in inspection 
policy of providing more rapid feedback to the general inspector resulted in  d ' in-
creasing from a mean value of 2.5 to a mean value of 3.16, a 26 percent increase 
in sensitivity over the course of 10 weeks (see Figure 7.4). This represented 
a 60 percent increase in the signal-to-noise ratio (i.e., beta) and a 50  percent 
 decrease in the probability of missing a defect. 

288 
C H A P T E R  7
if not impossible, to recall. Recall can be improved by the use of  chunking , or 
the grouping of similar items. The above numbers, when properly grouped as 
1-212-555-1212, are much more easily remembered as three chunks (the 1 is the 
obvious standard for long distance). Similarly,  rehearsal , or mentally repeating 
the numbers, which shifts additional attentional resources (see Figure 7.1) to 
working memory, can improve recall. 
 Working memory also decays quickly, in spite of rehearsing or serially cy-
cling through the items being actively maintained. The more items in working 
memory, the longer it takes to cycle through and the greater likelihood of one 
or more of the items being lost. It is estimated that the half-life for a memory 
store of three items is 7 s. This can be easily demonstrated by presenting a sub-
ject three random numbers (e.g., 5 3 6). After 7 s counting backward to prevent 
rehearsal, most individuals would have forgotten at least one number, if not two 
numbers. 
 Some recommendations for minimizing errors on tasks requiring the use of 
working memory are to (Wickens, Gordon, and Liu, 1997): 
 ■ 
 Minimize the memory load, in terms of both capacity and time to maintain 
recall 
 ■ 
 Utilize chunking, especially in terms of meaningful sequences and use of 
letters over numbers (e.g., the use of words or acronyms instead of numbers 
for toll-free telephone numbers, such as 1-800-CTD-HELP) 
 ■ 
 Keep chunks small, no more than three or four items of arbitrary nature 
4
3
2
1
0
Detectability (d')
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Change
Week number
 Figure 7.4   Change in sensitivity with time for glass inspection. 
 ( From: Drury and Addison, 1973.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
289
 ■ 
 Keep numbers separate from letters (e.g., chunks should contain similar 
entities) 
 ■ 
 Minimize confusion of similar-sounding items (e.g., letters D, P, and T are 
easily confused, as opposed to letters J, F, and R)  
 Information from working memory may be transferred to  long-term memory 
if it will be needed for later use. This could be information related to general 
knowledge in semantic memory or information on specific events in one’s life 
in the form of event memory. This transfer must be done in an orderly manner 
so as to be able to easily retrieve the data at a later time in a process we know as 
learning. The process of retrieving the information is the weak link and can be 
facilitated by frequent activation of that memory trace (e.g., a social security or 
phone number used every day) and the use of  associations with previous knowl-
edge. These associations should be concrete rather than abstract and meaningful 
to the user, utilizing the user’s expectations and stereotypes. For example, the 
name  John Brown can be associated with the image of a brown house. 
 If there is a lack of clear or organized associations, the process can be done 
artificially in the form of mnemonics—an acronym or phrase—the letters of 
which represent a series of items. For example, the resistor color code (black, 
brown, red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet, gray, white) can be remembered 
from the first letters of each word in the expression “big brown rabbits often 
yield great big vocal groans when gingerly slapped.” Standardization of proce-
dures or use of memory aids (signs or notes) for complicated procedures also 
helps by decreasing the load on long-term memory. Unfortunately, long-term 
memory decays exponentially, with the most rapid decline in the first few days. 
Because of this, the effectiveness of training programs should not be evaluated 
immediately after the program. 
 DECISION MAKING AND RESPONSE SELECTION 
 Decision making  is really the core of information processing, in which people 
evaluate alternatives and select an appropriate response. This is a relatively 
long-term process and should be distinguished from short-term processing as 
in choice reaction time. Unfortunately people are not optimal decision makers 
and frequently do not make rational decisions based on objective numbers or 
hard information. The rational approach in classical decision theory would be 
to calculate an expected value based on the sum of products of each outcome 
multiplied by its expected probability: 
E   pivi 
 where  E  expected value 
               p i  probability of  i th outcome 
 
  v i  value of the  i th outcome 
 However, people typically use a variety of heuristics to make decisions, in 
which case a variety of biases may influence the way they seek information, 

290 
C H A P T E R  7
attach values to outcomes, and make overall decisions. A short list of such biases 
is derived from Wickens, Gordon, and Liu (1997): 
 ■ 
 A limited number of  cues or pieces of information are used. 
 ■ 
 Undue weight is given to early cues. 
 ■ 
 Inattention is given to later cues. 
 ■ 
 Prominent or salient cues are given greater weight. 
 ■ 
 All information is weighted equally regardless of true weight. 
 ■ 
 A limited number of hypotheses are generated. 
 ■ 
 Once a hypothesis has been selected, later cues are omitted. 
 ■ 
 Only confirming information is sought for the chosen hypothesis. 
 ■ 
 Only a small number of responses are chosen. 
 ■ 
 Potential losses are weighted more heavily than comparable potential gains. 
 By understanding these biases, the industrial engineer may be able to better pre-
sent information and better set up the overall process to improve the quality of 
decision making and minimize errors. 
 In addition, current theories on decision making center around  situational 
awareness , which is an evaluation of all the cues received from the surround-
ing environment. It requires the integration of cues or information into mental 
representations, ranging from simple schemata to complex mental models. To 
improve situational awareness, operators need to be trained to recognize and 
consider appropriate cues, to check the situation for consistency within the cues, 
and to analyze and resolve any conflicts in the cues or the situation. Decision 
aids, such as simple decision tables (discussed in Chapter 9) or more complex, 
expert systems, may assist in the decision-making process. Also, the display of 
key cues, the filtering out of undesirable cues, and the use of spatial techniques 
and display integration can assist in this process. Some of these will be discussed 
further in the later section on display modality. 
 The speed and difficulty of decision making and response selection, as 
discussed earlier, are influenced by many factors. One attempt at quantifying 
this process is typically performed through a  choice–reaction time experiment, 
in which the operator will respond to several stimuli with several appropriate 
responses (see Figure 7.5a). This can be considered as simple decision mak-
ing, and based on the human information processing system, the response time 
should increase as the number of alternative stimuli increases. The response is 
nonlinear (see Figure 7.5b), but when decision complexity is quantified in terms 
of the amount of information conveyed in bits, then the response becomes lin-
ear and is referred to as the  Hick-Hyman law  (Hick, 1952; Hyman, 1953; see 
Figure 7.5c) 
 RT  a  bH 
 where RT  response time (s) 
 
  H  amount of information (bits) 
                  a  intercept 
                  b  slope, sometimes referred to as information processing rate 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
291
 Note that when there is only one choice (e.g., when the light appears, press the 
button),  H  0 and the response time is equal to the intercept. This is known as 
 simple reaction time . It can vary depending on the type of stimulus (auditory 
reaction times are about 40 ms faster than visual reaction times), the intensity of 
the stimulus, and preparedness for the signal. 
 Overall choice reaction times also vary considerably due to a variety of fac-
tors. The greater the compatibility (see also Section 5.3) between the stimulus 
and the response, the faster the response. The more practice, the faster the re-
sponse. However, the faster the operator tries to respond, the greater the number 
of errors. Similarly, if there is a requirement for very high accuracy (e.g., air-
traffic control), the response time will become slower. This inverse relationship 
is known as the  speed-accuracy trade-off . 
 The use of multiple dimensions, in another form of redundancy, can also de-
crease response time in decision making; or, conversely, if there is conflicting infor-
mation, response time will be slowed. A classic example is the  Stroop Color-Word 
Task (Stroop, 1935), in which the subject is asked to read a series of words express-
ing colors as rapidly as possible. In the control redundant case, having red ink spell 
out the word  red  will result in a fast response. In the conflict case, red ink letters 
spelling out  blue will slow response time due to the semantic and visual conflicts.     
 Figure 7.5   Hick-Hyman law illustrated in a choice–reaction time experiment: 
(a) choice–reaction time experiment from Design Tools, (b) raw data, (c) information 
expressed in bits. 
(a)

292 
C H A P T E R  7
Reaction time (msec)
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Number of alternatives
0
2
4
6
8
10
Reaction time (msec)
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Amount of information (bits)
0
1
0.5
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
b = 140 msec/bit
a = 190
 
Figure 7.5  (continued)
Human Information Processing in a Wiring Task 
 EXAMPLE 7.2  
 A good example of quantifying the amount of information processed in an industrial 
task was presented by Bishu and Drury (1988). In a simulated wiring task, indus-
trial operators moved a stylus to the proper terminal or location on a control panel, 
which consisted of four different plates, each having eight possible components. 
Each component area was divided into 128 terminals in an array of eight columns 
and 16 rows. The most complex task involved all four plates (log 2 4  2 bits of 
information), all eight components (3 bits), eight columns (3 bits), and 16 rows 
(4 bits) for a total complexity of 12 bits (sum of 2, 3, 3, and 4). From this con-
trol panel, others of less complexity could be produced by reducing the number of 
plates, components, columns, and rows. A low-complexity task involved only two 
(b)
(c)

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
293
plates (1 bit), four components (2 bits), four columns (2 bits), and 8 rows (3 bits) for 
a total complexity of 8 bits (sum of 1, 2, 2, and 3). Other intermediate-complexity 
tasks were also utilized. 
 The final results showed a linear relationship between information processing 
(simulated wiring or placement) time and the information complexity of the input 
(see Figure 7.6). Using the Hick-Hyman law, this relationship can be expressed as 
 IP  2.328  0.7325 H 
 where IP  information processing time (s) 
          H  amount of information (bits) 
 Thus, as the number of alternatives in performing the task increased, so also in-
creased the informational loading on the central processing unit of the human op-
erator, and the corresponding time for task performance. Note that in this relatively 
real-world case of a complex task, the intercept may not always be a positive value 
corresponding to simple reaction time. 
 Fitts’ Law and Information Processing of Movement 
 EXAMPLE 7.3 
 Information theory was applied to the modeling of human movement by Fitts (1954) 
who developed the  index of difficulty  to predict movement time. The index of diffi-
culty was defined as a function of the distance of movement and target size in a series 
of positioning movements to and from identical targets: 
 ID  log 2 (2 D / W) 
 where ID  index of difficulty (bits) 
               D  distance between target centers 
             W  target width 
 Movement time was found to follow the Hick-Hyman law, now termed  Fitts’ law : 
 MT   a   b (ID) 
 where MT  movement time (s) 
                   a  intercept 
                   b  slope 
 In a particularly successful application of Fitts’ law, Langolf, Chaffin, and Foulke 
(1976) modeled human movement by different limbs across a wide range of distances, 
including very small targets visible only with the assistance of a microscope. Their 
results (see Figure 4.14) yielded slopes of 105 ms/bit for the arm, 45 ms/bit for the 
wrist, and 26 ms/bit for the finger. The inverse of the slope is interpreted, according to 
information theory, as the motor system bandwidth. In this case, the bandwidths were 
38 bits/s for the finger, 23 bits/s for the wrist, and 10 bits/s for the arm. This decrease 
in information processing rates was explained as the result of added processing for the 
additional joints, muscles, and motor units. Interestingly, these results are identical to 
Gilbreth’s classification of movements (see Section 4.2). 

294 
C H A P T E R  7
 RESPONSE EXECUTION 
 Response execution depends primarily on human movement. More details on 
the musculoskeletal system, motor control, and manual work can be found in 
Chapter 4. Note that the  Fitts’ Tapping Task  (see Figure 7.7) is a simple exten-
sion of the Hick-Hyman law with respect to movement and also an example of 
a speed-accuracy trade-off with respect to the size of the target and movement 
time. Specific applications of responses with respect to controls and to the opera-
tion of machines and other equipment are discussed in Chapter 5. 
 ATTENTIONAL RESOURCES 
 Attentional resources , or more simply  attention , refers to the amount of cogni-
tive capacity devoted to a particular task or processing stage. This amount could 
vary considerably from very routine, well-practiced assembly tasks with low at-
tentional demands to air-traffic controllers with very high attentional demands. 
Furthermore, this cognitive capacity can be applied in a very directed manner, 
such as a spotlight on a particular part of the human information processing sys-
tem, termed  focused attention . Or it can be applied in a much more diffuse man-
ner to various parts or even all the human information processing system, termed 
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
7
8
9
10
Information input (bits)
11
12
I.P. time (s)
LLLL
LHLL
HLLL
LLLH
LLHL
HHLL
LHHL
HLHL
LLHH
HLLH
LHLH
HHHL
HLHH
HHLH
LHHH
HHHH
 Figure 7.6   Hick-Hyman law illustrated in a wiring task. 
 (Reprinted from  Applied Ergonomics , Vol. 19, Bishu and Drury, Information Processing 
in Assembly Tasks—A Case Study, pp. 90–98, 1988, with permission from Elsevier 
Science.) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
295
 divided attention . An example of focused attention on working memory would 
occur while an operator was trying to remember a looked-up processing code 
while entering it into a computer-controlled machine tool. Focused attention can 
be improved by reducing the number of competing sources of information or de-
mands on the human information processing system or separating these sources 
in as distinct a manner as possible.  
 In contrast, an inspector, sorting apples on a conveyor line, divides his at-
tention between visual perception of blemishes and apple sizes; decision making 
on the nature of the blemish and the size of the apple, with reference to memory 
and the images stored there from training; and hand movements to remove the 
damaged apples and sort the good ones into appropriate bins by size. This latter 
case of performing various tasks simultaneously is also termed  multitasking or 
 timesharing . Because our cognitive resources for attention are relatively limited, 
timesharing between several tasks will probably result in a decrease in perfor-
mance for one or more of these tasks as compared to a single-task baseline. 
Again, it can be difficult to improve task performance in such situations, but 
strategies similar to those discussed for focused attention are also utilized. The 
number and difficulty of tasks should be minimized. The tasks should be made 
as dissimilar as possible in terms of the demands placed on a processing stage 
of Figure 7.1. Whereas a purely manual assembly task with auditory instructions 
can be managed, a musician tuning an instrument would have a much more dif-
ficult time listening to verbal comments. One approach that is fairlysuccessful in 
 Figure 7.7   Fitts’ Tapping Task from DesignTools. 

296 
C H A P T E R  7
explaining timesharing performance with multiple tasks is the multiple-resource 
model of Wickens (1984). 
 An extension of multiple-resource modes of attention relates to the mea-
surement of  mental workload  or the demands placed on the human information 
processor. One definition uses the ratio of resources required to the resources 
available, where time is one of the more important of a number of required 
resources. In the examples mentioned earlier, simple assembly may be time-
consuming, but is not especially demanding of cognitive resources. In contrast, 
air-traffic control, at peak times, can be very demanding. It can be very diffi-
cult to actually quantify these demands placed on the operator. Some of the ap-
proaches used to do so include these: 
 ■ 
 Primary task measures may be time required to perform the task divided by 
total time available, or the number of items completed per unit time. The 
problem with this approach is that some tasks are better timeshared than 
others. 
 ■ 
 Secondary task measures utilize the concept of a reserve capacity that, if 
not being directed to the performance of the primary task, will be used by 
a secondary task (choice reaction time), which can be controlled and more 
easily measured. The problem with this approach is that the secondary task 
typically seems artificial and intrusive, and it is difficult to identify how the 
operator prioritizes the performance of both tasks. 
 ■ 
 Physiological measures (e.g., heart rate variability, eye movement, pupil 
diameter, electroencephalograms) are thought to respond to the stress im-
posed by mental workload; although they typically don’t interfere with the 
primary task performance, the equipment needed to measure them may 
do so. 
 ■ 
 Subjective measures are thought to aggregate all aspects of mental work-
load in a simple overall rating (or a weighted average of several scales). 
Unfortunately, subjective reports don’t always accurately reflect true per-
formance; also, motivation may strongly affect the ratings. 
 For a more detailed discussion of mental workload and the advantages and disad-
vantages of various means to measure it, see Wickens (1984), Eggemeier (1988), 
and Sanders and McCormick (1993). 
 A final example of attentional resources relates to the ability of an operator 
(e.g., a visual inspector) to maintain attention and remain alert over prolonged 
periods of time. Termed  sustained attention  or  vigilance , the concern is how 
to minimize the vigilance decrement that occurs after as little as 30 min and 
increases up to 50 percent with increasing time (Giambra and Quilter, 1987; 
see Figure 7.8). Unfortunately, there are few documented countermeasures 
that work well for industrial tasks. The basic approach is to try to maintain a 
high level of arousal, which then maintains performance, following the  Yerkes- 
Dodson (1908) inverted-U  curve (see Figure 7.9). This can be done by providing 
more frequent rest breaks, providing task variation, providing operators with 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
297
1.000
0.875
0.750
0.625
0.500
0
8
Hit likelihood
Time into task (min)
16
24
32
40
48
56
64
 Figure 7.8   Vigilance decrement over time. 
 (From : Giambra and Quilter, 1987. Reprinted with permission from  Human Factors , 
Vol. 29, No. 6, 1987. Copyright 1987 by the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. 
All rights reserved.) 
High
Performance
Low
Low
Optimum
High
Arousal
 Figure 7.9   The Yerkes-Dodson law showing the inverted-U relationship between 
performance and the level of arousal. 
more feedback on their detection performance, and using appropriate levels 
of stimulation, either internal (e.g., caffeine) or external (e.g., music or white 
noise), or even through the introduction of false signals. However, the latter 
change of detection criteria will also increase the rate of false alarms (see the 
discussion of signal detection theory) with consequent costs. Increasing the 

298 
C H A P T E R  7
 Figure 7.10   Cognitive Work Evaluation Checklist. 
prominence of the signal will assist in the detection performance (e.g., making 
the signal brighter, larger, or with greater contrast through special illumina-
tion). Overlays that act as special patterns to enhance differences between the 
defective part and the rest of the object may also be useful. Finally, selecting 
inspectors with faster eye fixation time and better peripheral vision will also 
help in inspection performance (Drury, 1982).  
 To assist the industrial engineer in evaluating and redesigning cognitive 
tasks, these details on the human information processing system have been sum-
marized in the Cognitive Work Evaluation Checklist (see Figure 7.10). 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
299
 7.3  CODING OF INFORMATION: 
GENERAL DESIGN PRINCIPLES 
  As mentioned in the introduction to Chapter 4, many, if not most, industrial 
functions or operations will be performed by machines, because of the greater 
force, accuracy, and repeatability considerations. However, to ensure that these 
machines are performing satisfactorily at the desired specifications, there will 
always be the need for a human monitor. This operator will then receive a va-
riety of information input (e.g., pressure, speed, temperature, etc.) that has to 
be presented in a manner or form that will be both readily interpretable and 
unlikely to result in an error. Therefore, there are a number of design principles 
that will assist the industrial engineer in providing the appropriate information 
to the operator. 
 TYPE OF INFORMATION TO BE PRESENTED 
 Information to be presented can be either static or dynamic, depending on 
whether it changes over time. The former includes any printed text (even scroll-
ing text on a computer screen), plots, charts, labels, or diagrams that are un-
changing. The latter is any information that is continually updated, such as 
pressure, speed, temperature, or status lights. Either of the two categories can 
also be classified as 
 ■ 
 Quantitative—presenting specific numerical values (e.g., 50°F, 60 rpm) 
 ■ 
 Qualitative—indicating general values or trends (e.g., up, down, hot, cold) 
 ■ 
 Status—reflecting one of a limited number of conditions (e.g., on/off, stop/
caution/go) 
 ■ 
 Warnings—indicating emergencies or unsafe conditions (e.g., fire alarm) 
 ■ 
 Alphanumeric—using letters and numbers (e.g., signs, labels) 
 ■ 
 Representational—using pictures, symbols, and color to code information 
(e.g., “wastebasket” for deleted files) 
 ■ 
 Time-phased—using pulsed signals, varying in duration and intersignal in-
terval (e.g., Morse code or blinking lights)  
 Note that one informational display may incorporate several of these types of 
information simultaneously. For example, a stop sign is a static warning using 
alphanumeric letters, an octagonal shape, and the red color as representations of 
information. 
 DISPLAY MODALITY 
 Because there are five different senses (vision, hearing, touch, taste, smell), there 
could be five different  display modalities  for information to be perceived by the 
human operator. However, given that vision and hearing are by far the most de-
veloped senses and most used for receiving information, the choice is generally 
limited to those two. The choice of which of the two to use depends on a variety 

300 
C H A P T E R  7
of factors, with each sense having certain advantages as well as certain disad-
vantages. The detailed comparisons given in Table 7.1 may aid the industrial 
engineer in selecting the appropriate modality for the given circumstances.  
 Touch or tactile stimulation is useful primarily in the design of controls, 
which is discussed further in Section 5.3. Taste has been used in a very limited 
range of circumstances, primarily added to give medicine a “bad” taste and pre-
vent children from accidentally swallowing it. Similarly, odors have been used in 
the ventilation system of mines to warn miners of emergencies or in natural gas 
to warn the homeowner of a leaking stove. 
 SELECTION OF APPROPRIATE DIMENSION 
 Information can be coded in a variety of dimensions. Select a dimension ap-
propriate for the given conditions. For example, if lights are to be used, one can 
then select brightness, color, and frequency of pulsing as dimensions to code 
information. Similarly, if sound is to be used, one can select dimensions such as 
loudness, pitch, and modulation. 
 LIMITING ABSOLUTE JUDGMENTS 
 The task of differentiating between two stimuli along a particular dimension de-
pends on either a  relative judgment , if a direct comparison can be made of the 
two stimuli; or an  absolute judgment , if no direct comparison can be made. In 
the latter case the operator must utilize working memory to hold one stimu-
lus and make the comparison. As discussed previously, the capacity of working 
memory is limited to approximately 7  2 items by Miller’s rule. Therefore, an 
individual will be able to identify, at most, five to nine items based on absolute 
judgment. Research has shown that this holds true for a variety of dimensions: 
five levels for pure tones, five levels for loudness, seven levels for size of the ob-
ject, five levels for brightness, and up to a dozen colors. In contrast, individuals 
have been able to identify up to 300,000 different colors on a relative basis, when 
comparing them two at a time. If multiple dimensions are used (e.g., brightness 
 Table 7.1   When to Use Visual or Auditory Forms of Presentation 
 Use visual forms if: 
 Use auditory forms if: 
 The message is long and complex 
 The message is short and simple 
 The message deals with spatial references 
 The message deals with events in time 
 The message must be referred to later 
 The message is transient 
 No immediate action is needed 
 Immediate action is needed 
 Hearing is difficult (noise) or overburdened 
 Vision is difficult or overburdened 
 The operator can be stationary 
 The operator is moving about 
 Adapted from Deatherage, 1972. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
301
and color), then the range can be increased to some degree, but less than would 
be expected from the combination (direct product) of the two coding dimensions 
(Sanders and McCormick, 1993).   
 INCREASING DISCRIMINABILITY OF CODES 
 When selecting a coding scheme, one must consider that with regard to rela-
tive judgment, it is apparent that there has to be some minimum difference be-
tween the two codes or stimuli before they can be distinguished as different. This 
difference is termed the  just noticeable difference  (JND) and is found to vary 
depending on the level of the stimuli. For example (see Figure 7.11), if an indi-
vidual is given a 10-oz (0.283-kg) weight, the JND is roughly 0.2 oz (5.66 g). If 
the weight is increased to 20 oz (56.6 g), the JND increases to 0.4 oz (11.33 g),
 and so on. This relationship is termed  Weber’s law and can be expressed as 
 k  JND/ S 
 where  k  Weber’s fraction or slope 
               S  standard stimulus 
 The application of this law is quite evident in an industrial setting. Consider 
a lighting source with a three-way bulb (100-200-300 W). The brightness change 
from 100 to 200 W is quite noticeable, whereas the change from 200 to 300 W is 
much less noticeable. Thus, for a change in a high-intensity signal to be notice-
able, the change must be quite large. Although Weber’s law was formulated for 
relative thresholds, Fechner (1860) extended it to develop psychological scales 
for measuring a wide range of sensory experiences to form the basis for the sci-
ence of psychophysics. 
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0
10
Standard weight (oz)
Just noticeable difference (oz)
20
30
 
 Figure 7.11   Weber’s law showing the relationship between just noticeable difference 
and the level of stimuli which, for this example, is standard weight. 

302 
C H A P T E R  7
 COMPATIBILITY OF CODING SCHEMES 
 Compatibility refers to the relationship of stimuli and responses that are consis-
tent with human expectations, resulting in decreased errors and faster response 
time. This can occur at several levels: conceptual, movement, spatial, and modal-
ity.  Conceptual compatibility  refers to how meaningful the codes are to the indi-
viduals using them. Red is an almost universal code for danger or stop. Similarly, 
pictorial realism is very useful, for example, a symbol for a female on a door 
indicating women’s toilets.  Movement compatibility  refers to the relationship 
between the movement of controls and displays and is discussed further in Sec-
tion 5.3.  Spatial compatibility  refers to the physical arrangement of controls and 
displays. The classic example (see Figure 7.12) is the optimum arrangement of 
knobs to control the burners on a stove from Chapanis and Lindenbaum (1959). 
 Modality compatibility  refers to using the same stimulus modality for both the 
signal and the response. For example, verbal tasks (responses to verbal com-
mands) are performed best with auditory signals and spoken responses. Spatial 
tasks (moving a cursor to a target) are performed best with a visual display and 
a manual response.   
 REDUNDANCY FOR CRITICAL SITUATIONS 
 When several dimensions are combined in a redundant manner, the stimulus 
or code will be more likely to be interpreted correctly and fewer errors will be 
made. The stop sign is a good example, with its three redundant codes: the word 
 stop , the universal red color, and the unique (among traffic signs) octagonal 
shape. Note that these dimensions are all in the visual modality. Using two dif-
ferent modalities will improve the response as compared to two different dimen-
sions within a modality. Thus, for an emergency evacuation of a plant in case 
of a fire, using both an auditory signal (a siren) and a visual signal (flashing 
red lights) will be more effective than either modality alone. The trade-off, as 
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
 Figure 7.12   Spatial compat-
ibility of controls and burners 
on a stove top. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
303
discussed earlier in this chapter, is a reduction in the number of potential codes 
available and a reduction in the amount of information that can be presented.  
 MAINTAINING CONSISTENCY 
 When coding systems have been developed by different people in different situ-
ations, it is important to maintain consistency. Otherwise, especially under times 
of stress, it is likely that operators will revert instinctively to previous habits 
and errors will occur. Therefore, as new warnings are added to a factory having 
an existing warning system, it is important that the coding system duplicate the 
existing scheme when the same information is being transmitted, even though 
the old system might not have had the optimum design in the first place. For 
example, the color yellow, typically meaning proceed with caution, should have 
the same meaning for all displays.  
 7.4  DISPLAY OF VISUAL INFORMATION: 
SPECIFIC DESIGN PRINCIPLES 
 FIXED-SCALE, MOVING-POINTER DESIGN 
 There are two major alternative analog display designs: a fixed scale with a mov-
ing pointer and a moving scale with a fixed pointer (see Figure 7.13). The first is 
the preferred design because all major compatibility principles are maintained: 
increasing values on the scale go from left to right, and a clockwise (or left to 
right) movement of the pointer indicates increasing values. With a moving scale 
and fixed pointer, one of these two compatibility principles will always be vio-
lated. Note that the display itself can be circular, semicircular, a vertical bar, a 
horizontal bar, or an open window. The only situation in which the moving-scale 
and fixed-pointer design has an advantage is for very large scales, which cannot 
be fully shown on the fixed-scale display. In that case an open window display 
can accommodate a very large scale in back of the display with only the relevant 
portion showing. Note that the fixed-scale and moving-pointer design can very 
nicely display quantitative information as well as general trends in the readings. 
Also, the same displays can be generated with computer graphics or electronics 
without a need for traditional mechanical scales. 
 DIGITAL DISPLAYS FOR PRECISION 
 When precise numeric values are required and the values remain relatively static 
(at least long enough to be able to be read), then a digital display or counter should 
be utilized (see Figure 7.13). However, once the display changes rapidly, then 
counters become difficult to use. Also, counters are not good for identifying trends. 
Thus, digital counters were never very successful as a “high-tech” feature for au-
tomobile speedometers. A more detailed comparison in Table 7.2 shows the ad-
vantages and disadvantages of using moving pointers, moving scales and counters.  

304 
C H A P T E R  7
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
10
20
30
40
Increase
Increase
Increase
Decrease
Decrease
Decrease
Fixed scale, moving pointer
(a) Circular scales
0
1
2
3 4 5 6 7 8
9
10
(b) Circular scale with positive
 
and negative values
(c) Semicircular or
 
curved scale
(d) Vertical
scale
(e) Horizontal
scale
0
+10
+20
+30
+40
+50
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
Positive
Increase
Decrease
Increase
Decrease
Increase
Decrease
Negative
50
40
30
20
10
0
40
50
60
70
Digital display
(j) Digital
display
Moving scale, fixed pointer
(f) Circular
scale
(g) Open-window
scale
(h) Vertical
scale
(i) Horizontal
scale
Increase
Decrease
5
0
 
 
 
 
 
6
0
 
 
 
 
7
0
 
 
 
 
8
0
 
 
 
 
9
0
 
 
 
1
0
0
 
 
 
 
 
0
 
 
 
 
 
1
0
 
 
 
 
2
0
 
 
 
3
0
 
 
 
50
40
30
Increase
Decrease
Increase
Decrease
70
65
60
70
65
60
4
5
6
7
50
40
Electronic display
(k) Circular
(l) Horizontal
(m) Digital
Hot
Cold
ok
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
 Figure 7.13   Types of displays for presenting quantitative information. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
305
 DISPLAY BASIC FEATURES 
 Figure 7.14 illustrates some of the basic features utilized in a dial design. The 
scale range is clearly depicted with an orderly numerical progression with num-
bered major markers at 0, 10, 20, and so on, and minor markers at every unit. An 
intermediate marker at 5, 15, 25, and so on, helps identify readings better. A pro-
gression by 5s is less good but still satisfactory. The pointer has a pointed tip just 
meeting, but not overlapping, the smallest scale markers. Also, the pointer should 
be close to the surface of the scale to avoid parallax and erroneous readings.     
 PATTERNS FOR A PANEL OF DIALS 
 Usually a panel of dials is used to indicate the status of a series of pressure lines 
or valves, as in the control room of a power plant. In such cases, the operator is 
primarily a monitor, performing check readings to ascertain whether readings 
(and the status of the system) are normal. Although the actual dials may be quan-
titative, the operator is primarily determining whether any one dial is indicating 
a condition out of a normal range. Thus, the key design aspect is to align all 
normal states and all dial pointers in the same direction, such that any change 
or deviant reading will stand out from the others. This pattern is accentuated by 
having extended lines between dials (see Figure 7.15). 
 MINIMIZING INFORMATIONAL LOADING 
ON THE WORKER 
 Human error in reading display information increases as the amount of informa-
tion per unit area increases. Always consider Miller’s rule in limiting the amount 
of information presented. Proper coding of the information improves readability 
 Table 7.2   Comparison of Pointers, Scales, and Counters 
   
 Service rendered 
 Indicator 
 Quantitative 
reading 
 Qualitative 
reading 
 Setting 
 Tracking 
 Moving pointer…  Fair 
 Good (changes are 
easily detected) 
 Good (easily 
discernible relation 
between setting 
knob and pointer) 
 Good (pointer 
position is easily 
controlled and 
monitored) 
 Moving scale . . . 
 Fair 
 Poor (may be 
difficult to identify 
direction and 
magnitude) 
 Fair (may be diffi-
cult to identify rela-
tion between setting 
and motion) 
 Fair (may have 
ambiguous 
relationship to 
manual-control 
motion) 
 Counter . . . . . . . .  Good (minimum 
time to read and 
results in minimum 
error) 
 Poor (position 
change may not 
indicate qualitative 
change) 
 Good (accurate 
method to monitor 
numerical setting) 
 Poor (not readily 
monitored) 

306 
C H A P T E R  7
of the displays and decreases the number of errors. In general, color, symbols or 
geometric figures, and alphanumerics are the best coding methods. These require 
little space and allow easy identification of information. 
 INDICATOR LIGHTS TO GET THE ATTENTION 
OF THE WORKER 
 Indicator or warning lights are especially good in attracting attention to poten-
tially dangerous situations. Several basic requirements should be incorporated 
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
10
20
30
40
Scale unit
(nearest 1 lb)
Scale range
(0–100 lb)
Numbered
interval
(10 lb)
Graduation
interval
(1 lb)
lbs
 Figure 7.14   Basic features in the design of a dial. 
 Figure 7.15   Panel of dials designed for check reading. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
307
into their use. They should indicate to the operator what is wrong and what ac-
tion should be taken. In poor background conditions with poor contrasts, a red 
(typically a serious situation), a green, and a yellow (less-serious condition) light 
have advantages over a white light. In terms of size and intensity, a good rule is 
to make it twice the size (at least 1 degree of visual arc) and brightness of other 
panel indicators, and place it not more than 30 degrees off the operator’s line of 
sight. A flashing light, with a flash rate between 1 to 10 per second, will espe-
cially attract attention. Immediately after the operator takes action, the flashing 
should stop, but the light should remain on until the improper condition has been 
completely remedied. Further details on the coding of indicator lights are given 
in Table 7.3.    
 PROPER SIZE ALPHANUMERIC CHARACTERS
FOR LABELS 
 For the most effective alphanumeric coding, use recommended illumination lev-
els (see Section 6.1) and consider the following information on letter height, 
stroke width, width-height ratio, and font. Based on a viewing distance of 20 in 
(50.8 cm), the letter or numeral height should be at least 0.13 in (0.33 cm) and 
the stroke width at least 0.02 in (0.051 cm), to give a stroke width-height ratio 
of 1:6. This creates a preferred visual angle of 22 arc minutes as recommended 
by ANSI/HFS 100 (1988) or a point size of 10 as typically found in newspapers 
(one point equals 1/72 in or 0.035 mm). For distances other than 20 in (50.8 cm), 
the value can be scaled so as to yield a comparable visual angle (e.g., for a dis-
tance of 40 in, sizes would be doubled). 
 These recommendations refer to dark letters on a white background, the 
preferred format for reading for well-illuminated areas (e.g., typical work areas 
with windows or good lighting). White letters on a dark background are more 
appropriate for dark areas (e.g., nighttime conditions) and have a narrower stroke 
width (1:8 to 1:10 ratio) due to a spreading effect of the white letters. The font re-
fers to the style of type such as Roman, with serifs or the special embellishments 
on the ends of the strokes, or Gothic, without serifs. In general, a mix of upper-
case and lowercase letters is easier for extended reading. However, for special 
 Table 7.3   Recommended Coding of Indicator Lights 
   
   
 Color 
 Diameter 
 State 
 Red 
 Yellow 
 Green 
 White 
 12.5 mm. . . . . . . .  Steady 
 Failure; Stop 
action; Malfunction 
 Delay; Inspect 
 Circuit energized; 
Go ahead: Ready; 
Producing 
 Functional; 
In position; 
Normal (on) 
 25 mm or larger. . .  Steady 
 System or subsys-
tem in stop action 
 Caution 
 System or subsystem 
in go-ahead state 
   
 25 mm or larger . . .  Flashing 
 Emergency
condition 
   
   
   

308 
C H A P T E R  7
emphasis and attracting attention, as in labels, boldface or uppercase  letters with 
a width-height ratio of about 3:5 are useful (Sanders and McCormick, 1993).  
 7.5  DISPLAY OF AUDITORY INFORMATION: 
SPECIFIC DESIGN PRINCIPLES 
 AUDITORY SIGNALS FOR WARNINGS 
 As discussed previously, there are special characteristics of the auditory system 
that warrant using an auditory signal for warnings. Simple reaction time is con-
siderably quicker to auditory than visual signals (e.g., consider the starter pistol 
to start races). An auditory signal places much higher attentional demands on the 
worker than a visual signal. Because hearing is omnidirectional and sound waves 
penetrate barriers (to some degree, depending on thickness and material proper-
ties), auditory signals are especially useful if workers are at an unknown location 
and moving about. 
 TWO-STAGE AUDITORY SIGNALS 
 Because the auditory system is limited to short and simple messages, a two-stage 
signal should be considered when complex information is to be presented. The 
first stage should be an attention-demanding signal to attract attention; the sec-
ond stage would be used to present more precise information. 
 HUMAN ABILITIES AND LIMITATIONS 
 Because human auditory sensitivity is best at approximately 1,000 Hz, use audi-
tory signals with frequencies in the range of 500 and 3,000 Hz. Increasing signal 
intensity will serve two purposes. First, it will increase the attention-demanding 
quality of the signal and decrease response time. Second, it will tend to better dif-
ferentiate the signal from background noise. However, one should avoid exces-
sive levels (e.g., well above 100 dB), as these will tend to cause a startle response 
and perhaps disrupt performance. Where feasible, avoid steady-state signals so 
as to avoid adaption to the signal. Thus,  modulation  of the signal (i.e., turning 
the signal on and off in a regular cycle) in the frequency range of 1 to 3 Hz 
will tend to increase the attention-demanding quality of the signal. 
 ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS 
 Sound waves can be dispersed or attenuated by the working environment, so it 
is important to take environmental factors into account. Use signal frequencies 
below 1,000 Hz when the signals must travel long distances (i.e., more than 
1,000 ft), because higher frequencies tend to be absorbed or dispersed more eas-
ily. Use frequencies below 500 Hz when signals must bend around obstacles 
or pass through partitions. The lower the signal frequency, the more similar 
sound waves become to vibrations in solid objects, again with lower absorption 
characteristics. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
309
 DISSOCIATING THE SIGNAL FROM NOISE 
 Auditory signals should be as separate as possible from other sounds, whether 
useful auditory signals or unneeded noise. This means the desired signal should 
be as different as possible from other signals in terms of frequency, intensity, and 
modulation. If possible, warnings should be placed on a separate communica-
tion channel to increase the sense of  dissociability  and increase the attention-
demanding qualities of the warning. 
 These principles for designing displays, both auditory and visual, are sum-
marized as an evaluative checklist in Figure 7.16. If purchased equipment has di-
als or other displays that don’t correspond to these design guidelines, then there 
is the possibility for operator error and potential loss. If at all possible, those 
problems should be corrected or the displays replaced.  
 7.6  HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION: 
HARDWARE CONSIDERATIONS 
 KEYBOARDS 
 The standard computer keyboard used today is based on the typewriter key lay-
out patented by C. L. Sholes in 1878. Termed a  QWERTY keyboard , because of 
the sequence of the first six leftmost keys in the third row, it has the distinction 
of allocating some of the most common English letters to the weakest fingers. 
One potential explanation is that the most commonly used keys were separated 
from each other so that they would not jam upon rapid sequential activation. 
Other more scientifically based alternative layouts, which allocate the letters 
more proportionately, have been developed, with the 1936  Dvorak keyboard be-
ing the most notable. However, scientific studies have shown the Dvorak layout 
to achieve at most a 5 percent improvement over the QWERTY layout, which 
is probably not a large enough improvement to justify switching and retraining 
millions of operators. 
 In certain special circumstances such as stenotyping and mail sorting, a 
 chord keyboard  may be more appropriate. Whereas in a standard keyboard, in-
dividual characters are keyed in sequentially, a chord keyboard requires the si-
multaneous activation of two or more keys. The basic trade-off is that with such 
activation, fewer keys are required and considerably more (estimates of 50 per-
cent to 100 percent) information can be entered. It also has the distinct advantage 
of small size and one-handed operation, allowing the other hand to perform other 
tasks. However, for general use, the standard keyboard is more than sufficient 
without the need for additional specialized training. 
 Many keyboards will have a separate numeric keypad. Early research on 
telephones established that users preferred that numerals increase from left to 
right and then from top to bottom, which resulted in the standard layout for tele-
phones. An alternate layout was developed for calculators, in which the numbers 
increase from the bottom to the top. Most research has shown that the telephone 
layout is slightly but significantly faster and more accurate than the calculator 

310 
C H A P T E R  7
 Figure 7.16   Display design checklist. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
311
layout. Unfortunately, the difference was not large enough for the ANSI/HFS 
100 standard (Human Factors Society, 1988) to favor one over the other, result-
ing in, perhaps, the worst situation in performance, with an operator having to 
alternate between both layouts in an office environment (e.g., a telephone next to 
a computer keyboard).  
 For any keyboard, the keys should be relatively large, spaced center to center 
0.71 to 0.75 in (18 to 19 mm) horizontally and 0.71 to 0.82 in (18 to 21 mm) ver-
tically. Smaller keys, which are becoming more common as PCs become smaller 
and smaller, become a disadvantage to individuals with large fingers with a defi-
nite decrease in speed and an increase in errors. The keys will have a preferred 
displacement between 0.08 and 0.16 in (2.0 and 4.0 mm) with the key force not 
to exceed 0.33 lb (1.5 N). Actuation of a key should be accompanied by either 
tactile or auditory feedback. Traditionally, a slight upward slope (0 to 15°) has 
been advocated. However, more recent research shows that a slight downward 
slope of 10° may actually provide a more neutral and favorable wrist posture. 
Also, split keyboards have been shown to reduce the ulnar deviation commonly 
found while using traditional one-piece keyboards. As mentioned in Chapter 5, 
armrests provide shoulder/arm support and reduce shoulder muscle activity. 
These are recommended in place of the more commonly seen wrist rest, which 
may actually increase the pressure in the carpal tunnel and increase operator 
discomfort. 
 POINTING DEVICES 
 The primary device for data entry is the keyboard. However, with the growing 
ubiquitousness of graphical user interfaces and depending on the task performed, 
the operator may actually spend less than half the time using the keyboard. Es-
pecially for window and menu-based systems, some type of a cursor-positioning 
or a pointing device better than the cursor keys on a keyboard is needed. A wide 
variety of devices have been developed and tested. The  touchscreen  either uses 
a touch-sensitive overlay on the screen or senses the interruption of an infrared 
beam across the screen as the finger approaches the screen. This approach is 
Figure 7.16  (continued)

312 
C H A P T E R  7
quite natural, with the user simply touching the target directly on the screen. 
However, the finger can obscure the target and, in spite of the fairly large targets 
required, accuracy can be poor. The  light pen  is a special stylus linked to the 
computer by an electrical cable that senses the electron scanning beam at the 
particular location on the screen. The user has a similar natural pointing response 
as with a touch-screen, but usually with greater accuracy. 
 A  digitizing tablet  is a flat pad placed on the desktop, again linked to the 
computer. Movement of a stylus is sensed at the appropriate position on the 
tablet, which can either be absolute (i.e., the tablet is a representation of 
the screen) or relative (i.e., only direct movement across the tablet is shown). Fur-
ther complications are tablet size versus accuracy trade-offs and optimum control-
response ratios. Also, the user needs to look back at the screen to receive feed-
back. Both displacement and force joysticks (currently termed  track sticks or 
 track points ) can be used to control the cursor and have a considerable back-
ground of research on types of control systems, types of displays, control-re-
sponse ratios, and tracking performance. The  mouse  is a handheld device with 
a roller ball in the base to control position and one or more buttons for other 
inputs. It is a relative positioning device and requires a clear space next to the 
keyboard for operation. The  trackball , an upside-down mouse without the mouse 
pad, is a good alternative for work surfaces with limited space. More recently, 
 touchpads , a form of digitizing tablets integrated into the keyboard, have become 
popular, especially for notebook PCs. 
 A number of studies have compared these pointing devices, showing clear 
speed-accuracy trade-offs; that is, the fastest devices (touchscreens and light 
pens) are quite inaccurate. Keyboard cursor keys were very slow and probably 
not acceptable. Touchpads were a bit faster than joysticks, but were less pre-
ferred by users. Mice and trackballs were generally similarly good in both speed 
and accuracy and probably indicate why mice are so ubiquitous. However, there 
is a tendency for users to overgrip a mouse by a factor of 2 to 3 (i.e., use two to 
three times more than the minimum force required), with potential risk of incur-
ring an injury. Use of a drag-lock, similar to what is found on trackballs, would 
reduce this risk. For a more detailed review of cursor-positioning devices, please 
refer to Greenstein and Arnaut (1988) or Sanders and McCormick (1993). 
 MONITOR SCREENS 
 The center of the monitor screen should be placed at the normal line of sight, which 
is roughly about 15 degrees below the horizontal. For a 15-in screen, at a typical 
16-in reading distance, the edges are only slightly beyond the recommended 15 
degree cone of primary visual field. The implication is that within this optimal 
cone, no head movements are needed and eye fatigue is minimized. Thus, the top 
of the screen should not be above the horizontal plane through the eyes. 
 A 16-in reading distance, however, may not be optimal. A comfortable read-
ing distance is a function not only of the size of the displayed characters, but also 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
313
of the person’s ability to maintain focus and alignment of the eyes. The mean 
resting focus (measured in the dark or in the absence of a stimulus with a laser 
optometer) is roughly 24 in. The implication is that the eye may be under greater 
stress when viewing characters at distances larger or smaller than 24 in, because 
then there will be compromise between the “pull” of the stimulus and the ten-
dency of the eye to regress toward the individual’s resting position. However, 
there is a large variation in individual resting focus distances. Therefore, office 
workers who view computer screens for extended periods of time may wish to 
have their eyes measured for their resting focus. Then if they are not able to set 
the monitor screen at the appropriate distance (e.g., excessive short or long dis-
tances), they can have their eyes fitted with special “computer-viewing” lenses 
(Harpster et al., 1989). 
 The monitor, preferably tiltable, should be placed relatively vertical such 
that the angle formed by the line of sight and the line normal to surface of the 
display is relatively small, but definitely less than 40 degrees. Tilting the screen 
upward should be avoided due to an increased likelihood of developing specular 
reflections from overhead lighting, leading to glare and decreased visibility. The 
screen should have minimum flicker, uniform luminance, and glare control if 
needed (polarizing or micromesh filters). Further details on hardware and furni-
ture requirements for computer workstations can be found in the ANSI/HFS 100 
standard (Human Factors Society, 1988). 
 NOTEBOOKS AND HANDHELD PCS 
 Portable PCs, or laptop or notebook computers, are becoming immensely popu-
lar, easily beating out desktop PCs. The latest data from 2012 (www.inquisitr
.com) show desktops accounting for only 23 percent of the market, laptops 
43 percent, netbooks 17 percent, and tablets 18 percent. Their main advantage 
over a desktop is reduced size (and weight) and portability. However, with the 
smaller size, there are distinct disadvantages: smaller keys and keyboard, key-
board attached to screen, and lack of a peripheral cursor-positioning device. The 
lack of adjustability in placing the screen has been found to give rise to excessive 
neck flexion (much beyond the recommended 15 degrees), increased shoulder 
flexion, and elbow angles greater than 90 degrees, which have accelerated feel-
ings of discomfort as compared to using a desktop PC. Adding an external key-
board and raising the notebook computer or adding an external monitor helps 
alleviate the situation. 
 Even smaller devices, such as personal digital assistants and smartphones, 
have been developed to provide many of the features of smaller PCs at one’s 
fingertips. However, they are too new to have had detailed scientific evaluations 
performed. Being pocket-sized, they offer much greater portability and flexibil-
ity, but at an even greater disadvantage for data entry. Decrements in accuracy 
and speed, when entering text via the touchscreen, have been found. Alternate 
input methods such as touchscreens may be better. 

314 
C H A P T E R  7
 7.7  HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION: 
SOFTWARE CONSIDERATIONS 
  The typical industrial or methods engineer will not be developing programs but 
will, most likely, be using a variety of existing software. Therefore, that person 
should be aware of current software features or standards that allow best human 
interaction with the computer and minimize the number of errors that could oc-
cur from poor design. 
 Most current interactive computing software utilizes the  graphical user 
interface  (GUI), identified by four main elements: windows, icons, menus, 
and pointers (sometimes collectively termed WIMP).  Windows are the areas of 
the screen that behave as if they were independent screens in their own right. 
They typically contain text or graphics and can be moved around or resized. 
More than one window can be on a screen at once, allowing users to switch 
back and forth between various tasks or information sources. This leads to 
a potential problem of windows overlapping each other and obscuring vital 
information. Consequently, there needs to be a layout policy with windows 
being tiled, cascaded, or picture-in-a-picture (PIP). Usually windows have 
features that increase their usefulness, such as scrollbars that the user to move 
the contents of the window up and down or from left to right. This makes the 
window behave as if it were a real window onto a much larger world, where 
new information is brought into view by manipulating the scrollbars. There is 
usually a title bar attached to the top of the window, identifying it to the user, 
and there may be special boxes in the corners of the window to aid in resizing 
and closing. 
 Icons  are small or reduced representations of windows or other entities 
within the interface. By allowing icons, many windows can be available on the 
screen at the same time, ready to be expanded to a useful size by clicking on the 
icon with a pointer (typically a mouse). The icon saves space on the screen and 
serves as a reminder containing the dialog. Other useful entities represented by 
icons include a wastebasket for deleting unwanted files, programs, applications, 
or files accessible to the user. Icons can take many forms: they can be realistic 
representations of the objects they stand for or they can be highly stylized, but 
with appropriate reference to the entity (known as compatibility) so that users 
can easily interpret them. 
 The  pointer  is an important component of the WIMP interface, as the selec-
tion of an appropriate icon requires a quick and efficient means of directly ma-
nipulating it. Currently the mouse is the most common pointing device, although 
joysticks and trackballs can serve as useful alternatives. A touchscreen, with the 
finger serving as a pointer, can serve as a very quick alternative and even redun-
dant backup/safety measure in emergency situations. Different shapes of the cur-
sor are often used to distinguish different modes of the pointer, such as an arrow 
for simple pointing, cross-hairs for drawing lines, and a paintbrush for filling in 
outlines. Pointing cursors are essentially icons or images and thus should have a 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
315
hot spot that indicates the active pointing location. For an arrow, the tip is the ob-
vious hot spot. However, cutesy images (e.g., dogs and cats) should be avoided 
because they have no obvious hot spot. 
 Menus  present an ordered list of operations, services, or information that is 
available to the user. This implies that the names used for the commands in the 
menu should be meaningful and informative. The pointing device is used to indi-
cate the desired option, with possible or reasonable options highlighted and im-
possible or unreasonable actions dimmed. Selection often requires an additional 
action by the user, usually clicking a button on a mouse or touching the screen 
with the finger or a pointer. When the number of possible menu items increases 
beyond a reasonable limit (typically 7 to 10), the items should be grouped in 
separate windows with only the title or a label appearing on a menu bar. When 
the title is clicked, the underlying items pop up in a separate window known as 
a pull-down menu. To facilitate finding the desired item, it is important to group 
menu items by functionality or similarity. Within a given window or menu, the 
items should be ordered by importance and frequency of use. Opposite func-
tions, such as SAVE and DELETE, should be clearly kept apart to prevent ac-
cidental misselection. 
 Other menulike features include buttons, isolated picture-in-picture win-
dows within a display that can be selected by the user to invoke specific actions, 
toolbars, a collection of buttons or icons, and dialog boxes that pop up to bring 
important information to the user’s attention such as possible errors, problems, 
or emergencies. 
 Other principles in screen design include simple usability considerations: or-
derly, clean, clutter-free appearance, and expected information located where it 
should be consistently from screen to screen for similar functions or information. 
Eye-tracking studies indicate that the user’s eyes typically first move to the upper 
left center of the display and then move quickly in a clockwise direction. There-
fore, an obvious starting point should be located in the left upper corner of the 
screen, given the standard left-to-right and top-to-bottom reading pattern found 
in Western cultures. The composition of the display should be visually pleasing 
with balance, symmetry, regularity, predictability, proportion, and sequentiality. 
Density and grouping are also important features. 
 The appropriate use of uppercase and mixed-case fonts is important, with 
special symbols thrown in as necessary. Any text should be brief and concise, 
with familiar words and minimal jargon. Simple action terms expressed in a pos-
itive mode are much more effective than some negative statements or standard 
military jargon. Color is appropriate to draw attention but should be used spar-
ingly and limited to no more than eight colors. Note that a relatively high propor-
tion of the population suffers from deficiencies in color vision. 
 The user should always feel under control and have the ability to easily exit 
screens or modules and undo previous actions. Feedback should appear for any 
actions, and the progress should be indicated for any long transactions. Above 
all, the main consideration in any display should be simplicity. The simpler 

316 
C H A P T E R  7
the design, the quicker the response. Further information on software interface 
design can be found in Mayhew (1992), Galitz (1993), and Dix et al. (1998). As 
a convenience to the purchaser or user of software, the above desired features 
have been summarized in the Graphical User Interface Features Checklist (see 
Figure 7.17).    
o
N
s
e
Y
s
e
r
u
t
a
e
F
s
w
o
d
n
i
W
1.
Does the software use movable areas of the screen termed windows?
2.
Is there a layout policy for the windows (i.e., are they tiled, cascaded, or 
picture-in-picture)?
3.
Are there scrollbars to allow the contents of windows to be moved 
up or down?
4.
Are there meaningful titles identifying the windows?
5.
Are there special boxes in the corners of the windows to resize or 
close them?
o
N
s
e
Y
s
e
r
u
t
a
e
F
n
o
c
I
1.
Are reduced versions of frequently used windows, termed icons, utilized?
2.
Are the icons easily interpretable or realistic representations of the 
given feature?
o
N
s
e
Y
s
e
r
u
t
a
e
F
r
et
n
io
P
1.
Is a pointing device (mouse, joystick, touchscreen) utilized to 
move icons?
2.
Is the pointer or cursor easily identifiable with an obvious active area or 
hot spot?
o
N
s
e
Y
s
e
r
u
t
a
e
F
u
n
e
M
1.
Are meaningful menus (list of operations) with descriptive titles provided?
2.
Are menu items functionally grouped?
3.
Are menu items limited to a reasonable number (7 to 10)?
4.
Are buttons available for specific common actions?
5.
Are toolbars with a collection of buttons or icons used?
6.
Are dialog boxes used to notify the user of potential problems?
o
N
s
e
Y
s
n
oit
a
r
e
d
is
n
o
C
y
tili
b
a
s
U
r
e
h
t
O
1.
Is the screen design simple, orderly, and clutter-free?
2.
Are similar functions located consistently from screen to screen?
3.
Is the starting point for the screen action the upper left-hand corner?
4.
Does the screen action proceed left to right and top to bottom?
5.
Is any text brief and concise and does it use both uppercase and 
lowercase fonts?
6.
Is color used sparingly for attention (i.e., limited to eight colors)?
7.
Does the user have control over exiting screens and undoing actions?
Is feedback provided for any action?
 Figure 7.17   Graphi cal user interface features checklist. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
317
 SUMMARY 
 This chapter presented a conceptual model of the human as an information pro-
cessor, along with the capacities and limitations of such a system. Specific de-
tails were given for properly designing cognitive work so as not to overload the 
human with regard to information presented through auditory and visual dis-
plays, to information being stored in various memories, and to information being 
processed as part of the final decision-making and response-selection step. Also, 
because the computer is the common tool associated with information process-
ing, issues and design features with regard to the computer workstation were 
addressed. With manual work activities, the physical aspects of the workplace and 
tools, and the working environment having been addressed in Chapters 4, 5, and 6, 
the cognitive element is the final aspect of the human operator at work, and the 
analyst is now ready to implement the new method. 
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  How can the informational content of a task be quantified? 
 2.  What is redundancy? Give a good everyday example of redundancy. 
 3.  Explain the five stages of the human information processing model. 
 4.  How do information processing stages act to prevent an information overload of the 
human operator? 
 5.  What are the four possible outcomes explained by signal detection theory? 
 6.  Give an example of a task to which signal detection theory can be applied. What 
effect would a shift in the criterion have on task performance? 
 7.  What is the meaning of sensitivity in signal detection theory? What techniques can 
be used to increase sensitivity in an inspection task? 
 8.  What techniques can be used to improve memory? 
 9.  What are some of the biases that may negatively affect a person’s decision making? 
 10.  What is compatibility? Give two everyday examples of compatibility. 
 11.  Compare and contrast the different types of attention. 
 12.  What is the inverted-U curve in attention? 
 13.  Under what conditions are auditory displays best used? 
 14.  What is the difference between absolute and relative judgment? What is the limita-
tion in absolute judgment? 
 15.  What is the just noticeable difference and how does it relate to the level of the 
stimulus? 
 16.  Why is redundancy utilized for critical stimuli? 
 17.  Why is a fixed-scale, moving-pointer display preferred? 
 18.  What is the purpose of using patterns for a set of dials in a control room? 
 19.  What key features are used to increase attention in a visual display? 
 20.  What key features are used to increase attention in an auditory display? 

318 
C H A P T E R  7
 21.  What are the trade-offs between the different types of pointing devices? 
 22.  What are the main components of a good graphical user interface?  
 PROBLEMS  
 1.    a.  What is the amount of information in a set of eight signal lights if each light 
has an equal probability of occurrence?   
         b.  The probabilities of the lights are changed as shown below. Calculate the 
amount of information and the redundancy in this configuration. 
 Stimulus 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 Probability 
 0.08 
 0.25 
 0.12 
 0.08 
 0.08 
 0.05 
 0.12 
 0.22 
 2.  A large state university uses three-digit mail stops to code mail on campus. The 
initial step in sorting this mail is to sort according to the first digit (there are 10 
possible), which signifies a general campus zone. This step is accomplished by 
pushing a key with the corresponding number, which dumps the letter in an ap-
propriate bin. A typical mail sorter can sort 60 envelopes per minute, and it takes 
a minimum of 0.3 s just to push the key, with no cognitive processing involved.  
  a. 
 Assuming that the mail is distributed evenly over the campus zones, what is 
the mail sorter’s bandwidth? 
  b. 
 After a while the sorter notices that campus mail is distributed as follows. 
If the mail sorter used this information, how many pieces of mail could the 
sorter possibly handle in 1 min? 
 Zone 
 % Distribution 
 0 
 25 
 1 
 15 
 2 
 25 
 3–9 
 5 
 3.  Bob and Bill are two weather forecasters for AccurateWeather. Bob is a veteran 
forecaster, while Bill is fresh out of school. The following are the records (in num-
ber of predictions) on both forecasters’ ability to predict whether it will rain in the 
next 24 h. 
  a. 
 Which forecaster would you hire? Why? 
  b. 
 Who is a more conservative forecaster? Why? 
  c. 
 How would a conservative versus a risky forecaster be beneficial for different 
geographic regions? 
   
 True result 
   
 True result 
 Bob said: 
 Rain 
 No rain 
 Bill said: 
 Rain 
 No rain 
 Rain 
 268 
 56 
 Rain 
 100 
 138 
 No rain 
 320 
 5,318 
 No rain 
 21 
 349 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
319
 4.  The Dorben Electronics Co., manufacturer of resistors, screens potential quality 
control inspectors before they are hired. Dorben has developed the following pre-
employment test. Each potential employee is presented with the same set of 1,000 
resistors of which 500 are defective. The results for two applicants are as follows: 
(1) of the 500 good resistors, applicant 1 labeled 100 as defective, and of the 500 
bad resistors, applicant 1 labeled 200 as defective; (2) of the 500 good resistors, 
applicant 2 labeled 50 as defective, and of the 500 bad resistors, applicant 2 labeled 
300 as defective. 
  a. 
 Treat picking a defective resistor as defective as a hit. Fill in the following table. 
   
 Applicant 1 
 Applicant 2 
 Hit rate 
 ___________ 
 ___________ 
 False-alarm rate 
 ___________ 
 ___________ 
 Miss rate 
 ___________ 
 ___________ 
 Correct rejection rate 
 ___________ 
 ___________ 
 d ' 
 ___________ 
 ___________ 
  b. 
 Given that Dorben places a very large emphasis on quality control (i.e., they 
don’t wish to sell a defective product at any cost), which applicant would bet-
ter fulfill its goal? Why? 
  c. 
 Given that Dorben wishes to hire the most efficient inspector (i.e., most cor-
rect), which applicant would the company hire? 
 5.  The following performance data were collected under similar conditions on two 
inspectors removing defective products from the assembly line. Comment on the 
relative performance of the two inspectors. Which one is better at finding defects? 
Which would you hire if the cost of releasing a defective product were high? Which 
does an overall better job? (Hint, consider  d '.) 
   
   
 Case 1 
 Case 2 
 JRS 
 Hit rate 
 0.81 
 0.41 
   
 False alarm rate 
 0.21 
 0.15 
 ABD 
 Hit rate 
 0.84 
 0.55 
   
 False alarm rate 
 0.44 
 0.31 
 6.  The following response-time data (in msec) were obtained on Farmer Brown and 
his son Big John while operating a tractor using the right foot to control the clutch, 
brake, and accelerator. The foot is normally kept on the rest position. The location 
and sizes of the pedals are shown below, as well as some sample response times (in 
msec) for activating a given control from the rest position. 
  a. 
 What is the index of difficulty value for each pedal? 
  b. 
 Plot the response times. What law can be used to explain the relationship 
between response times and the difficulty in activating a given control? 
  c. 
 What is the simple reaction time for Farmer Brown? 
  d. 
 What is the bandwidth for Big John? 
  e. 
 Which farmer is the better tractor operator? Why? 

320 
C H A P T E R  7
 
2"
3"
3"
Clutch
2"
Brake
2"
2"
2"
Accelerator
Rest position
 
   
 Accelerator 
 Brake 
 Clutch 
 Farmer Brown 
 300 
 432 
 510 
 Big John 
 270 
 428 
 480 
 7.  Disregarding the digit 0, which keyboard is fastest for entering digits using one fin-
ger? Assume that the home position is digit 5. (Hint: Calculate the index of difficulty.) 
 
#A
#B
Scale .5 in
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
5
6
4
5
6
7
8
9
7
8
9
 
 8.  Pianists must often hit keys in very quick succession. The figure below displays a 
typical piano keyboard. 
  a. 
 Compare the index of difficulty for striking C, C#, F, and F#. Assume that one 
is starting from the A key and distances are measured center to center. 
  b. 
 If starting from the A key, it takes 200 ms to strike the C key and 500 ms to 
strike the F key, what is the bandwidth of a typical pianist? 
 
G#
A#
C#
D#
F#
A#
G#
1/2"
1"
Note:
A
B
C
D
1 Octave
E
F
G
A
B
 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
321
 9.  The knob with numbers and directional arrows on it shown below is used on refrig-
erators to control temperature. In which direction, clockwise or counterclockwise, 
would you turn the knob to make the refrigerator cooler? Why? How would you 
improve the control to avoid confusion? 
 
3
5
1
4
2
C
O
O
L
E
R
 
3
5
1
4
2
W
A
R
M
E
R
 
 
 10.  The dial shown below represents a pressure gage. The operational range is 50 psi. 
The operator must read the scale to the nearest 1 psi. Critically evaluate the dial, in-
dicating the poor design practices. Then redesign the dial, following recommended 
design practices. 
 
PSI
8
16
40
24
32
 
 11.  The scale shown below represents a scale used to measure weight. The maximum 
weight possible is 2 lb, and the scale must be read to the nearest 0.1 lb. Critically 
evaluate the dial, indicating the poor design practices. Then redesign the dial, fol-
lowing recommended design practices. 

322 
C H A P T E R  7
 
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.25
1.5
1.75
2
 
 12.  Design an EXIT sign which is to be displayed in a public auditorium. Explain the 
ergonomics principles that should be considered for this sign. 
 13.  Because of recent West Virginia flooding deaths in the New River Valley (large 
drainage into a narrow valley), you have been hired by FEMA to design a warning 
system that could be activated at the first sign of river levels rising very quickly. 
Assume that: (a) the warning must be quick, to allow sufficient time for the resi-
dents to leave their homes and run/drive to higher ground; (b) many individuals 
will be inside their homes or other buildings, especially if the flooding occurs at 
night; (c) many residents are older adults with poor hearing. Indicate which sensory 
modality you will focus on, and the key human factors principles involved with the 
appropriate/corresponding the design features; then provide a final recommended 
solution. 
 14.  The U.S. Air Force is trying to hire the best videogame players to run a Predator 
(drone aircraft) control system. They are trying to decide whether to hire Spec. 
John Doe or Sgt. Joe Brown. Their performances on a simulated button-pressing 
task (hand on Start and move to Button A or B as fast as possible) is as follows: 
 Interviewee 
 Button A (msec) 
 Button B (msec) 
 Spec. John Doe 
 450 
 800 
 Sgt. Joe Brown 
 500 
 950 
 
Start
B.5˝
A
1˝
2˝
2˝
 
 
  What is the amount of information processing required in pressing Button A and 
Button B (in bits)? What are the simple reaction times and bandwidths for each 
person? Who would be the best controller for the USAF? 
 15.  JB is the inspector for ACME, Inc. Is she a good inspector? Support your decision 
quantitatively. What is her d'? 
 
Good
20
1
30
19
Bad
Product
JB
Says
Good
Bad
 

 
 
C H A PT ER 7  Design of Cognitive Work  
323
 REFERENCES 
 ANSI (American National Standards Institute).  ANSI Standard for Human Factors 
Engineering of Visual Display Terminal Workstations . ANSI/HFS 100-1988. Santa 
Monica, CA: Human Factors Society, 1988. 
 Bishu, R. R., and C. G. Drury. “Information Processing in Assembly Tasks—A Case 
Study.”  Applied Ergonomics , 19 (1988), pp. 90–98. 
 Chapanis, A., and L. Lindenbaum. “A Reaction Time Study of Four Control-Display 
Linkages.”  Human Factors , 1 (1959), pp. 1–7. 
 Deatherage, B. H. “Auditory and Other Sensory Forms of Information Presentation.” 
In H. P. Van Cott and R. Kinkade (Eds.),  Human Engineering Guide to Equipment 
Design . Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1972. 
 Dix, A., J. Finlay, G. Abowd, and R. Beale.  Human-Computer Interaction. 2d ed. 
London: Prentice-Hall, 1998. 
 Drury, C. “Improving Inspection Performance.” In  Handbook of Industrial Engineering . 
Ed. G. Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1982. 
 Drury, C. G., and J. L. Addison. “An Industrial Study on the Effects of Feedback and 
Fault Density on Inspection Performance.”  Ergonomics , 16 (1973), pp. 159–169. 
 Eggemeier, F. T. “Properties of Workload Assessment Techniques.” In  Human Mental 
Workload . Eds. P. Hancock and N. Meshkati. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1988. 
 Fechner, G.  Elements of Psychophysics . New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1860. 
 Fitts, P. “The Information Capacity of the Human Motor System in Controlling the 
Amplitude of Movement.”  Journal of Experimental Psychology , 47 (1954), 
pp. 381–391. 
 Galitz, W. O.  User-Interface Screen Design . New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1993. 
 Giambra, L., and R. Quilter. “A Two-Term Exponential Description of the Time Course 
of Sustained Attention.”  Human Factors , 29 (1987), pp. 635–644. 
 Green, D., and J. Swets.  Signal Detection Theory and Psychophysics . Los Altos, CA: 
Peninsula Publishing, 1988. 
 Greenstein, J. S., and L. Y. Arnaut. “Input Devices.” In  Handbook of Human-Computer 
Interaction . Ed. M. Helander. Amsterdam: Elsevier/North-Holland, 1988. 
 Harpster, J .L., A. Freivalds, G. Shulman, and H. Leibowitz. “Visual Performance on 
CRT Screens and Hard-Copy Displays.”  Human Factors , 31 (1989), pp. 247–257. 
Helander, J. G., T. K. Landauer, and P. V. Prabhu, (Eds.). Handbook of Human- 
Computer Interaction, 2d ed. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1997.
 Hick, W. E. “On the Rate of Gain of Information.”  Quarterly Journal of Experimental 
Psychology , 4 (1952), pp. 11–26. 
 Human Factors Society.  American National Standard for Human Factors Engineering 
of Visual Display Terminal Workstations, ANSI/HFS 100-1988 . Santa Monica, CA: 
Human Factors Society, 1988. 
 Hyman, R. “Stimulus Information as a Determinant of Reaction Time.”  Journal of 
Experimental Psychology , 45 (1953), pp. 423–432. 
 Langolf, G., D. Chaffin, and J. Foulke. “An Investigation of Fitts’ Law Using a Wide 
Range of Movement Amplitudes.”  Journal of Motor Behavior , 8, no. 2 (June 1976), 
pp. 113–128. 

324 
C H A P T E R  7
 Mayhew, D. J.  Principles and Guidelines in Software User Interface Design . Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1992. 
 Miller, G. “The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on Our 
Capacity for Processing Information.”  Psychological Review , 63 (1956), pp. 81–97. 
 Sanders, M. S., and E. J. McCormick.  Human Factors in Engineering and Design . 
7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993. 
 Stroop, J. R. “Studies of Interference in Serial Verbal Reactions.”  Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology , 18 (1935), pp. 643–662. 
 Wickens, C.  Engineering Psychology and Human Performance . Columbus, OH: Merrill, 
1984. 
 Wickens, C. D. “Processing Resources in Attention.” In  Varieties of Attention . Eds. 
R. Parasuraman and R. Davies. New York: Academic Press, 1984. 
 Wickens, C. D., S. E. Gordon, and Y. Liu.  An Introduction to Human Factors Engineering . 
New York: Longman, 1997.  
 Yerkes, R. M., and J. D. Dodson. “The Relation of Strength of Stimulus to Rapidity of 
Habit Formation.”  Journal of Comparative Neurological Psychology , 18 (1908), 
pp. 459–482. 
 SELECTED SOFTWARE 
  DesignTools (available from the McGraw-Hill text website at www.mhhe.com/niebels-
freivalds). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002. 
 WEBSITES 
 Examples of bad ergonomic design —http://www.baddesigns.com/ 

 
325
 Workplace and 
Systems Safety 
 
325
 
  CHAPTER 
 
8  
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Accidents result from a sequence of events with multiple causes. 
 •  Examine accidents by using job safety analysis. 
 •  Detail the accident sequence or system failure by using the fault tree 
analysis. 
 •  Increase system reliability by adding backups and increasing component 
reliability. 
 •  Consider trade-offs of various corrective actions by using cost-benefit 
analysis. 
 •  Be familiar with OSHA safety requirements. 
 •  Control hazards by 
 
•  Eliminating them completely, if possible 
 
•  Limiting the energy levels involved 
 
•  Using isolation, barriers, and interlocks 
 
•  Designing fail-safe equipment and systems 
 
•  Minimizing failures through increased reliability, safety factors, and 
monitoring  
 W
 orkplace safety is an extension of the concept of providing a good, 
safe, comfortable working environment for the operator, as discussed 
in Chapter 7. The primary goal here is not to increase production 
through more efficient working conditions or improved worker morale, but spe-
cifically to decrease the number of accidents, which potentially lead to injuries 
and loss of property. Traditionally, of foremost concern to the employer have 
been compliance with existing state and federal safety regulations and avoid-
ance of a safety inspection by federal compliance officers (such as OSHA) with 
commensurate citations, fines, and penalties. However, more recently, the bigger 
driving force for implementing safety measures has been the escalating medical 

326 
C H A P T E R  8 
costs. Therefore, it only makes sense to implement a thorough safety program to 
reduce overall costs. Key issues of OSHA safety legislation and workers’ com-
pensation are introduced in this chapter, along with general theories for accident 
prevention and hazard control. However, details for correcting specific hazards 
are not addressed here, as there are numerous traditional textbooks on safety that 
cover these details (Asfahl, 2004; Banerjee, 2003; Goetsch, 2005; Hammer and 
Price, 2001; National Safety Council, 2000). These books will also address the 
setup and maintenance of safety management organizations and programs. 
 8.1  BASIC PHILOSOPHIES OF ACCIDENT 
CAUSATION 
 Accident prevention  is the tactical, sometimes relatively short-term, approach to 
controlling workers, materials, tools and equipment, and the workplace for the 
purpose of reducing or preventing the occurrence of accidents. This is in con-
trast to  safety management,  which is a relatively long-term strategic approach to 
the overall planning, education, and training for such activities. A good accident 
prevention process (see Figure 8.1) is an orderly approach very similar to the 
methods engineering program introduced in Chapter 2. 
 The first step in the accident prevention process is identification of the 
problem in a clear and logical form. Once the problem is identified, the safety  
engineer then needs to collect data and analyze them so as to understand the  
causation of the accident and identify possible remedies to prevent it or, if not 
completely prevent it, at least to reduce the effects or severity of the accident. 
In many cases, there may be several solutions, and the safety engineer will need 
to select one of these solutions. Then the remedy will have to be implemented 
and monitored to ensure that it is truly effective. If it is not effective, the engineer 
may need to repeat this process and attempt another, perhaps better, remedy. 
This monitoring effectively closes the feedback cycle and ensures a continuous  
improvement process for accident prevention. 
 DOMINO THEORY 
 In identifying the problem, it is important to understand some of the theories 
of accident causation and the sequence of steps in an accident itself. One such 
Identify Problem
Collect Data
Select Remedy
Implement Remedy
Monitor Results
Analyze Data
 Figure 8.1   Accident prevention process. 
 ( Adapted from: Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos, 1980.) 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
327
theory is the  domino theory,  developed by Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos (1980) 
based on a series of theorems developed in the 1920s which formed the indi-
vidual dominos (see Figure 8.2):   
 1.  Industrial injuries (or loss or damages) result from accidents, which involve 
contact with an energy source and the consequent release of that energy. 
 2.  Accidents are the result of immediate causes such as 
 
 a.  Unsafe acts by people 
 
 b.  Unsafe conditions in the workplace 
 3.  The immediate causes result from more basic causes: 
 
 a.  The unsafe acts from personal factors such as lack of knowledge, skill, 
or simply the lack of motivation or care 
 
 b.  The unsafe conditions due to job factors, such as inadequate work stan-
dards, wear and tear, poor working conditions, due to either the environ-
ment or lack of maintenance  
 4.  The basic causes result from an overall lack of control or proper management.  
 This domino (the first in the sequence) is essentially the lack of a properly imple-
mented or maintained safety program, which should include elements to prop-
erly identify and measure job activities, establish proper standards for those jobs, 
measure worker performance on those jobs, and correct worker performance as 
needed. 
 Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos (1980) further postulated that the injury is sim-
ply the natural consequence of the previous events having taken place, similar 
to dominos falling in a chain reaction. As a proactive preventive measure, one 
could simply remove one of the previous dominos, thereby preventing the rest 
from falling and stopping the sequence prior to injury. They also emphasized 
that it was important to try to remove a domino as far upstream as possible, that 
is, to implement the corrective procedure as early as possible, at the root causes. 
The implication is that if effort is put into only preventing the injury, similar ac-
cidents will still occur in the future with potential for property damage and other 
types of injuries. 
Lack of
Control 
Basic
Causes
Immediate
Causes
Injury
Accident
 Figure 8.2   The domino theory of an accident sequence. 
 ( Adapted from: Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos, 1980.) 

328 
C H A P T E R  8 
 As an adaptation of the domino theory, Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos (1980) 
also emphasized the concept of  multiple causation;  that is, behind each accident 
or injury there may be numerous contributing factors, causes, and conditions. 
These combine in a rather random fashion, such that it might be difficult to iden-
tify which, if any, of the factors was the major cause. Therefore, rather than try 
to find just one major cause, it would be best to try to identify and control as 
many causes as possible, so as to get the biggest overall effect on controlling or 
preventing the accident sequence. As an example, among unsafe acts caused by 
the human, which Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos (1980) claim amount to 88% of 
all accidents, there could be (1) horseplay, (2) operating equipment improperly, 
(3) intoxication or drugs, (4) purposefully negating safety devices, or (5) not 
stopping a machine before cleaning or removing a stuck piece. Among unsafe 
conditions, which amount to 10% of all accidents (the remaining 2% are unpre-
ventable “acts of God”), there could be (1) inadequate guards, (2) defective tools 
or equipment, (3) poorly designed machines or workplaces, (4) inadequate light-
ing, or (5) inadequate ventilation. 
 Figure 8.3 demonstrates the effects of various corrective actions taken along 
the domino sequence as well as multiple causation for a scenario in which sparks 
created by a grinder could ignite solvent fumes and cause an explosion and fire, 
with resulting burns to the operator. The injury is defined by burns to the opera-
tor. The accident leading to the injury is an explosion and fire. The sequence 
could be stopped by having the operator wear a fire-protective suit. The acci-
dent still happens, but a severe injury is avoided. Obviously, this is not the best 
1: Increase ventilation
2: Grinder material
Fire-protective suit
1: Use spark arrester          
2: Less concentrated fumes
Lack of 
Control
(1: Solvent
stored at 
grinder,
2: Poor identifi-
cation of work 
activities)
Basic
Causes
(1: Less 
volatile
solvent,
2: Grinder 
creates
sparks)
Immediate
Causes
(Sparks ignite 
fumes)
Accident
(Explosion/
fire)
Injury
(Burns)
1: Separate gas, grinder
2: Better inspection
 Figure 8.3   A domino sequence for a grinder spark igniting a fire. 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
329
control method, as fire still could occur with other consequences to property. 
Moving one domino backward, the fire was caused by sparks from the grinder 
igniting volatile fumes in the grinding area. The sequence could be stopped at 
this stage by using a spark arrester or decreasing the concentration of the fumes 
through better ventilation. This still is a risky control measure, as the spark ar-
rester may not stop all sparks, and the ventilator may fail or slow during power 
brownouts. Moving backward another domino, more basic causes could include 
a couple of different factors (note the multiple causation) such as having such a 
volatile solvent and the fact that the grinder wheel acting on the casting creates 
sparks. The sequence could be stopped here by having a less volatile solvent or 
by installing a softer grinding wheel made of a different material that would not 
create sparks. Again, these might not be the most effective control measures, as 
extremely hot weather could increase the vaporization of even a rather stable 
solvent and the grinding wheel could perhaps create sparks with harder castings. 
Furthermore, they can have other, less positive consequences, such as a softer 
grinding wheel being less effective in smoothing the rough edges on the castings. 
The final domino of lack of control has probably a multitude of factors: poor 
identification of work activities that allowed the use of solvent in the grinding 
area, storage of a solvent in a work area, poor safety inspections, lack of aware-
ness of the grinding operator, and so on. At this stage, simply separating the 
dangerous elements—that is, removing the solvent from the grinding area—is 
the simplest, cheapest, and most effective solution.  
 Although, strictly speaking, the Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos (1980) 
 accident-ratio triangle , which establishes the foundation for a major injury (see 
Figure 8.4a), is not an accident causation model, it emphasizes the necessity of 
moving backward in the accident progression sequence. For each major injury, 
most likely there were at least 29 minor injuries and 300 no-injury accidents, 
with untold hundreds or thousands of unsafe acts leading up to the base of the 
triangle. Therefore, rather than just reactively focus on the major injury or even 
the minor injuries, it makes sense for the safety engineer to look proactively, 
further back at the no-injury accidents and unsafe acts leading up to those acci-
dents, as a field of opportunities to reduce potential injury and property damage 
costs and have a much more significant and effective total loss control program. 
This accident-ratio triangle was later modified by Bird and Germain (1985) to 
include property damage and revised numbers (see Figure 8.4b). However, the 
basic philosophy remained the same. 
 BEHAVIOR-BASED SAFETY MODELS 
 More recent accident causation models have focused on behavioral aspects of 
the human operator. The basis for this approach lies in early crisis research 
of Hill (1949), followed by the quantification of these crises or more modest 
situational factors into  life change units  (LCUs) by Holmes and Rahe (1967) 
(see Table 8.1). The basic premise of the theory is that situational factors tax a 
person’s capacity to cope with stress in the workplace (or life in general), leaving 

330 
C H A P T E R  8 
the person more likely to suffer an accident as the amount of stress increases. 
It was found that 37 percent of individuals who accumulated between 150 and 
199 LCUs in 2 years had illnesses. As the LCUs increased from 200 to 299, 
51 percent had illnesses, and for those exceeding 300 LCUs, 79 percent had ill-
nesses. This theory may help explain apparently accident-prone individuals and 
the need for having stressed workers avoid difficult or dangerous tasks.  
 Another behavioral accident causation model is the  motivation-reward- 
satisfaction model  presented by Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos (1980). It expands 
on Skinnerian concepts (Skinner, 1947) of  positive reinforcement  to achieve cer-
tain goals. In terms of safety, worker performance is dependent on the worker’s 
motivation as well as the worker’s ability to perform. In the main positive feed-
back cycle (see Figure 8.5), the better the worker performs, the better the worker 
is rewarded; the more the worker is satisfied, the greater the worker’s motivation 
to perform better. This positive feedback could be applied both to safety perfor-
mance and to worker productivity (which is the basis for wage incentive systems 
discussed in Chapter 17). 
 The most current and popular variation of behavior-based safety training 
is the  ABC model . At the center of the model is behavior (the B part) of the 
worker, or what the worker does as part of the accident sequence. The C part is 
the consequence of the worker’s behavior, or the events taking place after the 
behavior, leading to a potential accident and injury. The first A parts are anteced-
ents (sometimes termed  activators ) or events that take place before the behavior 
occurs. Typically, this will start out as a negative process, in which the safety 
engineer tries to correct unpleasant consequences and determine what behaviors 
and -antecedents lead to these consequences. For example, an operator takes a 
shortcut across a moving conveyor—a behavior. The antecedent may be break 
Major injury
Minor injuries
Accidents
Major injury
Minor injuries
Property damage
Near misses
 Figure 8.4   (a) Heinrich accident-ratio triangle, (b) Bird and Germain (1985) accident 
ratio triangle. 
 ( Adapted from: Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos, 1980.) 
(a)
(b)

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
331
 Table 8.1   Table of Life Change Units 
 Rank 
 Life Event 
 Mean Value 
  1 
 Death of spouse 
 100 
  2 
 Divorce 
 73 
  3 
 Marital separation 
  65 
  4 
 Jail term 
  63 
  5 
 Death of close family member 
  63 
  6 
 Personal injury or illness 
  53 
  7 
 Marriage 
  50 
  8 
 Fired at work 
  47 
 9 
 Marital reconciliation 
 45 
 10 
 Retirement 
  45 
 11 
 Changes in family member’s health 
  44 
 12 
 Pregnancy 
  40 
 13 
 Sex difficulties 
  39 
 14 
 Gain of new family member 
  39 
 15 
 Business readjustment 
  39 
 16 
 Change in financial state 
  38 
 17 
 Death of close friend 
  37 
 18 
 Change to different line of work 
  36 
 19 
 Change in number of arguments with spouse 
  35 
 20 
 Mortgage over critical amount 
  31 
 21 
 Foreclosure of mortgage or loan 
  30 
 22 
 Change in work responsibilities 
 29 
 23 
 Son or daughter leaving home 
 29 
 24 
 Trouble with in-laws 
 29 
 25 
 Outstanding personal achievement 
 28 
 26 
 Wife beginning or stopping work 
 26 
 27 
 Begin or end school 
 26 
 28 
 Change in living conditions 
 25 
 29 
 Revision of personal habits 
 24 
 30 
 Trouble with boss 
 23 
 31 
 Change in work-hours, conditions 
 20 
 32 
 Change in residence 
 20 
 33 
 Change in schools 
 20 
 34 
 Change in recreation 
 19 
 35 
 Change in church activities 
 19 
 36 
 Change in social activities 
 18 
 37 
 Mortgage or loan under critical amount 
 17 
 38 
 Change in sleeping habits 
 16 
 39 
 Change in number of family get-togethers 
 15 
 40 
 Change in eating habits 
 15 
 41 
 Vacation 
 13 
 42 
 Christmas 
 12 
 43 
 Minor violations of the law 
 11 
 Source: Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos, 1980. 

332 
C H A P T E R  8 
time as the operator tries to beat the lunchtime rush to get into the cafeteria line 
first. The consequences are typically positive, with the operator having more 
time to eat lunch, but in this particular instance are negative, with an injury as the 
operator slipped on the conveyor. One approach in changing the behavior would 
be to post warnings on the dangers of jumping across the conveyor and to issue 
fines for violations. However, this a negative approach that would require major 
enforcement action. That is, changing antecedents can get behavior started, but 
in many cases are not sufficient to maintain that behavior, especially if the ap-
proach focuses on the negative. A better approach would be to use the motivation-
reward-satisfaction model and focus on positive consequences. This could be 
achieved by staggering lunch breaks for employees so that all would enjoy a 
relaxing, unrushed lunch break. It is also important to realize that the most effec-
tive activators are correlated with the most effective consequences—those that 
are positive, immediate, and certain.   
 Generally, behavior-based approaches are quite popular and effective as an 
 accident prevention method, especially considering that the large majority (up to 
88 percent) of accidents are due to unsafe acts and behaviors on the part of work-
ers. Unfortunately this approach focuses solely on people and not on physical haz-
ards. So there should also be mechanisms and procedures in place for ensuring 
SELF
Personality
Achievement
JOB CLIMATE
Style - Climate - Relations
Boss
Staff
Management
THE JOB ITSELF
Any fun?
JOB MOTIVATIONAL FACTORS
Can he or she achieve?
Promotion?
A sense of responsibility
PEER GROUP(S)
Norms
Pressures
UNION
Norms
Pressures
SELECTION
Can he or she do it?
TRAINING
Does he or she know how?
MOTIVATION
ABILITY
PERFORMANCE
REWARD
SATISFACTION
Boss
Peer
Union
Self
 Figure 8.5   The motivation-reward-satisfaction model. 
 Source: Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos, 1980. 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
333
safe workplace conditions. Finally, one should be careful that such programs do 
not drift away from the original purpose of promoting safety. From personal ex-
perience, a manufacturing company had implemented a positive reinforcement 
program of providing safety incentives for production workers: all workers in a de-
partment achieving a particular safety goal, for example, a month without a record-
able injury, were provided a free lunch in the cafeteria. If this record was extended 
to six months, they received a steak dinner at a popular restaurant; and if they 
reached one year, they received a $200 gift certificate. Of course, if there was a 
recordable injury, they had to start over from scratch. As result, once the stakes got 
high, injured workers were strongly encouraged by fellow workers not to report the 
injury to the plant nurse, circumventing the original intent!  
 8.2 ACCIDENT PREVENTION PROCESS 
 IDENTIFYING THE PROBLEM 
 In identifying the problem, the same quantitative exploratory tools (such as 
 Pareto analysis, fish diagram, Gantt chart, job-worksite analysis guide) discussed 
in Chapter 2 for methods engineering can also be used in the first step in the 
accident prevention process. Another tool that is effective in identifying whether 
one department is significantly more hazardous than another is the  chi-square 
analysis . This analysis is based on the chi-square goodness of fit test between a 
sample and a population distribution in the form of categorical data in a contin-
gency table. Practically, this is expressed as a difference between  m  observed and 
expected cell counts of injuries (or accidents or dollars): 
 X2  i
m
 (Ei  Oi)2 / Ei
 where  E i  expected value   H i   O T  / H T 
               O i  observed value 
              O T  total of observed values 
              H i  hours worked in area i 
              H T  total of hours worked 
               m  number of areas compared 
 If the resulting χ 2  is greater than X 2 α, m1, the critical χ 2  at an error level of 
α and   with  m  1 degrees of freedom, then there is a significant difference be-
tween the expected and observed values in injuries. Example 8.1 demonstrates 
an application for safety, and more details on the statistical procedure can be 
found in Devore (2003).   
 COLLECT AND ANALYZE DATA—
JOB SAFETY ANALYSIS 
 The second and third steps of the accident prevention process are the collec-
tion and analysis of data. The most common and basic tool for this is  job safety 

334 
C H A P T E R  8 
Chi-Square Analysis of Injury Data 
 EXAMPLE 8.1  
 Dorben Co. has three main production departments: processing, assembly, and packing/ 
shipping. It is concerned with the apparent high number of injuries in processing 
and would like to know if this is a significant deviation from the rest of the plant. 
Chi-square analysis comparing the number of injuries in 2006 (shown in Table 8.2) 
with an expected number based on the number of exposure hours is the appropriate 
way to study the problem. 
 The expected number of injuries in processing is found from 
 E i   H i   O T /  H T  900,000  362,900,00  11.2 
 Table 8.2   Observed and Expected Injuries 
 Department  
 Injuries  O i  
 Exposure (h)  
 Expected Injuries  E i  
 Processing 
 22 
 900,000 
 11.2 
 Assembly 
 10 
 1,400,000 
 17.4 
 Packing/Shipping 
 4 
 600,000 
 7.4 
 Total 
 36 
 2,900,000 
 36 
 The expected numbers of injuries for the other departments are found similarly. 
Note that the total number of expected injuries should add to the total number of 
observed injuries, 36. 
 X2  i
m
(Ei  Oi)2Ei  (11.2  22)211.2  (7.4  4)27.4
                               (17.4  10)217.4  15.1
 The resultant value of 15.1 is greater than  X 2 0.05,31  5.9, found in Table A3–4 
(Appendix 3). Therefore, the number of injuries in at least one department deviates 
significantly from the expected value based purely on exposure hours. This depart-
ment, processing, with 22 injuries instead of the expected 11.2, should then be stud-
ied in further detail to find the cause of this increase in injuries. Similarly, Packing/
Shipping shows significantly fewer injuries and may be studied for best practices. 
analysis  (JSA), sometimes also termed  job hazard analysis  or  methods safety 
analysis . In a JSA, the safety engineer (1) breaks down a job into its component 
elements in a sequential order, (2) examines each element critically for a poten-
tial hazard or the possibility of an accident occurrence, and (3) identifies ways of 
improving the safety of this element. While the safety engineer is performing a 
JSA, she or he should focus on four major factors: 
 1.  Worker: the operator, the supervisor, or any other individual that may be 
associated with this element 
 2.  Method: the work procedures being utilized in this particular process 
 3.  Machine: the equipment and tools being utilized 
 4.  Material: the raw material, parts, components, fasteners, etc., that are being 
used or assembled in the process. 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
335
 Thus, any improvements could involve better training of or personal protective 
equipment for the operator, a new method, safer equipment and tools, and differ-
ent and/or better materials and components.  
 As an example, consider the process of machining a relatively large (40-lb) 
coupling, shown in Figure 8.6, with its associated JSA in Figure 8.7. The pro-
cess involves (1) picking up the unfinished part from a crate, (2) setting it in the 
machine fixture, (3) tightening the fixture with a wrench, (4) blowing out ma-
chining chips (loosening the fixture and removing the coupling—not shown, but 
equivalent to elements 3 and 2, respectively), (5) smoothing any rough edges with 
a hand grinder, and (6) placing the finished part in a packing carton. Potential 
hazards and appropriate controls corresponding to each element are shown in 
Figure 8.7. Common problems include high compressive forces while one is 
retrieving and placing the coupling in crates or packing cartons. These forces could 
be reduced by tilting the boxes for easier entry. Another problem is shoulder flex-
ion with large torques while one is placing and/or removing the coupling into the 
machining fixture and tightening or loosening the fixture. These could be allevi-
ated by lowering the fixture and having the stand closer to the fixture so that the 
elbows are bent closer to the optimum 90° angle. Personal protective equipment 
such as a dust mask would help with dust and gel gloves with hand vibration. 
 JSAs provide several useful features that cross over into methods engineer-
ing. They are a simple, quick, and objective means of mapping all the relevant 
1
4
5
6
2
3
 Figure 8.6   Steps in the machining of a coupling. 
 Courtesy of Andris Freivalds. 

336 
C H A P T E R  8 
 Figure 8.7   Job safety analysis. 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
337
details. They can compare existing and proposed methods with potential effects 
not just on safety but also on production, which is a very useful application in 
terms of selling increased safety to management. Although quite qualitative, the 
JSA approach can be made more quantitative by adding probabilities, which 
leads into the very quantitative fault tree analysis, discussed later in Section 8.5.   
 SELECT A REMEDY—RISK ANALYSIS 
AND DECISION MAKING 
 Once JSAs have been completed and a variety of solutions have been suggested, 
the safety engineer will need to choose one for implementation. This can be done 
by using a variety of decision-making tools in the fourth step of the accident pre-
vention process, select a remedy (see Figure 8.1). Most of these tools are just as ap-
propriate for selecting a new method for improved productivity and are presented 
in Chapter 9. However, one of these tools,  risk analysis,  is more suitable for safety 
because it calculates the potential risk for an accident or injury and the reduction 
of risk due to modifications. According to Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos (1980), 
the analysis is based on the premise that the risk for injury or loss cannot be com-
pletely eliminated; that only a reduction in risk or potential loss can be achieved. 
Furthermore, any modifications should consider maximum cost effectiveness. 
 According to the method (Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos, 1980), the poten-
tial loss increases with (1) increased likelihood or probability that the hazard-
ous event will occur, (2) increased exposure to the hazardous conditions, and 
(3) increased possible consequences of the hazardous event. Numerical values 
are assigned to each of these three factors (see Table 8.2), and then an overall 
risk score is computed as a product of these factors (see Table 8.3). Note that 
 Table 8.3   Risk Analysis Factor Values 
 Likelihood 
 Values 
 Exposure 
 Values 
 Expected 
 10 
 Continuous 
 10 
 Possible 
 6 
 Daily 
 6 
 Unusual 
 3 
 Weekly 
 3 
 Remote 
 1 
 Monthly 
 2 
 ~ Conceivable 
 0.5 
 Few/Year 
 1 
 ~ Impossible 
 0.1 
 Yearly 
 0.5 
 Possible Consequences 
 Value 
 Catastrophe (many fatalities, $10 8 damage) 
 100 
 Disaster (few fatalities, $10 7 damage) 
 40 
 Very serious (fatality?, $10 6 damage) 
 15 
 Serious (serious injuries, $10 5 damage) 
 7 
 Important (injuries, $10 4 damage) 
 3 
 Noticeable (first aid, $10 3 damage) 
 1 
 Adapted from: Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos (1980). 

338 
C H A P T E R  8 
these numerical values are rather arbitrary, and consequently the final risk score 
is also rather arbitrary. This, however, doesn’t negate the method; it still serves to 
provide good relative comparisons between different safety features or controls.   
 As an example of risk analysis, consider an event that is conceivable but 
rather unlikely with a value of 0.5, with a weekly exposure and value of 3, and 
very serious consequences with a value of 15. The resulting product yields a risk 
score of 22.5 ( 0.5  3  15), which corresponds to a rather low risk, with 
possible attention needed, but not urgent attention. See Table 8.4. This same re-
sult can be achieved by using Figure 8.8 and a tie line to connect the two halves 
of the chart. The cost-effectiveness of two different remedies for the above risky 
event can be compared by using Figure 8.9. Remedy A reduces the risk by 75 
percent but costs $50,000, whereas remedy B reduces the risk by only 50 per-
cent, but also costs only $500. In terms of cost-effectiveness, remedy A is of 
doubtful merit and may have difficulty receiving financial support, while remedy 
B may well be justified because of its lower cost.  
 After an appropriate cost-effective remedy has been selected, the remedy must 
be implemented in the fifth step of the accident prevention method. This should 
occur at several levels. The safety engineer with appropriate technicians will install 
the appropriate safety devices or equipment. However, for a completely successful 
implementation, the individual operators and supervisors must also buy into the 
new approach. If they don’t follow the correct procedures with the new equipment, 
any potential safety benefits may be lost. As an aside, this also presents an op-
portunity to discuss the  3 Es  approach: engineering, education, and enforcement. 
The best remedy almost always is an engineering redesign. This will ensure strict 
safety and doesn’t rely strictly on operator compliance. The next-best remedy is 
education; however, this does rely on operator compliance and may not always 
succeed, especially if workers do not follow the correct procedures. Lastly, there 
is enforcement of strict rules and use of personal protective equipment. This pre-
sumes worker noncompliance, requires strict checkups, instills resentment with 
negative reinforcement, and should be used as a last resort.  
 MONITORING AND ACCIDENT STATISTICS 
 The sixth and final step in the accident prevention process is monitoring of 
the situation to evaluate the effectiveness of the new method. This provides 
feedback on the process and closes the loop by restarting the cycle in case the 
 Table 8.4   Risk Analysis and Cost-Effectiveness 
 Risk Situation 
 Value 
 Very high risk, discontinue operations 
 400 
 High risk, immediate correction 
 200–400 
 Substantial risk, correction needed 
 70–200 
 Possible risk, attention needed 
 20–70 
 Risk?, perhaps acceptable 
  20 
 Source: Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos (1980). 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
339
 Figure 8.8   Risk analysis calculation. 
 Source: Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos, 1980. 
A
B
 Figure 8.9   Risk analysis and cost-effectiveness. 
 Source: Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos, 1980. 

340 
C H A P T E R  8 
situation is not improving. Typically, numerical data provide a solid benchmark 
for monitoring any changes. These could be insurance costs, medical costs, or 
simply numbers of injuries and/or accidents. However, any of these numbers 
should be normalized to the worker exposure hours so that the numbers can 
be compared across locations and industries. Furthermore, OSHA recommends 
expressing injury statistics as  incidence rate  (IR) per 100 full-time employees 
per year: 
 IR  200,000   IH 
 where  I  number of injuries in given time period 
              H  employee hours worked in same time period 
 For OSHA record-keeping purposes, the injuries should be OSHA-recordable, 
or more than simple first-aid injuries. However, research has shown that there 
are considerable similarities between minor and major injuries (Laughery and 
Vaubel, 1993). Similarly, the  severity rate  (SR) monitors the number of lost-time 
(LT) days: 
 SR  200,000  LT/H 
 In addition to simply recording and monitoring the incidence rates as they 
change from month to month, the safety engineer should apply statistical con-
trol charting principles and look for long-term trends. The control chart (see 
Figure 8.10) is based on a normal distribution of the data and establishment of a 
lower control limit (LCL) and a upper control limit (UCL) as defined by 
 LCL  x–  ns
LCL  x–  ns 
 where 
  x–   sample mean 
                 s  sample standard deviation 
                 n  level of control limits  
 Figure 8.10   Statistical control limits. 
 Source: Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos, 1980. 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
341
 For example, for the case in which we would expect 100(1  α) percent of 
the data to fall between the upper and lower control limits,  n  would simply be 
the standard normal variable  z α /2 . For α  0.05,  n  becomes 1.96. However, for 
many situations a higher lever of control is needed, with  n  3 or even  n  6 
(the Motorola six-sigma control level). For tracking accidents or injuries, the 
control chart is rotated sideways, and monthly data are plotted on the chart (see 
Figure 8.11). Obviously the lower control limit is of less concern (other than a 
nice pat on the back and examining for best practices) than the upper control 
limit. Should several consecutive months fall above the upper control limit, this 
should be a red flag or signal to the safety engineer that there is a problem and a 
serious effort should be put into finding the cause. In addition to the  red flagging, 
an alert safety engineer should have noticed the upward trend beginning several 
months previously and started a control action earlier. This trend analysis could 
be easily performed using a moving linear regression over varying multiple-
month periods. 
 8.3 PROBABILITY METHODS 
  The accident causation models discussed previously, especially the domino the-
ory, implied a very deterministic response. That is far from the case. Grinding 
without safety glasses or walking under an unsupported roof in a coal mine at a 
given moment does not ensure an automatic accident and injury. However, there 
is a chance that an accident will occur, and the likelihood of that happening can 
be defined with a numeric probability. 
 Probability is based on Boolean logic and algebra. Any event is defined by 
a binary approach; that is, at any given moment, there are only two states—the 
event either exists and is true (T), or it does not exist and is false (F). There are 
three operators that define interactions between events: 
 1.  AND, the intersection between two events, with symbol ∩ or • (the dot 
sometimes is omitted) 
UCL
UCL
 Figure 8.11   Red flagging with control chart. 
 Adapted from: Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos, 1980. 

342 
C H A P T E R  8 
 2.  OR, the union between events, with symbol ∪ or   
 3.  NOT, the negation of an event, with the symbol   .  
 The interaction of two events  X  and  Y,  using these operators, follows a specific 
pattern termed the  truth tables  (see Table 8.5). Interactions between more than 
two events result in more complicated expressions, which necessitate an ordered 
processing to evaluate the resultant overall probability of the final accident or 
injury. The specific order or precedence that must be followed is as follows: 
( ),   , •, . Also, certain groupings of events tend to appear repeatedly, so that if 
one recognizes these patterns, simplification rules can be applied to quicken the 
evaluation procedure. The most common rules are given in Table 8.6. 
 The  probability of an event P ( X ) is defined as the number of times event  X 
occurs out of the total number of occurrences: 
 P ( X )  # X /#Total 
 and  P ( X ) must necessarily lie between 0 and 1. The probability of ORed events 
 X ∪  Y , is defined as 
 P ( X   Y )   P ( X )   P ( Y )   P ( XY ) 
 if the events are not mutually exclusive, and as 
 P ( X   Y )   P ( X )   P ( Y ) 
 Table 8.6   Boolean Algebra Simplifications 
 • Basic laws: 
 X ·  X   X 
 X  X–  0 
 X   X   X 
 X  –X   0 
 X T   X 
 X F  0 
 • Distributive laws: 
 XY   X Z   X ( Y   Z ) 
 ( X   Y )( X   Z )   X   YZ 
 XY   X –Y   X 
 X   Y –X    X   Y 
 X   XY   X 
 X ( X   Y )   X 
 X( X–    Y )   XY 
 ( X  Y ) ( X  –Y  )   X 
 Table 8.5   Boolean Truth Tables 
 X 
 Y 
 X ·  Y 
 X    Y 
  (Not) 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 X 
X– 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 F 
 F 
   
   

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
343
 if the events are mutually exclusive. Two events are defined as  mutually exclu-
sive  if the two events do not intersect, that is,  X ∩ Y  0. Thus necessarily  X and 
 X– are mutually exclusive. For the union of more than two events, an alternate 
expression, based on reverse logic, that is much easier to evaluate is more typi-
cally used: 
 P ( X   Y   Z )  1  [1   P ( X )][1   P ( Y )][1   P ( Z )] 
 The probability of ANDed events is defined as 
 
 
  P ( XY )   P ( X ) P ( Y )  
(2)
 if the two events are independent, and as 
 
 
  P ( XY )   P ( X ) P ( Y / X )   P ( Y ) P ( X / Y ) 
(3)
 if the two events are not independent. Two events are defined as  independent if 
the occurrence of one event doesn’t affect the occurrence of another event. Math-
ematically this is determined by equating Equations (2) and (3) and removing 
 P ( X ) from both sides, yielding 
 
 
  P ( Y )   P ( Y / X ) 
(4)
 if the two events are independent. Rearrangement of Equation (3) also yields a 
commonly used expression that is termed  Bayes’ rule: 
 
 
  P ( Y / X )   P ( Y ) P ( X / Y )/ P ( X ) 
(5)
 Note that two events cannot be both mutually exclusive and independent, 
because being mutually exclusive necessarily defines as the one event defining 
the other one, that is, being dependent. Example 8.2 demonstrates these various 
calculations as well as independent and nonindependent events. More details 
on basic probability can be found in Brown (1976).   
 8.4 RELIABILITY 
 The term  reliability  defines the probability of the success of a system, which 
necessarily must depend on the reliability or the success of its components. 
A system could be either a physical product with physical components or an 
operational procedure with a sequence of steps or suboperations that must be 
completed correctly for the procedure to succeed. These components or steps 
can be arranged in combinations using two different basic relationships: series 
and parallel arrangements. In a  series  arrangement (Figure 8.12a), every compo-
nent must succeed for the total system  T  to succeed. This can be expressed as the 
intersection of all components 
 T   A ∩  B ∩  C   ABC 

344 
C H A P T E R  8 
 Independent and Not Independent Events 
 EXAMPLE 8.2 
 Consider the number of occurrences of  A  being true (or 1) out of the total number of 
occurrences in Table 8.7a. This determines the probability of  A : 
 P ( X )  #X/#Total  7/10  0.7 
 Note that the probability of A– is the number of occurrences of being false (or 0) out 
of the total number of occurrences: 
 P (X–)  #X–/#Total  3/10  0.3 
 Also (X–) can be found from 
 P (X–)  1   P ( X )  1  0.7  0.3 
 Similarly the probability of  Y is 
 P ( Y )  # Y /#Total  4/10  0.4 
 The probability of  A ∩  B  is the number of occurrences of both  A  and  B  being true out 
of the total number of occurrences: 
 P ( XY )  # XY /#Total  3/10  0.3 
 Table 8.7   Independent or Not Independent Events 
 (a)  X and  Y are not independent  
 (b)  X and  Y are independent  
 X  
 X  
 Y  
 0  
 1  
 Total  
 Y  
 0  
 1  
 Total  
 0 
 2 
 4 
 6 
 0 
 2 
 3 
 5 
 1 
 1 
 3 
 4 
 1 
 4 
 6 
 10 
 Total 
 3 
 7 
 10 
 Total 
 6 
 9 
 15 
 The conditional probability of  X  given that  Y  has occurred (or is true) is defined as the 
number of occurrences of  X from the  Y  1 row: 
 P ( X / Y )  # X /#Total  Y  3/4  0.75 
 Similarly, 
 P ( X / Y )  # Y /#Total  X  3/7  0.43 
 Note also Bayes’ rule: 
 P ( Y / X )   P ( Y ) P ( X / Y )/ P ( X )  0.4  0.75/0.7  0.43   P ( Y / X ) 
 Finally, for two events to be independent, Equation (4) must be true. But for Table 8.7a, 
we found that  P ( Y )  0.4 while  P ( Y / X )  0.43. Therefore events  X  and  Y  are not inde-
pendent. However in Table 8.7b, we find 
 P ( X )  # X /#Total  9/15  0.6 
 P ( X/Y )  # X /#Total  Y  6/10  0.6 
 Since both expressions are equal, events  X  and  Y  are independent. The same equiva-
lence is found for  P ( Y ) and  P ( Y / X ) : 
 P ( Y )  # Y /#Total  10/15  0.67 
 P ( Y/X )  # Y /#Total  X   6/9  0.67 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
345
 which if independent (in most cases), yields a probability of 
 P ( T )   P ( A ) P ( B ) P ( C ) 
 or if not independent, yields 
 P ( T )   P ( A ) P ( B / A ) P ( C / AB ) 
 In a  parallel  arrangement, the total system succeeds if any one component 
succeeds. This can be expressed as an union of the component 
 T   A ∪  B ∪  C   A   B   C 
  which if mutually exclusive (typically), yields a probability of 
 P ( T )  1  [1   P ( A )][1   P ( B )][1   P ( C )] 
 Two examples (Examples 8.3 and 8.4) demonstrate the calculation of system 
probabilities.   
 Examples 8.2 and 8.3 indicate one of the basic principles for increasing sys-
tem reliability—increasing redundancy by adding components in parallel to the 
original component, so that two or more components or operations are providing 
the same function. Note that if two or more operations or components are re-
quired to prevent an accident, then those elements are in series and do not provide 
redundancy. System reliability can also be increased by increasing the reliability 
of the individual components. If the reliability of each engine in  Example 8.3 
is increased to 0.99, the total system reliability increases to 0.9998 as opposed 
to the original 0.9801. Note, however, that there is a trade-off—increasing the 
T = A B C
C
B
A
A
B
C
T = A + B + C
(a) Series system
(b) Parallel system
 Figure 8.12   Series and parallel components. 

346 
C H A P T E R  8 
Reliability of a Two-Stage Amplifier 
 EXAMPLE 8.3  
 Consider two prototypes of a two-stage amplifier with backup components. Proto-
type 1 (see Figure 8.13) has a backup for the full amplifier, while prototype 2 has a 
backup for each stage. Which has the better system reliability, given that all the com-
ponents are independent but identical with the same reliability of 0.9? 
 The best approach is to write all possible paths for system success. For prototype 
1 there are two possible paths, either  AB  or  CD . Written as an expression, system 
success is 
 T   AB   CD 
 Expressed as a probability, this expression becomes 
 P ( T )   P ( AB )   P ( CD )   P ( AB ) P ( CD ) 
 where 
 P ( AB )   P ( A ) P ( B )  0.9  0.9  0.81   P ( CD ) 
 
T = AB + CD
#1
A
C
D
B
T = AB + AD + CD + CB
#2
A
C
D
B
 Figure 8.13  Two prototypes of a two-stage amplifier 
 The overall system reliability becomes 
 P ( T )  0.81  0.81  0.81  0.81  0.964 
 For prototype 2 there are four possible paths:  AB  or  AD  or  CB  or  CD . Written as an 
expression, system success is 
 T   AB   AD   CB   CD 
 which simplifies to 
 T  ( A   C )( B   D ) 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
347
Reliability of a Four-Engine Airplane 
 EXAMPLE 8.4  
 Consider an airplane with four independent but identical engines (see Figure 8.14). 
The airplane can obviously fly with all four engines working, with any three engines 
working, and also with two engines working, as long as there is one engine working 
on each side of the plane; that is, two engines working on one side would cause the 
plane to be so unbalanced as to crash. What is the overall reliability of the airplane 
given that the reliability of each engine is 0.9? 
 Writing out all the possible engine scenarios results in these expressions: 
 4 engines ⇒  ABCD 
 3 engines ⇒  ABC   ABD   BCD   ACD 
 2 engines ⇒  AC   AD   BC   BD 
 T   ABCD   ABC   ABD   BCD   ACD   AC   AD   BC   BD 
 The expression must be simplified. Note that the three-engine combinations are 
roughly redundant to the two-engine combinations: 
 AC   ABC   AC (1   B )   AC 
 Similarly, the four-engine combination is redundant to any of the two-engine combi-
nations, resulting in a final expression for system reliability of 
 T   AC   AD   BC   BD 
 This expression further simplifies to 
 T  ( A   B )( C   D ) 
 The probability for each expression in parentheses is 
 P ( A   B )   P ( A )   P ( B ) –  P ( A ) P ( B )  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.99 
 and the total system probability becomes 
 P ( T )  0.99  0.99  0.9801 
 [Note that complicated probability expressions will have to be simplified; otherwise 
there may be an incorrect calculation. There are two basic  distributive laws that 
form the basis for all simplification rules. These are: 
 ( X   Y )( X   Z )   X   YZ 
 XY   XZ   X ( Y   Z ) 
 The others in Table 8.6 can be derived by substituting X– for  X ,  Y , or  Z above.] 
 Now substituting values for the variables yields 
 P ( A   C )   P ( A )   P ( C )   P ( A ) P ( C )  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.99 
 The overall system reliability becomes 
 P ( T )  0.99  0.99  0.9801 
 Therefore prototype 2 is the better amplifier with higher system reliability. 

348 
C H A P T E R  8 
reliabilities of individual components or increasing the number of parallel com-
ponents will necessarily increase the cost of the system. At some point, the in-
creasing costs may not merit the marginal increase in overall system reliability. 
This decision point may vary considerably, depending on whether the system of 
interest is a simple consumer product as opposed to commercial airlines. 
 As the Boolean expressions for system reliability become more complex, 
the simplification process can become correspondingly more complex and te-
dious. At that point, the use of  Karnaugh maps  will provide a definitive solution 
to the problem. A Boolean algebra map is developed so as to represent the spa-
tial representation of all possible events. Each event represents either a row or 
a column in a gridlike matrix. At its simplest, with two events, the matrix is 
2  2, with both conditions (either true or false) of one event  Y represented as 
rows, while both conditions of another event  X  are represented as columns (see 
Figure 8.15a). Then the expression  X   Y  is represented as three cells of the matrix 
(see Figure 8.15b), the expression  XY  is represented as one cell of the matrix (see 
Figure 8.15c), and X– is a vertical column under 0 (see Figure 8.15d). For more 
Both X and
Y occur 
Y occurs, but 
X does not
1 ( Y ) 
X occurs, but 
Y does not 
Neither X 
nor Y occurs
0 ( Y )
1 ( X )
0 ( X )
X
_
_
_
(a) Basic event mapping
Y
XY
Y
1
X
0
1
0
(b) T = X + Y
X
Y
XY
1
0
1
0
(c) T = XY
X
Y
(d) T = X
Y    X
0
0
1
1
 Figure 8.15   Basics of Karnaugh mapping. 
 
T = ABCD + ABC + ABD + BCD + ACD + AC + AD + BC + BD
X
X
X
X
A
B
C
D
 
 Figure 8.14  Reliability of a four-engine airplane 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
349
events, the matrix will increase in size; for example, with 4 variables, the matrix 
will have 16 cells, and for 6 variables the matrix will have 36 cells. Beyond six 
variables, it will become difficult to handle the matrix, and a computerized ap-
proach will become more practical. Also, with more complicated expressions, the 
expression must be written in the form of a simple sum of products. 
 Each term or product is then marked appropriately on the matrix. Undoubt-
edly there will be overlapping areas, or cells that are marked several times. 
A simplified expression is then written of nonoverlapping groups of cells, each 
having a unique characterization of those cells. If done correctly, each group is 
mutually exclusive, and the addition of the probabilities for each group is quite 
straightforward. Note that it is better to identify the largest possible areas so that 
fewer calculations are needed later. These areas will consist of a certain number 
of cells as determined by powers of 2, that is, 1, 2, 4, 8, etc. This is best demon-
strated by Example 8.4, the previous airplane example but using Karnaugh maps. 
More details on Karnaugh maps can be found in Brown (1976).    
Reliability of a Four-Engine Airplane Using Karnaugh Maps 
 EXAMPLE 8.5  
 Consider the same airplane of Example 8.4 with four independent but identical 
engines and the event expression 
 T   ABCD 1   ABC 2   ABD 3   CDB 4   CDA 5   AD 6   BC 7   AC 8   BD 9 
 Each combination of events can be delineated on a Karnaugh map (see Figure 8.16a) 
as indicated by the appropriate numbers. Many of the events or areas are overlapping, 
and only the nonoverlapping areas should be evaluated for the probability. Four such 
nonoverlapping areas are shown in Figure 8.16b, although there could be many other 
possible combinations of nonoverlapping areas. In this case the largest possible com-
bination of areas was selected: one of four cells, two two-cell combinations, and one 
remaining cell. The resulting expression is 
 T   AD 1   ACD– 2  A– BC 3  A– B C– D 4 
 with a value of 
 P ( T )  (0.9)(0.9)  (0.9)(0.9)(0.1)  (0.1)(0.9)(0.9) 
 (0.1)(0.9)(0.1)(0.9)  0.9801 
 Obviously the nine cells could be individually identified and calculated, but that 
would entail a much greater effort. As noted previously, larger areas will be charac-
terized by powers of 2, that is, 1, 2, 4, 8, etc. To simplify the calculations even further, 
a reverse logic can also be used to define the nonmarked areas. This value is then sub-
tracted from 1 to obtain the true probability of the event of interest (see Figure 8.16c). 
 T–  AB
— 1   BCD
—  2   ABCD 3 
 This results in a probability of 
 P ( T )  1   P ( T–)  1  (0.1)(0.1)  (0.9)(0.1)(0.1) 
 (0.9)(0.1)(0.1)(0.9)  0.9801 
 and the same value is calculated in the direct method. 

350 
C H A P T E R  8 
 
8
1278
10
568
2345
6789
11
6
369
7
479
9
10
11
01
01
00
00
CD   AB
(a)
2
1
3
4
10
11
01
00
10
11
01
00
CD   AB
(b)
10
11
01
3
2
1
00
10
11
01
00
CD   AB
(c)
 
 Figure 8.16  Reliability of a four-engine airplane using Karnaugh maps 
 8.5 FAULT TREE ANALYSIS 
  Another approach to examining accident sequences or system failures uses 
 fault tree analysis . This is a probabilistic deductive process using a graphical 
model of parallel and sequential combinations of events, or faults, leading to 
the overall undesired event, for example, an accident. It was developed by Bell 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
351
Laboratories in the early 1960s to assist the U.S. Air Force in examining missile 
failures and later used by NASA to ensure overall system safety for the manned 
space program. These events can be of various types and identified by differ-
ent symbols (see Figure 8.17). In general, there are two main categories:  fault 
events,  identified by rectangles, that are to be expanded further, starting from the 
top head event; and  basic events,  identified by circles, at the bottom of the fault 
tree that cannot be developed any further. Formally, there can also be house-
shaped symbols indicating that “normal” events can be expected to occur and 
diamond-shaped symbols indicating inconsequential events or events with insuf-
ficient data for further analysis. The events are linked with gates that involve the 
same Boolean logic described previously (see Figure 8.17 for the symbols). An 
 AND gate  requires that all the inputs occur for the output to occur. An  OR gate 
requires at least one of the inputs to occur for the output to occur. Obviously 
this implies that several of or all the inputs could occur as well, but only one is 
needed. It also helps to define the input events to the OR gate to cover all pos-
sible ways that the output event could occur. There could also be some situations 
in which the gates may have to be modified by labels to be modified by labels 
indicating certain situations, such as a conditional AND: event in which  A must 
occur before event  B  occurs or an exclusive OR: event in which either event  A or 
event  B  must occur for the output to occur but not both events. The first case can 
be alleviated by defining the AND gate such that the second event is conditioned 
on the first happening, and a third event is conditioned on the first two happen-
ing. The second case is a special case of mutually exclusive events and must be 
handled as such. 
Fault event that has to be evaluated further
Basic event at base level with no further development
Normal event that is expected to occur
Undeveloped event that is inconsequential or does not
have sufficient information for further development  
AND gate that requires all inputs to occur before output
can occur
OR gate that requires any input to occur for output to occur
 Figure 8.17   Fault tree symbols. 

352 
C H A P T E R  8 
Fault Tree Analysis of a Fire 
 EXAMPLE 8.6  
 The grinding shop of Dorben Co. has had several relatively small fires that were quickly 
put out. However, the company is concerned that a fire could get out of control and burn 
down the whole plant. One way to analyze the problem is to use the fault tree approach 
with a major fire as the head event. There are three requirements (well, actually four, 
but neglect oxygen which is ubiquitous): (1) combustible material with a probability of 
0.8, (2) an ignition source, and (3) the probability of a small fire getting out of control 
with a value of 0.1. There could be several ignition sources: (1) an operator smoking 
in spite of No Smoking signs, (2) sparks from the grinding wheel, and (3) an electrical 
short in the grinder. The company estimates the probabilities of these events as 0.01, 
0.05, and 0.02, respectively. All the events in the first set are required and thus are con-
nected with an AND gate. Note that the second event is conditional on the first, and the 
third event is conditional on the first two events. For the ignition set of events, any one 
input is sufficient for ignition to occur, and thus the events are connected with an OR 
gate. The complete fault tree is shown in Figure 8.18a. 
 An alternate approach would be to draw a sequence of events, similar to compo-
nents for a product or operations for a system, as shown in Figure 8.18b. The three main 
events—combustible, ignition, getting out of control—are drawn in series, as the path 
must go through all three to have the plant burn down. The ignition sources can be con-
sidered in parallel, as the path has only to go through any one of them to have ignition. 
Plant burns down
Ignition
Combustibles
Fire
out of
control
Smoking
A
B
C
B3
B1
B2
Short
Sparks
 Figure 8.18  (a) Fault tree for a fire in the grinding shop. (b) Component approach for a fire in the 
grinding shop. 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
353
Combustibles
Fire out of
control
Smoking
Sparks
Short
A
B
B1
B2
B3
C
 The expression for the final head event or system success (in this case, the 
plant burning down shouldn’t really be considered a success, but that is the general 
term used for a system) is 
 T   ABC 
 where  B   B 1   B 2   B 3. The probabilities are calculated as 
 P ( B )  1  [1   P ( B 1)][1   P ( B 2)][1   P ( B 3)] 
   1  (1 0.01)(1  0.05)(1  0.02)  0.0783 
 P ( T )   P ( A ) P ( B ) P ( C )  (0.8)(0.0783)(0.1)  0.0063 
 Thus, there is approximately a 0.6 percent chance of the plant burning down. 
 In spite of the relatively low probability, the company would still like to re-
duce this probability. Sparks are a natural part of grinding, and shorts are un-
predictable occurrences. So neither is a likely avenue for control measures. Two 
more reasonable approaches would be to enforce the No Smoking ban with the 
severe punishment of immediate firing. However, even if the probability of smok-
ing went down to zero, the resulting overall probability is still 0.0055, with only 
a 12 percent reduction. That may not be worth the antagonization of workers by 
the severe penalties. In contrast, removing the unnecessary combustibles, perhaps 
oily rags, from the grinding area may significantly reduce the probability from 
0.8 to 0.1. It would not be completely reduced to zero, because there still may be 
wooden shipping cartons for the castings. In this case, the resulting overall prob-
ability goes to 0.00078, which almost a factor-of-10 reduction and is probably 
more cost-effective. 
Figure 8.18  (continued)
 The development of a fault tree starts with identification of all the events 
that are deemed undesirable for normal operation. These events must be sep-
arated into mutually exclusive groups according to similar causes, with one 
head event for each group. For example, in a grinding operation, there could 
be several mutually exclusive fault events leading to different head events or 
accidents: getting a chip in the eye, having sparks from the grinder start a fire, 

354 
C H A P T E R  8 
the operator losing control of the casting while pushing on it and having his 
or her fingers scraped by the grinder, etc. Next, the relationships between the 
various causal events and head event are established through a combination of 
the AND and OR gates. This is continued until basic fault events are reached, 
which cannot be developed any further. Then probabilities are assigned to each 
of the basic events, and an overall probability of the head event is calculated 
using AND and OR expressions. In the final step, appropriate controls are at-
tempted along with estimated reductions in probabilities, leading to a decrease 
in the probability of the final head event. A simple fault tree analysis is shown 
in Example 8.6. Obviously, the cost of these controls or modifications has to be 
considered, and this will be examined through cost-benefit analysis discussed 
in the next section.  
 COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS 
 As mentioned in the previous section, a fault tree is very useful in studying a 
safety problem and understanding the relative contributions of various causes to 
the head event. However, for this approach to be ultimately effective, the cost of 
any controls or modifications to the system or workplace must also be consid-
ered, and this provides the basis for  cost-benefit analysis . The cost part is easy 
to understand; it is simply the money being spent to retrofit an old machine, to 
purchase a new machine or a safety device, or to train workers in a safer method, 
whether it is in a lump sum or prorated over some useful life. The benefit part is 
a bit more difficult to understand because it is typically a reduction in accident 
costs or lost production costs or money saved in reduced injuries and medical 
costs over a period of time. Consider, for example, the medical costs associated 
with injuries from a 200-ton press collected over a  5-year period (see Table 8.8). 
The severity levels are based on workers’ compensation categories (see Section 8.6), 
and the costs and probabilities are derived from the company’s medical records. 
The severities range from relative minor skin laceration treatable with first aid 
to permanent partial disabilities, such as the amputation of a hand, to permanent 
total disabilities from a major crushing injury or even death. The total expected 
costs for an injury using the press can be calculated by the summation of the 
relative expected costs for each level of injury severity based on the product of 
the respective costs and the proportion for each type of injury. This resultant 
total expected cost of approximately $10,000 multiplied by the probability of 
the head event yields a measure of  criticality  associated with using a press. Note 
that this criticality is usually expressed for a given exposure time (for example, 
200,000 worker-hours) or certain amount of production. The benefit part of the 
cost-benefit analysis will then be a reduction in this criticality, obtained from 
either reducing the probability of the head event or decreasing the severity and 
resulting costs of any injuries. Example 8.7 demonstrates the use of cost-benefit 
analysis to find an appropriate redesign of a coffee mill to prevent finger injuries. 
More details on fault tree and cost-benefit analyses can be found in Bahr (1997), 
Brown (1976), Cox (1998), and Ericson (2005).    

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
355
 Table 8.8   Example Expected Costs for an Injury from a Press 
 Severity 
 Cost ($) 
 Probability 
 Expected Cost ($) 
 First aid 
 100 
 0.515 
 51.50 
 Temporary total disability 
 1,000 
 0.450 
 450.00 
 Permanent partial disability 
 50,000 
 0.040 
 2,000.00 
 Permanent total disability 
 500,000 
 0.015 
 7,500.00 
   
   
   
 10,001.50 
 Fault Tree and Cost-Benefit Analyses 
of Coffee Mill Finger Lacerations 
 Example 8.7 
 With the rise in popularity of specialty coffees, many consumers have purchased cof-
fee mills to grind their own coffee beans for fresher coffee. As a result, there has been 
an increase in finger lacerations from the rotor blade due to inadvertent activation of 
the coffee mill with the fingers still in the mill. Possible contributing factors to such 
an accident and injury are shown in the fault tree of Figure 8.19 with estimated prob-
abilities for each event. This assumes a simple coffee mill with a switch to activate 
the rotor on the side of the mill. Working downward from the head event, the rotor 
must be in motion and the finger must be in the path of the rotor, indicating an AND 
gate. The reasons for the finger being in the path of the rotor, whether to remove the 
ground coffee or to clean the container, could be varied and for this example are not 
developed further. For the rotor to be in motion, the power must be connected and 
the circuit closed, again indicating an AND gate. The circuit could be closed either 
normally or abnormally, indicating an OR gate. Note that for either scenario, there 
is the presumption that the finger is in the container and in the path of the rotor. The 
normal closure could also include possibilities that the switch failed in a closed posi-
tion or that the switch was assembled in a closed position, again indicating an OR 
gate. The abnormal closure could be due to a variety of conditions—broken wire, 
incorrect wiring, conductive debris, or water in the container—only one of which has 
to occur for the circuit to short and close, thus indicating an OR gate. The calculated 
probabilities are as follows: 
 P (C1)  1  (1  0.001)(1  0.01)(1  0.001)(1  0.01)  0.022 
 P (C2)  1  (1  0.001)(1 –  0.1)(1  0.001)  0.102 
       B   C 1   C 2 
  P ( B )  1  (0.022)(1  0.02)  0.122 
  P(A)   P ( B )(1)  0.122 
  P ( H )   P ( A )(0.2)  0.122(0.2)  0.024  
 Assuming an expected $200 cost for finger injuries ranging from simple laceration to 
complete amputation (developed similarly as in Table 8.8), the resulting criticality  C 
of a coffee mill finger injury is then 
 C   P ( H )($200)  (0.024)(200)  $4.80 
 Now comes the interesting part in examining alternative redesigns and safety 
measures in order to reduce the likelihood of incurring a finger injury. An obvious 

356 
C H A P T E R  8 
Finger in path
of rotor (0.2) 
Rotor in motion (A)
Broken wire
(0.001) 
Wired
incorrectly
(0.001)
Circuit  closed (B)
Abnormal closure (C1)
Switch closed (C2) 
Power
connected (1) 
Rotor cuts finger (H)
Moisture
across
path
(0.01)
Conductive
debris
(0.01)
Switch
closed
normally
(0.1) 
Switch 
assembled
closed
(0.001)
Fails in
closed
position
(0.001) 
 Figure 8.19  Fault tree for a finger injury using a coffee mill 
redesign found on most coffee mills is an interlock switch in the cover of the cof-
fee mill (interlocks are discussed in greater detail in Section 8.8). The basic prem-
ise is that the finger cannot be in the bowl and the switch activated simultaneously. 
This would reduce the probability of “switch closed normally” from 0.1 to 0.0. 
However, the other failure modes could still occur, and the probability of the head 
event would not go completely to 0.0; instead, it reduces to 0.0048 with a new 
criticality of $0.96. 
 The resulting decrease in criticalities from $4.80 to $0.96 is a benefit of $3.84. 
However, there is an increased associated cost of approximately $1.00 per coffee 
mill to insert a switch in the cover of the coffee mill versus the simpler switch in 
the side of the mill. Therefore, the cost-benefit ( C/B ) ratio is 
 C / B  $1.00/$3.84  0.26 
 An alternative, cheaper approach could be to apply a warning sticker to the 
side of the coffee mill stating, “Always Disconnect Power Before Removing Cof-
fee or Cleaning Bowl” at a minimal cost of $0.10 per mill. The probability of a 
“power connected” event would be reduced, perhaps to 0.3, but not to 0.0, because 
consumers are likely to forget or ignore the warning. The resulting probability of 
the head event is reduced to 0.0072, and the criticality to $1.44. The new benefit is 
$3.36, yielding a cost-benefit ratio of 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
357
 8.6  SAFETY LEGISLATION AND WORKERS’ 
COMPENSATION 
 BASICS AND TERMINOLOGY 
 In the United States, safety legislation, as well as the rest of the legal sys-
tem, is based on a combination of  common law, statute law,  and  administrative 
law . Common law was derived from unwritten customs and typical usage in 
England, but adjusted and interpreted by the courts through judicial decisions. 
Statute law is written law enacted by legislators and enforced by the executive 
branch. Administrative law is established by the executive branch or govern-
ment agencies. However, because common law came first, many of our legal 
terms and principles are derived from that. Thus, the ancient terms of  mas-
ter, servant,  and  stranger  eventually came to represent an  employer,  an  em-
ployee,  and a  guest  or  visitor,  respectively.  Liability  is the obligation to provide 
compensation for damages or injury, while  strict liability  is a higher level of 
liability, in which the plaintiff need not prove negligence or fault. The  plaintiff 
is the person, typically injured, originating a suit in court. The  defendant is 
the entity defending the suit, typically an employer or the manufacturer of a 
product.  Negligence  is the failure to exercise a reasonable amount of care in 
preventing injury. Higher forms of negligence include  gross negligence, with 
failure to show the slightest care, and  negligence per se,  with no proof needed. 
Any resulting awards to the plaintiff fall into two categories:  compensatory 
damages  for medical costs, lost wages, and other direct losses on the part of 
the plaintiff; and  punitive damages  in the form of additional monetary amounts 
specifically to punish the defendant. 
 Under the English common law system, and later under statute law, the 
employer did have some legal obligations to provide a safe workplace, protect 
employees against injury, and pay for injuries and damages that could result if 
the employer failed to fulfill those obligations. These obligations also extended 
to customers and the general public, for example, visitors to the workplace. 
However, in practice, these legal obligations didn’t amount to much, as the bur-
den of proof fell on the worker to prove in court that the employer’s negligence 
was the sole cause of his or her injury. Several factors made it especially difficult 
 C / B  $0.10/$3.36  0.03 
 This approach, on the surface, appears to be much more cost-effective. However, 
the probability of “power connected” is probably greatly underpredicted, as most 
consumers will forget to unplug the power before entering the bowl. Therefore, 
this would not be the preferred solution. Note that if an additional $1.00 were ap-
plied to each mill for additional quality control to catch all the wiring and switch 
errors before shipping, reducing each of those probabilities to 0.0, the result-
ing cost-benefit ratio at 1.25 is much larger than for installation of the interlock 
switch in the cover. 

358 
C H A P T E R  8 
for the employee to prove his or her case. First, the doctrine of  privity required 
a direct relationship, as in the form of a contract, between the two contesting 
parties. Therefore, any workers not having a direct contract with the employer 
would likely have little success in court. Second, the  assumption of risk concept 
implied that a worker who was aware of the hazards of the job, but continued 
working there, assumed the risks and could not recover damages in case of in-
jury even though it occurred through no fault of her or his own. Third, fellow 
employee negligence or contributory negligence by the worker himself or herself 
severely limited the worker’s case. Finally, there was always the fear of loss of 
jobs for the worker or fellow employees, which generally restricted legal ac-
tions against employers. In addition, any legal action took many years, delaying 
the compensation needed for medical expenses, and resulted in inconsistent and 
relatively insufficient compensation, with much of the money going to the law-
yers involved. As a result demands arose for workers’ compensation legislation 
that would correct these inequities and force employers to take corrective action 
to safeguard their employees. 
 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION 
 In the United States, the first workers’ compensation laws were enacted in 1908 
for federal employees and eventually were enacted in all 50 states and the U.S. 
territories. These all operate on the general principle of recompensing work-
ers for medical expenses and lost wages without establishing fault. Typically 
they will have set amounts to be paid for given conditions and even occupa-
tions, which could vary among the states. Approximately 80 percent of the U.S. 
workforce is covered, with some notable exceptions: independent agricultural 
workers, domestic workers, some charity organizations, railroad and maritime 
workers, and smaller independent contractors. To ensure that worker benefits do 
not end if the employer were to go bankrupt, companies are required to obtain 
insurance. This could be on an exclusive basis through state funds set up for this 
purpose or on a competitive basis through private insurance companies. In some 
cases, very large, financially secure companies or entities can be self-insured. 
 There are three main requirements for a worker to claim compensation: 
 1.  The injury must have resulted from an accident. 
 2.  The injury must have arisen out of employment. 
 3.  The injury must have occurred during the course of employment. 
 Injuries not considered accidents include those caused by intoxication, those that 
are self-inflicted, or those that arise out of a heated argument. Also, anything 
that could have occurred normally, such as a heart attack, would not be covered, 
unless the work were considered so stressful as to be contributing to the heart 
attack. Injuries arising out of employment apply to work assigned by a supervi-
sor or work normally expected of that employee. A typical exception that would 
negate compensation is doing “government work” or using company equipment 
for personal use. Injuries during the course of employment apply to normal work 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
359
hours and not to commuting time to and from work, unless the company pro-
vides transportation. 
 Workers’ compensation is typically broken down into four categories of  
disability: (1) temporary partial, (2) temporary total, (3) permanent partial, and 
(4) permanent total.  Temporary partial disabilities  are ones in which the worker 
receives a minor injury and full recovery is expected. The worker can still per-
form most duties but may suffer some lost time and/or wages.  Temporary total 
disabilities  are ones in which the worker is incapable of performing any work for 
a limited time, but full recovery is expected. This category accounts for the ma-
jority of workers’ compensation cases.  Permanent partial disabilities  are ones in 
which the worker will not fully recover from injuries but can still perform some 
work. This category accounts for the majority of workers’ compensation costs 
and is further -subdivided into schedule and nonschedule injuries. A  schedule in-
jury  receives a specific payment for a specified time according to a schedule, as 
shown in Table 8.9. Note that there may be considerable differences in payments 
among states, as shown between federal and Pennsylvania workers. A  nonsched-
ule injury  is of less specific nature, such as disfigurement, with payments pro-
rated to a schedule injury.  Permanent total disabilities  are sufficiently serious 
that they will prevent the employee from ever working in regular employment. 
Again, there may be considerable differences in what constitutes total disability, 
but in many states this is accorded by the loss of sight in both eyes or the loss of 
both arms or both legs. In approximately one-half of the states, the compensation 
is for the duration of the disability or the injured worker’s lifetime. In the other 
half, the duration is limited to 500 weeks. The compensation is some percent-
age of wages, the majority being two-thirds. In case of the worker’s death, ben-
efits are paid to the surviving spouse for life or until remarriage and to children 
until the age of 18 or until the maximum period of payments (for example, 
500 weeks).  
 There may be some other important conditions depending on the states. In 
some cases, the companies may be able to require the injured worker to see a 
 Table 8.9   Lost-Limb Award Schedule (in weeks) for a Permanent Partial Disability 
 Amputation or 100% Loss of Use 
 Federal 
 Pennsylvania 
 Arm 
 312 
 410 
 Leg 
 288 
 410 
 Hand 
 244 
 325 
 Foot 
 205 
 250 
 Eye 
 160 
 275 
 Thumb 
 75 
 100 
 First finger (little) 
 46    (15) 
 50   (28) 
 Great toe (other) 
 38    (16) 
 40   (16) 
 Hearing—one ear (both) 
 52 (200) 
 60 (260) 

360 
C H A P T E R  8 
company physician and to perform suitable lighter-duty employment. If the worker 
refuses, workers’ compensation benefits can be terminated. In most cases, though, 
workers’ compensation cases are settled quickly and amicably, and the worker 
receives a direct settlement. In some situations, the case can be contested, with 
the employee and employer settling either directly or through the workers’ com-
pensation legal system. From the worker’s standpoint, it is generally a positive 
 trade-off—she or he accepts a guaranteed lesser amount of compensation in place 
of the uncertain option to sue the employer for negligence. However, the worker 
does not give up the rights to sue a third party, such as the manufacturer of faulty 
equipment or defective tools, the architect or contractor of faulty construction, or 
even an inspection agency that certified the safety of a building or machines. 
 From the company’s perspective, it is important to try to decrease work-
ers’ compensation costs as much as possible. This can be done through a vari-
ety of means. First and foremost, implement a safety program so as to reduce 
workplace hazards and to train operators in the proper procedures. Second, and 
almost equally important, implement a proper medical management program. 
This means hiring a good occupational nurse and selecting a knowledgeable lo-
cal physician to visit the plant and understand the various jobs. This will aid 
in proper diagnoses and the assignment of workers to light-duty jobs. It is also 
very important to get the injured employees back to work as quickly as possible, 
even if only on a light-duty job. Third, review the employment classification of 
each employee based on the job she or he performs. It makes no sense to have 
a misclassification result in increased premiums: for example, an office worker 
misclassified as a grinder operator. Fourth, conduct a thorough payroll audit. 
Overtime is charged as straight time on workers’ compensation. Therefore, dou-
ble overtime wages of $20 an hour would greatly inflate the company’s costs 
compared to straight $10 an hour charges. Fifth, compare self-insurance and 
various group insurance programs for lowest cost, and use a deductible. Sixth, 
check your  mod ratio  frequently. This is the ratio of actual losses to losses ex-
pected of similar employers, with 1.00 being average. By implementing a good 
safety program and reducing accidents, injuries, and consequently workers’ 
compensation claims, the mod ratio will drop significantly. A mod ratio of 0.85 
means a 15 percent savings on premiums. Through proper management, work-
ers’ compensation costs can be controlled. 
 8.7  OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH 
ADMINISTRATION (OSHA) 
 OSHA ACT 
 Congress passed the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 “to assure so 
far as possible every working man and woman in the Nation safe and healthful 
working conditions and to preserve our human resources.” Under the act, the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration was created to 
 1.  Encourage employers and employees to reduce workplace hazards and to 
implement new, or improve existing, safety and health programs. 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
361
 2.  Establish “separate but dependent responsibilities and rights” for em-
ployers and employees for the achievement of better safety and health 
conditions.  
 3.  Maintain a reporting and record-keeping system to monitor job-related 
injuries and illnesses. 
 4.  Develop mandatory job safety and health standards, and enforce them 
effectively. 
 5.  Provide for the development, analysis, evaluation, and approval of state 
occupational safety and health programs.  
 Because the act can intimately affect the design of the workplace, methods 
analysts should be knowledgeable regarding the details of this act. The  general-
duty clause  of the act states that each employer “must furnish a place of employ-
ment which is free from recognized hazards that cause or are likely to cause 
death or serious physical harm to employees.” Furthermore, the act declares that 
it is the employers’ responsibility to become familiar with standards applicable 
to their establishments and to ensure that employees have and use personal pro-
tective gear and equipment for safety. 
 OSHA standards fall into four categories: general industry, maritime, 
construction, and agriculture. All OSHA standards are published in the Fed-
eral Register, which is available in most public libraries, in a separate book 
of regulations (OSHA, 1997), and on the Web (http://www.osha.gov/). OSHA 
can begin standards-setting procedures on its own initiative or on the basis of 
petitions from the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS), the Na-
tional Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), state and local 
governments, nationally recognized standards-producing organizations such as 
the ASME, and employer or labor representatives. Of these groups, NIOSH, an 
agency of HHS, is quite active in making recommendations for standards. It 
conducts research on various safety and health problems and provides consid-
erable technical assistance to OSHA. Especially important are the investiga-
tion of toxic substances by NIOSH and its development of criteria for the use 
of such substances in the workplace. 
 OSHA also provides free on-site consultation services for employers in all 
50 states. This service is available on request, and priority is given to smaller 
businesses, which are generally less able to afford private-sector consultations. 
These consultants help employers identify hazardous conditions and determine 
corrective measures. A listing of such consultants is found on OSHA’s Web page 
(http://www.osha.gov/dcsp/smallbusiness/consult_directory.html). 
 The act also requires employers of 11 or more employees to maintain 
records of occupational injuries and illnesses on the  OSHA 300 log . An  oc-
cupational  injury  is defined as “any injury such as a cut, fracture, sprain or 
amputation which results from a work-related accident or from exposure in-
volving a single incident in the work environment.” An  occupational illness 
is “any abnormal condition or disorder, other than one resulting from an oc-
cupational injury, caused by exposure to environmental factors associated with 
employment.” Occupational illnesses include acute and chronic illnesses that 

362 
C H A P T E R  8 
may be caused by inhalation, absorption, ingestion, or direct contact with toxic 
substances or harmful agents. Specifically, they must be recorded if the result 
is death, loss of one or more workdays, restriction in motion or ability to do 
the work that had been done, loss of consciousness, transfer to another job, or 
medical treatment other than first aid.  
 WORKPLACE INSPECTIONS 
 To enforce its standards, OSHA is authorized to conduct workplace inspections. 
Consequently, every establishment covered by the act is subject to inspection by 
OSHA compliance safety and health officers. The act states that “upon present-
ing appropriate credentials to the owner, operator, or agent in charge,” an OSHA 
compliance officer is authorized to enter without delay any factory or workplace 
to inspect all pertinent conditions, equipment, and materials therein and to ques-
tion the employer, operator, or employees. 
 OSHA inspections, with few exceptions, are undertaken without advance 
notice. In fact, alerting an employer in advance of an OSHA inspection can 
bring a fine of up to $1,000 and/or a 6-month jail term. Special circumstances 
under which OSHA may give notice of inspection to an employer include 
those where  
 1.  Imminently dangerous situations exist that require correction as soon as 
possible. 
 2.  Inspections necessitate special preparation or must take place after regular 
business hours. 
 3.  Prior notice ensures that the employer and employee representatives or 
other personnel will be present. 
 4.  The OSHA area director determines that advance notice would produce a 
more thorough or more effective inspection. 
 Upon inspection, if an imminently dangerous situation is found, the compli-
ance officer asks the employer to abate the hazard voluntarily and to remove en-
dangered employees from exposure. Notice of the imminent danger must also be 
posted. Before the OSHA inspector leaves the workplace, he or she will advise 
all affected employees of the hazard. 
 At the time of the inspection, the employer is asked to select an employer 
representative to accompany the compliance officer during the inspection. An 
authorized employee representative is also given the opportunity to attend the 
opening conference and to accompany the compliance officer during the inspec-
tion. In those plants with a union, the union ordinarily designates the employee 
representative to accompany the compliance officer. Under no circumstances 
may the employer select the employee representative for the inspection. The act 
does not require an employee representative for each inspection; however, where 
there is no authorized employee representative, the compliance officer must con-
sult with a reasonable number of employees concerning safety and health mat-
ters in the workplace. 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
363
 After the inspection tour, a closing conference is held between the compli-
ance officer and the employer or the employer representative. Subsequently, the 
compliance officer reports the findings to the OSHA office, and the area director 
determines what citations, if any, will be issued and what penalties, if any, will 
be proposed. 
 CITATIONS 
 Citations inform the employer and employees of the regulations and standards 
alleged to have been violated, and the proposed time set for their abatement. The 
employer will receive citations and notices of proposed penalties by certified 
mail. The employer must post a copy of each citation at or near the place where 
a violation has occurred, for three days or until the violation is abated, whichever 
is longer. 
 The compliance officer has the authority to issue citations at the worksite, 
following the closing conference. To do so, he or she must first discuss each 
apparent violation with the area director and must receive approval to issue the 
citations. 
 The six types of violations that may be cited, and the penalties that may be 
imposed, are as follows: 
 1.  De minimis (no penalty). This type of violation has no immediate relation-
ship to safety or health, for example, number of toilets. 
 2.  Nonserious violation . This type of violation has a direct relationship to job 
safety and health, but probably would not cause death or serious physical 
harm. A proposed penalty of up to $7,000 for each violation is discretion-
ary. A penalty for a nonserious violation may be decreased considerably 
depending on the employer’s good faith (demonstrated efforts to comply 
with the act), history of previous violations, and size of business. 
 3.  Serious violation . This is a violation in which there is substantial probabil-
ity that death or serious harm could result, stemming from a hazard about 
which the employer knew or should have known. A mandatory penalty of 
up to $7,000 is assessed for each violation. 
 4.  Willful violation . This is a violation that the employer intentionally and 
knowingly commits. The employer either knows that its actions constitute 
a violation, or is aware that a hazardous condition exists and has made no 
reasonable effort to eliminate it. Penalties of up to $70,000 may be pro-
posed for each willful violation. If an employer is convicted of a willful 
violation that has resulted in the death of an employee, there may also be 
imprisonment for up to 6 months. A second conviction doubles these maxi-
mum penalties. 
 5.  Repeated violation . A repeated violation occurs when a violation of any 
standard, regulation, rule, or order is reinspected and another violation 
of the previously cited section is found. If, on reinspection, a violation 
of the previously cited standard, regulation, rule, or order is found, but it 

364 
C H A P T E R  8 
involves another piece of equipment and/or a different location in the es-
tablishment or worksite, it may be considered a repeated violation. Each 
repeated violation can bring a fine of up to $70,000. If there is a finding 
of guilt in a criminal proceeding, then up to 6 months’ imprisonment and 
a $250,000 fine for an individual or a $500,000 fine for a corporation 
may be imposed.  
 6.  Imminent danger . This is a situation in which there is reasonable certainty 
that a danger exists that can be expected to cause death or serious physical 
harm either immediately or before the danger can be eliminated through 
normal enforcement procedures. An imminent danger violation may result 
in a cessation of the operation or even complete plant shutdown. 
 Other violations for which citations and proposed penalties may be issued 
are as follows: 
 1.  Falsifying records, reports, or applications, on conviction, can bring a fine 
of $10,000 and 6 months in jail. 
 2.  Violating the posting requirements can bring a civil penalty of up to 
$7,000. 
 3.  Failing to abate or correct a violation can bring a civil penalty of up to 
$7,000 for each day the violation continues beyond the prescribed abate-
ment date. 
 4.  Assaulting, interfering with, or resisting an inspector in his or her duties 
can result in a fine of up to $5,000 and imprisonment for up to 3 years. 
 OSHA ERGONOMICS PROGRAM 
 In 1990, the high incidences and severity of work-related musculoskeletal disor-
ders found in the meatpacking industry led OSHA to develop ergonomics guide-
lines to be used in protecting meatpackers from these hazards (OSHA, 1990). 
The publication and dissemination of these guidelines were meant to be a first 
step in assisting the meatpacking industry in implementing a comprehensive 
safety and health program that would include ergonomics. Although the guide-
lines were initially meant to be advisory in nature, they were eventually devel-
oped into new industrywide ergonomics standards. The guidelines were meant to 
provide information so that employers could determine if they have ergonomics-
type problems, identify the nature and location of those problems, and imple-
ment measures to reduce or eliminate them. 
 The ergonomics program for meatpacking plants is divided into five sec-
tions: (1) management commitment and employee involvement, (2) worksite 
analysis, (3) recommended hazard prevention and controls, (4) medical manage-
ment, and (5) training and education. Detailed examples tailored for the meat-
packing industry are also provided. 
 Commitment and involvement are essential elements in any sound safety 
and health program. Commitment by management is especially important in 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
365
providing both the motivating force and the necessary resources to solve the 
problems. Similarly, employee involvement is necessary to maintain and con-
tinue the program. An effective program should have a team approach, with top 
management as the team leader, using the following principles: 
 1.  A written program for job safety, health, and ergonomics, with clear goals 
and objectives to meet these goals, endorsed and advocated by the highest 
levels of management. 
 2.  A personal concern for employee health and safety, emphasizing the elimi-
nation of ergonomics hazards. 
 3.  A policy that places the same emphasis on health and safety as on 
production. 
 4.  Assignment and communication of the responsibility of the ergonomics 
program to the appropriate managers, supervisors, and employees. 
 5.  A program ensuring accountability from these managers, supervisors, and 
employees for carrying out these responsibilities. 
 6.  Implementation of a regular review and evaluation of the ergonomics pro-
gram. This might include trend analyses of injury data, employee surveys, 
“before and after” evaluations of workplace changes, logs of job improve-
ments, etc.  
 Employees can be involved via the following: 
 1.  A complaint or suggestion procedure for voicing concerns to management 
without fear of reprisal 
 2.  A procedure for prompt and accurate recording of the first signs of work-
related musculoskeletal disorders, so that prompt controls and treatment 
can be implemented 
 3.  Ergonomics committees that receive reports of, analyze, and correct ergo-
nomics problems 
 4.  Ergonomics teams with the required skills to identify and analyze jobs for 
ergonomics stress 
 An effective ergonomics program includes four major program elements: 
worksite analysis, hazard control, medical management, and training and edu-
cation. Worksite analysis identifies existing hazards and conditions, as well as 
operations and workplaces where such hazards may develop. The analysis in-
cludes a detailed tracking and statistical analysis of injury and illness records, 
to identify patterns of work-related musculoskeletal disorder development. The 
first step in implementing the analysis program should be a review and analy-
sis of medical records, insurance records, and OSHA 300 logs using chi-square 
analysis and tracking incidence rates. Next, baseline screening surveys can be 
conducted to identify jobs that put employees at risk of developing work-related 
musculoskeletal disorders. The survey is typically performed with a question-
naire to identify potential ergonomics risk factors in the job process, workplace, 

366 
C H A P T E R  8 
or work method, as well as the location and severity of the potential musculo-
skeletal problems for the individual worker, using the body discomfort charts of 
Chapter 5. Then a physical worksite analysis should be conducted with a walk-
through of the plant and videotaping and analysis of critical jobs, using the work 
design checklists and analyses tools presented in earlier chapters. Finally, as in 
any methods program, periodic reviews should be conducted. These may un-
cover previously missed risk factors or design deficiencies. Trends of injuries 
and illnesses should be calculated and examined at regular intervals, as a quanti-
tative check on the effectiveness of the ergonomics program. 
 Hazard control involves the same engineering controls, work practice con-
trols, personal protective equipment, and administrative controls as discussed 
throughout this book. Engineering controls, where feasible, are the OSHA  
preferred method of control. 
 Proper medical management, including the early identification of signs 
and the effective treatment of symptoms, is necessary to reduce the risk of de-
veloping work-related musculoskeletal disorders. A physician or occupational 
nurse with experience in musculoskeletal disorders should supervise the 
program. The person should conduct periodic, systematic workplace walk-
throughs to remain knowledgeable about the jobs, identify potential light-
duty jobs, and maintain close contact with employees. This information will 
allow the health providers to recommend assignments of recovering workers 
to restricted-duty jobs with minimal ergonomic stress on the injured muscle 
and tendon groups. 
 Health care providers should participate in the training and education of all 
employees, including supervisors, on different types of work-related musculo-
skeletal disorders, means of prevention, causes, early symptoms, and treatments. 
This demonstration will assist in the early detection of work-related musculo-
skeletal disorders prior to the development of more severe conditions. Employ-
ees should be encouraged to report early signs and symptoms of work-related 
musculoskeletal disorders, for timely treatment without fear of retribution by 
management. Written protocols for health surveillance, evaluation, and treatment 
will assist in maintaining properly controlled procedures. 
 Training and education are critical components of an ergonomics program 
for employees potentially exposed to ergonomics hazards. Training allows 
managers, supervisors, and employees to understand the ergonomics problems 
associated with their jobs, as well as the prevention, control, and medical conse-
quences of those problems. 
 1.  General training on work-related musculoskeletal disorder risk factors, 
symptoms, and hazards associated with the job should be given annually to 
those employees who are potentially exposed. 
 2.  Job-specific training on tools, knives, guards, safety, and proper lifting should 
be given to new employees prior to their being placed on a full-time job.  
 3.  Supervisors should be trained to recognize the early signs of work-related 
musculoskeletal disorders and hazardous work practices. 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
367
 4.  Managers should be trained to be aware of their health and safety 
responsibilities. 
 5.  Engineers should be trained in the prevention and correction of ergonomics 
hazards through workplace redesign.  
 A rough-draft version of the guidelines for general industry, as a precursor to 
an ergonomics standard, was released in 1990, and the final version was signed 
early in 1992. It contained primarily the same information as found in the guide-
lines for the meatpacking industry. However, there was considerable negative 
reaction from industry, and with the Republicans gaining control of Congress in 
1992, the ergonomics standard was effectively shelved for the time being. 
 8.8 HAZARD CONTROL 
  This section presents the basic principles in controlling hazards. A  hazard is 
a condition with the potential of causing injury or damage;  danger  is the rela-
tive exposure to or potential consequences of that hazard. Thus, an unprotected 
worker on a scaffold is exposed to a hazard and has the danger of serious injury. 
If the worker wears a safety harness, there is still a hazard, but the danger of the 
hazard has been reduced considerably. 
 Hazards can occur in several general categories: (1) due to inherent proper-
ties such as high voltage, radiation, or caustic chemicals; (2) due to potential 
failure, either of the operator (or some other person) or of the machine (or some 
other equipment); or (3) due to environmental forces or stresses, for example, 
wind, corrosion, etc. The general approach is first to completely eliminate the 
hazard and prevent the accident, and then, if not successful, to reduce the hazard 
level to the point that, should the accident still happen, the potential injury or 
damage is minimized. Elimination of a hazard can be achieved through good 
design and proper procedures, such as use of noncombustible materials and 
solvents, rounding edges on equipment, automating corrosive dips (that is, re-
moving the operator from the hazardous environment, building an overpass at 
railroad and highway intersections, etc.). 
 If the hazard cannot be completely eliminated, then a second-level ap-
proach is to limit the hazard level. For example, an electric power drill in a wet 
environment has the potential for electrocution. Using a cordless drill would 
reduce the power level for serious injury, although some shock may still oc-
cur. Of course, the trade-off is a reduced torque level and drilling effectiveness. 
Using a pneumatic drill would completely eliminate the electrocution hazard, but 
may have limited use, especially for homeowners who don’t have compressed air 
available; may increase the cost of the drill; and may introduce a new hazard with 
the release of high-pressure air. The safest solution would be to use a mechanical 
hand drill, with no minimal hazards due to energy. However, the effectiveness of 
the tool would be significantly reduced and could introduce musculoskeletal fa-
tigue (a completely separate hazard). Another example of limiting the hazard level 
is the use of governors on school buses to limit the maximum speed of the vehicles. 

368 
C H A P T E R  8 
 If the hazard level cannot be limited due to the inherent nature of electro-
mechanical equipment or power tools, the next approach is to use isolation, bar-
riers, and interlocks to minimize the contact between the energy source and the 
human operator. Isolation and barriers impose either a distance or a physical 
impediment between the two. Placing a generator or a compressor outside the 
plant will limit normal daily contact between operators and the energy source. 
Only maintenance workers will have some exposure, at irregular intervals, to the 
energy source. Fixed machine guards or pulley enclosures are good examples of 
barriers. The third item, an  interlock,  is a more complex approach or device that 
prevents incompatible events from occurring at the wrong time. At the most ba-
sic level it could simply be a  lockout  (as in OSHA 1910.147, Lockout/Tagout) of 
a dangerous area to prevent unauthorized individuals from entering this area or 
a  lock in  of a switch in an energized status so that it can’t be accidentally turned 
off. The more typical active interlock is a mechanism that ensures that a given 
event doesn’t occur at the same time as another event. The previously mentioned 
switch in the cover of a coffee mill (Example 8.7) is a good example of an inter-
lock that prevents the user’s finger from being in the bowl at the same time that 
the switch is activated. 
 Another approach is the use of  fail-safe designs . Systems are designed such 
that, in the case of failure, they go to the lowest energy level. This can be ac-
complished through simple, passive devices such as fuses and circuit breakers, 
which upon experiencing high current levels physically open the circuit and drop 
the current immediately to zero. This can also be accomplished operationally 
through the design of valves that either fail in an open position so as to maintain 
fluid flow (that is, the valve disk is forced away from the seat by the flow) or fail 
in a closed position to stop current flow (that is, the valve disk is forced into the 
seat by the flow). Another good example of an operational design is the  deadman 
control  on a lawnmower or a waverunner. In the first case, the operator holds 
down a lever to keep the blade turning; if the operator trips and loses control of 
the lever, the blade stops through either release of the clutch or cutting of the 
engine. In the second case, the engine key is attached to the operator’s wrist by 
a leash; if the operator is thrown from the craft, the key is pulled out, stopping 
the engine. 
 Another approach in hazard control is failure minimization. Rather than al-
low the system to fail completely even in a fail-safe mode, this approach decreases 
the probability of system failure. This can be accomplished by increasing safety 
factors, monitoring system parameters more closely, and replacing key compo-
nents regularly or providing redundancy for these components.  Safety factor is 
defined as the ratio of strength to stress and should obviously be well above 1. 
Given that there can be considerable variance in the strength of material (for 
example, two-by-fours used in construction) and also some variance in environ-
mental stresses (for example, snow in northern locales), it would make sense to 
increase the safety factor appropriately to account for these variances and mini-
mize the collapse of the building. Monitoring of key temperatures and pressures, 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
369
with appropriate adjustments or compensations, can help forestall the system 
reaching critical levels. Automobile tire wear markers are one commonly used 
parameter monitoring system. The OSHA requirement of a buddy system for 
work in hazardous areas is another such example. Regular replacement of tires 
even before the wear markers are exposed is an example of regular replacement 
of components; using more two-by-fours (set at 12-in distances, rather than 
16 in) would be an example of redundancy in the system. 
 Finally, in case the system does finally fail, the organization must provide 
for personal protective equipment, escape and survival equipment, and rescue 
equipment so as to minimize the resulting injuries and costs. Fire-protective 
clothing, helmets, safety shoes, earplugs, etc., are common examples of personal 
protective equipment to minimize injury. The storage of self-rescuers at regular 
locations in mines provides miners extra oxygen in case of methane leaks or fires 
using up the ambient oxygen and extra time until rescuers can reach them. Simi-
larly, large companies will have their own firefighting equipment to save time 
compared to relying on local fire departments.  
 8.9 GENERAL HOUSEKEEPING 
  General safety considerations related to the building include adequate floor-
loading capacity. This is especially important in storage areas, where over-
loading may cause serious accidents. The danger signs of overloading include 
cracks in walls or ceilings, excessive vibration, and displacement of structural 
members. 
 Aisles, stairs, and other walkways should be investigated periodically to en-
sure that they are free of obstacles, are not uneven, and are not covered with oil 
or other material that could lead to slips and falls. In many old buildings, stairs 
should be inspected, as they are the cause of numerous lost-time accidents. Stairs 
should have a slope of 28 to 35 degrees, with tread widths of 11 to 12 in (27.9 to 
30.5 cm) and riser heights of 6.5 to 7.5 in (16.5 to 19.1 cm). All stairways should 
be equipped with handrails, should have at least 10 fc (100 lx) of illumination, 
and be painted in light colors. 
 Aisles should be plainly marked and straight, with well-rounded corners or 
diagonals at turn points. If aisles are to accommodate vehicle travel, they should 
be at least 3 ft wider than twice the width of the broadest vehicle. When traffic is 
only one-way, then 2 ft wider than the broadest vehicle is adequate. In general, 
aisles should have at least 10 fc (100 lx) of illumination. Color should be used 
throughout, to identify hazardous conditions (see Table 8.10). More details on 
aisles, stairs, and walkways can be found in OSHA 1910.21-1910.24,  Walking 
and Working Surfaces . 
 Most machine tools can be satisfactorily guarded to minimize the probabil-
ity of a worker being injured while operating the machine. The problem is that 
many older machines are not properly guarded. In these instances, immediate 
action should be taken to see that a guard is provided and that it is workable and 

370 
C H A P T E R  8 
routinely used. An alternate approach is to provide a two-button operation, such 
as that shown for the press operations in Figure 8.20. Note that the two hand 
buttons are spread well apart, so the operator’s hands are in a safe position when 
the press starts. These buttons should not require high levels of force; other-
wise repetitive-motion injuries are likely to occur. In fact, newer buttons can be 
activated through skin capacitance rather than relying on mechanical pressure. 
A better alternative may be to automate the process, completely freeing the op-
erator from the nip point or using a robotic manipulator in place of the operator. 
Further details on machine guarding can be found in OSHA 1910.211-1901.222, 
 Machinery and Machine Guarding .  
 A quality control and maintenance system should be incorporated in the tool 
room and the tool cribs, so that only reliable tools in good working condition 
are released to workers. Examples of unsafe tools that should not be released to 
operators include power tools with broken insulation, electrically driven power 
tools lacking grounding plugs or wires, poorly sharpened tools, hammers with 
mushroomed heads, cracked grinding wheels, grinding wheels without guards, 
and tools with split handles or sprung jaws. 
 There are also potentially dangerous materials and hazardous chemicals 
to be considered.These materials can cause a variety of health and/or safety 
problems and typically fall into one of three categories: corrosive materials, 
 Table 8.10   Color Recommendations 
 Color 
 Used for: 
 Examples 
 Red 
 Fire protection equip-
ment, danger, and as a 
stop signal 
 Fire alarm boxes, location of fire extinguish-
ers and fire hose, sprinkler piping, safety cans 
for flammables, danger signs, emergency stop 
buttons 
 Orange 
 Dangerous parts of ma-
chines, other hazards 
 Inside of movable guards, safety starting 
buttons, edges of exposed parts of moving 
equipment 
 Yellow 
 Designating caution, 
physical hazards 
 Construction and material handling equip-
ment, corner markings, edges of platforms, 
pits, stair treads, projections. Black stripes 
or checks may be used in conjunction with 
yellow 
 Green 
 Safety 
 Location of first-aid equipment, gas masks, 
safety deluge showers 
 Blue 
 Designating caution 
against starting or using 
equipment 
 Warning flags at starting point of machines, 
electrical controls, valves about tanks and 
boilers 
 Purple 
 Radiation hazards 
 Container for radioactive materials or sources 
 Black and 
white 
 Traffic and housekeeping 
markings 
 Location of aisles, direction signs, clear floor 
areas around emergency equipment 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
371
toxic materials, and flammable materials. Corrosive materials include a 
variety of acids and caustics that can burn and destroy human tissue upon 
contact. The chemical action of corrosive materials can take place by direct 
contact with the skin or through the inhalation of fumes or vapors. To avoid 
the potential danger resulting from the use of corrosive materials, consider 
the following measures:  
 1.  Be sure that the material handling methods are completely foolproof. 
 2.  Avoid any spilling or spattering, especially during initial delivery 
processes. 
 3.  Be sure that operators exposed to corrosive materials have used and are 
using correctly designed personal protective equipment and waste disposal 
procedures. 
 4.  Ensure that the dispensary or the first-aid area is equipped with the neces-
sary emergency provisions, including deluge showers and eye baths.  
 Figure 8.20   Two-button press operation. © Morton Beebe/CORBIS. 

372 
C H A P T E R  8 
 Toxic or irritating materials include gases, liquids, or solids that poison the 
body or disrupt normal processes by ingestion, absorption through the skin, or 
inhalation. To control toxic materials, use the following methods: 
 1.  Completely isolate the process from workers. 
 2.  Provide adequate exhaust ventilation. 
 3.  Provide workers with reliable personal protective equipment. 
 4.  Substitute a nontoxic or nonirritating material, wherever possible.  
 More details on toxic materials can be found in OSHA 1910.1000-1910.1200, 
 Toxic and Hazardous Substances . 
 Furthermore, per OSHA regulations, the composition of every chemical 
compound must be ascertained, its hazards determined, and appropriate control 
measures established to protect employees. This information must be clearly pre-
sented to workers with clear labels and material safety data sheets (MSDSs). 
Further information on this process (termed  HAZCOM ) can be found in OSHA 
1910.1200,  Hazard Communications . 
 Flammable materials and strong oxidizing agents present fire and explosion 
hazards. The spontaneous ignition of combustible materials can take place when 
there is insufficient ventilation to remove the heat from a process of slow oxi-
dation. To prevent such fires, combustible materials must be stored in a well-
ventilated, cool, dry area. Small quantities should be stored in covered metal 
containers. Some combustible dusts, such as sawdust, are not ordinarily known 
to be explosive. However, explosions can occur when such dusts are in a fine 
enough state to ignite. To avoid explosions, prevent ignition by providing ad-
equate ventilation exhaust systems and by controlling the manufacturing pro-
cesses to minimize the generation of dust and the liberation of gases and vapors. 
Gases and vapors may be removed from gas streams by absorption in liquids 
or solids, adsorption on solids, condensation, and catalytic combustion and in-
cineration. In absorption, the gas or vapor becomes distributed in the collecting 
liquid found in absorption towers, such as bubble-cap plate columns, packed 
towers, spray towers, and wet-cell washers. The adsorption of gases and vapors 
uses a variety of solid adsorbents, such as charcoal, with an affinity for certain 
substances such as benzene, carbon tetrachloride, chloroform, nitrous oxide, 
and acetaldehyde. Further information on flammable materials can be found in 
OSHA 1910.106,  Flammable and  Combustible Liquids . 
 In case the flammable materials ignite, suppression of the resulting fire is 
based on the relatively simple principles of the fire triangle (although the actual 
implementation may not always be so simple). There are three required compo-
nents, or legs of a triangle, to a fire: oxygen (or oxidizer in chemical reactions), fuel 
(or reducing agent in chemical reactions), and heat or ignition. Removal of any one 
component will suppress the fire (or collapse the triangle). Spraying of water on 
a house fire cools the fire (removes heat) and also dilutes the oxygen. Using foam 
on fire (or covering with a blanket) removes oxygen from the fire. Spreading out 
the logs in a campfire removes fuel. More practically, in a plant, there will be both 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
373
fixed extinguishing systems such as water sprinklers and portable fire extinguish-
ers. These are categorized by types and sizes. The four basic types are class A, for 
ordinary combustibles, which could use water or foam; class B, for flammable liq-
uids, typically using foam; class C, for electrical equipment, using nonconductive 
foams; and class D, for oxidizable metals. Further information on fire suppression 
can be found in OSHA 1910.155-1910-165,  Fire Protection .  
 SUMMARY 
 This chapter covered the basics on safety, including the accident prevention pro-
cess, starting with various theories on accident causation; the use of probability 
in understanding system reliability, risk management, and fault tree analysis; the 
use of cost-benefit analysis and other tools for decision making; various statisti-
cal tools for monitoring the success of the safety program; basic hazard control; 
and federal safety regulations relating to industry. Only the basics of hazard con-
trol were presented here. Specific details on specific workplace hazards can be 
found in numerous traditional safety textbooks such as those by Asfahl (2004), 
Banerjee (2003), Goetsch (2005), Hammer and Price (2001), National Safety 
Council (2000), and Spellman (2005). However, there should be sufficient in-
formation for the industrial engineer to start a safety program with the goal of 
providing a safe working environment for the employees. 
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  What is the difference between accident prevention and safety management? 
 2.  What are the steps in the accident prevention process? 
 3.  Describe the “dominoes” of the domino theory. What is the key aspect to this 
approach? 
 4.  How does multiple causation affect accident prevention? 
 5.  Compare and contrast life-change-unit, motivation-reward-satisfaction, and ABC 
models. What is the common link for all these models? 
 6.  Explain the significance of using chi-square analysis in accident prevention. 
 7.  What is the purpose of risk analysis in accident prevention? 
 8.  What is red flagging? 
 9.  Discuss the difference between independent and mutually exclusive events. 
 10.  In what ways can the reliability of a system be improved? 
 11.  Compare and contrast AND and OR gates. 
 12.  What is criticality and what role does it play in cost-benefit analysis? 
 13.  Compare and contrast common law and statute law. 
 14.  What is the difference between liability and strict liability? 
 15.  What is the difference between negligence, gross negligence, and negligence per 
se? 
 16.  What is the difference between compensatory and punitive damages? 

374 
C H A P T E R  8 
 17.  Prior to workers’ compensation, what three common law conditions were used by 
employers to disqualify an injured worker from receiving benefits? 
 18.  What are the three main requirements for obtaining workers’ compensation? 
 19.  Compare and contrast the four categories of disabilities recognized under workers’ 
compensation. 
 20.  What is the difference between schedule and nonschedule injuries? 
 21.  What is a third-party suit? 
 22.  What are some ways that a company could try to keep its workers’ comp costs down? 
 23.  Why is the OSHA general duty clause so important? 
 24.  What types of citations can be issued by OSHA? 
 25.  What are the key elements of OSHA’s proposed ergonomics program? 
 26.  What is the difference between a hazard and a danger? 
 27.  What is the general approach used in hazard control? 
 28.  Explain why a deadman switch is a good example of a fail-safe design. Give an 
example where it might be used. 
 29.  What is a safety factor? 
 30.  What is the fire triangle? Explain how its principles are used in fire extinguishers. 
 PROBLEMS  
 1.  For the injury data given in the table below: 
  a. 
 What are the incidence and severity rates for each department? 
  b. 
 Which department has significantly more injuries than the others? 
  c. 
 Which department has a significantly higher severity rate than the others? 
  d. 
 As a safety specialist, which department would you tackle first? Why? 
 Department 
 Injuries 
 Lost Days 
 Hours Worked 
 Casting 
 13 
 3 
 450,000 
 Spruing 
 2 
 0 
 100,000 
 Shearing 
 5 
 1 
 200,000 
 Grinding 
 6 
 3 
 600,000 
 Packing 
 1 
 3 
 500,000 
 2.  An engineer was adjusting the gearbox of a large steam engine while it was in op-
eration and dropped a wrench into the path of the gears. As a result, the engine was 
thrown out of alignment and badly wrecked. Luckily the engineer only suffered 
minor lacerations from ejected pieces of metal. The engineer hypothesized that the 
metal-handle wrench simply slipped out of his oily hands. 
  a. 
 Use the domino and multiple-causation theories to examine this accident 
scenario. 
  b. 
 Use job safety analysis to suggest control measures (and indicate relative 
effectiveness for each) that could have prevented the injuries and damage. 
What is your ultimate recommendation?  

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
375
 3.  Given  P ( A )  0.6,  P ( B )  0.7,  P ( C )  0.8,  P ( D )  0.9,  P ( E )  0.1 and indepen-
dent events, determine  P ( T ) for 
  a. 
 T   AB   AC   DE 
  b. 
 T   A   ABC   DE 
  c. 
 T   ABD   BC   E 
  d. 
 T   A   B  C DE 
  e. 
 T   ABC   BCD  C DE 
 4.  Perform a cost-benefit analysis using fault tree analysis on a stairway. Assume 
that over the last year, three accidents were caused by slippery surfaces, five were 
caused by inadequate railings, and three were caused by someone negligently 
leaving tools or other obstacles on the steps. The average cost for each accident 
was $200 (total for first aid, lost time, etc.). Assume that you have been allocated 
$1,000 to improve the safety of the stairway (although you don’t need to spend all 
the money). Three alternatives could be employed: 
  1. 
 New surfaces, which will reduce accidents caused by slippery surfaces by 
70 percent and cost $800 
  2. 
 New railings, which will reduce accidents caused by inadequate railings by 
only 50 percent (since not all pedestrians use railings!) and cost $1,000 
  3. 
 Signs and educational programs, which are estimated to reduce both railing 
and obstacle-related accidents, each by 20 percent (people forget easily) but 
cost only $100 
 (To calculate basic event probabilities, assume that the stairway is used 
5 times per hour, 8 h/day, 5 days/week, 50 weeks/year.) 
 a.  Draw a fault tree of the situation. 
 b.  Evaluate all alternatives (or combinations) to determine the best allocation of 
the $1,000. 
 5.  Widgets are painted and cured with heat from a drier in the paint shop. Three com-
ponents are required to start a fire in the paint shop and cause major damage: fuel, 
ignition, and oxygen. Oxygen is always present in the atmosphere and thus has a 
probability of 1.0. Ignition can occur either from a spark due to static electricity (with a 
probability of 0.01) or from overheating of the drier mechanism (0.05). Fuel is provided 
by the volatile vapors that can arise from three sources: paint vapors during the drying 
process (0.9), paint thinner used to thin the paint (0.9), and solvent used for the cleanup 
of equipment (0.3). Property damage from a fire could amount to as much as $100,000. 
You have three choices of solutions in minimizing the likelihood of a major fire:  
  1. 
 Spend $50 to move cleanup operations to a different room, which would 
reduce the probability of having solvent vapors in the paint area to 0.0. 
  2. 
 Spend $3,000 on a new ventilation system which reduces the probability of 
having vapor from each of the three fuels to 0.2. 
  3. 
 Spend $10,000 for a new type of paint and spraying system that doesn’t 
release volatile vapors, reducing the probability of paint and paint thinner 
vapors to 0.0. 
  
 a.  Draw a fault tree and recommend the most cost-effective solution. 
  
 b.  Consider the domino theory as applied to this scenario. Name each of the 
dominoes in the proper order, and provide two other possible solutions that 
would apply to this scenario. 

376 
C H A P T E R  8 
 6.    a.  Draw the fault tree given by the Boolean expression  T   AB   CDE   F . 
  b. 
 The severity of  T is 100 lost workdays per accident. The probabilities of the 
basic events are  A  0.02,  B  0.03,  C  0.01,  D  0.05,  E  0.04, and  F  
0.05. What is the expected loss associated with the head event  T as given? 
  c. 
 Compare two alternatives from a cost-benefit standpoint. Which would you 
recommend? 
  
  i.  $100 to reduce  C and  D to 0.005 
  
 ii.  $200 to reduce  F to 0.01 
 7.  Calculate the system reliability. Assume that events are independent. 
 
0.9
A
B
C
D
E
0.9
0.9
0.7
0.8
 8.  One of the early propeller planes (a Ford Tri-Motor) had three engines, one directly 
in the middle and one on each wing. In this configuration, the plane can fly with 
any two engines or just the middle one alone. Assuming that the reliability of each 
engine is 0.9, what is the reliability of the overall plane? 
 9.  NASA uses four identical onboard computers (that is, three are redundant) to 
control the space shuttle. If the reliability of any computer is 0.9, what is the overall 
system reliability? 
 10.  Pick one of the OSHA 1910 standards. Then examine the OSHA Review Commis-
sion decisions regarding this standard. Are there any similarities between the cases? 
Who typically won? Were the original citations and/or fines issued by OSHA modi-
fied by the court? 
 11.  A nuclear power plant uses four cooling lines to carry away heat away from the 
central core reactor. Lines A1 and A2 cool the top and bottom surfaces, while 
lines B1 and B2 cool the top and bottom halves of the cylindrical chamber. The 
reactor will not overheat if any one of the B lines is functioning (i.e., both A 
lines and the other B line can be down) or if both A lines are functioning (i.e., 
both B lines can be down). If the reliability of each line is 0.9, what is the over-
all system reliability? 
 
A1
B1
B2
A2
 12.  The USA Steel Co. uses coke and iron to produce steel in closed furnaces. Reduc-
tion of the iron and oxidation of the coke produces various gases (including CO), 
which are vented through flues to the atmosphere. On January 2 (the first day after 
the Christmas shutdown), a worker was overcome with CO in the furnace area and 
died. A safety inspector later pieced together the following facts: (a) The facilities 

 
 
C HA PT ER 8    Workplace and Systems Safety 
377
were antiquated, and the flues contained many small cracks. (b) In a cost-cutting 
measure over the Christmas holidays, the company had shut down all ventilation 
in the plant. (c) Several of the CO monitors were found to have dead batteries. (d) 
Contrary to company policy, the worker was not wearing an appropriate respirator. 
Analyze this scenario and develop a fault tree. Assume that the probability of not 
wearing the proper respirator is 0.1, and the probabilities of the batteries dying, the 
ventilators being shut off, and the flue leaking are each 0.01. Calculate the prob-
ability of the head event. 
 REFERENCES 
 Asfahl, C. R.  Industrial Safety and Health Management . New York: Prentice-Hall, 2004. 
 Bahr, N. J.  System Safety Engineering and Risk Assessment: A Practical Approach . 
London: Taylor & Francis, 1997. 
 Banerjee, S.  Industrial Hazards and Plant Safety . London: Taylor & Francis, 2003. 
 Bird, F., and G. Germain.  Practical Loss Control Leadership . Loganville, GA: Interna-
tional Loss Control Institute, 1985. 
 Brown, D. B.  Systems Analysis and Design for Safety . New York: Prentice-Hall, 1976. 
 Cox, S.  Safety, Reliability and Risk Management: An Integrated Approach . Butterworth 
Heinemann, 1998. 
 Devore, J. L.  Probability and Statistics for Engineering and the Sciences . 6th ed. New 
York: Duxbury Press, 2003. 
 Ericson, C. A.  Hazard Analysis Techniques for System Safety. New York: Wiley- 
Interscience, 2005. 
 Goetsch, D. L.  Occupational Safety and Health for Technologists, Engineers, and 
Managers . 5th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2005. 
 Hammer, W., and D. Price.  Occupational Safety Management and Engineering . 5th ed. 
New York: Prentice-Hall, 2001. 
 Heinrich, H. W., D. Petersen, and N. Roos.  Industrial Accident Prevention . 5th ed. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1980. 
 Holmes, T. H., and R. H. Rahe. “The Social Readjustment Rating Scale.”  Journal of 
Psychosomatic Research , 11 (1967), pp. 213–218. 
 Laughery, K., and K. Vaubel. “Major and Minor Injuries at Work: Are the Circum-
stances Similar or Different?”  International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics , 
12 (1993), pp. 273–279. 
 National Safety Council.  Accident Prevention Manual for Industrial Operations . 
12th ed. Chicago: National Safety Council, 2000. 
 OSHA.  Code of Federal Regulations—Labor . 29 CFR 1910. Washington, DC: Office of 
the Federal Register, 1997. 
 OSHA.  Ergonomics Program Management Guidelines for Meatpacking Plants . OSHA 
3123. Washington, DC: Bureau of National Affairs, 1990. 
 Skinner, B. F. “Superstition’ in the Pigeon.”  Journal of Experimental Psychology , 
38 (1947), pp. 168–172. 
 Spellman, F. R.  Safety Engineering: Principles and Practices . Lanham, MD: 
Government Institutes, 2005. 

378 
C H A P T E R  8 
 WEBSITES 
 NIOSH homepage —http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/ 
 OSHA consultants —http://www.osha.gov/dcsp/smallbusiness/consult_directory.html 
 OSHA homepage —http://www.oshrc.gov 
 OSH Review Commission homepage —http://www.oshrc.gov 

 
379
 Proposed 
Method 
Implementation 
 
379
 
  CHAPTER 
 
 9  
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Decide among alternative methods, using value engineering, cost-benefit 
analysis, crossover charts, and economic analyses. 
 •  Sell the new method; people are resistant to change. 
 •  Establish sound base rates by using reliable job evaluations. 
 •  Accommodate workers of all abilities. 
 P
 resenting and installing the proposed method is the fifth step in the sys-
tematic development of a work center to produce a product or perform a 
service. However, the analyst must first choose which proposed method 
to present. Several alternative methods may be feasible, some more effective 
than others, some more costly than others. A variety of decision-making tools 
are presented in this chapter to assist the analyst in selecting the best alternative. 
Obviously, many factors may comprise the definition of  best , and these tools 
will help the analyst in weighing these factors appropriately. 
 Selling the proposed method is the next, and probably the most important, 
element in the presentation procedure. This step is as important as any of the 
preceding steps, because a method not sold is usually not installed. No matter 
how thorough the data gathering and analysis and the ingenuity of the proposed 
method, the value of the project is zero unless it is installed. 
 Humans naturally resent the attempts of others to influence their thinking. 
When someone approaches with a new idea, the instinctive reaction is to put up 
a defense against it and resist any changes. We feel that we must protect our own 
individuality, preserve the sanctity of our own egos. All of us are just egotisti-
cal enough to convince ourselves that our ideas are better than those of anyone 
else. It is natural for us to react in this manner, even if the new idea is to our own 
advantage. If the idea has merit, there is a tendency to resent it because we did 
not think of it first. 
 The presentation of the proposed method should include the decision mak-
ing that went into choosing the final design and should emphasize the sav-
ings in material and labor that would be achieved with it. Next, the quality and 

380 
C H A P T E R  9 
reliability improvements obtained by installing the improved method should 
be emphasized. Finally, the payback time for capital investment should be 
addressed. Without reasonable cost recovery the project will not go forward. 
 Once the proposed method has been properly presented and sold, it can be 
installed. Installation, like presentation, requires sales ability. During installa-
tion, the analyst must continue selling the proposed method to engineers and 
technicians on their own level, to subordinate executives and supervisors, and to 
labor and organized labor representatives. 
 9.1 DECISION-MAKING TOOLS 
 DECISION TABLES 
 Decision tables  are a structured approach for taking the subjectivity out of deci-
sion making, that is, determining which of several alternative methods changes 
should be implemented. The tables essentially consist of condition–action state-
ments, similar to if–then statements in computer programs.  If  the right condition 
or combination of conditions exists,  then  specified actions are taken. Thus, the 
tables can unambiguously describe complex, multirule, multivariable decision 
systems. 
 Such decision tables, also known as  hazard action tables , are frequently uti-
lized in safety programs to specify certain actions for given hazard conditions 
(Gausch, 1972). The hazard may be identified by two different variables: fre-
quency, how often the accident is likely to occur; and severity, how severe the 
loss will be. Frequency may be categorized as extremely remote, remote, reason-
ably probable, and highly probable, while severity may have levels of negligible, 
marginal, critical, and catastrophic. This results in a hazard action table with five 
plans, as shown in Table 9.1. 
 Consider the right column marked with an asterisk. The analyst would con-
clude that a condition that is highly probable and would result in a catastrophe, 
with possible death and severe injury to personnel, should immediately be elimi-
nated by shutting down the operation. Obviously, this is a simplified example 
that can be envisioned mentally. However, if one has 20 states for each of two 
different variables, then there are 400 categories of conditions, which cannot 
be remembered easily. Overall, decision tables emphasize making better-quality 
decisions through better decision analysis techniques and less time pressure; that 
is, the action plans can be worked out ahead of time, rather than having to deal 
with instantaneous pressures, possibly resulting in errors. 
 VALUE ENGINEERING 
 A simple way to expand the evaluation of alternatives is to apply numbers and 
form a payoff matrix. This is often termed  value engineering  (Gausch, 1974). 
Each solution may have different values with respect to the desired benefits. 
A weight is determined for each benefit (0 to 10 is a reasonable range), and then 

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
381
a value (0 to 4, with 4 being best) is assigned to reflect how well each solution 
produces the desired benefit. The assigned value is multiplied by the appropriate 
weight, and the products are summed for the final score. The highest sum is the 
most appropriate solution.  
 Note that benefits will have different relative weights for different compa-
nies, different departments within a company, or even different points in time for 
the same department. Also note that the Evaluating Alternatives step of Muther’s 
Systematic Layout Planning (see Section 3.8) is a form of value engineering. 
 COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS 
 A more quantitative approach to deciding between different alternatives is a 
 cost-benefit analysis . This approach requires five steps: 
 1.  Determine what is changed due to better design, that is, increased produc-
tivity, better quality, decreased injuries, and so on. 
 2.  Quantify these changes (benefits) into monetary units. 
 3.  Determine the cost required to implement the changes. 
 4.  Divide the cost by the benefit for each alternative, to create a ratio. 
 5.  The smallest ratio determines the desired alternative. 
 Step 2 is probably the most difficult to assess and quantify. It is not always 
possible to assign dollar values; sometimes it may be percent changes, injuries, or 
other values. Example 9.1 may help in understanding all three decision-making 
 Table 9.1   Hazard Action Table 
 
 Severity 
  Frequency 
  Negligible 
 Marginal 
 Critical 
 Catastrophic 
  Extremely remote 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Remote 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Reasonably probable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (*) 
  Probable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Actions 
 
 
 
 
  Forget it 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Long-range study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Correct (1 year) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Correct (90 days) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Correct (30 days) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shutdown 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Source: Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos, 1980. 

382 
C H A P T E R  9 
Cutoff Operation 
 EXAMPLE 9.1  
 The Dorben Co. manufactures simple, small knife blades inserted into a plastic han-
dle. One of the operations in formation of the blade is the cutting off of knife blades 
from a thin strip of stainless steel via a foot-pedal-operated press. Using tweezers, the 
worker procures a rubber nib from a parts bin and inserts it over the blade to protect 
it. After press activation, the cutoff blade is placed on a holder plate for later assem-
bly into the handle (a good example of the effective therblig  preposition !). Because 
of the small blade size, a stereoscope is used to assist in the operation. The operators 
have complained about wrist, neck, back, and ankle pain. Possible method changes 
include (1) replacement of the mechanical pedal with a foot-operated electric switch, 
to reduce ankle fatigue; (2) better adjustment of the position of the stereoscope, to 
reduce neck fatigue; (3) implementation of a video projection system, for heads-
up viewing; (4) use of a gravity feed bin for the nibs, to improve productivity; and 
(5) replacement of the tweezers with a vacuum-operated stylus, to both improve produc-
tivity and eliminate a potential cumulative trauma disorder (CTD) causing pinch grip. 
 Assume the productivity improvements shown in Table 9.2, based on an MTM-2 
analysis (see Section 13.1) and injury reductions based on the CTD Risk Index shown 
in Figure 5.25. 
 Company policy authorizes methods engineers to proceed, with no further au-
thorization needed, if condition 1 and either condition 2 or 3 are met: (1) implemen-
tation costs are less than $200 (i.e., petty cash), (2) productivity increases are more 
than 5 percent, (3) injury risks decrease more than 33 percent. In terms of decision 
tables, the situation could be structured as shown in Table 9.3. 
 In terms of value engineering, weights of 6, 4, and 8 can be assigned to the three 
factors of interest: increased productivity, decreased injury rates, and low-cost solu-
tions (see Table 9.4). Each solution is rated from 0 to 4 for each of the factors. The 
resulting product sums are 28, 36, 18, 58, and 42, and the gravity feed bin change at 
58 is clearly the best solution. 
 For a cost-benefit analysis, anticipated benefits could be quantified by both in-
creases in productivity and decreases in injury rates. Assume that the company profits 
$645 for each 1 percent increase in productivity over the course of the year.  Similarly, 
a decrease in workers’ compensation and medical costs due to a decrease in CTD in-
juries can be considered a benefit. The company has averaged one CTD case leading 
to surgery every 5 years of operation. Assuming that one CTD surgery case costs the 
 Table 9.2   Expected Changes in Productivity, Injury Risk Potential, and Cost 
for Various Method Changes in Cutoff Operation 
 Work design and
methods changes  
 Δ Productivity 
(%)  
 Δ  CTD Risk 
(%)  
 Cost ($)  
 1. Foot-operated electric switch 
 0 
 –1 * 
 175 
 2. Adjust stereoscope 
 0 
 –2 
 10 
 3. Video projection system 
 1 ** 
 –2 
 2,000 
 4. Gravity feed bin 
 7 
 –10 
 40 
 5. Vacuum stylus 
 1 ** 
 –40 
 200 
 * The current CTD Risk Index does not address lower extremities. However, there is reason to 
believe that the lower force for the electric switch will have some beneficial effect. 
 ** Can’t be quantified from MTM-2, but some benefit is expected. 

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
383
company $30,000, the expected loss per year is $6,000. For each 1 percent decrease 
in risk, the company benefits $60 per year. The increases in productivity and de-
creases in injury rates can be quantified as shown in Table 9.5. 
 From Table 9.5, it is obvious that for any ratio less than 1 (methods changes 2, 
4, 5, and 6), there are more benefits than the costs required to implement the meth-
ods change. However, methods change 4 is by far the most cost-effective. Interest-
ingly, a combination of methods changes 2, 4, and 5 (alternative 6) may be worth 
considering for the comparatively low total dollar amounts expended. 
 Table 9.3   Decision Table for Cutoff Operation 
 Conditions  
 Action  
 Methods Changes  
 1  
 2  
 3  
 Policy  
 1. Electric switch 
 
 
 
 — 
 2. Adjust stereoscope 
 
 
 
 
 — 
 3. Video projection system 
 
 
 
 
 — 
 4. Gravity feed bin 
 
 
 
 
 Proceed 
 5. Vacuum stylus 
 
 
 
 
 Proceed 
 Table 9.4   Value Engineering Analysis of the Cutoff Operation 
 Evaluating Alternatives 
 Plant: Dorben Co.  
 
 A  
 B  
 C  
 D  
 E  
 Project:
Cutoff Operation 
 Alternatives 
 Electric 
switch 
 Adjust 
stereo- 
scope 
 Video 
projection 
 Gravity 
feed bin 
 Vacuum 
stylus 
 Date: 6-12-97 
 Analyst: AF 
 Ratings and weighted ratings 
 Comments 
 Factor/Consideration 
 Wt 
 A 
 B  
 C  
 D  
 E  
 Increase in productivity 
 6 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 1 
 6 
 3 
 18 
 1 
 6 
  Decrease in injuries 
 4 
 1 
 4 
 1 
 4 
 1 
 4 
 2 
 8 
 3 
 12 
 Low-cost solution 
 8 
 3 
 24 
 4 
 32 
 1 
 8 
 4 
 32 
 3 
 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Totals 
 28 
36
 18 
 58 
 42 
 Remarks: 
 Gravity feed bin is the most justifiable methods change. 

384 
C H A P T E R  9 
tools. Other examples of cost-benefit analyses as related to less definable ben-
efits, such as health and safety issues, are presented in Brown (1976). 
 CROSSOVER CHARTS 
 Crossover  (or  break-even )  charts  are very useful in comparing the payback times 
of alternative methods changes. One may use general-purpose equipment with 
low capital costs but higher setup costs, while the other may use special equip-
ment at a higher capital cost but with lower setup costs. At some production 
quantity, the two methods are equal, and this is the  crossover point . This relates 
to the most prevalent mistake made by planners. Large amounts of money are 
tied up in fixtures that show large savings while in use, but they are seldom used. 
For example, a savings of 10 percent in direct labor costs on a job in constant use 
would probably justify greater expense in tools than an 80 or 90 percent savings 
on a small job that appears on the production schedule only a few times a year 
(a good example of the Pareto analysis in Section 2.1). 
 The economic advantage of lower labor costs is the controlling factor in 
determining the tooling; consequently, jigs and fixtures may be desirable even 
where only small quantities are involved. Other considerations, such as im-
proved interchangeability, increased accuracy, or reduced labor troubles, may 
provide the dominant reason for elaborate tooling, although this is usually not 
the case.  
 MULTIPLE-CRITERIA DECISION MAKING 
 Decision making in the presence of multiple, often conflicting, criteria can 
be approached by a relatively new process called  multiple-criteria decision 
making  (MCDM), developed by Saaty (1980). For example, assume that an 
analyst has four alternatives  a 1 ,  a 2 ,  a 3 ,  a 4  to consider, which would be applied 
to four possible states of the product or market  S 1 ,  S 2 ,  S 3 ,  S 4 . Also assume that 
 Table 9.5   Cost-Benefit Analysis for Cutoff Operation 
 
 Benefit ($)  
 
 
 Method Changes  
 Productivity  
 Injury rates  
 Total  
 Cost ($)  
 Cost benefit  
 1. Electric switch 
 0 
   60 
 60 
 175 
 2.92 
 2. Adjust stereoscope 
 0 
  120 
 120 
 10 
 0.08 
 3. Video projection system 
 645 
   120 
 765 
 2,000 
 2.61 
 4. Gravity feed bin 
 4,515 
  600 
 5,115 
 40 
 0.01 
 5. Vacuum stylus 
 645 
 2,400 
 3,045 
 100 
 0.03 
 6. Methods changes 2, 4, 5 
 5,160 
 3,120 
 8,280 
 150 
 0.02 

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
385
this analyst estimates the following outcomes for the various alternatives and 
states of the market: 
 
 States of product or market 
 Alternatives 
 S 1 
 S 2 
 S 3 
 S 4 
 Total 
 a 1 
 0.30 
 0.15 
 0.10 
 0.06 
 0.61 
 a 2 
 0.10 
 0.14 
 0.18 
 0.20 
 0.62 
 a 3 
 0.05 
 0.12 
 0.20 
 0.25 
 0.62 
 a 4 
 0.01 
 0.12 
 0.35 
 0.25 
 0.23 
 Total 
 0.46 
 0.53 
 0.83 
 0.76 
 
 If the outcomes represent profits or returns, and the state of the market will be 
 S 2 , then the analyst will definitely decide on alternative  a 1 . If the outcomes represent 
scrap or some other factor that the analyst wishes to minimize, then alternative  a 3 is 
chosen. (Although  a 4  also has an outcome of 0.12, the analyst chooses  a 3 , as there is 
less variability in outcome under this alternative than with  a 4 .) Seldom should deci-
sions be made under an assumed certainty. Usually, some risk is involved in predict-
ing the future state of the market. Assume that the analyst is able to estimate the 
following probability values associated with each of the four states of the market: 
 S 1  . . . . . . .  0.10 
 S 2  . . . . . . .  0.70 
 S 3  . . . . . . .  0.15 
 S 4  . . . . . . .  0.05 
 
 1.00 
 EXAMPLE 9.2 
Crossover Analysis of Fixture and Tooling Costs 
 The production engineer in a machining department has devised two alternative meth-
ods involving different tooling for a job being machined in the shop. Data on the 
present and proposed methods are shown in Table 9.6. Which method would be more 
economical in view of the activity? The base pay rate is $9.60 per hour. The esti-
mated activity is 10,000 pieces per year. The fixtures are capitalized and depreciated 
in 5 years. A cost analysis reveals that a total unit cost of $0.077, represented by alter-
native 2, is the most economical in the long run. 
 A crossover chart (see Figure 9.1) allows the analyst to decide which method to 
use for given quantity requirements. The present method is the best for quantities up 
to about 7,700 per year: 
 (0.137  0.0006) x  0  (0.097  0.001) x  300 
 x  300  (0.1376  0.098)  7,576
Alternative method 1 is better for quantities between 7,576 and 9,090 per year: 
 (0.097  0.001) x  300  (0.058  0.007) x  600 
 x  300  (0.098  0.065)  9,090

386 
C H A P T E R  9 
and method 2 is best for quantities above 9,090 per year. Note that in this latter approach, fixture costs were 
absorbed up front, while tool costs were considered as expendable supplies. 
 Table 9.6   Fixture and Tooling Costs 
 Method  
 Standard 
time 
(min)  
 Fixture 
cost  
 Tool 
cost  
 Average tool 
life  
 Unit 
direct 
labor cost  
 Unit 
fixture 
cost  
 Unit tool 
cost  
 Unit 
total 
cost  
 Present method 
 0.856 each 
 None 
 $6 
 10,000 pieces 
 $0.137 
 None 
 $0.0006 
 $0.1376 
 Alternative 1 
 0.606 each 
 $300 
 20 
 20,000 pieces 
 0.097 
 $0.006 
 0.0010 
 0.104 
 Alternative 2 
 0.363 each 
 600 
 35 
 5,000 pieces 
 0.058 
 0.012 
 0.0070 
 0.077 
 
2,000
1,800
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
Total cost for specified
annual quantity in dollars
Total activity in thousands of pieces
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
No. 2 alternate method
No. 1 alternate method
Present method
 Figure 9.1   
A crossover (break- 
even) chart for fixture 
and tooling costs. 
 A logical decision-making strategy would be to calculate the expected return 
under each decision alternative and then select the largest value to maximize or 
the smallest value to minimize. Here, 
 
E
PC
n
( )
a
ij
i
n
jP
j∑
=
=
 

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
387
 EXAMPLE 9.3 
 Crossover Analysis of Competing Methods 
 Insufficient volume may make it impractical to consider many alternative proposals 
that may offer substantial savings over existing methods. For example, an operation 
done on a drill press involved a 0.5-in hole reamed to the tolerance of 0.500 to 0.502 in. 
The activity of the job was estimated to be 100,000 pieces. The time study department 
established a standard of 8.33 h per thousand to perform the reaming operation, and 
the reaming fixture cost $2,000. Since a base rate of $7.20 per hour was in effect, the 
money rate per thousand pieces was $60. 
 Now, assume that a methods analyst suggests broaching the inside diameter, 
because the part can be broached at the rate of 5 h per thousand. This would be a sav-
ings of 3.33 h per thousand pieces, or a total savings of 333 h. At the $7.20 base rate, 
this would mean a direct labor savings of $2,397.60. However, it would not be practi-
cal to go ahead with this idea, because the tool cost for broaching is $2,800. Thus, the 
change would not be sound unless the labor savings could be increased to $2,800 to 
offset the cost of the new broaching tools. 
 Because the labor savings in a new broaching setup would be 3.33  $7.20 
per thousand, 116,800 pieces would have to be ordered before the change in tooling 
would be justified. 



$2,800
1,000
$7.20
3.33
116,783 pieces
 However, if the broaching method had been used originally instead of the ream-
ing procedure, it would have paid for itself in 



M
$2,800
2,000
$7.20
3.33 /
33,367 pieces
 With production requirements of 100,000 pieces, the labor savings would be 3.33  
$7.20  66.6 thousand (the difference between 100,000 and 33,400)  $1,596.80 
over the present reaming method. Had a motion analysis been made in the planning 
stage, this savings might have been realized. Figure 9.2 illustrates these relationships 
with the customary crossover chart. 
 E ( a 1 )  0.153 
 E ( a 2 )  0.145 
 E ( a 3 )  0.132 
 E ( a 4 )  0.15 
 Thus, alternative  a 1 would be selected to maximize the desired result. 
 A different decision-making strategy would be to consider the state of the 
market that has the greatest chance of occurring. From the data given, this mar-
ket state would be  S 2 , which carries a probability value of 0.70. The choice, again 
based on the most probable future, would be alternative  a 1 , with a 0.15 return. 
 A third decision-making strategy is based on a  level of aspiration . Here, 
we assign an outcome value  C ij , which represents the consequence of what we 
are willing to settle for if we are reasonably sure we will get at least this con-
sequence most of the time. This assigned value may be considered to represent 

388 
C H A P T E R  9 
a level of aspiration, which we shall denote as A. For each  a j , we then determine 
the probability that the  C ij  in connection with each decision alternative is greater 
than or equal to A. Select the alternative with the greatest  P(C ij   A) . 
 For example, if we assign the consequence value of 0.10 to  A , we have the 
following: 
 (C ij  0.10) 
 a 1  0.95 
 a 2  1.00 
 a 3  0.90 
 a 4  0.90 
 
Dollars
10,400
9,600
8,800
8,000
7,200
6,400
5,600
4,800
4,000
3,200
2,400
1,600
800
0
Pieces to be produced (thousands)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Fixed cost (reaming fixture)
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Crossover point 33,367
Crossover point 116,783
Variable cost
(broaching)
Variable cost
(broaching)
Fixed cost
(broaching tools
& reaming fixture)
Fixed cost (broaching tools alone)
Variable cost (reaming)
 Figure 9.2   Crossover chart illustrating the fixed and variable costs of two competing 
methods. 

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
389
 Decision alternative  a 2  has the greatest  P(C ij   A) , so it would be 
recommended. 
 Analysts may be unable to assign probability values to various states of the 
market with confidence and may therefore want to consider any one of them as 
being equally likely. A decision-making strategy that may be used under these 
circumstances is based on the  principle of insufficient reason , as there is no rea-
son to expect that any state is more likely than any other state. Here, we compute 
the various expected values based on 
E
p C
n
( )
a
ij
n
j
j
1
∑
=
 
 In our example, this would result in 
 E ( a 1 )  0.153 
 E ( a 2 )  0.155 
 E (a 3 )  0.155 
 E ( a 4 )  0.183 
 Based on this choice, alternative  a 4 would be proposed. 
 A second strategy analysts may consider when making decisions under 
uncertainty is based on the  criterion of pessimism . When one is pessimistic, one 
anticipates the worst. Therefore, in a maximization problem, the minimum con-
sequence would be selected for each decision alternative. The analyst compares 
these minimum values and selects the alternative that has the maximum of the 
minimum values. In our example: 
 Alternative 
 Min  C ij 
 a 1  . . . . . . . . . . .  0.06 
 a 2  . . . . . . . . . . .  0.10 
 a 3  . . . . . . . . . . .  0.05 
 a 4  . . . . . . . . . . .  0.01 
 Here, alternative  a 2  would be recommended, because its minimum value of 0.10 
is a maximum when compared to the minimum values of the other alternatives. 
 The  plunger criterion  is a third decision-making strategy that analysts may want 
to consider. This criterion is based on an optimistic approach. If one is optimistic, 
one expects the best, regardless of the alternative chosen. Therefore, in a maximizing 
problem, the analyst would select the maximum  C ij  for each alter native and would 
then select the alternative with the largest of these maximum values. Thus 
 Alternative 
 Min  C ij 
 a 1 . . . . . . . . . . .  0.30 
 a 2 . . . . . . . . . . .  0.20 
 a 3 . . . . . . . . . . .  0.25 
 a 4 . . . . . . . . . . .  0.35 

390 
C H A P T E R  9 
 Here, decision alternative  a 4  would be recommended, because of its maximum 
value of 0.35. 
 Most decision makers are neither completely optimistic nor completely 
pessimistic. Instead, a coefficient of optimism  X is established, where 
 0   X  1 
 Then a  Q i is determined for each alternative, where 
 Q i  ( X ) (Max  C ij )  (1   X ) (Min  C ij ) 
 The alternative recommended is the one associated with the maximum  Q i for 
maximization, and with the minimum  Q i for minimization. 
 A final decision-making approach based on uncertainty is the  minimax re-
gret criterion . This criterion involves the calculation of a  regret matrix . For each 
alternative, based on a state of the market, analysts calculate a regret value. This 
regret value is the difference between the payoff actually received and the payoff 
that could have been received if the decision maker had been able to foresee the 
state of the market. 
 To construct the regret matrix, the analyst selects the maximum  C ij  for each 
state  S j and then subtracts the  C ij  value of each alternative associated with that 
state. In our example, the regret matrix would be 
 
 States 
 Alternative 
 S 1 
 S 2 
 S 3 
 S 4 
 a 1 
 0 
 0 
 0.25 
 0.19 
 a 2 
 0.20 
 0.01 
 0.17 
 0.05 
 a 3 
 0.25 
 0.03 
 0.15 
 0 
 a 4 
 0.29 
 0.03 
 0 
 0 
 The analyst then selects the alternative associated with the minimum of the max-
imum regrets (minimax). 
 Alternative 
 Min  r ij 
 a 1 . . . . . . . . . .  0.25 
 a 2 . . . . . . . . . .  0.20 
 a 3 . . . . . . . . . .  0.25 
 a 4 . . . . . . . . . .  0.29 
 Based on the minimax regret criterion,  a 2  would be selected, in view of its mini-
mum regret of 0.20. 
 Such decision making is very common in manual materials handling (see 
Chapter 4), where there is always a trade-off between worker safety and worker 
productivity. The greater the focus on worker safety, for example, through reduc-
tion in loads and the corresponding biomechanical stresses on the lower back, 
the worse the productivity of the load handled. To maintain job productivity at 
the desired level, a reduction of load weight requires an increased task frequency, 

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
391
with corresponding heavier physiological demands. A metabolic evaluation will 
lead to the conclusion that the infrequent lifting of heavy loads is preferable 
to the frequent lifting of lighter loads. However, from a biomechanical point 
of view, the load weight should be minimized, regardless of frequency, result-
ing in a conflict. This problem was examined by Jung and Freivalds (1991) us-
ing MCDM for a critical range of task frequencies of 1 lift/min to 12 lifts/min 
(see Figure 9.3). For infrequent tasks (	 7/min), the biomechanical stress pre-
dominates; for higher-frequency tasks (
 7/min), the physiological stress pre-
dominates. At about 7 lifts/min, however, both stresses participate equally in 
determining the overall stress level to the worker. Thus, depending on the alter-
natives and the effect of each alternative with regard to specific attributes of in-
terest, different solutions can be obtained. Analysts should become familiar with 
these decision-making strategies and should use those that are most appropriate 
to their organizations.   
 ECONOMIC DECISION TOOLS 
 The three most frequently used appraisal techniques for determining the desir-
ability of investing in a proposed method are (1) the return on sales method, 
(2) the return on investment or payback method, and (3) the discounted cash 
flow method. 
 The  return on sales  method involves computing the ratio of (1) the average 
yearly profit brought about through using the method to (2) the average yearly 
sales or increase in dollar value added to the product, based on the pessimistic 
estimated life of the product. However, while this ratio provides information on 
the effectiveness of the method and the resulting sales efforts, it does not con-
sider the original investment required to get started on the method. 
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0
3
6
9
12
Psychophysical
stress
Physiological
stress
Biomechanical
stress
Frequency
Stress level
 Figure 9.3   Unacceptability of stress levels used in reconciling the conflicting 
guidelines. 
 ( From : Jung and Freivalds, 1991) 

392 
C H A P T E R  9 
 The  return on investment  method gives the ratio of (1) the average yearly 
profit brought about through using the method, based upon the pessimistic esti-
mated life of the product, to (2) the original investment. Of two proposed meth-
ods that would result in the same sales and profit potential, management would 
prefer to use the one requiring the least investment of capital. The reciprocal of 
the return on investment is often referred to as the  payback  method. This gives 
the time that it would take to realize a full return on the original investment. 
 The  discounted cash flow  method computes the ratio of (1) the present worth 
of cash flow, based on a desired percentage return, to (2) the original investment. 
This method calculates the rate of flow of money in and through the company 
and the  time value of money . The time value of money is important. Because of 
interest earned, a dollar today is worth more than a dollar at any later date. For 
example, at 15-percent compound interest, $1 today is worth $2.011 five years 
from now. Expressing it another way, $1 received 5 years from now would be 
worth about 50 cents today. Interest may be thought of as the return obtainable 
by the productive investment of capital. 
 The following applies to the present-value concept: 
 Single payment 
 
 
 – Future-worth factor 
 (given  P , find  F ) 
F   P (1   i ) n 
 – Present-worth factor 
 (given  F , find  P ) 
P   F (1   i )  n  
 Uniform series 
 
 – Sinking fund factor 
 (given  F , find  R ) 

R
Fi
(
1

i
)
1

n
 – Capital recovery 
 (given  P , find  R ) 



R
Pi
i
i
(1
)
(1
)
1

n
n
 – Future-worth factor 
 (given  R , find  F ) 
F   R [(1   i ) n  1]/ i 
 – Present-worth factor 
 (given  R , find  P ) 
P
R
i
i
n
n
=
i
[(
)
]
(
)
1
i)n −
n
+
 where  i  interest rate for a given period 
 
 n  number of interest periods 
 
 P  present sum of money (present worth of principal) 
 
 F   future sum of money at end of  n  periods from present date; equiva-
lent to  P with interest  i 
 
 R   end-of-period payment or receipt in a uniform series continuing for 
coming  n periods; the entire series equivalent to  P at interest  i 
 An assumed return rate  I  is the basis of the cash flow computation. All 
cash flows following the initial investment for the new method are estimated 
and adjusted to their present worth, based on the assumed return rate. The total 
estimated cash flows for the pessimistic estimated life of the product are then 

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
393
 EXAMPLE 9.4 
Economic Justification of a Proposed Method 
 An example should clarify the use of the three methods for appraising the potential of 
a proposed method. 
 Investment for proposed method: $10,000 
 Desired return on investment: 10 percent 
 Salvage value of jigs, fixtures, and tools: $500 
 Estimated life of the product for which the proposed method will be used: 
10 years 
 Present worth of cash flow: 
 (3,000)(0.9091)  $2,730 
 (3,800)(0.5645)  2,140 
 (3,800)(0.8264)   3,140 
 (3,000)(0.5132)  1,540 
 (4,600)(0.7513)   3,460 
 (2,200)(0.4665)  1,025 
 (5,400)(0.6830)   3,690 
 (1,400)(0.4241)     595 
 (4,600)(0.6209)   2,860 
   (500)(0.3855)     193 
 
 $21,373 
 Salvage value of tools: 
 (500)(0.3855)  $193 
 Total present worth of anticipated gross profit and tool salvage value: $21,566. 
Ratio of present worth to original investment: 
 

21,566
10,000
2.16
 The new method satisfactorily passes all three appraisal methods (see Table 9.7). 
A 61-percent return on sales and a 32.3-percent return on capital investment represent 
very attractive returns. The return of the $10,000 capital investment will take place 
in 3.09 years, and the cash flow analysis reveals that the original investment will be 
recovered in 4 years while earning 10 percent. During the 10-year anticipated life of 
the product, $11,566 more than the original investment will be earned. 
 Table 9.7   Comparison of Economic Justification Methods 
 End of year  
 Increase in sales 
values due to 
proposed method  
 Cost of 
production with 
proposed method  
 Gross profit due to 
proposed method  
 
 1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $5,000 
 $2,000 
 $3,000 
 
 2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6,000 
 2,200 
 3,800 
 
 3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7,000 
 2,400 
 4,600 
 
 4  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8,000 
 2,600 
 5,400 
 
 5  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7,000 
 2,400 
 4,600 
 
 6  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6,000 
 2,200 
 3,800 
 
 7  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5,000 
 2,000 
 3,000 
 
 8  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4,000 
 1,800 
 2,200 
(continued)

394 
C H A P T E R  9 
summed as a profit (or loss) in terms of cash on hand today. Finally, this total is 
compared to the initial investment. 
 Estimates of the product demand 10 years hence may deviate considerably 
from reality. Thus, the element of chance is introduced, and the probabilities 
of success tend to diminish with the increased length of the payoff period. The 
results of any study are only as valid as the reliability of the input data. Constant 
follow-up can determine the validity of the assumptions. The analyst should not 
hesitate to alter decisions if the original data prove to be invalid. Sound financial 
analysis is intended to facilitate the decision-making process, not replace good 
business judgment. 
 9.2 INSTALLATION 
  After a proposed method has been approved, the next step is installation. The 
analyst should stay with the job during installation, to ensure that all details are 
carried out in accordance with the proposed plan. The analyst should verify that 
the work center being established is equipped with the facilities proposed, the 
planned working conditions are provided, the tooling is done in accordance with 
recommendations, and the work is progressing satisfactorily. A mechanic may 
make a slight change without considering the consequences, resulting in less 
than anticipated benefits. The analyst should “sell” the new method to the opera-
tor, supervisor, and setup person along the way so that these employees will be 
more accepting of the new method. 
 Once the new work center has been installed, the analyst must check all as-
pects to see whether they conform to the specifications established. In particular, 
the analyst must verify that the  reach  and  move  distances are the correct length, 
the tools are correctly sharpened, the mechanisms function soundly, stickiness 
and sluggishness have been worked out, safety features are operative, material is 
available in the quantities planned, working conditions associated with the work 
center are as anticipated, and all parties have been informed of the new method. 
 End of year  
 Increase in sales 
values due to 
proposed method  
 Cost of 
production with 
proposed method  
 Gross profit due to 
proposed method  
 
 9  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3,000 
 1,600 
 1,400 
 
 10  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2,000 
 1,500 
 500 
 
  . . . . . . . . . . . .  $53,000 
 $20,700 
 $32,300 
  Average  . . . . . . . . . . . . . $ 5,300 
 $ 2,070 
 $ 3,230 
 Return on sales  
3,230
5,300
61% 
 Return on investment  

3,230
10,000
32.3% 
 
 Payback  1/0.323  3.09 years 
Totals

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
395
 Once every aspect of the new method is ready for operation, the supervisor 
assigns the operator who will be working with the method. The analyst should 
then stay with the operator as long as necessary to ensure that the operator is 
familiar with the new assignment. This period may be a matter of a few minutes, 
several hours, or even several days, depending on the complexity of the assign-
ment and the flexibility and adaptability of the worker. 
 Once the operator begins to get a feel for the method and can work sys-
tematically, the analyst can proceed with other work. However, the installation 
phase should not be considered complete until the analyst has checked back sev-
eral times during the first few days after installation to ensure that the proposed 
method is working as planned. Also check with line supervisors to ensure that 
they spot-check and monitor the new method. 
 RESISTANCE TO CHANGE 
 It is not unusual for workers to resist changes in the method. Although many 
may think of themselves as open-minded, most people are quite comfortable 
with their present job or workplace, even if it might not be the most comfort-
able or pleasant. Their fear of change and the impact it might have on their jobs, 
pay, and security overrides other concerns (see Maslow’s hierarchy of human 
needs, Section 18.3). Worker reactions to change can be quite obstinate and per-
plexing, as experienced by Gilbreth in the following classic example. While do-
ing a motion study in a bed manufacturing plant, he noticed a large middle-aged 
woman ironing bed sheets in an obviously very inefficient and fatiguing manner. 
To iron each sheet, she picked up a large and heavy iron, sat down, and pressed 
down hard on the sheet, about 100 times for each sheet. She was fatigued and 
had back pain. With a few work design changes using counterweights to support 
the iron (the modern-day equivalent of a tool balancer), he considerably reduced 
the physical workload. However, the woman’s reaction was completely opposite 
of that expected. Instead of being the only worker physically capable of doing 
the job (and receiving praise from her supervisor), she was only one of many. 
Her status was lost and she was dead set against the change (DeReamer, 1980). 
 Thus, it is important to “sell” the new method to the operators, supervisors, 
mechanics, and others. Employees should be notified well in advance about any 
method changes that will affect them. The resistance to change is directly pro-
portional to the magnitude of the change and the time available to implement the 
change. Therefore, large changes should be made in small steps. Don’t change 
the whole workstation, chair or stool, and tooling all at once. Start with the chair, 
maybe change the tools next, and then finally change the workstation. 
 Explain the reasons for the change. People resist what they don’t under-
stand. Instead of just replacing the worker’s pistol-grip tool for a horizontal work 
surface with an in-line tool, explain that this tool will weigh less and require less 
upper arm motion, that is, it will be more comfortable to use. 
 As a general rule for dealing with emotion, it is better to emphasize posi-
tives, for example, “This new tool is going to be much easier to use,” and 

396 
C H A P T E R  9 
deemphasize negatives, such as, “That tool is heavy and unsafe.” Get the worker 
to participate directly in the process of the methods change or work design. 
Workers have a good record of following their own suggestions, and where 
workers have been involved in the decision making, there has typically been less 
resistance to the changes. One successful approach is to form worker committees 
or ergonomic teams (see Section 18.5). 
 Threats of force, that is, management reprisals for not making the change, 
may be counterproductive, setting up counteremotions to resist the change. In 
addition, people often resist the social aspects of change, rather than the tech-
nical aspects. Therefore, if it can be shown that other employees are using the 
same device, an operator will be much more likely to go along with the change. 
 The last step in methods engineering, after appropriate standards have been 
set, is to maintain the method, that is, to determine if the anticipated productivity 
gains are being realized. Here, the industrial engineers must be very careful to 
determine whether any effect is truly due to the new method or due to the  Haw-
thorne effect , solely. 
 HAWTHORNE EFFECT 
 The Hawthorne effect refers to an often quoted study emphasizing the need for 
worker involvement in methods changes or production planning leading to in-
creased motivation and productivity. Actually, this was a very poorly designed 
series of studies from which it is difficult to draw any true scientific effect or 
conclusion, other than the need to be very careful when assuming that productiv-
ity improvements are due strictly to the methods changes. The initial, less well-
known study was a joint project between the National Research Council and 
Western Electric Co. to examine the effects of illumination on productivity. The 
study was conducted at the very large Hawthorne plant (some 40,000 workers) 
near Chicago, from 1924 to 1927. In general, management found that employees 
were reacting to changes in illumination in the way they were expected to react; 
that is, when illumination was increased, they were expected to produce more, 
and they did. When the illumination was decreased, they were expected to pro-
duce less, and they did. A follow-up study tested this point even further. Light-
bulbs were changed and workers were allowed to assume that the illumination 
had been increased. In fact, the lightbulbs were replaced with ones of exactly the 
same wattage. However, the workers commented favorably on the increased illu-
mination and responded with increased productivity. Thus, physiological effects 
were being confounded by psychological effects (Homans, 1972). 
 Based on these results, Western Electric decided to conduct a further series 
of studies on mental attitudes and workers’ effectiveness. These are the more 
famous Hawthorne studies, conducted in conjunction with the Harvard School 
of Business Administration from 1927 to 1932 (Mayo, 1960). Six female op-
erators were placed in a separate room and subjected to various experimental 
conditions: (1) special group incentive for the six workers, as opposed to the 
more than 100 workers in a given department; (2) inclusion of two 5- or 10-min 

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
397
rest breaks; (3) shorter workdays; (4) shorter workweeks; and (5) lunches and/or 
beverages provided by the company. Any changes were discussed with the group 
of six ahead of time, and any that were seriously objected to were discarded. 
Also, later, the effects of these changes on the workers were discussed in a rather 
formal interview process. 
 With the workers welcoming these opportunities to vent their feelings, these 
structured interviews degenerated into open-ended gripe sessions. Interestingly, 
production generally increased during this span of five years (except for minor 
changes in product or start/stop of vacation periods), regardless of test condi-
tions. In addition, absences and sick days decreased considerably for the six 
operators, as compared to their coworkers. Western Electric, already known for 
its concern for worker welfare, attributed this somewhat surprising result to an 
overall increase in concern for the worker, with a resulting increase in social 
satisfaction (Pennock, 1929–1930). 
 Unfortunately, these conclusions are oversimplified, as other effects 
were also confounded in the study. There were large variations in supervisory 
practices, different and inconsistent measures of productivity were utilized 
throughout the five years of the study, and significant changes in methods were 
introduced (Carey, 1972). For example, a drop delivery system was implemented 
for the experimental group for the purpose of counting the relays produced. How-
ever, based on principles of motion economy (in Section 4.3), this also tended to 
increase production rates. 
 Regardless of the controversy, the Hawthorne studies have three main impli-
cations: (1) the basic rule of experimentation—“the act of measuring something 
changes it”—was confirmed; (2) proper human relations can act as a strong mo-
tivator (see Section 10.3); and (3) it is very difficult to tease apart confounded 
factors in an uncontrolled study. Therefore, the analyst should be very careful 
about jumping to conclusions about the effectiveness of methods changes on 
productivity. Part of the productivity changes could be due to the improved 
method, while part could be due to improved morale or motivation of the af-
fected operator. Also, any productivity measurements, even though innocuous on 
the surface, could have unintended effects, if the workers become aware of them 
and perform as expected.  
 9.3 JOB EVALUATION 
  This is the sixth step in the systematic procedure of applying methods engineer-
ing. Every time a method is changed, the job description should be altered to re-
flect the conditions, duties, and responsibilities of the new method. When a new 
method is introduced, a job evaluation should be done, so that a qualified opera-
tor may be assigned to the work center and an appropriate base rate provided. 
 A job evaluation should start with an accurate title, a detailed job description 
identifying the specific duties and responsibilities of the job, and the minimum 
requirements for the worker performing the job. The worker should be en-
listed in accurately defining the job responsibilities. A combination of personal 

398 
C H A P T E R  9 
interviews and questionnaires, along with direct observation, results in a concise 
definition of the job and the duties that it entails. The mental and physical func-
tions required to perform the work should also be included, and such definitive 
words as  direct ,  examine ,  plan ,  measure , and  operate  should be used. The more 
accurate the description, the better, with Figure 9.4 illustrating a detail example 
for a clerical job. These job descriptions are useful supervisory tools that can aid 
in the selection, training, and promotion of employees, and in the assessment of 
work distribution. 
 Essentially, the job evaluation is a procedure by which an organization ranks 
its jobs in order of their worth or importance. It should provide the following: 
 1.  A basis for explaining to employees why one job is worth more (or less) 
than another job 
 2.  A reason to employees whose rates of pay are adjusted because of a change 
in method 
 3.  A basis for assigning personnel with specific abilities to certain jobs 
 4.  Criteria for a job when new personnel are employed or promotions are made  
 5.  Assistance in the training of supervisory personnel 
 6.  A basis for determining where opportunities for methods improvement exist   
 JOB EVALUATION SYSTEMS 
 The majority of job evaluation systems in use today are a variation or combina-
tion of four principal systems: the classification method, the point system, the 
factor comparison method, and the ranking method. The  classification method , 
sometimes called the  grade description plan , consists of a series of definitions 
designed to differentiate jobs into wage groups. Once the grade levels have been 
defined, analysts study each job and assign it to the appropriate level, on the 
basis of the complexity of its duties and responsibilities and its relation to the 
description of the several levels. The U.S. Civil Service Commission uses this 
plan extensively. 
 For this method of job evaluation, the analyst uses the following procedure: 
 1.  Prepare a grade description scale for each type of job, such as machine op-
erations, manual operations, skilled (craft) operations, or inspection. 
 2.  Write the grade descriptions for each grade in each scale, using such fac-
tors as 
 
 a.  Type of work and complexity of duties 
 
 b.  Education necessary to perform job 
 
 c.  Experience necessary to perform job 
 
 d.  Responsibilities 
 
 e.  Effort demanded 
 3.  Prepare job descriptions for each job. Classify each job by  slotting (placing 
in a specific category) the job description into the proper grade description.  

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
399
 In the  point system , analysts directly compare all the attributes of a job with 
the attributes in other jobs, using the following procedure: 
 1.  Establish and define the basic factors common to most jobs, indicating the 
elements of value in all jobs. 
 2.  Specifically define the degrees of each factor. 
JOB TITLE 
Shipping and Receiving Clerk 
DEPT. 
Shipping
MALE X FEMALE 
DATE 
 TOTAL POINTS 280 CLASS 5
JOB DESCRIPTION
Directs and assists in loading and unloading, counting, and receiving or rejecting 
purchased parts and supplies, and later delivers to proper departments.
Examines receivals out of line with purchase orders. Maintains file on all purchase orders 
and/or shipping orders and keeps open orders up-to-date. Maintains daily and weekly 
shipping reports and monthly inventory reports.
Assists in packing of all foreign and domestic shipments. Makes up request for 
inspection form on certain materials received and rejection form for all items rejected.
Job requires thorough knowledge of packing, shipping and receiving routine, plant 
layout, shop supplies, and finished parts. Needs to have a knowledge of simple office 
routine. Ability to work with other departments, as a service department, and to deal 
effectively with vendors. Job requires considerable accuracy and dependability. The 
effects of poor decisions include damaged receivables and shipments, inaccurate 
inventories, and extra material handling. Considerable lifting of weights up to 100 lbs. is 
involved. Works in conjunction with two class 4 packers and shippers.
Points
Degree
Job Evaluation
15
1
Education
50
50
50
30
25
25
280
20
10
2
Experience and training
3
Initiative and ingenuity
3
Analytical ability
2
Personality requirements
1
Supervisory responsibility
1
Responsibility for loss
6
Physical application
5
1
Mental or visual application
5
Working conditions
 Figure 9.4   Job analysis for a shipping and receiving clerk. 

400 
C H A P T E R  9 
 3.  Establish the points to be accredited to each degree of each factor. 
 4.  Prepare a description of each job. 
 5.  Evaluate each job by determining the degree of each factor contained in it. 
 6.  Sum the points for each factor to get the total points for the job. 
 7.  Convert the job points into a wage rate. 
 The  factor comparison  method of job evaluation usually has the following 
elements: 
 1.  Determine the factors establishing the relative worth of all jobs. 
 2.  Establish an evaluation scale that is usually similar to a point scale, except 
that the units are in terms of money. For example, a $2,000 per month 
benchmark job might attribute $800 to the responsibility factor, $400 to 
education, $600 to skill, and $200 to experience. 
 3.  Prepare job descriptions. 
 4.  Evaluate key jobs, factor by factor, by ranking each job from the lowest to 
the highest. 
 5.  Pay wages on each key job, based on various factors. The money allocation 
automatically fixes the relationships among jobs for each factor, and there-
fore establishes the ranks of jobs for each factor. 
 6.  Evaluate other jobs, factor by factor, on the basis of the monetary values 
assigned to the various factors in the key jobs. 
 7.  Determine a wage by adding the money values of the various factors.  
 Both the point system and the factor comparison method are more objective 
and thorough in their evaluations of the various jobs involved; both plans study 
the basic factors common to most jobs that influence their relative worth. Of the 
two plans, the point system is the more commonly used and is generally consid-
ered the more accurate method for occupational rating. 
 The  ranking method  arranges jobs in order of importance, or according to 
relative worth. Here, the entire job is considered, including the complexity and 
degree of difficulty of the duties, the requirements for specific areas of knowl-
edge, the required skills, the amount of experience required, and the level of 
authority and responsibility assigned to the job. This method became popular 
in the United States during World War II, because of its simplicity and ease of 
installation. Generally speaking, the ranking method is less objective than the 
other techniques necessitating greater knowledge of all jobs, and for this reason 
has not been used extensively in recent years. The following steps apply to the 
ranking method: 
 1.  Prepare job descriptions. 
 2.  Rank jobs (usually, departmentally first) in the order of their relative 
importance. 
 3.  Determine the class or grade for groups of jobs, using a bracketing process. 
 4.  Establish the wage or wage range for each class or grade.  

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
401
 FACTOR SELECTION 
 Under the factor comparison method, most companies use five factors. In some 
point programs, 10 or more factors may be used. However, it is preferable to use 
a small number of factors. The objective is to use only as many factors as are 
necessary to provide a clear-cut difference among the jobs. The elements of any 
job may be classified according to 
 1.  What job demands the employee meets in the form of physical and mental 
factors 
 2.  What the job takes from the employee in the form of physical and mental 
fatigue 
 3.  The responsibilities that the job demands 
 4.  The conditions under which the job is done  
 Other factors may include education, experience, initiative, ingenuity, physical 
demands, mental and/or visual demands, working conditions, hazards, equipment 
responsibility, process, materials, products, and the work and safety of others. 
 These factors are present in varying degrees in all jobs, and any job under 
consideration falls under one of the several degrees of each factor. The vari-
ous factors are equally important. To recognize these differences in importance, 
the analyst assigns weights or points to each degree of each factor, as shown in 
Table 9.8. Figure 9.5 illustrates a completed job rating, with substantiating data. 
 Table 9.8   Points Assigned to Factors and Key to Grades 
 Factors 
 1st 
degree 
 2nd 
degree 
 3rd 
degree 
 4th 
degree 
 5th 
degree 
 Skill 
 
 
 
 
 
  1. Education  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14 
 28 
 42 
 56 
 70 
  2. Experience  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22 
 44 
 66 
 88 
 110 
  3. Initiative and ingenuity  . . . . . . .  14 
 28 
 42 
 56 
 70 
 Effort 
 
 
 
 
 
  4. Physical demand  . . . . . . . . . . .  10 
 20 
 30 
 40 
 50 
  5. Mental and/or visual demand  . . .  5 
 10 
 15 
 20 
 25 
 Responsibility 
 
 
 
 
 
  6. Equipment or process  . . . . . . . . .  5 
 10 
 15 
 20 
 25 
  7. Material or product  . . . . . . . . . .  5 
 10 
 15 
 20 
 25 
  8. Safety of others  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5 
 10 
 15 
 20 
 25 
  9.  Work of others  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5 
 10 
 15 
 20 
 25 
 Job conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
  10. Working conditions  . . . . . . . . .  10 
 20 
 30 
 40 
 50 
  11. Unavoidable hazards  . . . . . . . . .  5 
 10 
 15 
 20 
 25 
 Source: National Electrical Manufacturers Association. 

402 
C H A P T E R  9 
 For example, education may be defined as a requirement with first-degree 
education requiring only the ability to read and write, with second-degree educa-
tion requiring the use of simple arithmetic, which would be characteristic of two 
years of high school. Third-degree education could be equivalent to four years 
of high school, while fourth-degree education may be equivalent to four years 
of high school plus four years of formal trades training. Fifth-degree education 
could be equivalent to four years of technical university training.  
JOB RATING-SUBSTANTIATING DATA
DORBEN MFG. CO.
UNIVERSITY PARK, PA.
Education
FACTORS 
DEG. POINTS 
BASIS OF RATING
JOB TITLE:  Machinist (General) 
CODE: 
176 
DATE: 
Nov. 12
Experience
Initiative
and 
ingenuity
Physical
demand
Mental or
visual demand
Responsibility
for equipment
or process
Responsibility
for material
or product
Responsibility
for safety 
of others
Responsibility
for work
of others
Working
conditions
Unavoidable
hazards
REMARKS:  Total 307 -- assign to job class 4.
3
4
3
2
4
3
2
3
2
3
3
42
88
42
20
20
15
10
15
10
30
15
Requires the use of fairly complicated drawings, advanced shop mathematics, variety 
of precision instruments, shop trade knowledge.  Equivalent to four years of high 
school or two years of high school plus two to three years of trades training.
Intermittent physical effort required tearing down, assembling, installing, and 
maintaining machines.
Concentrated mental and visual attention required.  Laying out, setup, machining, 
checking, inspecting, fitting parts on machines.
Damage seldom over $900.  Broken parts of machines.  Carelessness in handling gears 
and intricate parts may cause damage.
Responsible for directing one or more helpers a great part of time. Depends on type of 
work.
Somewhat disagreeable conditions due to exposure to oil, grease, and dust.
Exposure to accidents, such as crushed hand or foot, loss of fingers, eye injury from 
flying particles, possible electric shock, or burns.
Probable loss due to scrapping of materials or work, seldom over $300.
Safety precautions are required to prevent injury to others; fastening work properly to face 
plates, handling fixtures, etc.
Three to five years installing, repairing, and maintaining machine tools and other 
production equipment.
Rebuild, repair, and maintain a wide variety of medium-size standard automatic and 
hand-operated machine tools.  Diagnose trouble, disassemble machine and fit new parts, 
such as antifriction and plain bearings, spindles, gears, cams, etc.  Manufacture 
replacement parts as necessary.  Involves skilled and accurate machining using a variety of 
machine tools.  Judgment required to diagnose and remedy trouble quickly so as to 
maintain production.
 Figure 9.5   Job rating and substantiating form. 

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
403
 Experience appraises the time that an individual with the specified education 
usually requires to learn to perform the work satisfactorily from the standpoint 
of both quality and quantity. Here, first degree could involve up to 3 months; 
second degree, 3 months to 1 year; third degree, 1 to 3 years; fourth degree, 3 to 
5 years; and fifth degree, more than 5 years. In a similar manner, each degree of 
each factor is identified with a clear definition and with specific examples, when 
applicable. 
 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
 Considerable judgment is needed to evaluate each job with respect to the degree 
of each factor required for the plan. Consequently, it is usually desirable to have 
a committee consisting of a union representative, the department supervisor, the 
department steward, and a management representative (usually from human re-
sources) perform the evaluation. 
 Committee members should assign their degree evaluations independently 
of the other members and should evaluate all jobs for the same factor before 
proceeding to the next factor. The correlation among different evaluators should 
be reasonably high, such as 0.85 or higher. The members should then discuss any 
differences until there is agreement on the level of the factor. 
 JOB CLASSIFICATION 
 After all jobs have been evaluated, the points assigned to each job should be tab-
ulated. Next, the number of labor grades within the plant should be determined. 
Typically, the number of grades runs from 8 (typical of smaller plants and lesser 
skilled industries) to 15 (typical of larger plants and higher skilled industries) 
(see Figure 9.6). For example, if the point range of all the jobs within a plant 
is from 110 to 365, the grades shown in Table 9.9 could be established. Similar 
ranges are not necessary for the various labor grades. Increasing the point ranges 
might be desirable for more highly compensated jobs.  
 The jobs falling within the various labor grades are then reviewed relative to 
one another, to ensure fairness and consistency. For example, it would not be ap-
propriate for a class A machinist to be in the same grade level as a class B machinist. 
Next, hourly rates are assigned to each of the labor grades. These rates are 
based on area rates for similar work, company policy, and the cost-of-living in-
dex. Frequently, analysts establish a rate range for each labor grade. The total 
performance of each operator determines his or her pay rate within the estab-
lished range, and  total performance  refers to quality, quantity, safety, attendance, 
suggestions, and so on.    
 JOB EVALUATION PROGRAM INSTALLATION 
 After plotting area rates against the point values of the various jobs, the analyst 
develops a rate versus point value trend line, which may or may not be a straight 
line. Regression techniques are helpful in developing this trend line. Several 

404 
C H A P T E R  9 
 Table 9.9   Labor Grades 
 Grade 
 Score range 
(points) 
 Grade 
 Score range
(points) 
  12  . . . . . . . . . . . .  100–139 
 
 6  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  250–271 
  11  . . . . . . . . . . . .  140–161 
 
 5  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  272–293 
  10  . . . . . . . . . . . .  162–183 
 
 4  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  294–315 
 
 9  . . . . . . . . . . . .  184–205 
 
 3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  316–337 
 
 8  . . . . . . . . . . . .  206–227 
 
 2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  338–359 
 
 7  . . . . . . . . . . . .  228–249 
 
 1  . . . . . . . . . . . .  360 and above 
Base rate in cents
1,100
1,000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Evaluation points
0
200
300
400
100
500
10 percent above wage trend line
Red circle jobs
Rate range within
labor grade 1
10 percent below wage trend line
Wage trend line
Jobs with low rates that will
be adjusted to conform with
respective labor grade
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
 Figure 9.6   Evaluation points and base rate range for nine labor grades. 
points will be either above or below it. Points significantly above the trend line 
represent employees whose present rate is higher than that established by the job 
evaluation plan; points significantly below the trend line represent employees 
whose present rate is less than that prescribed by the plan. 
 Employees whose rates are less than called for by the plan should receive 
immediate increases to the new rate. Employees whose rates are higher than 
called for by the plan (such rates are referred to as  red circle rates ) are not given 
a rate decrease. However, they are also not given an increase at their next review, 

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
405
unless the cost-of-living adjustment results in a rate higher than their current 
pay. Finally, any new employee would be paid the new rate advocated by the job 
evaluation plan. 
 POTENTIAL CONCERNS 
 Although a point job evaluation system is probably the most favorable approach 
to bringing both equity and objectivity to the determination of individual com-
pensation, there can be some problems. If the job description is not worded care-
fully, some employees may refuse to perform certain work, simply because these 
tasks are not included in the job description. A point plan can also create unnec-
essary and undesirable power relationships within the company, as they establish 
an obvious pecking order that can interfere with cooperation and group decision 
making. 
 Another problem is that individuals will recognize that they can increase 
their job evaluation points by increasing their responsibility, by adding unneces-
sary work, or by adding another employee. These additions may be unnecessary 
and may really add only more overhead costs, in addition to the cost increase of 
the higher-paid job resulting from the point additions. 
 One of the principal concerns heard in the courtrooms and legislative hear-
ings deals with the principle of “equal pay for equal work.” A point job evalu-
ation system is based on this concept. However, decisions have to be made on 
how much weight to give to initiative and experience, found in many salaried 
jobs (many held by women), as opposed to physical demand and hazardous con-
ditions found in many production jobs (many held by men). Also, the analyst 
must realize that there is no inherent worth to any job: it is worth what is pro-
vided in the marketplace. If a lack of nurses is exacerbated by an aging popula-
tion, salaries will rise. Conversely, if there is an overabundance of programmers, 
salaries will drop. 
 It is also important that a regular follow-up of the plan be done, so that it is 
adequately maintained. Jobs change, so it is necessary to review all jobs peri-
odically and make adjustments when necessary. Finally, employees must under-
stand the essential fairness of the job evaluation plan and attempt to work with 
the system.  
 9.4 AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT 
  While implementing a new method and performing job evaluations, the analyst 
must consider the implications of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
The ADA was passed in 1990 to “outlaw discrimination in employment against 
a qualified individual with a disability.” This is an important consideration for all 
employers with 15 or more employees, as it may entail considerable workplace 
redesign or other accommodations. The ADA covers such employment practices 
as recruitment, hiring, promotion, training, pay, layoffs, firing, leave, benefits, 
and job assignments, the last of which would be the concern of methods analysts. 

406 
C H A P T E R  9 
The ADA protects any individual “with a physical or mental impairment that 
substantially limits a major life activity.”  Substantial  implies something more 
than minor, while  major life activity  includes hearing, seeing, speaking, breath-
ing, walking, manually feeling or manipulating, learning, or working. Temporary 
injuries of limited duration are not covered. 
 The individual with a disability must be qualified to perform the “es-
sential functions” of the job with or without “reasonable accommodations.” 
 Essential functions  are basic job duties that an employee must be able to per-
form. They can be determined using the job analysis techniques presented 
earlier in this chapter.  Reasonable accommodation  is any change or adjust-
ment to a job or work environment that allows the individual to perform the 
essential functions of the job and enjoy the benefits and privileges that all em-
ployees enjoy. Those accommodations could include physical modification of 
the tools, equipment, or workstation; job restructuring; modification of work 
schedules; and modification of training materials or policies, among others. 
The purpose of any modifications would be to make them usable and acces-
sible. One consideration is that any such change will be ergonomically ben-
eficial to all workers. Many of the work design principles (Chapters 4 to 7) 
should be useful here also. 
 A reasonable accommodation is one that does not place an undue hard-
ship on the employer, that is, one that is not unduly costly, extensive, sub-
stantial, or disruptive, and that does not fundamentally alter the nature or 
operation of the business. Variables that affect cost are the company size, 
financial resources, and its operational nature or structure. Unfortunately, 
there is no specific or quantitative definition of the cost factor. Most likely, 
that will evolve through the legal system as various cases of discrimination 
are brought forward in the courts. For further information on the definitions, 
legal aspects, and accessibility modifications guidelines, the methods engi-
neer should consult the ADA (1991).  
 9.5 FOLLOW-UP 
  The eighth and last step in a methods engineering program is Follow-Up (please 
refer back to Figure 1.3). The seventh step, Establish Time Standards, is not 
strictly part of methods changes and will not be discussed in this section on 
methods. However, it is a necessary part of any successful work center and will 
be covered in great detail in Chapters 10 to 16. 
 Following up the method, in the short term, includes ensuring that the instal-
lation was correct, so that the operators can be trained in the proper work prac-
tices and can achieve the desired productivity levels. It also includes economic 
analyses to verify that the projected savings are truly achieved. If follow-up 
is not done, management may question the need for such changes and may be 
less willing to support similar methods changes in the future. Finally, it is im-
portant to keep everyone sold on the method, so that the operators don’t slide 

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
407
back to the old patterns of movement, supervisors do not slack off in the en-
forcement of new procedures, and management does not waiver in its commit-
ment to the overall program. 
 Following up the new method is a critical aspect of maintaining a 
smoothly running and efficient work center. Otherwise, several years later, 
another methods engineer will be examining the present method and asking 
the same questions—“Why?” and “What is the purpose of this operation?”—
which were asked as part of this operation analysis. Thus, it is very important 
to close the feedback loop and maintain a continuous improvement cycle, as 
shown in Figure 2.1.  
 9.6  SUCCESSFUL METHODS 
IMPLEMENTATIONS 
  As an example of an effective methods program to manufacturing, one Ohio 
company realized a 17,496-ton annual savings. By forming a mill section into 
a ring and welding it, the company could replace an original rough-forged ring 
weighing 2,198 lb. The new mill section blank weighed only 740 lb. The saving 
of 1,458 lb of high-grade steel, amounting to twice the weight of the finished 
piece, was brought about by the simple procedure of reducing the excess mate-
rial that previously had to be cut away. Another more detailed change is shown 
in example 9.5. 
 Methods improvements can also be implemented in less traditional opera-
tions. An analytic laboratory in a New Jersey plant applied the principles of 
operation analysis in laying out new workbenches in the form of a cross, so 
that each chemist had an L-shaped worktable. This arrangement allowed each 
chemist to reach any part of the workstation by taking only one stride. The 
new workbench consolidated equipment, thus saving space and eliminating 
the duplication of facilities. One glassware cabinet serviced two chemists. 
A large four-place fume head allowed multiple activity in an area that was 
formerly a bottleneck. All utility outlets were also relocated for maximum 
efficiency.  
 Methods improvements can be used to streamline service organizations. 
A state government division developed an operation analysis program that 
resulted in an estimated annual savings of more than 50,000 h. This was brought 
about by combining, eliminating, and redesigning all paperwork activities; 
improving the plant layout; and developing paths of authority. 
 Methods improvement is also effective in office environments. One indus-
trial engineering department of a Pennsylvania company was given the problem 
of simplifying the paperwork necessary for shipping molded parts manufactured 
in one of its plants to an outlying plant for assembly. The department devel-
oped a new method that reduced the average daily shipment of 45 orders from 
552 sheets of paper forms to 50 sheets. The annual savings in paper alone was 
significant. 

408 
C H A P T E R  9 
 EXAMPLE 9.5  
Methods Change for Auto-Starter 
 A representative case history, which follows operation analysis, is the production of 
an auto-starter, a device for starting AC motors by reducing the voltage through a 
transformer. A subassembly of the auto-starter is the arc box. This part sits in the bot-
tom of the auto-starter and acts as a barrier between the contacts so there are no short-
circuits. The present design consists of the components shown in Table 9.10. 
 In assembling these components, the operator places a washer, lock washer, and 
nut on one end of each rod. Next, the worker inserts the rods through the three holes 
in the first barrier. Then the operator places one spacer on each of the rods (three in 
all) and adds another barrier. Operators repeat this until six barriers are on the rods, 
separated by the tubing. 
 Table 9.10   Auto-Starter Components 
 Asbestos barriers with three drilled holes 
 6 
 Spacers of insulating tubing 2 in long 
 15 
 Steel rods threaded at both ends 
 3 
 Pieces of hardware 
 18 
 Pieces total 
 42 
 It was suggested that the six barriers be made with two slots, one at each end, 
and that two strips of asbestos be made for supporting the barriers, with six slots in 
each. These would be slipped together and placed in the bottom of the auto-starter as 
needed. The manner of assembly would be the same as that used in putting together 
the separator in an eggbox. A total of 15 suggested improvements occurred after the 
analysis was completed, with the results shown in Table 9.11. 
 Table 9.11   Improvements for Auto-Starter 
 Old method  
 New method  
 Savings  
 42 parts 
 8 
 34 
 10 workstations 
 1 
 9 
 18 transportations 
 7 
 11 
 7,900 ft of travel 
 200 
 7,700 
 9 storages 
 4 
 5 
 0.45-h time 
 0.11-h time 
 0.34-h 
 $1.55 costs 
 $0.60 
 $0.95 
 More recently, methods improvement was tied in very successfully to an 
ergonomics program. A central Pennsylvania manufacturer of automobile car-
peting was cited by OSHA for excessive work-related musculoskeletal injuries. 
In lieu of the developing ergonomics standard, the company was cited under 
the General Duty Clause of the 1970 OSHAct for not providing a safe working 

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
409
environment for its employees. As part of the four-year abatement program, 
the company hired an occupational nurse to provide proper medical manage-
ment and an outside ergonomics consultant to assist on the workplace redesigns 
necessary to reduce the injury rates. A detailed worksite analysis identified or 
confirmed from the medical records the critical jobs and workstations. Success-
ful methods changes implemented included water jet cutters in place of manual 
trimming of the carpets with knives, a decrease in the number of times the car-
pets were handled manually with excessive pinch grips, and changes in gluing 
and sewing operations. In addition, the working conditions through the employ-
ees’ perspective were analyzed with a health and safety survey, and the workers 
were provided with various levels of ergonomics training. As a result, the num-
ber of OSHA-recordable musculoskeletal injuries dropped from a high of 55 in 
the first year, to 35 in the second year, to 17 in the third year, and to an eventual 
low of 8 in the fifth year. However, more important, the ergonomics program 
was considered so successful by OSHA that abatement program oversight was 
terminated after the second year!  
 SUMMARY 
 Increased output and improved quality are the primary outcomes of methods and 
work design changes, but methods changes also distribute the benefits of im-
proved production to all workers and help develop better working conditions and 
a safer working environment, so the worker can do more work at the plant, do a 
good job, and still have enough energy to enjoy life. The examples of effective 
implementation of methods changes clearly demonstrate the need to follow an 
orderly approach, as presented in Figure 2.1. The methods engineer should note 
that it is not sufficient to use sophisticated mathematical algorithms or the latest 
software tools to develop the ideal method. It is necessary to sell the plan both to 
management and to the workers themselves. Additional interpersonal techniques 
and strategies for dealing with people to better sell the method are presented 
in Chapter 18. 
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  Compare and contrast a decision table with value engineering. 
 2.  How does one define the benefits especially related to health and safety in cost-
benefit analysis? 
 3.  What are the principal concerns of management with regard to a new method that is 
relatively costly to install? 
 4.  What is meant by the discounted cash flow method? 
 5.  What is meant by the payback method? How is it related to the return on invest-
ment method? 

410 
C H A P T E R  9 
 6.  What is the relationship between return on capital investment and the risk associ-
ated with the anticipated sales of the product for which a new method will be used? 
 7.  What two specific subjects should be emphasized in writing the job description? 
 8.  Is time a common denominator of labor cost? Why or why not? 
 9.  What is a job evaluation? 
 10.  Which four methods of job evaluation are being practiced in this country today? 
 11.  Explain in detail how a point plan works. 
 12.  Which factors influence the relative worth of a job? 
 13.  What is the weakness of using historical records as a means of establishing stan-
dards of performance? 
 14.  Explain why a range of rates, rather than just one rate, should be established for 
every labor grade. 
 15.  What are the principal negative considerations that should be understood prior to 
the installation of a point job evaluation system? 
 16.  What are the principal benefits of a properly installed job evaluation plan? 
 17.  Which three considerations constitute a successful job evaluation plan? 
 18.  How does the ADA enter into a methods change? 
 PROBLEMS  
 1.  How much capital could be invested in a new method if it is estimated that $5,000 
would be saved the first year, $10,000 the second year, and $3,000 the third year? 
Management expects a 30 percent return on invested capital. 
 2.  You have estimated the life of your design to be three years. You expect that a 
capital investment of $20,000 will be required to get it into production. You also 
estimate, based on sales forecasts, that the design will result in an after-tax profit of 
$12,000 the first year and $16,000 the second year, and a $5,000 loss the third year. 
Management has asked for an 18 percent return on capital investment. Should the 
company go ahead with the investment to produce the new design? Explain. 
 3.  In the Dorben Company, a materials handling operation in the warehouse is being 
done by hand labor. Annual disbursements for this labor and for related expenses 
(social security, accident insurance, and other fringe benefits) are $8,200. The 
methods analyst is considering a proposal to build certain equipment to reduce 
this labor cost. The first cost of this equipment will be $15,000. It is estimated 
that the equipment will reduce annual disbursements for labor and labor extras to 
$3,300. Annual payments for power, maintenance, and property taxes plus insur-
ance are estimated to be $400, $1,100, and $300, respectively. The need for this 
particular operation is anticipated to continue for 10 years. Because the equipment 
is specially designed for the particular purpose, it will have no salvage value. It is 
assumed that the annual disbursements for labor, power, and maintenance will be 
uniform throughout the 10 years. The minimum rate of return before taxes is 
10 percent. Based on an annual cost comparison, should the company proceed 
with the new material handling equipment? 

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
411
 4.  A job evaluation plan based on the point system uses the following factors: 
  a. 
 Education: maximum weight 100 points; four grades 
  b. 
 Effort: maximum weight 100 points; four grades 
  c. 
 Responsibility: maximum weight 100 points; four grades 
 
   A floor sweeper is rated as 150 points, and this position carries an hourly rate of 
$6.50. A class 3 milling machine operator is rated as 320 points, which results in 
a money rate of $10 per hour. What grade of experience would be given to a drill 
press operator with an $8.50/h rate and point ratings of grade 2 education, grade 
1 effort, and grade 2 responsibility? 
 5.  A job evaluation plan in the Dorben Company provides for five labor grades, of 
which grade 5 has the highest base rates and grade 1 the lowest. The linear plan 
involves a range of 50 to 250 points for skill, 15 to 75 points for effort, 20 to 
100 points for responsibility, and 15 to 75 points for job conditions. Each of the 
four factors has five degrees. Each labor grade has three money rates: low, mean, 
and high.  
  a. 
 If the high money rate of labor grade 1 is $8 per hour and the high money rate 
of labor grade 5 is $20 per hour, what would be the mean money rate of labor 
grade 3? 
  b. 
 What degree of skill is required for a labor grade of 4, if second-degree effort, 
second-degree responsibility, and first-degree job conditions apply?  
 6.  In the Dorben Company, the analyst installed a point job evaluation plan covering 
all indirect employees in the operating divisions of the plant. Ten factors were used 
in this plan, and each factor was broken down into five degrees. In the job analy-
sis, the shipping and receiving clerk position was shown as having second-degree 
initiative and ingenuity, valued at 30 points. The total point value of this job was 
250 points. The minimum number of points attainable in the plan was 100, and the 
maximum was 500. 
  a. 
 If 10 job classes prevailed, what degree of initiative and ingenuity would be 
required to elevate the job of shipping and receiving clerk from job class 4 to 
job class 5? 
  b. 
 If job class 1 carried a rate of $8 per hour and job class 10 carried a rate of 
$20 per hour, what rate would job class 7 carry? ( Note : Rates are based on the 
midpoint of job class point ranges.)  
 7.  An ergonomist suggests replacing two mail clerks, each of whom sorts 
3,000 pieces/h and gets paid $10/h, with a machine vision system that can sort 
6,000 pieces/h but costs $1/h to maintain and $50,000 to purchase. How many 
hours would it take to pay off the system? 
 8.  The USAF is thinking of purchasing a improved automatic controller (no 
human required) at a cost of $100,000 that can make 4,000 target contacts 
per hour to replace USAF specialists who can, on average, make 1,000 target 
contacts per hour. Note that a USAF specialist is paid a relatively low salary of $8/h 
(but with good veteran benefits) and that the controller will require $1/h mainte-
nance costs. How many hours of target detection would it take to pay off this new 
controller? 

412 
C H A P T E R  9 
 9.  Use the information from Problem 12 in Chapter 8. Assume that you are given the 
authority and the appropriate funds to correct the problem. You can spend: 
  a. 
 $50 to replace batteries in all CO monitors annually to reduce that probability 
to 0.0 
  b. 
 $500 on electricity over the holidays to maintain ventilation and reduce that 
probability to 0.0 
  c. 
 $5,000 to replace the flue and reduce that probability to 0.0 
 
   Which  one alternative is most cost-effective? Which one alternative would you 
recommend? Why? 
 REFERENCES 
 ADA.  Americans with Disabilities Act Handbook . EEOC-BK-19. Washington, DC: 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and U.S. Dept. of Justice, 1991. 
 Brown, D. B.  Systems Analysis & Design for Safety . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall, 1976. 
 Carey, A. “The Hawthorne Studies: A Radical Criticism.” In  Concepts and Controversy 
in Organizational Behavior . Ed. W. R. Nord. Pacific Palisades, CA: Goodyear 
Publishing, 1972. 
 DeReamer, R.  Modern Safety and Health Technology . New York: John Wiley & Sons, 
1980. 
 Dunn, J. D., and F. M. Rachel.  Wage and Salary Administration: Total Compensation 
Systems . New York: McGraw-Hill, 1971. 
 Fleischer, G. A. “Economic Risk Analysis.” In  Handbook of Industrial Engineering . 
2d ed. Ed. Gavriel Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1992. 
 Gausch, J. P. “Safety and Decision-Making Tables.”  ASSE Journal , 17 (November 
1972), pp. 33–37. 
 Gausch, J. P. “Value Engineering and Decision Making.”  ASSE Journal , 19 (May 1974), 
pp. 14–16. 
 Heinrich, H. W., D. Petersen, and N. Roos.  Industrial Accident Prevention . 5th ed. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1980. 
 Homans, G. “The Western Electric Researches.” In  Concepts and Controversy in 
Organizational Behavior . Ed. W. R. Nord. Pacific Palisades, CA: Goodyear 
Publishing , 1972. 
 Jung, E. S., and A. Freivalds. “Multiple Criteria Decision-Making for the Resolution of 
Conflicting Ergonomic Knowledge in Manual Materials Handling.”  Ergonomics , 
34, no. 11 (November 1991), pp. 1351–1356. 
 Livy, B.  Job Evaluation: A Critical Review . New York: Halstead, 1973. 
 Lutz, Raymond P. “Discounted Cash Flow Techniques.” In  Handbook of Industrial 
Engineering . 2d ed. Ed. Gavriel Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1992. 
 Mayo, E.  The Human Problems of an Industrial Civilization . New York: Viking Press, 
1960. 
 Milkovich, George T., Jerry M. Newman, and James T. Brakefield. “Job Evaluation 
in Organizations.” In  Handbook of Industrial Engineering . 2d ed. Ed. Gavriel 
Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1992. 

 
 
C HA PT ER 9    Proposed Method Implementation  
413
 Pennock, G. A. “Industrial Research at Hawthorne.”  The Personnel Journal , 8 (June 
1929–April 1930), pp. 296–313. 
 Risner, Howard.  Job Evaluation: Problems and Prospects . Amherst, MA: Human 
Resource Development Press, Inc., 1988. 
 Saaty, T. L.  The Analytic Hierarchy Process . New York: McGraw-Hill, 1980. 
 Thuesen, H. G., W. J. Fabrycky, and G. J. Thuesen.  Engineering Economy . 5th ed. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1977. 
 Wegener, Elaine.  Current Developments in Job Classification and Salary Systems . 
Amherst, MA: Human Resource Development Press, Inc., 1988. 
 SELECTED SOFTWARE 
  DesignTools (available from the McGraw-Hill text website at www.mhhe.com/ 
 niebel-freivalds). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002. 

This page intentionally left blank

 
415
 
415
 
  CHAPTER 
 
 10 
 
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Use time study to establish time standards. 
 •  Use both audio and visual break points to divide the operation into 
elements. 
 •  Use continuous timing to obtain a complete record of times. 
 •  Use snapback timing to avoid clerical errors. 
 •  Perform a time check to confirm the validity of the time study. 
 T
 he seventh step in the systematic process of developing the efficient work 
center is the establishment of time standards. These can be determined by 
using estimates, historical records, and work measurement procedures. In 
past years, analysts relied more heavily on estimates as a means of establishing 
standards. However, experience has shown that no individual can establish con-
sistent and fair standards simply by looking at a job and judging the amount of 
time required to complete it. 
 With the historical records method, production standards are based on the 
records of similar, previously performed jobs. In common practice, the worker 
punches in on a time clock or data collection hardware every time he or she 
begins a new job and then punches out after completing the job. This technique 
tells how long it actually took to do a job, but not how long it should have taken. 
Some jobs carry personal, unavoidable, and avoidable delay time to a much 
greater extent than they should, while other jobs do not carry their appropriate 
share of delay time. Historical records have consistently deviated by as much as 
50 percent on the same operation of the same job. 
 Any of the work measurement techniques—stopwatch (electronic or me-
chanical) time study, predetermined time systems, standard data, time formulas, 
or work sampling studies—represents a better way to establish fair production 
standards. All these techniques are based on establishing an actual allowed time 
standard for performing a given task, with due allowance for fatigue and for per-
sonal and unavoidable delays. 
 Time Study 

416 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
 Accurately established time standards make it possible to increase the ef-
ficiency of the equipment and the operating personnel; poorly established 
standards, although better than no standards at all, lead to high costs, labor dis-
sension, and possibly even failure of the enterprise. This may mean the differ-
ence between the success or failure of a business. 
 10.1 A FAIR DAY’S WORK 
  The fundamental principle in industry is that an employee is entitled to a fair 
day’s pay in return for which the company is entitled to a fair day’s work. A fair 
day’s work can be defined as the amount of work that can be produced by a qual-
ified employee when working at a standard pace and effectively utilizing her or 
his time where work is not restricted by process limitations. This definition does 
not clarify what is meant by qualified employees, standard pace, and effective 
utilization of flexibility. For example, the term  qualified employee  can be further 
defined as a representative average of those employees who are fully trained and 
able satisfactorily to perform any and all phases of the work involved, in accor-
dance with the requirements of the job under consideration. 
 Standard pace  can be defined as the effective rate of performance of a con-
scientious, self-paced, qualified employee when working neither fast nor slow 
and giving due consideration to the physical, mental, or visual requirements of 
the specific job. One interpretation specifies that as a worker walking without 
load, on smooth, level ground at a rate of 3 mi/h. 
 There is also some uncertainty over the definition of  effective utilization . 
Typically this could be the maintenance of a standard pace while performing 
essential elements of the job during all portions of the day except that which is 
required for reasonable rest and personal needs, under circumstances in which 
the job is not subject to process, equipment, or other operating limitations. 
 In general, a fair day’s work is one that is fair to both the company and the 
employee. This means that the employee should give a full day’s work for the 
time that he or she gets paid, with reasonable allowances for personal delays, 
unavoidable delays, and fatigue. The worker is expected to operate in the pre-
scribed method at a pace that is neither fast nor slow, but one that may be con-
sidered representative of all-day performance by the experienced, cooperative 
employee. Time study is one method of determining a fair day’s work. 
 10.2 TIME STUDY REQUIREMENTS 
  Certain fundamental requirements must be realized before the time study is 
made. For example, whether the standard is required on a new job or on an old 
job in which the method or part of the method has been altered, the operator 
should be thoroughly acquainted with the new technique before the operation 
is studied. Also, the method must be standardized for the job before the study 
begins. Unless all details of the method and working conditions have been stan-
dardized, the time standards will have little value and will become a continual 
source of mistrust, grievances, and internal friction. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 0  Time Study 
417
 Analysts should tell the union steward, the department supervisor, and the 
operator that the job is to be studied. Each of these parties can then take the ap-
propriate steps necessary to allow a smooth, coordinated study. The operator 
should verify that she or he is performing the correct method and should become 
acquainted with all details of that operation. The supervisor should check the 
method to make sure that feeds, speeds, cutting tools, lubricants, and so forth 
conform to standard practice, as established by the methods department. Also, 
the supervisor should investigate the amount of material available so that no 
shortages take place during the study. The union steward should then make sure 
that only trained, competent operators are selected; should explain why the study 
is being made; and should answer any pertinent questions raised by the operator. 
 ANALYST’S RESPONSIBILITY 
 All work involves varying degrees of skill, as well as physical and mental effort. 
There are also differences in the aptitude, physical application, and dexterity of 
the workers. It is easy for the analyst to observe an employee at work and mea-
sure the actual time taken to perform a task. It is considerably more difficult to 
evaluate all variables and determine the time required for a qualified operator to 
perform the task. 
 The time study analyst should ensure that the correct method is being used, ac-
curately record the times taken, honestly evaluate the performance of the operator, 
and refrain from any operator criticism. The analyst’s work must be completely 
dependable and accurate. Inaccuracy and poor judgment will not only affect the 
operator and the company financially, but may also result in loss of confidence 
by the operator and the union. The time study analyst should always be honest, 
tactful, pleasing, patient, and enthusiastic, and should always use good judgment.  
 SUPERVISOR’S RESPONSIBILITY 
 The supervisor should notify the operator in advance that his or her work assign-
ment is to be studied. The supervisor should see that the proper method estab-
lished by the methods department is being utilized, and that the operator selected 
is competent and has adequate experience on the job. Although the time study 
analyst should have a practical background in the area of work being studied, 
analysts cannot be expected to know all specifications for all methods and pro-
cesses. Therefore, the supervisor should verify that the cutting tools are prop-
erly ground, the correct lubricant is being used, and a proper selection of feeds, 
speeds, and cut depths is being made. The supervisor should also make certain 
that operators use the prescribed method, conscientiously assisting and training 
all employees in perfecting this method. Once the time study is completed, the 
supervisor should sign the original copy, indicating compliance with the study. 
 UNION’S RESPONSIBILITY 
 Most unions recognize that standards are necessary for the profitable operation 
of a business and that management continues to develop such standards using 

418 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
accepted work measurement techniques. Furthermore, every union steward 
knows that poor time standards cause problems for both labor and management. 
 Through training programs, the union should educate all its members in the 
principles, theories, and economic necessity of time study practice. Operators 
cannot be expected to be enthusiastic about time study if they know nothing 
about it. This is especially true in view of its background (see Chapter 1). 
 The union representative should make certain that the time study includes 
a complete record of the job conditions, that is, work method and workstation 
layout. The representative should ascertain that the current job description is ac-
curate and complete and also encourage the operator to cooperate with the time 
study analyst. 
 OPERATOR’S RESPONSIBILITY 
 Every employee should be sufficiently interested in the welfare of the company 
to support the practices and procedures inaugurated by management. Operators 
should give new methods a fair trial and should cooperate in helping to work out 
any bugs. The operator is closer to the job than anyone else, and she or he can 
make a real contribution to the company by helping to establish ideal methods. 
 The operator should assist the time study analyst in breaking the job down 
into elements, thus ensuring that all details of the job are specifically covered. 
The operator should also work at a steady, normal pace while the study is being 
made and should introduce as few foreign elements and extra movements as 
possible. The worker should use the exact method prescribed, as any action that 
artificially lengthens the cycle time could result in an overly liberal standard. 
 10.3 TIME STUDY EQUIPMENT 
  The minimum equipment required to conduct a time study program includes a 
stopwatch, time study board, time study forms, and pocket calculator. Videotape 
equipment can also be very useful. 
 STOPWATCH 
 Two types of stopwatches are in use today: the traditional decimal minute watch 
(0.01 min) and the much more practical electronic stopwatch. The decimal minute 
watch, shown in Figure 10.1, has 100 divisions on its face, and each division is equal 
to 0.01 min; that is, a complete sweep of the long hand requires 1 min. The small 
dial on the watch face has 30 divisions, each of which is equal to 1 min. Therefore, 
for every full revolution of the sweep hand, the small hand moves one division, or 
1 min. To start this watch, move the side slide toward the crown. Depressing the 
crown moves both the sweep hand and the small hand back to zero. Releasing the 
crown puts the watch back into operation, unless the side slide is moved away from 
the crown. Moving the side slide away from the crown stops the watch. 
 Electronic stopwatches cost approximately $50. These watches provide res-
olution to 0.001 s and an accuracy of 0.002 percent. They weigh about 4 oz and 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 0  Time Study 
419
are about 4  2  1 in (see Figure 10.2). They permit timing any number of in-
dividual elements, while also counting the total elapsed time. Thus, they provide 
both  continuous  and  snapback timing  (button C), with none of the disadvantages 
of mechanical watches. To operate the watch, press the top button (button A). 
Each time the top button is pressed, a numerical readout is presented. Pressing 
the memory button (button B) causes previous readouts to be retrieved.  
 With mechanical watches costing $150 and up and electronic watches fall-
ing in price, the mechanical watches are quickly disappearing from use. In addi-
tion, various time study apps for iPads, iPhones, and Android phones (as well as 
tablets) are now available. 
 VIDEOTAPE CAMCORDERS 
 Videotape camcorders are ideal for recording operators’ methods and elapsed 
time. By taking pictures of the operation and then studying them one frame at a 
time, analysts can record exact details of the method used and then assign nor-
mal time values. They can also establish standards by projecting the film at the 
same speed at which the pictures were taken and then performance-rating the 
 Figure 10.1   Decimal minute watch. 
B
C
A
D
start
stop
reset
 Figure 10.2   Electronic stopwatch 
 (A) Start/stop, (B) memory retrieval, 
(C) mode (continuous/snapback), and 
(D) other functions. 

420 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
operator. Because all the facts are there, observing the videotape is a fair and ac-
curate way to rate performance. Then, too, potential methods improvements that 
would seldom be uncovered with a stopwatch procedure can be revealed through 
the camera eye. Another advantage of videotapes is that with MVTA software 
(discussed in the later section on Time Study Software), time studies can be done 
almost automatically. More recently, with the arrival of digital camcorders and 
PC editing software, time studies can be done practically online. Videotapes are 
also excellent for training the novice time study analyst, as sections can easily be 
rewound and repeated until sufficiently mastered. 
 TIME STUDY BOARD 
 When the stopwatch is being used, analysts find it convenient to have a suitable 
board to hold the time study form and the stopwatch. The board should be light, 
so as not to tire the arm, and yet strong and sufficiently hard to provide a  suitable 
backing for the time study form. Suitable materials include ¼  -in plywood or 
smooth plastic. The board should have both arm and body contacts, for comfort-
able fit and ease of writing while it is being held. For a right-handed observer, 
the watch should be mounted in the upper right-hand corner of the board. A 
spring clip to the left would hold the time study form. Standing in the proper 
position, the time study analyst can look over the top of the watch to the worksta-
tion and follow the operator’s movements, while keeping both the watch and the 
time study form in the immediate field of vision. 
 TIME STUDY FORMS 
 All the details of the study are recorded on a time study form. The form provides 
space to record all pertinent information concerning the method being studied, tools 
utilized, and so on. The operation being studied is identified by such information as 
the operator’s name and number, operation description and number, machine name 
and number, special tools used and their respective numbers, department where the 
operation is performed, and prevailing working conditions. Providing too much in-
formation concerning the job being studied is better than too little. 
 Figure 10.3 illustrates a time study form that has been developed by the 
authors. It is sufficiently flexible to be used for practically any type of opera-
tion. On this form, analysts would record the various elements of the operation 
horizontally across the top of the sheet, and the cycles studied would be entered 
vertically, row by row. The four columns under each element are R for  ratings ; 
W for  watch time  or  watch readout ; OT for  observed time , that is, the differential 
time between successive watch times; and NT for  normal time . 
 TIME STUDY SOFTWARE 
 Several software packages are available for the time study analyst. Some of these 
run on personal digital assistants (PDAs), including QuickTimes by Applied 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 0  Time Study 
421
 Figure 10.3   Snapback study of a die-casting operation (rating elements every cycle). 
Computer Services, Inc.; and WorkStudy by Quetech, Ltd. More recently, with 
the advent of tablets and smartphones, a variety of applications have become 
available for these platforms, including a simple, user-friendly program for the 
iPad, QuickTS, that is available for the users of this textbook (see Figure 10.4). 

422 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
 Figure 10.4   The QuickTS time study program on an iPad. 
Any of these software products will allow the analyst to eliminate much of the 
drudgery of clerical transcription and to improve the accuracy of computations. 
 For those analysts performing time studies from videotapes, an interesting 
option is the Multimedia Video Task Analysis (MVTA, Nexgen Ergonomics). 
MVTA interfaces directly to a VCR through a graphical interface and enables 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 0  Time Study 
423
users to interactively identify break points in the video record while analyzing 
at any desired speed (real time, slow/fast motion, or frame by frame in forward/
reverse direction). MVTA then automatically produces time study reports and 
computes frequency of occurrence of each event, as well as postural analysis for 
work design.   
 TRAINING EQUIPMENT 
 A simple, inexpensive piece of equipment that can assist in the training of time 
study analysts is the metronome used by music students. This device can be set 
to provide a predetermined number of beats per minute, such as 104 beats per 
minute. This happens to equal the number of cards dealt per minute when deal-
ing at a standard pace (see Chapter 11). By synchronizing the delivery of a card 
at a four-hand bridge table such that a card is delivered with each beat of the 
metronome, we can demonstrate standard pace. Many metronomes, especially 
the electronic ones, can be set to provide a louder beep (or light blink) to occur 
every 3, 4, or 5 beats to create a more realistic element. To illustrate 80 percent 
performance, the instructor need only set the metronome to 83 beats per minute 
and then synchronize the card dealing and beep accordingly. 
 10.4 TIME STUDY ELEMENTS 
  The actual conduct of a time study is both an art and a science. To ensure suc-
cess, analysts must be able to inspire confidence in, exercise judgment with, and 
develop a personable approach to everyone with whom they come in contact. 
They should thoroughly understand and perform the various functions related to 
the study: selecting the operator, analyzing the job and breaking it down into its 
elements, recording the elapsed elemental values, performance-rating the opera-
tor, assigning appropriate allowances, and working up the study itself. 
 CHOOSING THE OPERATOR 
 The first step in beginning a time study is to select the operator with the 
assistance of the departmental or line supervisor. In general, an operator who 
is average or somewhat above average in performance gives a more satisfac-
tory study than a low-skilled or highly superior operator. The average opera-
tor usually performs the work consistently and systematically. That operator’s 
pace will tend to be approximately in the standard range (see Chapter 11), 
thereby making it easier for the time study analyst to apply a correct perfor-
mance factor. 
 Of course, the operator should be completely trained in the method, should 
like the work, and should demonstrate an interest in doing a good job. The opera-
tor should be familiar with time study procedures and practices, and should have 
confidence in both time study methods and the analyst. The operator should also 
be cooperative enough to follow through willingly with suggestions made by 
both the supervisor and the time study analyst. 

424 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
 The analyst should approach the operator in a friendly manner and demon-
strate an understanding of the operation to be studied. The operator should have 
the opportunity to ask questions about the timing technique, method of rating, 
and application of allowances. In some instances, the operator may never have 
been studied before. All questions should be answered frankly and patiently. The 
operator should be encouraged to offer suggestions, and when the operator does 
so, the analyst should receive them willingly, thus showing respect for the skill 
and knowledge of the operator. 
 RECORDING SIGNIFICANT INFORMATION 
 Analysts should record the machines, hand tools, jigs or fixtures, working con-
ditions, materials, operations, operator name and clock number, department, 
study date, and observer’s name. Space for such details is provided under Re-
marks on the time study form. A sketch of the layout may also be helpful. 
The more pertinent information is recorded, the more useful the time study 
becomes over the years. It becomes a resource for establishing standard data 
and developing formulas (see Chapter 12). It will also be useful for methods 
improvement, operator evaluation, tool evaluation, and machine performance 
evaluation. 
 When machine tools are used, the analyst should specify the name, size, 
style, capacity, and serial or inventory number as well as the working conditions. 
Dies, jigs, gages, and fixtures should be identified by their numbers and with 
short descriptions. If the working conditions during the study are different from 
the normal conditions for that job, they will affect the operator’s performance. 
For example, in a drop forge shop, if a study were made on an extremely hot 
day, the working conditions would be poorer than usual, and operator perfor-
mance would reflect the effect of the intense heat. Consequently, an allowance 
(see Chapter 11) would be added to the operator’s normal time. If the working 
conditions improve, the allowance can be diminished. Conversely, if the working 
conditions become poorer, the allowance should be raised. 
 POSITIONING THE OBSERVER 
 The observer should stand, not sit, a few feet to the rear of the operator, so as 
not to distract or interfere with the worker. Standing observers are better able to 
move around and follow the movements of the operator’s hands as the operator 
goes through the work cycle. During the course of the study, the observer should 
avoid any conversation with the operator, as this could distract the worker or 
upset the routines. 
 DIVIDING THE OPERATION INTO ELEMENTS 
 For ease of measurement, the operation should be divided into groups of mo-
tions known as  elements . To divide the operation into its individual elements, 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 0  Time Study 
425
the analyst should watch the operator for several cycles. However, if the cycle 
time is more than 30 min, the analyst can write the description of the elements 
while making the study. If possible, the analyst should determine the operational 
elements before the start of the study. Elements should be broken down into 
divisions that are as fine as possible and yet not so small that reading accuracy 
is sacrificed. Elemental divisions of around 0.04 min are about as fine as can be 
read consistently by an experienced time study analyst. However, if the preced-
ing and succeeding elements are relatively long, an element as short as 0.02 min 
can be readily timed. 
 To identify endpoints completely and develop consistency in reading the 
watch from one cycle to the next, consider both sound and sight in the elemental 
breakdown. For example, the  break points  of elements can be associated with 
such sounds as a finished piece hitting the container, a facing tool biting into a 
casting, a drill breaking through the part being drilled, and a pair of micrometers 
being laid on a bench. 
 Each element should be recorded in its proper sequence, including a basic 
division of work terminated by a distinctive sound or motion. For example, the 
element “up part to manual chuck and tighten” would include the following ba-
sic divisions: reach for part, grasp part, move part, position part, reach for chuck 
wrench, grasp chuck wrench, move chuck wrench, position chuck wrench, turn 
chuck wrench, and release chuck wrench. The termination point of this element 
would be the chuck wrench being dropped on the head of the lathe, as evidenced 
by the accompanying sound. The element “start machine” could include reach 
for lever, grasp lever, move lever, and release lever. The rotation of the machine, 
with the accompanying sound, would identify the termination point so that read-
ings could be made at exactly the same point in each cycle. 
 Frequently, different time study analysts in a company adopt a standard 
elemental breakdown for given classes of facilities, to ensure uniformity in 
establishing break points. For example, all single-spindle bench-type drill press 
work may be broken down into standard elements, and all lathe work may be 
composed of a series of predetermined elements. Having standard elements as 
a basis for operation breakdown is especially important in the establishment of 
standard data (see Chapter 12). 
 Some additional suggestions may help in breaking elements down: 
 1.  In general, keep manual and machine elements separate, as machine times 
are less affected by ratings. 
 2.  Likewise, separate constant elements (those elements for which the time 
does not deviate within a specified range of work) from variable elements 
(those elements for which the time does vary within a specified range 
of work). 
 3.  When an element is repeated, do not include a second description. Instead, 
in the space provided for the element description, give the identifying num-
ber that was used when the element first occurred. 

426 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
 10.5 START OF STUDY 
  At the start of the study, record the time of day (on a whole minute) from a “mas-
ter” clock while simultaneously starting the stopwatch. (It is assumed that all 
data are recorded on the time study form.) This is the  starting time 1  as shown 
in Figure 10 5. One of two techniques can be used for recording the elemental 
 Figure 10.5   Summary of steps in performing and computing a time study. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 0  Time Study 
427
times during the study. The  continuous timing  method, as the name implies, al-
lows the stopwatch to run for the entire duration of the study. In this method, the 
analyst reads the watch at the break point of each element, and the time is al-
lowed to continue. In the  snapback  technique, after the watch is read at the break 
point of each element, the watch time is returned to zero; as the next element 
takes place, the time increments from zero.  
 When recording the watch readings, note only the necessary digits and omit 
the decimal point, thus giving as much time as possible to observing the perfor-
mance of the operator. If using a decimal minute watch and if the break point of 
the first element occurs at 0.08 min, record only the digit 8 in the W (watch time) 
column. Other example recordings are shown in Table 10.1.  
 SNAPBACK METHOD 
 The snapback method has both advantages and disadvantages compared to the 
continuous technique. Some time study analysts use both methods, believing that 
studies of predominantly long elements are more adapted to snapback readings, 
while short-cycle studies are better suited to the continuous method. 
 Because elapsed element values are read directly in the snapback method, 
no clerical time is needed to make successive subtractions, as for the continuous 
method. Thus, the readout can be inserted directly in the OT ( observed time ) 
column. Also, elements performed out of order by the operator can be readily re-
corded without special notation. In addition, proponents of the snapback method 
state that delays are not recorded. Also, because elemental values can be com-
pared from one cycle to the next, a decision could be made as to the number of 
cycles to study. However, it is actually erroneous to use observations of the past 
few cycles to determine how many additional cycles to study. This practice can 
lead to studying entirely too small a sample. 
 Table 10.1   Recording Watch Readings for Continuous Timing 
 Consecutive reading of 
watch in decimal minutes 
 Recorded reading 
 0.08 
 8 
 0.25 
 25 
 1.32 
 132 
 1.35 
 35 
 1.41 
 41 
 2.01 
 201 
 2.10 
 10 
 2.15 
 15 
 2.71 
 71 
 3.05 
 305 
 3.17 
 17 
 3.25 
 25 

428 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
 Among the disadvantages of the snapback method is that it encourages the 
removal of individual elements from the operation. These cannot be studied in-
dependently, because elemental times depend on the preceding and succeeding 
elements. Consequently, omitting such factors as delays, foreign elements, and 
transposed elements could allow erroneous values in the readings accepted. One 
of the traditional objections to the snapback method was the amount of time lost 
while snapping the hand back to zero. However, this problem has been elimi-
nated with the use of electronic watches. Also, short elements (0.04 min and 
less) are more difficult to time with this method. Finally, the overall time must be 
verified by summing the elemental watch readings, a process that is more prone 
to error. 
 Figure 10.3 illustrates a time study of a die-casting operation using the snap-
back method. 
 CONTINUOUS METHOD 
 The continuous method of recording elemental values is superior to the snap-
back method for several reasons. The most significant is that the resulting study 
presents a complete record of the entire observation period; as a result, it appeals 
to the operator and the union. The operator is able to see that no time has been 
left out of the study, and all delays and foreign elements have been recorded. 
Because all the facts are clearly presented, this technique of recording times is 
easier to explain and sell. 
 The continuous method is also better adapted to measuring and recording 
very short elements. With practice, a good time study analyst can accurately 
catch three successive short elements (less than 0.04 min), if they are followed 
by an element of about 0.15 min or longer. This is possible by remembering the 
watch readings of the break points of the three short elements and then recording 
their respective values while the fourth, longer element is taking place. 
 Nevertheless, more clerical work is involved in calculating the study if the 
continuous method is used. Because the watch is read at the break point of each 
element while the hands of the watch continue their movements, it is necessary 
to make successive subtractions of the consecutive readings to determine the 
elapsed elemental times. For example, the following readings might represent 
the break points of a 10-element study: 4, 14, 19, 121, 25, 52, 61, 76, 211, 16. 
The elemental values of this cycle would be 4, 10, 5, 102, 4, 27, 9, 15, 35, and 5. 
Figure 10.6 illustrates a completed time study of the same die-casting operation 
using the continuous method. 
 ADDRESSING DIFFICULTIES 
 During the time study, analysts may observe variations from the element se-
quence originally established. Occasionally, analysts may miss specific break 
points. These difficulties complicate the study; the less often they occur, the eas-
ier it is to calculate the study. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 0  Time Study 
429
 When missing a reading, the analyst should immediately indicate an “M” 
in the W column. In no case should the analyst approximate and endeavor to 
record the missed value. This practice can destroy the validity of the standard 
established for the specific element. If the element were then to be used as a 
 Figure 10.6   Continuous timing study of a die-casting operation (rating every cycle). 

430 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
source of standard data, appreciable discrepancies in future standards might re-
sult. Occasionally, the operator omits an element; this is handled by drawing a 
horizontal line through the space in the W column. This should happen infre-
quently; it is usually a sign of an inexperienced operator or a lack of standardiza-
tion in the method. Of course, the operator can inadvertently omit an element, 
for example, forgetting to “vent cope” in making a bench mold. If elements are 
omitted repeatedly, the analyst should stop the study and investigate the neces-
sity of performing the omitted elements. This should be done in cooperation with 
the supervisor and the operator, so that the best method can be established. The 
observer is expected to be constantly on the alert for better ways to perform the 
elements; as ideas come to mind, the observer should jot them down in the note 
section of the time study form, for future evaluation.  
 The observer may also see elements performed out of sequence. This hap-
pens fairly frequently when a new or inexperienced employee is studied on a 
long-cycle job made up of many elements. Avoiding such disturbances is one of 
the prime reasons for studying a competent, fully trained employee. However, 
when elements are performed out of order, the analyst should immediately go to 
the element being performed and draw a horizontal line through the middle of its 
W space. Directly below this line, the analyst should write the time the operator 
began the element, and above it, the completion time. This procedure should be 
repeated for each element performed out of order, as well as for the first element 
performed back in the normal sequence. 
 During a time study, the operator may encounter unavoidable delays, such as 
an interruption by a clerk or supervisor, or tool breakage. The operator may also 
intentionally cause a change in the order of work by going for a drink of water or 
stopping to rest. Such interruptions are referred to as  foreign elements . 
 Foreign elements can occur either at the break point or during the course of 
an element. The majority of foreign elements, particularly those controlled by the 
operator, occur at the termination of an element. If a foreign element occurs during 
an element, it is signified by letters (A, B, C, etc.) in the NT column of this element. 
If the foreign element occurs at the break point, it is recorded in the NT column of 
the work element that follows the interruption (  5  in Figure 10.5). The letter A is 
used to signify the first foreign element, the letter B to signify the second, and so on. 
 As soon as the foreign element has been properly designated, the analyst should 
write a short description of it in the lower left-hand corner of the space. The time 
that the foreign element begins is entered in the W1 block of the foreign element 
section, and the time it ends is entered in the W2 block. These values can then be 
subtracted when the time study is calculated, to determine the exact duration of the 
foreign element. This value is then entered in the OT column of the foreign element 
section. Figure 10.5 illustrates the correct handling of a foreign element. 
 Occasionally, a foreign element is of such short duration that it is impossible 
to record the foreign element in the fashion outlined. Typical examples of this 
would be dropping a wrench on the floor and quickly picking it up, wiping one’s 
brow with a handkerchief, or turning to speak briefly to the supervisor. In such 
cases, where the foreign element may be 0.06 min or less, the most satisfactory 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 0  Time Study 
431
method of handling the interruption is to allow it to accumulate in the element 
and immediately circle the reading, indicating that a “wild” value has been en-
countered. A short comment should be entered in the note section across from 
the element in which the interruption occurred, justifying the circled number. 
Cycle 7 in Figure 10.7 illustrates the correct handling of a wild value. 
 Figure 10.7   Time study with overall rating. 

432 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
 CYCLES IN STUDY 
 Determining how many cycles to study to arrive at an equitable standard is a 
subject that has caused considerable discussion among time study analysts as 
well as union representatives. Because the activity of the job, as well as its cycle 
time, directly influences the number of cycles that can be studied from an eco-
nomic standpoint, the analyst cannot be completely governed by sound statistical 
practice that demands a certain sample size based on the dispersion of individual 
element readings. General Electric Company has established Table 10.2 as an 
approximate guide to the number of cycles to observe.   
 A more accurate number can be established by using statistical methods. 
Because time study is a sampling procedure, the observations can be assumed 
to be distributed normally about an unknown population mean with an unknown 
variance. Using the sample mean  x–    and sample standard deviation  s , the normal 
distribution for a large sample leads to the confidence interval 
 
x
zs
n

 where 
s
n
i
i
i
n



(
)
x
x
i
2
1
1
∑
 Table 10.2   Recommended Number of Observation Cycles 
 Cycle time (min) 
 Recommended
number of cycles 
 0.10 
 200 
 0.25 
 100 
 0.50 
 60 
 0.75 
 40 
 1.00 
 30 
 2.00 
 20 
 2.00–5.00 
 15 
 5.00–10.00 
 10 
 10.00–20.00 
 8 
 20.00–40.00 
 5 
 40.00–above 
 3 
 Source: Information taken from the Time Study Manual of the Erie 
Works of the General Electric Company, developed under the guid-
ance of Albert E. Shaw, manager of wage administration. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 0  Time Study 
433
 However, time studies often involve only small samples ( n  30); therefore, 
a  t distribution must be used. The confidence interval equation is then 
x
t s
n

 The  term can be considered an error term expressed as a fraction of x–: 
kx
k
ts
n

 
 where  k  an acceptable fraction of x– . 
 Solving for  n yields 
 
n
ts
kx
k
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
2
 It is also possible to solve for  n before making the time study by interpreting 
historical data of similar elements, or by actually estimating      and  s  from several 
snapback readings with the highest variation.   
 Calculation of Required Number of Observations 
 EXAMPLE 10.1 
 A pilot study of 25 readings for a given element showed that x–  0.30 and  s  0.09.   
A 5% desired acceptable fraction  k  and an alpha  0.05 for 24 degrees of freedom 
(25 minus 1 degree of freedom for estimating one of the parameters) yield  t  2.064. 
(See Table A3–3, Appendix 3, for values of  t .) Solving the last equation yields 
 




⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
≈
n
0.09
2.064
0.05
0.30
153.3
154 observations
r
2
 To ensure the required confidence, always round up. 
 10.6 EXECUTION OF STUDY 
  This section provides an overview of the main steps needed to execute the time 
study. More details on rating operator performance and adding allowances are 
presented in Chapter 11.  

434 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
 RATING OPERATOR PERFORMANCE 
 Because the actual time required to perform each element of the study depends 
to a high degree on the skill and effort of the operator, it is necessary to adjust 
upward the time of the good operator and downward the time of the poor opera-
tor to a standard level. Therefore, before leaving the workstation, analysts should 
give a fair and impartial performance rating to the study. On short-cycle, repeti-
tive work, it is customary to apply one rating to the entire study, or an average 
rating for each element (see Figure 10.7). However, where the elements are long 
and entail diversified manual movements, it is more practical to evaluate the per-
formance of each element as it occurs. This was done for the die-casting study 
shown in Figures 10.3 and 10.6, in which the elements were more than 0.20 min 
in duration. The time study form includes provisions for both the overall rating 
and the individual element rating. 
 In the performance rating system, the observer evaluates the operator’s ef-
fectiveness in terms of a  qualified operator  performing the same element. The 
rating value is expressed as a decimal or percentage and is assigned to the 
observed element, in the R column (  3  in Figure 10.5). A qualified operator is 
defined as a thoroughly experienced operator working under customary condi-
tions at the workstation, at a pace neither too fast nor too slow, but representative 
of a pace that can be maintained throughout the day. 
 Statistical Calculation of an Outlier 
 EXAMPLE 10.2 
 Consider the seventh cycle of element 1 (circled) in Figure 10.7, when the operator 
drops the casting and has an excessively long element. The 1.5IQR criterion is based 
on descriptive statistics using a box plot and considers any value outside the 1.5 times 
the interquartile range (range between the first and third quartiles) to be an outlier 
(Montgomery and Runger, 1994). For element 1, the mean value is 0.145, the standard 
deviation is 0.0306, the first quartile is 0.13, and the third quartile is 0.15. Therefore, 
the value of 1.5IQR is 
 1.5IQR  1.5  (0.15  0.130)  0.03 
 Because the circled value of 0.25 is well beyond the mean plus the 1.5IQR value of 
0.168, this can be considered an outlier and discarded from the calculation of the 
standard time. 
 Using the three-sigma rule (or four-sigma, Montgomery, 1991) for a 95 percent 
confidence interval with  t at 14 degrees of freedom of 2.145 yields a value of 
 




ts
n
/
2.145
0.0306/ 15
0.051
 The three-sigma rule yields the critical value of 0.153, which is very close to the 
1.5IQR criterion and yields the same conclusion, an outlier. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 0  Time Study 
435
 The basic principle of performance rating is to adjust the mean observed 
time (OT) for each element performed during the study to the  normal time (NT) 
that would be required by the qualified operator to perform the same work: 
 NT  OT   R/100 
 where  R  is the performance rating of the operator expressed as a percentage, 
with 100 percent being standard performance by a qualified operator. To do a fair 
job of rating, the time study analyst must be able to disregard personalities and 
other varying factors and consider only the amount of work being done per unit 
of time, as compared to the amount of work that the qualified operator would 
produce. Chapter 11 more fully explains the performance-rating techniques in 
common use. 
 ADDING ALLOWANCES 
 No operator can maintain a standard pace every minute of the working day. 
Three classes of interruptions can take place, for which extra time must be pro-
vided. The first is personal interruptions, such as trips to the restroom and drink-
ing fountain; the second is fatigue, which can affect even the strongest individual 
on the lightest work. The third is unavoidable delays, such as tool breakage, 
supervisor interruptions, slight tool trouble, and material variations, all of which 
require that some allowance be made. Because the time study is made over a 
relatively short period, and because foreign elements should have been removed 
in determining the normal time, an allowance must be added to the normal time 
to arrive at a fair standard that can reasonably be achieved by an operator. The 
time required for a fully qualified, trained operator, working at a standard pace 
and exerting average effort, to perform the operation is termed the  standard time 
(ST) for that operation. The allowance is typically given as a fraction of normal 
time and is used as a multiplier equal to 1  allowance: 
 ST  NT  NT  allowance   NT  (1  allowance) 
 An alternative approach is to formulate the allowances as a fraction of the total 
workday, because the actual production time might not be known. In that case, 
the expression for standard time is 
 ST   NT /(1  allowance) 
 Chapter 11 details the means for arriving at realistic allowance values. 
 10.7 CALCULATING THE STUDY 
  After properly recording all the necessary information on the time study form, 
observing an adequate number of cycles, and performance-rating the operator, 
the analyst should record the finishing time (  6  in Figure 10.5) at the same mas-
ter clock used for the start of the study. For continuous timing, it is very impor-
tant to verify the final stopwatch reading with the overall elapsed clock reading. 

436 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
These two values should be reasonably close ( 2 percent difference). (A sizable 
discrepancy may mean that an error has occurred, and the time study may have 
to be repeated.) Finally, the analyst should thank the operator and proceed to the 
next step, the study computations. 
 For the continuous method, each watch reading must be subtracted from the 
preceding reading to get the elapsed time; this value is then recorded in the OT 
column. Analysts must be especially accurate in this phase, because carelessness 
at this point can completely destroy the validity of the study. If the elemental per-
formance rating was used, the analyst must multiply the elapsed elemental times 
by the rating factor and record the result in the NT spaces. Note that because NT 
is a calculated value, it is typically recorded with three digits. 
 Elements that the observer missed are signified by an M in the W column 
and are disregarded. Thus, if the operator happened to omit element 7 of cycle 4 
in a 30-cycle study, the analyst would have only 29 values of element 7 with 
which to calculate the mean observed time. The analyst should disregard not 
only the missed element but also the succeeding one, as the subtracted value in 
the study would include the time for performing both elements. 
 To determine the elapsed elemental time on out-of-order elements, it is 
merely necessary to subtract the appropriate watch times. 
 For foreign elements, the analyst must deduct the time required for the for-
eign element from the cycle time of the applicable element. The analyst can 
obtain the time taken by the foreign element by subtracting the W1 reading in the 
foreign element section of the time study form from the W2 reading. 
 After all elapsed times have been calculated and recorded, the analyst should 
study them carefully for any abnormality. Values that are extreme can be consid-
ered as statistical outliers of the cyclical repetition of an element. To determine 
if an elemental time is an outlier, one can use either the 1.5IQR criterion (inter-
quartile range, Montgomery and Runger, 1994) or the three-sigma rule (Mont-
gomery, 1991). Both rules are demonstrated in Example 10.2. These values are 
then circled and excluded from further consideration in working up the study. 
For example, in cycle 7 of element 1 in Figure 10.7, the operator dropped a cast-
ing. Whereas previously that was considered a “wild” value, it would be just as 
easily excluded based on the statistical outlier criteria. 
 Machine elements have little variation from cycle to cycle, while consider-
ably wider variation could be expected in manual elements. When unexplain-
able time variations occur, the analyst should be quite careful before circling 
such values. Remember that this is not a performance-rating procedure. By ar-
bitrarily discarding high or low values, the analyst may end up with an incorrect 
standard. 
 If elemental rating is used, then after the elemental elapsed time values have 
been computed, the analyst should determine the normal elemental time by mul-
tiplying each elemental value by its respective performance factor. This normal 
time is then recorded in the NT columns for each element (10 in Figure 10.5). 
Next, the analyst determines the mean elemental normal value by dividing the 
total of the times recorded in the NT columns by the number of observations. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 0  Time Study 
437
 After determining all elemental elapsed times, the analyst should check to 
ensure that no arithmetic or recording errors have been made. One method of 
checking for such accuracy is to complete the  time check of the time study form 
(see Figure 10.5). To do this, though, the analyst needed to have synchronized 
the starting and stopping of the watch at a master clock, recording the  starting 
time   1  and the  finishing time   6  on the form. The analyst then sums three quanti-
ties: (1) total observed times, known as  effective time  (12 on the form); (2) total 
foreign elements time, known as  ineffective time  (13 on the form); and (3) total 
of  time elapsed before study (TEBS   2  on the form) and time elapsed after study 
(TEAF   7  on the form). The time elapsed before study is the readout when the 
analyst snaps the watch at the start of the first element. The time elapsed after 
study is the last readout when the analyst snaps the watch at the very end of the 
study. These last two quantities are sometimes totaled, forming the  check time 
(  8  on the form). The three quantities together equal the  total recorded time (14 
on the form). The difference between the finishing and starting times on the mas-
ter clock equals the  actual elapsed time (  9  on the form). Any difference between 
the total recorded time and the elapsed time is called  unaccounted time  (15 on 
the form). Normally, in a good study, this value would be zero. The unaccounted 
time divided by the elapsed time is a percentage called the  recording error . This 
recording error should be less than 2 percent. If it exceeds 2 percent, the time 
study should be repeated. 
 After the normal elemental times have been calculated, the analyst should 
add the percentage allowance to each element to determine the allowed or stan-
dard time. In the time study of Figure 10.7, the normal time for element 1 is 
multiplied by 1.12 to yield the following elemental standard time for element 1: 
 ST  0.152  (1  0.12)  0.170 
 The nature of the job determines the amount of allowance to be applied, as 
discussed in Chapter 11. Suffice it to say at this point that 15 percent is the aver-
age allowance used for manual elements, and 10 percent is the allowance usually 
applied to machine elements. 
 In most cases, each element occurs once within each cycle and the number 
of occurrences is simply 1. In some cases, an element may be repeated within a 
cycle (e.g., three passes on a lathe within the same cycle). In that case, the num-
ber of occurrences becomes 2 or 3, and the time accrued by that element within 
the one cycle is doubled or tripled. 
 The standard times for each element are then summed to obtain the standard 
time for the entire job, which is recorded in the space labeled  Total Standard 
Time on the time study form. 
 10.8 THE STANDARD TIME 
  The sum of the elemental times gives the standard in minutes per piece, using 
a decimal minute watch, or hours per piece, using a decimal hour watch. The 
majority of industrial operations have relatively short cycles (less than 5 min); 

438 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
consequently, it is sometimes more convenient to express standards in hours 
per hundred pieces. For example, the standard on a press operation might be 
0.085 h per hundred pieces. This is a more satisfactory method of expressing the 
standard than 0.00085 h per piece or 0.051 min per piece. 
 The percent efficiency of the operator can be expressed as 
 E  100   H e / H c  100   O c / O e 
 where  E  percent efficiency 
 
  H e  standard hours earned 
 
  H c  clock hours on job 
 
  O e  expected output 
 
  O c  current output 
 Thus, an operator producing 10,000 pieces during the working day would earn 
8.5 h of production and would perform at an efficiency of 8.5/8  106 percent. 
 Once the standard time has been computed, it is given to the operator in the 
form of an operation card. The card can be either computer-generated or run 
off on a copier. The operation card serves as the basis for routing, scheduling, 
instruction, payroll, operator performance, cost, budgeting, and other necessary 
controls for the effective operation of a business. Figure 10.8 illustrates a typical 
production operation card. 
 TEMPORARY STANDARDS 
 Employees require time to become proficient in any new or different opera-
tion. Frequently, time study analysts establish a standard on a relatively new 
operation on which there is insufficient volume for the operator to reach top 
efficiency. If the analyst bases operator grading on the usual conception of 
output (i.e., rating the operator below 100), the resulting standard may seem 
unduly tight, and the operator will probably be unable to make any incentive 
earnings (see Chapter 17). In contrast, if the analyst considers that the job is 
new and the volume is low, and establishes a liberal standard, then if the size 
of the order is increased, or if a new order for the same job is received, trouble 
may occur.  
 Perhaps the most satisfactory method of handling such situations is the issu-
ance of temporary standards. The analyst establishes the standard by giving con-
sideration to the difficulty of the work assignment and the number of pieces to be 
produced. Then, by using a learning curve (see Chapter 18) for the work, as well 
as the existing standard data, the analyst can develop an equitable temporary 
standard for the work. The resulting standard will be considerably more liberal 
than if the job involved a large volume. When released to the production floor, 
the standard is clearly marked “temporary,” and will include the maximum quan-
tity for which it applies. When temporary standards are released, they should 
only be in effect for the duration of the contract, or for 60 days, whichever is 
shorter. Upon expiration, they should be replaced by permanent standards.   

 Figure 10.8   Typical production operation card. (The “F” numbers refer to the fixtures used with the involved 
operation.) .
 
439

440 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
 SETUP STANDARDS 
 The elements of work commonly included in setup standards involve all events 
that take place between completion of the previous job and the start of the pres-
ent job. The setup standard also includes “teardown” or “put-away” elements, 
such as punching in on the job, getting tools from the tool crib, getting drawings 
from the dispatcher, setting up the machine, punching out on the job, remov-
ing tools from the machine, returning tools to the crib, and tallying production. 
Figures 10.7 and 10.9 illustrate a study that involved four setup elements (S-1, 
S-2, S-3, and S-4). 
 In establishing setup times, the analyst should use the identical procedure 
followed in establishing production standards, except that there will be no op-
portunity to get a series of elemental values for determining the mean times. 
Also, the analyst cannot observe the operator performing the setup elements in 
 Calculation of Hours Earned and Percent Efficiency 
EXAMPLE 10.3   
 The standard time for an operation is 11.46 min per piece. In an 8-h shift, the operator 
would be expected to produce 
8 h
60min/ h
11.46min/piece
41.88 pieces
 

 
 However, if the operator produced 53 pieces in a given working day, the standard 
hours (see Chapter 17) earned would be 
H
53 pieces
11.46min piece
60min h
10.123 h
e 


 
 The standard  S h expressed in hours per hundred pieces  C is 
S
C
C
11.46min piece
100 pieces
60min h
19.1 h/
h 


 
 The standard hours earned would be 


H
C
C
19.1 h
5

C
3 pieces
100 pieces
10.123 h
e
 
 The operator’s efficiency would be 
 E  100  10.123/8  126.5% 
 or more simply 
 E  100  53/41.88  126.5% 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 0  Time Study 
441
advance; consequently, the analyst is obliged to divide the setup into elements 
while the study is taking place. However, because setup elements, for the most 
part, are of longer duration, there is a reasonable amount of time to break the job 
down, record the time, and evaluate the performance as the operator proceeds 
from one work element to the next. 
 There are two ways of handling setup times: distributed by quantity, or al-
located by job. In the first method, they would be distributed over a specific 
manufacturing quantity, such as 1,000 or 10,000 pieces. This method is satisfac-
tory only when the magnitude of the production order is standard. For example, 
industries that ship from stock and reorder on a basis of minimum-maximum 
inventories are able to control their production orders to conform to economical 
lot sizes. In such cases, the setup time can be equitably prorated over the lot size. 
For example, suppose that the economical lot size of a given item is 1,000 pieces 
and that reordering is always done on the basis of 1,000 units. If the stan-
dard setup time in a given operation is 1.50 h, then the allowed operation time 
could be increased by 0.15 h per 100 pieces to take care of the make-ready and 
put-away elements. 
 This method is not at all practical if the size of the order is not controlled. In 
a plant that requisitions on a job-order basis, that is, releases production orders 
specifying quantities in accordance with customer requirements, it is impossible 
to standardize on the size of the work orders. For example, this week an order 
for 100 units may be issued, and next month an order for 5,000 units of the same 
part may be needed. In the example, the operator would only be allowed 0.15 h 
to set up the machine for the 100-unit order, which would be inadequate. On the 
5,000-unit order, however, the operator would be given 7.50 h, which would be 
considerably too much time. 
 It is more practical to establish setup standards as separate standard times 
(see Figures 10.7 and 10.9). Then, regardless of the quantity of parts to be pro-
duced, a fair standard would prevail. In some concerns, the setup is performed 
by a person other than the operator who does the job. The advantages of having 
separate setup personnel are quite obvious. Lower-skilled workers can be uti-
lized as operators when they do not have to set up their own facilities. Setups are 
more readily standardized and methods changes more easily introduced when 
the responsibility for setup rests with one individual. Also, when sufficient facili-
ties are available, production can be continuous if the next work assignment is 
set up while the operator is working on the present job. 
 PARTIAL SETUPS 
 Frequently, it is not necessary to set up a facility completely to perform a given 
operation, because some of the tools of the previous operation are required in 
the job being set up. For example, in hand-screw machine or turret lathe setups, 
careful scheduling of similar work for the same machine allows partial setups 
from one job to be used for the next. Instead of having to change six tools in 
the hex turret, it may only be necessary to change two or three. This savings in 

442 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
 Figure 10.9   Back of the time study form shown in Figure 10.7. 
 The study indicates a piece time of 0.523 min (0.8717 h/ C ) and a setup time of 6.772 min 
(0.1129 h). 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 0    Time Study 
443
setup time is one of the principal benefits of a well-formulated group technology 
program.  
 Because the sequence of work scheduled for a given machine seldom 
remains the same, it is difficult to establish partial setup times to cover all pos-
sible variations. For example, the standard for a complete setup for a given No. 4 
Warner & Swasey turret lathe might be 0.80 h. However, if this setup is per-
formed after job X, it might take only 0.45 h; after job Y, it may require 0.57 h; 
while following job Z, 0.70 h may be necessary. The variations possible in par-
tial setup time are so broad that the only practical way to establish their values 
accurately is to use standard data (see Chapter 12) for each job. 
 In plants where setup times are less than 1 h and production runs are rea-
sonably long, it is common practice to allow operators the full setup time for 
each job performed. This is advantageous for several reasons: First, if the plant 
incorporates wage incentives, operators are considerably more satisfied because 
of higher earnings, and they plan their work to the best possible advantage. This 
results in more production per unit of time and in lower total costs. Also, consid-
erable time and paperwork are saved by avoiding having to determine a standard 
for the partial setup operation and its application in all pertinent cases. In fact, 
this saving tends to approach the extra amount paid to operators resulting from 
the difference between the time required to make the complete setup and the 
time required to make the partial setup.  
 SUMMARY 
 To summarize, the steps for performing and computing a typical time study are 
as follows (see Figure 10.5 for numbers corresponding to these steps): 
 1.  Synchronize at the master clock and record the starting time. 
 2.  Walk to the operation and start the study. The readout at the snap is the 
time elapsed before the study. 
 3.  Rate operator performance while the element is taking place, and record 
either the single or the average rating. 
 4.  Snap the watch at the start of the next element. For continuous timing, 
enter the readout in the W column; for snapback timing, enter the readout 
in the OT column, as shown. 
 5.  For a foreign element, indicate in the appropriate NT column and record 
the times in the  Foreign Element section. 
 6.  Once all elements have been timed, snap the watch at the master clock. 
Record the finishing time. 
 7.  Record the readout as the time elapsed after the study. 
 8.  Add 2. and 7. to obtain the check time. 
 9.  Subtract 1. from 6. to obtain the elapsed time. 

444 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
 10.  Calculate the normal time by multiplying the observed time by the rating. 
 11.  Sum all observed times and the normal times for each element. Find the 
average normal time. 
 12.  Add all OT totals to obtain the effective time. 
 13.  Add all foreign elements to obtain the ineffective time. 
 14.  Add 8., 12., and 13. to obtain the total recorded time. 
 15.  Subtract 14. from 9. to obtain the unaccounted time. Use the absolute 
value. (The difference could be either negative or positive, and positive 
numbers are desired.) 
 16.  Divide 15. by 9. to obtain the percent recording error. Hopefully, this 
value is less than 2 percent! 
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  How is a fair day’s pay determined? 
 2.  What benchmark is used for standard pace? 
 3.  Why should the supervisor sign the time study? 
 4.  What are the effects of poor time standards? 
 5.  What equipment does the time study analyst need? 
 6.  What features of the PDA make it attractive to time study analysts? 
 7.  How can the metronome be used as a training tool for performance rating? 
 8.  What considerations should be given to the choice of the operator to be studied? 
 9.  Why is it essential to record complete information on the tools and facility on the 
time study form? 
 10.  Why are working conditions important in identifying the method being observed? 
 11.  Why would a time study analyst who is hard of hearing have difficulty in perform-
ing a time study? 
 12.  Differentiate between constant and variable elements. Why should they be kept 
separate when dividing the job into elements? 
 13.  What advantages does the continuous method of watch recording offer over the 
snapback method? 
 14.  Explain why electronic stopwatches have increased the use of the snapback 
procedure. 
 15.  Why is the time of day recorded on the time study form? 
 16.  How is a large variation in the sequence of elemental time recordings handled? 
 17.  Explain what a foreign element is and how foreign elements are handled under the 
continuous method. 
 18.  What factors enter into the determination of the number of cycles to observe? 
 19.  Why is it necessary to rate the operator? 
 20.  When should individual elements of each cycle be rated? 
 21.  Define a qualified operator. 
 22.  Why are allowances applied to the normal time? 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 0  Time Study 
445
 23.  What is the significance of a circled elapsed time? 
 24.  What steps are taken in the computation of a time study conducted in accordance 
with the continuous overall performance-rating procedure? 
 25.  How does the walking pace of 3 mi/h agree with your concept of a standard 
performance? 
 26.  Define standard time. 
 27.  Why is it usually more convenient to express standards as time per hundred pieces, 
rather than time per piece? 
 28.  Why would temporary standards be established? 
 29.  Which elements of work are included in the setup standard?  
 PROBLEMS  
 1.  Based on Table 10.2, how many observations should be taken on an operation for 
which the annual activity is 750 pieces and the cycle time is estimated at 15 min? 
 2.  Take a simple operation that you perform regularly, such as brushing your teeth, 
shaving, or combing your hair, and estimate the time it takes you to perform that 
operation. Now measure the time it takes while working at a standard pace. Is your 
estimate within plus or minus 20 percent of the estimated time? 
 3.  To demonstrate various levels of performance to a group of union stewards, the time 
study supervisor of XYZ Company is using the metronome while dealing bridge 
hands. How many times per minute should the metronome beat to demonstrate the 
following levels of performance? 60 percent, 75 percent, 100 percent, 125 percent  
 4.  You used the General Electric guide sheet to determine the number of observations 
to study. The guide sheet indicated that 10 cycles were required. After making the 
study, you used the standard error of the mean to estimate the number of observa-
tions needed for a given confidence level. The resulting calculation indicated that 
20 cycles should be studied. What would be your procedure? Why? 
 5.  The time study analyst at Dorben Company developed the following snapback 
stopwatch readings where elemental performance rating was used. The allowance 
for this element was assigned a value of 16 percent. What would be the standard 
time for this element? 
 Snapback reading 
 Performance factor 
 28 
 100 
 24 
 115 
 29 
 100 
 32 
 90 
 30 
 95 
 27 
 100 
 38 
 80 
 28 
 100 
 27 
 100 
 26 
 105 

446 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
 6.  What would be the required number of readings if the analyst wanted to be 87 percent 
confident that the mean observed time was within 5 percent of the true mean and 
the following values were established for an element after 19 cycles were observed? 
 
   0.09, 0.08, 0.10, 0.12, 0.09, 0.08, 0.09, 0.12, 0.11, 0.12, 0.09, 0.10, 0.12, 0.10, 0.08, 
0.09, 0.10, 0.12, 0.09 
 7.  The following data resulted from a time study made on a horizontal milling machine: 
 
   Mean manual effort time per cycle: 4.62 min 
 
   Mean cutting time (power feed): 3.74 min 
 
   Mean performance rating: 115 percent 
 
   Machine allowance (power feed): 10 percent 
 
   Fatigue allowance: 15 percent 
 
   What is the standard time for the operation? 
 8.  A work measurement analyst in Dorben Company took 10 observations of a high-
production job. He performance-rated each cycle and then computed the mean 
normal time for each element. The element with the greatest dispersion had a mean 
of 0.30 min and a standard deviation of 0.03 min. If it is desirable to have sampled 
data within 5 percent of the true data, how many observations should this time 
study analyst take of this operation? 
 9.  In Dorben Company, the work measurement analyst took a detailed time study of 
the making of shell molds. The third element of this study had the greatest variation 
in time. After studying nine cycles, the analyst computed the mean and standard 
deviation of this element, with the following results: 
 x–  0.42  s  0.08
 
   If the analyst wanted to be 90 percent confident that the mean time of the sample 
was within 10 percent of the mean of the population, how many total observa-
tions should have been taken? Within what percentage of the average of the total 
population is  at the 95 percent confidence level, under the measured observations? 
 10.  Based on the data provided in Figure 10.7, what would be the efficiency of an 
operator who set up the machine and produced an order of 5,000 pieces in a 40-h 
workweek? 
 11.  Establish the money rate per hundred pieces from the following data: 
 
   Cycle time (averaged measured time): 1.23 min 
 
   Base rate: $8.60 per h 
 
   Pieces per cycle: 4 
 
   Machine time (power feed): 0.52 min per cycle 
 
   Allowance: 17 percent on effort time; 12 percent on power feed time 
 
   Performance rating  88 percent 
 12.  The following data resulted from a study taken on a horizontal milling machine: 
 
   Pieces produced per cycle: 8 
 
   Average measured cycle time: 8.36 min 
 
   Average measured effort time per cycle: 4.62 min 
 
   Average rapid traverse time: 0.08 min 
 
   Average cutting time power feed: 3.66 min 
 
   Performance rating: 115 percent 
 
   Allowance (machine time): 10 percent 
 
   Allowance (effort time): 15 percent 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 0  Time Study 
447
 
   The operator works on the job a full 8-h day and produces 380 pieces. How many stan-
dard hours does the operator earn? What is the operator’s efficiency for the 8-h day?  
 13.  Express the standard of 5.761 min in hours per hundred pieces. What would the 
operator’s efficiency be if 92 pieces were completed during a working day? What 
would the efficiency be if the operator set up the machine (standard for setup  
0.45 h) and produced 80 pieces during the 8-h workday? 
 14.  Find the observed, normal, and standard times for the following jobs shown on the 
website. Assume standard performance and a 10 percent allowance. 
  a. 
 Stamping extrusions 
  b. 
 Stamping end couplings 
  c. 
 Flashlight assembly 
  d. 
 Union assembly 
  e. 
 Hospital bed rail assembly 
  f. 
 Stitching (garments) 
  g. 
 Labeling (garments) 
  h. 
 Cut and tack (garments) 
 15.  Complete the following time study. 

448 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
 16.  Complete the time study by filling in the circles. Then, calculate a standard time for 
an 8-h job. Assume a 10 percent allowance. 
 
 
 REFERENCES 
 Barnes, Ralph M.  Motion and Time Study: Design and Measurement of Work . 7th ed. 
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1980. 
 Gomberg, William.  A Trade Union Analysis of Time Study . 2d ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall, 1955. 
 Griepentrog, Carl W., and Gilbert Jewell.  Work Measurement: A Guide for Local Union 
Bargaining Committees and Stewards . Milwaukee, WI: International Union of 
Allied Industrial Workers of America, AFL-CIO, 1970. 
 Lowry, S. M., H. B. Maynard, and G. J. Stegemerten.  Time and Motion Study and 
Formulas for Wage Incentives . 3d ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1940. 
 Mundel, M. E.  Motion and Time Study: Improving Productivity . 5th ed. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1978. 
 Nadler, Gerald.  Work Design :  A Systems Concept . Rev. ed. Homewood, IL: Richard 
D. Irwin, 1970. 
 Rotroff, Virgil H.  Work Measurement . New York: Reinhold Publishing, 1959. 
  Smith, George, L.  Work Measurement—A Systems Approach. Columbus , OH: Grid, 1978.  
 United Auto Workers.  Time Study—Engineering and Education Departments. Is Time 
Study Scientific ? Publication No. 325. Detroit, MI: Solidarity House, 1972. 
 SELECTED SOFTWARE 
  DesignTools (available from the McGraw-Hill text website at www.mhhe.com/
niebel-freivalds). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002. 
 MVTA. Nexgen Ergonomics, 3400 de Maisonneuve Blvd. West, Suite 1430, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada H3Z 3B8 (http://www.nexgenergo.com/). 
 QuickTimes. Applied Computer Services, Inc., 7900 E. Union Ave., Suite 1100, Denver 
CO 80237 (http://www.acsco.com/). 
 QuickTS (included with textbook), New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002. 
 Work study,  Quetech Ltd., 1-866-222-1022 (http://www.quetech.com) 

 
449
 
449
 
  CHAPTER 
 
11 
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Use ratings to adjust observed times to those expected with standard 
performance. 
 •  Speed rating is the fastest and simplest method. 
 •  Rate the operator before recording the time. 
 •  For a study with long elements, rate each separately. 
 •  For a study with short elements, rate the overall study. 
 •  Use allowances to compensate for fatigue and delays at work. 
 •  Provide a minimum of 9 percent to 10 percent constant allowance for 
personal needs and basic fatigue. 
 •  Add allowances to normal time as a percentage of normal time to obtain 
standard time.  
 D
uring a time study, analysts carefully observe the performance of the op-
erator. The performance being executed seldom conforms to the exact 
definition of  standard . Thus, some adjustment must be made to the mean 
observed time to derive the time required for a qualified operator to do the job 
when working at a standard pace. To arrive at the time required by a qualified 
worker, time study analysts must increase the time if an above-standard operator 
has been selected for study and decrease the time if a below-standard operator 
has been selected for study. Only in this manner can they establish a true stan-
dard for qualified operators. 
 Performance rating is probably the most important step in the entire work  
measurement procedure. It is also the step most subject to criticism, as it is based 
entirely on the experience, training, and judgment of the work measurement ana-
lyst. Regardless of whether the rating factor is based on the speed or tempo of 
the output or on the performance of the operator compared to that of a qualified 
worker, experience and judgment are still the criteria for determining the rating 
factor. For this reason, analysts must have sufficient training and high personal 
integrity. 
 Performance 
Rating and 
Allowances 

450 
C H A P T E R  1 1
 After calculation of the normal time, one additional step must be performed 
to arrive at a fair standard. This last step is the addition of an allowance to ac-
count for the many interruptions, delays, and slowdowns caused by fatigue in 
every work assignment. For example, when planning a road trip of 1,300 mi, we 
know that the trip cannot be made in 20 h driving at a speed of 65 mi/h. An al-
lowance must be added for periodic stops for personal needs, driving fatigue, un-
avoidable stops due to traffic congestion and stoplights, possible detours and the 
resulting rough roads, car trouble, and so forth. Thus, we may actually estimate 
that the trip will take 25 h, allowing an additional 5 h for all delays. Similarly, 
analysts must provide an allowance if the resulting standard is to be fair and 
readily maintainable by an average worker performing at a steady, normal pace. 
 11.1 STANDARD PERFORMANCE 
 Standard performance  is defined as the level of performance attained by a thor-
oughly experienced operator working under customary conditions at a pace 
neither too fast nor too slow, but representative of one that can be maintained 
throughout the day. To better define such performance, we use carefully defined 
benchmark examples that are familiar to us all. Typical benchmarks include 
dealing 52 cards in 0.50 min or walking 100 ft (3 mi/h or 4.83 km/h) in 0.38 min. 
However, a specific description should be given of the distance of the four hands 
dealt with respect to the dealer and of the technique of grasping, moving, and 
disposing of the cards or whether the ground is level, whether a load is being car-
ried, and how heavy the load is while walking. The more clear-cut and specific 
the definition of the conditions, the better it is. 
 The benchmark examples should be supplemented by a clear description 
of the characteristics of an employee carrying out a standard performance. A 
representative description of such an employee might be as follows: a worker 
who is adapted to the work and has attained sufficient experience to perform 
the job in an efficient manner, with little or no supervision. The worker pos-
sesses coordinated mental and physical qualities, enabling him or her to pro-
ceed from one element to another without hesitation or delay, in accordance 
with the principles of motion economy. The worker maintains a good level 
of efficiency through knowledge and proper use of all tools and equipment 
related to the job. She or he cooperates and performs at a pace best suited for 
continuous performance. 
 Considerable individual differences can exist between workers. Differences 
in inherent knowledge, physical capacity, health, trade knowledge, physical dex-
terity, and training can cause one operator to consistently outperform another. 
For example, in a random selection of 1,000 employees, the frequency distribu-
tion of performance would approximate the normal curve, with more than 997 
cases on average falling within three-sigma limits. Graphically, this distribution 
of the 1,000 people would appear as shown in Figure 11.1 (Presgrave, 1957). 
Based on the ratio of the two extremes (1.39/0.61), the best individual would be 
more than twice as fast as the slowest individual. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
451
   11.2 SOUND RATING CHARACTERISTICS 
  The first and most important characteristic of any rating system is accuracy. Be-
cause the majority of rating methods rely on the judgment of the time study 
analyst, perfect consistency in rating is impossible. However, rating procedures 
applied to different operators employing the same method that yield standards 
deviating less than 5 percent from the mean are considered adequate. 
 Time study analysts should be similarly accurate. It is not difficult to cor-
rect the rating habits of an analyst who rates consistently high or consistently 
low. However, it is very difficult to correct the rating ability of an analyst who is 
inconsistent, rating too high one day and too low the next day, and that person 
should probably not continue to conduct time studies. Inconsistency, more than 
anything else, destroys the operator’s confidence in the time study procedure. 
 Performance rating should be done only during the observation of elemen-
tal times. As the operator progresses from one element to the next, using the 
prescribed method, an analyst should carefully evaluate the operator’s speed, 
dexterity, false moves, rhythm, coordination, effectiveness, and the other factors 
influencing output and judge the operator’s performance compared to standard 
performance. Once the performance has been recorded, it should not be changed. 
However, this does not imply that the observer always has perfect judgment. If 
the rating is questioned, the job or operation should be restudied to prove or dis-
prove the recorded evaluation. 
 The frequency of rating depends on the cycle time. In short-cycle repetitive 
operations, little deviation in operator performance is expected during the course 
of the average-length study (15 to 30 min), and it is perfectly satisfactory to  evalu-
ate the performance of the entire study. Also, an observer who endeavors to rate 
each element in such a study will be so busy recording values that he or she will be 
unable to effectively observe, analyze, and evaluate the operator’s  performance. 
 When the study is relatively long (more than 30 min) or is made up of sev-
eral long elements, operator performance may vary during the course of the 
–3σ
.61
–2σ
.74
–σ
.87
X
1.00
+σ
1.13
+2σ
1.26
+3σ
1.39
340
340
20
20
140
140
 Figure 11.1   Expected distribution of the output of 1,000 people selected at random. 

452 
C H A P T E R  1 1
study. In such studies, analysts should rate each element, especially if they 
are longer than 0.10 min. But in general, the more frequently a study is rated, the 
more accurate the evaluation of operator performance will be. As examples, the 
time studies shown in Figures 10.3, 10.5, and 10.6 rate each element, whereas 
the time study shown in Figure 10.7 rates the overall study. 
 11.3 RATING METHODS 
 SPEED RATING 
 Speed rating  is a performance evaluation method that considers only the rate of 
work per unit time. In this method, the observer measures the effectiveness of 
the operator against the concept of a qualified operator doing the same work, and 
then assigns a percentage to indicate the ratio of the observed performance to 
standard performance. 
 This method particularly emphasizes the observer having complete knowl-
edge of the job before doing the study. To illustrate, the pace of machine work-
ers in a plant producing aircraft engine parts would appear considerably slower 
than the pace of stitchers in the garment industry. The greater precision of air-
craft work requires such care that the movements of the various operators might 
appear unduly slow to one not completely familiar with the work. 
 In speed rating, analysts first appraise the performance to determine whether 
it is above or below normal. They then try to place the performance in the precise 
position on the rating scale that correctly evaluates the numerical difference be-
tween the standard and the performance demonstrated. Thus, 100 percent is usu-
ally considered normal. A rating of 110 percent indicates that the operator was 
performing at a speed 10 percent greater than normal, and a rating of 90 percent 
means that the operator was performing at a speed 90 percent of normal. 
 All analysts, through years of experience, will eventually develop a mental 
model of standard performance. However, it may be useful for the novice ana-
lyst to consider the performance of several common tasks in order to develop 
an initial mental model. Two such tasks were suggested by Presgrave (1957): 
(1) walking at 3 mi/h (4.83 km/h), that is, 100 ft (30.5 m) in 0.38 min, and 
(2) dealing a deck of 52 cards into four equal piles closely spaced in 0.5 min 
(note that the opposite thumb feeds the cards to the dealing hand). A guide with 
specific anchor points for various levels is presented in Table 11.1. 
 It may also be useful for the novice analyst to begin by rating only by 10s, 
that is, 80, 90, 100, and then eventually moving onto 5s, and so on. Also, it is 
very important for any analyst to record the rating in the R column on the time 
study form before snapping and looking at the watch readout. Otherwise, the 
analyst may be accused of  rating by the watch . 
 Some companies use a speed rating technique normalized to 60 percent 
standard. This is based on the standard hour approach, that is, producing 60 min 
of work every hour. On this basis, a rating of 80 would mean that the operator 
was working at a speed of 80/60, or 133 percent, which is 33 percent above nor-
mal. A rating of 50 would indicate a speed of 50/60, or 83.3 percent of normal.  

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
453
 Time study analysts use speed rating for elemental, cycle, or overall rating. 
For example, all the time studies shown in Chapter 10 utilized speed rating. 
 THE WESTINGHOUSE SYSTEM 
 One of the oldest used rating systems, then termed  leveling,  was developed by 
Westinghouse Electric Corporation (Lowry, Maynard, and Stegemerten, 1940). 
This  Westinghouse rating system  considers four factors in evaluating the perfor-
mance of the operator: skill, effort, conditions, and consistency. 
 The system defines  skill  as “proficiency at following a given method” and 
further relates it to expertise, as demonstrated by the proper coordination of 
mind and hands. The skill of an operator results from experience and inherent 
aptitudes, such as natural coordination and rhythm. Skill increases over time, be-
cause increased familiarity with the work brings speed, smoothness of motions, 
and freedom from hesitations and false moves. A decrease in skill is usually 
caused by some impairment of ability, brought about by physical or psycho-
logical factors, such as failing eyesight, failing reflexes, and the loss of muscular 
strength or coordination. Therefore, a person’s skill can vary from job to job, and 
even from operation to operation on a given job. 
 There are six degrees of skill: poor, fair, average, good, excellent, and super. 
Table 11.2 illustrates the characteristics of the various degrees of skill, with their 
equivalent percentage values. The skill rating is then translated to its equivalent 
percentage value, which ranges from 15 percent for superskill to 22 percent 
for poor skill. This percentage is then combined algebraically with the ratings for 
effort, conditions, and consistency to arrive at the final rating, or performance- 
rating factor. 
 This rating method defines  effort  as a “demonstration of the will to work 
effectively.” Effort is representative of the speed with which skill is applied, and 
can be controlled to a high degree by the operator. When evaluating the operator’s 
effort, the observer must rate only the “effective” effort, because occasionally an 
operator will apply misdirected effort to increase the cycle time of the study.  
 The six effort classes for rating purposes are poor, fair, average, good, excel-
lent, and excessive. Excessive effort is assigned a value of 13 percent, and poor 
effort a value of 17 percent. Table 11.3 gives the numerical values for the dif-
ferent degrees of effort and outlines the characteristics of the various categories. 
 Table 11.1   Speed Rating Guide 
 Rating 
 Verbal anchor points 
 Walking speed 
(mi/h) 
 Cards dealt 
per 1/2 min 
 0 
 No activity 
 0 
 0 
 67 
 Very slow, clumsy 
 2 
 35 
 100 
 Steady, deliberate 
 3 
 52 
 133 
 Brisk, businesslike 
 4 
 69 
 167 
 Very fast, high degree of dexterity 
 5 
 87 
 200 
 Upper limit for short period 
 6 
 104 

454 
C H A P T E R  1 1
 The  conditions  referred to in this performance-rating procedure affect the 
operator and not the operation, and they include temperature, ventilation, light, 
and noise. Thus, if the temperature at a given workstation is 60°F, yet it is cus-
tomarily maintained at 68 to 74°F, the conditions will be rated as lower than 
normal. Factors that affect the operation, such as poor tools or materials, would 
not be considered when applying the performance factor for working conditions. 
 The six general classes of conditions, with values ranging from 6 percent 
to 7 percent, are ideal, excellent, good, average, fair, and poor. Table 11.4 gives 
the respective values for these conditions. 
 The last of the four factors that influence the performance rating is operator 
 consistency . Unless the analyst uses the snapback method, or makes and records 
successive subtractions as the study progresses, the consistency of the operator 
must be evaluated as the study is worked up. Elemental time values that con-
stantly repeat would have perfect consistency. This situation occurs very infre-
quently, as there always tends to be some variability due to material hardness, 
tool cutting edge, lubricant, erroneous watch readings, and foreign elements. 
 Table 11.2   Westinghouse System Skill Ratings 
 0.15 
 A1 
 Superskill 
 0.13 
 A2 
 Superskill 
 0.11 
 B1 
 Excellent 
 0.08 
 B2 
 Excellent 
 0.06 
 C1 
 Good 
 0.03 
 C2 
 Good 
 0.00 
 D 
 Average 
 –0.05 
 E1 
 Fair 
 –0.10 
 E2 
 Fair 
 –0.16 
 F1 
 Poor 
 –0.22 
 F2 
 Poor 
 Source: Lowry, Maynard, and Stegemerten (1940), p. 233. 
 Table 11.3   Westinghouse System Effort Ratings 
 0.13 
 A1 
 Excessive 
 0.12 
 A2 
 Excessive 
 0.10 
 B1 
 Excellent 
 0.08 
 B2 
 Excellent 
 0.05 
 C1 
 Good 
 0.02 
 C2 
 Good 
 0.00 
 D 
 Average 
 0.04 
 E1 
 Fair 
 0.08 
 E2 
 Fair 
 0.12 
 F1 
 Poor 
 0.17 
 F2 
 Poor 
 Source: Lowry, Maynard, and Stegemerten (1940), p. 233. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
455
Elements that are mechanically controlled will have near-perfect consistency and 
are rated 100.  
 The six classes of consistency are perfect, excellent, good, average, fair, 
and poor. Perfect consistency is rated 4 percent, and poor consistency is rated 
–4 percent, with the other classes falling in between these values. Table 11.5 
summarizes these values. 
 Once the skill, effort, conditions, and consistency of the operation have been 
assigned, and their equivalent numerical values established, analysts can determine 
the overall performance factor by algebraically combining the four values and add-
ing their sum to unity. For example, if a given job is rated C2 on skill, (i.e., good 
but not very good), C1 on effort, (i.e., better than good, perhaps very good), D on 
conditions, (i.e., typical, average conditions), and E on consistency, (i.e., only fair 
or below-average consistency), the performance factor would be as follows: 
 Skill 
 C2 
 0.03 
 Effort 
 C1 
 0.05 
 Conditions 
 D 
 0.00 
 Consistency 
 E 
 –0.02 
 Algebraic sum 
   
 0.06 
 Performance factor 
   
 1.06 
 Many companies have modified the Westinghouse system to include only 
the skill and effort factors of the overall rating. They contend that consistency 
is very closely allied to skill, and that conditions are rated average in most in-
stances. If conditions deviate substantially from normal, the study could be post-
poned, or the effect of the unusual conditions could be taken into consideration 
in the application of the allowance (see Section 11.10). 
 Table 11.4   Westinghouse System Condition Ratings 
 0.06 
 A 
 Ideal 
 0.04 
 B 
 Excellent 
 0.02 
 C 
 Good 
  0.00 
 D 
 Average 
 –0.03 
 E 
 Fair 
 –0.07 
 F 
 Poor 
 Source: Lowry, Maynard, and Stegemerten (1940), p. 233. 
 Table 11.5   Westinghouse System Consistency Ratings 
 0.04 
 A 
 Perfect 
 0.03 
 B 
 Excellent 
 0.01 
 C 
 Good 
   0.00 
 D 
 Average 
 –0.02 
 E 
 Fair 
 –0.04 
 F 
 Poor 
 Source: Lowry, Maynard, and Stegemerten (1940), p. 233. 

456 
C H A P T E R  1 1
 The Westinghouse rating system demands considerable training to differ-
entiate the levels of each attribute. It is appropriate for either cycle rating or 
overall study rating but not for elemental rating, because (except for very long 
elements), analysts would not have time to evaluate the dexterity, effectiveness, 
and physical application of each element. Also in the author’s opinion, a rating 
system that is simple, concise, easily explained, and keyed to well-established 
benchmarks is more successful than a complex rating system, such as the 
Westinghouse, requiring involved adjustment factors and computational tech-
niques that may confuse the average shop employee. 
 SYNTHETIC RATING 
 In an effort to develop a rating method that would not rely on the judgment of 
a time study observer and would give consistent results, Morrow (1946) estab-
lished a procedure known as  synthetic rating . The synthetic rating procedure 
determines a performance factor for representative effort elements of the work 
cycle by comparing actual elemental observed times to times developed through 
fundamental motion data (see Chapter 13). Thus, the performance factor may be 
expressed algebraically as 
P
F
O
tF

 where 
 P  performance or rating factor 
 
  F t  fundamental motion time 
 
  O  observed mean elemental time for elements used in  F t 
 This factor would then be applied to the remainder of the manually controlled el-
ements comprising the study. Again, machine-controlled elements are not rated. 
A typical illustration of synthetic rating appears in Table 11.6. 
 For element 1, 
 P  0.096/0.08  120% 
 and for element 4, 
 P  0.278/0.22  126% 
 The mean of these is 123 percent, which is the rating factor used for all effort 
elements. 
 More than one element should be used to establish a synthetic rating factor, 
because research has proved that operator performance varies significantly from 
element to element, especially in complex work. Unfortunately, a major objec-
tion to the synthetic rating procedure is the time required to develop the predeter-
mined time system analysis of the given job. 
 OBJECTIVE RATING 
 The  objective rating  method, developed by Mundel and Danner (1994), elimi-
nates the difficulty of establishing a standard pace for every type of work. This 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
457
procedure establishes a single work assignment to which the pace of all other 
jobs is compared. After the judgment of pace, a secondary factor assigned to the 
job indicates its relative difficulty. Factors influencing the difficulty adjustment 
are (1) amount of body used, (2) foot pedals, (3) bimanualness, (4) eye–hand 
coordination, (5) handling or sensory requirements, and (6) weight handled or 
resistance encountered.  
 Numerical values, resulting from experiments, have been assigned for a 
range of each factor. The sum of the numerical values for each of the six fac-
tors constitutes the secondary adjustment. The rating  R  can thus be expressed as 
follows: 
 R  P  D
 where  P  pace rating factor 
 
  D  job difficulty adjustment factor 
 This performance-rating procedure gives consistent results. Comparing the 
pace of the operation under study to an operation completely familiar to the 
observer is easier than simultaneously judging all the attributes of an operation 
and comparing them to a concept of normal for that specific job. The secondary 
factor does not affect inconsistency, as this factor merely adjusts the rated time 
by some percentage. Tables of percentage values for the effects of various dif-
ficulties in the operation performed are given in Mundel and Danner (1994). 
 11.4 RATING APPLICATION AND ANALYSIS 
  The value of a rating is written in the  R  column of the time study form. Typically, 
the decimal point is omitted, and a whole number (i.e., percent) value is written 
to save time. After the stopwatch phase is complete, the analyst multiplies the 
observed time (OT) by the rating  R,  scaled by 100, to yield the normal time (NT): 
 NT  OT  R/100 
 Table 11.6   Examples of Synthetic Ratings 
 Element 
no. 
 Observed average 
time (min) 
 Element 
type 
 Fundamental
motion time (min) 
 Performance 
factor 
 1 
 0.08 
 Manual 
 0.096 
 123 
 2 
 0.15 
 Manual 
 — 
 123 
 3 
 0.05 
 Manual 
 — 
 123 
 4 
 0.22 
 Manual 
 0.278 
 123 
 5 
 1.41 
 Power-fed 
 — 
 100 
 6 
 0.07 
 Manual 
 — 
 123 
 7 
 0.11 
 Manual 
 — 
 123 
 8 
 0.38 
 Power-fed 
 — 
 100 
 9 
 0.14 
 Manual 
 — 
 123 
 10 
 0.06 
 Manual 
 — 
 123 
 11 
 0.20 
 Manual 
 — 
 123 
 12 
 0.06 
 Manual 
 — 
 123 

458 
C H A P T E R  1 1
In effect, this rates the operator’s performance compared to that of a qualified 
operator working at the standard performance pace without overexertion, while 
adhering to the correct method (see Figure 11.2).  
 The performance-rating plan that is easiest to apply, easiest to explain, and 
gives the most valid results is straight speed rating, augmented by synthetic 
benchmarks. As has been explained, 100 is considered normal in this procedure, 
and performance greater than normal is indicated by values directly proportional 
to 100. The speed rating scale usually covers a range from 50 to 150. Operators 
performing outside this 3-to-1 productivity range may be studied, but this is not 
recommended. The closer the performance is to standard, the better the chance 
of achieving a fair normal time. 
 Four criteria determine whether time study analysts using speed rating can 
consistently establish values within 5 percent of the rating average calculated by 
a group of trained analysts: 
 1.  Experience in the class of work performed 
 2.  Use of synthetic benchmarks on at least two of the elements performed 
 3.  Selection of an operator who gives performances somewhere between 85 
and 115 percent of standard pace 
 4.  Use of the mean value of three or more independent studies and/or different 
operators  
 Experience with the class of work performed is critical. The analyst should 
be sufficiently familiar with the work to understand every detail of the method 
being used. For example, on an assembly job using a fixture, the observer should 
be familiar with the difficulty in positioning the components in the fixture, 
should know the class of fit between all mating parts, and should have a clear 
understanding of the relationship between time and class of fit. The observer 
should also know the proper sequence of events and the weights of all the parts 
handled. This does not necessarily mean that the analyst must have been an ac-
tual operator in the work being studied, although this would be desirable; an 
analyst with 10 years’ experience in the metal trades would have considerable 
difficulty establishing standards in the garment industry. 
 Whenever more than one operator is available to be studied, the analyst 
should select the one who is thoroughly experienced on the job, has a reputa-
tion of being receptive to time study practice, and consistently performs at a 
Normal Time
Operator #1 - Observed Time
Operator #2 - Observed Time
Operator #3 - Observed Time
Rating > 100
Rating = 100
Rating < 100
 Figure 11.2   Relationships of observed time, ratings, and normal time 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
459
pace near or slightly better than standard. The closer the operator performs to a 
standard pace, the easier it will be to rate him or her. For example, if 0.50 min is 
normal for dealing a deck of cards into four bridge hands, performance within 
15 percent of this standard would be fairly easy to identify. However, a perfor-
mance 50 percent faster or slower than normal would cause considerable diffi-
culty in establishing an accurate rating factor for the performance demonstrated. 
 The accuracy of the analyst’s rating can be checked using synthetic stan-
dards. In the time study of Figure 10. 7, the average of observed time for element 
1 is 2.07/15  0.138 min. When 0.138 min is divided by the MTM conversion 
factor of 0.0006, an observed time of 230 TMUs (see Chapter 13) is obtained. 
The fundamental motion time for element 1 is 255 TMUs, which yields a syn-
thetic rating of 255/230  111 percent. In this particular study, the analyst was 
on target with a speed rating of 110 percent, and the synthetic rating was used as 
a validation of that judgment. 
 For rating the overall study, the analyst should take three or more indepen-
dent samples before arriving at the standard. These can be made on the same 
operator at different times of the day, or on different operators. The point is that 
as the number of samples increases, compensating errors diminish the overall 
error. An example clarifies this point. One author, along with two other trained 
industrial engineers, reviewed performance rating training films involving 
15 different operations. The results are shown in Table 11.7. The standard ratings 
 Table 11.7   Performance Ratings of Three Different Engineers Observing 15 Different Operations 
Operation
 Standard 
rating 
Engineer A
 Engineer B 
 Engineer C 
 Average of
Engineers A, B, C 
 Rating 
 Deviation  
 Rating 
 Deviation 
 Rating 
 Deviation 
 Rating 
 Deviation  
 1 
 110 
 110 
 0 
 115 
 5 
 100 
 –10 
 108 
 –2 
 2 
 150 
 140 
 –10 
 130 
 –20 
 125 
 –25 
 132 
 –18 
 3 
 90 
 110 
 20 
 100 
 10 
 105 
 15 
 105 
 15 
 4 
 100 
 100 
 0 
 100 
 0 
 100 
 0 
 100 
 0 
 5 
 130 
 120 
 –10 
 130 
 0 
 115 
 –15 
 122 
 –8 
 6 
 120 
 140 
 20 
 120 
 0 
 105 
 –15 
 122 
 2 
 7 
 65 
 70 
 5 
 70 
 5 
 95 
 30 
 78 
 13 
 8 
 105 
 100 
 –5 
 110 
 5 
 100 
 –5 
 103 
 –2 
 9 
 140 
 160 
 20 
 145 
 5 
 145 
 5 
 150 
 10 
 10 
 115 
 125 
 10 
 125 
 10 
 110 
 –5 
 120 
 5 
 11 
 115 
 110 
 –5 
 120 
 10 
 115 
 0 
 115 
 0 
 12 
 125 
 125 
 0 
 125 
 0 
 115 
 –10 
 122 
 –3 
 13 
 100 
 100 
 0 
 85 
 –15 
 110 
 10 
 98 
 –2 
 14 
 65 
 55 
 –10 
 70 
 5 
 90 
 25 
 72 
 7 
 15 
 150 
 160 
 10 
 140 
 –10 
 140 
 –10 
 147 
 –3 
Average of 
15 opera-
tions
 112 
 115.0 
 112.3 
111.3
 112.9 
 Average 
deviation 
 0 
 3.0 
 0.7 
 –0.7 
 0.9 

460 
C H A P T E R  1 1
were not disclosed until all 15 operations had been rated. The average deviation 
of all three engineers for the 15 different operations was only 0.9 on a speed rat-
ing scale with a range of 50 points to 150 points. Yet, engineer C was 30.0 high 
on operation 7 and engineer B was 20.0 low on operation 2. When the known 
ratings were within the 70 to 130 range, the average rating of the three analysts 
exceeded 5 points of the known rating in only one case (operation 3).   
 11.5 RATING TRAINING 
  To be successful, analysts must develop track records for setting accurate standards 
that are accepted by both labor and management. To maintain the respect of all 
parties, the rates must be consistent. This is especially the case for a speed rating. 
 In general, when studying operators performing somewhere in the range 
of 0.70 to 1.30 of standard, good analysts should regularly establish standards 
within 5 percent of the true rate. Thus, if several operators are performing the 
same job, and different analysts, each studying a different operator, establish 
time standards on the job, then the resulting standard from each study should be 
within 5 percent of the mean of the group of studies. 
 To ensure speed rating consistency, both with their own rates and with the 
rates established by the others, analysts should continually participate in train-
ing programs. Such training should be more intense for the neophyte time study 
analyst. One of the most widely used training methods is the observation of vid-
eotapes illustrating diverse operations performed at different productivity levels. 
Each film has a known level of performance. (Selected training videotapes are 
listed at the end of this chapter.) After the film is shown, the correct speed rat-
ing is compared with the values established independently by the trainees. If 
the analysts’ values deviate substantially from the correct value, then specific 
information should be put forward to justify the rating. For example, the analyst 
may have underrated the operator due to an apparently effortless sequence of 
motions, whereas the operator’s smooth, rhythmic blending of movements may 
really have been an indication of high dexterity and manipulative ability. 
 As successive operations are reviewed, analysts should plot their ratings 
against the known values (see Figure 11.3). A straight line indicates perfection, 
whereas high irregularities on both sides of the line indicate inconsistency as 
well as an inability to evaluate performance. In Figure 11.3, the analyst rated the 
first film 75, but the correct rating was 55. The second was rated 80, while the 
proper rating was 70. In all but the first case, the analyst was within the compa-
ny’s established area of correct rating. Note that, due to the nature of confidence 
intervals, the 5 percent accuracy criterion is valid only around 100 percent, or 
standard performance. When performance is below 70 percent of standard or 
above 130 percent of standard, an experienced time study analyst would expect 
an error much larger than 5 percent. 
 It is also helpful to plot successive ratings on the  x  axis and indicate the posi-
tive or negative magnitude of deviation from the correct value on the  y  axis (see 
Figure 11.4). The closer the time study analyst’s rating comes to the  x  axis, the 
more nearly correct he or she is.  

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
461
130
50
150
140
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
Correct rating
Analyst’s rating
1
2
4
3
5
7
6
Area of correct
rating
Accurate rating of
performance becomes
increasingly difficult
when 70–130 range
is exceeded.
 Figure 11.3   Chart showing a record of seven studies with the analyst tending to rate 
a little high on studies 1, 2, 4, and 6 and a little low on studies 3 and 7 
 Only study 1 was rated outside the range of desired accuracy. 
0
5
10
15
Approximate area of correct rating
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
+10
+5
0
–5
–10
Percentage deviation
Trial number
 Figure 11.4   Record of an analyst’s rating factors on 15 studies 

462 
C H A P T E R  1 1
 A recent statistical study involving the performance rating of 6,720 individ-
ual operations by a group of 19 analysts over a period of approximately 2 years 
produced several interesting observations. Analysts overrated low performance 
levels and underrated high performance levels. This is typical of novice raters 
who tend to be conservative raters and are afraid to deviate too far from standard 
performance. In statistical applications, this tendency is termed  regression to the 
mean  and results in a relatively flat line compared to the expected line with a 
slope of 1 (see Figure 11.5). The novice rater who rates higher than the true 
value for performances below standard performance produces a  loose rate . The 
result is a standard time that is too easy for operators to achieve, which means 
the company would lose money on that operation. For performances above the 
standard, a novice rater who rates lower than the true value produces a  tight rate, 
which results in a time that is difficult for operators to achieve. Some analysts, 
even after years of experience, consistently tend to rate either tight or loose. 
 The statistical study also concluded that the operation being examined has 
an effect on errors in rating performance. Complex operations tend to be more 
difficult to performance-rate than simpler operations, even for experienced ana-
lysts. At low performance levels, overrating is greater for difficult operations 
than for simple operations, while at high performance levels, underrating is 
greater for the easy-to-perform operations. 
 As mentioned previously in Chapter 10, the Multimedia Video Task Analy-
sis (MVTA, Nexgen Ergonomics) that is typically used to capture time study 
information may also be useful for training purposes. 
 11.6 ALLOWANCES 
  The watch readings of any time study are taken over a relatively short time. 
Therefore, normal time does not include unavoidable delays, which may not 
even have been observed, and other legitimate lost time. Consequently, analysts 
must make some adjustment to compensate for such losses. The application of 
50
100
150
50
100
Analyst’s rating
Correct rating
Perfect rating
150
Loose
Tight
Conservative
 Figure 11.5   Examples of loose, tight, and conservative rater 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
463
these adjustments, or  allowances,  may be considerably broader in some com-
panies than in others. For example, Table 11.8 reveals the items that 42 firms 
included in their allowances.  
 Allowances are applied to three parts of the study: (1) the total cycle time, 
(2) machine time only, and (3) manual effort time only. Allowances applicable to 
the total cycle time are expressed as a percentage of the cycle time, and compen-
sate for such delays as personal needs, cleaning the workstation, and oiling the 
machine. Machine time allowances include time for tool maintenance and power 
variance, while representative delays covered by effort allowances are fatigue 
and certain unavoidable delays. 
 Two methods are frequently used for developing standard allowance data. 
One is direct observation, which requires observers to study two, or perhaps 
three, operations over a long time. Observers record the duration of and reason 
for each idle interval. After establishing a reasonably representative sample, ob-
servers summarize their findings to determine the percent allowance for each 
applicable characteristic. Data obtained in this fashion, like those for any time 
study, must be adjusted to standard performance. Because observers must spend 
a long time directly observing one or more operations, this method is exception-
ally tedious, not only for analysts, but also for the operators. Another disadvan-
tage is the tendency to take too small a sample, which may yield biased results. 
 The second technique involves work sampling studies (see Chapter 14). This 
method requires taking a large number of random observations, thus requiring 
only part-time, intermittent services of the observer. In this method, no stop-
watch is used, as observers merely walk through the area under study at random 
times and note briefly what each operator is doing. The number of delays re-
corded, divided by the total number of observations during which the operator is 
engaged in productive work, approximates the allowance required by the opera-
tor to accommodate the delays encountered. 
 Table 11.8   Typical Industrial Allowances 
 Allowance factor 
 No. of firms 
 Percentage of firms 
 1. Fatigue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 39 
 93 
 
 A. General  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 19 
 45 
 
 B. Rest periods  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 13 
 31 
 
 
 Did not specify A or B  . . . . . . . . . . . 
 7 
 17 
 2. Time required to learn  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 3 
 7 
 3. Unavoidable delay  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 35 
 83 
 
 A. Operator  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1 
 2 
 
 B. Machine  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 7 
 17 
 
 C. Both operator and machine  . . . . . . . . 
 21 
 50 
 
 
 Did not specify A, B, or C  . . . . . . . . 
 6 
 14 
 4. Personal needs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 32 
 76 
 5. Setup or preparation operations  . . . . . . . 
 24 
 57 
 6. Irregular or unusual operations  . . . . . . . 
 16 
 38 
 Source: Hummel (1935). 

464 
C H A P T E R  1 1
 Figure 11.6 attempts to provide a scheme for ordering the various types of 
allowances according to function. The main division is fatigue versus special al-
lowances.  Fatigue allowances,  as the name implies, provide time for the worker to 
recover from fatigue incurred as a result of the job or work environment, and these 
are subdivided into  constant  and  variable fatigue allowances. Special allowances 
include many different factors related to the process, equipment, and materials and 
are termed  unavoidable delays, avoidable delays, extra, and  policy allowances .   
 11.7 CONSTANT ALLOWANCES 
 PERSONAL NEEDS 
 Personal needs  include those cessations in work necessary for maintaining the gen-
eral well-being of the employee; examples are trips to the drinking fountain and the 
restroom. The general working conditions and class of work influence the time nec-
essary for personal delays. For example, working conditions involving heavy work 
performed at high temperatures, such as that done in the press-room of a rubber-
molding department or in a hot-forge shop, would require greater allowance for 
personal needs than light work performed in comfortable temperature areas. 
 There is no scientific basis for a numerical percent to give; however, detailed 
production checks have demonstrated that a 5 percent allowance for personal 
time, or approximately 24 min in 8 h, is appropriate for typical shop work-
ing conditions. Lazarus (1968) reported that of 235 plants in 23 industries, the 
personal allowance ranged from 4.6 to 6.5 percent. Thus, the 5 percent figure 
appears to be adequate for the majority of workers. 
 BASIC FATIGUE 
 The  basic fatigue allowance is a constant to account for the energy expended 
to carry out the work and to alleviate monotony. A value of 4 percent of nor-
mal time is considered adequate for an operator who is doing light work, while 
Special allowances
Constant allowances
Total allowances
Normal
time
Standard
time
Personal 
needs
Basic
fatigue
Variable
fatigue
Unavoidable
delays
Avoidable
delays
Extra
allowances
Policy
allowances
+
=
 Figure 11.6   Types of allowances 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
465
seated, under good working conditions, with no special demands on the sensory 
or motor systems (ILO, 1957). 
 Between the 5 percent personal needs allowance and the 4 percent basic fa-
tigue allowance, most operators are given an initial 9 percent constant allowance, 
to which other allowances may be added, if necessary. 
 11.8 VARIABLE FATIGUE ALLOWANCES 
 BASIC PRINCIPLES 
 Closely associated with the allowance for personal needs is the allowance for 
fatigue, although this allowance is usually applied only to the effort portions 
of the study. Fatigue is not homogeneous in any respect. It ranges from strictly 
physical to purely psychological or combinations of the two. The result is a de-
crease in the will to work. The major factors that affect fatigue include working 
conditions, especially noise, heat, and humidity; the nature of the work, such 
as posture, muscular exertion, and tediousness; and the general health of the 
worker. Although heavy manual work, and thus muscular fatigue, is diminish-
ing in industry, due to mechanization, other fatigue components, such as mental 
stress and tediousness, may be increasing. Because not all fatigue can be elimi-
nated, proper allowance must be made for the working conditions and repetitive-
ness of the work. 
 One method of determining the fatigue allowance is to measure the decline 
in production throughout the working period. The production rate for every quar-
ter of an hour during the course of the working day may be measured. Any de-
cline in production that cannot be attributed to methods changes or personal or 
unavoidable delays may be attributed to fatigue and expressed as a percentage. 
Brey (1928) expressed the coefficient of fatigue as follows: 
 F  ( T –  t )  100/ T 
 where  F  coefficient of fatigue 
 
  T  time required to perform operation at end of continuous work 
 
  t  time required to perform operation at beginning of continuous work 
 Many attempts have been made to measure this fatigue through various 
physical, chemical, and physiological means, none of which have so far been 
completely successful. Therefore, the International Labour Office (ILO, 1957) 
has tabulated the effect of various working conditions, to arrive at appropriate 
allowance factors (see Table 11.9) with a more detailed point system introduced 
in a later edition (ILO, 1979). These factors include standing versus sitting, ab-
normal positions, use of force, illumination, atmospheric conditions, required 
job attention, noise level, mental strain, monotony, and tediousness. To use this 
table, the analyst would determine the allowance factors for each element of the 
study and then sum them for a total variable fatigue allowance, which is then 
added to the constant fatigue allowance.  

466 
C H A P T E R  1 1
 Table 11.9   ILO Recommended Allowances 
 A. Constant allowances: 
   
 
1. Personal allowance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 5 
 
2. Basic fatigue allowance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 4 
 B. Variable allowances: 
   
 
1. Standing allowance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2 
 
2. Abnormal position allowance: 
   
 
 
a . Slightly awkward  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 0 
 
 
b . Awkward (bending)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2 
 
 
c . Very awkward (lying, stretching) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 7 
 
3.  Use of force, or muscular energy (lifting, pulling, or pushing): 
   
 
 
Weight lifted, lb:  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   
 
5  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 0 
 
10  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1 
 
15  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2 
 
20  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 3 
 
25  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 4 
 
30  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 5 
 
35  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 7 
 
40  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 9 
 
45  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 11 
 
50  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 13 
 
60  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 17 
 
70  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 22 
 
4. Bad light: 
   
 
 
a. Slightly below recommended . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 0 
 
 
b . Well below  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2 
 
 
c . Quite inadequate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 5 
 
5. Atmospheric conditions (heat and humidity)—variable  . . . . . . . 
 0–100 
 
6. Close attention: 
   
 
 
a . Fairly fine work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 0 
 
 
b . Fine or exacting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2 
 
 
c . Very fine or very exacting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 5 
 
7. Noise level: 
   
 
 
a . Continuous  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 0 
 
 
b . Intermittent—loud  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2 
 
 
c . Intermittent—very loud  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 5 
 
 
d . High-pitched—loud  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 5 
 
8. Mental strain: 
   
 
 
a . Fairly complex process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1 
 
 
b . Complex or wide span of attention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 4 
 
 
c . Very complex  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 8 
 
9. Monotony: 
   
 
 
a . Low . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 0 
 
 
b . Medium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1 
 
 
c . High  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 4 
 10. Tediousness: 
   
 
 
a . Rather tedious . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 0 
 
 
b . Tedious  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  2 
 
 
c . Very tedious  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 5 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
467
 These ILO recommendations were developed through consensus agree-
ments between management and workers across many industries and have not 
been directly substantiated. However, since the 1960s, much work has been 
done in developing specific standards for the health and safety of the U.S. 
worker. Here, we examine how well these standards compare with the ILO 
fatigue allowances.  
 ABNORMAL POSTURE 
 Allowances for posture are based on metabolic considerations and can be sup-
ported by metabolic models that have been developed for various activities 
(Garg, Chaffin, and Herrin, 1978). Three basic equations for sitting, standing, 
and bending can be used to predict and compare the energy expended for various 
postures. Using an average adult (both male and female) body weight of 152 lb 
(69 kg) and adding an additional energy expenditure of 2.2 kcal/min for manual 
hand work (Garg, Chaffin, and Herrin, 1978), we obtain energy expenditures of 
3.8, 3.86, and 4.16 kcal/min, for sitting, standing, and bending, respectively. Be-
cause sitting is a basic comfortable posture that can be maintained for extended 
periods, the other postures are compared to sitting. The ratio of standing to sit-
ting energy expenditures is 1.02, or an allowance of 2 percent, while the ratio 
of bending to sitting energy expenditures is 1.10, or an allowance of 10 percent. 
The first is identical to the ILO recommendations. The second is slightly larger 
than the ILO value of 7 percent, but may represent an extreme case of posture, 
which cannot be maintained for an extended time. 
 MUSCULAR FORCE 
 Fatigue allowances can be formulated on two important physiological principles: 
muscle fatigue and muscle recovery after fatigue. The most immediate result of 
muscle fatigue is the significant reduction in muscle strength. Rohmert (1960) 
quantified these principles as follows: 
 1.  Reduction in maximum strength occurs if the static holding force exceeds 
15 percent of maximum strength. 
 2.  The longer the static muscular contraction, the greater the reduction in 
muscle strength. 
 3.  Individual or specific muscle variations are minimized if forces are normal-
ized to the individual’s maximum strength for that muscle. 
 4.  Recovery is a function of the degree of fatigue; that is, a given percent 
decrease in maximal strength will require a given amount of recovery. 
 These concepts of fatigue and recovery were further quantified by Rohmert 
(1973) into a series of curves for rest allowances RA as a function of force and 
holding time (see Figure 11.7):  
 RA  1,800  ( t / T ) 1.4  ( f / F  0.15) 0.5 

468 
C H A P T E R  1 1
 where RA  rest allowance (% of time  t ) 
 
  t  duration of holding time (min) 
 
  f  holding force (lb) 
 
  F  maximum holding force (lb) 
 
  T  maximum holding time for holding force  f (min), defined as 
 T  1.2/(f/ F  0.15) 0.618  1.21 
 The maximum holding force  F  can be approximated based on data collected 
on 1,522 industrial male and female workers (Chaffin, Freivalds, and Evans, 
1987). The average of the three basic standardized lifting strengths (arm, leg, 
torso) is approximately 100 lb (45.5 kg). Using this value of maximum holding 
force for infrequent lifts (less than one lift every 5 min) of short duration yields 
the allowances tabulated in Table 11.10. For more frequent lifts (more than one 
lift every 5 min), metabolic considerations predominate, and the NIOSH lifting 
guidelines (see Section 4.4) should be utilized in determining the limitation for 
lifting. Also, loads above 51 lb (23.2 kg) are not allowed by the NIOSH lifting 
guidelines. 
10
10
9
8
7
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
25
25
50
50
100
100200
200
400
400
800
800
600
600
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Force developed, in fractions of maximum force
Holding time (minutes)
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0
0.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
5
15
25
100200
400
800
600
1000
1200
1400
50
0
5
15
25
100200
400
800
600
1000
1200
1400
50
 Figure 11.7   Percentage rest allowances for various combinations of holding 
forces and time 
 ( From : Rohmert, 1973). 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
469
 For muscular energy, we consider the formula for determining the amount of 
rest required for heavy work presented in Section 4.4:  
  R  ( W  5.33)/( W  1.33) 
 where   R  time required for rest, as percentage of total time 
 
  W  average energy expenditure during work (kcal/min) 
 This expression can be reformulated into a rest allowance: 
 RA  (Δ W /4  1)  100 
 where RA  rest allowance as percentage added to normal time 
 
 Δ W  energy expenditure increment for work   W  1.33 kcal/min 
 Measuring the heart rate is easier than measuring energy expenditure. The 
rest allowance can therefore be reformulated with the heart rate as follows: 
 RA  ( HR /40  1)  100 
 Table 11.10   Comparison of ILO and Calculated Allowances for Use of Muscular Force 
 Load (lb) 
 ILO 
 Calculated 
 5 
 0 
 0 
 10 
 1 
 0 
 15 
 2 
 0 
 20 
 3 
 0.5 
 25 
 4 
 1.3 
 30 
 5 
 2.7 
 35 
 7 
 4.5 
 40 
 9 
 7.0 
 45 
 11 
 10.2 
 50 
 13 
 14.4 
 60 
 17 
 NA 
 70 
 22 
 NA 
 Calculation of Rest Allowance for Infrequent 
Use of Muscular Force 
 EXAMPLE 11.1
 Consider a worker lifting a 40-lb (18.2-kg) load less than once every 5 min. First, cal-
culate the maximum holding time for a load that is 40/100  40 percent of an average 
person’s maximum strength capability: 
 T  1.2 / (0.4  0.15) 0.618  1.21  1.62 min 
 Then substitute a short-duration exertion of 0.05 min and a maximum holding 
time of 1.62 min into the rest allowance equation: 
 RA  1,800  (0.05/1.62) 1.4  (0.4  0.15) 0.5 
  1,800  (0.00768)  (0.5)  6.91 ¯ 7% 
 The resulting variable rest allowance of 7 percent is added to the typical 9 percent 
constant allowance for a total allowance of 16 percent. 

470 
C H A P T E R  1 1
 where   RA  rest allowance, as percentage added to work time 
 
 ΔHR  difference between working heart rate and resting heart rate   
 ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS 
 Modeling the human body and its responses to atmospheric conditions is a very 
difficult task. Many attempts have been made to combine the physiological man-
ifestations and the changes of several environmental conditions into one simple 
index (Freivalds, 1987). However, no such index can suffice, and considerable 
variability in allowances can result. The ILO allowances are based on an out-
dated concept of cooling power, and they greatly underpredict required rest al-
lowances. Thus, there is considerable deviation in the ILO allowances from true 
stress levels. This is explained in detail in Freivalds and Goldberg (1988). 
 A better approach is to consider the more recent guidelines developed by 
NIOSH (1986), utilizing the wet-bulb globe temperature (WBGT, described in 
Section 6.3) and working energy expenditures. The resulting fatigue allowances 
for unacclimatized workers (from Figure 6.13) can be quantified through a least-
squares regression, resulting in 
 RA   e (−41.5  0.0161 W  0.497 WBGT ) 
 where 
 W  working energy expenditure (kcal/h) 
 
 WBGT  wet-bulb globe temperature (°F)   
  Calculation of Rest Allowance for Overall Fatigue 
EXAMPLE 11.2  
 Consider the strenuous task shown in fig 4.20 for shoveling coal into a furnace, with 
an energy expenditure of 10.2 kcal/min. The required rest allowance RA is 
 RA  [(10.2 − 1.33)/4  1]  100  122% 
 Therefore, to provide adequate time for recovery from fatigue, the worker would 
need to spend more than 4 h out of an 8-h shift resting. Note that the acceptable Δ W 
for males is 5.33 – 1.33  4 kcal/min. (For females, substitute the values 4.0 for 5.33 
and 1.0 for 1.33.) 
 NOISE LEVEL 
 The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA, 1983) has estab-
lished permissible noise exposures for workers in industry. The permissible lev-
els depend on the duration of the exposure, as shown in Table 11.11. 
 Should the total daily exposure consist of exposures to several different 
noise levels, then the combined exposure is calculated using the equation 
 D   C 1/ T 1   C 2 / T 2  …  1 
 where  D  noise dose (decimal value) 
 
  C  time spent at specified noise level (h) 
 
 T  time permitted (Table 11.11) at specified noise level (h) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
471
 and the required relaxation allowance (in %) is simply 
 RA  100  (D  1)   
 Thus, the total exposure to various noise levels cannot exceed a 100-percent 
dose. For example, a worker may be exposed to 95 dBA noise for 3 h and 90 dBA 
noise for 5 h. Although each exposure is separately permissible, the combined 
dose is not: 
 D  3/4  5/8  1.375 	 1 
 Therefore, the required relaxation allowance for OSHA compliance is 
 RA  100  (1.375  1)  37.5% 
 Thus, 90 dBA is the maximum permissible level for an 8-h day, and any sound 
level above 90 dBA will require a relaxation allowance. 
 For computation of the noise dose, all sound levels between 80 and 130 dBA 
must be included in the computations (although continuous levels above 
115 dBA are not allowed at all). Table 11.11 provides only certain key times, so 
the following computational formula can be used for intermediate noise levels: 
T 
32
2
5
(
)
L 80
−
/  
 where  L  noise level (dBA) 
 Table 11.11   OSHA-Permissible Noise Levels 
 Noise level (dBA) 
 Permissible time (h) 
 80 
 32 
 85 
 16 
 90 
 8 
 95 
 4 
 100 
 2 
 105 
 1 
 110 
 0.5 
 115 
 0.25 
 120 
 0.125 
 125 
 0.063 
 130 
 0.031 
Calculation of a Relaxation Allowance
for Atmospheric Conditions 
 EXAMPLE 11.3 
 A worker is performing manual assembly at a seated workstation and is expending 
roughly 200 kcal/h. If the WBGT IN is 88.5°F, then 
 RA   e [ 41.5  0.0161(200)  0.49(88.5)]   e 5.7045 ¯ 300% 
 Based on a relaxation allowance of 300 percent, the worker would need 45 min 
of rest for each 15 min of work. 

472 
C H A P T E R  1 1
 ILLUMINATION LEVELS 
 Reconciliation of the ILO (1957) allowances and the IESNA (1995) recom-
mended illumination levels (see Section 6.1) can be approached as follows. For 
rest allowances, a task that is slightly below recommended guidelines can be 
considered to be within the same illumination subcategory, perhaps slightly sub-
standard, at the low end of the range, and is assigned a 0 percent allowance. 
A task that is well below adequate illumination may be defined as being one 
subcategory beneath its recommended illumination and is assigned a 2 percent 
allowance. A task with quite inadequate illumination may be defined as being 
two or more subcategories below its recommended level and receives a 5 percent 
allowance. These definitions are fairly realistic, as human perceptions of illu-
mination are logarithmic; that is, as illuminance increases, we require a greater 
intensity difference before a change is noted (IESNA, 1995).   
 The literature contains some evidence that increased task illumination results 
in better-skilled performance. The most germane performance measure is task 
completion time under varying illumination conditions. However, it should be 
kept in mind that performance accuracy is also important. For example, Bennett, 
 Calculation of a Relaxation Allowance for Noise 
EXAMPLE 11.4  
 A worker is exposed to the noise levels shown in Table 11.12 during an 8-h workday. 
 The last entry is obtained as follows: 
 
(
)
T
32
2
3.48
/5
 The noise dose is 
 D  1/32  4/8  3
3.48  1.393 
 and the rest allowance is 
 RA  100  (1.393  1)  39.3% 
 Because the 8-h noise exposure dosage exceeds OSHA requirements, the worker must 
be provided with a 39.3-percent rest allowance. Note that, again, the ILO-recommended 
values greatly underpredict required allowances. 
 Table 11.2   Noise Levels Over an 8-h Day 
 Noise level 
 L (dBA)  
 Time 
spent  C (h)  
 Time permitted 
 T /(h)  
 80 
 1 
 4 
 3 
 32 
 90 
 8 
 96 
 3.48 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
473
Chitlangio, and Pangrekar (1977) reported the time to read a 450-word, pencil-
written article as a cubic function of task illumination: 
 Time  251.8  33.96 log FC  6.15 (log FC) 2  0.37 (log FC) 3 
 where Time  mean reading time (s) 
 
  FC  task illumination (fc) 
 The recommended IES (1981) illumination for reading this pencil-written 
material is category E (from Table 6.2), 50 to 100 fc (500 to 1,000 lx). The 
weighting factors total zero (from Table 6.3), so the recommended illumination 
is 75 fc (750 lx), the middle value in category E. Table 11.13 compares mod-
eled reading times as a function of decreasing illumination and allowances. De-
creasing the illumination to the next-lower subcategory increased performance 
times by 3 to 5 percent, which is not too far from the 2 percent ILO allowance 
for well below recommended lighting. The next-lower illumination subcategory 
produced times that were 6 to 8 percent greater than that at the recommended 
levels, which is somewhat greater than the 5 percent allowance for inadequate il-
lumination. Overall, this study (Bennett, Chitlangio, and Pangrekar, 1977) came 
reasonably close to supporting the ILO allowances. 
 VISUAL STRAIN 
 The ILO visual strain rest allowance provides no allowance for fairly fine work, 
a 2 percent allowance for fine or exacting work, and a 5 percent allowance for 
very fine or very exacting work. These allowances only refer to the precision 
of the visual task requirements, without mentioning the other task conditions 
that have a very large effect on visual requirements: illumination (or luminance), 
glare, flicker, color, viewing time, and contrast. Therefore, the ILO allowances 
are only rough approximations. More specific values can be determined by target 
detectability, as first quantified by Blackwell (1959) in his visibility curves (see 
Figure 6.3). Four factors have the greatest effect in determining how visible a 
target in a task will be: 
 1.  Background luminance of the task . This is the magnitude of the light re-
flected from the target’s background into the eyes of an observer, measured 
in foot-lamberts (fL). 
 Table 11.13   Modeled Reading Times as a Function of Illumination 
 Illumination 
(fc) 
 Modeled time 
(s) 
 %Change 
from 75 fc 
 ILO
category 
 Allowance 
(%) 
 75 
 207.3 
 — 
 (Recommended) 
 0 
 50 
 210.0 
 1.3 
 Slightly below 
 0 
 30 
 213.9 
 3.2 
 Well below 
 2 
 20 
 217.2 
 4.8 
 Well below 
 2 
 15 
 219.8 
 6.0 
 Inadequate 
 5 
 10 
 223.6 
 7.9 
 Inadequate 
 5 
 Source: Bennett, Chitlangio, and Pangrekar, 1977. 

474 
C H A P T E R  1 1
 2.  Contrast . This is the difference between the luminance levels of the tar-
get and the background. The contrast must also be adjusted (divided) by 
the following factors: real-world conditions (2.5), movement of the target 
(2.78), and uncertainty in the location (1.5). 
 3.  Time available for observation . This ranges from a few milliseconds to sev-
eral seconds, and it can affect the speed and accuracy of performance. 
 4.  Size of target, measured as a visual angle in arc minutes . 
 Blackwell’s visibility curves can be modeled by the following equation (with 
allowable ranges): 
 %Det  81   C 0.2   L 0.045   T   0.003   A 0.199 
 where %Det  % targets detected (0100%) 
 
  C  contrast (0.0011.8) 
 
  L  background luminance (1100 fL) 
 
  T  viewing time (0.011 s) 
 
  A  visual angle (164 arc min) 
 The percentage of targets detected may be used to check visual strain al-
lowances by specifying a percentile range for population description abilities. 
Highly used percentile ranges are the 50th and 95th percentiles, and these may 
also be applied to target detection, to define relaxation allowance categories. 
At least a 95 percent target detection defines a visual task without significant 
problems and can thus define the ILO fairly fine work category with its associ-
ated 0 percent allowance. At least a 50 percent target detection defines the fine 
or exacting work category with its 2 percent allowance. Finally, less than half of 
targets detected can define very fine or very exacting work with its associated 
5 percent allowance. 
 It must be stressed that Blackwell’s model does not directly define the rest 
allowance. Instead, it defines absolute target detection ability, which in turn can 
be used to define a rest allowance. Thus, the rest allowance should be inversely 
proportional to the expected percentage of detected targets. 
 In general, small visual angles usually produce the lowest performance lev-
els, whereas viewing time only affects performance for the higher contrast levels.  
 MENTAL STRAIN 
 Mental strain is very difficult to measure clearly across many types of tasks. For 
mental workload, standardized measures of performance have not yet been clearly 
defined, and variability between individuals on the same task is high. Also under-
lying any mental strain definition is an understanding of the factors that make a 
task complex, on which models are lacking. Investigation of the basis and ade-
quacy of these relaxation allowances thus necessarily requires (1) an independent 
indicator of task complexity and (2) objective evidence of changing work output 
with fatigue or time on the job. Even given this information, experimental differ-
ences in motivation can greatly affect observed results, rendering comparisons 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
475
between studies useless. The vagueness of the ILO relaxation allowance com-
plicates matters even further: 1 percent for a fairly complex process, 4 percent 
for a process requiring a complex or wide span of attention, and 8 percent for a 
very complex process. At best, a controlled study with timed reading or mental 
arithmetic tasks, such as those by Okogbaa and Shell (1986), can serve as a crude 
check of these allowances. Both of these tasks could be considered complex and 
requiring wide attention span and thus deserving of a 4 percent rest allowance. 
However, reading performance decreased at a rate of 3.5 percent per hour, while 
arithmetic performance decreased at a rate of approximately 2 percent per hour. 
Thus, the ILO (1957) guidelines support performance decrements due to mental 
strain for 1 h, but are inadequate for longer periods and may have to be modified.   
Calculation of Rest Allowance for Visual Strain 
 EXAMPLE 11.5 
 The inspection of resistors on electronic circuit boards may be considered exacting 
work, which requires a 2 percent allowance based on ILO guidelines. To confirm this, 
we use the following calculations. The board is viewed at a distance of 12 in, without 
magnification, and the stripes on each resistor are 0.02 in wide. The required visual 
angle is 3,438  0.02/12  5.73 arc minutes. The resistor body (task background) has 
a luminance of 10 fL, and the contrast between the stripe and background is 0.5. The 
contrast is divided by a factor of 1.5  2.5  3.75 to adjust for real-world detection 
and uncertain location (Freivalds and Goldberg, 1988). The mean time for eye fixation 
is 0.2 s. Plugging these values into the detectability equation yields 
 %Det  81  (0.5 / 3.75) 0.2  10 0.045  0.2   0.003  5.73 0.199 
  81  0.668  1.109  1.005  1.415  85.3% 
 A detectability of 85.3 percent is under 95 percent and would require a 2 percent 
allowance. 
 MONOTONY 
 Assignment of a monotony rest allowance, as defined by ILO (1957), is most  
appropriate as “the result of repeated use of certain mental faculties, as in men-
tal arithmetic.” Tasks with low monotony receive no additional allowance; tasks 
with medium monotony receive 1 percent, and tasks with high monotony receive 
a 4 percent allowance. Because the cognitive tasks of Okogbaa and Shell (1986) 
were performed over 4 h, perhaps they should also receive the monotony allow-
ance. However, even the addition of the maximum 4 percent allowance would 
only extend the period of adequacy to 2 h. Vigilance tasks present another exam-
ple of monotonous work. Baker, Ware, and Sipowicz (1962) noted that subjects 
detected 90 percent of short light interruptions in a lamp after 1 h of continuous 
testing. By the end of 10 h, the subjects were only detecting about 70 percent of 
signals, or a drop in performance of 2 percent per hour. Again, the ILO allow-
ance is not sufficient to compensate performance decrements that occur over an 
entire shift, and better allowances must be developed. 

476 
C H A P T E R  1 1
 TEDIOUSNESS 
 Allowances for task tediousness (or task repetition) are 0 percent for a rather te-
dious task, 2 percent for a tedious task, and 5 percent for a very tedious task. As 
defined by ILO (1957), this allowance is applied to elements in which there is “re-
peated use of certain members of the body, such as fingers, hands, arms or legs.” 
In other words, a tedious task repeatedly utilizes the same physical movements, 
whereas a monotonous task repeatedly uses the same mental faculties. A methods 
study used to simplify work and make it more efficient also tends to make it more 
tedious or repetitive for skilled workers, making it more likely that the workers 
will be prone to work-related musculoskeletal disorders (see Chapter 5). 
 Developmental work on risk assessment models for CTD (ANSI, 1995; 
Seth, Weston, and Freivalds, 1999) has found that the frequency of motions, pos-
tures of the hand and wrist, and the forces exerted by the hand are key factors 
in increasing the risk for CTD. However, these relatively crude models are far 
from reliable and are not validated over a wide range of jobs and industries. Still, 
epidemiological data from NIOSH (1989) have indicated that 10,000 damag-
ing wrist motions per shift is a threshold point at which CTD cases increase 
noticeably, and that at 20,000 motions, the number of cases increases signifi-
cantly. This would seem to imply that 10,000 motions is a limit for unimpaired 
performance and for relaxation allowances of up to 100 percent, which is much 
greater than recommended by ILO (1957). Obviously, most of these models are 
very much in the developmental stages, and considerable validation must be per-
formed before specific values for allowances can be set. 
 11.9 SPECIAL ALLOWANCES 
 UNAVOIDABLE DELAYS 
 This class of delays applies to effort elements and includes interruptions from 
the supervisor, dispatcher, time study analyst, and others; material irregularities; 
difficulty in maintaining tolerances and specifications; and interference delays 
where multiple machine assignments are made. 
 As can be expected, every operator experiences numerous interruptions dur-
ing the course of the workday. The supervisor or group leader may interrupt the 
operator to give instructions or to clarify certain written information. The inspec-
tor may interrupt to point out the reasons for some defective work that passed 
through the operator’s workstation. Interruptions also come from planners, expe-
diters, fellow workers, production personnel, and others. 
 Unavoidable delays are frequently a result of material irregularities. For ex-
ample, the material may be in the wrong location; or it may be running too soft 
or too hard, or too short or too long; or it may have excessive stock on it, as 
in forgings when the dies begin to wash out, or on castings due to incomplete 
removal of risers. When material deviates substantially from standard specifica-
tions, the customary unavoidable delay allowance may prove inadequate. The 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
477
analyst must then restudy the job and allow time for the extra elements intro-
duced by the irregular material. 
 As discussed in Section 2.3, if more than one machine is assigned to an 
operator during the workday, one or more machines must wait until the opera-
tor completes work on another machine. As more machines are assigned to the 
operator, machine interference time increases. Example 11.6 shows the appli  ca-
tion of Wright’s formula (from Section 2.3) in calculating the allowance for such 
machine interference. 
Allowance for Machine Interference 
 EXAMPLE 11.6  
 In a quilling production, an operator is assigned a package of 60 spindles. The mean 
machine running time per package, determined by stopwatch study, is 150 min. The 
standard mean servicing time per package, also developed by time study, is 3 min. 
Machine interference time as calculated from Wright’s formula (see Section 2.3) was 
found to be 1,160 percent of the mean servicing time. 
 Thus, we would have 
 Machine running time 
 150.00 min 
 Servicing time 
 3.00 min 
 Machine interference time 
 11.6  3.0   34.80 min 
 Standard time for 60 packages 
 187.80 min 
 Standard time per package 
 
187 80
60
3 13
.
min

 Alternatively, the machine interference time can be calculated as a percentage 
allowance, to which other allowances can be added: 
 
%
.
.
%
allowance


34 8
153
100
22 75
 The amount of interference is also related to the performance of the op-
erator. Thus, the operator demonstrating a low level of effort experiences more 
machine interference than the operator who, through higher effort, reduces the 
time spent in attending the stopped machine. The analyst determines the normal 
interference time as calculated from the methods presented in Chapter 2. If the 
normal interference time is smaller than the observed machine interference time, 
then the ratio of the two times will yield a measure of operator performance. 
 AVOIDABLE DELAYS 
 It is not customary to provide any allowance for avoidable delays, such as visits 
with other operators for social reasons, uncalled-for work stoppages, and idle-
ness other than rest to overcome fatigue. Although operators may take these 
delays at the expense of output, no allowance for these cessations of work is 
provided in the development of the standard. 

478 
C H A P T E R  1 1
 EXTRA ALLOWANCES 
 In metal fabrication and related operations, the allowance for personal, unavoid-
able, and fatigue delays usually approximates 15 percent. However, in certain 
cases, an extra allowance may be required to yield a fair standard. For example, 
for a substandard lot of raw material, analysts may need to add an extra allow-
ance to account for an unduly high number of rejects. Or, a situation may arise in 
which, because of the breakage of a jib crane, the operator is obliged to place a 
50-lb casting in the chuck of the machine. An extra allowance would be needed 
for the additional fatigue in manually handling the work. 
 One extra allowance frequently used, especially in the steel industry, is a 
percentage added to a portion or all of the cycle time to account for the opera-
tor observing the process to maintain efficient progress of the operation. This 
allowance is frequently referred to as  attention time  allowance and may cover 
such situations as an inspector observing tin plate coming off the line, a first 
helper observing the conditions of a molten bath or receiving instructions from 
the melter, or a crane operator receiving directions from the crane hooker. With-
out this extra allowance, such operators would find it impossible to make the 
same earnings as fellow employees. 
 The time required to clean the workstation and lubricate the operator’s ma-
chine may be classified as an unavoidable delay. When these elements are the 
responsibilities of the operator, management must provide an applicable allow-
ance. Analysts often include this time as a total cycle time allowance when these 
functions are performed by the operator. The type and size of equipment and the 
material being fabricated have a considerable effect on the time required to do 
these tasks. One company has established a table of allowances to cover these 
items (see Table 11.14). Sometimes supervisors give operators 10 or 15 min at 
the end of the day to perform these elements. When this is done, the established 
standards would not include any allowance for cleaning and oiling the machine.  
 A tool maintenance allowance provides time for the operator to maintain 
tools after the original setup. In setup, first-class tools already properly ground are 
 Table 11.14   Clean Machine Allowance Chart 
 Item 
 Percent per machine 
 Large 
 Medium  
 Small 
 1. Clean machine when lubricant is used  . . . . . . . . . . . .  1 
 ¾ 
 ½ 
 2. Clean machine when lubricant is not used  . . . . . . . . . ¾ 
 ½ 
 ¼ 
 3.  Clean and put away large amounts of tools
or equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ½ 
 ½ 
 ½ 
 4.  Clean and put away small amounts of tools 
or equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ¼ 
 ¼ 
 ¼ 
 5.  Shut machine down for cleaning (this percentage
is for machines equipped with chip pans, which
are stopped at intervals to permit sweeper to
clean away large chips)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1 
 ¾ 
 ½ 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
479
generally provided. However, in long production runs, the tools may have to be 
sharpened periodically and the operator should be given an appropriate allowance.  
 POLICY ALLOWANCES 
 A policy allowance is used to provide a satisfactory level of earnings for a speci-
fied level of performance under exceptional circumstances. Such allowances 
could cover new employees, the differently abled, workers on light duty, and oth-
ers. These are typically decided by management, perhaps with union negotiations.    
 11.10 APPLYING ALLOWANCES 
  The fundamental purpose of all allowances is to add enough time to normal pro-
duction time to enable the average worker to meet the standard when performing 
at standard performance. There are two ways of applying allowances. The most 
common is to add a percentage to the normal time, so that the allowance is based 
on a percentage of the productive time only. It is also customary to express the 
allowance as a multiplier, so that the normal time (NT) can be readily adjusted 
to the standard time (ST): 
 ST   NT   NT  allowance   NT  (1  allowance) 
 where 
ST  standard time 
 
 NT  normal time 
 Thus, if a 10 percent allowance were provided on a given operation, the multi-
plier would be 1  0.1  1.1. 
 For example, the computation of a total allowance might be 
 Personal needs 
 5.0 percent 
 Basic fatigue 
 4.0 
 Unavoidable delay 
 1.0 
 Total 
 10.0 percent 
 Normal time would then be multiplied by 1.1 to determine the standard time. Us-
ing the time study example in Figure 10.5, the average normal time of 0.177 min 
for element 1 is multiplied by 1.1, corresponding to a 10 percent allowance, to 
yield a standard time of 0.195 min. Out of a 480-min workday, the operator would 
work 480/1.1  436 min and would be allowed 44 min rest. This rest would be 
allocated as lunch and other breaks. Note that based on the principles covered in 
Chapter 4, frequent, short breaks are preferred over infrequent, long breaks. 
 Some companies apply the percent allowance to the total working day, as the 
actual production time might not be known. For the previous example, the mul-
tiplier of normal times becomes 100/(100  10)  1.11 (instead of 1.1), and the 
standard time for element 1 becomes 0.196. Of the 480-min workday, 480  0.1 
 48 min (instead of 44 min) would be allocated to rest. Although the difference 
between the two approaches is not large, it could add up to more than a year for sev-
eral hundred workers. This would then become a policy decision for the company.  

480 
C H A P T E R  1 1
 SUMMARY 
 Performance rating is a means of adjusting the observed time on a job, so as to 
derive the time required for a qualified operator to do the job when working at 
a standard pace. Because the rating is based entirely on the experience, training, 
and judgment of the time study analyst, there may be criticism of the method. 
Consequently, many different rating systems have been developed in an attempt 
to obtain an “objective” system. However, each rating system still ultimately 
depends on the subjectivity and honesty of the rater. Thus, it is important to train 
the time study analyst thoroughly in rating properly and consistently. That this 
can be done successfully has been borne out by many studies. 
 After ratings have been used to adjust the observed times, allowances must 
be added to account for delays and interruptions. Typical allowances used in 
industry are 5 percent for personal needs, 4 percent for basic fatigue, and addi-
tional amounts for variable fatigue. Some guidelines are provided in Table 11.15 
for allocating variable fatigue allowances in a more quantitative manner than has 
typically been done. These guidelines are especially appropriate for abnormal 
position, use of force, atmospheric, and other work environment conditions. The 
allowances for visual strain, mental strain, monotony, and tediousness are cur-
rently less reliable and should be developed in greater detail. Finally, additional 
allowances for unavoidable delays and extra allowances (e.g., machine cleaning) 
may have to be added. Note that the analyst must be accurate and consistent in 
applying these allowances. Otherwise, if the allowances are too high, manufac-
turing costs are unduly inflated; if the allowances are too low, tight standards 
result, causing poor labor relations and eventual failure of the system. 
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  Why has industry been unable to develop a universal conception of standard perfor-
mance? 
 2.  Which factors enter into large variances in operator performance? 
 3.  What are the characteristics of a sound rating system? 
 4.  During a time study, when should a rating be given? Why is this important? 
 5.  What governs the frequency of performance rating during a given study? 
 6.  Explain the Westinghouse system of rating. 
 7.  Under the Westinghouse rating system, why are “conditions” evaluated? 
 8.  What is synthetic rating? What is its principal weakness? 
 9.  What is the basis of speed rating, and how does this method differ from the West-
inghouse system? 
 10.  Which four criteria are fundamental for doing a good job in speed rating? 
 11.  Why is training in performance rating a continuous process? 
 12.  Why should more than one element be used in the establishment of a synthetic rat-
ing factor? 
 13.  Would there be any objection to studying an operator who is performing at an 
excessive pace? Why or why not?   

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
481
 Table 11.15   Revised Table of Allowances 
 Constant Allowances 
   
 Personal Needs 
 5 
 Basic Fatigue 
 4 
 Variable Relaxation Allowances 
   
 Posture Allowances 
   
 Standing 
 2 
 Awkward (bending, lying, crouching) 
 10 
 Illumination Levels 
   
 One level (one IES subcategory) below recommended 
 1 
 Two levels below recommended 
 3 
 Three levels (full IES category) below recommended 
 5 
 Visual Strain (Close Attention) 
   
 Fine or exacting work 
 2 
 Very fine or exacting work 
 5 
 Mental Strain 
   
 First hour 
 2 
 Second hour 
 4 
 Each succeeding hour 
 2 
 Monotony 
   
 First hour 
 2 
 Second hour 
 4 
 Each succeeding hour 
 2 
 Use of Muscular Force or Energy 
   
 Infrequent lifting, extended static holds 
   
 (1 lift per 5 min)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   RA  1,800  ( t / T ) 1.4  ( f / F  0.15) 0.5 ,   
 
 where  T  1.2/( f / F – 0.15) 0.618  1.21 
 Frequent lifting   
 (	1 lift per 5 min)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Use NIOSH Lifting Guidelines with LI  1.0 
 Overall whole body activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   RA  (ΔHR/40  1)  100 or 
 
   RA  (Δ W /4  1)  100 
 Atmospheric Conditions  . . . . . . . . . .  RA  exp(41.5  0.0161 W  0.497 WBGT) 
 Noise Level  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  RA  100  ( D  1), where D   C 1 / T 1   C 2 / T 2  . . . 
 Repetitiveness (Tediousness)   
 No established standards yet  . . . . . Use CTD risk analysis and keep risk index  1.0 
 14.  In what ways can an operator give the impression of high effort and yet produce at 
a mediocre or poor level of performance? 
 15.  What main areas are allowances intended to cover? 
 16.  What are the two methods used in developing standard allowance data? Briefly 
explain the application of each technique. 
 17.  Give several examples of personal delays. Which percentage allowance seems 
adequate for personal delays, under typical shop conditions? 

482 
C H A P T E R  1 1
 18.  What are some of the major factors that affect fatigue? 
 19.  Which operator interruptions would be covered by the unavoidable delays allowance? 
 20.  What percentage allowance is usually provided for avoidable delays? 
 21.  When are extra allowances provided? 
 22.  Why is fatigue allowance frequently applied only to the effort areas of the work 
cycle?  
 23.  Why are allowances based on a percentage of the productive time? 
 24.  What are the advantages of having operators oil and clean their own machines? 
 25.  Give several reasons for not applying an extra allowance to operations, if the major 
part of the cycle is machine-controlled and the internal time is small compared to 
the cycle time. 
 PROBLEMS  
 1.  Rate the overall study for each of the following jobs shown on the website. 
  a.  Stamping end extrusions 
  b.  Stamping end couplings 
  c.  Flashlight assembly 
  d.  Union assembly 
  e.  Hospital bed rail assembly 
  f.  Stitching (garments) 
  g.  Labeling (garments) 
  h.  Cut and tack (garments) 
 2.  Develop an allowance factor for an assembly element for which the operator stands 
in a slightly awkward position, regularly lifts a weight of 15 lb, and has good 
light and atmospheric conditions. The attention required is fine, the noise level is 
continuous at 70 dBA, and the mental strain is low, as are the monotony and the 
tediousness of the work. 
 3.  Calculate the fatigue allowance for an operation for which the operator loads and 
unloads a 25-lb gray iron casting once every 5 min at a height of 30 in. 
 4.  What would be the allowance for problem 3 if the frequency increased to 
5 per minute? 
 5.  In XYZ Co., an all-day study revealed the following noise sources: 0.5 h, 100 dBA; 
1 h, less than 80 dBA; 3.5 h, 90 dBA; 3 h, 92 dBA. Calculate the rest allowance. 
 6.  What fatigue allowance should be given to a job if it took 1.542 min to perform the 
operation at the end of continuous work, but only 1.480 min at the beginning of 
continuous work? 
 7.  Based on the ILO tabulation, what would the allowance factor be on a work ele-
ment involving a 42-lb pulling force in inadequate light, in which exacting work 
was required? 
 8.  Calculate the fatigue allowance for a worker shoveling scrap metal into a bin. The 
operator’s working heart rate is approximately 130 beats/min and resting heart rate 
is 70 beats/min. 
 9.  Calculate the fatigue allowance for a 200-lb worker monitoring a steel furnace 
while standing next to it. The WBGT index indicates 92°F. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 1  Performance Rating and Allowances  
483
 REFERENCES 
 ANSI.  Control of Work-Related Cumulative Trauma Disorders—Part I: Upper Extremities . 
ANSI Z-365 Working Draft. Itasca, NY: American National Standards Institute, 1995.  
 Baker, R. A., J. R. Ware, and R. R. Sipowicz. “Signal Detection by Multiple Monitors.” 
 Psychological Record, 12, no. 2 (April 1962), pp. 133–137. 
 Bennett, C. A., A. Chitlangio, and A. Pangrekar. “Illumination Levels and Performance 
of Practical Visual Tasks.”  Proceedings of the 21st Annual Meeting of the Human 
Factors Society (1977), pp. 322–325. 
 Blackwell, H. R. “Development and Use of a Quantitative Method for Specification of 
Interior Illumination Levels on the Basis of Performance Data.”  Illuminating Engi-
neer , 54 (June 1959), pp. 317–353. 
 Brey, E. E. “Fatigue Research in Its Relation to Time Study Practice.”  Proceedings, Time 
Study Conference . Chicago, IL: Society of Industrial Engineers, February 14, 1928.  
 Chaffin, D. B., A. Freivalds, and S. R. Evans. “On the Validity of an Isometric Bio-
mechanical Model of Worker Strengths.”  IIE Transactions, 19, no. 3 (September 
1987), pp. 280–288. 
 Freivalds, A. “Development of an Intelligent Knowledge Base for Heat Stress Evaluation.” 
 International Journal of Industrial Engineering, 2, no. 1 (November 1987), pp. 27–35.  
 Freivalds, A., and J. Goldberg. “Specification of Bases for Variable Relaxation Allow-
ances.”  The Journal of Methods-Time Measurement, 14 (1988), pp. 2–29. 
 Garg, A., D. B. Chaffin, and G. D. Herrin. “Prediction of Metabolic Rates for Manual 
Materials Handling Jobs.”  American Industrial Hygiene Association Journal, 39, 
no. 12 (December 1978), pp. 661–674. 
 Hummel, J. O. P.  Motion and Time Study in Leading American Industrial Establish-
ments (MS Thesis). University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University, 1935. 
 IESNA.  Lighting Handbook,  8th ed. Ed. M. S. Rea. New York: Illuminating Engineering 
Society of North America, 1995, pp. 459–478. 
 ILO.  Introduction to Work Study . Geneva, Switzerland: International Labour Office, 1957.  
 ILO.  Introduction to Work Study . 3d ed. Geneva, Switzerland: International Labour 
Office, 1979. 
 Konz, S., and S. Johnson.  Work Design . 5th ed. Scottsdale, AZ: Holcomb Hathaway 
Publishers, 2000. 
 Lazarus, I. “Inaccurate Allowances Are Crippling Work Measurements.”  Factory (April 
1968), pp. 77–79. 
 Lowry, S. M., H. B. Maynard, and G. J. Stegemerten.  Time and Motion Study and For-
mulas for Wage Incentives . 3d ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1940. 
 Moodie, Colin L. “Assembly Line Balancing.” In  Handbook of Industrial Engineering, 
2d ed. Ed. Gavriel Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1992. 
 Morrow, R. L.  Time Study and Motion Economy . New York: Ronald Press, 1946. 
 MTM Association.  Work Measurement Allowance and Survey . Fair Lawn, NJ: MTM 
Association, 1976. 
 Mundel, Marvin E., and David L. Danner.  Motion and Time Study: Improving Produc-
tivity . 7th ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1994. 
 Murrell, K. F. H.  Human Performance in Industry . New York: Reinhold Publishing, 1965.  

484 
C H A P T E R  1 1
 Nadler, Gerald.  Work Design: A Systems Concept . Rev. ed. Homewood, IL: Richard D. 
Irwin, 1970. 
 NIOSH.  Criteria for a Recommended Standard for Occupational Exposure to Hot 
Environments . Washington, DC: National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health, Superintendent of Documents, 1986. 
 NIOSH.  Health Hazard Evaluation—Eagle Convex Glass Co . HETA 89-137-2005. 
Cincinnati, OH: National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 1989. 
 Okogbaa, O. G., and R. L. Shell. “The Measurement of Knowledge Worker Fatigue.” 
 IIE Transactions, 12, no. 4 (December 1986), pp. 335–342. 
 OSHA, “Occupational Noise Exposure: Hearing Conservation Amendment.”  Federal 
Register, 48 (1983), Washington, DC: Occupational Safety and Health Administra-
tion, pp. 9738–9783. 
 Presgrave, R. W.  The Dynamics of Time Study . 4th ed. Toronto, Canada: The Ryerson 
Press, 1957. 
 Rohmert, W. “Ermittlung von Erholungspausen für statische Arbeit des Mensche.”  
Internationale Zeitschrift für Angewandte Physiologie einschließlich Arbeitsphysi-
ologie, 18 (1960), pp. 123–140. 
 Rohmert, W. “Problems in Determining Rest Allowances, Part I: Use of Modern Meth-
ods to Evaluate Stress and Strain in Static Muscular Work.”  Applied Ergonomics, 4, 
no. 2 (June 1973), pp. 91–95. 
 Seth, V., R. Weston, and A. Freivalds. “Development of a Cumulative Trauma Disorder 
Risk Assessment Model.”  International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 23, no. 4 
(March 1999), pp. 281–291. 
 Silverstein, B. A., L. J. Fine, and T. J. Armstrong. “Occupational Factors and Carpal 
Tunnel Syndrome.”  American Journal of Industrial Medicine, 11, no. 3 (1987), 
pp. 343–358. 
 Stecke, Kathryn E. “Machine Interference: Assignment of Machines to Operators.” In 
 Handbook of Industrial Engineering, 2d ed. Ed. Gavriel Salvendy. New York: John 
Wiley & Sons, 1992. 
 SELECTED SOFTWARE 
  DesignTools (available from the McGraw-Hill text website at www.mhhe.com/niebel-
freivalds). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002. 
 MVTA. Nexgen Ergonomics, 3400 de Maisonneuve Blvd. West, Suite 1430, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada H3Z 3B8 (http://www.nexgenergo.com/). 
 QuickTS (available from the McGraw-Hill text website at www.mhhe.com/niebel-
freivalds). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002. 

 
485
 
485
 
  CHAPTER 
 
12 
 KEY POINTS 
 •  For common work elements, use standard data, tabular or graphical 
collections of normal times. 
 •  Keep setup and cyclical elements separate. 
 •  Keep constant and variable elements separate. 
 •  Use formulas to provide quick and consistent normal times for variable 
elements. 
 •  Keep formulas as clear, concise, and simple as possible. 
 •  After summing normal times, add allowances for new standard times. 
 S
 tandard time data are elemental times obtained from time studies that 
have been stored for later use. For example, a regularly repeated setup 
elemental time should not be remeasured for every operation. The prin-
ciple of applying standard data was established many years ago by Frederick 
W. Taylor, who proposed that each elemental time be properly indexed so that it 
could be used to establish future time standards. When we speak of standard data 
today, we refer to all the tabulated element standards, plots, nomograms, and 
tables that allow the measurement of a specific job without the use of a timing 
device, such as a stopwatch. 
 Standard data can have several levels of refinement: motion, element, and 
task. The more refined the standard data element, the broader its range of us-
age. Thus, motion standard data have the greatest application, but it takes longer 
to develop such a standard than either element or task standard data. Element 
standard data are widely applicable and allow the faster development of a 
standard than motion data. This chapter is devoted to element standard data; 
Chapter 13 addresses motion standard data and their use to predetermine stan-
dard time systems. 
 A time study formula is an alternative and, typically, simpler presentation 
of standard data, especially for variable elements. Such formulas have partic-
ular application in nonrepetitive work for which it is impractical to establish 
 Standard Data
and Formulas 

486 
C H A P T E R  1 2
standards for each job using an individual time study. Formula construction in-
volves the design of an algebraic expression that establishes a time standard in 
advance of production by substituting known values peculiar to the job for the 
variable elements. 
 Work standards calculated from standard data and formulas are relatively 
consistent in that the tabulated elements result from many proven stopwatch time 
studies. Because the values are tabulated, it is only necessary to sum the required 
elements to establish a standard, and all analysts should arrive at identical per-
formance standards for a given method. Consistency therefore is ensured for 
standards established by different analysts in a plant, as well as for the various 
standards computed by a given time study observer. 
 Standards on new work can usually be computed more quickly through stan-
dard data or formulas than by a stopwatch time study. This allows the establish-
ment of standards for indirect labor operations, which is usually impractical if 
stopwatch studies are required. Typically, one work measurement analyst can 
establish 25 rates per day using standard data or formulas, but only 5 rates per 
day using stopwatch methods. 
 12.1 STANDARD TIME DATA DEVELOPMENT 
 GENERAL APPROACH 
 To develop standard time data, analysts must distinguish constant elements from 
variable elements. A  constant element  is one whose time remains approximately 
the same, cycle after cycle. A  variable element  is one whose time varies within a 
specified range of work. Thus, the element “start machine” would be a constant, 
while the element “drill 3/8-in-diameter hole” would vary with the depth of the 
hole, the feed, and the speed of the drill. 
 Standard data are indexed and filed as they are developed. Also, setup ele-
ments are kept separate from elements incorporated into each piece time, and 
constant elements are separated from variable elements. Typical standard data 
for machine operation would be tabulated as follows: (1) setup, ( a ) constants, 
( b ) variables; (2) each piece, ( a ) constants, ( b ) variables. 
 Standard data are compiled from different elements in time studies of a 
given process over a period of time. Only those studies proved valid through use 
are included in the data. In tabulating standard data, the analyst must be care-
ful to define the endpoints clearly. Otherwise, there may be a time overlap in 
the recorded data. For example, in the element “out stock to stop” on a bar feed 
No. 3 Warner & Swasey turret lathe, the element could include reaching for the 
feed lever, grasping the lever, feeding the bar stock through the collet to a stock 
stop located in the hex turret, closing the collet, and reaching for the turret han-
dle. Then again, this element may involve only the feeding of bar stock through 
the collet to a stock stop. Because standard data elements are compiled from a 
great number of studies taken by different time study observers, the limits or 
endpoints of each element should be carefully defined. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 2  Standard Data and Formulas 
487
 Any missing values in a standard data tabulation will have to be measured, 
typically by a stopwatch time study (see Chapter 10). Sometimes, very short 
individual elements will be difficult if not impossible to measure separately. 
However, the analyst can determine their individual values by timing groups of 
elements collectively and using simultaneous equations to solve for the indi-
vidual elements, as shown in Example 12.1.   
 Calculation of Brief Element Times 
 EXAMPLE 12.1
 Element  a  is “pick up small casting,” element  b  is “place in leaf jig,”  c  is “close cover 
of jig,”  d  “position jig,”  e  “advance spindle,” and so on. These elements are timed in 
groups, as follows: 
 a   b   c  element 1  0.070 min   A 
(1) 
 b   c   d  element 3  0.067 min   B 
(2) 
 c   d   e  element 5  0.073 min   C 
(3) 
 d   e   a  element 2  0.061 min   D 
(4) 
 e   a   b  element 4  0.068 min   E 
(5) 
 First, we add these five equations: 
 3 a  3 b  3 c  3 d  3 e   A   B   C   D   E 
 Then let 
 A   B   C   D   E   T 
 3 a  3 b  3 c  3 d  3 e  T  0.339 min 
 and 
 a  b  c  d  e  0.339  0.113 min
               3
 Therefore, 
 A   d   e  0.113 min 
 Then 
 d   e  0.113 min  0.07 min  0.043 min 
 because 
 c   d   e  0.073 min 
 c  0.073 min  0.043 min  0.030 min 
 Likewise, 
 d   e   a  0.061 
 and 
 a  0.061  0.043  0.018 min 
 Substituting in Equation (1), we get 
 b  0.070  (0.03  0.018)  0.022 

488 
C H A P T E R  1 2
 TABULAR DATA 
 For example, when developing standard data times for machine elements, the 
analyst may need to tabulate horsepower requirements for various materials in 
relation to depth of cut, cutting speeds, and feeds. To avoid overloading existing 
equipment, the analyst should have information on the workload being assigned 
to each machine for the conditions under which the material is being removed. 
For example, in the machining of high-alloy steel forgings on a lathe capable of a 
developed horsepower of 10, it would not be feasible to take a 3/8-in depth of cut 
while operating at a feed of 0.011 in per revolution and a speed of 200 surface 
feet per minute. Tabular data, either from the machine tool manufacturer or from 
empirical studies (see Table 12.1) indicate a horsepower requirement of 10.6 for 
these conditions. Consequently, the work would have to be planned for a feed 
of 0.009 in at a speed of 200 surface ft; this would only require a horsepower 
rating of 8.7. Such tabular data are best stored, retrieved, and accumulated into 
a final standard time using commercially available spreadsheet programs (e.g., 
Microsoft Excel). 
 USING NOMOGRAMS AND PLOTS 
 Because of space limitations, tabularizing values for variable elements is not 
always convenient. By plotting a curve or a system of curves in the form of an 
alignment chart, the analyst can express considerable standard data graphically 
on one page. 
 Figure 12.1 illustrates a nomogram for determining turning and facing time. 
For example, if the problem is to determine the production in pieces per hour to 
turn 5 linear inches of a 4-in-diameter shaft of medium carbon steel on a machine 
utilizing 0.015-in feed per revolution and having a cutting time of 55 percent of 
the cycle time, the answer could be readily determined graphically. Connecting 
a recommended cutting speed of 150 ft/min for medium carbon steel, shown on 
scale 1, to the 4-in diameter of the work, shown on scale 2, results in a speed of 
143 rpm, shown on scale 3. The 143-rpm point is connected with the 0.015-in 
feed per revolution, shown on scale 4. This line extended to scale 5 shows a feed 
of 2.15 in/min. This feed point connected with the length of cut, shown on scale 
6 (5 in), gives the required cutting time, on scale 7. Finally, this cutting time of 
2.35 min, connected with the percentage of cutting time, shown on scale 8 (in 
 Substituting in Equation (2), we see that 
 d  0.067  (0.022  0.03)  0.015 min 
 Substituting in Equation (3), we arrive at 
 e  0.073  (0.015  0.03)  0.028 min 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 2  Standard Data and Formulas 
489
this case, 55 percent), gives the production in pieces per hour, on scale 9 (in this 
case, 16).  
 Figure 12.2 illustrates a plot of forming time in hours per hundred pieces 
for a certain gage of stock over a range of sizes expressed in square inches. Each 
of the 12 points in this plot represents a separate time study. The plotted points 
indicate a straight-line relationship, which can be expressed as a formula: 
 Standard time  50.088  0.00038 (size) 
 Details on developing such formulas are found in Section 12.2. 
 Using nomograms or plots has some distinct disadvantages. First, it is easy 
to introduce an error in reading from the plot, because of the amount of inter-
polation usually required. Second, there is the chance of outright error through 
incorrect reading or misalignment of the intersections on the various scales.  
 12.2  FORMULA CONSTRUCTION 
FROM EMPIRICAL DATA 
 IDENTIFY VARIABLES 
 The first step in formula construction is to identify the dependent and indepen-
dent variables involved. Because the analyst is concerned with setting time stan-
dards, the dependent variable frequently will be time. For example, a formula 
might be developed for curing bonded rubber parts between 2 and 8 oz in weight. 
The independent variable is the weight of the rubber, while the dependent vari-
able is the time to cure. The range for the dependent variable would be 2 to 8 oz, 
while the dependent variable of time would have to be quantified from studies. 
 ANALYZE ELEMENTS AND COLLECT DATA 
 After the initial identification is finished, the next step is to collect data for 
the formula, written from existing studies or taking new studies, to obtain a 
 Table 12.1   Horsepower Requirements for Turning High-Alloy Steel Forgings for Cuts 3/8-inch and 1/2-inch 
Deep at Varying Speeds and Feeds 
 Surface 
feet 
 3/8-in depth cut (feeds, in/rev) 
 1/2-in depth cut (feeds, in/rev) 
 0.009 
 0.011 
 0.015 
 0.018 
 0.020 
 0.022 
 0.009 
 0.011 
 0.015 
 0.018 
 0.020 
 0.022 
 150 
 6.5 
 8.0 
 10.9 
 13.0 
 14.5 
 16.0 
 8.7 
 10.6 
 14.5 
 17.3 
 19.3 
 21.3 
 175 
 8.0 
 9.3 
 12.7 
 15.2 
 16.9 
 18.6 
 10.1 
 12.4 
 16.9 
 20.2 
 22.5 
 24.8 
 200 
 8.7 
 10.6 
 14.5 
 17.4 
 19.3 
 21.3 
 11.6 
 14.1 
 19.3 
 23.1 
 25.7 
 28.4 
 225 
 9.8 
 11.9 
 16.3 
 19.6 
 21.7 
 23.9 
 13.0 
 15.9 
 21.7 
 26.1 
 28.9 
 31.8 
 250 
 10.9 
 13.2 
 18.1 
 21.8 
 24.1 
 26.6 
 14.5 
 17.7 
 24.1 
 29.0 
 32.1 
 35.4 
 275 
 12.0 
 14.6 
 19.9 
 23.9 
 26.5 
 29.3 
 15.9 
 19.4 
 26.5 
 31.8 
 35.3 
 39.0 
 300 
 13.0 
 16.0 
 21.8 
 26.1 
 29.0 
 31.9 
 17.4 
 21.2 
 29.0 
 34.7 
 38.6 
 42.5 
 400 
 17.4 
 21.4 
 29.1 
 34.8 
 38.7 
 42.5 
 23.2 
 28.2 
 38.7 
 46.3 
 51.5 
 56.7 

490 
C H A P T E R  1 2
3
4
5
5
10
15
20
30
40
50
60
80
100
6
0
10
0
20
30
40
50
60
80
100
120
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
D
Facing
L
r
.5
.15
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.8
1.0
1.5
2
3
4
5
6
8
10
15
20
30
40
50
60
80
100
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9
1
1.5
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9
1.0
1.5
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
15
20
.0007
.0008
.0009
.001
.002
.003
.004
.005
.006
.008
.010
.015
.020
.030
.040
.050
.060
.080
.100
.250
.200
.150
.300
1200
1000
800
600
500
400
300
200
150
100
80
60
50
40
30
.1
.15
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.8
1
1.5
2
3
4
5
6
8
10
15
20
30
40
50
60
80
100
30
40
50
60
80
100
150
200
300
400
500
600
800
1000
1500
2000
Turning
D
L
f
Production-pieces per hour
Production-pieces per hour
Percent cutting time
Percent cutting time
Cutting time per piece - minutes
Cutting time per piece - minutes
Length of cut - inches - L
Length of cut - inches - L
Feed - inches per revolution - f
Feed - inches per revolution - f
Feed - inches per minute
Feed - inches per minute
Revolutions per minute - RPM
Revolutions per minute - RPM
Diameter - inches - D
Diameter - inches - D
Cutting speed - feet per minute
Cutting speed - feet per minute
Production-pieces per hour
Percent cutting time
Cutting time per piece - minutes
Length of cut - inches - L
Feed - inches per revolution - f
Feed - inches per minute
Revolutions per minute - RPM
Diameter - inches - D
Cutting speed - feet per minute
 Figure 12.1   Nomogram for determining facing and turning time. (Crobalt, Inc.) 
sufficiently large sample to cover the range of work for the formula. Obviously, 
variable elements tend to vary in proportion to some characteristics of the work, 
such as size, shape, or hardness. These elements should be carefully studied to 
determine which factors influence the time, and to what extent. In general, the 
constant elements should not deviate substantially.  

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 2  Standard Data and Formulas 
491
 In general, the more studies used, the more data will be available, and the 
more normal will be the conditions reflected. If desired, statistical procedures 
such as the power test (Neter et al., 1996) can be used to determine the exact 
number of studies to be collected. 
 PLOT DATA AND COMPUTE VARIABLE 
EXPRESSIONS 
 Next, the data are posted to a spreadsheet (e.g., Microsoft Excel) for analysis 
of the constants and variables. The constants are identified and combined and 
the variables analyzed so as to have the factors influencing time expressed in an 
algebraic form. By plotting a curve of time versus the independent variable, the 
analyst may deduce potential algebraic relationships. For example, plotted data 
may take a number of forms: a straight line, nonlinear increasing trend, a nonlin-
ear decreasing trend, or no obviously regular geometric form. If a straight line, 
then the relationship is quite straightforward: 
 y   a   bx 
 with the constants  a  and  b  determined from least-squares regression analysis. If 
the plot shows a nonlinear increasing trend, then power relationships of the form 
 x 2 ,  x 3 ,  x n , or  e x  should be attempted. For nonlinear decreasing trends, negative 
Size (in2)
Standard time (decimal hours per hundred)
0
250
200
150
100
50
.22
.20
.18
.16
.14
.12
.10
.08
.06
.04
.02
0
Δy
Δx = 0.00038
 Figure 12.2   Forming time for different stock sizes. 

492 
C H A P T E R  1 2
power or negative exponentials should be attempted. For asymptotic trends, log 
relationships or negative exponentials of the form 
 y  1  e x 
 should be attempted. 
 Note that adding terms to the model will always produce a better model 
with a higher percentage of the variance (expressed as  r 2 ) in the data explained. 
However, the model may not be statistically significantly better; that is, statistically 
there is no difference in the quality of the predicted value between the two models. 
Furthermore, the simpler the formula, the better it can be understood and applied. 
Cumbersome expressions involving many terms to powers should be avoided. The 
range for each variable should be specifically identified. The limitations of the 
formula must be noted by describing its applicable range in detail. 
 There is a formalized procedure for computing the best model, termed the 
 general linear test . It computes the decrease in unexplained variance between the 
simpler model, termed the  reduced model,  and the more complex model, termed 
the  full model . The decrease in variance is tested statistically, and the more com-
plex model is used only if the decrease is significant (see Example 12.2). Further 
details on curve fitting and model development can be found in various statistical 
textbooks such as Neter et al. (1996) or Rawling (1988).   
EXAMPLE 12.2
 In the element “strike arc and weld,” analysts obtained the following data from 
10 detailed studies: 
 Study number 
 Size of weld 
 Minutes per inch of weld 
 1 
 1/8 
 0.12 
 2 
 3/16 
 0.13 
 3 
 1/4 
 0.15 
 4 
 3/8 
 0.24 
 5 
 1/2 
 0.37 
 6 
 5/8 
 0.59 
 7 
 11/16 
 0.80 
 8 
 3/4 
 0.93 
 9 
 7/8 
 1.14 
 10 
 1 
 1.52 
 Plotting the data resulted in the smooth curve shown in Figure 12.3. A simple lin-
ear regression of the dependent variable “minutes” against the independent variable 
“weld” yields: 
 
 
 
 
  y  0.245  1.57 x 
(1) 
 with  r 2  0.928 and sum of squares (SSE)  0.1354. 
 Figure 12.3 indicates a definite nonlinear trend to the data, so adding a quadratic 
component to the model seems reasonable. Regression now yields 
 
 
 
 
  y  0.1  0.178 x  1.61 x 2 
(2) 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 2  Standard Data and Formulas 
493
 with  r 2  0.993 and SSE  0.012. The increase in  r 2  would seem to indicate a definite 
improvement in the fit of the model. This improvement can be tested statistically with 
the general linear test 
 
F 
SSE F
dfFf
/
( )
F /
[
]

SSE
SSE F
( )
R
( )
F
(
)
df
d
 f
R
F
f
d
f
f
 where SSE(R)  sum of squares error for reduced (i.e., simpler) model 
 
 SSE(F)  sum of squares error for full (i.e., more complex) model 
 
 df R  degrees of freedom for reduced model 
 
 df F  degrees of freedom for full model 
 Comparing the two models yields 
 
F 

0
7
71 98
/
.
/
012
.
(
)

0 1354
0 012
.
.
1354
0
(
)
8
7

 As 71.98 is considerably larger than  F (1,7)  5.59, the full model is a significantly 
better model. 
 The process can be repeated by adding another term with a higher power (e.g., 
 x 3 ), which yields the following model: 
 
 
 
 
  y  0.218  1.14 x  3.59 x 2  1.16 x 3 
(3) 
 with  r 2  0.994 and SSE  0.00873. However in this case, the general linear test does 
not yield a statistically significant improvement: 
F 

0
6
2 25
/
.
/
00873
.
(
)
0.
.

012
0 00873
(
)
7
6

 
 The  F value of 2.25 is smaller than the critical  F (1,6)  5.99. 
 Interestingly, using a simple quadratic model of the form 
 
 
 
 
  y  0.0624  1.45 x 2 
(4) 
 with  r 2  0.993 and sum of squares  0.0133 yields the best and simplest model. 
Comparing this model [Equation (4)] with the second model [Equation (2)] yields 
 
F 

0
7
0 758
/
.
/
012
.
(
)

0 0133
0 012
.
.
0133
0
(
)
8
7

 The  F  value is not significant, and the extra linear term in  x  does not yield a  better 
model. 
 This best-fitting quadratic model can be checked by substituting a 1-in weld, to yield 
 y  0.0624  1.45(1) 2  1.51 
 This checks quite closely with the time study value of 1.52 min. 
 At times the analyst may recognize that more than one independent vari-
able is influencing time and that the final expression may consist of a multiple 
combination of various powers of the independent variables. If that is the case, 

494 
C H A P T E R  1 2
multivariate regression techniques must be applied. These calculations are quite 
tedious and specialized statistical software packages, such as MINITAB or SAS, 
will have to be utilized. 
 CHECK FOR ACCURACY AND FINALIZE 
 Upon completion of the formula, analysts should verify it before releasing it for 
use. The easiest and fastest way to check the formula is to use it to check existing 
time studies. Any marked differences (roughly 5 percent) between the formula 
value and the time study value should be investigated. If the formula does not 
have the expected validity, the analyst should accumulate additional data by tak-
ing more stopwatch and/or standard data studies. 
 The final step in the formula development process is to write the formula 
report. The analyst should consolidate all data, calculations, derivations, and ap-
plications of the formula and present this information in a complete report prior 
to putting the formula into use. This will make available all the facts regarding 
the process employed, the operating conditions, and the scope of formula.  
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
0
1/8
1/4
3/8
1/2
5/8
3/4
7/8
Size of weld (inches)
Minutes per inch of weld
 Figure 12.3   Curve plotted on regular coordinate paper takes quadratic form 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 2  Standard Data and Formulas 
495
 12.3 ANALYTICAL FORMULAS 
  Standard times can be calculated using analytical formulas found in technical 
handbooks or from information provided by machine tool manufacturers. By 
finding the appropriate feeds and speeds for different types and thicknesses of 
materials, analysts can calculate cutting times for different machining operations. 
 DRILL PRESS WORK 
 A drill is a fluted end-cutting tool used to originate or enlarge a hole in solid ma-
terial. In drilling operations on a flat surface, the axis of the drill is at 90 degrees 
to the surface being drilled. When a hole is drilled completely through a part, 
the analyst must add the lead of the drill to the length of the hole to determine 
the entire distance the drill must travel to make the hole. When a blind hole is 
drilled, the distance from the surface being drilled to the deepest penetration of 
the drill is the distance that the drill must travel (see Figure 12.4). 
 The commercial standard for the included angle of drill points is 118 
degrees, so the lead of the drill may be readily found through the expression 
 
l
r
A
 tan
 where 
 l  lead of drill 
 
  r  radius of drill 
 
 tan  A  tangent of one-half the included angle of drill 
 Figure 12.4   Drill travel distance 
 Distance  L indicates the distance the drill must travel when drilling through (illustration at 
left) and when drilling blind holes (illustration at right) (lead of drill is shown by distance  l ). 

496 
C H A P T E R  1 2
 To illustrate, calculate the lead of a general-purpose drill with 1-in diameter: 
l
l
l



0 5
59
0 5
1 6643
0 3
tan
.
°
-inlead
 After determining the total length that the drill must move, we divide this distance 
by the feed of the drill in inches per minute, to find the drill cutting time in minutes. 
 Drill speed is expressed in feet per minute (ft/min), and feed in thousandths 
of an inch per revolution (r). To change the feed into inches per minute when the 
feed per revolution and the speed in feet per minute are known, the following 
equation can be used: 
F
fS
d
m
F
f
 3 82
 where 
 F m  feed (in/min) 
 
   f  feed (in/r) 
 
  S f  surface feet per minute 
 
  d  diameter of drill (in) 
 For example, to determine the feed in inches per minute of a 1-in drill run-
ning at a surface speed of 100 ft/min and a feed of 0.013 in/r, we have 


F
(3.82)(0.013)(100)
1
4.97in min
m
F
 To determine how long it would take for this 1-in drill running at the same 
speed and feed to drill through 2 in of a malleable iron casting, we use the equation 
 
T
L
Fm
F

 where 
 T  cutting time (min) 
 
  L  total length drill must move 
 
  F m  feed (in/min) 
 which should yield 
 
T  2
4 97
0

3
(
)
hi k
f
i g
(
)
leadof drill
r
   
  0.463-min cutting time 
 The cutting time thus calculated does not include an allowance, which must 
be added to determine the standard time. The allowance should include time for 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 2  Standard Data and Formulas 
497
variations in material thickness and for tolerance in setting the stops, both of 
which affect the cycle cutting time. Personal and unavoidable delay allowances 
should also be added to arrive at an equitable standard time. 
 LATHE WORK 
 Many variations of machine tools are classified as lathes. These include the engine 
lathe, turret lathe, and automatic lathe (automatic screw machine). All of these 
lathes are used primarily with stationary tools or with tools that translate over the 
surface to remove material from the revolving work, which includes forgings, cast-
ings, or bar stock. In some cases, the tool revolves while the work is stationary, 
as on certain stations of automatic screw machine work. For example, a slot in a 
screw head can be machined in the slotting attachment on the automatic lathe. 
 Many factors alter speeds and feeds, such as the condition and design of the 
machine tool, the material being cut, the condition and design of the cutting tool, 
the coolant used for cutting, the method of holding the work, and the method of 
mounting the cutting tool. 
 As in drill press work, feeds are expressed in thousandths of an inch per revolu-
tion, and speeds in surface feet per minute. To determine the cutting time for  L  in of 
cut, the length of cut in inches is divided by the feed in inches per minute, or 
 
T
L
Fm
F

 where  T  cutting time (min) 
 
  L  total length of cut 
 
 F m  feed (in/min) 
 and 
F
fS
d
m
F
f
 3 82
 where 
 f  feed (in/r) 
 
  S f  speed (surface ft/min) 
 
  d  diameter of work (in) 
 MILLING MACHINE WORK 
 Milling  refers to the removal of material with a rotating multiple-tooth cutter. 
While the cutter rotates, the work is fed past the cutter. This differs from a drill 
press, for which the work is usually stationary. In addition to machining plane 
and irregular surfaces, operators use a milling machine for cutting threads, slot-
ting, and cutting gears. 
 In milling work, as in drill press and lathe work, the speed of the cutter is 
expressed in surface feet per minute. Feeds or table travel are usually expressed 
in thousandths of an inch per tooth. To determine the cutter speed in revolutions 

498 
C H A P T E R  1 2
per minute from the surface feet per minute and the diameter of the cutter, use 
the following expression: 
N
S
d
r
f
 3 82
 where  N r  cutter speed (rpm) 
 
  S f  cutter speed (ft/min) 
 
  d  outside diameter of cutter (in) 
 To determine the feed of the work in inches per minute into the cutter, use 
the expression 
 F m   fn t N r 
 where  F m  feed of work into cutter (in/min) 
 
  f  feed of cutter (in per tooth) 
 
  n t  number of cutter teeth 
 
  N r  cutter speed (rpm) 
 The number of cutter teeth suitable for a particular application may be ex-
pressed as 

=
n
F
F N
t
m
F
tF
 where  F t  chip thickness. 
 To compute the cutting time on milling operations, the analyst must take 
into consideration the lead of the milling cutter when figuring the total length of 
cut under power feed. This can be determined by triangulation, as illustrated in 
Figure 12.5, which shows the slab-milling of a pad. 
 In this case, to arrive at the total length that must be fed past the cutter, the 
lead  BC  is added to the length of the work (8 in). Clearance for removal of the 
work after the machining cut is handled as a separate element, because greater 
feed under rapid table traverse is used. By knowing the diameter of the cutter, 
you can determine  AC  as being the cutter radius, and you can then calculate the 
height of the right triangle  ABC  by subtracting the depth of cut  BE  from the cut-
ter radius  AE , as follows: 
 BC
AC
AB


AC2
2
AB
 In the preceding example, suppose we assume that the cutter diameter is 4 in 
and that it has 22 teeth. The feed per tooth is 0.008 in, and the cutting speed is 
60 ft/min. We can compute the cutting time by using the equation 
 
T
L
Fm
F


 
 
C H A PT ER 1 2  Standard Data and Formulas 
499
 where  T  cutting time (min) 
 
  L  total length of cut under power feed 
 
 F m  feed (in/min)  
 Then L would be equal to (8 inches 1  BC ) and 
BC 

4
3

06
0 97
.06
0
 
 Therefore, 
 
  L  8.975 
 
  F m   fn t N r 
 
  F m  (0.008)(22) N r 
 or 
 
N
Sf
d
r 


3 82
3
Sf
82 6
4
57 3
.
82
3
Sf
(
)
60
. r
3 pm
r
 Then 
 F m  (0.008)(22)(57.3)  10.1 in/min 
 and 
 
T 

8 975
10 1
0 889
.
.
.
mincutting time
A
B
C
E
Work
Feed
8"
1/4"
Helical mill
 Figure 12.5   Slab-milling a casting 8 in long 

500 
C H A P T E R  1 2
 Through knowledge of feeds and speeds, analysts can determine the re-
quired cutting or processing time for various work performed in their plants. 
The illustrations cited in drill press, lathe, and milling work are representa-
tive of the techniques used to establish raw cutting times. The necessary ap-
plicable allowances must be added to these values to create fair total element 
allowed values.  
 12.4 USING STANDARD DATA 
  For easy reference, constant standard data elements should be tabulated and filed 
under the machine or the process. Variable data can be either tabulated or ex-
pressed as a curve or equation, and then filed under the facility or operation class. 
 Table 12.2 illustrates standard data for blanking and piercing stock on a 
punch press. By identifying the job according to the distance that the strip of 
sheet stock is moved per piece, the analyst can find the standard time for the 
complete operation. 
 Table 12.3 illustrates standard setup data for No. 5 Warner & Swasey turret 
lathes at a specific plant. To determine the setup time with these data, the analyst 
would visualize the tooling in the square and hex turret and would then refer to 
the table. For example, if a certain job required a chamfering tool, turning tool, 
and facing tool in the square turret, and needed two boring tools, one reamer, and 
a collapsible tap in the hex turret, the setup standard time would be 69.70 min 
plus 25.89 min, or 95.59 min. To arrive at this solution, the analyst would find 
the value of the relevant tooling under the square turret column (line 8) and the 
most time-consuming applicable tooling in the hex turret section, which in this 
case is tapping. This would give a value of 69.7 min. Because three additional 
tools are in the hex turret (first bore, second bore, and ream), the analyst would 
then multiply 8.63 by 3 to get 25.89 min. Finally, adding 25.89 min to 69.70 min 
yields the total required setup time.  
 Table 12.2   Standard Data for Blanking and Piercing Strip Stock Hand Feed 
with Piece Automatically Removed on Toledo 76 Punch Press 
 L (distance in inches) 
 T (time in hours per hundred hits) 
 1 
 0.075 
 2 
 0.082 
 3 
 0.088 
 4 
 0.095 
 5 
 0.103 
 6 
 0.110 
 7 
 0.117 
 8 
 0.123 
 9 
 0.130 
 10 
 0.137 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 2  Standard Data and Formulas 
501
 SUMMARY 
 When properly applied, standard data permit the rapid establishment of accurate 
time standards before the job is performed. This feature makes their use especially 
attractive for estimating the cost of new work, for cost quotes, and for subcon-
tracting purposes. The use of standard data also simplifies many administrative 
problems in plants where there may be restrictions pertaining to such matters 
as the type of study to be made (continuous or snapback), the number of cycles to 
be studied, the operator(s) to be studied, and the observer to conduct the study. By 
 Table 12.3   Standard Setup Data for No. 5 Turret Lathes
Basic tooling
Hex turret
Square
turret
 
   
   
 Hex turret 
 No.  Square turret 
 Partial  Chamfer 
 Bore or 
turn 
 Drill 
 S. tap or 
ream 
 C. tap 
 C. die 
 1.  Partial  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 31.5 
 39.6 
 44.5 
 48.0 
 47.6 
 50.5 
 58.5 
  2.    Chamfer   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  38.2  
  39.6  
  46.8  
  49.5  
  50.5  
  53.0  
  61.2  
 3.  Face or cutoff  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 36.0 
 44.2 
 48.6 
 51.3 
 52.2 
 55.0 
 63.0 
 4.  Turn, bore, groove, radius . . . . . . 
 40.5 
 49.5 
 50.5 
 53.0 
 54.0 
 55.8 
 63.9 
 5.  Face and chamfer  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 37.8 
 45.9 
 51.3 
 54.0 
 54.5 
 56.6 
 64.8 
 6.  Face and cutoff  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 39.6 
 48.6 
 53.0 
 55.0 
 56.0 
 58.5 
 66.6 
 7.  Face and turn or turn and cutoff  . 
 45.0 
 53.1 
 55.0 
 56.7 
 57.6 
 60.5 
 68.4 
 8.  Face, turn, and chamfer . . . . . . . . 
 47.7 
 55.7 
 57.6 
 59.5 
 60.5 
 69.7 
 78.4 
 9.  Face, turn, and cutoff  . . . . . . . . . 
 48.6 
 57.6 
 57.5 
 60.0 
 62.2 
 71.5 
 80.1 
 10.  Face, turn, and groove . . . . . . . . . 
 49.5 
 58.0 
 59.5 
 61.5 
 64.0 
 73.5 
 81.6 
 11.  Circled basic tooling from above  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    
 12.  Each additional tool in square . . . . . . . . . . .
  4.20  
  
 
 13.  Each additional tool in hex . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  8.63  
  
 
 14.  Remove and set up three jaws . . . . . . . . . . .
  5.9 
 
 
 15.  Set up subassembly or fixture . . . . . . . . . . .
  18.7 
 
 
 16.  Set up between centers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  11.0 
 
 
 17.  Change lead screw  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  6.6 
 
 
 Total setup 
  min 

502 
C H A P T E R  1 2
using the standard data technique, analysts may not only avoid such details, but 
may also alleviate some sources of tension between labor and management.   
 In general, the more refined the element times, the greater the coverage of 
the data. Consequently, in job shops, it is practicable to have individual element 
values, as well as grouped or combined values, so that the data for a given fa-
cility will have enough flexibility to allow rates to be set for all types of work 
scheduled for a machine. For short-cycle jobs, fundamental motion data are es-
pecially useful for establishing standards. 
 A time study formula can similarly establish standards in a fraction of the 
time required for individual studies. One advantage of formulas over standard 
data is that a less skilled (and less costly) person can plug data into formulas 
more quickly than adding standard data elements. Also, because columns of fig-
ures must be added in the standard data method, there is a greater chance for 
omission or arithmetic error in setting a standard than in using a formula. 
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  What is meant by  standard data ? 
 2.  What is the approximate ratio of the time required to set standards by stopwatch 
methods to the time required using standard data methods? 
 3.  What are the advantages to establishing time standards by using standard data 
rather than taking individual studies? 
 4.  What are some of the disadvantages of using curves to tabulate standard data? 
 5.  What advantages do formulas have over standard data in establishing time  standards?  
 6.  Is the use of time study formulas restricted to machine shop operations where feeds 
and speeds have been analytically shown to influence times? Explain. 
 7.  What are the characteristics of a sound time study formula? 
 8.  What is the danger of using too few studies in the derivation of a formula? 
 9.  Explain in detail how one would develop a best-fit formula. 
 PROBLEMS  
 1.  What would be the horsepower requirements of turning a mild steel shaft with 3-in 
diameter if a cut of 1/4 in with a feed of 0.022 in/r at a spindle speed of 250 rpm 
were established? 
 2.  How long would it take to turn 6 in of 1-in bar stock on a No. 3 Warner & Swasey 
turret lathe running at 300 ft/min and feeding at the rate of 0.005 in/r? 
 3.  A plain milling cutter with 3-in diameter and a face width of 2 in is being used 
to mill a piece of cold-rolled steel 1.5 in wide and 4 in long. The depth of cut is 
3/16 in. How long will it take to make the cut if the feed per tooth is 0.010 in and 
a 16-tooth cutter running at a surface speed of 120 ft/min is used? 
 4.  Compute the times for elements  a ,  b ,  c ,  d , and  e when  a   b   c is timed at 
0.057 min;  b   c   d is timed at 0.078 min;  c   d   e equals 0.097 min;  d   e   a 
is 0.095 min; and  e   a   b is 0.069 min. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 2  Standard Data and Formulas 
503
 5.  What would be the lead of a 3/4-in-diameter drill with an included angle of 
118 degrees? 
 6.  What would be the feed in inches per minute of a 3/4-in drill running at a surface 
speed of 80 ft/min and a feed of 0.008 in/r? 
 7.  How long would it take the drill from Problem 6 to drill through a casting 
2.25 in thick? 
 8.  The analyst in Dorben Company made 10 independent time studies in the hand 
paint spraying section of the finishing department. The product line under study 
 revealed a direct relation between spraying time and product surface area. The fol-
lowing data were collected: 
 Study no. 
 Rating factor 
 Product surface area 
 Standard time 
 1 
 0.95 
 170 
 0.32 
 2 
 1.00 
 12 
 0.11 
 3 
 1.05 
 150 
 0.31 
 4 
 0.80 
 41 
 0.14 
 5 
 1.20 
 130 
 0.27 
 6 
 1.00 
 50 
 0.18 
 7 
 0.85 
 120 
 0.24 
 8 
 0.90 
 70 
 0.23 
 9 
 1.00 
 105 
 0.25 
 10 
 1.10 
 95 
 0.22 
 
  Compute the slope and intercept constant, using regression line equations. How 
much spray time would you allow for a new part with a surface area of 250 in 2 ? 
 9.  The work measurement analyst in the Dorben Company wants to develop an ac-
curate equation for estimating the cutting of various configurations in sheet metal 
with a band saw. The data from eight time studies for the actual cutting element 
provided the following information: 
 No. 
 Lineal inches 
 Standard time 
 1 
 10 
 0.40 
 2 
 42 
 0.80 
 3 
 13 
 0.54 
 4 
 35 
 0.71 
 5 
 20 
 0.55 
 6 
 32 
 0.66 
 7 
 22 
 0.60 
 8 
 27 
 0.61 
 
   What would be the relation between the length of cut and the standard time, using 
the least-squares technique? 
 10.  The work measurement analyst in the XYZ Company wishes to develop standard 
data involving fast, repetitive manual motions, for use in a light assembly depart-
ment. Because of the shortness of the desired standard data elements, the analyst is 
obliged to measure them in groups as they are performed on the factory floor. On a 
certain study, this analyst is endeavoring to develop standard data for five elements, 
denoted  A ,  B ,  C ,  D , and  E . Using a fast (0.001) decimal minute watch, the analyst 
studied a variety of assembly operations and arrived at the following data: 

504 
C H A P T E R  1 2
 A   B   C  0.131 min 
 B   C   D  0.114 min 
 C   D   E  0.074 min 
 D   E   A  0.085 min 
 E   A   B  0.118 min 
 
   Compute the standard data values for each of the elements  A ,  B ,  C ,  D , and  E . 
 11.  The work measurement analyst in the Dorben Company is developing standard data 
for prepricing work in the drill press department. Based on the following recom-
mended speeds and feeds, compute the power feed cutting time of 1/2-in high-
speed drills with a 118-degree included angle to drill through material that is 1 in 
thick. Include a 10 percent allowance for personal needs and fatigue. 
 Material 
 Recommended 
speed (ft/min)  
 Feed (in/r) 
 Al (copper alloy) 
 300 
 0.006 
 Cast iron 
 125 
 0.005 
 Monel (R) 
 50 
 0.004 
 Steel (1112) 
 150 
 0.005 
 12.  The following data were obtained between standard time and the blanking of vari-
ous leather pieces from cow hides. Derive a formula for this relationship. 
 Study no. 
 Area of
leather (in 2 ) 
 Standard 
time (min) 
 1 
 5.0 
 0.07 
 2 
 7.5 
 0.10 
 3 
 15.5 
 0.13 
 4 
 25.0 
 0.20 
 5 
 34.0 
 0.24 
 13.  Develop a formula for the relationship between time and area from the following 
data: 
 Study no. 
 Time 
 Area 
 1 
 4 
 28.6 
 2 
 7 
 79.4 
 3 
 11 
 182.0 
 4 
 15 
 318.0 
 5 
 21 
 589.0 
 REFERENCES 
 Cywar, Adam W. “Development and Use of Standard Data.” In  Handbook of Industrial 
Engineering . Ed. Gavriel Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1982. 
 Fein, Mitchell. “Establishing Time Standards by Parameters.”  Proceedings of the Spring 
Conference of the American Institute of Industrial Engineers . Norcross, GA: 
American Institute of Industrial Engineers, 1978. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 2  Standard Data and Formulas 
505
 Metcut Research Associates.  Machining Data Handbook . Cincinnati, OH: Metcut 
Research Associates, 1966.  
 Neter, J., M. Wasserman, M. H. Kutner, and C. J. Nachstheim.  Applied Linear 
Statistical Models . 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1996. 
 Pappas, Frank G., and Robert A. Dimberg.  Practical Work Standards . New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1962. 
 Rawling, J. O.  Applied Regression Analysis . Pacific Grove, CA: Wadsworth & Brooks, 
1988. 
 SELECTED SOFTWARE 
 MINITAB. 3081 Enterprise Dr., State College, PA 16801. 
 SAS. SAS Institute, Cary, NC 27513. 

This page intentionally left blank

 
507
 
507
 
  CHAPTER 
 
13 
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Use predetermined time systems to predict standard times for new or 
existing jobs. 
 •  Predetermined time systems are a data base of basic motion times. 
 •  Accurate systems require more time to complete. 
 •  Quick, simple systems are usually less accurate. 
 •  Consider not only the main motion, but also complexities or interactions 
with other motions. 
 •  Use predetermined time systems to improve methods analysis. 
 S
 ince the time of Frederick W. Taylor, management has realized the desir-
ability of assigning standard times to the basic elements of work. These 
times are referred to as  basic motion times, synthetic times , or  prede-
termined times . They are assigned to fundamental motions and groups of mo-
tions that cannot be precisely evaluated with ordinary stopwatch time study 
procedures. They are also the result of studying a large sample of diversified 
operations with a timing device, such as a motion picture camera or videotape 
machine, capable of measuring very short elements. The time values are syn-
thetic in that they are often the result of logical combinations of therbligs; they 
are basic in that further refinement is both difficult and impractical; they are 
predetermined because they are used to predict standard times for new work 
resulting from methods changes. 
 Since 1945, there has been a growing interest in the use of basic motion 
times as a method of establishing rates quickly and accurately without using 
the stopwatch or other time recording devices. Today, practicing methods ana-
lysts can obtain information from more than 50 different systems of established 
predetermined time. Essentially, these predetermined time systems are sets of 
motion–time tables with explanatory rules and instructions on the use of the 
motion–time values. Considerable specialized training is essential to the practi-
cal application of these techniques. In fact, most companies require certification 
 Predetermined 
Time Systems 

508 
C H A P T E R  1 3
before analysts are permitted to establish standards using the Work-Factor, 
Methods-Time Measurement (MTM), or MOST systems. 
 To give the reader a good overview of the field of predetermined time 
systems, we will review MTM in some detail, as it is the pioneer, as well as a 
quicker subsystem of MTM called MTM-2. In addition, a derivative of MTM, 
a complete Maynard Operation Sequence Technique (MOST) will be dis-
cussed. Derivations of the common predetermined time systems are illustrated in 
Figure 13.1. MTM-2 and MOST are the most commonly used predetermined time 
systems, according to 141 industrial engineers surveyed (Freivalds et al., 2000). 
 13.1 METHODS–TIME MEASUREMENT 
 MTM-1 
 Methods-Time Measurement (Maynard, Stegemerten, and Schwab, 1948) gives 
time values for the fundamental motions of reach, move, turn, grasp, position, 
disengage, and release. The authors defined MTM as “a procedure which ana-
lyzes any manual operation or method into the basic motions required to perform 
it, and assigns to each motion a pre-determined time standard which is deter-
mined by the nature of the motion and the conditions under which it is made.” 
 MTM-1 data are the result of frame-by-frame analyses of motion pic-
ture films of diversified areas of work. The data taken from the various films 
were rated by the Westinghouse technique, tabulated, and analyzed to determine 
the degree of difficulty caused by variable characteristics. For example, both the 
distance and the type of reach affect the reach time. Further analysis categorized 
five distinct cases of reach, each requiring a different time allotment for a given 
distance: 
 1.  Reach to object in fixed location, or to object in other hand, or to object on 
which other hand rests. 
 2.  Reach to single object in location that may vary slightly from cycle to 
cycle. 
 3.  Reach to object jumbled with other objects, requiring search and select as 
well. 
 4.  Reach to a very small object, or an object for which accurate grasp is 
required. 
 5.  Reach to indefinite location to get hand in position for body balance, or for 
next motion, or out of the way. 
 In addition, they found that move time was influenced by both the distance 
and the weight of the object being moved, as well as by the specific type of 
move. The three cases of move are 
 1.  Move object to other hand, or against stop. 
 2.  Move object to approximate or indefinite location. 
 3.  Move object to exact location.  

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
509
1980
2000
1960
1940
1920
Direct effect
Influence
Motion-time
standards
Philco
MTS
Work-factor
R.C.A.
W-F
F.B. Gilbreth
Therbligs
H.L. Gantt
Human Factors
Harrington Emerson
Management
F.W. Taylor
Time Study
Motion-time analysis
A.B. Segur "M.T.A."
Work time
measurement
General
Motors
Micro
motion
analyses
Macro
motion
analyses
Universal
analyzing
system
UAS
Dimensional
motion times
G.E.
DMT
Basic
motion
times
BMT
General
purpose
data
GPD
Motion time
survey
G.E.
MTS
Applied
time
study
W. Holmes
Engstrom's
tables
G.E.
Methods-time
measurement
Westinghouse
MTM-1
Unified 
standard
data
USD
Simplified
motion
system
SMS
Minneapolis
Honeywell
M-H
Modular
arrangement
of PTS
MODAPTS
Maynard operation
sequence technique
MOST
MOST for
Windows
MTM-LINK for
Windows
MOD++ 
for 
Windows
MTM-3
MTM-2
Elemental time
standards
Western
Electric
Master
standard
data
MSD
 Figure 13.1   Family tree of predetermined time systems. 
 Courtesy: Standards International, Chicago, Illinois. 
 Finally, 2 cases of release and 18 cases of position also influence time. 
 Table 13.1 summarizes the MTM-1 values. The time values of the therblig 
grasp vary from 2.0 to 12.9 TMU [1 time-measurement unit (TMU) 5 0.00001 h], 
depending on the classification of the grasp. 

510 
C H A P T E R  1 3
 Table 13.1   Summary of MTM-1 Data 
Table I—Reach—R
 Distance 
Moved (in) 
 Time (TMU) 
 Hand in Motion 
 A 
 B 
 C or D 
 E 
 A 
 B 
 Case and Description 
 1 / 2 or less 
 2.0 
 2.0 
 2.0 
 2.0 
 1.6 
 1.6 
 A  Reach to object in fixed 
location, or to object in 
other hand or on which 
other hand rests. 
 B  Reach to single object in 
location that may vary 
slightly from cycle to cycle. 
 C  Reach to object jumbled 
with other objects in a group 
so that search and select 
occur. 
 D  Reach to a very small object 
or where accurate grasp is 
required. 
 E  Reach to indefinite location 
to get hand in position for 
body balance or next motion 
or out of way. 
 1 
 2.5 
 2.5 
 3.6 
 2.4 
 2.3 
 2.3 
 2 
 4.0 
 4.0 
 5.9 
 3.8 
 3.5 
 2.7 
 3 
 5.3 
 5.3 
 7.3 
 5.3 
 4.5 
 3.6 
 4 
 6.1 
 6.4 
 8.4 
 6.8 
 4.9 
 4.3 
 5 
 6.5 
 7.8 
 9.4 
 7.4 
 5.3 
 5.0 
 6 
 7.0 
 8.6 
 10.1 
 8.0 
 5.7 
 5.7 
 7 
 7.4 
 9.3 
 10.8 
 8.7 
 6.1 
 6.5 
 8 
 7.9 
 10.1 
 11.5 
 9.3 
 6.5 
 7.2 
 9 
 8.3 
 10.8 
 12.2 
 9.9 
 6.9 
 7.9 
 10 
 8.7 
 11.5 
 12.9 
 10.5 
 7.3 
 8.6 
 12 
 9.6 
 12.9 
 14.2 
 11.8 
 8.1 
 10.1 
 14 
 10.5 
 14.4 
 15.6 
 13.0 
 8.9 
 11.5 
 16 
 11.4 
 15.8 
 17.0 
 14.2 
 9.7 
 12.9 
 18 
 12.3 
 17.2 
 18.4 
 15.5 
 10.5 
 14.4 
 20 
 13.1 
 18.6 
 19.8 
 16.7 
 11.3 
 15.8 
 22 
 14.0 
 20.1 
 21.2 
 18.0 
 12.1 
 17.3 
 24 
 14.9 
 21.5 
 22.5 
 19.2 
 12.9 
 18.8 
 26 
 15.8 
 22.9 
 23.9 
 20.4 
 13.7 
 20.2 
 28 
 16.7 
 24.4 
 25.3 
 21.7 
 14.5 
 21.7 
 30 
 17.5 
 25.8 
 26.7 
 22.9 
 15.3 
 23.2 
 Table II—Move—M 
 Distance 
Moved (in) 
 Time (TMU) 
 Wt. Allowance 
   
 A 
 B 
 C 
 Hand in 
Motion B 
 Wt. (lb) 
up to 
 Factor 
 Constant 
(TMU) 
 Case and
Description 
 1 / 2 or less 
 2.0 
 2.0 
 2.0 
 1.7 
 2.5 
 0 
 0 
 A  Move object to 
other hand or 
against stop. 
 B  Move object 
to approximate 
or indefinite 
location. 
 C  Move object to 
exact location. 
 1 
 2.5 
 2.9 
 3.4 
 2.3 
   
   
   
 2 
 3.6 
 4.6 
 5.2 
 2.9 
 7.5 
 1.06 
 2.2 
 3 
 4.9 
 5.7 
 6.7 
 3.6 
   
   
   
 4 
 6.1 
 6.9 
 8.0 
 4.3 
 12.5 
 1.11 
 3.9 
 5 
 7.3 
 8.0 
 9.2 
 5.0 
   
   
   
 6 
 8.1 
 8.9 
 10.3 
 5.7 
   
   
   
 7 
 8.9 
 9.7 
 11.1 
 6.5 
 17.5 
 1.17 
 5.6 
 8 
 9.7 
 10.6 
 11.8 
 7.2 
   
   
   
 9 
 10.5 
 11.5 
 12.7 
 7.9 
 22.5 
 1.22 
 7.4 
 10 
 11.3 
 12.2 
 13.5 
 8.6 
   
   
   
 12 
 12.9 
 13.4 
 15.2 
 10.0 
 27.5 
 1.28 
 9.1 
 14 
 14.4 
 14.6 
 16.9 
 11.4 
   
   
   
 16 
 16.0 
 15.8 
 18.7 
 12.8 
 32.5 
 1.33 
 10.8 
 18 
 17.6 
 17.0 
 20.4 
 14.2 
   
   
   
 20 
 19.2 
 18.2 
 22.1 
 15.6 
 37.5 
 1.39 
 12.5 
 22 
 20.8 
 19.4 
 23.8 
 17.0 
   
   
   
 24 
 22.4 
 20.6 
 25.5 
 18.4 
 42.5 
 1.44 
 14.3 
 26 
 24.0 
 21.8 
 27.3 
 19.8 
   
   
   
 28 
 25.5 
 23.1 
 29.0 
 21.2 
 47.5 
 1.50 
 16.0 
 30 
 27.1 
 24.3 
 30.7 
 22.7 
   
   
   

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
511
 Table III—Turn and Apply Pressure—T and AP 
 Weight 
 Time TMU for Degrees Turned 
 30° 
 45° 
 60° 
 75° 
 90° 
 105° 
 120° 
 135° 
 150° 
 165° 
 180° 
 Small—0 to 2 lb 
 2.8 
 3.5 
 4.1 
 4.8 
 5.4 
 6.1 
 6.8 
 7.4 
 8.1 
 8.7 
 9.4 
 Medium—2.1 to 10 lb 
 4.4 
 5.5 
 6.5 
 7.5 
 8.5 
 9.6 
 10.6 
 11.6 
 12.7 
 13.7 
 14.8 
 Large—10.1 to 35 lb 
 8.4 
 10.5 
 12.3 
 14.4 
 16.2 
 18.3 
 20.4 
 22.2 
 24.3 
 26.1 
 28.2 
 Apply Pressure Case A—10.6 TMU. Apply Pressure Case B—16.2 TMU 
 Table IV—Grasp—G 
 Case 
 Time (TMU) 
 Description 
 1A 
 2.0 
 Pick Up Grasp —Small, medium, or large object by itself, easily grasped. 
 1B 
  3.5 
 Very small object or object lying close against a flat surface. 
 1C1 
  7.3 
 Interference with grasp on bottom and one side of nearly cylindrical object. 
Diameter larger than  1 / 2 . 
 1C2 
  8.7 
 Interference with grasp on bottom and one side of nearly cylindrical object. 
Diameter  1 / 4  to  1 / 2 . 
 1C3 
 10.8 
 Interference with grasp on bottom and one side of nearly cylindrical object. 
Diameter less than  1 / 4 . 
 2 
  5.6 
 Regrasp. 
 3 
  5.6 
 Transfer Grasp. 
 4A 
  7.3 
 Object jumbled with other objects so search and select occur. Larger than 1 3 1 3 1.  
 4B 
  9.1 
 Object jumbled with other objects so search and select occur.  1 / 4  3  1 / 4  3  1 / 8  to 
1 3 1 3 1. 
 4C 
 12.9 
 Object jumbled with other objects so search and select occur. Smaller than  1 / 4  3  1 / 4  
3  1 / 8 . 
 5 
          0 
 Contact, sliding or hook grasp. 
 Table V—Position*—P 
 Class of Fit 
   
 Symmetry 
 Easy to 
Handle 
 Difficult to 
Handle 
 1—Loose 
 No pressure required. 
 S 
 5.6 
 11.2 
   
   
 SS 
 9.1 
 14.7 
   
   
 NS 
 10.4 
 16.0 
 2—Close 
 Light pressure required. 
 S 
 16.2 
 21.8 
   
   
 SS 
 19.7 
 25.3 
   
   
 NS 
 21.0 
 26.6 
 3—Exact 
 Heavy pressure required. 
 S 
 43.0 
 48.6 
   
   
 SS 
 46.5 
 52.1 
   
   
 NS 
 47.8 
 53.4 
 *Distance moved to engage—1 or less. 
 Table VI—Release—RL 
 Case 
 Time (TMU) 
 Description 
 1 
 2.0 
 Normal release performed by opening fingers as independent 
motion. 
 2 
 0 
 Contact release. 

512 
C H A P T E R  1 3
 Table VII—Disengage—D 
 Class of Fit 
 Easy to 
Handle 
 Difficult to 
Handle 
 1—Loose —Very slight effort, blends with subsequent move. 
 4.0 
 5.7 
 2—Close —Normal effort, slight recoil. 
 7.5 
 11.8 
 3—Tight —Considerable effort, hand recoils markedly. 
 22.9 
 34.7 
Table 13.1  (continued)
 Table IX—Body, Leg, and Foot Motions 
 Description 
 Symbol 
 Distance 
 Time TMU 
 Foot Motion— Hinged at ankle. 
 With heavy pressure. 
 Leg or Foreleg Motion 
 FM 
 Up to 4 
 8.5 
 FMP 
   
 19.1 
 LM— 
 Up to 6 
 7.1 
   
   
 Each add’l inch 
 1.2 
 Sidestep—Case 1— Complete when leading leg 
contacts floor. 
     
 SS-C1 
 Less than 12 
 Use REACH or 
MOVE time 
   
 12 
 17.0 
   
 Each add’ l inch  
 0.6 
 Case 2— Lagging leg must contact 
floor before next motion can 
be made. 
 SS-C2 
 12 
 34.1 
   
   
 Each add’l inch 
 1.1 
 Bend, Stoop, or Kneel on One Knee. 
 Arise. 
 B, S, KOK 
   
 29.0 
 AB, AS, AKOK 
   
 31.9 
 Kneel on Floor—Both Knees. 
 KBK 
   
 69.4 
 Arise. 
 AKBK 
   
 76.7 
 Sit. 
 SIT 
   
 34.7 
 Stand from Sitting Position. 
 STD 
   
 43.4 
 Turn Body 45 to 90 degrees— 
   
   
   
 Case 1— Complete when leading leg contacts 
floor. 
 TBC1 
   
 18.6 
 Case 2— Lagging leg must contact floor before 
next  motion can be made. 
 TBC2 
   
 37.2 
 Walk. 
 W-FT. 
 Per foot 
 5.3 
 Walk. 
 W-P 
 Per pace 
 15.0 
 Table VIII—Eye Travel Time and Eye Focus—ET and EF 
 Eye Travel Time 5 15.2 3 T
D TMU with a maximum value of 20 TMU 
 where  T 5 the distance between points from and to which the eye travels. 
 
 D 5 the perpendicular distance from the eye to the line of travel  T . 
 Eye Focus Time 5 7.3 TMU. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
513
 Source: MTM Association for Standards and Research, Fair Lawn, New Jersey. 
 First, the analyst summarizes all left-hand and right-hand motions required 
to perform the job properly. Then the rated times in TMU for each motion are 
determined from the methods–time data tables. To determine the time required 
for a normal performance of the task, the nonlimiting motion values are either 
circled or deleted, as only the limiting motions will be summarized, provided 
that it is “easy” to perform the two motions simultaneously (see Table X of 
 Table 13.1). For example, if the right hand must reach 20 in (50 cm) to pick up a 
nut, the classification would be R20C and the time value would be 19.8 TMU. If, 

514 
C H A P T E R  1 3
at the same time, the left hand must reach 10 in (25 cm) to pick up a cap screw, 
a designation of R10C with a TMU value of 12.9 would be in effect. The right-
hand value would be the limiting value, and the 12.9 value of the left hand would 
not be used in calculating the normal time. 
 The tabulated values do not include any allowance for personal delays, fa-
tigue, or unavoidable delays. When analysts use these values to establish time 
standards, they must add appropriate allowances to the summary of the synthetic 
basic motion times. Proponents of MTM-1 state that no fatigue allowance is 
needed in the vast majority of applications, because the MTM-1 values are based 
on a work rate that can be sustained at steady state for the working life of a 
healthy employee. 
 An example of an MTM-1 analysis of a clerical operation (replacing a page 
in a three-ring binder) is shown in Table 13.2. 
 Today, MTM has received worldwide recognition. In the United States, it is 
administered, advanced, and controlled by the MTM Association for Standards 
and Research. This nonprofit association is one of 12 associations that constitute 
the International MTM Directorate. Much of MTM systems’ success is the result 
of an active committee structure made up of members of the association. 
 The MTM family of systems continues to grow. In addition to MTM-1, 
the association has introduced MTM-2, MTM-3, MTM-V, MTM-C, MTM-M, 
MTM-MEK, MTM-UAS, and the Windows-based software tool MTM-LINK. 
 MTM-2 
 In an effort to further the application of MTM to work areas where the detail of 
MTM-1 would economically preclude its use, the International MTM Director-
ate initiated a research project to develop less-refined data suitable for the major-
ity of motion sequences. The result of this effort was MTM-2. Defined by the 
MTM Association of the United Kingdom, it is a system of synthesized MTM 
data and is the second general level of MTM data. It is based exclusively on 
MTM and consists of 
 1.  Single basic MTM motions 
 2.  Combinations of basic MTM motions  
 The data are adapted to the operator and are independent of the workplace 
or equipment used. In general, MTM-2 should find application in work assign-
ments where 
 1.  The effort portion of the work cycle is more than 1 min. 
 2.  The cycle is not highly repetitive. 
 3.  The manual portion of the work cycle does not involve a large number of 
either complex or simultaneous hand motions.  
 The variability between MTM-1 and MTM-2 depends to a large extent on 
the length of the cycle. This is reflected in Figure 13.2, which shows the range of 
percentage deviation of MTM-2 from MTM-1. This range of error is considered 
to be the expected range for 95 percent of the time. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
515
 Table 13.2   MTM-1 A1 
   
   
 MTM-1 Analysis of MTM-C  
 Validation 
   
 ELEMENT TITLE: 
 Replace page in 3-ring binder 
   
   
 STARTS: 
 Get binder from shelf at left 
 ANALYST: 
 MTM Association for 
Standards 
and Research 
 INCLUDES: 
 Get binder, open cover, locate correct page, 
open rings, replace old sheet, close rings, 
Aside binder to shelf 
   
 ENDS: 
 DATE: 
 Left-Hand Description 
 F 
 LH 
Motion 
 TMU 
 RH 
Motion 
 F 
 Right-Hand 
Description 
 1. GET BINDER—OPEN COVER 
   
   
   
   
   
 Reach to binder 
 R30B 
 25.8 
   
   
   
 Grasp binder 
 G1A 
 2.0 
   
   
   
 Move to desk 
 M30B 
 24.3 
   
   
   
 Release 
 RL1 
 2.0 
   
   
   
 Reach to cover 
 R7B 
 9.3 
   
   
   
 Grasp edge 
 G1A 
 2.0 
   
   
   
 Open cover 
 M16B 
 15.8 
   
   
   
 Release 
 RL1 
 2.0 
   
   
   
   
   
 83.2 
   
   
   
 2. LOCATE CORRECT PAGE 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 14.6 
 EF 
 2 
 Read first page data 
 Reach to edge 
 3 
 R3D 
 21.9 
   
   
   
 Grasp 
 3 
 G1B 
 10.5 
   
   
   
 Move up 
 3 
 M4B 
 20.7 
   
   
   
 Regrasp 
   
 G2 
 — 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 43.8 
 EF 
 2 3 3 
 Identify pages 
 Move pages back 
   
 M8B 
 10.6 
   
   
   
 Release 
   
 RL1 
 2.0 
   
   
   
 Reach to hold 
   
 R8B 
 10.1 
 R4B 
   
 To edge of page 
 Grasp 
   
 G5 
 0.0 
 G5 
   
 Contact 
   
   
   
 8.0 
 M½  B 
 4 
 Slide back up 
 Contact 
 3 
 G5 
 0.0 
 RL2 
 4 
 Release 
 Move 
 3 
 M½B 
 7.5 
 R1B 
 3 
 To corner 
   
   
   
 0.0 
 G5 
 3 
 Contact 
 Regrasp pages 
   
 G2 
 5.6 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 87.6 
 EF 
 4 3 3 
 Identify pages 
 Move pages back 
   
 M8B 
 10.6 
   
   
   
 Release 
   
 RL1 
 2.0 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 255.5 
   
   
   
 3. REPLACE PAGE 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 To ring 
   
 R7A 
 7.4 
 R7A 
   
 To ring 
 Grasp 
   
 G1A 
 2.0 
 G1A 
   
 Grasp 
 Pull open 
   
 APB 
 16.2 
 APB 
   
 Pull open 
 Open 
   
 M½A 
 2.0 
 M½A 
   
 Open 
 Release 
   
 RL1 
 2.0 
 RL1 
   
 Release 
 To edge of paper 
   
 R6D 
 10.1 
   
   
   
 Grasp 
   
 G1B 
 3.5 
   
   
   
(Continued)

516 
C H A P T E R  1 3
 Left-Hand Description 
 F 
 LH 
Motion 
 TMU 
 RH 
Motion 
 F 
 Right-Hand 
Description 
 To basket 
   
 M30B 
 24.3 
 R-E 
   
   
 Release 
   
 RL1 
 2.0 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 10.1 
 R6D 
   
 To new sheet 
   
   
   
 3.5 
 G1B 
   
 Grasp 
   
   
   
 15.2 
 M12C 
   
 To rings 
   
   
   
 16.2 
 P2SE 
   
 Align to ring 
   
   
   
 2.0 
 M½C 
   
 To ring 
   
   
   
 16.2 
 P2SE 
   
 Align 
   
   
   
 2.0 
 M½A 
   
 Down on rings 
   
   
   
 2.0 
 RL1 
   
 Release 
 To center ring 
   
 R4B 
 8.6 
 R6B 
   
 To center ring 
 Grasp 
   
 G1A 
 2.0 
 G1A 
   
 Grasp 
 Press to close 
   
 APB 
 16.2 
 APB 
   
 Press to close 
 Close 
   
 M½A 
 2.0 
 M½A 
   
 Close 
 Release 
   
 RL1 
 2.0 
 RL1 
   
 Release 
   
   
   
 167.5 
   
   
   
 4.  CLOSE COVER AND ASIDE 
BINDER 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 Reach to cover 
   
 R7B 
 9.3 
   
   
   
 Grasp edge 
   
 G1A 
 2.0 
   
   
   
 Close cover 
   
 M16B 
 15.8 
   
   
   
 Release 
   
 RL1 
 2.0 
   
   
   
 Reach to binder 
   
 R6B 
 8.6 
   
   
   
 Grasp 
   
 G1A 
 2.0 
   
   
   
 Regrasp 
   
 G2 
 5.6 
   
   
   
 Move to shelf 
   
 M30B 
 24.3 
   
   
   
 Release 
   
 RL1 
 2.0 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 71.6 
   
   
   
 ELEMENT SUMMARY 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 1. Get Binder—Open Cover 
   
   
 83.2 
   
   
   
 2. Locate Correct Page 
   
   
 255.5 
   
   
   
 3. Replace Page 
   
   
 167.5 
   
   
   
 4. Close Cover and Aside Binder 
   
   
 71.6 
   
   
   
   
   
 TOTAL 
 577.8 
   
   
   
Table 13.2  (continued)
 MTM-2 recognizes 11 classes of actions, which are referred to as categories. 
These 11 categories and their symbols are 
 GET 
 G 
 PUT 
 P 
 GET WEIGHT 
 GW 
 PUT WEIGHT 
 PW 
 REGRASP 
 R 
 APPLY PRESSURE 
 A 
 EYE ACTION 
 E 
 FOOT ACTION 
 F 
 STEP 
 S 
 BEND & ARISE 
 B 
 CRANK 
 C 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
517
 In using MTM-2, analysts estimate distances by classes; these distances affect 
the times of the GET (G) and PUT (P) categories. As in MTM-1, the analysts base 
the distance moved on the path traveled by the knuckle at the base of the index 
finger for hand motions, and the path traveled by the fingertips, if only the fingers 
move. The codes for the five tabulated distance classes correspond to the five levels 
of classification of motions, as discussed in Section 4.2 (see Table 13.3). 
 Three variables affect the time required to perform a GET: the case involved, 
the distance traveled, and the weight handled. GET can be considered a compos-
ite of the therbligs  reach, grasp,  and  release,  while PUT is a combination of the 
therbligs  move and  position . 
 The three cases of GET are A, B, and C. Case A implies a simple contact 
grasp, such as the fingers pushing an object across a desk. If an object, such as 
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
9,000
40
30
20
10
1 minute
Length of cycle– TMU
Percent error
MTM-1
MTM-2
 Figure 13.2   Percentage variation of MTM-1 when compared with MTM-2 at 
increasing cycle lengths. 
 Courtesy: MTM Association. 
 Table 13.3   Summary of MTM-2 Data 
 MTM-2 
 Range 
 Code 
 GA 
 GB 
 GC 
 PA 
 PB 
 PC 
 Up to 2 
 –2 
 3 
 7 
 14 
 3 
 10 
 21 
 Over 2–6 
 –6 
 6 
 10 
 19 
 6 
 15 
 26 
 Over 6–12 
 –12 
 9 
 14 
 23 
 11 
 19 
 30 
 Over 12–18 
 –18 
 13 
 18 
 27 
 15 
 24 
 36 
 Over 18 
 –32 
 17 
 23 
 32 
 20 
 30 
 41 
 MTM 
association  ®
 GW 1 - per 2 lb     
         PW 1 - per 10 lb       
 A 
 R 
 E 
 C 
 S 
 F 
 B 
 14 
 6 
 7 
 15 
 18 
 9 
 61 
 Source: MTM Association. 

518 
C H A P T E R  1 3
a pencil, is picked up by simply enclosing the fingers with a single movement, 
this is a B grasp. If the type of grasp is neither an A nor a B, then it is a case 
C GET. Analysts can resort to the decision diagram (see Figure 13.3) to assist in 
determining the correct case of GET. Tabular values in TMU of the three cases of 
GET, as applied to each of the five coded distances, appear in Table 13.3.  
 PUT involves moving an object to a destination with the hand or fingers. It 
starts with an object grasped and under control at the initial place and includes 
all transporting and correcting motions necessary to place the object at the des-
tination. PUT ends with the object still under control at the intended place. The 
same case, distance, and weight variables affect PUT as for GET. 
 Just as there are three cases of GET, there are three cases of PUT. The PUT 
case depends on the number of correcting motions required. A  correction is an 
unintentional stop, hesitation, or change in direction at the terminal point. 
 1.  PA: No correction . This is a smooth motion from start to finish and is the 
action employed in laying an object aside, or placing it against a stop or in 
an approximate location. This is the most common PUT. 
 2.  PB: One correction . This PUT occurs most often in positioning easy-to-
handle objects where a loose fit occurs. It is difficult to recognize. The 
decision diagram shown in Figure 13.4 is designed to identify this PUT by 
exception. 
 3.  PC: More than one correction . Multiple corrections, or several very short, 
unintentional motions, are usually obvious. These unintentional motions 
are generally caused by handling difficulty, close fits, nonsymmetry of 
engaging parts, or uncomfortable working positions.   
Are grasping
motions necessary
GA
Enough to close hand
or fingers with one
motion
GC
GB
No
No
Yes
Yes
 Figure 13.3   Algorithm for determining 
case of GET. 
 Courtesy: MTM Association. 
Continously
smooth motion
Obvious
correcting
motions
PB
PA
Yes
No
PC
Yes
No
 Figure 13.4   Algorithm 
for determining case 
of PUT. 
 Courtesy: MTM 
Association. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
519
 Analysts identify cases of PUT by the decision model shown in Figure 13.4. 
When in doubt, analysts assign the higher class. If an engagement of parts fol-
lows a correction, and if the engagement distance exceeds 1 in (2.5 cm), an ad-
ditional PUT is used. The tabular values for the three cases of PUT as applied to 
the five coded distances (the same as for GET) are given in Table 13.3. 
 A final technicality involving PUTs is that a PUT can be accomplished in 
one of two ways: insertion or alignment. An insertion involves placing one ob-
ject into another, such as a shaft into a sleeve. With an insertion, the terminal 
point for a correction is the point of insertion. An alignment involves orienting a 
part on a surface, such as bringing a ruler up to a line. Table 13.4 may be helpful 
in assisting the analyst in better identifying the appropriate case. 
 Weight in MTM-2 is determined similarly to MTM-1. The time value ad-
dition for GET WEIGHT (GW) is 1 TMU per 2 lb (1 kg). Thus, if a load of 
12 lb (6 kg) is handled by both hands, the time addition due to weight would 
be 3 TMU, since the effective weight per hand would be 6 lb (3 kg). For PUT 
WEIGHT (PW), additions are 1 TMU per 10 lb (5 kg) of effective weight, up to 
a maximum of 40 lb (20 kg). Weights less than 4 lb (2 kg) are not considered. 
 The category REGRASP (R) is also similar to MTM-1. Here, however, 
a time of 6 TMU is assigned. The authors of MTM-2 point out that for a 
REGRASP to be in effect, the hand must retain control. 
 APPLY PRESSURE (A) has a time of 14 TMU. The authors point out that 
this category can be applied by any member of the body and that the maximum 
permissible movement for an apply pressure is ¼   in (6.4 mm). 
 EYE ACTION (E) is allowed under either of the following cases: 
 1.  The eyes must move to see various aspects of the operation involving more 
than one specific section of the work area. This eye movement is defined 
as moving beyond a circle of 4-in (10-cm) diameter at a typical viewing 
distance of 16 in (40 cm). Note that this is equivalent to the primary visual 
field defined in Chapter 4. 
 2.  The eyes must concentrate on an object to recognize a distinguishable 
characteristic.  
 The estimated value of EYE ACTION is 7 TMU. The value is only allowed 
when EYE ACTION is independent of hand or body motions. 
 CRANK (C) occurs when the hands or fingers move an object in a circular 
path of more than one-half revolution. For less than one-half revolution, a PUT 
is used instead. Under MTM-2, the category CRANK has only two variables: the 
 Table 13.4   Comparison of Insertion and Alignment PUTs [in (mm)] 
   
 PA 
 PB 
 PC 
 Insertion 
 Clearance  0.4 in (10.2 mm)  Clearance  0.4 in (10.2 mm) 
 Tight fit 
 Alignment 
 Tolerance  0.25 in (6.3 mm)  0.0625 in (1.6 mm)  Tolerance  Tolerance  0.0625 in (1.6 mm) 
   
   
  0.25 in (6.3 mm) 
   

520 
C H A P T E R  1 3
number of revolutions and the weight or resistance. A time of 15 TMU is allot-
ted for each complete revolution. Where weight or resistance is significant, PUT 
WEIGHT is applied to each revolution. 
 FOOT (F) movements are 9 TMU, and STEP (S) movements are 18 TMU. 
The time for STEP movement is based on a 34-in (85-cm) pace. The decision 
diagram (see Figure 13.5) can be helpful in ascertaining whether a given move-
ment is a STEP or a FOOT movement. 
 The category BEND & ARISE (B) occurs when the body changes its verti-
cal position. Typical movements characteristic of BEND & ARISE include sit-
ting down, standing up, and kneeling. A time value of 61 TMU is assigned to 
this category. However, when an operator kneels on both knees, the movement 
should be classed as 2 B. Table 13.3 summarizes the applicable MTM-2 values. 
 There are several special situations of which the analyst should be aware in 
performing a correct MTM-2 analysis. Motions performed with both hands simul-
taneously cannot always be performed in the same time as motions performed by 
one hand only. Figure 13.6 reflects motion patterns for which the time required for 
simultaneous motions is the same as that required for easy motions performed by 
one hand. In these instances, an open rectangle appears. An X in the rectangle indi-
cates that, with practice, simultaneous motions can be made. A darkened rectangle 
indicates that it is difficult, even with practice, to perform the motions simultane-
ously. Figure 13.7 shows how much additional time these difficult simultaneous 
Motion
GET
Get
Case
GA
GB
GC
PA
PB
PC
PC
PA
GC
GB
GA
PB
O*W
Put
PUT
Easy
Practice
Difficult
*O = Outside; W = Within normal vision
 Figure 13.6   Difficulty of 
simultaneous motions. 
 Courtesy: MTM 
Association. 
Leg movement
is greater
than 12"
Purpose of movement
is to displace the
trunk
F
S
Yes
No
Yes
No
 Figure 13.5   
Algorithm for differen-
tiating between STEP 
(S) and FOOT 
motion (F). 
 Courtesy: MTM 
Association. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
521
motions require. An example of the application of this  principle of simultaneous 
motions  is marked with   1  in Figure 13.8. A PC2 is added to the overall time be-
cause of two simultaneous PC motions in the right and left hands.  
 A second situation involves the  principle of limiting motions:  for two dif-
ferent motions performed simultaneously by the left and right hands, the longer 
time predominates. This is shown as a   2  in Figure 13.8, with the shorter element 
circled out (GB18). A GC12 is 23 TMUs, as compared to 18 TMUs for a GB18. 
 If one hand performs two motions simultaneously, the longer time again pre-
dominates, because of the  principle of combined motions . This would apply for 
case   3  ; a GB18 is longer than an F. (A curve connects the two lines to indicate 
a combined motion.) 
 A similar situation appears for case   4 , but it is more complicated because 
of the combined motion in the left hand. In this case, R is already assumed to 
be part of any C-type motion and is thus crossed out. Therefore, the overall time 
for the first two lines is 24 TMU, because of the right hand’s GB18 (18 TMU) 
and R (6 TMU) rather than GC12 (23 TMU). However, if the R is a completely 
separate motion, then it would be counted. As an example, Figure 13.9 shows a 
complete MTM-2 analysis for a flashlight assembly. 
 MTM-3 
 The third level of methods–time measurement is MTM-3. This level was devel-
oped to supplement MTM-1 and MTM-2. MTM-3 is helpful in work situations 
where an interest in saving time at the expense of some accuracy makes it the 
best alternative. The accuracy of MTM-3 is within 65 percent, with a 95 per-
cent confidence level, when compared to MTM-1 analysis for cycles of approxi-
mately 4 minutes. It has been estimated that MTM-3 can be applied in about 
GA
GB
GC
PA
PB
PC
GC2
GC2
PC2
GC
PB2*
PC2
PB
PC2
PC
PA
GB
GA
*IF PB 
is performed simultaneously with PB
 
, an addition of PB2 is made only if the actions
are outside the normal area of vision.
 Figure 13.7   MTM-2 simultaneous 
hand motion allowances. 

522 
C H A P T E R  1 3
 Figure 13.8   Examples of MTM-2 conventions. 
one-seventh the time of MTM-1. However, MTM-3 cannot be used for opera-
tions that require either eye focus or eye travel time, as the data do not consider 
those motions.  
 The MTM-3 system consists of only four categories of manual motions: 
 1.  Handle (H). A motion sequence with the purpose of getting control of an 
object with the hand or fingers and placing the object in a new location. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
523
 2.  Transport (T). A motion with the purpose of moving an object to a new 
location with the hand or fingers. 
 3.  Step and Foot motions (SF). These are the same as defined in MTM-2. 
 4.  Bend and Arise (B). These, too, are the same as defined in MTM-2. 
 5.  Case A or B is determined by whether or not there is a correcting motion.   
 Figure 13.9   MTM-2 analysis of flashlight assembly. 

524 
C H A P T E R  1 3
 Table 13.5 presents MTM-3 data. Ten time standards, ranging from 7 to 
61 TMU, form the basis for the development of any standard, subject to the limi-
tations noted earlier. 
 MTM-V 
 MTM-V was developed by Svenska MTM Gruppen, the Swedish MTM Asso-
ciation, for use in metal cutting operations. It is of particular use with short runs 
in machine shops. MTM-V provides for work elements involved in (1) bring-
ing the work to the jig, fixture, or chuck, removing the work from the machine, 
and placing it aside; (2) operating the machine; (3) checking the work to ensure 
quality of output; and (4) cleaning the nip point area of the machine, to maintain 
facility output and product quality. MTM-V does not cover process time involv-
ing feeds and speeds. 
 Analysts use this system to establish setup times for all typical machine 
tools. Therefore, standard times for such elements as setting up and dismounting 
fixtures, jigs, stops, cutting tools, and indicators can be calculated. All manual 
cycle times of 24 min (40,000 TMU) or more established by MTM-V are within 
5 percent of that produced by MTM-1 at the 95 percent confidence level. 
MTM-V is about 23 times faster than MTM-1. 
 MTM-C 
 MTM-C, which is widely used in the banking and insurance industries, is a two-
level standard data system used to establish time standards for clerical-related 
work tasks, such as filing, data entry, and keyboarding. Both levels of MTM-C 
are traceable to MTM-1 data. 
 The system provides three distinct ranges for reach and move (Get Place). 
A six-place numeric coding system (similar to MTM-V) provides a detailed 
description of the operation being studied. 
 MTM-C develops standards in the same way as the other MTM systems. 
Analysts can combine it with existing proven standard data or standard data 
developed from other sources or techniques. MTM-C is available in manual or 
automated forms. For the latter, an MTM-C data set can be incorporated into 
MTM-LINK. 
 The nine level 1 categories used in MTM-C, shown in Table 13.6, are as follows:  
 1.  Get Place . This category includes the basic work divisions required to get 
an object, move it aside without relinquishing control, and release it. For 
 Table 13.5   Summary of MTM-3 Data 
   
   
 Handle 
 Transport 
 Inches 
 Code 
 HA 
 HB 
 TA 
 TB 
 6 
 6 
 18 
 34 
 7 
 21 
 6 
 32 
 34 
 48 
 16 
 29 
   
   
 SF 18 
 B 61 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
525
example, the coding and description of an element in this category might 
be 112210—Get small stack with medium move.   
 2.  Open/Close . Characteristic of this category are such operations as opening 
or closing books, doors, drawers, binder rings, zippered objects, envelopes, 
and files. An example of the coding for a representative operation would be 
212100—Open hinge cover, medium. 
 3.  Fasten/Unfasten . This category includes attaching and removing clips, 
clamps, bands, and staples, all used to join materials. A representative coding 
for this work element would be 312130—Fasten with a large paper clip.  
 4.  Organize File . This category includes the basic elements involved with 
filing activities and some of the organizational handling of work directly or 
indirectly related to filing. An example of the coding and description of this 
category is 410400—Arrange a pile into a stack. 
 5.  Read/Write . This category includes a prose reading speed of 330 words per 
minute. Writing time values have been developed for letters, numerals, and 
symbols. Values are a weighted average based on the frequency of occur-
rence of each type of character in normal prose. An example of coding and 
a representative description would be 510600—Read average prose, per 
word. 
 6.  Keyboarding . This category includes all the actions related to data entry 
and the manual keyboarding functions. An example of the coding and the 
description in this category is 613530—Insert single object in typewriter, 
long distance. 
 7.  Handling . This category includes all the clerical activities not covered in 
the other categories. An example of the coding and the description of an 
element in this category might be 760600—Adhere envelope flap. 
 8.  Walk Body Motions . This category includes walking values based on pace. 
Body motions include sitting, standing, and horizontal and vertical body 
movements while in a chair. An example of the coding and description of 
an element in this category is 860002—Move while in swivel chair. 
 9.  Machines . The machine data are representative of a group of similar types 
of equipment. Data for keyboards are typical examples of this category. 
 Table 13.6   MTM-C Level-1 Elements 
 Level 1 Elements 
 Symbol 
 Get Place 
 11 X X X X 
 Open Close 
 21 X X X X 
 Fasten Unfasten 
 31 X X X X 
 Organize File 
 4 X X X X X 
 Read Write 
 5 X X X X X 
 Keyboarding 
 6 X X X X X 
 Handling 
 7 X X X X X 
 Walk Body Motions 
 8 X X X X X 
 Machines 
 9 X X X X X 

526 
C H A P T E R  1 3
 Level 2 data are directly traceable to level 1 and to MTM-1. Level 2 elements 
and their symbols are shown in Table 13.7. The level 2 elements are as follows:  
 1.  Get/Place/Aside . These elements are applied collectively or separately. The 
coding and element example of this category, with collective basic divi-
sions, would be G5PA2—Get a pencil for use and set it aside for later. 
 2.  Open/Close . Included in these data is getting the object being opened or 
closed. These data are applied individually or in combination, as follows: 
C65—Close string, tie envelope; or OC4—Open and close binder rings. 
 3.  Fasten/Unfasten . For fasten (F), the element is made up of getting the ob-
jects and fastening them. For unfasten (U), the element includes getting the 
objects and unfastening them. 
 4.  Identify . The data for this element include eye travel time values, along 
with eye focuses required to identify (I) single or multiple words and sets 
of numbers. 
 5.  Locate File . The data for this element cover typical filing activities. The 
first position of the coding is L, for locate. The second position is also a 
letter that corresponds to the filing activity, such as LI (insert), LR 
(remove), LT (tilt and replace). 
 6.  Read/Write . The reading data include the reading of words and single 
numbers and/or characters. Read also contains detailed Read-and-Compare, 
as well as Read-and-Transcribe data. The writing data include common 
clerical items, such as address, date, initials, and names. The coding 
and element description for two representative elements would be 
RW20—Read 20 words and RCN25—Read and compare 25 numbers. 
 7.  Handling . This element includes the actual paper handling activities from 
level 1: organize data and handling data. In the majority of elements, 
 Table 13.7   MTM-C Level 2 Elements 
 Level 2 Elements 
 Symbol 
 Aside 
 A 
 Body Motions 
 B 
 Close 
 C 
 Fasten 
 F 
 Get 
 G 
 Handling 
 H 
 Identify 
 I 
 Locate File 
 L 
 Open 
 O 
 Place 
 P 
 Read 
 R 
 Typing 
 T 
 Unfasten 
 U 
 Write 
 W 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
527
objects have been obtained with a Get, as well as the action handling 
elements. In the coding for handling elements, H is the first coding posi-
tion. The second position is the initial letter of the element activity. An 
example of coding for folding a sheet with two folds would be HF12.   
 8.  Body Motions . These elements include walking, sitting and standing, 
bending, and arising, and the horizontal body motions alone or in a chair. 
 9.  Keyboarding . These elements include three major sections of data: 
Handling, Keystroke, and Correction. An example of the coding and 
description is TKE17E—Type one 7-in (17.5-cm) line. 
 MTM-C level 1 can be calculated faster than MTM-2. Also, the speed of 
MTM-C level 2 is faster than MTM-3. Compare the standards for replacing 
a page in a three-ring binder, developed first using MTM-1 (see Table 13.2), 
then using MTM-C level 1 (see Table 13.8), and finally using MTM-C level 2 
(see Table 13.9). Note how closely the three standards agree (see Table 13.10). 
 MTM-M 
 MTM-M is a predetermined time system for evaluating operator work using a 
microscope. In the development of MTM-M, basic times from MTM-1 were not 
used, although the beginning and endpoint definitions of motion elements were 
compatible with MTM-1. The data used were original data developed through 
the efforts of the United States/Canada MTM Association. In general, MTM-M 
is a higher-level system, similar to MTM-2. 
 This system has four major tables and one subtable. Analysts must consider 
four variables when selecting the appropriate data: (1) type of tool, (2) condition 
of tool, (3) terminating characteristic of the motion, and (4) distance/tolerance 
ratio. Additional factors, other than the direction of movement and these four 
variables, that have an impact on motion performance time include 
 1.  Tool load state, empty or loaded 
 2.  Microscope power 
 3.  Distance moved 
 4.  Positioning tolerance 
 5.  Purpose of the motion, as determined by the manipulations involved at the 
motion termination (for example, workers may use tweezers to contact 
grasp an object, or to pick up an object) 
 6.  Simultaneous motions  
 With the growing amount of microminiature manufacturing, the application 
of fundamental data similar to MTM-M will expand. Such data allow analysts 
to establish equitable standards that would be difficult to establish by stopwatch 
procedures. Establishing reliable elemental standards by direct observation is 
impossible. It is only possible to establish sound elemental and operation stan-
dards for microscope work by using standard data similar to MTM-M or by 
micromotion procedures. (see Section 4.3).   

528 
C H A P T E R  1 3
 Table 13.8   MTM-C Operation Analysis (Level 1) 
   
 MTM-C Operation Analysis 
 Validation 
   
 MTM-C Level 1 
 Sheet of 
 MTM Association 
for Standards 
and Research 
 Replace page in 3-ring binder 
   
 DEPARTMENT:  
 ANALYST:  
   
   DATE:  
                           Clerical
                   CNR
   11/77
 No. Description 
 Reference 
 Element
(TMU) 
 Occurrence
per Cycle  
 TMU per
Cycle 
 1.   OPEN BINDER 
   
   
   
   
 Get binder from shelf 
 113 520 
 21 
 1 
 21 
 Aside to desk 
 123 002 
 22 
 1 
 22 
 Get cover 
 112 520 
 14 
 1 
 14 
 Open cover 
 212 100 
 15 
 1 
 15 
 2.   LOCATE CORRECT PAGE 
   
   
   
   
 Read on first page 
 510 000 
 7 
 2 
 14 
 Locate approximate 
 451 120 
 16 
 3 
 48 
 Identify page number 
 440 630 
 22 
 3 
 66 
 Locate correct page 
 450 130 
 18 
 4 
 72 
 Identify pages 
 440 630 
 22 
 3 
 66 
 3.   REPLACE PAGES 
   
   
   
   
 Get binder rings 
 112 520 
 14 
 1 
 14 
 Open rings 
 210 400 
 21 
 1 
 21 
 Get old sheet 
 111 100 
 10 
 1 
 10 
 Aside sheet to basket 
 123 002 
 22 
 1 
 22 
 Get new sheet 
 111 100 
 10 
 1 
 10 
 Insert sheet in binder 
 462 104 
 64 
 1 
 64 
 Get rings 
 112 520 
 14 
 1 
 14 
 Close rings 
 222 400 
 21 
 1 
 21 
 4.   CLOSE COVER AND ASIDE BINDER 
   
   
   
   
 Get cover 
 111 520 
 8 
 1 
 8 
 Close cover 
 222 100 
 13 
 1 
 13 
 Get binder 
 112 520 
 14 
 1 
 14 
 Aside binder to shelf 
 123 002 
 22 
 1 
 22 
   
   
 TOTAL TMU PER CYCLE 
 571 
   
   
 ALLOWANCES _______ % 
   
   
   STANDARD HOURS PER _______ UNIT 
   
   
   
 UNITS PER HOUR 
   
 OTHER SPECIALIZED MTM SYSTEMS 
 Three other specialized MTM systems are MTM-TE, MTM-MEK, and 
MTM-UAS. The first of these, MTM-TE, was developed for electronic tests. 
This system has two levels of data that were developed from MTM-1 for basic 
test application. Level 1 includes the elements  get, move, body motions, identify, 
adjust, and miscellaneous data. Level 2 includes  get and  place, read and  identify, 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
529
 Table 13.10   Comparison of MTM-1, MTM-C (1), and MTM-C (2) 
 Techniques 
 Number of Elements 
 Standard 
 MTM-1 
 57 
 577.8 
 MTM-C level 1 
 21 
 577 
 MTM-C level 2 
 11 
 575 
 Table 13.9   MTM-C Operation Analysis (Level 2) 
   
 MTM-C Operation Analysis 
 Validation 
 MTM-C Level 2 
 Sheet of 
 MTM Association 
for Standards
and Research 
 Replace page in 3-ring binder 
   
 DEPARTMENT:  
 ANALYST:  
     DATE:  
                             Clerical
                     CNR
   
    2/77
 No. Description 
 Reference 
 Element 
(TMU) 
 Occurrence 
per Cycle 
 TMU per 
Cycle 
 Get and aside binder 
 G5A2 
 29 
 1 
 29 
 Open cover 
 O1 
 29 
 1 
 29 
 Read first page 
 RN2 
 14 
 1 
 14 
 Locate pages 
 LC12 
 129 
 1 
 129 
 Identify pages 
 130 
 22 
 6 
 132 
 Open rings 
 O4 
 35 
 1 
 35 
 Remove sheet 
 G1A2 
 32 
 1 
 32 
 New sheet on rings 
 HI14 
 84 
 1 
 84 
 Close rings 
 C4 
 35 
 1 
 35 
 Close cover 
 C1 
 27 
 1 
 27 
 Aside binder 
 G5A2 
 29 
 1 
 29 
   
     TOTAL TMU PER CYCLE       575 
adjust, body motions,  and  writing . A third level of data is also available in the 
form of synthesized level 1 data. MTM-TE data do not cover “trouble-shoot” 
relative to electronic test operations. They do, however, provide guidelines for 
investigations and recommendations for work measurement for this activity.    
 The second specialized system, MTM-MEK, was designed to measure 
one-of-a-kind and small-lot production. This two-level system developed from 
MTM-1 can analyze all manual activities, as long as the following requirements 
are met: 
 1.  The operation is not highly repetitive or organized, although it may contain 
similar elements that require different methods. The method used to per-
form a given operation typically varies from cycle to cycle. 
 2.  The workplace, tools, and equipment used are universal in character. 
 3.  The task is complex and necessitates employee training; yet the lack of a 
specific method requires a high degree of versatility by the operator. 

530 
C H A P T E R  1 3
 The objectives of MTM-MEK are to 
 1.  Provide accurate measurement of an activity connected with one-of-a-kind 
or small-lot production 
 2.  Provide an easily definable description of unorganized work, thus generally 
identifying a procedure 
 3.  Provide fast application 
 4.  Provide accuracy relative to MTM-1 
 5.  Require minimum training and application practice  
 The data in MTM-MEK consist of 51 time values in the following eight 
categories: get and place, handle tool, place, operate, motion cycles, fasten or 
loosen, body motions, and visual control. In addition, there are standard data for 
a wide range of assembly tasks in one-of-a-kind and small-lot production. These 
data consist of 290 time values in the following categories: fasten, clamp and 
unclamp, clean and/or apply lubricant/adhesive, assemble standard parts, inspect 
and measure, mark and transport. 
 The third specialized system, MTM-UAS, is a third-level system developed 
to provide a process description, as well as to determine the standard times in 
any activity related to batch production. MTM-UAS is applicable to various ac-
tivities, as long as the following characteristics of batch production are present: 
 1.  Similar tasks 
 2.  Workplace specifically designed for the task 
 3.  Good levels of work organization 
 4.  Detailed instructions 
 5.  Well-trained operators 
 The MTM-UAS analyzing system consists of 77 time values in seven of the 
eight categories used in MTM-MEK. These are get and place, place, handle tool, 
operate, motion cycles, body motions, and visual control. MTM-UAS is about 
eight times faster than MTM-1. At cycle times of 4.6 min or more, the standard 
produced by MTM-UAS is within 5 percent of that produced by MTM-1, with 
a 95 percent confidence level. 
 As part of its family of PTS systems, MTM Association has also developed two 
systems that link directly to its software package MTM-LINK. 4M is a second-level 
system used to convey MTM-1 level information to the MTM-LINK specifically 
suited for long-run production. Similarly, MTM-B represents a third generation of 
synthesized data, based on the MTM-UAS system. MTM-B is offered as a data 
module of the MTM-LINK software system and is best suited for use where the 
primary focus is speed of application. Also, more recently with increasing interest 
in health care and improving efficiency and operations therein, MTM-HC has been 
developed as a standard database devoted specifically to health-care activities.  
 MTM SYSTEMS COMPARISON 
 Figure 13.10 illustrates the total absolute accuracy, at a 90 percent confidence 
level, of all the MTM systems. Table 13.11 compares the level of detail, such as 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
531
100
1
2
3
4
5
6 7 8 9 1
2
3
4
5
6 7 8 9 1
2
3
4
5
6 7 8 9 1
2
3
4
5
6 7 8 9 1
2
3
Nonrepetitive manual cycle TMU (NRT)
 Percent accuracy
4
5
6 7 8 9 1
2
3
4
5
6 7 8 9
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
100,000
10,000
1,000
100
This graph is used as a 
guideline only since applicator
proficiency varies considerably.
MTM-1
MTM-V
MTM-3
MTM-2
MTM-M
MTM-C2
4M DATA
MTM-TE2
MTM-TE1
MTM-C1
MEK
UAS
 Figure 13.10   Total absolute accuracy at 90 percent confidence level of the various MTM systems. 

532 
C H A P T E R  1 3
the number of therbligs utilized, the time to analyze a job (expressed as a multiple 
of the job cycle time), and the accuracy, for the three basic MTM systems. Over-
all, MTM-2 may be a good compromise between the excessive time required for 
MTM-1 and the poor accuracy of MTM-3. A 6-min job will take approximately 
600 min to analyze with MTM-2 and will be off by no more than 0.24 min.    
 13.2  MAYNARD OPERATION SEQUENCE 
TECHNIQUE (MOST) 
  An outgrowth of MTM, called Maynard Operation Sequence Technique (MOST), 
is a simplified system developed by Zandin (1980) and originally applied at Saab-
Scania in Sweden in 1967. With MOST, analysts can establish standards at least 
five times faster than with MTM-1, with little if any sacrifice in accuracy. 
 As with MTM, there are three levels in the MOST system. At the highest 
level, MaxiMOST is used to analyze long, infrequent operations. Such opera-
tions may range from 2 min to several hours in length, occur less than 150 times 
per week, and tend to have high variability. Thus, MaxiMOST is very quick but 
less accurate. At the lowest level, MiniMOST is used for very short and very 
frequent operations. Such operations are less than 1.6 min in length, are repeated 
more than 1500 times a week, and have little variability. Consequently, the anal-
ysis is very detailed and precise but quite time-consuming. The intermediate 
level of accuracy is covered by BasicMOST, which covers operations between 
the two ranges just described. The typical operation best suited for BasicMOST 
would be 0.5 to 3 min in length. 
 MOST identifies three basic sequence models: general move, controlled 
move, and tool and equipment use. The general move sequence identifies the 
spatial free movement of an object through the air; the controlled move sequence 
describes the movement of an object when it either remains in contact with a 
surface or remains attached to another object during the movement. The tool 
and equipment use sequence is aimed at the use of common hand tools and other 
pieces of equipment. 
 To identify the exact way a general move is performed, analysts consider 
four subactivities: action distance (A), which is primarily horizontal movement 
 Table 13.11   Comparison of MTM-1, MTM-2, and MTM-3 
 Therbligs utilized 
 MTM-1 
 MTM-2 
 MTM-3 
   
 Release 
   
   
   
 Reach 
 Get 
   
   
 Grasp 
   
 Handle 
   
 Move 
 Put 
   
   
 Position 
   
   
 Time to analyze job 
   250 3 cycle time 
 100 3 cycle time 
    35 3 cycle time 
 Relative speed 
       1 
    2.5 
   7 
 Time/accuracy - 100 TMU 
     15 min/6 21% 
     6 min/6 40% 
      2 min/6 70% 
 Time/accuracy - 10,000 TMU 
 1500 min/6 2.1% 
 600 min/6 4% 
 200 min/6 7% 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
533
distance; body motion (B), which is mainly vertical motion; gain control (G); and 
placement (P). These subactivities are grouped into three phases: get, put, and re-
turn (see Figure 13.11).  Get  means reaching some distance with hands, perhaps 
with body motion or steps, for an object and gaining manual control of the object. 
It uses three of the subactivities, A, B, and G, to define this phase of the general 
move.  Put  is moving the object some distance to new location (A), perhaps with 
body motion (B), and placing the object at a specified location (P).  Return means 
walking back some distance to the workstation (A). This is not meant for the 
hands, and typically if the operator remains at the workstation, there is no return.  
 Each subactivity is further defined by time-related index values correspond-
ing to the relative difficulty of the subactivity. MOST starts with the values 0, 1, 
3, 6, 10, and 16, but can proceed to higher values for very specific subactivities, 
such as long walking distances or complicated or long controlled moves. The 
specific index values with their descriptions for the general move are shown in 
both Figures 13.12 and 13.13. These index values, when scaled by a factor of 10, 
yield the appropriate time values of the subactivities in TMUs. 
 For example, to get a washer 5 in (12.5 cm) away, place on a bolt located 5 in 
away, and return to the original position would yield A 1 B 0 G 1 A 1 B 0 P 1 A 1 with a total 
time of (1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1) 3 10 5 50 TMU. The get is defined by A 1 5 
reach to washer with 5-in travel, B 0 5 no body motion, G 1 5 grasp washer; the put 
is defined by A 1 5 place washer with 5-in travel, B 0 5 no body motion, P 1 5 place 
washer with a loose fit. The final A 1 5 return to original position with 5-in travel. 
 About 50 percent of manual work occurs as general moves. A typical gen-
eral move may include the parameters of walking to a location, bending to pick 
up an object, reaching and gaining control of the object, arising after bending, 
and placing the object. More specifically, consider walking three steps, bend-
ing down to pick up a bolt from the floor, arising, walking the three steps back, 
and placing the bolt in a bolthole. The analysis yields A 6 B 6 G 1 A 6 B 0 P 3 A 0  with a 
total time of (6 1 6 1 1 1 6 1 3 1 0) 3 10 5 220 TMU. The get is defined by 
A 6 5 walk three steps to object, B 6 5 bend and arise, G 1 5 gain control of light 
A
A B P
*
A B P
A B G
Return
Put aside
Use
Put in place
Get
A
A  B  P
A  B  G
Return
Put
Get
A
M  X  I
A  B  G
Return
Move/Actuate
Get
General Move
Controlled Move
Tool/Equipment Use
 Figure 13.11   BasicMOST 
activities and subactivities. 

534 
C H A P T E R  1 3
object; the put is defined by A 6 5 walk three steps to place object, B 0 5 no body 
motion, P 3 5 place and adjust object, and A 0 5 no return.  
 The controlled move sequence, which covers such manual operations as 
cranking, pulling a starting lever, turning a steering wheel, or engaging a start-
ing switch, accounts for approximately one-third of all work sequences. In con-
trolled move sequences, the following subactivities are used: the previously 
defined action distance (A), body motion (B), gain control (G); and the new 
subactivities: move controlled (M), in which the path of the object is controlled; 
process time (X), controlled not by manual actions but by mechanical devices; 
alignment (I), the final conclusion of the controlled move process to achieve 
alignment of two objects. These subactivities are also grouped into three phases: 
get, move/actuate, and return. As for the general move, get involves reaching 
some distance with the hands for an object (A), perhaps with body motion or 
steps (B), and then gaining manual control of the object (G). The move is over 
a controlled path, perhaps with body motion or steps (M), with a time allotment 
for the control process to occur or a device be actuated (X), and final alignment 
of the object at end of the process time (I). Finally, similar to the general move, 
there is a return to the workplace if needed (A). Again there are the basic 0, 1, 
3, 6, 10, and 16 index values with larger ones allocated for longer process times. 
The subactivities are shown in Figure 13.14 and with the complete tabulation 
shown in Figure 13.13. 
 As an example of a controlled move, engaging a feed lever on a milling 
machine yields A 1 B 0 G 1 M 1 X 10 I 0 A 0  with a total time of (1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 10 1 
0 1 0) 3 10 5130 TMU. The get subactivity is defined by A 1 5 reach to lever 
(within reach), B 0 5 no body motion, and G 1 5 gain control of light lever. The 
 Figure 13.12   General move subactivities. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
535
move/actuate subactivity is defined by M 1 5 move lever (, 12 in) to engage the 
machine, with an X 10 5 process time of ~3.5 s, and I 0 5 no precise alignment. 
The final A 0 5 no return to workplace; i.e., all the activity occurred at the same 
workstation. In a second, more complicated example, a press operator moves a 
4 3 8 ft sheet of thin-gauge steel a distance of 14 in. The sheet is aligned to two 
 Figure 13.13   BasicMOST ® Data Card. 

536 
C H A P T E R  1 3
Figure 13.13  (continued)

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
537
Figure 13.13  (continued)

538 
C H A P T E R  1 3
stops on opposite ends of the sheet (not necessary to reposition hands during 
alignment). The operator takes one step back to gain control of the sheet. The 
analysis yields A 3 B 0 G 3 M 3 X 0 I 6 A 0  with a time of (3 1 0 1 3 1 3 1 0 1 6 1 0) 3 
10 5 150 TMU. The get subactivity is defined by A 3 5 a step back to handle the 
oversize sheet, B 0 5 no vertical body motion, and G 3 5 gain control of bulky 
object. The move/actuate subactivity is defined by M 3 5 move sheet more than 
12 in, with X 0 5 zero process time, and I 6 5 a two-point alignment, the points 
separate by more than 4 in. The final A 0 5 no return to workplace; i.e., all the 
activity occurred at the same workstation.  
 The third and final activity sequence in BasicMOST is tool and equipment 
use. Cutting, surface treating, gaging, fastening, recording with tools, keyboard-
ing, paper handling, and even thinking are all covered with this activity sequence, 
which covers one-sixth of all work sequences. The tool and equipment use activity 
sequence embraces a combination of general move and controlled move activities 
with five phases of subactivities: (1) get tool, (2) put tool in place for use, (3) use 
the tool, (4) put the tool aside, and (5) return to workplace (if needed). Get tool 
means reaching some distance with the hands for the tool, perhaps with body mo-
tion or steps, and gaining control of the tool, with the same A, B, and G subactivi-
ties as for the general or controlled move. Put tool in place for use includes moving 
the tool to where it will be used (A), perhaps with body motion or steps (B), and a 
final positioning for use (P). Use of the tool or the specific piece of equipment has 
a variety of common actions: F 5 fasten, i.e., assemble with fingers or tool; L 5 
loosen, i.e., disassemble with fingers or tool, opposite of F; C 5 cut, separate, or 
divide with a sharp tool; S 5 surface treat, i.e., apply or remove material from the 
surface of an object; M 5 measure, i.e., compare the physical characteristics of 
 Figure 13.14   Controlled move subactivities. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
539
object with a standard; R 5 record information with pen or pencil; T 5 think, i.e., 
eye actions or mental activity to obtain information or to inspect an object; W 5 
keyboard or typewriter, i.e., use a mechanical or electronic data entry device; K 5 
keypad, i.e., use alphanumeric keypad such as on a PDA or telephone; and 
H 5 letter or paper handling, i.e., the performance of various paper filing and 
sorting operations. Put the tool aside (perhaps for later reuse) is similar to the put 
in a general move with subactivities A, B, and P. Finally, as for the general and 
controlled moves, there is a return to the workplace if needed (A). Again there are 
the basic 0, 1, 3, 6, 10, and 16 index values with larger ones for more complicated 
actions. The complete tabulation is shown in Table 13.13. 
 As an example of tool use, an operator picks up a knife from a bench two 
steps away, makes one cut across the top of a cardboard box, and puts the knife 
back on the bench. The analysis yields A 3 B 0 G 1 A 3 B 0 P 1 C 3 A 3 B 0 P 1 A 0 , with a total 
time of (3 1 0 1 1 1 3 1 0 1 1 1 3 1 3 1 0 1 1 1 0) 3 10 5150 TMU. The 
get phase is defined by A 3 5walk two steps, B 0 5 no vertical body motion, and 
G 1 5 gain control of light knife. The put phase consists of A 3 5 walk two steps 
back, B 0 5 no vertical body motion, and P 1 5 loose fit of knife on box. The tool 
use phase is C 3 5 slice once with knife. The put tool aside phase is defined by 
A 3 5 walk two steps back to bench, B 0 5 no vertical body motion, and P 1 5 lay 
knife on bench. The final A 0 5 no return; i.e., the operator remains at the bench. 
 Another example involves a testing operation, in which a technician picks up 
a meter lead, places it on a terminal, and reads a voltage off the meter scale. The 
lead is then placed aside. The analysis yields A 1 B 0 G 1 A 1 B 0 P 3 T 6 A 1 B 0 P 1 A 0  with a 
total time of (1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 3 1 6 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 0) 3 10 5140 TMU. 
The get phase is defined by A 1 5 reaches for lead (within reach), B 0 5 no 
vertical body motion, and G 1 5 gain control of light lead. The put phase consists 
of A 1 5 moves hand with lead within reach, B 0 5 no vertical body motion, and 
P 3 5 places lead with slight adjustment on terminal. The tool use phase is T 6 5 
read voltage value on scale. The put tool aside phase is defined by A 1 5 moves 
lead back within reach, B 0 5 no vertical body motion, and P 1 5 sets lead back 
on bench. The final A 0 5 no return; i.e., the operator remains at the bench. 
 The analysis is performed on the BasicMOST form (see Figure 13.15). Basic 
information such as job code and date   1   is entered at the top right-hand corner. The 
area of work   2  is entered below with information on the activity or the job and the 
conditions encountered   3  . The job is broken down into appropriate activities which 
are numbered sequentially and entered in order in the left side of the form   4  . Ap-
propriate activity sequences—general move, controlled move, or tool and equipment 
use—are selected on the right side of the form   5  identified with the correspond-
ing labels by the number. Next the appropriate index values are entered next to the 
subactivity letters. Finally, the index values are multiplied by 10 (to obtain TMU), 
entered in the rightmost column and summated in the bottom right-hand corner   6  .  
 There are some general rules to be followed. Each activity sequence is fixed; 
i.e., no letter may be added or omitted. Index values are fixed as given; i.e., there 
is no interpolation; round up if necessary. Finally, there may be some adjust-
ments for the amount of simultaneous activity (similar to MTM). In a high-level 

540 
C H A P T E R  1 3
 Figure 13.15   BasicMOST calculation form. 
interaction with both hands working simultaneously, only the highest value from the 
two hands is used (60 TMU), and the other hand and TMU value are circled out: 
 RH 
 A 1 B 0 G 1 
 A 1 B 0 P 3 
 A 0 
 60 
 LH 
 A 1 B 0 G 1 
 A 1 B 0 P 3 
 A 0 
 60 
 In a low-level interaction with both hands working separately, the values from 
both hands are added to yield 120 TMU: 
 RH 
 A 1 B 0 G 1 
 A 1 B 0 P 3 
 A 0 
 60 
 LH 
 A 1 B 0 G 1 
 A 1 B 0 P 3 
 A 0 
 60 
 There can also be intermediate level of interaction with only certain phases 
occurring simultaneously, e.g., the GET phase below, which is circled out, yield-
ing a total of 100 TMU. 
 RH 
 A 1 B 0 G 1 
 A 1 B 0 P 3 
 A 0 
 60 
 LH 
 A 1 B 0 G 1 
 A 1 B 0 P 3 
 A 0 
 40 
 As a final complete example, the same flashlight assembly shown in 
Figure 13.9, using MTM-2 analysis, is analyzed using MOST in Figure 13.16.  

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
541
 Figure 13.16   MOST analysis of flashlight assembly. 

542 
C H A P T E R  1 3
 MOST is also available in a computerized version that permits the retrieval 
of activity sequences, subactivities, and the indexed parameters involved in de-
veloping a standard of performance for the method under study. It has been esti-
mated that the use of a computerized system should result in application speeds 
five to ten times faster than manual application speeds. Computer-developed 
standards are also more error-free, because the system does not accept an input 
that is not logical. An example of a general move sequence in Basic-MOST ® is 
shown in Figure 13.17.  
 13.3 PREDETERMINED TIME APPLICATION 
 STANDARD DATA DEVELOPMENT 
 One of the most important uses of predetermined time systems is the develop-
ment of standard data elements. With standard data, standard times for opera-
tions can be set much faster than by the laborious procedure of summarizing 
long columns of fundamental motion times. In addition, standard data usually 
reduce clerical errors, as less arithmetic is involved. 
 With sound standard data, it is economically feasible to establish standards 
on indirect work, such as maintenance, material handling, clerical and office, in-
spection, and similar expense operations. Also, with standard data, analysts can 
economically calculate operation times involving long cycles and consisting of 
many short-duration elements. For example, one company developed standard data 
applicable to radial drill operations in its tool room. Time study analysts developed 
standard data for the elements required to move the tool from one hole to the next 
and to present and back off the drill. They then combined these standard data ele-
ments into one multivariable chart, so that the data could be rapidly summarized. 
 Figure 13.17   Example of a general move sequence, get and move washer 5 in, in 
BasicMOST. 
 Figure from  BasicMOST ® . Used by permission of H. B. Maynard and Co., Inc., 
Pittsburgh, PA. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
543
 An example illustrating the flexibility of predetermined systems is the devel-
opment of a standard time for a clerical operation. This formula for sorting time 
slips includes the following elements: 
 1.  Pick up pack of departmental time slips and remove elastic band. 
 2.  Sort time slips into direct labor (incentive), indirect labor, and day work. 
 3.  Record the total number of time slips. 
 4.  Get pile of time slips, put elastic band around pack, and put aside. 
 5.  Get pile of time slips and bunch. 
 6.  Sort incentive time slips into “parts” time slips. 
 7.  Count piles of incentive “parts” time slips. 
 8.  Record the number of “parts” time slips and the number of incentive time 
slips. 
 9.  Sort “parts” time slips into numerical sequence. 
 10.  Bunch piles of numerical time slips and place in one pile on desk.  
 Methods analysts break each element down into the fundamental motions. 
Once the basic values are assigned and the variables are determined, the resulting 
algebraic equation allows the rapid calculation of time for the clerical operation. 
A stopwatch can frequently be helpful in developing standard data elements. 
Some portions of an element may be more readily determined by predetermined 
times, whereas other portions may be better adapted to stopwatch measurement. 
Finally, predetermined basic motion times have necessarily been developed for 
standard performance. Therefore, no ratings are needed, eliminating the one step 
that is most open to controversy and uncertainty. 
 METHODS ANALYSIS 
 An equally important use for any predetermined time system is methods analy-
sis. Analysts who appreciate these systems look more critically at each and every 
workstation, thinking about how improvements may be made. Using a predeter-
mined time system is simply developing a motion or methods analysis in greater 
numerical detail, identifying better ways of eliminating ineffective therbligs, and 
reducing the times on the remaining effective therbligs. Another checklist has 
therefore been developed (see Figure 13.18) to aid the analyst in better meth-
ods analysis. Key opportunities for simplifying the method (using the MTM-2 
system as an example) include 
 1.  Elimination of body motions, such as Bend and Arise, with a large time 
value of 61 TMU 
 2.  Reduction of case levels, especially case C motions, resulting in a 
39 percent decrease in basic motion times 
 3.  Minimizing reach distances, with a 5-TMU decrease for each shorter 
distance code 
 4.  Avoiding the lifting of heavy parts, where each 2 lb (1 kg) drops 1 TMU   

544 
C H A P T E R  1 3
o
N
s
e
Y
) 
G
 ( s
T
E
G
1.
Can GETs be performed simultaneously with other GETs or 
PUTs without penalty?
2.
Can GETs be performed during a machine cycle?
3.
Can jigs/fixtures, gravity-feed devices, or bins be used to 
simplify GETs (i.e., from GC to GB or to GA)?
4.
Can GAs be used and objects slid into position?
5.
Can the transfer of objects from one hand to another be avoided?
6.
Can tools be prepositioned to simplify GETs?
7.
Can tools be palmed while performing other work (instead of 
being set down and later retrieved)?
8.
Can more than one object be grasped at the same time?
9.
Can travel distances be reduced (i.e., to lower motion 
classification levels)? 
10.
Are hand motions balanced in terms of case and distance?
o
N
s
e
Y
)
P
( s
T
U
P
1.
Can PUTs be performed simultaneously with other GETs or 
PUTs without penalty?
2.
Can tight tolerances or the accurate location of an object be avoided?
3.
Can the delivery point of an object be chamfered or funneled?
4.
Can fixed guides or stops be utilized? 
5.
Can the objects be made symmetrical? 
6.
Can the depth of insertion be reduced?
7.
Can the other hand assist in complex PUTs?
8.
Can objects be PUT together mechanically?
9.
Can drop deliveries be utilized to simplify PUTs 
(i.e., from PC to PB or to PA)?
10.
Can objects be slid to a location (i.e., use a PA)?
11.
Are destination points in the normal area of vision?
o
N
s
e
Y
)
A
( e
r
u
ss
e
r
P
 yl
p
p
A
1.
Can As be avoided by improved design or better processing 
(e.g., eliminate burrs or tight spots)?
2.
Can unnecessary tightening from operations be avoided?
3.
Can tight tolerances be avoided?
4.
Can the contamination of parts due to filings, dust, dirt, etc., 
causing As be avoided?
5.
Can momentum be used to eliminate As?
6.
Are the largest muscle groups used to best advantage in 
applying pressure?
7.
Can clapping devices or mechanical actions be used to eliminate As?  
o
N
s
e
Y
)
R
( 
p
s
a
r
g
e
R
1.
Can Rs be avoided during PUTs?
2.
Can tools be prepositioned in the desired orientation?
 Figure 13.18   MTM-2 methods analysis checklist.
Adapted from Brown, 1976. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
545
3.
Can magazine feeds, stacking devices, vibratory feeders, 
etc., be used to present the part properly?
4.
Can parts be made symmetrical to avoid the need for Rs?
5.
Can parts be prepositioned during a machine cycle?
o
N
s
e
Y
)
E
( 
n
oitc
A
 e
y
E
1.
Can objects and displays be placed in the normal area of vision 
to avoid Es?
2.
Is there sufficient illumination to avoid Es?
3.
Are bins and parts correctly identified, perhaps by use of color?
4.
Can parts be made symmetrical and positioned properly to avoid Es?
5.
Can visual checks of assembly parts be avoided (i.e., use detents 
and tactile feel)?
6.
Can visual interpretation of dial settings be avoided (i.e., use 
on/off or status indicators)?
7.
Can Es be performed during preceding manual motions 
without penalty?
o
N
s
e
Y
)
C
( 
k
n
a
r
C
1.
Can the wheel or crank be spun?
2.
Can the number of revolutions be reduced (i.e., larger thread size used)?
3.
Can resistance during cranking be eliminated?
4.
Can the crank be power-driven?
o
N
s
e
Y
)
S
( 
p
et
S
1.
Is the shortest route or best layout being utilized?
2.
Are floor surfaces easy and clear of obstructions?
3.
Are the most commonly used parts located close by?
4.
Is any necessary information and tooling located at the workstation 
(i.e., avoid unnecessary Ss)?
5.
Can materials and parts be brought mechanically (via conveyors) 
to and from the workstation?
6.
Can vehicular transport (carts) be used?
o
N
s
e
Y
)
F
( 
n
oit
o
M
 t
o
o
F
1.
Can Fs be performed simultaneously with other motions?
2.
Can the foot rest comfortably on the switch or pedal during the 
operation?
3.
Is the body supported by a stool (weight off the load-bearing leg)? 
4.
Can either foot operate the pedal alternately?
o
N
s
e
Y
)
B
( e
sir
A
 
d
n
a 
d
n
e
B
1.
Can drop deliveries be utilized to avoid Bs?
2.
Are materials and products located between elbow and knuckle 
height to minimize Bs?
3.
Are proper lifting procedures (squat lifting, etc.) being utilized?
4.
Can the too frequent entry and exit of a seated workstation be avoided?
-
Figure 13.18  (continued)

546 
C H A P T E R  1 3
 5.  Eliminating operations that require eye travel and eye focus, which elimi-
nates 7 TMU each 
 6.  Prepositioning tools, parts, and materials  
 In one company, $40,000 was allocated for advanced tooling to increase the 
rate of production on a brazing operation. Prior to retooling, analysts conducted a 
work measurement study of the existing method. Using predetermined time sys-
tems, they discovered that by providing a simple fixture and rearranging the load-
ing and unloading area, the company production could increase from 750 to 1,000 
pieces per hour. The total cost of the synthetic basic motion–time study was $40. 
As a result of the study, the company avoided the costly $40,000 retooling program.      
Methods Improvement in T-Shirt Turning 
 EXAMPLE 13.1 
 This example considers both the productivity and health/safety aspects obtained 
through an MTM-2 analysis of T-shirt turning (Freivalds and Yun, 1994). Garments 
are sewn “inside out” so that the seams can be stitched. Once the garment is com-
pleted, it must be “turned” or inverted. 
 Workers on this job were highly susceptible to various cumulative trauma disor-
ders. An MTM-2 analysis of the present method, shown in Figure 13.19a, indicated 
that the results were a total of 141 TMU. An obvious characteristic of this job was 
the high usage of case C motions. Was it possible to reduce the GETs and PUTs 
(questions 3 and 4 under GET in Figure 13.18)? 
 The proposed solution was to build a vacuum-powered device to draw the 
T-shirt into a pipe. Once the vacuum was shut off, the T-shirt could be removed in 
an inverted state. The MTM-2 analysis of the improved method (see Figure 13.19b) 
yielded a total of only 108 TMU. For the complete operation of turning, inspection, 
and folding (total of 360 TMU), this resulted in a (141 – 108)/360 5 9.2 percent 
decrease in time. Overall, the difficult and injurious case C hand motions were elimi-
nated, with a simultaneous improvement in productivity. 
(a) Present method 
Figure 13.19   MTM-2 analysis of T-shirt turning. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
547
 SUMMARY 
 This chapter discusses several of the more popular predetermined time systems. 
There are many others, including several proprietary systems developed by 
industry. Many years ago, Frederick W. Taylor visualized the development of 
standards for basic divisions of work similar to those still in use. In his paper 
“Scientific Management,” he predicted that the time would come when a suffi-
cient volume of basic standards would be developed to make further time studies 
unnecessary. Today we have about reached this state, with the vast majority of 
standards developed by using standard data and/or predetermined times. 
 However, there is still a question as to the validity of adding basic predeter-
mined times to determine elemental times, because therblig times may vary once 
the sequence is changed. Thus, the time for the basic element “reach 20 in” may 
be affected by the preceding and succeeding elements and may not be entirely 
dependent on the class of reach and distance. 
 Therefore, the analyst should consider the main purpose of the motion pat-
tern, as well as its complexity, characteristics, and distance. For example, when 
(b) Proposed method 
Figure 13.19  (continued)

548 
C H A P T E R  1 3
an object is palmed while the hand is moving, a simultaneous operation takes 
place in addition to the move. The result might be a reduction in the average 
speed. This would allow the hand to establish control of the object over the dis-
tance moved. The longer the distance, the more time the hand has to palm the 
object. Thus, the longer the combined motion, the more the motion approaches 
the time required for a simple reach of the same distance. 
 There are many compelling reasons to use predetermined time systems. 
They can be used to define a standard time before production begins and to esti-
mate production costs ahead of time, when no job exists to time study. However, 
these systems are only as good as the people using them. The analyst must be 
very careful to understand the assumptions behind the systems and use them in 
the proper manner. To assist in and, perhaps, even simplify this process, some of 
the predetermined time systems offer associated software packages, which are 
listed at the end of the chapter. 
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  Who was originally responsible for thinking in terms of developing standards for 
basic work divisions? What was his contribution? 
 2.  What are the advantages of using predetermined times? 
 3.  What other two terms are frequently used to identify predetermined times? 
 4.  Who pioneered the MTM system? 
 5.  What is the time value of 1 TMU? 
 6.  Would it be easy or difficult to perform a GB get with the left hand while simulta-
neously performing a PC place with the right hand? Explain. 
 7.  Why was MTM-2 developed? Where does MTM-2 have special application? 
 8.  Are MTM-1 and MTM-2 consistent in their handling of simultaneous motions? 
 9.  If MTM-3 were used to study an operation of approximately 3-min duration, what 
could you say about the accuracy of the standard? 
 10.  How is MTM related to the method analysis? 
 11.  Explain the relationship of predetermined times to standard data. 
 12.  How is MOST related to MTM? 
 13.  Compare and contrast the three MOST systems. 
 14.  What are the three basic motion sequences used in BasicMOST? 
 15.  How are simultaneous activities handled in BasicMOST? 
 16.  What are some of the advantages in using a predetermined time system as opposed 
to stopwatch time study? 
 PROBLEMS  
 1.  Determine the time for the dynamic component of M20 B20. 
 2.  A 30-lb bucket of sand having a coefficient of friction of 0.40 is pushed 15 in 
away from the operator, who uses both hands. What would be the normal time for 
the move? 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
549
 3.  A ¾  -in-diameter coin is placed within a 1-in-diameter circle. What would be the 
normal time for the position element? 
 4.  Calculate the equivalent in TMUs of 0.0075 h per piece, 0.248 min per piece, 
0.0622 h per hundred, 0.421 s per piece, and 10 pieces per minute. 
 5.  The MTM-2 (see Figure 13.20) analysis describes a simple operation in which each 
hand gets a part, regrasps it, and then the right hand puts it into a fixture. Pressure 
is applied to seat it. Next, a pin is grasped, regrasped, and inserted into the assem-
bly. A handwheel is cranked continuously six revolutions under resistance until a 
pointer is aligned exactly. Identify any errors by circling them. Rewrite the analysis 
correctly and explain each correction. 
 6.  Develop a BasicMOST analysis of the paper sequence of activities in Figure 13.20. 
 7.  The Purdue Pegboard Task is a standard test for motor skills. It consists of a board 
with a series of holes and three types of pieces: pegs, washers, and standoffs, stored 
in a depression at the top of the board. The assembly, with the board rotated per-
pendicular to the operator’s torso, is as follows: 
  a. 
 Right hand picks up a peg and inserts it into a hole with a tight clearance. 
  b. 
 As the peg is inserted, the left hand picks up a washer and mounts it on the 
peg (0.01-in clearance). 
 
Completed assembly
12 inches
Pegs
Standoffs
Washers
 
  c. 
 As the washer is mounted, the right hand picks up a standoff and mounts it on 
the peg on top of the washer (0.01-in clearance). 
  d. 
 As the standoff is mounted, the left hand picks up another washer and mounts 
it on the peg on top of the standoff (0.01-in clearance). 
  e. 
 As the washer is mounted, the right hand picks up another peg and starts a 
new assembly in the next hole down. The hands keep alternating in picking 
up pieces and completing assemblies. 
 
   Develop an MTM-2 analysis for the first complete assembly. What happens as the 
operator proceeds down the board? Why? Why would MTM-2 not be appropriate 
for this task?   

550 
C H A P T E R  1 3
 8.  Develop a BasicMOST analysis for the first complete assembly in Problem 7. 
 9.  Develop an MTM-2 analysis of the cable-clamp assembly shown in Figure 4.17. 
 10.  Develop a BasicMOST analysis of the cable-clamp assembly shown in Figure 4.17. 
 11.  As described in Problem 7, the Purdue Pegboard Task is a standard test for motor 
skills. It consists of a board with a series of holes and pegs, stored in depressions 
 Figure 13.20  MTM-2 analysis of simple assembly for Problem 5. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
551
at the top of the board (shown below). One version of a standard task is done with 
both hands simultaneously as follows: 
  a. 
 Both right and left hands pick up pegs and insert them into the holes. 
  b. 
 This continues with another of set of pegs until the last (25th) set of holes is 
filled. 
 
   Calculate the normal time for inserting 25 pegs using both MTM-2 and MOST . 
What happens to your analysis as the operator proceeds down the board? Why 
would MTM-2 not be appropriate for this task? 
 
  12.  The old-fashioned way of voting, by paper ballot, involves a voter picking up a 
pencil, placing an X in the appropriate box for the chosen candidate, returning the 
pencil to the table, and then placing the ballot in the ballot box. Assume that all 
items (ballot, pencil, ballot box) are within a forearm reach. Calculate a normal time 
(in minutes) for voting using both MTM-2 and MOST. 
 13.  A worker tests piston rings. He picks up an untested ring from the left-side stand 
with his left hand, tries to pass it through the left-hand slot (a no-go slot, mean-
ing a good ring should not go through). He then pulls the ring back and tries the 
right-hand slot (a go slot, meaning a good ring should go through). As it goes 
through, he picks it up with his right hand and places it in the right-side stand. 

552 
C H A P T E R  1 3
Assume forearm movements. Calculate the normal time for this job using both 
MTM-2 and MOST. 
 
Ungaged
Rings
Gaged
Rings
Rejects
No-go Gage
Go Gage
 
 REFERENCES 
 Brown, A. D. “Apply Pressure.”  Journal of the Methods-Time Measurement Association, 
14 (1976). 
 Freivalds, A., S. Konz, A. Yurgec, and J. H. Goldberg. “Methods, Work Measurement 
and Work Design: Are We Satisfying Customer Needs?”  The International Journal 
of Industrial Engineering, 7, no. 2 (June 2000), pp. 108–114. 
 Freivalds, A., and M. H. Yun. “Productivity and Health Issues in the Automation of 
T-Shirt Turning.”  International Journal of Industrial Engineering, 1, no. 2 (June 
1994), pp. 103–108. 
 Karger, Delmar W., and Walton M. Hancock.  Advanced Work Measurement . New York: 
Industrial Press, 1982. 
 Maynard, Harold B., G. J. Stegemerten, and John L. Schwab.  Methods Time Measure-
ment . New York: McGraw-Hill, 1948. 
 Sellie, Clifford N. “Predetermined Motion-Time Systems and the Development and Use 
of Standard Data.” In  Handbook of Industrial Engineering . 2d ed. Ed. Gavriel 
Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1992. 
 Zandin, Kjell B.  MOST Work Measurement Systems . New York: Marcel 
Dekker, 1980. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 3  Predetermined Time Systems  
553
 SELECTED SOFTWARE 
 MOD11, International MODAPTS Association, 3302 Shearwater Court, Woodbridge, 
VA 22192 (http://www.modapts.org/) 
 MOST , H. B. Maynard and Co., Eight Parkway Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15220, 2001 
(http://www.hbmaynard.com/) 
 MTM-LINK, The MTM Association, 1111 East Touhy Ave., Des Plaines, IL 60018 
(http://www.mtm.org/) 

This page intentionally left blank

 
555
 
555
 
  CHAPTER
 
  14 
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Work sampling is a method of analyzing work by taking a large number of 
observations at random times. 
 •  Use work sampling to 
 •  Determine machine and operator utilization 
 •  Determine allowances 
 •  Establish time standards 
 •  Use as many observations as practical, but maintain accuracy. 
 •  Take observations over as long a period of time as feasible, preferably 
several days or weeks. 
 W
ork sampling  is a technique used to investigate the proportions of 
total time devoted to the various activities that constitute a job or work 
sit-uation. The results of work sampling are effective for determining 
machine and personnel utilization, allowances applicable to the job, and produc-
tion standards. Although the same information can be obtained by time study 
procedures, work sampling frequently provides the same information faster and 
at considerably less cost. 
 In conducting work sampling studies, analysts take a comparatively large 
number of observations at random intervals. The ratio of observations of a given 
activity to the total observations approximates the percentage of time that the pro-
cess is in that state of activity. For example, if 1,000 observations taken at random 
intervals over a day showed that an automatic screw machine was turning out 
work in 700 instances but was idle for miscellaneous reasons in 300 instances, 
then the downtime of the machine would be 30 percent of the working day. 
 Work sampling was first applied in the British textile industry. Later, un-
der the name  ratio-delay study , the technique was brought to the United States 
(Morrow, 1946). The accuracy of the data determined by work sampling de-
pends on the number of observations and the period over which the random 
 Work Sampling 

556 
C H A P T E R  1 4
observations are taken. Unless the sample size is sufficiently high, and the sam-
pling period represents typical conditions, inaccurate results may occur. 
 The work sampling method has several advantages over the conventional 
time study procedure: 
 1.  It does not require continuous observation by an analyst over a long time. 
 2.  Clerical time is diminished. 
 3.  The total work-hours expended by the analyst are usually much fewer. 
 4.  The operator is not subjected to long-period stopwatch observations. 
 5.  Crew operations can be readily studied by a single analyst.  
 14.1 THE THEORY OF WORK SAMPLING 
  The theory of work sampling is based on the fundamental law of probability: at a 
given instant, an event can be either present or absent. Statisticians have derived 
the following expression to show the probability of  x  occurrences of such an 
event in  n observations: 
 
 


(
)
P
n
x (
P q
( )
x
!
!
!
(
)

(
x
n x
 
 where 
 p 5 probability of a single occurrence 
 
   q 5 1 2  p 5 probability of an absence of occurrence 
 
   n 5 number of observations 
 The distribution of these probabilities is known as the  binomial distribu-
tion  with mean equal to  np , and variance equal to  npq . As  n  becomes large, the 
binomial distribution approaches the normal distribution. Because work sam-
pling studies involve large sample sizes, the normal distribution is a satisfactory 
approximation of the binomial distribution. This normal distribution of a propor-
tion has a mean equal to  p and a standard deviation equal to 
 
pq
n  
 In work sampling studies, we take a sample of size  n  in an attempt to 
estimate  p . We know from elementary sampling theory that we cannot expect pˆ 
 (pˆ 5 the proportion based on a sample) for each sample to be the true value of  p . 
We do, however, expect the  pˆ      of any sample to fall within the range of  p 61.96 
standard deviations approximately 95 percent of the time. In other words, if  p is 
the true percentage of a given condition, we can expect the pˆ of any sample to fall 
 outside the limits  p 6 1.96 standard deviations only about 5 times in 100 due to 
chance alone. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 4  Work Sampling 
557
 This theory can be used to estimate the total sample size needed to achieve 
a certain degree of accuracy. The expression for the standard deviation  p  of a 
sample proportion is 
 
  

(
)
pq
n
p( 
n
p
 
(1)
 where 
 p 5 standard deviation of a percentage 
 
   p 5 true percentage occurrence of element being sought, expressed 
as a decimal 
 
   n 5 total number of random observations upon which  p is based 
 Based on the concept of a confidence interval, consider the term  z a/2  p  as the
 acceptable limit of error   at a (1 – a)100 percent confidence error, where 
 
 




ℓ
z
z
 


pq n
/
p
/
/2
 
(2)
 Squaring both sides and solving for  n yield 
 
  


ℓ
(
)
n
p


q
p( 
/

ℓ

ℓ
p(
/
/
2
2
/ℓ
/2
2
2ℓ
(
)
 
(3)
 For a typical application, using a 95 percent confidence interval,  z a/2  is 1.96 and 
 n becomes 
 
  
ℓ
n
p

q
3 84
/ 2    
 Normal Approximation of the Binomial Distribution 
EXAMPLE 14.1  
 To clarify the fundamental theory of work sampling, it would be helpful to interpret 
the results of an experiment. Assume the following circumstances: One machine with 
random breakdowns was observed for a 100-day period. During this period, eight 
random observations were taken per day. 
 Let 
 n 5 number of observations per day 
 
   k 5 total number of days that observations were taken 
 
   x i 5 number of breakdown observations observed in  n random observations on 
day  i ( i 5 1, 2, …,  k ) 
 
   N 5 total number of random observations 
 
   N x 5 number of days that the experiment showed the number of breakdowns 
equal to  x ( x 5 0, 1, 2, …,  n ) 
 The probability  P ( x ) that the machine is down  x  times in  n  observations is given 
by the binomial distribution 
 
 



P
n
x n
x
P q
( )
x
!
!(
)!
x
n x
 where  p 5 probability of machine being down 
 
   q 5 probability of machine running 

558 
C H A P T E R  1 4
 and 
 
  p 1  q 5 1 
 For our example,  n 5 8 observations per day,  k 5 100 days of observations, and 
 N 5 800 total observations. An all-day time study for several days revealed that  p 5 0.5. 
The following table shows the number of days in which  x  breakdowns were observed 
in the work sampling study ( x 5 0, 1, 2, 3, …,  n ) and the expected number of break-
downs given by our binomial model, using  p 5 0.5 from the all-day time study. 
 X  
 N x  
 P(x)  
 100 P(x)  
 0 
 0 
 0.0039 
 0.39 
 1 
 4 
 0.0312 
 3.12 
 2 
 11 
 0.1050 
 10.5 
 3 
 23 
 0.2190 
 21.9 
 4 
 27 
 0.2730 
 27.3 
 5 
 22 
 0.2190 
 21.9 
 6 
 10 
 0.1050 
 10.5 
 7 
 3 
 0.0312 
 3.12 
 8 
 0 
 0.0039 
 0.39 
   
 100 
 1.00* 
 100* 
 *Approximately 
 There is close agreement between the observed days that a specified number of 
breakdowns occurred,  N x , and the expected number computed theoretically as  kP(x) . 
 
 


P
x
n
i
observe
r
dproportio
r
nof down timeonday
iP
i
 where  i 5 1,2,3,…, k 
 






∑
∑
∑
p
k
x
n k
⋅
x
N
ˆ
i
i
k
i
i
k
i
i
k
1
1

i
1
 The hypothesis is that the theoretical information shows close enough agreement 
to the observed information for the theoretical binomial to be accepted. This may 
be tested using the chi-square (x 2 ) distribution. The x 2  distribution tests whether the 
observed distribution frequencies differ significantly from the expected frequencies. 
 In the example, the observed frequency is  N x  and the expected frequency is  kP(x) , 
and we have 
 
  
∑
=
x
N
P
−
P
[
100 ( )
x ]
100 ( )
x
x
k
k
2
0
2
 
 The quantity under the summation is distributed approximately as x 2  for  k  degrees of 
freedom. In this example, x 2 5 0.206. 
estimated proportion of machine downtime, based 
on a work sampling experiment

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 4  Work Sampling 
559
 Analysts must determine whether the calculated value of x 2  is sufficiently large 
to refute a null hypothesis, that is, the difference between the observed frequencies 
and the computed frequencies is due to chance alone. This experimental value of x 2 is 
so small that it could easily have occurred through chance. Therefore, we accept the 
hypothesis that the experimental data “fit” the theoretical binomial distribution. 
 In typical industrial situations,  p  (which was known to have a value of 0.5) is un-  
 known to analysts. The best estimate of  p is pˆ, which may be computed as  
∑X
N
i
i
k
1
  . 
 As the number of random observations per day  n  increases and/or the number
of days increases, pˆ will approach  p . However, with limited observations, analysts are 
concerned with the accuracy of pˆ. 
 If a plot of  P(x)  versus  x  were made from our example, it would appear as shown 
in Figure 14.1. 
 When  n  is sufficiently large, regardless of the actual value of  p , the binomial 
distribution very closely approximates the normal distribution. This tendency can be 
seen in the example when  p is approximately 0.5. When  p is near 0.5,  n may be small 
and the normal can be a good approximation to the binomial. 
 When using the normal approximation, set 
 
  5  p 
 and 
 
  
pq
n
p
  
0
1
2
3
4
x
P(x)
5
6
7
8
.2
.1
0
 Figure 14.1   Probability distribution of breakdown observations. 

560 
C H A P T E R  1 4
 To approximate the binomial distribution, the variable  z  is used for entry in the normal 
distribution (see Table A3–2, Appendix 3), and it takes the following form: 
 
 
z
p
p

pq n
ˆ
 Although  p  is unknown in the practical case, we can estimate  p from pˆ and deter-
mine the interval within which  p  lies, using confidence limits. For example, imagine 
that the interval defined by 
 
 
p
pq
n
ˆ
1.96
ˆ ˆ
 
 and 
 
 
p
pq
n
ˆ
1.96
ˆ ˆ
 
 contains  p 95 percent of the time. 
 Graphically, this may be represented as 
 
 

p
pq
n
p
p
pq
n
ˆ
1.96
ˆ ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
1.96
ˆ ˆ
 We derive the expression for finding a confidence interval for  p  as follows: 
Suppose that we want an interval that contains  p  95 percent of the time; that is, a 
95 percent confidence interval. For  n sufficiently large, the expression 
 
 

z
p
p

pq n
ˆ
ˆ ˆ
 is approximately a standard normal variable. Therefore, we set the probability 
 
 



⎢
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎥
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
p z
⎢
⎢
⎢
p
p

pq n
z
ˆ
ˆ ˆ
0.95
0.025
0.0925
 
 Rearranging the inequalities and remembering that – z 0.025 5  z 0.975 5 1.96, the interval 
with approximately a 95 percent chance of containing  p is then 
 
 



p
pq
n
p
p

pq
n
ˆ
1.96
ˆ ˆ
ˆ
1.96
ˆ ˆ
 
 These limits imply that the interval defined contains  p  with 95 percent confidence, 
since  z has been selected as having a value of 1.96. 
 The underlying assumptions of the binomial are that  p , the probability of a suc-
cess (the occurrence of downtime), is constant for each random instant that we ob-
serve the process. Therefore, it is always necessary to take random observations when 
doing a work sampling study. This reduces any bias introduced by worker anticipation 
of observation times. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 4  Work Sampling 
561
 14.2 SELLING WORK SAMPLING 
  Before beginning a work sampling program, the analyst must “sell” its use and 
reliability to all members of the organization who will be affected by the results, 
including the union, the line supervisor, and company management. This can 
be done by conducting several short sessions with representatives of the vari-
ous interested parties and explaining examples of the law of probability, thus 
illustrating why sampling procedures work. Even though stopwatch time study is 
well understood and readily accepted, both unions and workers will accept work 
sampling techniques once the procedure is fully explained. Factors in favor of 
work sampling are that it is completely impersonal and does not have the pres-
sure of a stopwatch time study. 
 In the initial session, the analyst should create a simple study by tossing 
unbiased coins. All participants should readily recognize that a single coin toss 
stands a 50-50 chance of being heads. When asked how they would determine 
the probability of heads versus tails, they will undoubtedly propose tossing a 
coin a few times to find out. When asked whether two times is adequate, they 
will say no. Ten times may be suggested, but they may still think that is not ad-
equate. When larger numbers are suggested, they will probably agree that 100 
or more times is sufficient to achieve the desired result with some degree of as-
surance. This example firmly implants the principle of work sampling: adequate 
sample size to ensure statistical significance. 
 Next, the analyst should discuss the probable results of tossing four unbiased 
coins. Here, there is only one arrangement in which the coins can fall to show no 
heads, and only one arrangement that permits all heads. However, three heads or 
one head can result from four possible arrangements. Six possible arrangements 
can give two heads. With all 16 possibilities thus named, four unbiased coins 
tossed continually will distribute themselves as shown in Figure 14.2. 
 After this explanation and a demonstration of this distribution, that is, by 
making several tosses and recording the results, the audience should agree that 
100 tosses could demonstrate a normal distribution. A thousand tosses would 
probably approach a normal distribution more closely, and 100,000 would give a 
nearly perfect distribution. However, such a distribution is not sufficiently more 
Number of heads
6/16
4/16
1/16
0
1
2
3
4
 Figure 14.2   Distribution of number 
of heads with infinite number of tosses, 
using four unbiased coins. 

562 
C H A P T E R  1 4
accurate than the 1,000-toss distribution, and it is not economically worth the 
extra effort. This establishes the idea that significant accuracy is approached rap-
idly at first and then at a diminishing rate.  
 Next the analyst should point out that a machine or operator could figu-
ratively be in a heads or tails state. For example, a machine could be running 
(heads) or idle (tails). A cumulative plot of “running” would eventually level 
off, giving an indication of when it would be safe to stop taking readings (see 
Figure 14.3). Also, “idle” machine time could be broken down into the various 
interruptions and delays for a more detailed understanding of such time.  
 14.3 PLANNING THE WORK SAMPLING STUDY 
  Detailed planning must be done before actual work sampling study observations 
are made. The plans start with a preliminary estimate of the activities on which 
information is sought. This estimate may involve one or more activities, and 
the estimate can frequently be made from historical data. If the analyst cannot 
make a reasonable estimate, he or she should work-sample the area for two or 
three days and use that information as the basis for these estimates. 
 Once the preliminary estimates have been made, the analyst can determine 
the desired accuracy of the results. This can best be expressed as a tolerance, or 
limit of error, within a stated confidence level. Next, the analyst must estimate 
the number of observations to be made and determine the frequency of observa-
tions. Finally, the analyst designs the work sampling form on which to tabulate 
the data, as well as the control charts to be used in conjunction with the study. 
 DETERMINING THE NUMBER 
OF OBSERVATIONS NEEDED 
 To determine the number of observations needed, the analyst must know the 
desired accuracy of the results. The more observations, the more valid the final 
answer. Three thousand observations give considerably more reliable results than 
Number of observations
Percent running time
78
74
70
66
62
58
54
50
0
20
40
60
80
100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300 320 340
 Figure 14.3   Cumulative percentage of running time. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 4  Work Sampling 
563
300. However, because of the cost of obtaining so many observations and the 
marginal improvement in accuracy, 300 observations may be ample.  
 For example, suppose you want to determine the number of observations 
required, with 95 percent confidence, such that the true proportion of personal 
and unavoidable delay time is within the interval of 6 to 10 percent. The un-
avoidable and personal delay time is expected to be 8 percent. These assump-
tions are expressed graphically in Figure 14.4. 
 In this case, pˆ would equal 0.08, and we assume an  ℓ    of 2 percent, or 0.02. 
Using these values, we can solve for  n as follows: 
 
 n 


3 84
0

08
08
0 02
707
2
.
84
0

(
.
1
0

)
observations
r
 
 If the analyst does not have the time or capability to collect 707 obser-
vations, but can only collect 500 data points, the preceding equation can be 
inverted to solve for the resulting error limit: 
 
 ℓ=
3 84
1
3 84 0 92 0 0
500
0 024
.84
)
.3
( .0
)( .
)
08
.
p
p
1(
n


 
 With 500 observations, then, the accuracy of the study would be 62.4 percent. 
Thus, there is a direct trade-off between the error or accuracy of the study and 
the number of observations collected. Note that this 2.4 percent is an absolute 
accuracy. Some analysts may wish to express this as a relative accuracy of 
30 percent with respect to the base proportion (0.024/0.08). 
 Software for determining the observations required for a work sampling study 
is readily available today. These programs perform all the statistical calculations 
required to determine sample sizes and confidence intervals. For example, they can 
calculate the 90 percent, 95 percent, and 99 percent confidence intervals for a sam-
ple. They can also provide the number of samples necessary to achieve 90 percent, 
95 percent, and 99 percent confidence for a specified degree of accuracy. 
 Note that if several workers are observed simultaneously, the observations 
cannot be considered to be independent. This problem of correlated observations 
has been addressed by Richardson and Pape (1992) and results in a corrected 
confidence interval calculated after data collection. Instead of Equation (1), the 
standard deviation for the confidence interval is calculated from 
 
  

∑
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
y j
n j
np
n
( )j
)j
(
1

m
)
2
2
( )j
1 2
.06
.10
p = .08
ˆ
ˆ
1.96σp
ˆ
1.96σp
 Figure 14.4   Tolerance range of the percentage of unavoidable delay allowance 
required within a given section of a plant. 

564 
C H A P T E R  1 4
 where 
 m 5 number of grouped observations 
 
   n(j) 5 number of workers at  j th observation 
 
   n 5 total number of observations 
 
   y(j) 5 number of workers “idle” (or other category of interest) at  j th 
observation 
 Example 14.2 demonstrates the effect of correlated observations on the error 
in a work sampling study.   
Correlated Observations 
 EXAMPLE 14.2 
 The owner of a strip mall would like to determine whether there are sufficient parking 
spots (presently 250) for her customers. Cursory observations indicate that the park-
ing lot is roughly 80 percent full during business hours. She hires an industrial engi-
neering analyst to conduct a more complete work sampling study. The analyst collects 
10 random samples on a Wednesday from 9  a.m. to 6  p.m. with the following results. 
 Sample  j  
 Empty Spots  y(j)  
 y(j) 2  
 1 
 36 
 1,296 
 2 
 24 
 576 
 3 
 11 
 121 
 4 
 10 
 100 
 5 
 9 
 81 
 6 
 20 
 400 
 7 
 19 
 361 
 8 
 28 
 784 
 9 
 35 
 1,225 
 10 
 57 
 3,249 
 Total 
 249 
 8,193 
 The proportion of empty spots is 
 
  p 5 249/10/250 5 0.0996 
 Since at any given sampling time the 250 observations of parking spots are going to 
be correlated, the limit of error must be calculated from 
 
 






ℓ
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
∑
s
y j
n j
np
n
1.96
1.96
( )j
)j
(
1

m
)
1.96 8,193 / 250
2,500(0.0996)
2,500(10
1
 )
0.0369
2
2
( )j
2
12
12
 
 The owner then can conclude with 95 percent confidence that 9.96 6 3.68 percent of the 
parking spots will be open at any given time. This translates approximately to 16 to 34 
open spots, and the owner can conclude that presently there is sufficient (but barely at cer-
tain times) parking for her customers. Note that the direct calculation of the limit of error 
 
 ℓ

( .
)
.

( .
)( .
)
,
.
8.
8. 4( 0996 0
2 500
0
1
12
pq n
⎡⎣
⎤⎦⎤
0117
0
 
 is incorrect and understates the true error. It would also be prudent for the analyst to 
collect samples over several days to avoid representativeness errors. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 4  Work Sampling 
565
 DETERMINING OBSERVATION FREQUENCY 
 The frequency of the observations depends, for the most part, on the number of 
observations required and the time available to develop the data. For example, 
for 3,600 observations to be completed in 20 calendar days, the analyst would 
need to obtain approximately 3,600/20 5 180 observations per day.  
 Of course, the number of analysts available and the nature of the work being 
studied also influence the frequency of the observations. For example, if only 
one analyst is available to accumulate the data in Example 14.3, it may be im-
practical for that person to take 180 observations during one day. 
 After determining the number of observations per day, the analyst must se-
lect the actual time needed to record the observations. To obtain a representative 
sample, observations are taken randomly at all times of the day. There are many 
ways of randomizing the occurrence of the observations. In a manual approach, 
the analyst may select nine numbers daily from a statistical table of random num-
bers, ranging from 1 to 48 (see Appendix 3, Table A3–5). If each number carries 
a value, in minutes, equivalent to 10 times its size, the numbers selected can then 
set the time, in minutes, from the beginning of the day to the time for taking the 
observations. For example, the random number 20 would mean that the analyst 
should make a series of observations 200 min after the beginning of the shift. 
 Another approach considers four adjacent digits in the random number table. 
Digit 1 is the day identifier, with numbers 1 to 5 identifying the workday Monday 
through Friday. Digit 2 is the hour identifier, with numbers 0 to 8 added to the starting 
time of work (e.g., 7:00  a.m. ). Digits 3 and 4 are the minutes identifiers, with num-
bers between 0 and 60 acceptable. Obviously, the easiest approach is to use a random 
number generator on any of the commercial spreadsheets or to use DesignTools. 
 The study should be long enough to include normal fluctuations in produc-
tion. The longer the overall study, the better the chance of observing average 
conditions. Usually, work sampling studies are made over a block of time rang-
ing from two to four weeks. 
 Determination of the Required Number of Observations 
 EXAMPLE 14.3  
 An analyst wishes to determine the amount of downtime due to tool problems in an 
area involving 10 CNC machining centers where very fine drilling is taking place. 
An initial pilot study indicated that out of 25 observations, only one CNC machine 
was down, for a pˆ of 0.04. The analyst wishes a more accurate study with an estimate  
 within 61 percent of the true value, with a 99 percent confidence. Because  Z 0.005 is 
2.58, the number of observations needed is then: 
 
 




n
2.58
0.04
(1
0.04)
0.01
2,556
2
2
 
 Even if the analyst took 256 trips to the plant floor with 10 simultaneous observations 
on each trip, this is still a large number, and the analyst may wish to reconsider a 
lower level of confidence. Furthermore, there is also the problem of correlated obser-
vations (see Example 14.2). 

566 
C H A P T E R  1 4
 Another alternative to help analysts decide when to make daily observa-
tions is a random reminder. This pocket-sized instrument beeps at random times, 
letting analysts know when to make the next observation. The user preselects 
an average sampling rate (observations per hour, or observations per day) and 
responds with a trip to the data collection area upon hearing the beep. Typically, 
the instrument can be preset at any of the following average beeps per hour: 
0.64, 0.80, 1.0, 1.3, 1.6, 2.0, 2.5, 3.2, 4.0, 5.0, 6.4, and 8.0. This instrument is 
especially useful for self-observation, discussed later in this chapter. A table with 
times prepared in advance can require too much of the analyst’s time when he or 
she is attempting to record data conscientiously at the listed times. 
 DESIGNING THE WORK SAMPLING FORM 
 The analyst should design an observation form to record the data to be gathered 
during the work sampling study. A standard form is usually not acceptable, as 
since each work sampling study is unique from the standpoint of the total obser-
vations needed, the random times that observations are made, and the informa-
tion being sought. The best form is tailored to the study objectives. 
 Figure 14.5 is an example of a work sampling study form. An analyst designed 
this form to determine the time utilized for various productive and nonproductive 
states in a maintenance repair shop. The form accommodates 20 random observations 
during the workday. Some analysts prefer to use a specially designed card that allows 
observations to be made without the attention caused by a clipboard. The card can be 
sized so that it can be carried conveniently in the shirt or coat pocket. For instance, the 
form shown in Figure 14.5 could easily be split into two sections, with one section on 
each side of a 3-in by 5-in card that could be carried in the shirt pocket.  
 USING CONTROL CHARTS 
 The control chart techniques used in statistical quality control work can readily be 
applied to work sampling studies to identify problem areas. These studies deal exclu-
sively with percentages or proportions, so analysts use the  p chart most frequently. 
 The first problem in setting up a control chart is the choice of limits. In gen-
eral, a balance must be sought between the cost of looking for an assignable cause 
when none is present and the cost of not looking for an assignable cause when one 
is present. As an arbitrary choice, the analyst should use the 6 3 limits as control 
limits on the  p chart. (More extreme limits, such as the six sigma process developed 
by Motorola, can also be utilized.) Substituting 3 for 1.96 in Equation (1) yields 
 
 
ℓ
p
p

n
3
3
 =
(1
)
 
 Suppose that  p  for a given condition is 0.10 and that 180 observations are 
taken each day. Solving for  ℓ yields 
 
  


ℓ
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤
≈
3
0.1
0.9 180
0.067
0.07
1 2
 
 A control chart similar to Figure 14.6 could then be constructed, and the  p 9 
values for each day would be plotted on that chart.  

Work Sampling Study
Main repair shop
Remarks
Number working this study
Date
By
Productive occurrences
Nonproductive occurrences
Obs.
nos.
Random
time
Total
Total
observations
Percentage
productive
Percentage
nonproductive
Mch
Weld
Elect. Carpen.
Idle
Personal
Janitor
Pipe
fit
Gen.
labor
Get
tools
Grind
tools
Wait
job
Confer
foreman
Wait
crane
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
 Figure 14.5   Work sampling study form. 
 
567

568 
C H A P T E R  1 4
 In quality control work, the control chart indicates whether the process is in 
control. In a similar manner, in work sampling, the analyst considers points be-
yond 63 limits of  p  as being out of control. Thus, a sample that yields a value 
of  p  is assumed to have been drawn from a population with an expected value of 
 p  if  p  falls within the 63 limits of  p . Expressed another way, if a sample has a 
value  p  that falls outside the 63 limits, the sample is assumed to be from some 
different population, or the original population is assumed to be changed. Note 
that, also as for quality, a sample that falls below the lower control limit may be 
viewed with joy, rather than concern. Nevertheless, it is still important to find the 
cause of this deviation. 
 As in quality control work, points other than those out of control may be 
of some statistical significance. For example, it is more likely that a point will 
fall outside the 63 limits than that two successive points will fall between the 
62 and 63 limits. Hence, two successive points between these limits would 
indicate that the population has changed. A series of significant sets of points has 
been derived. This idea is discussed in most statistical quality control texts under 
the heading “runs.”  
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Out of control
Upper control limit
Lower control limit
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11
Sample number
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
Mean
0.17
p = 0.10
0.03
 Figure 14.6   Sample control chart. 
Use of Control Charts in Work Sampling 
 EXAMPLE 14.4  
 The Dorben Company wishes to measure the percentage of machine downtime in 
the lathe department. An original estimate showed the downtime to be approximately 
0.20. The desired results were to be within 65 percent of  p , with a confidence level 
of 0.95. Analysts took 6,400 readings over 16 days at the rate of 400 readings per day. 
They computed a  p 9 value for each daily sample of 400 and set up a  p  chart for  p 5 
0.20 and subsample size  N 5 400 (see Figure 14.7). 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 4  Work Sampling 
569
 Each day, they took readings and plotted  p 9. On the third day, the point for  p 9 
went above the upper control limit. An investigation revealed that following an ac-
cident in the plant, several workers left their machines to assist the injured employee. 
Because an assignable cause of error was discovered, they discarded this point from 
the study. If they had not used a control chart, these observations would have been 
included in the final estimate of  p .  
 On the fourth day, the point for  p 9 fell below the lower control limit. No assign-
able cause could be found for this occurrence. The industrial engineer in charge of the 
project also noted that the  p 9 values for the first two days were below the mean  p and 
decided to compute a new value for  p , using the values from days 1, 2, and 4. The new 
estimate of  p  turned out to be 0.15. To obtain the desired accuracy,  n  was then 8,830 
observations. The control limits also changed (see Figure 14.8). 
x
x x
x
Out of control
Assignable cause
Upper control limit
Lower control limit
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11
Day
12 13 14 15 16
0.26
p = 0.20
0.14
 Figure 14.7  Control 
chart for Example 14.4. 
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x x
x
x
x
Eliminated from consideration
Upper control limit (#1)
Upper control limit (revised)
Lower control limit (#1)
Mean (#1)
Mean (Revised)
Lower control limit (revised)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11
Day
12 13 14 15 16
p = 0.15
0.14
0.207
0.195
0.093
0.085
 Figure 14.8  Revised control 
chart for Example 14.4. 

570 
C H A P T E R  1 4
 The percentage downtime in Example 14.4 will not remain the same forever. 
Methods improvement should be a continuing process, and the percentage down-
time should diminish. Control charts can also be used to show the progressive 
improvement of work areas. This idea is especially important if work sampling 
studies are used to establish standard times, because such standards must change 
whenever conditions change if they are to remain realistic. 
 14.4 RECORDING OBSERVATIONS 
  In approaching the work area, the analyst must not anticipate the expected 
recording. The analyst should walk to a fixed point, make the observation, and 
record the facts. It might be helpful to make an actual mark on the floor to show 
where to stand for the repeat observations. If the operator or machine being stud-
ied is idle, the analyst must also determine the reason for the idleness and mark 
this on the form. The cause for a worker’s idleness, whether a machine break-
down, lack of raw material, etc., is very important in redesigning the job for 
improved productivity. The analyst must learn to take the visual observations, 
and then make the written entries after leaving the work area. This minimizes 
the operators’ feelings of being watched and allows them to perform in their 
accustomed manner. 
 Even if the analyst observes proper work sampling protocol, the data tend to 
be biased when the technique is used for studying people. The arrival of an ana-
lyst at the work center immediately influences the activity of the operator. The 
operator becomes productively engaged as soon as he or she sees the analyst ap-
proaching the work center. Then, too, there is a natural tendency for the analyst 
to record what has just happened or what will be happening, rather than what is 
actually happening at the exact moment of the observation. 
 A camcorder can be very useful in performing unbiased work sampling 
studies involving only people. The authors made a work sampling study over a 
 The analysts took observations for 12 more days and plotted the individual  p 9 values 
on the new chart. As can be seen, all the points fell within the control limits. They then 
calculated a more accurate value of  p , using all 6,000 observations, and determined that 
the new estimate of  p  was 0.14. A recalculation of achieved accuracy showed it to be 
slightly better than the desired accuracy. As a final check, the analysts computed new 
control limits, using  p  equal to 0.14. The dashed lines superimposed on Figure 14.8 
show that all points were still in control using the new limits. If a point had fallen out 
of control, the analysts would have eliminated it and computed a new value of  p . They 
would have repeated this process until the desired accuracy was achieved and all  p 9 
values were in control. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 4  Work Sampling 
571
10-day period on data processing workers with the elements “working” and “not 
working.” The 2,520 observations collected indicated a statistically significant 
( p , 0.001) difference of a 12.3 percent greater “not working” average with 
the camcorder than with the personal observation method. Whereas the workers 
hesitated to indicate that they were idle, the camcorder accurately recorded the 
ongoing activity. 
 Similarly, some of the work measurement software described later comes 
with dedicated or personal digital assistants (PDAs) to facilitate data recording 
and uploading of the data to desktop PCs for later data analysis. These devices 
can also be set to provide audible beeps to signal the appropriate random time 
for data collection. Otherwise, stand-alone random reminder devices can be 
utilized.   
 14.5 MACHINE AND OPERATOR UTILIZATION 
  Analysts can use work sampling to determine machine and operator utilization. 
As an example, consider machine utilization in a heavy machine shop. Manage-
ment estimated that the actual cutting time in this section should be 60 percent 
of the workday, to comply with the quotations being submitted. There were 14 
machines involved, and the analysts had to take approximately 3,000 observa-
tions to get the accuracy desired. 
 Analysts designed a work sampling form (see Figure 14.9, but with cells 
blank) to accommodate the 16 possible states that each of the 14 machines might 
be in at the time of an observation. Then they set up a random pattern of 6 obser-
vations of the 14 operations per each of 36 separate shifts. 
 Because the principal purpose of the study was to learn the status of the ac-
tual cutting time in this section, an analyst kept a cumulative percentage machine 
cutting chart (see Figure 14.10). At the beginning of each day’s study, the ana-
lysts took a ratio of all previous cutting observations to the total observations to 
date. By the end of the 10th day of the study, the percentage of machine cutting 
time began to level off at 50.5 percent. 
 After all 3,024 observations were collected, the analysts divided the sum 
of all observations in each category by the total number of observations, result-
ing in percentages that represented the distributions of cutting time, setup time, 
and the various operations listed. Figure 14.9 illustrates the summary sheet for 
this study with cutting time amounting to 50.7 percent. The percentage of time 
required by the various delays, such as 9.6 percent for setup or 10.8 percent for 
tool handling, may indicate potential areas for methods improvement that would 
help increase the cutting time. Example 14.5 shows a similar approach for deter-
mining operator utilization.     

    Figure 14.9   Work sampling summary sheet. 
572

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 4  Work Sampling 
573
53
52
51
50
49
48
47
46
Machines cutting
percent
Number of observation days
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Work Sampling to Determine Operator Utilization 
 EXAMPLE 14.5 
 Management in a semiconductor plant was considering increasing the number of taping 
machines monitored by one operator from 10 to 12. Typically the machines run auto-
matically other than requiring regular resupply of raw components and having irregular 
stoppages due to lot changes, loading errors, and electrical arc problems, which must be 
attended to by the operator. Because there are long machine cycles with irregular break-
downs, work sampling is the best approach to determine operator utilization.  
 A total of 185 observations were taken over a one-week period, resulting in 125 
observations in which the operator was busy with a variety of activities, shown in 
 Figure 14.11  Operator 
utilization on taping 
machines. 
 Figure 14.11. Correspondingly, 60, or 32.4 percent, of the observations indicated that 
the operator was idle. The resulting limit of error is 
 
 ℓ
ℓ
2
3 8
3 8
3
0 6 6 185
0 00 55
00455

ℓ
(0
)(
)
6 6
pq
0.067
6  
 Thus, management concluded with 95 percent confidence that the operator will be 
idle 32.4 6 6.7 percent of the time, and thus the operator could easily monitor an 
additional two machines. 
 Figure 14.10   Cumulative 
percentage machine cutting. 

574 
C H A P T E R  1 4
 14.6 DETERMINING ALLOWANCES 
  The determination of allowances must be correct, if fair standards are to be devel-
oped. Prior to the introduction of work sampling, analysts frequently determined 
allowances for personal reasons and unavoidable delays by taking a series of all-day 
studies on several operations and then averaging the results. Thus, they recorded, 
timed, and analyzed trips to the restroom, trips to the drinking fountain, interrup-
tions, and so forth. Although this method provided a fair allowance, it was costly 
and time-consuming and was fatiguing to both the analyst and the operator. 
 Through a work sampling study, analysts take a great number of observa-
tions (usually, more than 2,000) at different times of the day and of different 
operators. They can then divide the total number of idle observations that involve 
normal operators by the total number of working observations. The result equals 
the percentage allowance that should be given to the operator for the class of 
work being studied. The different elements that enter into personal and unavoid-
able delays can be kept separate, and an equitable allowance can be determined 
for each class or category. 
 Figure 14.12 illustrates a summary of a work sampling study for determin-
ing unavoidable delay allowances on bench, machine, inspection, and spray op-
erations. There were interferences in 26 cases out of 2,895 observations made 
on the bench operations. This indicated an unavoidable delay allowance of 0.95 
(26/2,750) percent for this class of work. 
 14.7 DETERMINING STANDARD TIME 
  Work sampling can be very useful for establishing time standards on both di-
rect and indirect labor operations. The technique is the same as that used for 
determining allowances. The analyst must take a large number of random ob-
servations. The percentage of the total observations that the operator is working 
approximates the percentage of total time for that state.  
ACME Electric Products, Inc.
Operation
Bench
Machine
Inspection
Spray
80
20
61
63
199
43
1,407
1,712
3.06
8
7
984
1,060
0.71
 9
 27
1,172
1,228
2.30
39
26
2,750
2,895
.95
Personal
Other
Idle
Interference
Working
Total
Observations
Percent
Allowance
Dept.____________________
Date ___________
 Figure 14.12   Work sampling summary of idle, interference, and working activities for 
determining unavoidable allowance. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 4  Work Sampling 
575
 More specifically, the observed time OT (see Chapter 10) for a given ele-
ment is calculated from the working time divided by the number of units pro-
duced during that time 
 
 
OT 

T
P
n
n
i
 where 
 T 5 total time 
 
   n i 5 number of occurrences for element  i 
 
   n 5 total number of observations 
 
   P 5 total production for period studied 
 The normal time NT is found by multiplying the observed time by the average 
rating: 
 
NT  OT  R–	100 
 where R– 5 average performance rating 5 S  R / n . Finally, the standard time is 
found by adding allowances to the normal time. 
 Example 14.6 shows this procedure for a single operation, and Example 14.7 
shows it for multiple elements.   
Calculation of Standard Time for a Single Operation 
 EXAMPLE 14.6  
 Table 14.1 lists the information necessary for the calculations, the sources of the 
information, and the specific data used in this example of a drill press operator. 
 
 





T
P
n
n
OT
480
420
0.85
0.971min
i
 
 The normal time (NT) is found by scaling the observed time by the average 
rating R
_
: 
 
 





R
NT
OT
100
0.971
110 100
1.069min  
 Table 14.1   Information on Drill Press Operator 
 Information  
 Source  
 Data  
 Total working day (working 1 idle) 
 Time card 
 480 min 
 Number of units drilled 
 Inspection department 
 420 units 
 Working fraction 
 Work sampling 
 85 percent 
 Average rating 
 Work sampling 
 110 percent 
 Allowances 
 Work sampling 
 15 percent 
 Finally, the standard time is found by adding allowances (using the multiplier ap-
proach) to the normal time: 
 
 ST 5 NT 3 (1 1 Allowance) 5 1.069 3 1.15 5 1.229 min 

576 
C H A P T E R  1 4
Calculation of Standard Time for Multiple Elements 
 EXAMPLE 14.7  
 An analyst made 30 observations over 15 min on a work assignment involving three 
elements, during which time 12 units were produced. The resulting data appear in 
Table 14.2. The observed times were, respectively, 
 
 









OT
15
12
9
30
0.375min
OT
15
12
7
30
0.292min
OT
15
12
12
30
0.500min
1
T
2
T
3
T
 
 and the respective normal times were 
 
 












NT
0.375
860
9
100
0.358min
NT
0.292
705
7
100
0.294min
NT
0.500
1180
11
100
0.536min
1
T
2
T
3
T
 Table 14.2   Tabular Data of a Three-Element Work Sampling Study 
   Observation 
number  
 Performance rating observed  
 Element 1  
 Element 2  
 Element 3  
 Idle  
  1 
 90 
   
   
   
  2 
   
   
   
 100 
  3 
   
 110 
   
   
  4 
  95 
   
   
   
  5 
 100 
   
   
   
  6 
   
 100 
   
   
  7 
   
   
 105 
   
  8 
  90 
   
   
   
  9 
   
   
 110 
   
 10 
  85 
   
   
   
 11 
   
   
  95 
   
 12 
   
 90 
   
   
 13 
   
   
 100 
   
 14 
   
   
  95 
   
 15 
  80 
   
   
   
 16 
   
   
 110 
   
 17 
   
 105 
   
   
 18 
   
   
  90 
   
 19 
 100 
   
   
   
 20 
   
   
  85 
   
 21 
   
   
  90 
   
 22 
   
   
  90 
   

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 4  Work Sampling 
577
 14.8 SELF-OBSERVATION 
  Managers and salaried workers should periodically take work samples of their 
own work to evaluate the effectiveness of their time usage. In many cases, man-
agers spend less time on the important aspects than they think they are spending. 
They also spend more time on unimportant aspects, such as personal and avoid-
able delays, than they believe they are spending. Once managers learn how much 
time is being taken by functions that could be readily handled by subordinates 
and clerical personnel, they can take positive action. 
 For example, a university professor may decide to conduct a personal work 
sampling study to determine how much time is spent on various activities over 
an 8-week period during the academic year. This period should be representative 
and not subject to seasonal variation. The professor sets a random reminder to 
provide 2 samples per hour on average. Thus, over the 8-week study period, the 
professor would have approximately 640 observations (8 weeks 3 40 h/wk 3 
2 observations/h). For a more accurate study the professor could have chosen to 
take samples at a higher rate within the study interval. 
 To record the data, a form similar to that shown in Figure 14.13 was used to 
record one week of daily random observations. Each time the random reminder 
beeped (e.g., Diviliss Electronics), the professor recorded the code letter for the 
applicable category and the time. 
 At the end of the 8-week study, 80 of the total 640 observations were coded I 
(committee participation), which meant that about 12.5 percent of work time was 
spent in committee participation. The 95 percent confidence interval would be 
 
 

1 96 0
5 1
0

5
640
0 026
.
(
125
.
)
125
.
   Observation 
number  
 Performance rating observed  
 Element 1  
 Element 2  
 Element 3  
 Idle  
 24 
   
   
 100 
   
 25 
   
 95 
   
   
 26 
   
   
   
 100 
 27 
   
 105 
   
   
 28 
   
 100 
   
   
 29 
   
   
 110 
   
 30 
 110 
   
   
   
 S Rating 
 860 
 705 
 1,180 
 100 
 Assuming a constant 10 percent allowance for all elements, the final standard 
time was 
 
 ST 5 (0.358 1 0.294 1 0.536) (1 1 0.10) 5 1.307 min 

578 
C H A P T E R  1 4
 Therefore, the professor is 95 percent confident that committee work is occu-
pying 12.5 6 2.6 percent of the time. Based on this and the other activity per-
centages, the professor altered the calendar to utilize time and energy in a more 
positive manner. 
 Figure 14.13   A work sampling form specially designed for self-observation. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 4  Work Sampling 
579
 14.9 WORK SAMPLING SOFTWARE 
  Using a computer can save an estimated 35 percent of the total work sampling 
study cost, because of the high percentage of clerical effort relative to actual 
observation time. The majority of the effort involved in summarizing work sam-
pling data is clerical: calculating percentages and accuracies, plotting data on 
control charts, determining the number of observations required, determining the 
daily observations required, determining the number of trips to the area being 
studied per day, determining the time of day for each trip, and so on. 
 Several work sampling software packages, with a variety of features, are 
available for the analyst. All use tablet PCs or the versatile smartphones to 
collect data. Examples includes SamplePro by Applied Computer Services, 
WorkStudy1 by Quetech, Ltd., and UmtPlus by Laubrass, Inc. One advantage 
of such programs is their ability to link directly into Excel for performance more 
detailed data analysis, thus reducing clerical work and rapidly and accurately 
achieving the final results.  
 SUMMARY 
 Work sampling is another tool that allows time and methods analysts to obtain 
information on machine and operator utilization, as well as to set time standards. 
Performance-rated work sampling is especially useful in determining the amount 
of time that should be allocated for unavoidable delays, work stoppages, and 
the like. The extent of these interruptions is a suitable area for study to improve  
 productivity. Work sampling is also being used more heavily for establishing 
standards on production support labor, maintenance, and service labor. 
 Everyone in the field of methods-time study and wage payment should be-
come familiar with the advantages, limitations, uses, and applications of this 
technique. In summary, the following considerations should be kept in mind: 
 1.  Explain and “sell” the work sampling method before using it. 
 2.  Confine individual studies to similar groups of machines or operations. 
 3.  Use as large a sample size as is practicable. 
 4.  Take individual observations at random times, so that observations are 
recorded for all hours of the day. 
 5.  Take the observations over an extended period of time so as to be repre-
sentative of the actual conditions. 
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  Where was work sampling first used? 
 2.  What are advantages of work sampling over stopwatch time study? 
 3.  In what areas is work sampling applicable? 
 4.  How can you determine the time of day to make the various observations, such that 
biased results do not occur? 

580 
C H A P T E R  1 4
 5.  What considerations should be kept in mind when doing work sampling studies? 
 6.  Discuss the statistical basis for the trade-off between the number of observations 
collected and the accuracy of work sampling. 
 7.  What are the principal advantages of using a random reminder in connection with 
a self-observation study? 
 8.  Over how long a period is it desirable to collect observations? 
 9.  Discuss the trade-offs of simultaneously observing 10 clerks in a large bank. 
 10.  How can the validity of work sampling be “sold” to the employee who is not 
 familiar with probability and statistical procedures? 
 11.  What are the pros and cons of using work sampling to establish performance 
 standards? 
 PROBLEMS  
 1.  The analyst in the Dorben Reference Library decides to use the work sampling 
technique to establish standards. Twenty employees are involved. The operations 
include cataloging, charging books out, returning books to their proper location, 
cleaning books, record keeping, packing books for shipment, and handling cor-
respondence. A preliminary investigation resulted in the estimate that 30 percent of 
the group’s time was spent in cataloging. How many work sampling observations 
would be made if it were desirable to be 95 percent confident that the observed data 
were within a tolerance of 610 percent of the population data? Describe how the 
random observations should be made.  
 
    The following table illustrates some of the data gathered from 6 of the 20 
employees. The number of volumes cataloged equals 14,612. From these data, 
determine a standard, in hours per hundred, for cataloging. Then design a control 
chart based on 63 limits for the daily observations. 
 Item  
 Operators 
 Smith   Apple   Brown   Green   Baird   Thomas  
 Total hours worked 
 78 
 80 
 80 
 65 
 72 
 75 
 Total observations (all elements) 
 152 
 170 
 181 
 114 
 143 
 158 
 Observations involving cataloging  
 50 
 55 
 48 
 29 
 40 
 45 
 Average rating 
 90 
 95 
 105 
 85 
 90 
 100 
 2.  The work measurement analyst in the Dorben Company is planning to establish 
standards for indirect labor, using the work sampling technique. This study will 
provide the following information: 
 
 
   T 5 total operator time represented by the study 
 
 
   N 5 total number of observations involved in the study 
 
 
   n 5 total observations of element under study 
 
 
   P 5 production for period under study 
 
 
   R 5 average performance rating factor during study 
 
   Derive the equation for estimating the normal elemental time for an operation. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 4  Work Sampling 
581
 3.  The analyst in the Dorben Company wishes to measure the percentage of down-
time in the drop hammer section of the forge shop. The superintendent estimates 
the downtime to be about 30 percent. The desired results, using a work sampling 
study, are to be within 65 percent of  p , with a confidence level of 0.95. The analyst 
decides to take 300 random readings a day for three weeks. Develop a  p chart for 
 p 5 0.30 and subsample size  N 5 300. Explain the use of this  p chart. 
 4.  The Dorben Company is using the work sampling technique to establish standards 
for its data entry clerks. The pool has six clerks, each of whom works a 40-h week. 
Over a four-week period, 1,700 random simultaneous observations of all six clerks 
were made. During the study period, the clerks produced 9,001 entries. Of the 
random observations, 1,225 showed that data entry was taking place. Assuming a 
20 percent allowance and an average data entry rating of 85 percent, calculate the 
hourly standard per entry. 
 5.  How many observations should be recorded in determining the allowance for 
personal delays in a forge shop, if it is expected that a 5 percent personal allowance 
will suffice, and if this value is to remain between 4 and 6 percent across 95 percent 
of the time? 
 6.  To get 65 percent precision on work that is estimated to take 80 percent of the 
workers’ time, how many random observations are required at the 95 percent confi-
dence level? 
 7.  If the average handling activity during a 10-day study is 82 percent and the number 
of daily observations is 48, what is the confidence interval for each day’s percent-
age activity? 
 8.  The following data were collected by an intern working at the Mole Hill Ski Resort 
regarding the efficiency of the V-8 Ford engine that was used to power the rope tow 
for the bunny slope. Managers would like to know how many hours of service they 
can expect to achieve out of their obviously failing engine out of a typical 16-h 
skiing day. After studying the data, you can state with 95 percent confidence that 
the engine will be able to run for ___________ h 6 ___________ h of a 16-h day. 
 
Running on 8 cylinders
Running on 7 cylinders
Running on 6 cylinders
Not running, engine clogged
 
 9.  Data from an 8-h work sampling study are shown below. 
  a. 
 What percentage of the time is the machine running? 
  b. 
 What percentage of the time is the machine broken? 
  c. 
 What is the limit of accuracy of this study for a 5 0.05? 
  d. 
 What is the 95 percent confidence interval of the machine running? 
  e. 
 Your manager says that the range in part d is unacceptably large. She would 
like to narrow the range down to 61 min of running time. How many obser-
vations should you collect to achieve this? 

582 
C H A P T E R  1 4
 
Running
Idle
Broken
Out of stock
Other
 
 10.  Dorben Co. provides a 10 percent allowance for its operators. A work sampling 
study of one operator over an 8-h shift yields the following data. Average rated 
performance is 110 percent. Expected output is 50 units/shift.
  a. 
 What is the observed time (in minutes) for loading? 
  b. 
 What is the normal time for unloading? 
  c. 
 What is the overall standard time? 
  d. 
 What is the accuracy of the study? 
 
Load
Unload
Process
Idle
 11.  A work sampling analyst notices that out of 50 observations, a worker is taking a 
break 2 times, is chatting to a coworker 2 times, and is absent from the workstation 
once. The analyst is 95 percent confident that the worker is actually working from 
_________ percent to __________ percent of the time. If the statement is changed 
to say that the analyst is 95 percent confident that the worker is working from 
87 percent to 93 percent of the time, what changes have occurred in the work 
sampling study? 
 12.  The following observations were obtained randomly over an 8-hour time period on 
the Zip operator, during which time he assembled 20 Zip drives. 
  a. 
 How many minutes of a typical 8-h work day is the Zip operator working? 
  b. 
 What is the average performance of the Zip operator? 
  c. 
 What is the normal time for the Zip operator? 
  d. 
 What is the %error for this study? 
 Rating 
 # observations 
 70 
 1 
  80 
 3 
  90 
 9 
 100 
 8 
 110 
 1 
 Idle 
 8 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 4  Work Sampling 
583
 REFERENCES 
 Barnes, R. M.  Work Sampling . 2d ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1957. 
 Morrow, R. L.  Time Study and Motion Economy . New York: Ronald Press, 1946. 
 Richardson, W. J.  Cost Improvement, Work Sampling and Short Interval Scheduling . 
Reston, VA: Reston Publishing, 1976. 
 Richardson, W. J., and E. S. Pape. “Work Sampling.” In  Handbook of Industrial 
Engineering . 2d ed. Ed. Gavriel Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1992. 
 SELECTED SOFTWARE 
 JD-7/JD-8 Random Reminder. Divilbiss Electronics, RR #2, Box 243, Chanute, KS 
66720 (http://www.divilbiss.com) 
 DesignTools and QuikSamp (available from the McGraw Hill text website at 
www.mhhe.com/niebel-freivalds). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002. 
 Workstudy1, Quetech, Ltd., 866 222-1022 (www.quetech.com) 
 SamplePro. Applied Computer Services, Inc., 7900 E. Union Ave., Suite 1100, Denver 
CO 80237. 
 UMT Plus, Laubrass, Inc., 3685 44e Ave., Montreal, QC H1A 5B9, Canada 
(www.laubrass.com) 

This page intentionally left blank

 
585
 
585
 
  CHAPTER
 
  15 
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Use both time studies and predetermined time systems to develop stan-
dards for relatively predictable indirect labor. 
 •  Use slots or similar job categories to establish standards for relatively 
unpredictable indirect and expense labor. 
 •  Utilize work sampling and historical records to establish standards for 
professional expense labor. 
 •  Use queuing theory to calculate waiting times for jobs. 
 •  Use Monte Carlo simulation to predict delays or downtimes on jobs. 
 S
 ince 1900, the percentage increase of indirect and expense workers has 
more than doubled that of direct labor workers. This is especially true 
with the recent growth of service industries such as health care, insur-
ance, banking, retailing, information technology, and even arts, entertainment, 
and the leisure industry. Groups traditionally classified as  indirect labor include 
shipping and receiving, trucking, stores, inspection, material handling, toolroom, 
janitorial, and maintenance.  Expense labor includes all positions not coming un-
der direct or indirect: office clerical, accounting, sales, management, engineer-
ing, and so on. 
 The rapid growth in office workers, maintenance workers, and other indirect 
and expense employees is due to several factors. First, the increased mechani-
zation of industry and the complete automation of many processes, including 
the use of robots, have decreased the need for craftspeople and operators. This 
trend toward increased automation has resulted in a huge demand for electronics 
specialists, instrumentation specialists, computer hardware and software techni-
cians, and other service people. 
 Second, the tremendous increase in paperwork brought on by federal, state, 
and local legislation is responsible, to a large extent, for an ever-increasing num-
ber of clerical employees. Third, office and maintenance work has not been sub-
jected to the methods study and technical advances that have been applied so 
effectively to direct labor in industrial processes. With a large share of most 
 Indirect and 
Expense Labor 
Standards 

586 
C H A P T E R  1 5
payrolls being earmarked for indirect and expense labor, management is beginning 
to realize the opportunities for the application of methods and standards in this area. 
 15.1  INDIRECT AND EXPENSE 
LABOR STANDARDS 
  The systematic approach to methods, standards, and wage payment is just as appli-
cable to the indirect and expense areas as it is to direct labor. Careful fact-finding, 
analysis, proposed method development, presentation, installation, and job analysis 
development should precede a program for establishing standards on indirect and 
expense labor. The methods analysis procedure in itself can introduce economies. 
 Work sampling is a good technique for determining the severity of a prob-
lem and the savings potential in the indirect and expense areas. It is not unusual 
to find that the workforce is productively engaged only 40 to 50 percent of the 
time, or even less. For example, in maintenance work, which represents a large 
share of the total indirect cost, analysts may find the following reasons for much 
of the time lost during the workday: 
 1.  Inadequate communication . It is quite common to find incomplete and even 
incorrect job instructions on work orders. This necessitates additional trips 
to the toolroom and supply room to obtain parts and tools that should have 
been available when the work was started. As an example, a work order 
that merely states “Repair leak in oil system” does not provide sufficient 
detail on whether a new valve, pipe, or gasket is needed, or whether the 
valve has to be repacked. 
 2.  Unavailability of parts, tools, or equipment . If maintenance workers do not 
have the facilities and parts to do the job, they are obliged to improvise, 
which usually wastes time and frequently results in inferior work. 
 3.  Interference of production employees . With improper scheduling, mainte-
nance employees may find that they are unable to begin a repair, service, or 
overhaul operation, because the machine is still being used by production 
employees. This can result in the technician idly waiting until the produc-
tion department is ready to turn over the equipment. 
 4.  Overstaffing of the maintenance job . Too often, a crew of three or four is 
supplied, when only two are needed, resulting in wasted time. 
 5.  Unsatisfactory work that must be redone . Poor planning frequently results 
in an attitude of “this will get by” on the part of the mechanic. This results 
in the repair work having to be redone. 
 6.  Improper planning . Good planning ensures that there is sufficient work 
scheduled for maintenance so as to minimize idle waiting time.  
 INDIRECT LABOR STANDARDS 
 Standards for indirect labor departments, such as clerical, maintenance, and tool-
making, should be developed on any operation or group of operations that can be 
quantified and measured. These operations must first be broken down into direct, 

 
 
C H A P T ER 1 5  Indirect and Expense Labor Standards  
587
transportation, and indirect elements. The tools used for establishing standards 
for direct work are the same as discussed previously: time study, predetermined 
time systems, standard data, formulas, and work sampling. 
 Analysts can therefore establish standards for such tasks as hanging a door, re-
winding a 1-hp motor, painting a centerless grinder, sweeping the chips from a de-
partment, or delivering a skid of 200 forgings. For each of these operations, analysts 
establish standard times by measuring the time required for the operator to perform 
the job. They then performance-rate the study and apply an appropriate allowance. 
 Careful study and analysis often reveal that crew balance and interference 
cause more unavoidable delays in indirect work than in direct work. Crew bal-
ance is the wasted time encountered by one member of a crew while watching 
other crew members perform job elements. Interference time is the time that a 
worker waits for others to do necessary work before that worker can start. Both 
crew balance and interference delays are unavoidable delays; however, they are 
usually characteristic of indirect labor operations only, such as those performed 
by maintenance workers. Queuing theory, explained later in this chapter, is a 
useful tool for estimating the magnitude of waiting time. 
 Because of the high degree of variability characteristic of most maintenance 
and material handling operations, it is necessary to conduct sufficient independent 
time studies of each operation to ensure that the resulting standard is representative 
of the time needed for the normal operator to do the job under average conditions. 
For example, if a study indicates that it takes 47 min to sweep a machine floor 
60 ft wide by 80 ft long, the analyst must ensure that average conditions prevail dur-
ing the study. The work of a sweeper will be considerably more time-consuming 
if the shop is machining cast iron rather than an alloy steel, because alloy steel is 
much cleaner and alloy steel chips are easier to handle. Also, the use of slower 
speeds and feeds results in fewer chips. Therefore, a 47-min standard established 
when the shop is working with alloy steel will be inadequate for producing cast-
iron parts. Additional time studies would ensure that average conditions prevailed 
and that the resulting standards represented those conditions. Similarly, analysts 
can establish standards based on square footage for painting. 
 Toolroom work is similar to the work done in job shops. Analysts can there-
fore predetermine the method by which tools such as a drill jig, milling fixture, 
form tool, or die can be made. Analysts use time study and/or predetermined 
elemental times to establish a sequence of elements and to measure the normal 
time required for each element. Work sampling provides an adequate tool for 
determining the allowances that must be added for fatigue, personal, unavoid-
able, and special delays. The standard elemental times thus developed can be 
tabularized in the form of standard data and then used to design time formulas 
for pricing future work. 
 FACTORS AFFECTING INDIRECT 
AND EXPENSE STANDARDS 
 All indirect and expense work is a combination of four divisions: (1) direct work, 
(2) transportation, (3) indirect work, and (4) unnecessary work and delays. 

588 
C H A P T E R  1 5
 Direct work is that segment of the operation that discernibly advances the 
progress of the work. For example, in the installation of a door, the direct work 
elements may include these actions: cut door to rough size, plane to finish size, 
locate and mark hinge areas, chisel out hinge areas, mark for screws, install 
screws, mark for lock, drill out for lock, and install lock. Such direct work can be 
easily measured using conventional techniques, such as a stopwatch time study, 
standard data, or fundamental motion data. 
 Transportation is the work performed in movements during the course of the 
job or from job to job. Transportation may be horizontal or vertical or both. Typi-
cal transportation elements include walk up and down stairs, ride elevator, walk, 
carry load, push truck, and ride on motor truck. Transportation elements are 
also easy to measure and to establish as standard data. For example, one com-
pany uses 0.50 min per 100-ft zone as its standard for horizontal travel time and 
0.30 min as its standard time for 10 ft of vertical travel. 
 As a general rule, analysts cannot evaluate the indirect portion of indirect 
or expense labor by physical evidence in the completed job, or at any stage 
during the work, except by deductive inferences from certain features of the 
job. Indirect work elements may be separated into three divisions: (1) tooling, 
(2) material, and (3) planning. 
 Tooling work elements include the acquisition, disposition, and maintenance 
of all tools needed to perform an operation. Typical elements under this category 
would include getting and checking tools and equipment; returning tools and 
equipment at the completion of the job; cleaning tools; and repairing, adjusting, 
and sharpening tools. The tooling work elements are easy to measure by con-
ventional means; statistical records provide data on the frequency of their 
occurrence. Waiting line or queuing theory provides information on the expected 
waiting time at supply centers. 
 Material work elements involve acquiring and checking the material used 
in an operation and disposing of scrap. Making minor repairs to materials, pick-
ing up and disposing of scrap, and getting and checking materials are charac-
teristic of material work elements. As with tooling elements, material elements 
are readily measured, and their frequency can be accurately determined through 
historical records. Queuing theory provides the best estimate of waiting time for 
acquiring material from storerooms. 
 The planning elements represent the most difficult area in which to estab-
lish standards. These elements include consulting with the supervisor, planning 
work procedures, inspecting, checking, and testing. Work sampling techniques, 
especially self-observation, provide a basis for determining the time required to 
perform the planning elements. 
 Planning and methods improvement can eliminate unnecessary work and 
delays, which may represent as much as 40 percent of the indirect and expense 
payroll. Much of this wasted time is management-oriented; for this reason, ana-
lysts should follow the systematic procedure recommended in Chapter 1 prior to 
establishing standards. In this work, analysts should get and analyze the facts, 
and develop and install the method, before establishing the standard. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 1 5  Indirect and Expense Labor Standards  
589
 Much of the delay time encountered in indirect and expense work is due to 
queues. Workers are obliged to stand in line at the tool crib, the storeroom, or the 
stockroom, waiting for a forklift truck, a desk calculator, or some other piece of 
equipment. Through the application of queuing theory, analysts can frequently de-
termine the optimum number of servicing units required in the given circumstances. 
 BASIC QUEUING THEORY 
 Queuing system problems may occur when the flow of arriving traffic (people, facil-
ities, and so on) establishes a random demand for service at facilities with a limited 
service capacity. The time interval between arrival and service varies inversely with 
the level of the service capacity. The greater the number of service stations and the 
faster the rate of servicing, the smaller the time interval between arrival and service. 
 Methods and work measurement analysts should select an operating pro-
cedure that minimizes the total cost of operation. There must be an economic 
balance between waiting times and service capacity. The following four charac-
teristics define queuing problems: 
 1.  The pattern of arrival rates . The arrival rate (for example, a machine 
breaking down for repair) may be either constant or random. If random, the 
pattern is a probability distribution of the values of the intervals between 
successive arrivals. Also, probability distribution of the random pattern 
may be definable or undefinable. 
 2.  The pattern of the servicing rate . The servicing time may also be either 
constant or random. If random, analysts should define the probability 
distribution that fits the random pattern. 
 3.  The number of servicing units . In general, multiple-service queuing prob-
lems are more complex than those of single-service systems. However, 
most problems are the multiple-service type, such as the number of 
mechanics required to keep a battery of machines in operation. 
 4.  The pattern of selection for service . Service is usually on a first-come, 
first-served basis; however, in some cases, the selection may be completely 
random, or may follow some set of priorities.  
 The solutions to queuing problems fall into two broad categories: analytic 
and simulation. The analytic category covers a wide range of problems for which 
mathematical probability and analytic techniques have provided equations repre-
senting systems with various assumptions about queuing characteristics. One of 
the most common assumptions about the arrival pattern, or arrivals per unit time 
interval, is that they follow Poisson’s probability distribution: 
 
 

p k
a e
k
)
k
!
k
a

 where 
 a 5 mean arrival rate 
 
  k 5 number of arrivals per time interval  

590 
C H A P T E R  1 5
 A helpful graphic presentation of the cumulative Poisson probabilities appears 
in Figure 15.1. 
 A further consequence of a Poisson-type arrival pattern is that the random 
variable time between arrivals obeys an exponential distribution with the same 
.000001
.00001
.0001
.001
.01
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9
.99
.999
.9999
.99999
.999999
a • 01
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
2
0.2
a • 01
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
2
0.2
c • 
10
0
a = Average number of arrivals per unit time
P(c, a) = Probability that "c" or more arrivals occur per unit time
P(c, a) =
∞
x=c∑
e–aax
x!
 Figure 15.1   Poisson distribution of arrivals. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 1 5  Indirect and Expense Labor Standards  
591
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1 0
60
70 80 90 100• a 
2 0
3 0
4 0
50
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
20
30
40
50
60
70 80 90 100• a 
20
 1
 1
 10
20
30
50
4 0
30
40
50
70
100
100
150 
150 
140 
130 
120 
110 
100 
90
80
70
60
• c
c •
 • c
Figure 15.1  (continued)
parameter  a . Being a continuous distribution, the exponential distribution has a 
density function 
 f ( x ) 5  ae 2 ax  
 The exponential distribution has a mean  5 1/ a  and a variance 5 1/ a 2 , 
and  can be recognized as the mean interval between arrivals. In some queuing 
systems, the number of services per unit time may follow the Poisson pattern; 
the service times subsequently follow the exponential distribution. Figure 15.2 
illustrates the exponential curve  F(x) 5  e 2 x  , which shows the probabilities of 
exceeding various multiples of any specified service time.  

592 
C H A P T E R  1 5
1.0
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
.09
.08
.07
.06
.05
.04
.03
.02
.01
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
F(X) Probability of exceeding a specified value of "X"
 Figure 15.2   The exponential distribution. 
 The basic equations governing the queue applicable to Poisson arrivals and 
service, in arrival order, fall into these five categories: 
 1.  Any service time distribution and a single server 
 2.  Exponential service time and a single server 
 3.  Exponential service time and finite servers 
 4.  Constant service time and a single server 
 5.  Constant service time and finite servers 
 Equations have been developed for each of these categories. These equations 
provide quantitative answers to such problems as mean delay time in the waiting 
line and mean number of arrivals in the waiting line. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 1 5  Indirect and Expense Labor Standards  
593
 Two examples demonstrate the application of queuing theory. The first 
(Example 15.1) is the determination of a standard for an inspection process. This 
fits into the first of the five categories, a single server with any service time 
distribution. The second example (Example 15.2) applies to toolroom delays 
and falls into the second category, a single server with exponential service time. 
Many industrial problems fall into this category. 
Use of Queuing Theory to Establish a Standard 
Time for Inspection 
 EXAMPLE 15.1 
 An analyst wishes to determine a standard for inspecting the hardness of large motor 
armatures. The time is composed of two distinct quantities: the time the inspector 
takes to make his Rockwell observations, and the time the operator must wait until 
the next armature shaft is made available for inspection. The following assumptions 
apply: (1) single server; (2) Poisson arrivals; (3) arbitrary servicing time; and (4) first-
come, first-served discipline. This is a situation that fits into the first of the five cat-
egories, and the following equations apply: 
 (a)  

u

P 
ah
s
0
 
 (b)  



⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
w
uh
u
h
⎦
⎝
⎣
2(1
)
u
1
2
 
 (c)  



m
w
P
w
u
0
 
 where  a 5 average number of arrivals per unit of time 
 
  h 5 mean servicing time 
 
  w 5 mean waiting time of all arrivals 
 
  m 5 mean waiting time of delayed arrivals 
 
  n 5 number of arrivals present (both waiting and being served) at any given 
time 
 
  s 5 number of servers 
 
  u 5 servers’ occupancy ratio 5 ah
—s 
 
 5 standard deviation of servicing time 
 
  P(n) 5 probability of  n arrivals being present at any random time 
 
  P( ^ n) 5 probability of at least  n arrivals being present at any random time 
 
  t 5 unit of time 
   P   t/h 5 probability of a delay greater than  t/h multiples of the mean holding time 
 
  P ( d  0) 5 probability of any delay (delay greater than 0) 
 
  L 5 mean number of waiting individuals among all individuals 
 A stopwatch time study establishes a normal time of 4.58 min per piece for 
the actual hardness testing. The standard deviation of the service time is 0.82 min, and 
75 tests are made in every 8-h workday. From these data, we have 
 s 5 1 


a
75
480
0.156

594 
C H A P T E R  1 5
 
  h 5 4.58 
 
   5 0.82 
 
  u 5 (0.156)(4.58) 5 0.714 
 



⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
w
(0.714)(4.58)
2(1
0.714)
1
0.82
4.58
2
 
 
 5 5.90 min mean waiting time of an arrival 
 Thus, the analyst is able to determine a total time of 4.58 1 5.90 5 10.48 min per shift. 
Use of Queuing Theory to Establish a Standard Time 
for Toolroom Service 
EXAMPLE 15.2  
 Toolroom service time can be modeled as a single server with Poisson arrivals with 
exponential service. The equations that apply are 
 
 (a)  P . 0 5  u 
 
 (b)  P .  t / h 5  ue ( u –1)( t / h ) 
 
 (c)  P ( n ) 5 (1 –  u ) u n 
 
 (d)  P (^ n) u n 
 
 (e)  



w
h P
u
uh
u
(
0

P
)
1
1
u
 
 (f) 




m
w
p
uh
u
0
1
 
 
 (g)  


L
m
h
1
u
1
 
 The arrivals at a tool crib are considered to be Poisson, with an average time of 7 min 
between one arrival and the next. The length of the service time at the crib window is 
distributed exponentially, with a mean of 2.52 min determined through a stopwatch 
time study. The analyst wishes to determine the probability that a person arriving at 
the crib will have to wait, and the average length of the queues that form from time 
to time. Using this information, the analyst can evaluate the practicality of opening a 
second tool-dispensing window. 
 
 a 5 0.14 average number of arrivals per minute 
 
 h 5 2.52 min mean service time 
 
 s 5 1 server 
 
 P . 0 5 u 
 
 

ah
u
s
0.35
probability of a person arriving at crib
r
having to wait  
 
 




L
u
1
1
1.52
average length o
t
f queue formed
 

 
 
C H A P T ER 1 5  Indirect and Expense Labor Standards  
595
 MONTE CARLO SIMULATION 
 Simulation can be used to solve queuing problems for which neither standard 
nor empirical formulas are obtainable. Instead the analyst introduces a sample 
set of input values drawn from specified arrival and service time distributions. 
These input data generate a sample output distribution of waiting line results for 
the period. This approach, termed  Monte Carlo simulation , develops an optimum 
solution through a proper balance of service stations, servicing rates, and arrival 
rates and is most helpful for analyzing the waiting line problem involved in the 
centralized–decentralized storage location of tools, supplies, and service facilities. 
 Example 15.3 demonstrates the use of the technique to determine the min-
imum number of operators needed to set up machines in an automatic screw 
machine section.  
Use of Monte Carlo Simulation to Determine the Optimum 
Number of Operators 
 EXAMPLE 15.3  
 Fifteen machines are presently being serviced by three operators. The labor rate is 
$12/h, while the machine rate is $48/h. An analysis of past records reveals the fol-
lowing probability distributions of work stoppages per hour and the time required to 
service a machine: 
 Work stoppages 
per hour   
   Probability  
 Hours to get machine 
into operation  
 Probability  
 0 
 0.108 
 0.100 
 0.111 
 1 
 0.193 
 0.200 
 0.254 
 2 
 0.361 
 0.300 
 0.009 
 3 
 0.186 
 0.400 
 0.007 
 4 
 0.082 
 0.500 
 0.005 
 5 
 0.040 
 0.600 
 0.008 
 6 
 0.018 
 0.700 
 0.105 
 7 
 0.009 
 0.800 
 0.122 
 8 
 0.003 
 0.900 
 0.170 
   
 1.000 
 1.000 
 0.131 
 1.100 
 0.075 
 1.200 
 0.003 
   
 1.000 
 
 The time to get a machine into operation results in a bimodal distribution and 
does not conform to any standard distribution. The analyst assigns random blocks 
of three-digit numbers (000 to 999), in direct proportion to the probabilities associ-
ated with the data for both the arrival and the service rates, to simulate the expected 
behavior in the screw machine section over a period of time. The analyst takes a set 

596 
C H A P T E R  1 5
of random observations, to simulate the work stoppages occurring during one day of 
activity (8 working hours) on the floor. These random numbers yield the following: 
 Hour  
 Random number  
 Work stoppages  
 1 
 221 
 1 
 2 
 193 
 1 
 3 
 167 
 1 
 4 
 784 
 3 
 5 
 032 
 0 
 6 
 932 
 5 
 7 
 787 
 3 
 8 
 236 
 1 
 9 
 153 
 1 
 10 
 587 
 2 
 11 
 573 
 2 
 To estimate the time required to get a machine into operation after it has stopped, 
the analyst selects a different set of random numbers as input for each work stoppage. 
 Hour  
 Random number  
 Hours to get machine 
into operation  
 1 
 341 
 0.200 
 2 
 112 
 0.200 
 3 
 273 
 0.200 
 4 
 106 
 0.100 
 5 
 597 
 0.800 
 6 
 337 
 0.200 
 7 
 871 
 1.000 
 8 
 728 
 0.900 
 9 
 739 
 0.900 
 10 
 799 
 1.000 
 11 
 202 
 0.200 
 12 
 854 
 1.000 
 13 
 599 
 0.800 
 14 
 726 
 0.900 
 15 
 880 
 1.000 
 Table 15.1 shows the predicted machine downtime because of insufficient op-
erators, based on the indicated outcomes for 8 h of operation in the automatic screw 
machine department. 
 The simulated model indicates 2.8 h of machine downtime every day because 
of the lack of an operator. At a machine rate of $48/h, this amounts to a daily cost of 
2.8 3 48 5 $134.40. As the cost of a fourth operator only results in an added daily 
direct labor cost of 8 3 12 5 $96, it appears that three workers are not economically 
optimum to service the operation. 
 Note, however, that 10 random numbers make a very small simulation and may lead 
to incorrect results. With larger numbers, there is a greater chance of converging to an 
optimum solution. In fact, with 80 random numbers, the present setup of three workers 
to service the 15 automatic screw machines does appear to be the optimum solution, as 
only 19.6 h (instead of the extrapolated 28) are lost over the course of 80 h of operation. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 1 5  Indirect and Expense Labor Standards  
597
 EXPENSE LABOR STANDARDS 
 More and more, management is recognizing the need to determine accurately the 
appropriate office force for a given volume of work. To control office payroll, 
management must develop time standards, as they are the only reliable yard-
sticks for evaluating the size of any task. 
 As for direct labor work, methods analysis should precede work measure-
ment in all expense operations. The flow process chart is the ideal tool for dis-
playing the facts of the present method, allowing that method to be critically 
reviewed. Using the primary approaches to operation analysis, the analyst then 
considers such factors as the purpose of the operation, design of forms, office 
layout, elimination of delays resulting from poor planning and scheduling, and 
the adequacy of existing equipment. 
 After the completion of a thorough methods program, standards development 
can commence. Many office jobs are repetitive; consequently, it is not particularly 
difficult to set fair standards. Word processors; call centers, billing groups, and 
data input operators are representative groups that readily lend themselves to work 
measurement by stopwatch, standard data, and basic motion data techniques. 
 Table 15.1   Results of Monte Carlo Simulation of Machine Downtime 
 Hour  
 Random 
number  
 Work
stoppages  
 Random 
number  
 Hours 
to get 
machine 
into 
operation  
 Operators
available 
for next 
work 
stoppage  
 Downtime 
hours 
because of 
lack of 
operators 
for 
servicing  
 1 
 221 
 1 
 341 
 0.200 
 2 
   
 2 
 193 
 1 
 112 
 0.200 
 2 
   
 3 
 167 
 1 
 273 
 0.200 
 2 
   
 4 
 784 
 3 
 106 
 0.100 
 2 
   
   
   
   
 597 
 0.800 
 1 
   
   
   
   
 337 
 0.200 
 0 
   
  5 
 032 
 0 
 — 
 — 
 3 
   
  6 
 932 
 5 
 871 
 1.000 
 2 
   
   
   
   
 728 
 0.900 
 1 
   
   
   
   
 739 
 0.900 
 0 
   
   
   
   
 799 
 1.000 
 0 
 0.9 
   
   
   
 202 
 0.200 
 0 
 0.9 
 7 
 787 
 3 
 854 
 1.000 
 0 
   
   
   
   
 599 
 0.800 
 0 
 0.9 
   
   
   
 726 
 0.900 
 0 
 0.1 
 8 
 236 
 1 
 880 
 1.000 
 1 
   
 9 
 153 
 1 
 495 
 0.700 
 2 
   
 10 
 587 
 2 
 128 
 0.200 
 2 
   
   
   
   
 794 
 1.000 
 1 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 Total 
 2.8 

598 
C H A P T E R  1 5
 In studying office work, analysts should carefully identify element end-
points, so that standard data may be established for pricing future work. For 
example, in inputting physician orders to the computer system, the following 
elements of work normally occur for each physician order. 
 1.  Pick up physician order from pile. 
 2.  Read physician order instructions. 
 3.  Input headings on order, using keyboard: 
 
 a.  Date 
 
 b.  Patient name 
 
 c.  Lab test or drug required 
 
 d.  Ordering physician/department 
 Once analysts have developed standard data for most of the common ele-
ments used in an office, they can calculate time standards rapidly and economi-
cally. Of course, many clerical positions comprise a series of diversified activities 
that do not readily lend themselves to measurement. Such work is not made up 
of a series of standard cycles that continually repeat themselves; consequently, 
the work is more difficult to measure than direct labor operations. Because of 
this characteristic of some office routines, it is necessary to take many time stud-
ies, each of which may only be one cycle in duration. Then, by calculating all the 
studies taken, analysts can develop a standard for typical or average conditions. 
For example, they can calculate a time standard based on a page of physician or-
ders. Granted, some orders require symbols, Latin terminology, and other special 
characters or spacing and therefore take considerably longer than routine orders. 
Yet, if the technical keyboarding is not representative of average conditions, it 
does not result in an unfair influence on the operator’s performance over a period 
of time; simple keyboarding and shorter orders balance out the extra time needed 
to input complex orders. 
 It is usually not practical to establish standards on service positions that re-
quire creative thinking. One should carefully consider before trying to establish 
time standards for the physician placing the order. If such standards are estab-
lished, they should be used for scheduling, control, or labor budgeting, not for 
incentive wage payment. Putting pressure on employees such as physicians may 
retard creative thinking and patient care, and may even result in outright rebellion. 
Also, physicians should be evaluated under professional performance standards 
(see next section.) The result may be more costly to the health maintenance orga-
nization than the amount saved through the greater productivity of the physician.  
 SUPERVISORY STANDARDS 
 It is possible to establish standards for supervisory work (see Example 15.4). 
The work sampling technique is an especially good tool for determining equi-
table supervisor loads and for maintaining a proper balance between supervisors, 
facilities, clerical employees, and direct labor. Analysts could obtain the same 
information through all-day time studies, but the cost of reliable data would 

 
 
C H A P T ER 1 5  Indirect and Expense Labor Standards  
599
usually be prohibitive. Supervisory standards can be expressed in effective ma-
chine running hours or some other benchmark.   
The Setting of Supervisory Standards 
 EXAMPLE 15.4 
 A study of a panel manufacturer revealed that 0.223 supervisory hour was required 
per machine running hour in a given department (see Figure 15.3). The work sam-
pling study showed that out of 616 observations, the supervisor was working with 
the grid machines, inspecting grids, doing desk work, supplying material, walking, or 
engaging in activities classified as miscellaneous allowances for a total of 519 times. 
Converted to prorated hours, this figure revealed that 518 indirect hours were required 
for 2,461 machine running hours. Adding a 6 percent personal allowance, analysts 
computed a standard of 0.223 supervisory hour per machine running hour. 
 
 


518
2,461
1.06
0.223
 Thus, in a department operating 192 machine running hours a week, a supervi-
sor’s efficiency would be 
 
 


192
0.223
40h / week
107percen
r
t  
 
 Figure 15.3   Summary of supervisory work. 

600 
C H A P T E R  1 5
 15.2  STANDARD INDIRECT AND EXPENSE 
LABOR DATA 
 FUNDAMENTALS 
 Developing standard data to establish standards on indirect and expense labor 
operations is quite feasible. In view of the diversification of indirect labor opera-
tions, standard data are probably more appropriate for office, maintenance, and 
other indirect work than for standardized production operations. 
 As individual time standards are calculated, the analyst should tabularize 
the elemental times, for future reference. As the inventory of standard data is 
built up, the cost of developing new time standards declines proportionally. For 
example, tabularizing standard data for forklift truck operations can be based 
on six different elements: travel, brake, raise fork, lower fork, tilt fork, and the 
manual elements required to operate the truck. Once standard data have been ac-
cumulated for each of these elements, through the required range, analysts can 
determine the standard time required for any fork truck operation by summariz-
ing the applicable elements. In a similar manner, standard data can readily be 
established on janitorial work elements, such as sweep floor, wax and buff floor, 
dry mop, wet mop, vacuum rugs, or clean, dust, and mop lounge. 
 The maintenance job of “inspecting seven fire doors in a plant and mak-
ing minor adjustments” can be estimated from standard data. For example, the 
Department of the Navy developed the following standard: 
 Operation 
 Unit time (h) 
 No. units 
 Total time (h) 
 Inspection of fire door, roll-up type 
(manual chain, crankshaft, or electrically 
operated) fusible link. Includes minor 
adjustment 
 0.170 
 7 
 1.190 
 Walk 100 ft between each door, 
obstructed walking 
 0.00009 
 600 
 0.054 
   
   
   
 1.24 
 The standard data time of 0.00009 h/ft of obstructed walking was established 
from predetermined time systems, and the inspection time of 0.170 h per fire 
door was established from a stopwatch time study. 
 UNIVERSAL INDIRECT LABOR STANDARDS (UILS) 
 Where maintenance and other indirect operations are numerous and diversified, 
efforts have been made to reduce the number of different time standards for 
indirect operations, through universal indirect labor standards (UILS). The 
principle behind universal standards is the assignment of the major proportion 
of indirect operations (perhaps as much as 90 percent) to appropriate groups. 
Each group has its own standard, which is the average time for all indirect 
operations assigned to the group. For example, group A may include the 

 
 
C H A P T ER 1 5  Indirect and Expense Labor Standards  
601
following indirect operations: replace defective union, repair door (replace two 
hinges), replace limit switch, and replace two sections (14 ft of 1-in pipe). The 
standard time for any indirect operation performed in group A may be 48 min. 
This time represents the mean x– of all jobs within the group, and the dispersion 
of the jobs within the group for 2s is some predetermined percentage of x– (per-
haps 610 percent). 
 The three principal steps in introducing a universal indirect labor system, 
expressed as  slotting , are to 
 1.  Determine the number of standards (groups or slots) to do a satisfactory 
job. (Twenty slots should be used when the range is up to 40 h.) 
 2.  Determine the numerical standard representative of each group of opera-
tions contained in each slot. 
 3.  Assign the standard to the appropriate slot of indirect labor work as 
it occurs.  
 The initial step is to determine good benchmark standards, based on mea-
surements of an adequate sample of the indirect labor for which the UILS system 
is being developed. This is the most time-consuming and costly step in the pro-
cess. The analyst must establish a relatively large number of standards (200 or 
more) that are representative of the entire population of indirect work. Compe-
tent analysts can develop these measured benchmark standards by using proven 
industrial engineering tools, including stopwatch time study, standard data, for-
mulas, fundamental motion data, and work sampling. 
 Once established, the benchmark standards are arranged in numerical se-
quence. Thus, assuming 200 benchmark standards, the shortest would be listed 
first, the next-shortest second, and so on, ending with the longest. If there are 
20 slots, and if a uniform distribution is used, the time standard for the first 
slot is computed by calculating the mean of the first 10 benchmark standards. 
Similarly, the value of the second slot is calculated by taking the mean of bench-
mark standards 11 through 20. The last slot would be equal to the average of 
the benchmark standards 191 through 200. Engineers have used this procedure 
extensively in the development of UILS. 
 More reliable UILS result from using the normal, rather than the uniform, 
distribution. For 20 slots, the 200 standards would not be assigned as 10 per slot. 
Instead, the standard normal variable would be divided into 20 equal intervals 
(truncation of the two tails allows this). For example, the standard normal vari-
able may have a truncated range of 
 
 23.0 #  z # 1 3.0 
 which accounts for 99.74 percent of the area under the curve. The range of each 
interval would be 0.3. The benchmark standards used in the compilation of the 
mean of each of the 20 slots (intervals) would equal 
 
  P ( z e interval)(200)/0.9987 

602 
C H A P T E R  1 5
 Slot numbers 1 and 20 (because of symmetry) would have 
 
 
	

	



≈
z


P
P
z
	
(
3 0
2.7)(200)
0.9987
(2 7
3.0)(200)
0.9987
(0.9987
0.9965)(200)
0.9987
0.4406
0standard
a
s
 
 and slot numbers 10 and 11 would have 
 
 
	

	



≈
z


P
P
z
	
(
0 3
0.0)(200)
0.9987
(0 0
0.3)(200)
0.9987
(0.6179
0.5000)(200)
0.9987
23.61
24standards
 Rounding off the fractions is dictated by the fact that all 200 jobs must be 
assigned to a slot. The universal standard time for each slot is the average of the 
benchmark standards assigned to the slot. When studying a new part to be made, 
analysts can fit jobs to categories where similar jobs have been studied and stan-
dards established. 
 To determine the relative accuracy of the uniform and normal techniques, 
analysts used 270 maintenance standards developed by the Department of the 
Navy as benchmark standards. They divided these benchmark standards into 
20 slots, using the two approaches. To compare the results of the uniform and nor-
mal techniques, a simulation was done. For each of 25 weeks, analysts selected 
jobs at random until the sum of the actual standard times exceeded or equaled 
40 h. They then determined the universal maintenance standard for each job and 
calculated the weekly sum. They assumed that each job was properly slotted. 
 For each week, an error was calculated as 
 


Actualstandardtime
universalstandardtime
Actualstandardtime
100percen
r
t  
 The results of the simulations for the uniform and normal distributions are given 
in Table 15.2. This study confirmed that the normal gives better results than the 
uniform distribution. 
 Increasing the pay period from one week (40 h) to two weeks (80 h) would 
markedly reduce the cumulative error per pay period. The magnitude of the error 
would also decrease as the number of groups (slots) increased. 
 UILS offers an opportunity to introduce standards for a majority of indirect 
operations at a moderate cost, and it minimizes the cost of maintaining the indi-
rect standards system.   
 15.3  PROFESSIONAL PERFORMANCE 
STANDARDS 
  The cost of salaried workers is a sizable proportion of the total expense bud-
get, especially in service organizations, In most manufacturing and business  
operations, the salaries of professional employees in engineering, accounting, 

 
 
C H A P T ER 1 5  Indirect and Expense Labor Standards  
603
purchasing, sales, and general management represent a significant proportion of 
total cost. If the productivity of these employees can be improved by as little as 
a few percent, the overall impact on the firm’s business is consequential. Estab-
lishing standards for salaried employees and utilizing these standards as achiev-
able goals inevitably enhance productivity. 
 The difficulties in developing professional standards lie, first, in determining 
what to count and, second, in determining the method for counting these outputs. 
In determining what to count, the analyst can begin by stating the objectives of the 
professional employees’ positions. For example, buyers in the purchasing depart-
ment might have the following objective: “to procure quality components and raw 
materials at the lowest price, in time to meet company production and delivery 
schedules.” To be effective, a count of buyers’ outputs must consider five things: 
(1) proportion of deliveries made on schedule; (2) proportion of deliveries that meet 
or exceed quality requirements; (3) proportion of shipments that represent the lowest 
available price; (4) number of orders placed during some interval of time, such as 
one month; and (5) total dollar value of the purchases made during a period of time. 
 Table 15.2   Results of 25-Week Simulation 
   
 Absolute percent error 
 Week number 
 Uniform 
 Normal 
 1 
 5.97 
 7.18 
 2 
 16.01 
 6.93 
 3 
 8.49 
 6.42 
 4 
 10.94 
 4.03 
 5 
 25.78 
 1.67 
 6 
 2.61 
 0.47 
 7 
 4.79 
 6.08 
  8 
 0.88 
 3.37 
 9 
 4.51 
 5.34 
 10 
 0.05 
  6.45 
 11 
 30.78 
  0.32 
 12 
 21.93 
  1.75 
 13 
 8.23 
 4.24 
 14 
 6.67 
 7.55 
 15 
 2.37 
 2.37 
 16 
 0.06 
 0.87 
 17 
 12.53 
 2.88 
 18 
 3.73 
 5.21 
 19 
 6.85 
 1.52 
 20 
 11.50 
 2.29 
 21 
 20.18 
 2.48 
 22 
 6.44 
 8.31 
 23 
 3.46 
 6.72 
 24 
 2.96 
 0.45 
 25 
 11.74 
  1.01 
 Mean 
 9.18 
 3.84 
 Variance 
 151.78 
 21.62 
 Std. dev. 
 12.32 
 4.65 

604 
C H A P T E R  1 5
 The next problem is to establish achievable goals. In such instances, us-
ing historical records, supplemented with work sampling analyses, to determine 
how time is utilized can serve as the basis for the development of professional 
standards. 
 Returning to the example of establishing buyers’ standards, it would not 
be difficult to identify the purchases made by the various buyers, and to review 
what proportion of these orders was delivered on schedule over a six-month pe-
riod. The historical data study may reveal something analogous to the following: 
 Buyer 
 Proportion of orders delivered on 
or before schedule (percent) 
 A 
 70 
 B 
 82 
 C 
 75 
 D 
 50 
 E 
 80 
 Based on this record, skilled buyers should be able to procure at least 
72  percent of their purchases on schedule (the mean of their performance). 
 Similarly, a quality review of the purchases made by the five buyers may 
disclose the following: 
 Buyer 
 Proportion of orders delivered with 
less than 5 percent rejects (percent) 
 A 
 85 
 B 
 90 
 C 
 80 
 D 
 95 
 E 
 80 
 Here, the quality standard could be that 86 percent of orders received have less 
than 5 percent rejects (the mean of the past performance of the five buyers). 
 For the proportion of procurements purchased at the lowest available price, 
historical records can once again provide a comparison of the performance of the 
five buyers. Assume the following performance record applied: 
 Buyer 
 Proportion of orders procured at the 
lowest available price (percent) 
 A 
 45 
 B 
 50 
 C 
 60 
 D 
 47 
 E 
 40 
 The average of these values, 48.4 percent of the orders placed at the lowest avail-
able price, could be used as the normal performance. 

 
 
C H A P T ER 1 5  Indirect and Expense Labor Standards  
605
 Historical records might also indicate that, on average, a buyer placed 
120 orders per month, with a total monetary worth of $120,840. 
 These five criteria could then be used to develop an overall performance 
standard: delivery, quality, price, number of orders, and order value. For exam-
ple, one method would add the means of the first three criteria (0.72 1 0.86 
1 0.484) plus 0.002 times the mean of the order placed plus 0.000001 times 
the average monetary worth of purchases. The buyer’s standard in this fictitious 
operation would then be 
 
 0.72 1 0.86 1 0.484 1 0.24 1 0.12 5 2.424 
 Another example may help clarify how performance standards may be de-
veloped for managerial personnel. Consider the position of director of personnel 
administration. An analysis may suggest four specific objectives of this position:  
 1.  Establish a methodology for identifying both the quantity and quality of the 
company’s human resources. 
 2.  Establish a procedure for attracting, employing, and retaining the kinds and 
numbers of employees required for successful operation of the company. 
 3.  Establish policies, programs, and practices that facilitate the achievement 
of departmental objectives and maintain employee morale. 
 4.  Administer and maintain the company’s benefit program. 
 Now that the objectives have been stated, it is relatively easy to develop a 
performance standard in terms of time. For example, the standard for objective 1 
may be: “Within the next 3 months, train staff representatives to conduct an audit 
of the company’s personnel, to determine projected needs from the standpoint of 
both numbers and type.” 
 The performance standard for objective 2 might be: “Within the next 
12 months, employ (a) 2 Ph.D. chemists; (b) 7 M.S. degrees in industrial and/or 
mechanical engineering; and (c) 35 B.S. degrees, with a distribution of 10 in 
business, 20 in engineering, and 5 in liberal arts. Employ (based on anticipated 
turnover and expansion) 75 hourly employees. Investigate the turnover rate of 
professional employees in the past year, and prepare a report showing how turn-
over may be reduced.” 
 For objective 3, the performance standard might be as follows: “Within the 
next 3 months, update the current management handbook, bringing the salary 
administration program up to date. Within the next 6 months, develop and dis-
tribute a booklet for all hourly employees, describing the new grievance proce-
dure established in the new labor contract. The booklet should explain not only 
the importance of reducing the number of grievances, but also how this can be 
done.” 
 The performance standard for objective 4 could be: “Within the next 
12 months, review the company’s entire fringe benefit program and compare our 
benefits to those of similar-sized companies in this area. Make any appropriate 
recommendations to management.” 

606 
C H A P T E R  1 5
 These objectives identify performance standards for finite time periods. The 
standards may change as time passes, because each standard is result-based. The 
standards established for succeeding periods may include different work assign-
ments to meet the stated objectives. 
 In the establishment of professional performance standards, the profes-
sionals themselves should assist in identifying the objectives of each position, 
gathering the historical performance records, and developing the standards. Per-
formance standards developed without the complete involvement of the profes-
sionals are seldom realistic. 
 When gathering historical data to facilitate the development of professional 
standards, the analyst should take a work sampling study during the period that 
serves as the basis of the historical record data. This work sampling study can re-
veal how much working time was spent on the various necessary work routines, 
or on work assignments that could better be handled by clerical or semiprofes-
sional employees. It could also reveal how much time was literally wasted. After 
reviewing the work sampling study, the analyst can performance-rate the average 
data gathered over the historical period, to obtain a standard that is more repre-
sentative of normal professional experience. 
 In the development of professional standards, the following guidelines 
should be observed: 
 1.  Each manager should be involved with setting the standards for his or her 
professional subordinates. Professional standards should be developed 
jointly by employees and their supervisors. 
 2.  Standards should be result-based and should be worded to include mea-
surement references. 
 3.  Standards must be realistically attainable by at least one-half of the group 
concerned. 
 4.  Standards should be periodically audited and revised if necessary. 
 5.  It is helpful to work-sample managers to ensure that they have adequate 
clerical and administrative aid support and are using their time judiciously. 
 SUMMARY 
 It is more difficult to study and determine representative standard times for 
nonrepetitive tasks, which are characteristic of most indirect labor operations, 
than for repetitive tasks. Because indirect labor operations are difficult to stan-
dardize and study, they are only infrequently subjected to methods analysis. 
Consequently, this area usually holds greater potential for reducing costs and 
increasing profits through methods and time study than does any other.  
 The usual procedure is to take a sufficiently large sample of stopwatch time 
studies to ensure the representation of average conditions, and then to tabularize 
the allowed elemental times in the form of standard data. Predetermined time 
systems data also have wide application in establishing standards on indirect 

 
 
C H A P T ER 1 5  Indirect and Expense Labor Standards  
607
work. This is especially true of those systems that utilize larger blocks of funda-
mental motions, such as MTM-2 and MOST. 
 Analysts can accurately estimate indirect elements involving waiting time 
by using waiting line or queuing theory. Where the problem does not fit estab-
lished waiting line equations, analysts can use Monte Carlo simulation as a tool 
for determining the extent of the waiting line problem in the work area. To assist 
in establishing standards on indirect and expense work, Table 15.3 can serve as a 
guide for choosing the appropriate method. 
 Standards on indirect work offer distinct advantages to both the employer 
and the employee. Some of these advantages are as follows: 
 1.  The installation of standards leads to many operating improvements. 
 2.  The efficiency of various indirect labor departments can be determined. 
 3.  Labor loads can be better scheduled and budgeted. 
 4.  System improvements can be evaluated prior to installation, avoiding 
costly mistakes. 
 5.  Wage incentive plans can be installed, allowing employees to increase 
their earnings. 
 6.  Employees require less supervision and perform better, as a program of 
work standards tends to enforce itself. 
 Table 15.3   Guide for Establishing Indirect Labor and Expense Standard 
 Indirect and expense 
type work 
 Recommended method of establishing standards 
 Routine maintenance. Work 
standards 0.5 to 3 hrs 
 Standard data, MTM-2, MTM-3, MOST 
 Complicated maintenance, 
standards 3 hrs to 40 hrs 
 Slotting based on universal indirect labor standards 
 Shipping and receiving 
 Standard data, MTM-2, MTM-3, MOST 
 Toolroom 
 Slotting based on universal indirect labor standards 
 Inspection 
 Standard data, MTM-2, MOST 
 Tool design 
 Slotting based on universal indirect labor standards 
 Buying 
 Standards based on historical records, analysis, and 
work sampling 
 Accounting 
 Standards based on historical records, analysis, and 
work sampling 
 Plant engineering 
 Standards based on historical records, analysis, and 
work sampling 
 Clerical 
 Standards based on standard data, MTM-2, MOST 
 Janitorial 
 Standard data, slotting based on universal indirect labor 
standards 
 General management 
 Standards based on historical records, analysis, and 
work sampling 

608 
C H A P T E R  1 5
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  Differentiate between indirect labor and expense labor. 
 2.  Explain queuing theory. 
 3.  Which four divisions constitute indirect and expense work? 
 4.  Are standards established on the unnecessary delays portion of indirect and 
expense work? Why or why not? 
 5.  Why has there been a marked increase in indirect workers? 
 6.  Why do more unavoidable delays occur in maintenance operations than in 
production work? 
 7.  What is meant by crew balance? By interference time? 
 8.  Explain how time standards could be established on janitorial operations. 
 9.  Which office operations can be readily time studied? 
 10.  Why are standard data especially applicable to indirect labor operations? 
 11.  Summarize the advantages of standards established on indirect work. 
 12.  Explain the application of slotting for indirect or expense labor. 
 13.  Why will a universal standards system involving as few as 20 benchmark standards 
work in a large maintenance department where thousands of different jobs are 
performed each year? 
 PROBLEMS  
 1.  Work measurement procedures establish an average time of 6.24 min per piece on 
the inspection of a complex forging. The standard deviation of the inspection time 
is 0.71 min. Usually, 60 forgings are delivered to the inspection station on the line 
every 8-h turn. One operator performs this inspection. Assuming that the castings 
arrive in Poisson fashion and that the service time is exponential, what would be 
the mean waiting time of a casting at the inspection station? What would be the 
average length of the casting queue? 
 2.  In the tool and die room of the Dorben Company, the work measurement analyst 
wishes to determine a standard for the jig boring of holes on a variety of molds. 
The standard will be used to estimate mold costs only. It will be based on operator 
wait time for molds coming from a surface grinding section and on operator 
machining time. The wait time is based on a single server, Poisson arrivals, expo-
nential service time, and first-come, first-served discipline. A study revealed that 
the average time between arrivals was 58 min. The average jig-boring time was 
46 min. What is the possibility of a delay of a mold at the jig borer? What is the 
average number of molds in back of the jig borer? 
 3.  What would be the expected waiting time per shipment if a stopwatch time study 
established that the normal time to prepare a shipment was 15.6 min? Twenty-one 
shipments are made every shift (8 h). The standard deviation of the service time has 
been estimated as 1.75 min. It is assumed that the arrivals are Poisson distributed 
and that the servicing time is arbitrary. 
 4.  Using Monte Carlo methods, what would be the expected downtime hours due to 
the lack of an operator for servicing if four operators were assigned to the work 
situation described in Example 15.3? 

 
 
C H A P T ER 1 5  Indirect and Expense Labor Standards  
609
 5.  The arrivals at the company cafeteria are Poisson, with an average time of 1.75 min 
between arrivals during the lunch period. The average time for a customer to obtain 
lunch is 2.81 min, and this service time is distributed exponentially. What is the 
probability that a person arriving at the cafeteria will have to wait? How long? 
 REFERENCES 
 Knott, Kenneth. “Indirect Operations: Measurement and Control.” In  Handbook of 
Industrial Engineering . 2d ed. Ed. Gavriel Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & 
Sons, 1992. 
 Lewis, Bernard T.  Developing Maintenance Time Standards . Boston, MA: Industrial 
Education Institute 1967. 
 Nance, Harold W.  Office Work Measurement . Malabar, FL: Krieger, 1983. 
 Newbrough, E. T.  Effective Maintenance Management . New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967. 

This page intentionally left blank

 
611
 
611
 Standards 
Follow-Up 
and Uses 
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Follow-up of methods and standards is necessary for both fairness to 
workers and profitability. 
 •  Use the appropriate approach for setting and revising standards. 
 •  Use standards to 
 •  Set wage incentives. 
 •  Compare methods. 
 •  Determine plant capacity. 
 •  Determine labor costs and budgets. 
 •  Enforce quality standards. 
 •  Improve customer service. 
 F
 ollow-up is the eighth and last of the systematic steps in installing a meth-
ods improvement program. Although follow-up is as important as any of 
the other steps, it is frequently the most neglected. Analysts have a natural 
tendency to consider the methods improvement program complete after develop-
ing the time standards. However, a methods installation and resultant standard 
should never be considered complete. 
 Follow-up is necessary to ensure that the proposed method is being followed, 
that the established standards are being realized, and that the new method is 
being supported by labor, supervision, the union, and management. Follow-
up usually results in additional benefits accruing from new ideas and new 
approaches, which eventually stimulate the desire to improve a methods engi-
neering program for an existing design or process. The procedure is to repeat the 
methods improvement cycle shortly after it is completed, so that each process 
 
CHAPTER
 
  16 
 

612 
C H A P T E R  1 6 
and each design are continually being scrutinized for further improvement. This 
is a necessary component of any sound continuous improvement program. 
 Without follow-up, it is easy for the proposed methods to revert to the origi-
nal procedures. We have made innumerable methods studies where follow-up 
revealed that the method under study was slowly reverting to, or had reverted 
to, the original method. Humans are creatures of habit, and a workforce must 
develop the habit of the proposed method, if it is to be preserved. Continual 
follow-up is the only way to ensure that the new method is maintained long 
enough for all those associated with its details to become completely familiar 
with its routines. 
 16.1 MAINTAINING STANDARD TIMES 
  Both labor and management have emphasized the necessity of establishing fair 
standard times, and once fair standards are introduced, it is equally important 
that they be maintained. Although it is the normal function of production super-
vision to spot-check and monitor standards, the extensiveness of this job seldom 
permits adequate time for completely effective follow-up. Consequently, the 
methods and standards department should schedule regular follow-ups. 
 The initial follow-up or audit for production jobs should take place ap-
proximately one month after the development of time standards. A second audit 
should be made two months later, and a third three to nine months after that. The 
frequency of the audits should be based on the expected hours of application per 
year. As an example, one large company uses the data shown in Table 16.1 to 
determine the frequency of the audit of methods and standards. 
 On each follow-up, analysts should review the original method report as 
well as the development of the standard, to be certain that all aspects of the new 
method are being followed. At times, they may find that portions of the new 
method are being neglected and that workers have reverted to the old ways. Work-
ers sometimes conceal methods changes they have personally implemented, so 
they can increase their earnings or diminish their effort while achieving the same 
production. Often methods changes that increase the time required to perform the 
task may have also developed. These changes may have been initiated by the su-
pervisor or an inspector and, in their opinion, may be of insufficient consequence 
to adjust the standard. When this happens, the supervisor should be contacted 
 Table 16.1   Frequency of Audits 
 Hours of application 
per standard per year 
 Frequency of audit 
 0–10 
 Once per 3 years 
 10–50 
 Once per 2 years 
 50–600 
 Once per year 
 Over 600 
 Twice per year 
 Source: Courtesy Industrial Engineers Division, Procter & Gamble, Co. 

 
 
CH A PT ER 1 6    Standards Follow-Up and Uses   
613
immediately and the analyst should attempt to determine why the unauthorized 
changes have taken place. If no satisfactory reasons can be given for the change, 
the analyst should insist that the correct procedure be followed.   
 Both the method and the performance of the operator should be followed 
up. The worker’s performance should be equal to or greater than standard. Per-
formance should be compared to typical learning curves (see Chapter 18) for the 
class of work. If the operator is not making sufficient progress, a careful study, 
including a meeting with the operator, should be conducted to determine if any 
unforeseen difficulties have been encountered. 
 Usually, workers’ performance approximates the normal curve, as described 
in Chapter 11. However, several common variations from the normal curve indi-
cate problems and the need for an audit. Figure 16.1 illustrates that the standards 
are loose and that workers are holding back so that they do not earn at a rate 
above 140 percent, feeling that if they perform beyond this point, the time stan-
dards will be adjusted downward. 
 Figure 16.2 illustrates the output in an environment where the method has 
not been standardized. Variation in material is another cause of this flat distribu-
tion. In both of these instances, an audit can ensure that the best method is being 
used. Thus, the developed standard reflects the time required for average expe-
rienced operators, working with good skill and effort, to perform an operation 
at a pace that can be maintained for 8 h, allowing for personal and unavoidable 
delays and fatigue. 
 An audit should typically be performed if the overall cycle time and the ex-
isting time standards vary by more than 5 percent. In the majority of cases, a 
detailed time study should reveal that a change in method is the cause. This can 
Performance (percent)
Frequency
95
115
Expected distribution
Actual
distribution
135
 Figure 16.1   Distribution of performance in plant where standards are loose 
 compared to expected distribution of average performance of 115 percent of normal. 

614 
C H A P T E R  1 6 
be ascertained by referring to the original time study, which includes a complete 
description of the method.  
 In addition, the analyst should review all factory layouts to ensure that the 
ideal flow of materials and product is taking place and examine any new equip-
ment acquired in conjunction with the method, to ensure that the anticipated 
productivity is being realized. 
 Furthermore, the analyst should audit the job evaluation after the worker has 
performed the new method for six months. This review should ensure that the 
compensation of all employees associated with the developed method is compet-
itive with equivalent jobs in the area. Absentee rates should be audited, to obtain 
an additional measure of operator acceptance. Although auditing methods and 
standards require time and expense, a thorough and regular follow-up system 
will ensure the success of the program. 
 16.2 USING STANDARDS 
 STANDARDS REVIEW 
 Time standards are fundamental to the operation of any manufacturing enterprise 
or business, providing the one common denominator from which all elements 
of cost evolve. In fact, everyone uses time standards for practically everything 
she or he does or wants anyone else to do. Examples in everyday life include a 
worker who allocates one hour to wash, shave, dress, eat breakfast, and get to 
work; the student who schedules two hours to complete an assignment; and the 
bus driver who follows a specific schedule of arrivals and departures. 
Performance (percent)
Frequency
95
115
Expected distribution
Actual
distribution
135
 Figure 16.2   Distribution of performance in plant where methods and/or material has 
not been standardized. 

 
 
CH A PT ER 1 6    Standards Follow-Up and Uses   
615
 We are particularly interested in time standards used in the effective opera-
tion of a manufacturing company, a service enterprise, or a business. Such time 
standards may be determined in one or more of the following ways: 
 1.  By estimate or performance records 
 2.  By stopwatch time study (see Chapter 10) 
 3.  By standard data (see Chapter 12) 
 4.  By time study formulas (see Chapter 12) 
 5.  By predetermined time systems (see Chapter 13) 
 6.  By work sampling studies (see Chapter 14) 
 7.  By queuing theory (see Chapter 15)  
 Methods 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 give considerably more reliable results than meth-
ods 1 or 7. If standards are used for wage payment, they should be determined 
as accurately as possible. Consequently, standards determined by estimate or by 
performance records are better than no standards at all. All these methods are ap-
plicable under certain conditions, and all have limitations on accuracy and instal-
lation cost. The summaries presented in Tables 16.2 and 16.3 may prove helpful 
in selecting the appropriate approach. 
 WAGE INCENTIVE PLANS BASIS 
 While standards have many other uses in the operation of an enterprise, the need 
for reliable and consistent standards is most pronounced in the wage payment 
area (see Chapter 17). Without equitable standards, no incentive plan that com-
pensates in proportion to output can possibly succeed, and without this yard-
stick, it is not possible to measure individual performance. 
 Similarly, any type of supervisory bonus keyed to productivity depends 
directly on equitable time standards. Because workers receive more and better 
supervisory attention under a plan where the supervisory bonus is related to out-
put, the majority of supervisory plans consider worker productivity as the prin-
cipal criterion for the supervisory bonus. Other factors usually are indirect labor 
costs, scrap cost, product quality, and methods improvements. 
 METHODS COMPARISONS 
 Because time is a common measure for all jobs, time standards are a basis for 
comparing various methods of doing the same work. For example, suppose 
an operator thought it might be advantageous to install broaching on a close-
tolerance inside diameter, rather than ream the part to size, as is currently being 
done. To make a sound decision on the practicality of the change, analysts would 
develop time standards for each procedure and then compare the results. 
 EFFECTIVE SPACE UTILIZATION 
 Time is the basis for determining how much of each kind of equipment is needed. 
Management can only make the best possible utilization of space by knowing the 

616 
C H A P T E R  1 6 
 Table 16.2   Comparison of Different Methods for Establishing a Time Standard 
 Advantages 
 Disadvantages 
 Stopwatch Time Study 
 1.  Only method directly measuring operator times 
 1.  Requires rating worker performance 
 2.  Allows detailed observation of complete cycle 
and method 
 2.  Does not force a detailed record of the method, 
motions, tools, etc., used 
 3.  May cover relatively infrequent elements 
 3.  May not properly evaluate noncyclic elements 
 4.  Provides quick and accurate values for machine-
controlled elements 
 4.  Bases standard on the bias of one analyst studying 
one worker using one method 
 5.  Is relatively simple to learn and explain 
 5.  Requires ongoing production work 
 Predetermined Time Systems 
 1.  Forces a detailed record of the method, motions, 
tools, etc., used 
 1.  Depends on complete description of method, 
motions, tools, etc., for accurate standard 
 2.  Encourages work simplification 
 2.  Requires more training of analysts 
 3.  Eliminates performance rating 
 3.  Is more difficult to explain to workers 
 4.  Permits establishment of standard before actual 
production 
 4.  Requires more time to establish standards 
 5.  Permits easy adjustment of standard due 
to methods changes 
 5.  Requires other data sources for process- or 
machine-controlled elements 
 6.  Establishes consistent standards 
     
 Standard Data, Formulas, and Queuing Methods 
 1.  Eliminates performance rating 
 1.  May require more training of analysts 
 2.  Establishes consistent standards 
 2.  Is more difficult to explain to workers 
 3.  Permits establishment of standard before actual 
production 
 3.  May not accommodate small variations in the 
method 
 4.  Permits easy adjustment of standard due to 
methods changes 
 4.  May be inaccurate if extended beyond the scope of 
the data used in their development 
 Work Sampling 
 1.  Reduces tension caused by constant observation 
of the worker 
 1.  Impairs accuracy of performance rating 
 2.  Establishes an average standard over varying 
conditions 
 2.  Requires relatively large number of random 
observations for accuracy 
 3.  Permits simultaneous development of standards 
for a variety of operations 
 3.  Requires accurate records of working hours and 
units produced 
 4.  Best for analysis of machine utilization, work 
activities, and delays 
 4.  Assumes that worker uses a standard method 

 
 
CH A PT ER 1 6    Standards Follow-Up and Uses   
617
exact requirements for facilities. If a company requires 10 milling machines, 
20 drill presses, 30 turret lathes, and 6 grinders in one machining department, the 
manager can plan for the best layout of this equipment. Without time standards, 
the company could overprovide for one facility and underprovide for another, 
inefficiently utilizing the space available. 
 As another example, to determine the size of storage and inventory areas, 
managers consider the length of time a part will be in storage as well as the 
demand for the part. Here again, time standards are the basis for determining the 
size of such areas. 
 PLANT CAPACITY DETERMINATION 
 Through time standards, the machine, department, and plant capacity can all be 
determined. Once the available facility hours and the time required to produce a 
unit of product are known, it is a matter of simple arithmetic to estimate product 
potential. For example, if the bottleneck operation requires 15 min per piece, and 
if 10 facilities for this operation exist, then based on a 40-h/week operation, the 
plant capacity for this product would be 
 
 


40 h
10
0.25 h
1,600piecesperweek
 NEW EQUIPMENT PURCHASE BASIS 
 Because time standards allow analysts to determine machine, department, and 
plant capacity, they also provide the information necessary to determine how 
many of which facilities are needed for a given production volume. Accurate 
 Table 16.3   Guide for Selecting Appropriate Time Standard Method 
 Best method: 
 For work: 
 Stopwatch time study 
 1.  With repetitive cycles of any duration 
   
 2.  With wide variety of dissimilar elements 
   
 3.  With process- or machine-controlled elements 
 Predetermined time systems 
 1.  With operator-controlled elements 
   
 2.  With repetitive cycles of short to medium duration 
   
 3.  Not yet in production 
   
 4.  With controversy over rating and consistency of 
standards 
 Standard data, formulas, 
and queuing methods   
 1.  With similar elements of any duration 
 2.  With controversy over rating and consistency of 
standards 
 Work sampling 
 1.  With large variations from cycle to cycle 
   
 2.  With controversy over stopwatch use 
   
 3.  With controversy over constant observation of worker 
   
 4.  Where machine utilization, activity levels, and 
delay allowances are needed 

618 
C H A P T E R  1 6 
comparative time standards also highlight the advantages of one facility over its 
competitors. For example, a plant may find it necessary to purchase three addi-
tional single-spindle, bench-type drill presses. By reviewing available standards, 
plant managers can procure the style and design of drill press that produces the 
most favorable output per unit of time. 
 WORKFORCE VERSUS AVAILABLE WORK 
 Having concrete information on the required production volume, as well as the 
time needed to produce a unit, enables analysts to determine the required labor 
force. For example, if the production load for a given 40-h week is 4,420 h, the 
company needs 4,420/40, or 111, operators. This use of standards is especially 
important in a retrenching market, in which production volume is going down. 
Without a yardstick to determine the actual number of people needed to per-
form the reduced load, when overall volume diminishes, the entire workforce 
may slow down to make the available work last. Unless the workforce balances 
with the available work volume, unit costs progressively rise. Under these cir-
cumstances, production operations start producing a loss, necessitating increased 
selling prices with potential reductions in sales volume. The cycle repeats with 
greater losses. 
 In an expanding market, it is equally important to be able to budget labor. 
Rising customer demands necessitate a greater volume of personnel. Companies 
must determine the exact number and type of personnel to add to the payroll, so 
that these workers can be recruited in sufficient time to meet customer schedules. 
If accurate time standards exist, it is a matter of simple arithmetic to convert 
product requirements to departmental work-hours. 
 Figure 16.3 illustrates how overall plant capacity may be increased in an 
expanding market. Here, the plant anticipates doubling its work-hour capacity 
between January and November. This budget projects the scheduled contracts 
in terms of work-hours and allows a reasonable cushion (crosshatched section) 
for receiving additional orders. This process can be extended into budgeting the 
labor needs of specific departments as well. 
 IMPROVING PRODUCTION CONTROL 
 Production control is the phase of an operation that schedules, routes, expedites, 
and follows up production orders, in an effort to achieve operating economies 
and satisfy customer requirements. The whole function of production control 
is based on determining where and when the work can be done. This cannot be 
achieved without a concrete idea of “how long.” 
 Scheduling, one of the major functions of production control, is usually 
handled in three degrees of refinement: (1) long-range, or master, scheduling; 
(2) firm order scheduling; and (3) detailed operation scheduling, or machine loading. 
 Long-range scheduling is based on the existing and anticipated production 
volume. In this case, specific orders are not given any particular sequence, but 
are merely lumped together and scheduled in appropriate time periods.  

 
 
CH A PT ER 1 6    Standards Follow-Up and Uses   
619
 Firm order scheduling involves scheduling existing orders to meet customer 
demands, while still operating in an economical fashion. Here, workers assign 
degrees of priority to specific orders, and anticipated shipping promises evolve 
from this schedule. 
 Detailed operation scheduling, or machine loading, involves assigning spe-
cific operations to individual machines day by day. The scheduling is planned to 
minimize setup time and machine downtime, while meeting firm order sched-
ules. Figure 16.4 illustrates the machine loading of a specific department for 
one week. It shows that considerable capacity exists on milling machines, drill 
presses, and internal thread grinders. 
 Regardless of the degree of refinement of the scheduling procedure, sched-
uling would be impossible without time standards. Time standards help prede-
termine the flow of materials and work in progress, thus forming a basis for 
accurate scheduling. The success of any schedule is directly related to the accu-
racy of the time values used in determining the schedule. If time standards do not 
exist, schedules formulated on judgment only cannot be expected to be reliable. 
 DETERMINING LABOR EFFICIENCY 
 With reliable time standards, a plant does not have to have an incentive wage 
payment system to determine and control its labor costs. The ratio of depart-
mental earned production hours to departmental clock hours reveals the effi-
ciency of that department. The reciprocal of the efficiency multiplied by the 
average hourly rate gives the hourly cost of standard production. For example, 
Available capacity
for new orders
Productive Capacity
as of January 1
Required worker-hour load
based on scheduled contracts
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Worker-hour capacity by weeks
Total worker-ho
ur lo
ad b
udg
ete
d f
or 
10 
mo
nth
 pe
riod
 
 Figure 16.3   Chart illustrating actual projected work-hour load and budgeted 
work-hour load. 

620 
C H A P T E R  1 6 
Dorben Manufacturing Company
Machine load – July 29
Mon.
Tues.
Wed.
Thurs.
Fri.
Sat.
32
0
64
96
128
160
192
32
0
64
96
128
160
192
32
0
64
96
128
160
192
656
0
1312
1968
2624
3280
3936
1648
0
3296
4844
6592
8240
9888
64
0
128
192
256
320
384
64
0
128
192
256
320
384
96
0
192
288
384
480
576
112
0
224
336
448
560
672
112
0
224
336
448
560
672
128
0
256
384
512
640
768
112
0
224
336
448
560
672
112
0
224
336
448
560
672
48
0
96
144
196
240
288
48
0
96
144
192
240
288
#4W & S
(2)
#3W & S
(41)
#2W & S
(4)
Leland Gifford
drill presses
(7)
Providence
drill presses
Delta
drill presses
(7)
Cinn-Bickford
drill presses
(7)
J & L external
thd. grinders
(7)
J & L internal
thd. grinders
(3)
Cinn C'T' less
 grinders
(2)
Horizontal
milling machine
(8)
Vertical
milling machine
(4)
Modern cutoff
J & L lathes
(2)
Punch press
(6)
Total
machines
Represents machine-hours based on available material
Represents machine-hours based on prospective material
Represents worker-hours
 Figure 16.4   Machine loading of a machining department for one week. 
 (Notice that several schedules depend on receiving additional raw material.) 

 
 
CH A PT ER 1 6    Standards Follow-Up and Uses   
621
the  finishing department in a plant using straight daywork may have 812 clock 
hours  H c  of labor time for 876 earned hours  H e  of production. The departmental 
efficiency will then be  
 
 



E
H
H
e
c
876
812
108percent
 
 If the average day work (see Chapter 17) hourly rate in the department is $16.80, 
then the hourly direct labor cost, based on standard production, is 
 
 


1
1.08
$16.80
$15.56
 
 In a second example, assume that in another department, the clock hours are 
2,840 and the earned hours of production for the period are only 2,760. In this 
case, the efficiency would be 
 
 

2,760
2,840
97percent
 
 and the hourly direct labor cost, based on standard production, with an average 
daywork rate of $16.80, would equal 
 
 


1
0.97
$16.80
$17.32
 
 In the latter case, management would realize that its labor costs were run-
ning $0.52 per hour more than base rates, and it could increase supervision to 
bring total labor costs into line. In the first example, labor costs were running 
less than standard, which would allow a downward price revision, increasing the 
production volume, or making some other adjustment suitable to both manage-
ment and labor. 
 MANAGEMENT PROBLEMS 
 Time standards are accompanied by many control measures, such as schedul-
ing, routing, material control, budgeting, forecasting, planning, and standard 
costs. Having controls on practically every phase of an enterprise, including 
production, engineering, sales, and cost, minimizes management problems. For 
example, Figure 16.5 illustrates a monthly lost-time analysis developed so that 
management can take positive action when scheduled hours are not attained as 
planned. Note that a goal of 9.50 percent hours lost of scheduled time was es-
tablished and that the months of July, September, October, and April exceeded 
that goal; more specifically, the upper control limit (UCL). By exercising the 
“exception principle,” in which attention is given only to those items deviating 
from the planned course of events, management can confine its efforts to only a 
small segment of the total activity of the enterprise. 
  

622 
C H A P T E R  1 6 
 CUSTOMER SERVICE 
 Experience has proved that companies that have developed sound standards 
based on measurement are more likely to meet scheduled delivery dates for their 
products. The use of time standards allows the introduction of up-to-date produc-
tion control procedures, with the resulting advantage to customers who get their 
merchandise when they want and need it. Also, time standards tend to make any 
company more time- and cost-conscious; this usually results in lower selling 
prices. As has been explained, quality is maintained under a work standards plan, 
thus assuring the customers of more parts made to required specifications.  
 16.3 COSTING 
 Costing  refers to the procedure of accurately determining costs in advance of 
production. The advantage of being able to predetermine cost is obvious. Most 
contracts today are let on a “firm cost” basis, which means that the producer 
must predetermine production costs in order to set the firm price high enough 
to make a margin of profit. By having time standards on direct labor operations, 
producers can preprice those elements using the  prime cost  of the product. Prime 
cost is usually thought of as the sum of the direct material and direct labor costs. 
 Costs are the basis of actions within an organization. When the costs of pro-
cessing a part become too high compared to competitive production methods, 
consideration will be given to making a change. Invariably, several alternatives 
exist for producing a given functional design—alternatives that compete on a 
cost basis. For example, casting will compete with forging, reaming with broach-
ing, die casting with plastic molding, powdered metal with automatic screw 
machine, and so on. 
 Manufacturing costs can be classified into four groups: direct material costs, 
direct labor costs, factory expense, and general expense. The first two are directly 
FY 91 Goal = 9.50%
Percent by month
30
20
10
0
Percent of scheduled time
15.32
6.38
11.42 10.40
2.57
5.72
0.44
6.25
5.93
10.70
8.28
5.73
1.66
JUL
AUG
SEP
OCT
NOV
DEC
JAN
FEB
MAR APR MAY JUN
JUL
UCL
Goal
 Figure 16.5   Monthly lost-time analysis. 
 ( Courtesy: Ramesh C. Gulati, Sverdrup Technology, Inc., AEDC Group) 

 
 
CH A PT ER 1 6    Standards Follow-Up and Uses   
623
involved with production, while the latter two are expenses beyond production 
costs, sometimes termed  overhead. Direct material  costs include the costs of 
raw materials, purchased subcomponents, standard commercial items (fasten-
ers, wires, connectors, etc.), and subcontracted items. The industrial engineer 
begins by calculating the basic quantity required for the design. To this value are 
added losses for scrap, from either manufacturing or process errors; waste, from 
design errors; and shrinkage due to theft or environmental effects. The resulting  
increased quantity, multiplied by unit price, yields final material costs, with a 
factor subtracted for any anticipated salvage: 
 
 Cost materials 5  Q 3 (1 1  L sc 1  L w 1 L sh ) 3  C 2  S 
 where 
 Q 5 base quantity in weight, volume, area, length, etc. 
 
  L sc 5 loss factor due to scrap (same units) 
 
  L w 5 loss factor due to waste (same units) 
 
 L sh 5 loss factor due to shrinkage (same units) 
 
  C 5 unit cost of materials 
 
  S 5 value of salvaged materials 
 Direct labor  refers to the workers involved in direct production of the product. 
Direct labor costs are calculated from the time required to produce the product 
(the standard time, as discussed in previous chapters) multiplied by the wage rate.  
Estimating the Prime Cost of a Component 
 EXAMPLE 16.1 
 In estimating the prime cost to produce an ABS component that is injection-molded, 
the analyst first multiplies the cost per pound of the ABS resin by the weight in pounds 
of the product, with due allowance for the sprue, runners, and normal shrinkage (typi-
cally, 3 to 7 percent on complex thermoplastic parts). To this figure, the analyst adds 
the direct labor cost. For example, if the injection press operator services five ma-
chines and has an hourly rate (including the cost of fringe benefits) of $18, the direct 
labor cost per injection press is $3.60 per hour, or $0.06 per minute. If the cycle time 
for molding the part is 0.5 min, the direct labor cost per piece is $0.03. 
 Let us assume the cost of the resin to be $1.20 per pound and the weight of each 
piece to be 1 oz. Let us also assume that the weight of the runners and sprue is 0.1 oz, 
and that 5 percent shrinkage is characteristic of this particular molding room. Then 
the estimated material cost is 
 
 $1.20 3 1.1 31.05/16 5 $0.087 
 In this example, the prime cost per piece is 
 
 $0.03 1 0.087 5 $0.117 
 Factory expense  includes such costs as indirect labor, tooling, machine, and 
power costs.  Indirect labor  typically includes shipping and receiving, trucking, 
warehousing, maintenance, and janitorial services. Indirect labor, machine, and 
tool costs may have greater influence on the selection of a particular process 
than material and direct labor costs. For example, in the previous illustration, the 

624 
C H A P T E R  1 6 
single-cavity mold may cost $30,000, and the machine rate (cost of operating 
the injection press, exclusive of the press operator) may be $20 /h. (In a complex 
machining center, machine rates are often as low as a few dollars per hour and 
range as high as $50 or more per hour.) Similarly, the allocation of tool costs also 
has a significant relationship with the quantity to be produced.  
Estimating Factory Cost 
 EXAMPLE 16.2  
 Using the facts from Example 16.1, we assume that 10,000 pieces are to be produced. 
This gives a unit tool cost of $30,000/10,000, or $3.00 per piece. This is much greater 
than the combined material and direct labor cost (more than 10 times). If 1,000,000 
pieces are to be produced, the unit cost for the mold will be only $0.03 (about 
one-third the cost of direct labor and material). Let us assume that the machine rate 
of this equipment (not including the mold cost) is $20/h, or $0.333 per minute, and 
that 1 million pieces are desired. Then the total factory cost (direct material 1 direct 
labor 1 factory expense) is 
 
 $0.087 1 $0.03 1 $0.3332 5 $0.2835 
 General expense includes such costs as  expense labor (accounting, adminis-
tration, clerical, engineering, sales, etc.), rent, insurance, and utilities. The indus-
trial engineer is primarily concerned with factory cost, because this is the cost 
that affects the choice of alternative ways of producing a given design. 
 Figure 16.6 illustrates the various cost and profit elements in the develop-
ment of selling price. An understanding of the basis of cost will enable the en-
gineer to select the materials, processes, and functions to create the best product 
with cost usually being the deciding factor. The relationship between cost, sales, 
profit or loss, and volume is best revealed in a break-even or crossover chart 
(from Chapter 9). Figure 16.7 illustrates a typical break-even chart in costing. 
 The distribution of cost factors will vary dramatically with the number of 
units to be produced. When quantities are low, the proportion of development 
costs is high compared to the cost of manufacturing expense, direct labor, raw 
material, and purchased parts. The development cost includes design, drawings 
preparation, manufacturing information compilation, tool design and construc-
tion, testing, inspection, and many other items incidental to placing the first parts 
into production. As the number of units increases, the emphasis centers on a 
reduction in factory overhead, direct labor, and material costs, through advanced 
process engineering and manufacturing methods. For example, if an automobile 
manufacturer produces 2 million cars per year, of which 1 million have four 
cylinders per engine and the other 1 million have six cylinders per engine, and 
if there are four piston rings per cylinder, then 40 million piston rings must be 
produced per year. A savings of $0.01 on each ring would equal $400,000 per 
year. Therefore, to obtain the minimum cost, considerable engineering effort can 
be profitably applied to the production effort, beginning with raw material and 
continuing up to the installation of the finished product.  

 
 
CH A PT ER 1 6    Standards Follow-Up and Uses   
625
Direct
labor
Factory
expense
Gross
profit
General
expense
Sales
expense
Direct
material
Prime
cost
Factory
cost
Total
cost
Selling 
price
Manufacturing
cost
Dollars
Capacity
Fixed expense
Variable expense
Direct material
Direct labor
Profit
Taxes
Sales
Break-even point
PROFIT Before
PROFIT Before
taxes
taxes
Profit after
taxes
Profit before
taxes
 Figure 16.6   Elements of cost and gross profit 
(profit before taxes) entering into the development 
of selling price. 
 Note that, in this particular product, material cost 
is approximately 53 percent of total cost, and 
17.5 percent of total cost is anticipated as gross profit. 
 Figure 16.7   Break-even 
chart indicating relationship 
between cost, sales, profit 
or loss, and volume. 
 Note that for each category 
the previous category is 
added to yield a cumulative 
sum. 

626 
C H A P T E R  1 6 
 There is constant competition between materials and processes, based on 
costs that are influenced by the number of pieces made during a period of 
time. The parts activity affects the amount of time the activity is operated, 
compared with the hours available. The ratio of hours operated to hours avail-
able has considerable effect upon cost. Consider the following representative 
example. 
 A large hydraulic extrusion press, including the hydraulic pumps and the 
building to house the press, costs $3,000,000. Depreciation, maintenance, and 
interest on investment amount to 20 percent ($600,000) per year.  Normally 
there are 2,000 working hours per year in one shift (8 h/day 3 5 days/
week 5 40 h/week 3 50 weeks/y 5 2000 h/yr). Three shifts would represent 
6,000 h/yr available. The minimum cost of the facility during a 24-h day 
would therefore be 600,000/6,000 5 $100 per hour. However if the sales 
department can sell only enough to keep the equipment busy 8 h/day, the 
machine costs increase to 600,000/2,000 5 $300 per hour. If sales decrease 
further, the machine cost will increase even more, making it difficult to oper-
ate the business at a profit.   
Costing a Picture Window 
 EXAMPLE 16.3  
 As an example, consider new window construction. Hess Manufacturing Co. pro-
duces a large variety of vinyl replacement windows and storm doors. A standard 
data system and costing are a necessity for Hess to consider any changes in the 
styles, shapes, and features of windows and doors. Consider the simplest element in 
window construction, the picture window, or the fixed pane of glass in an aluminum 
frame. One of the smaller picture windows is nominally 2 ft 3 3 ft, but is actually 
24 in 3 35.5 in. 
 Direct materials for a picture window include the vinyl-clad 6069 aluminum 
extrusions for the head, sill, two jambs, and four glazing stops; two glazing blocks and 
two weep-hole covers; a double pane of glass separated by a butyl spacer for insula-
tion purposes; and packaging materials. By separate count (see Table 16.4), these total 
$18.42 in direct material costs. Note that several different scrap factors are utilized in 
calculating the material costs. For the aluminum extrusions, an 8 percent scrap factor 
increases the cut length and cost by 8 percent: 
 
 24.25 in 3 (1 1 0.08) 3 $0.08275in 5 $2.167 
 A flow process chart of the manufacturing operation indicates that the following ba-
sic operations are needed: cutting the aluminum extrusions and glazing stops to size, 
punching weep holes, welding the frame, cleaning the corners, assembling the final 
product, and packaging. From the standard data of Table 16.5 and required compo-
nents, a total standard assembly time of 19.193 min for a 2-ft 3 3-ft picture window 
can be calculated (see Table 16.6). Of the 19.193 min, 14.522 min is due to manual 
elements of the operator (with a 20 percent allowance, 12.102 3 1.2 5 14.522 min), 
and 4.671 min is due to machine elements (with a 5 percent allowance for machine 
malfunction and maintenance, 4.449 3 1.05 5 4.671 min). 

 
 
CH A PT ER 1 6    Standards Follow-Up and Uses   
627
 Table 16.4   Bill of Materials—New Construction Picture (2-ft 3 3-ft) Window 
 Part-Materials  
 Units  
 Length
(in)  
 Scrap
factor  
 Total 
length (in)  
 Unit cost 
($/in)  
 Cost ($)  
 Extrusions 
 Head, 6069 
 1 
 24.250 
 0.08 
 26.190 
 0.08275 
 2.167 
 Sill, 6069 
 1 
 24.250 
 0.08 
 26.190 
 0.08275 
 2.167 
 Jamb, 6069 
 2 
 35.697 
 0.08 
 38.552 
 0.08275 
 6.380 
 Glazing stop, top 
 2 
 15.290 
 0.08 
 16.513 
 0.00733 
 0.242 
 Glazing stop, sides 
 2 
 19.750 
 0.08 
 21.330 
 0.00733 
 0.313 
 Hardware 
 Glazing block 
 2 
 — 
 0.01 
 — 
 0.019 
 0.0388 
 Weep hole cover 
 2 
 — 
 0.01 
 — 
 0.085 
 0.1717 
 Glass 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 Clear glass* 
 2 
 5.92 
 0.10 
 6.51 
 0.258 
 3.360 
 Swiggle † 
 1 
 119.00 
 0.10 
 130.90 
 0.0246 
 3.220 
 Packaging 
 Corner boots 
 4 
 — 
 0.03 
 — 
 0.056 
 0.231 
 Stretch wrap ‡ 
 1 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 0.131 
 0.131 
   
   
   
 Total direct material costs 
 18.42 
 * Glass size is given as an area in feet and unit cost as $/foot.
 † A swiggle is the butyl spacer  between the double panes of glass.
‡Not specifically measured; an average value is used. 
 Table 16.5   Standard Data (Minutes) for New-Construction (2-ft 33-ft) Windows 
 Operation  
 Oper.
Code  
 Window type  
 Observed time  
 Operator 
rating  
 Normal time  
 sh  
 sci  
 dh  
 pic  
 Operator  
 Mach.  
 Operator  
 Mach.  
 Cut 
 CT 
 • 
 • 
 • 
   
 0.125 
 — 
 115 
 0.144 
 — 
   
 CT 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 0.232 
 — 
 102 
 0.236 
 — 
   
 CT 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 0.432 
 — 
 122.5 
 0.529 
 — 
 Mill 
 ML 
 • 
 • 
   
   
 0.305 
 — 
 125 
 0.381 
 — 
 Drill 
 DL 
 • 
 • 
 • 
   
 0.275 
 — 
 115 
 0.316 
 — 
   
 DL 
 • 
   
 • 
   
 0.242 
 — 
 117 
 0.283 
 — 
 Punch 
 PC 
 • 
 • 
 • 
   
 0.145 
 — 
 115 
 0.167 
 — 
   
 PC 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 0.208 
 — 
 122.5 
 0.255 
 — 
 Balance assembly 
 BA 
 • 
   
 • 
   
 0.757 
 — 
 120 
 0.908 
 — 
 Reinforcing bar 
 RB 
 • 
 • 
 • 
   
 1.233 
 — 
 115 
 1.418 
 — 
 Wool pile 
 WP 
 • 
 • 
 • 
   
 0.163 
 — 
 115 
 0.187 
 — 
 Weld 
 WD 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 0.767 
 0.717 
 107.5 
 0.825 
 0.717 
 Corner clean 
 CC 
 • 
 • 
 • 
   
 1.133 
 — 
 122.5 
 1.388 
 — 
   
 CC 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 0.220 
 2.942 
 100 
 0.220 
 2.942 
 Hardware 
 HW 
 • 
 • 
 • 
   
 1.673 
 — 
 112.5 
 1.882 
 — 
 Drop-in glazing 
 DG 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 3.210 
 — 
 107.5 
 3.451 
 — 
 Final assembly 
 FA 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 3.390 
 — 
 115 
 3.899 
 — 
 Packaging 
 PK 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 0.373 
 0.790 
 105 
 0.392 
 0.790 
 Note: sh 5 single-hung window; sci 5 slider single-hung window; dh 5 double-hung window; pic 5 picture window. 

628 
C H A P T E R  1 6 
 Note that these  standard costs  are carefully predetermined target costs 
that should be attained. They are used to determine product costs, evaluate per-
formance, and, in general, form budgets. As work is done, however, actual costs 
are incurred, which may reveal  variances  when compared to the standard costs. 
These variances are considered favorable when actual costs are less than the 
budgeted or standard costs, or unfavorable when actual costs exceed standard 
costs. The variances provide feedback on what should be modified to run a 
productive line. 
 Table 16.6   Assembly Time (Minutes) Analysis—New-Construction Picture 
(2-ft 3 3-ft ) Window 
 Manual elements  
 Process  
 Head  
 Sill  
   
 Jamb  
 Glazing 
stop  
 Machine 
elements  
 Cut 
 0.529 
 0.529 
   
 0.529 
 0.236 
 — 
 Punch weep holes 
 — 
 0.255 
   
 — 
 — 
 — 
 # Parts/frame 
 1 
 1 
   
 2 
 4 
 — 
 Subtotal time 
   
   
 3.315 
   
   
 — 
 Weld 
   
   
 0.825 
   
   
 0.717 
 Corner clean 
   
   
 0.220 
   
   
 2.942 
 Drop-in glazing 
   
   
 3.451 
   
   
 — 
 Final assembly 
   
   
 3.899 
   
   
 — 
 Packaging 
   
   
 0.392 
   
   
 0.790 
 Total assembly time 
   
   
 12.102 
   
   
 4.449 
 Allowances 
   
   
   20% 1 
   
   
       5% 2 
 Standard assembly time 
   
   
 14.522 
   
   
 4.671 
   
   
 Total standard assembly time 
 19.193 
 1 Includes 5 percent personal allowance, 5 percent basic fatigue allowance, 5 percent delay 
allowance, 5 percent material handling allowance
 2 Considers malfunctioning and maintenance of machine 
 Table 16.7   Costing of New Construction Picture (2-ft 3 3-ft) Window 
 Type of cost  
 Minutes  
 Hours  
 Rate ($/h)   
   Cost ($)  
 Direct materials 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 18.42 
 Direct labor 
 19.193 
 0.320 
 7.21 
 2.31 
 Factory expense 
 19.193 
 0.320 
 9.81 
 3.14 
   
   
 Total factory cost 
 23.87 
 The 19.193 min corresponds to 0.32 h (19.193/60) of direct labor, which, at 
an average rate of $7.21/h, yields $2.31 in direct labor costs. An overhead rate of 
136 percent of direct labor costs yields $3.14 in factory expense (0.32 3 1.36 3 7.21). 
Adding direct material costs of $18.42 to the two previous costs yields a total factory 
cost of $23.87 (see Table 16.7). Based on this cost, Hess can determine a suggested 
retail cost that will maintain its budget and desired profitability. 

 
 
CH A PT ER 1 6    Standards Follow-Up and Uses   
629
 16.4 STANDARDS IN SERVICE WORK 
 Over these past five years of recession, the media have been widely reporting on 
the demise of manufacturing jobs in the United States, with a concurrent surge in 
service industry jobs. Data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2010) has indeed 
shown a decrease of manufacturing as a percentage of total employment, from 
around 25 percent in 1970 to less than 10 percent today. However, this is only a 
snapshot of the current situation, with the larger picture showing a more complex 
situation. Historically, the United States had was primarily an agricultural econ-
omy; for example, in the 1840s, more than 70 percent of the labor force was in 
agriculture. However, this percentage has declined steadily since then, whereas 
industry grew to a peak in the early 20th century—but even then employment in 
manufacturing never exceeded one-third of America’s workforce. Agricultural 
jobs now account for only 2 percent of the labor force (and this figure has re-
mained flat at that level for the past 40 years or so). More important is the ser-
vice sector, which was already large in the 1800s, and has exceeded industrial 
employment throughout these past 170 years (Gallman and Weiss, 1969). Before 
World War II, the service sector grew because American became richer and were 
able to afford meals, repairs, grooming, and other services. After World War II, 
productivity in industry, due to mechanization and then computerization, grew 
rapidly, faster than in the service industry. This meant that fewer industrial work-
ers were needed, while at the same time Americans were still getting wealthier 
and demanding more services, especially in health care, due to an aging popula-
tion that was living longer. The slower productivity growth in this sector meant 
that it had to pull in workers, primarily from the industrial sector, as the agricul-
tural sector was already very minimal. Thus, the decline in manufacturing and 
increase in the service sector is not a short-term phenomenon; rather, it has been 
going on for the past 170 years. What this also implies is that work measurement 
and standards should be applied to the service sector to increase productivity in 
that area. 
 The work measurement techniques described in previous chapters apply 
equally well to service jobs. Direct observation of a caregiver by another in-
dividual with regard to start and stop time is classic stopwatch time study (see 
Chapter 10); the direct observation of a number of clerks in a bank is classic 
work sampling (see Chapter 14). These approaches have been used very success-
fully by numerous companies in nonmanufacturing or service-type operations. 
A classic example is United Parcel Service (UPS), which uses more than 1,000 
industrial engineers to ensure efficient and reliable customer service by conduct-
ing time studies on drivers’ routes to decrease time spent delivering packages 
and to improve customer service. Millions of dollars are spent to develop better, 
more efficient, and safer methods and then training drivers in these methods. 
Improvements include: (1) domed seats to allow drivers to slide on and off more 
quickly at each stop; (2) a drop floor in the rear of the vehicle that allows a 
shorter step from the ground for quicker entry; (3) bulkhead doors for quicker 
access to the vehicle package compartment; and (4) knocking on customer doors 

630 
C H A P T E R  1 6 
rather than wasting seconds looking for a doorbell. Changes such as these may 
save only a minute each day, but they cumulatively save the company more than 
$5 million annually. 
 HEALTH CARE AND SOCIAL SERVICES 
 Spending on health in the United States neared $2.6 trillion in 2010, and even though 
the rate of growth has slowed recently, it is still expected to grow faster than national 
income over the foreseeable future. These costs have increasingly strained federal 
and state budgets, as well as placing a greater burden of employer-sponsored health-
care program costs on both employers and workers. Although some of the causes of 
these increases (e.g., increasingly costly technology and prescription drugs, rise in 
occurrence of chronic diseases) are quite beyond the control of industrial engineers, 
others (such as hospital care and physician/clinical services, which combined ac-
count for 51 percent of the nation’s health expenditures) are much more measurable 
and addressable (Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, 2008). 
 From a work study viewpoint, one of the biggest issues in health care is the 
lack of standardization of the unit processed: that is, the human patient. As com-
pared to a product on an assembly line, the patient is much more variable, in terms 
of size, age, weight and (most importantly) state of health or lack of it. Therefore, 
there will be a great variance in time for processing the patient. Rather than speak-
ing in terms of general health-care services, such as a respiratory care procedure, 
the analyst must decompose the procedure into smaller but more uniform elements 
or activities and measure the amount of time involved. For example, a respiratory 
care procedure might consist of five elements or work activities: (1) set up equip-
ment, (2) monitor the patient, (3) adjust settings, (4) suction (in case of problems), 
and (5) measure blood gases. Depending on the patient’s status (relatively healthy, 
average, very ill), the workload for the nurse or respiratory therapist can range 
from 24 to 236 minutes. This ten-fold range could be considerably different than 
simply handling one respiratory care patient, or even breaking it down into activi-
ties, ranging from 5 to 27, or only a five-fold range (see Table 16.8).  
 Sometimes, time study and direct observation may not be appreciated (e.g., 
upper management) or may not be possible (e.g., physicians in surgery). In 
those instances, analysts may have to use modified approaches, such as self-
observation and recording (see Section 14.8 and Example 16.4) or rather unob-
trusive work sampling (see Chapter 14). For example, there has been consid-
erable discussion in health-care management regarding the amount of nurses’ 
hospital time that is spent on non-nursing activities, the argument being that 
high-paid, well-trained nursing personnel time is “wasted” on these activities. 
The proper way to assess the situation would be to conduct a careful work sam-
pling study. It is estimated that 60 percent of nurses’ time is spent in nursing 
activities. Assuming a 95 percent confidence interval with a selected error range 
of 3 percent, Equation (3) in Chapter 14 indicates that 1,024 observations are 
needed to complete the study. If collected randomly over a span of two weeks, 
an average of approximately 73 observations must be collected each day. If at 

 
 
CH A PT ER 1 6    Standards Follow-Up and Uses   
631
the end of study, we find that 65 percent of nurses’ time is spent on nursing 
activities, and some 9–10 percent is justifiable downtime for personal breaks, 
meals, and so on, then some 25–26 percent of the time may be spent on activi-
ties that should be studied further to determine whether these activities should 
be allocated to other workers.   
 Table 16.8   Workload (in minutes) for Three Respiratory Care Patients 
 Element 
 Standard 
Time 
 Healthy Patient 
 Average Patient 
 Very Ill Patient 
 Frequency 
 Total Time 
 Frequency 
 Total Time 
 Frequency 
 Total Time 
 Setup 
 20 
 1 
 20 
 1 
 20 
 1 
 20 
 Monitor 
 1 
 3 
 3 
 5 
 5 
 3 
 3 
 Adjust 
 3 
 1 
 1 
 3 
 9 
 5 
 15 
 Suction 
 11 
 0 
 0 
 4 
 44 
 9 
 99 
 Blood gas 
 11 
 0 
 0 
 2 
 22 
 9 
 99 
 Total 
   
 5 
 24 
 15 
 108 
 27 
 236 
Workload Analysis in the Service Industry 
  EXAMPLE 16.4  
 A large case study of community service operations was undertaken by Sterling As-
sociates (1999) for the Department of Social and Health Services (DSHS) of Wash-
ington state. Because community service caseloads had decreased over the past few 
years, DSHS was interested in knowing whether the workload for social workers, 
financial specialists, and office assistants had also decreased. A total of 304 staff 
members were given pagerlike random reminders that “buzzed” at specified random 
times, at which time they were to record the specific task they were performing on an 
electronic, Web-based form. This format allowed for quick access, regular updating, 
and easy analysis of the data. 
 The study encompassed a two-month study period (specifically 90,385 worker-
hours) collecting 91,371 observations for 17 different tasks, for 15 different programs 
in 6 different district offices. Assuming a 99 percentile confidence interval, a worst-case 
scenario of  p 5 0.5 for the task of interest, and using Equation (3) in reverse, yielded 
 
 
ℓ
(2.58 )(0.5)(0.5)
91,371
0.0043
2


 Thus, for any task occurring roughly 50 percent of the time, the resulting accuracy 
is  1 0.41 percent. For any task occurring a smaller percentage of the time, the accu-
racy would be even better. 
 Time spent for a given task (e.g., case audits) was calculated as follows. Out of 
the 91,371 observations, 2,224 were for case audits, during which time 2,217 case 
audits were completed. Thus the time per audit was 
 
Time/audit
90,385
2,217
2,224
91,371
0.99 h/audit



 
 The primary results showed a large disparity (see Figure 16.8) between the 
amount of time spent on servicing various programs and the actual number of cases 

632 
C H A P T E R  1 6 
 CALL CENTERS 
 A  call center  is a central customer service operation where agents handle tele-
phone calls for their company or for a client. Clients may include mail-order 
catalog companies, telemarketers, financial services and insurance companies, 
hotels, airlines, or simply help desks for a variety of companies. Because much 
of this work is outsourced, often to other countries, and because more than two-
thirds of the call-center operating costs are related to labor, the call center is very 
concerned about efficiency of operations. Therefore, performance measurement, 
for both time and quality, is very important in determining the optimum work-
force, so as to minimize labor costs and maximize financial return. 
 One key performance measure is  talk time,  the amount of time the agent 
actually speaks to a customer, with the clock starting to count from the second 
the phone is answered until the second the customer is disconnected. A second 
handled by that program (as measured in assistance units, AU). This may mean that 
a redistribution of effort or workforce could be undertaken to better handle the vari-
ous programs. To assist in this, a staffing needs model was developed. Although there 
were some differences, the overall results were similar among the various district of-
fices. Finally, although the setting of standards was not emphasized in this study, the 
overall idle time (roughly 4 percent) was quite low. However, this result should be 
tempered by recognition of the fact that, as in all self-observation studies, workers 
may be hesitant to accurately indicate that they are not working. 
Food stamps
TANF
Other
General assistance
Childcare
Medical
Percentage of AUs
Other
Percentage of Time
TANF
Medical
Food stamps
General assistance
Childcare
 Figure 16.8   Assistance units (AU) compared to time. 

 
 
CH A PT ER 1 6    Standards Follow-Up and Uses   
633
one is  after-call worktime,  the amount of time the agent spends to finish the 
work related to the just-completed phone call. The clock starts counting from 
the second the phone call is disconnected to the second the agent takes another 
call. The final measure is  average handle time  (AHT), which is the sum of talk 
time and after-call worktime. Typically each call center will have a standard for 
each of these measures. For example, if the talk time standard is 120 seconds and 
the after-call worktime is 30 seconds, the average handle time is 150 seconds. 
Because all these calls are handled through computerized systems, the times are 
automatically recorded and the performance metrics are easily obtained. No for-
mal time or work sampling studies are needed. 
 There are no industry standards for these performance metrics, as there are 
too many factors that affect average handle time. These could include: (1) the 
type of calls that are received, (2) the number of inquiries during a single call, 
(3) the number of different responses utilized for servicing each inquiry, (4) the 
process that is followed for each inquiry, (5) the knowledge and training level of 
the agent, (6) the communication or interaction level for each call, and (7) the 
quality metrics for that call center. Thus, for example, Company A may view 
itself as a no-frills company with minimal concern for customer service, whereas 
Company B focuses on customer service and wishes to have the customer feel 
warm and fuzzy. To reduce costs, it would make sense to reduce handle time, 
which then reduces the number of agents needed and decreases costs. How-
ever, if the customer feels rushed or, worse, doesn’t get even get connected to 
an agent, the caller may abandon the call (leading to problems with two more 
performance metrics:  abandonment rate,  percent of incoming calls abandoned, 
and  service level,  percent of calls picked up in a certain time period). Thus, there 
must be a balance between staffing and service, which can be determined only 
by the specific call center. 
 The other crucial aspect of call-center staffing is  staff occupancy, which 
is the total handle time or workload hours compared with available time or 
staff hours. If the occupancy is too low, agents are idle. If the occupancy is 
too high, agents are overworked and incoming callers are delayed, resulting 
in increasing abandonment rates. Interestingly, a doubling of call volume does 
not require a doubling of staff to meet the same service level (say 80 percent 
in 20 seconds). As the volume grows, the staff-to-workload ratio gets smaller 
and agent occupancy goes higher (see Table 16.9). Also, a relatively small in-
crease in staffing can lead to large improvements in the service level. The prob-
lem is that even though theoretically 20 hours of workload could be handled 
by 20 agents, the incoming calls do not come in back-to-back uniform order. 
Because of the randomness of arrival, queuing models specific to call centers 
have been developed (e.g., Erlang C) that predict percentage of callers delayed, 
the amount of delay, and the resulting service level (see Table 16.10). So, in 
general, larger call centers will naturally be more efficient than smaller ones, 
because of economies of scale. For more information on call centers, please 
refer to Reynolds (2003).  

634 
C H A P T E R  1 6 
 SUMMARY 
 Thorough and regular follow-up ensures attainment of the expected benefits 
from the new method. This calls for maintaining time standards to ensure a sat-
isfactory rate structure. Periodically, all standards should be checked to verify 
that the methods being employed are identical to those in use at the time the 
standards were established. A continuing methods analysis is a must. 
 There are many uses of time standards in all areas of any enterprise. Prob-
ably the most significant result of time standards is the maintenance of overall 
plant efficiency. If efficiency cannot be measured, it cannot be controlled, and 
without control, it will markedly diminish. Once efficiency goes down, labor 
costs rapidly rise, and the result is eventual loss of competitive position in the 
market. By establishing and maintaining effective standards, a business can stan-
dardize direct labor costs and control overall costs. 
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  Compare and contrast the different ways of determining a standard time. 
 2.  How can valid time standards help develop an ideal plant layout? 
 3.  Explain the relationship between time standards and plant capacity. 
 4.  In what way are time standards used for effective production control? 
 5.  How do time standards allow the accurate determination of labor costs? 
 6.  How does developing time standards help maintain the product quality? 
 7.  In what way is customer service improved through valid time standards? 
 Table 16.9   Call-Center Volume and Staffing Requirements (from NAQC, 2010) 
 Calls per Hour 
 Workload Hours 
 Staff Required 
 %Staff Occupancy 
(Workload/Staff) 
 100 
 8.33 
 12 
 69 
 200 
 16.67 
 21 
 79 
 400 
 33.33 
 39 
 85 
 800 
 66.67 
 74 
 90 
 1600 
 133.33 
 142 
 04 
 Table 16.10   Call-Center Staffing and Service Level (from Reynolds, 2003) 
 Number 
of Staff 
 % Callers 
Delayed 
 Delay of Delayed 
Callers (sec)  
 Average 
Delay (sec)  
 Service Level 
(% in 20 seconds)  
 21 
 76 
 180 
 137 
 32 
 22 
 57 
 90 
 51 
 55 
 23 
 42 
 60 
 25 
 70 
 24 
 30 
 45 
 13 
 81 
 25 
 21 
 36 
 8 
 88 
 26 
 14 
 30 
 4 
 93 
 27 
 9 
 26 
 2 
 96 

 
 
CH A PT ER 1 6    Standards Follow-Up and Uses   
635
 8.  What is the relationship between labor cost and efficiency? 
 9.  Explain how inventory and storage areas can be accurately predicted. 
 10.  An audit revealed that a standard as originally established was 20 percent loose. 
Explain the methodology for rectifying the rate. 
 11.  What is the relationship between the accuracy of time standards and production 
control? Does the law of diminishing returns apply? 
 12.  Explain the different costs that constitute factory cost. Which ones would a meth-
ods analyst have greatest control over? 
 13.  Explain the benefits of increasing production in relation to manufacturing cost. 
 14.  When is it no longer necessary to follow up the installed method?  
 PROBLEMS  
 1.  In the XYZ Company, management is considering going from two 8-h shifts per 
day to three 8-h shifts per day, or two 10-h shifts per day, to increase capacity. 
Management realizes that shift start-up results in a loss of productivity that aver-
ages 0.5 h per employee. The premium for the third shift is 15 percent per hour. 
Time over 8 h worked per day gives the operator 50 percent more pay. To meet 
projected demands, it is necessary to increase the work-hours of production by 
25 percent. In view of insufficient space and capital equipment, this increase cannot 
be accommodated by increasing the number of employees on either the first or the 
second shift. How should management proceed? 
 2.  A time standard is established allowing the operator 11.28 min per piece. The sales 
department expects to sell at least 2,000 of these parts in the next year. How many 
audits of this standard would you recommend be scheduled during the next 
12 months? 
 3.  If a day work shop were paying an average rate of $12.75/h and had 250 direct 
labor employees working, what would be the true direct labor cost per hour if, 
during a normal month, 40,000 h of work were produced? Assume 21 working 
days per month. 
 4.  The Dorben Co. is deciding whether it is worth releasing a new “improved” model 
of its widget. The following details have been collected: 
 Standard time (min) 
 5 1.00 
 Direct material costs per widget 
 5 $0.50 
 Direct labor costs per widget 
 5 $1.00 
 Indirect labor costs per widget 
 5 $0.50 
 Expense labor costs per widget 
 5 $0.50 
 Fixed overhead costs including sales costs/year 
 5 $50,000  
   a. 
 Plot the prime cost as a function of production. 
   b. 
 Plot total costs as a function of production. 
   c. 
 Given a sales price of $3.00 per widget, how many widgets must Dorben sell 
to make a profit? Show this point on the plot. 
 5.  Operators assemble pumps at an hourly rate of $10. The standard time for the 
assembly is 20 min. Direct material costs are $19.50 per pump. Indirect labor and 
other overhead are calculated simply at a rate of $5/h, while general office expenses 
are calculated at a rate of $2/h. What is the factory cost for one pump? 

636 
C H A P T E R  1 6 
 REFERENCES 
 Carter, W. K., and M. F. Usry.  Cost Accounting . 12th ed. Houston: Dane Publications, 
1999. 
 Gallman, R. E., and Weiss, T. J. “The Service Industries in the Nineteenth Century:, in 
Production and Productivity in the Service Industries (ed. V. R. Fuchs). New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1969, pp; 287–352. 
 Lucey, T.  Costing . New York: Continuum, 2002. 
 North American Quitline Consortium, NAQC Issue Paper, Call Center Metrics: Best 
Practices in Performance  Measurement and Management to Maximize Quitline 
Efficiency and Quality, http://www.naquitline.org/, 2010. 
 Reynolds, P. Call Center Staffing: The Complete Practical Guide to Workforce 
Management. Nashville, TN: The Call Center School Press. 2003. 
 Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, High and rising health care costs: Demystifying U.S. 
health care spending, October 2008. 
 Sims, E. R.  Precision Manufacturing Costing . New York: Marcel Dekker, 1995. 

 
637
 
637
 
  CHAPTER
 
  17 
 
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Set simple but fair incentives based on proven standards. 
 •  Guarantee basic hourly rates. 
 •  Provide individual incentives above the base rates. 
 •  Tie incentives directly to increased production of a quality product. 
 •  Avoid offsetting productivity gains with increased injury costs. 
 T
 o generate highly productive and satisfied workers, a company must re-
ward and recognize them for effective performance. The reward must be 
meaningful to the employees, whether it is financial, psychological, or 
both. Experience has proved that workers do not give extra or sustained effort 
unless some incentive, either direct or indirect, is provided. Incentives, in one 
form or another, have been used for many years. Today, with the increasing need 
for U.S. business and industry to improve productivity to retard inflation and 
maintain or improve their position in the world market, management should not 
overlook the advantages of wage incentives. Only about 25 percent of manufac-
turing employees are now on incentives. If this figure were doubled in the next 
decade, large increases in productivity could be obtained. 
 With fringe benefits becoming increasingly significant (today, they average 
about 40 percent of direct labor), these costs must be spread over higher produc-
tion output which can be achieved through wage incentives. At present, fringe 
benefits include not only basic features such as pensions, vacation time, and med-
ical benefits (the costs of which have been skyrocketing), but also added features 
such as disability insurance and educational benefits, as shown in Table 17.1. 
 Typical nonincentive, fixed wage payment is known as  day work , while any 
incentive plan that increases the employee’s production may be referred to as a 
 flexible compensation plan . Four types of flexible plans are discussed briefly in 
this chapter: piecework and standard labor hour plans; the gain-sharing plans—
Scanlon, Rucker, IMPROSHARE; ESOPs; and profit sharing. Before analysts 
design wage payment plans for specific plants, they should review the strengths 
and weaknesses of past plans, including day work and all nonfinancial plans.  
 Wage Payment 

638 
C H A P T E R  1 7 
 17.1 DAY WORK PLANS 
 Day work  plans compensate the employee on the basis of number of hours worked 
times an established hourly base rate. Company policies that are fair, with rela-
tively high base rates (based upon job evaluation and merit rating), a guaranteed 
annual wage, and relatively high fringe benefits, build healthy employee attitudes, 
stimulate employee morale, and tend to indirectly increase productivity. 
 From the company’s perspective, it would seem that a day work plan 
is ideal. Unit labor costs (employee wages divided by productivity or worker 
performance) decrease as worker productivity increases (see Figure 17.1). Math-
ematically, the normalized unit labor costs  y c can be expressed as 
 
y c  y w /x 
 where 
 y w  normalized hourly base rate ( 1) 
 
  x  normalized productivity or performance 
 Unfortunately, all day work plans have one weakness: they allow too broad a gap 
between employee benefits and productivity. After a period of time, employees 
take the benefits for granted, and the company never realizes the expected lower 
unit labor costs. The theories, philosophies, and techniques of day rate plans are 
beyond the scope of this text; for more information in this area, refer to books on 
personnel administration.  
 17.2 FLEXIBLE COMPENSATION PLANS 
  Flexible compensation plans include all plans in which the worker’s compensa-
tion is related to output. This category includes both simple, individual incentive 
plans and group incentive plans. In simple individual plans, each employee’s per-
formance for the period governs that employee’s compensation. Group plans are 
applicable to two or more persons who are dependent on one another working as 
a team. In these plans, each employee’s compensation within the group is based 
on his or her base rate and on the performance of the entire group for the period.  
 Table 17.1   Typical Fringe Benefits Provided by a Company 
 Benefit 
 Approximate percentage* 
 Health insurance 
 13–18 
 Vision insurance 
 ½  –1 
 Dental insurance 
 2–4 
 Vacations (up to 4 weeks per year) 
 20–25 
 Personal leave (up to 5 days per year) 
 2–5 
 Holidays (up to 10 per year) 
 10–12 
 Term life insurance 
 2–5 
 Long-term disability 
 1–3 
 Pension 
 25–30 
 Educational expense reimbursement 
 1–2 
 *As percentage of total fringe benefits. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 7    Wage Payment 
639
 The incentive for high or prolonged individual effort is not nearly as great in 
group plans as it is in individual plans. Hence, industry favors individual incen-
tive methods. In addition to lower overall productivity, group plans have other 
drawbacks: (1) personnel problems brought about by nonuniformity of produc-
tion, coupled with uniformity of pay; and (2) difficulties in justifying base rate 
differentials for the various opportunities within the group. 
 However, group plans do offer some decided advantages over individual in-
centives: (1) ease of installation, due to ease of measuring group, rather than 
individual, output; and (2) reduction of administration cost due to reduced pa-
perwork, less verification of inventory in process, and less in-process inspection. 
 In general, individual incentive plans foster higher production rates and 
lower product unit costs. If it is practical to install, the individual incentive plan 
should be given preference over group systems. In contrast, the group approach 
works well where it is difficult to measure individual output and where indi-
vidual work is variable and frequently performed in cooperation with another 
 Figure 17.1   Relationship between costs, wages, and productivity in day work plans. 
 (Adapted from Fein, 1982; Reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) 

640 
C H A P T E R  1 7 
employee. For example, if four operators are working together in the operation 
of an extrusion press, it would be virtually impossible to install an individual 
incentive system; rather, a group plan would be applicable. Similarly, any job 
rotation scheme, to minimize repetitive-motion injuries, would necessarily have 
to use a group incentive plan. 
 PIECEWORK PLAN 
 Under the  piecework  plan, all standards are expressed in money, and the opera-
tors are rewarded in direct proportion to output. Under piecework, the day rate 
is not guaranteed. Because federal law requires a minimum guaranteed hourly 
rate, piecework is no longer used in the United States. Prior to World War II, 
piecework was used more extensively than any other incentive plan. The reasons 
for the popularity of piecework were that it was easily understood by the worker, 
was easily applied, and was one of the oldest wage incentive plans. Figure 17.2 
illustrates graphically the relationship between an operator’s wages and unit di-
rect labor costs under a piecework plan.  
Productivity = x
Wages (yw) and unit labor costs (yc)
Normalized unit labor costs
Normalized wages
1.50
1.00
0.50
0
2.00
yc  1
yw  x
1.50
2.00
1.00
0.50
 Figure 17.2   Relationship between costs, wages, and productivity in piecework. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 7    Wage Payment 
641
 Because the unit labor costs remain constant regardless of worker produc-
tivity, the company does not appear to benefit from a piecework plan. However, 
that is not true if the reader remembers the different costs that enter into factory 
expenses (see Chapter 16). Relatively constant overhead costs would decrease if 
considered on a unit cost basis. 
 STANDARD HOUR PLAN 
 The  standard hour plan  with a guaranteed base rate, established by job evalua-
tion, is by far the most popular incentive plan in use today. It offers all the ad-
vantages of piecework and eliminates the major legal problem. Graphically, the 
relationship between operator wages and unit direct labor cost, plotted against 
productivity, is a combination of Figures 17.1 and 17.2 (see Figure 17.3). The 
worker operates under a day work plan up to 100 percent productivity, and un-
der piecework beyond 100 percent productivity. For example, a standard may 
Productivity = x
Earnings (yw) and unit labor costs (yc)
Normalized unit labor costs
Normalized wages
yc  1/x
1.50
1.00
0.50
0
2.00
yw  1
yc  1
yw  x
1.50
2.00
1.00
0.50
 Figure 17.3   Relationship between costs, wages, and productivity in the standard 
hour plan. 
 (Adapted from Fein, 1982) (Reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) 

642 
C H A P T E R  1 7 
be expressed as 0.02142 h per piece or 373 pieces per 8-h shift. Once the base 
rate is known, it is easy to calculate either the money rate or the operator’s 
wages. If the operator has a base rate of $12, then the money rate of this job is 
12.00  0.02142  $0.257 per piece. If the operator produces 412 pieces in an 
8-h workday, wages for the day are 412  0.257  $105.88, and hourly wages 
are $105.88/8  $13.24. The operator’s efficiency for the day, in this case, is 
then 412/373, or 110 percent.  
 A variation of the standard hour plan is a scheme whereby the incentives 
are applied to each worker based on group output, creating a group incentive 
scheme. This is especially useful for work cells, as part of job enlargement or 
job rotation, or in situations where individual performance cannot easily be mea-
sured (e.g., shipbuilding, aircraft manufacturing). These schemes have some 
advantages in allowing greater flexibility for workers, reducing competition, 
and encouraging group spirit and teamwork. However, individual incentive is 
reduced, and better workers may become discouraged. 
 MEASURED DAY WORK 
 During the early 1930s, shortly after the era of efficiency experts, organized 
labor tried to get away from time study practice and, in particular, piecework. 
At that time,  measured day work  became popular as an incentive system that 
lessened the direct relationship between a standard and worker’s earnings. Many 
modifications of measured day work installations are in operation today, and the 
majority follow a specific pattern. First, job evaluations establish base rates for 
all jobs falling under the plan. Second, some form of work measurement deter-
mines standards for all operations. Third, analysts keep a progressive record of 
each employee’s efficiency for one to three months. This efficiency, multiplied 
by the base rate, forms the basis of a guaranteed base rate for the next period. 
For example, the base rate of a given operator may be $12/h. Assume that the 
controlling performance period is one month, or 173 working hours. If, during 
the month, the operator earned 190 standard hours, his or her efficiency for the 
period would be 190/173, or 110 percent. Then, in view of the performance, the 
operator would receive a base rate of 1.10  12.00  $13.20, for every hour 
worked during the next period, regardless of performance. However, achieve-
ment during this period would govern the base rate for the succeeding period. 
 In all measured day work plans today, the base rate is guaranteed; thus, an 
operator falling below standard (100 percent) for any given period would receive 
the base rate for the following period. The length of time used in determining 
performance usually runs three months, to diminish the clerical work of calculat-
ing and installing new guaranteed base rates. Of course, the longer the period, 
the less incentive effort can be expected. When the spread between performance 
and reward is too great, the effect of incentive performance diminishes. 
 The principal advantage of measured day work is that it takes the immediate 
pressure off workers. They know what their base rates are, and they realize that, 
regardless of performance, they will receive that amount for the period. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 7    Wage Payment 
643
 The limitations of measured day work are apparent. First, because of the 
length of the performance period, the incentive feature is not particularly strong. 
Second, to be effective, the plan places a heavy responsibility on supervisors for 
maintaining production above standard. Otherwise, the employee’s performance 
drops, thus lowering the base rate for the following period and causing employee 
dissatisfaction. Third, keeping detailed rate records and making periodic adjust-
ments are costly in all base rates. In fact, just as much clerical work is involved 
under measured day work as under any straight incentive plan in which employ-
ees are rewarded according to output. 
 GAIN-SHARING PLANS 
 Gain-sharing  plans, also known as  productivity sharing  plans, are characterized 
by sharing the benefits of improved productivity, cost reduction, and/or quality 
improvement. Many firms throughout the United States today have some form of 
gain-sharing plan as a supplement, rather than replacing existing compensation 
systems. The principle is to reward employees for improvements in productiv-
ity and/or cost, whether or not the improvements are solely due to performance 
above normal or improvements in work methods.   A 1991 U.S. General Account-
ing Office study of 76 companies using gain sharing found a 17 percent average 
increase in productivity in the first year. 
 Under plans of this type, management computes incentives on a monthly 
basis. Customarily, only two-thirds of the incentive earned in a given pay period 
is distributed. The remaining one-third is placed in a reserve fund to be used for 
any month in which performance falls below standard. The three productivity 
sharing plans discussed here are Scanlon, Rucker, and IMPROSHARE. They 
differ in the formula used to compute productivity savings and in the implemen-
tation method. The Scanlon and Rucker plans measure the payroll of the firm 
against total dollar sales and compare the result to the average of the past sev-
eral years. The IMPROSHARE plan measures output against total hours worked. 
Thus, the Scanlon and Rucker plans use dollars as the measurement unit, while 
IMPROSHARE uses hours. All three of these productivity plans are flexible 
regarding the personnel included in the plan. Direct and indirect workers as well 
as all levels of management may be included. 
 Key issues in creating an effective gain-sharing program for any of these 
plans include: (1) using easy-to-understand formulas, (2) annual evaluation of 
the program, (3) direct employee involvement during setup of the program, (4) a 
base reward system that is at the current market level (i.e., not an excuse to pay 
below prevailing wages), (5) an expert to guide the design process, and (6) stable 
product or service lines (unstable baselines with wide payout variations may 
undermine confidence in the program). 
 Scanlon Plan  During the Great Depression, Joseph Scanlon developed the 
 Scanlon plan to save a failing company. Three fundamental principles form the 
basis of this plan: bonus payment, identity with the company or firm, and em-
ployee involvement. Scanlon plans recognize the value and contribution of each 

644 
C H A P T E R  1 7 
member of the firm, encourage decentralized decision making, and seek to get 
each employee to identify with the organization’s objectives through financial 
participation. 
 Before the bonus is calculated, a base ratio must be computed. This tradi-
tionally is 
 
 
Base ratio
payroll cost to be included
value of production

 Analysts use historical study of approximately one year to establish a proper 
base ratio. This base ratio is multiplied by the value of production (sales plus or 
minus inventory) to yield allowed labor costs. The difference between this and 
actual labor costs produces a bonus pool to be shared. Typically, the company 
keeps a portion of this pool as a reserve for capital expenditures. The remainder 
is distributed to the employees as a monthly bonus, based on a percentage of 
their wages. For example: 
 Net sales 
 $2,000,000 
 Inventory change 
 0 
 Value of production 
 2,000,000 
 Allowed payroll cost (15%) 
 300,000 
 Less actual payroll cost 
 270,000 
 Bonus pool 
 30,000 
 Company share (25%) 
 7,500 
 Capital reserve 
 7,500 
 Employee share 
 15,000 
 Bonus % of actual 
payroll (15,000/270,000) 
   5.55% 
 To stimulate identity with the company, the Scanlon plan recommends a 
continuing program of management development in which all employees, 
through effective communication, learn about the goals, objectives, opportuni-
ties, and problem areas characteristic of the plan. The Scanlon plan incorporates 
most “quality of work life” variables, including job enlargement, job enrichment, 
feeling of achievement, and recognition. 
 Employee involvement is typically accomplished through a formalized sug-
gestion system and two overlapping committee systems. Elected employee rep-
resentatives meet at least monthly with their departmental supervisors to review 
productivity, cost reductions, and quality improvement suggestions. These com-
mittees frequently have certain decision-making authority for less costly sug-
gestions. More costly suggestions, or those affecting another department, are 
referred to a higher-level committee. 
 Rucker Plan  This plan came into being during the early 1940s. It was con-
ceived by Allen W. Rucker, who noted the relationship between payroll costs and 
actual net sales plus or minus inventory changes minus purchased materials and 
services. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 7    Wage Payment 
645
 Like the Scanlon plan, the  Rucker plan  emphasizes identity with the com-
pany and employee involvement, through the establishment of a suggestion 
system, Rucker committees, and good labor–management communications. 
The Rucker plan provides a bonus in which everyone, excluding top admin-
istration, shares a percentage of the gains. In the evaluation of the bonus, a 
historical relationship between labor and value added must be established. For 
example: 
 Net sales (for period of 1 year) 
 $1,500,000 
 Inventory change (decrease) 
 200,000 
   
 $1,300,000 
 Less materials and supplies used 
 700,000 
 Production value added 
 $600,000 
 
Rucker standard
payroll costs included in group
production value

 Assuming that the labor costs in the base 1-year period are $350,000, the 
Rucker standard becomes 
 
$350,000
$600,000
0.583

 Thus, in any future period (usually one month) that the actual labor costs 
are less than 0.583 of production value, employees earn bonuses. Typically, 
30 percent of this bonus is reserved for deficit months, a portion is kept by 
the company for future improvements, and the remainder (often 50 percent) 
is distributed to employees. With 50 percent of the bonus distributed to em-
ployees and 30 percent retained for deficit months, gain-sharing additives for 
rework production and delivery performance can often utilize the remaining 
20 percent of the bonus, rather than that amount being kept by the company to 
provide improvements. 
 Because materials and supplies used are deducted from net sales, the Rucker 
plan calculation partially accounts for variables, such as product mix. This 
plan also encourages employees to conserve supplies and materials, since the 
employees would benefit from these savings. 
 IMPROSHARE  The IMproved PROductivity through SHARing plan was 
developed by Mitchell Fein in 1974. Its goal is to produce more products in 
fewer hours of direct and indirect labor. Unlike the Scanlon and Rucker plans, 
IMPROSHARE does not emphasize employee involvement, but rather measures 
performance and encourages workers to improve productivity. 
 IMPROSHARE compares the work-hours saved for a given number of units 
produced to the hours required to produce the same number of units during a 
base period. The savings are shared by the company and the direct and indirect 
employees involved with the production of the product. Base productivity is 

646 
C H A P T E R  1 7 
measured by comparing the labor hour value of completed production to the 
total labor input for this production. Only acceptable products are counted. Thus, 
 
  
Work-hour standard
total production work-hours
units produced

 IMPROSHARE Incentive Plan 
 EXAMPLE 17.1
 Assume that in a single-product plant, 122 employees produced 65,500 units over 
a 50-week period. If the total hours worked were 244,000, the work-hour standard 
would be 
 
 

unit
244,000
65,500
3.725 h
 If, in a week, 125 employees worked a total of 4,908 h and produced 1,650 units, 
the value of the output would be 1,650  3.725  6,146.25 h. The gain would be 
6,146.25 – 4,908  1,238.25 h. Typically, one-half of this amount, or 619.125 h, goes 
to the employees. This would be a 12.6 percent (619.125/4,908) bonus or additional 
pay to each employee. 
 The company also benefits, as labor costs are reduced. The unit labor cost of 
3.725h established for the base period is reduced to (4,908  619.25)/1,650  3.350 h 
per unit. 
 Graphically, the IMPROSHARE plan can be considered a variation of the 
standard hour plan of Figure 17.3, except that the slope of the piecework segment 
is not 1, but a fraction less than 1 (see Figure 17.4). This fraction, or slope  p , is 
the participation fraction and could vary between companies. If the split between 
the company and employees is 50/50 (as discussed previously), then  p  is equal to 
0.5. In the standard hour plan, the participation is 100 percent and  p  1. 
    Employee Stock-Ownership Plans (ESOPs)   Employee stock-ownership 
plans have become increasingly popular in the past few decades. An  ESOP is a 
defined contribution plan that provides a company’s workers with an ownership 
interest in that company, typically through stock ownership. Stock shares are 
given to employees and held in a trust for them until they retire or leave the com-
pany. Although 100-percent worker owned plants are rare, an ESOP can be used 
to develop such an organization. The National Center for Employee Ownership 
estimates that more than 13 million workers are covered in more than 11,000 
ESOPs around the United States. 
 Profit Sharing  Profit sharing  can be defined as a procedure under which, in 
addition to regular pay, an employer pays all employees special current or de-
ferred sums based on the prosperity of the company. No one specific type of 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 7    Wage Payment 
647
profit sharing has received general industrial acceptance. In fact, just about ev-
ery installation has certain “tailor-made” features that distinguish it from others. 
However, the majority of profit-sharing systems fall into one of the following 
broad categories: (1) cash plans, (2) deferred plans, and (3) combined plans. 
 As the name implies, the straight cash plan involves the periodic distribu-
tion of money from the profits of the business to the employees. The payment is 
not included with the regular pay envelope, but is made separately, to identify it 
as an extra reward, brought about by the individual and combined efforts of the 
entire operating force. The amount of the cash distribution is based on the degree 
of financial success of the enterprise for the bonus period. The shorter the period, 
the closer the connection between effort and financial reward to the employees. 
Longer periods are selected because they average out the vagaries of business 
cycles. 
 Deferred profit-sharing plans feature the periodic investment of portions 
of the profits for employees. Upon retirement or separation from the company, 
yc  1/x
1.50
1.00
0.50
0
2.00
yw  1
yc  
Productivity = x
Earnings (yw) and unit labor costs (yc)
yw  1 + p (x1)
1.50
2.00
1.00
0.50
Normalized unit labor costs
Normalized wages
C
1 + p (x1)
x
 Figure 17.4   Relationship between costs, wages, and productivity in incentive plans 
with variable participation ( p  participation fraction). 
 (Adapted from Fein, 1982) (Reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) 

648 
C H A P T E R  1 7 
employees have a source of income other than wages. Deferred profit-sharing 
plans obviously do not provide the incentive stimulus that cash plans do. How-
ever, deferred profit-sharing plans do offer the advantage of being easier to in-
stall and administer. Also, plans of this type offer more security than the cash 
reward plans. This makes them especially appealing to stable workers. 
 Combined plans arrange to have some of the profits invested for retirement 
and similar benefits, and some distributed as cash rewards. This class of plans 
can realize the advantages of both the deferred plans and those employing the 
straight cash system. A representative installation might provide for sharing one-
half the profits with the employees. Of this amount, one-third may be distributed 
to employees as bonus checks, one-third may be held in reserve to be given out 
during a less successful financial period, and the remaining one-third may be 
placed with a trustee for deferred distribution. 
 There are three methods for determining the amount of money to be given 
to individual employees from the company’s profits. The first and least used is 
the “share and share alike” plan. Here, each employee, regardless of job class, 
receives an equal amount of the profits, after attaining the prescribed period of 
company service. Proponents of this method believe that individual base rates 
already take care of the relative importance of the different workers to the com-
pany. The “share and share alike” plan supplies a feeling of teamwork and im-
portance to each employee, no matter what his or her position in the plant. 
 The most commonly used method of distribution under profit sharing is based 
on the regular compensation paid to workers. The theory is that the employee who 
was paid the most during the period contributed the most to the company’s profits 
and consequently should share in them to the greatest extent. For example, a tool-
maker earning $15,000 during a six-month period would receive a greater share of 
the company’s profits than a chip hauler paid $7,000 during the same period. 
 Another popular means of profit distribution involves the allocation of 
points. Points are given for each year of seniority, each $100 of pay, and other 
factors such as attendance and cooperation. The number of points accumulated 
for the period determines each employee’s share of the profits. Perhaps the 
principal disadvantage of the point method is the difficulty of maintaining and 
administering the complex and detailed records. 
 For a profit-sharing plan to succeed, worker representation and union coop-
eration are essential. The emphasis should be placed on partnership and not on 
management benevolence. Management should recognize that the plan should be 
dynamic and is not a panacea for all problems. Profit sharing should not be used 
as an excuse for paying lower than prevailing wages.  
 Perhaps the greatest concern about profit sharing is the employee taking for 
granted that an extra check will be received at the end of the year. Employees 
will come to expect these checks, and they may even feel cheated if the company 
has a lean year and cannot pay them. For these reasons, any employer should be 
very cautious before embarking on a profit-sharing program. Nevertheless, many 
companies today are experiencing high worker efficiency, decreased costs, scrap 
reduction, and better worker morale as a result of profit sharing.  

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 7    Wage Payment 
649
 Comparison of Two Incentive Schemes 
 EXAMPLE 17.2 
 A company would like to evaluate two incentive schemes. The first is similar to the 
IMPROSHARE gain-sharing plan, with a 50/50 split above 100 percent productiv-
ity. The second is constant day work up to 100 percent productivity, a  kicker  up to 
120 percent (a step increase in wages to induce workers to reach a certain level of 
productivity), and then a participative gain-sharing plan but with the workers only 
receiving 20 percent and the company 80 percent. The plans and unit labor costs are 
shown in Figure 17.5. The company would like to know the point at which the two 
plans break even above 100 percent productivity. 
 The first plan’s normalized unit labor costs can be expressed as 
 
  y c1  0.5  0.5 x 
 while the second plan’s are 
 
  y c2  0.2  1 x 
 Equating the two equations and solving for  x  yield  x  1.67. Therefore, with 
plan 1, the company benefits up to 167 percent productivity, and with plan 2, with 
higher productivity levels. The company must decide whether it is reasonable to 
expect workers to reach such high levels of productivity. 
1.50
1.00
0.50
0
Plan #2
Plan #2
Plan #1
Productivity = x
Earnings = y       Unit costs = yc
Plan #1
1.50
1.67
1.00
0.50
Normalized earnings
Normalized unit labor costs
 Figure 17.5   Comparison of two incentive schemes. 

650 
C H A P T E R  1 7 
 INDIRECT FINANCIAL PLANS 
 Company policies that stimulate employee morale and increase productivity, 
without directly relating compensation to production, fall in the indirect financial 
plans classification. Overall company policies such as fair and relatively high 
base rates, equitable promotion practices, sound suggestion systems, a guaran-
teed annual wage, and relatively high fringe benefits build healthy employee 
attitudes, which stimulate and increase productivity. Thus, they are classified as 
indirect financial plans. 
 The weakness of all indirect incentive methods is that they allow too broad 
a gap between employee benefits and productivity. After a period of time, 
employees take the benefits for granted and fail to realize that continuance 
of those benefits must result entirely from employee productivity. The theo-
ries, philosophies, and techniques of indirect incentives are beyond the scope 
of this text; for more information in this area, refer to books on personnel 
administration.  
 17.3 IMPLEMENTING WAGE INCENTIVES 
 PREREQUISITES 
 The majority of companies that have incentive plans installed favor their con-
tinuance and believe that their plans are (1) increasing the production rate, 
(2) lowering overall unit costs, (3) reducing supervision costs, and (4) promoting 
increased employee earnings. Before installing a wage incentive program, man-
agement should survey its plant to be sure that the plant is ready for an incentive 
plan. Initially, a policy of methods standardization must be introduced so that 
valid work measurement can be accomplished. If different operators follow dif-
ferent patterns while performing their work, and if the sequence of elements has 
not been standardized, the organization is not ready for the installation of wage 
incentives. 
 Work schedules should create a backlog of orders for each operator, so that 
the chances of running out of work are minimized. This implies that adequate 
inventories of material are available, and that machines and tools are properly 
maintained. Also, established base rates should be fair, and should provide for 
a sufficient spread between job classes, to recognize the positions that demand 
more skill, effort, and responsibility. Preferably, management will have estab-
lished base rates through a sound job evaluation program. 
 Finally, fair performance standards must be developed before wage in-
centives are installed. These rates should never be set by judgment or past 
performance records. To be sure that the rates are correct, some form of work 
measurement, based on time study, predetermined time systems, standard data, 
formulas, or work sampling, should be used. 
 Once these prerequisites are complete and management is fully sold on 
incentive wage payment, the company is in a position to design the system. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 7    Wage Payment 
651
 DESIGN 
 To be successful, an incentive plan must be fair to both the company and its 
operators. The plan should give operators the opportunity to earn approximately 
20 to 35 percent above base rate. Next, a good incentive plan must be simple. 
The simpler the plan, the more easily it is understood by all parties, and under-
standing enhances the chances for approval. Individual incentive plans are more 
easily understood, and they work the best, if individual output can be measured. 
 The plan should guarantee the basic hourly rate set by job evaluation, and 
the rate should be a good living wage comparable to the prevailing wage rate of 
the area for each job in question. There should be a range of pay rates for each 
job, and these should be related to total performance, which encompasses qual-
ity, reliability, safety, and attendance as well as output. For performance greater 
than standard, operators should be compensated in direct proportion to output, 
thus discouraging any restriction of production. 
 To help employees associate effort with compensation, paycheck stubs 
should clearly show both the regular and the incentive earnings. It is also advis-
able to indicate on a separate form the efficiency of the operator for the past pay 
period. This is calculated as the ratio of the standard hours produced during the 
period to the hours worked during the period. 
 ADMINISTRATION 
 Once the plan has been installed, management must accept responsibility for 
maintaining it. Management must exercise its right to change the standards when 
the methods and/or equipment is changed. Employees must be guaranteed an 
opportunity to present their suggestions, and the advisability of their requests 
must be proved before any changes are made. Compromising on standards must 
be avoided, or it will lead to failure of the plan. 
 Management must keep all employees aware of how the plan works and 
of any changes to the plan. One technique frequently used is to distribute to all 
employees an “operating instructions” manual detailing both company policy 
relative to the plan and all working details, with examples. The manual should 
thoroughly explain the basis of job classifications, time standards, performance-
rating procedure, allowances, and grievance procedures. It should also describe 
the technique of handling any unusual situation. Finally, it should present the 
objectives of the organization and the role of each employee in the fulfillment of 
those objectives. 
 Next, a motivational climate must be established to accompany the formal 
incentive plan. First, a management style must emphasize a supporting role, 
rather than a directive role, with supervisors assisting workers as best they can. 
 Second, realistic goals of the plan should be clearly established and should 
be broken down into division, department, work center, and individual goals. 
They should emphasize both quality and quantity, as well as reliability and any 
other characteristic essential to the success of the business. 

652 
C H A P T E R  1 7 
 Third, there should be regular feedback to all employees about the results 
of their efforts and the impact of these efforts on the established goals. Fourth, 
every work situation should be designed so that operators are in a position to 
control, to a large extent, the assignments they are given. A sense of responsibil-
ity is an important source of motivation, as is recognition for achievement. More 
details on motivational theories and approaches are presented in Chapter 18. 
 Administrators of the plan should make a daily check of low and excessively 
high performance, in an effort to determine their causes. Low performance not 
only is costly to management in view of the guaranteed hourly rate, but also leads 
to employee unrest and dissatisfaction. Unduly high performance is a symptom 
of loose standards, or the introduction of a methods change for which no stan-
dard revision has been made. In addition, a loose rate would lead to dissatisfac-
tion among neighboring workers, who see the operator with the low standard as 
having a “soft job.” A sufficient number of such poor standards can cause the 
whole incentive plan to fail. Also, operators who have the loose rate may restrict 
their daily production, for fear that management will adjust the standard. This 
restriction of output is costly both to the operators and to the company. 
 Management should make a continuous effort to include a greater share of 
the employees in the incentive plan. When only a portion of the plant is on stan-
dard, there will be a lack of harmony among operating personnel because of 
significant differentials in take-home pay. However, work generally should not 
be put on incentive unless 
 1.  It can readily be measured. 
 2.  The volume of available work is sufficient to justify economically an 
incentive installation. 
 3.  The cost of measuring the output is not excessive. 
 Fundamental to the administration of any wage incentive plan keyed to 
production is the constant adjustment of standards in response to changes in 
the work. No matter how insignificant a methods change may be, the standard 
should be reviewed for possible adjustment. Several minor methods improve-
ments, in aggregate, can amount to a sufficient time differential, causing a loose 
rate, if the standard is not changed. When revising time standards due to methods 
changes, it is only necessary to study those elements affected by the changes. 
 Effective administration of the plan requires a continuing effort to minimize 
the nonproductive hours of direct labor. This nonproductive time, for which al-
lowance must be given, represents lost time due to machine breakdowns, material 
shortages, tool difficulties, and long interruptions of any sort not covered in the 
allowances applied to the individual time standards. Managers must watch this 
time—frequently referred to as “blue ticket time” or “extra allowance time”—
carefully, or it will destroy the purpose of the entire plan. 
 Under incentive effort, production performance is considerably higher than 
under day work operation. With the shorter accompanying in-process time of 
materials, very careful inventory control is needed to prevent material shortages. 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 7    Wage Payment 
653
Likewise, management should introduce a program of preventive maintenance to 
ensure the continuous operation of all machine tools. Equally important to mate-
rial control is the control of all nondurable tools, so that shortages, with resulting 
operator delays, do not develop. 
 It is essential that exact piece counts that determine the operator’s earnings 
be recorded at each workstation. This is usually done by the operator; however, 
controls must be established to prevent operators from falsifying their produc-
tion output. When the number of pieces produced is small, the operators’ count 
at the end of the shift is verified by the immediate supervisor, who initials the 
production report. When the number of pieces is large, a large box holding 
round numbers of the work, such as 10, 20, or 50 is used. Thus, at the end of 
the shift, it is a simple matter for the operators’ supervisors to authenticate 
production reports by counting the boxes and multiplying by the number each 
box holds.  
Administration of a Wage Incentive Plan 
 EXAMPLE 17.3  
 Assume that on a certain job, the production rate is 10 pieces per hour, and that an 
hourly rate of $12 is in effect under a straight day work operation. Thus, the unit direct 
labor cost is $1.20. Now, this shop changes over to incentive wage payment for which 
the day rate of $12/h is guaranteed, and, above task, the operator is compensated in di-
rect proportion to his or her output. Let us assume that the standard developed through 
time study is 12 pieces per hour, and that for the first 5 h of the workday, a certain 
operator averages 14 pieces per hour. His earnings for this period would then be 
 

⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
($12.00)(5) 14
12
$70.00
 
 Now, assume that for the remainder of the workday, the operator could not be 
productively engaged in work, due to a material shortage. The worker would then 
expect at least the base rate, or 
 
 (3) ($12.00)  $36.00 
 which would give earnings for the day of 
 
 $70.00  $36.00  $106.00 
 This would result in a unit direct labor cost of 
 
 

$106.00
70
$1.514
 
 Under day work, even with the low performance, the operator would have produced 
the 70 pieces in less than the working day. Here, the earnings would be 8  $12.00, or 
$96.00, and the unit direct labor cost would be $96.00/70, or $1.371. Therefore, any 
nonproductive time should be carefully controlled. 

654 
C H A P T E R  1 7 
 Basically, management establishes wage incentive plans to increase produc-
tivity. In a sound and properly maintained installation, the percentage of incen-
tive earnings of those workers on incentive would remain relatively constant over 
time. If an analysis shows that incentive earnings continue to rise over a period 
of years, the installation probably has problems that will ultimately erode the ef-
fectiveness of the plan. If, for example, the average incentive earnings increases 
from 17 percent to 40 percent over a period of 10 years, the 23 percent rise is 
most likely not due to a proportionate increase in productivity, but to a creeping 
looseness in standards 
 A checklist for fundamental principles to be applied in a sound wage incen-
tive plan is given in Table 17.2. 
 INCENTIVE PLAN FAILURE 
 An incentive plan may be classified as a failure when its maintenance costs more 
than the plan actually saves; it thus must be discontinued. Usually, it is not possi-
ble to put a finger on the precise cause of failure; there may be numerous reasons 
for a plan’s lack of success. One survey (Britton, 1953; see Table 17.3) listed the 
 Table 17.2   Checklist for Sound Wage Incentive Plans 
   
 Yes 
 No 
 1. Is there agreement between management and labor on general 
principles?  
  □ 
 □ 
 2. Is there a sound foundation of job evaluations and wage rate 
 structures? 
 □ 
 □ 
 3. Are there individual, group, or plantwide incentives? 
 □ 
 □ 
 a. Is the most weight applied to individual incentives? 
 □ 
 □ 
 4. Are incentives in direct proportion to increased production? 
 □ 
 □ 
 5. Is the plan as simple as possible? 
 □ 
 □ 
 6. Is quality tied to incentives? 
 □ 
 □ 
 7. Is the establishment of incentives preceded by methods 
 improvements? 
 □ 
 □ 
 8. Are the incentives based on proven techniques? 
   
   
 a. From detailed time studies 
 □ 
 □ 
 b. From basic motion data or predetermined time systems 
 □ 
 □ 
 c. From standard data or formulas 
 □ 
 □ 
 9. Are the standards based on standard performance under normal 
conditions? 
 □ 
 □ 
 10. Are standards changed when methods change? 
 □ 
 □ 
 
 a.  By mutual agreement between management and labor 
 representatives 
 □ 
 □ 
 11. Are temporary standards kept to a minimum? 
 □ 
 □ 
 12. Are basic hourly rates guaranteed? 
 □ 
 □ 
 13. Are incentives established for indirect workers? 
 □ 
 □ 
  14. Are accurate records kept for piece counts, unmeasured work, 
setup, and downtime? 
 □ 
 □ 
 15. Are good human relations maintained? 
 □ 
 □ 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 7    Wage Payment 
655
principal causes of plan failure as poor fundamentals, inept human relations, and 
poor administration, resulting in too costly a program. Most of these are due to 
incompetent management—management that permits the installation of a plan 
with poor scheduling, unsatisfactory methods, a lack of standardization or loose 
standards, and the compromising of standards.  
 Also, without the complete cooperation of the employees, the union, and 
management to foster a team spirit, ultimate success of the incentive plan cannot 
be achieved. 
 17.4  NONFINANCIAL PERFORMANCE 
MOTIVATION PLANS 
 Nonfinancial incentives include any rewards that have no relation to pay, and yet 
they improve employees’ spirits to such an extent that added effort is evident. 
Elements or company policies that fall under this category include periodic shop 
conferences, quality control circles, frequent talks between supervisors and 
employees, proper employee placement, job enrichment, job enlargement (see 
Chapter 18), nonfinancial suggestion plans, ideal working conditions, and the post-
ing of individual production records. Effective supervisors and capable, conscien-
tious managers also use many other techniques, such as treating the employee and 
spouse to dinner, providing tickets to sporting events or the theater, or arranging 
 Table 17.3   Most Common Reasons for Incentive Plan Failures 
   
 Percent 
 Fundamental deficiencies 
 41.5 
 Poor standards 
 11.0 
 Low incentive coverage of direct productive work 
 8.6 
 Ceiling on earnings 
 7.0 
 No indirect incentives 
 6.8 
 No supervisory incentives 
 6.1 
 Complicated pay formula 
 2.0 
 Inept human relations 
 32.5 
 Insufficient supervisor training 
 6.9 
 No guarantee of standards 
 5.7 
 A fair day’s work not required 
 5.0 
 Standards negotiated with the union 
 4.8 
 Plan not understood 
 4.1 
 Lack of top-management support 
 3.6 
 Poorly trained operators 
 2.4 
 Poor technical administration 
 26.0 
 Method changes not coordinated with standards 
 7.8 
 Faulty base rates 
 5.1 
 Poor administration, i.e., poor grievance procedure 
 4.9 
 Poor production planning 
 3.2 
 Large group on incentive 
 2.8 
 Poor quality control 
 2.2 

656 
C H A P T E R  1 7 
special trips to trade shows or other companies for exposure to state-of-the-art 
technology. All these approaches seek to motivate by improving the work environ-
ment. They are frequently referred to as “quality of work life” plans. 
 The management team also needs to set an example of high performance 
and the pursuit of excellence. Thus, employees will understand that the culture 
of their company is top performance in the manufacture of products of the best 
quality. The results of this philosophy by all workers will be a feeling of great 
pride in their work. In concert with this philosophy should be individual and 
group programs that recognize teamwork and team results.  
 SUMMARY 
 Incentive principles have been applied in job shops and production shops, in the 
manufacture of both hard goods and soft goods, in manufacturing and service 
industries, and in direct and indirect labor operations. Incentives have been used 
to increase productivity, improve product quality and reliability, reduce waste, 
improve safety, and stimulate good working habits, such as punctuality and regu-
lar attendance. 
 Probably the best wage incentive plan applied to individual workers today is 
the standard hour plan with a guaranteed day rate. However, profit sharing, em-
ployee stock ownership, and other related cost improvement savings plans have 
also met with success in many cases. In general, they tend to be more effective 
when they are installed in addition to, rather than instead of, a simple incentive 
plan. Group plans must guarantee their respective day rates to all members of 
the group, and should reward group members in direct proportion to their 
productivity once standard performance is achieved. 
 Table 17.4 illustrates the thinking of 508 personnel/industrial relations man-
agers regarding the various plans. The majority feel that simple incentives—
piecework, standard hour plans, and measured day work—are the best from the 
standpoint of raising productivity and being easy to explain. 
 Table 17.4   Characterization of Flexible Compensation Plans by Survey Respondents 
   
 Profit
sharing
(%) 
 Employee
stock-ownership 
plans (%) 
 Gain sharing 
Scanlon, Rucker, 
IMPROSHARE (%) 
 Simple 
std. hr. pc. 
rate (%) 
 Best for: 
   
   
   
   
 Raising productivity 
 28 
 5 
 26 
 41 
 Increasing loyalty 
 48 
 17 
 19 
 14 
 Providing for retirement 
 80 
 13 
 n.a. 
 n.a. 
 Linking labor cost to performance 
 53 
 n.a. 
 28 
 19 
 Easiest to: 
   
   
   
   
 Explain to employees 
 32 
 9 
 4 
 49 
 Administer 
 40 
 7 
 4 
 38 
 n.a.  not asked.
 Source: Adapted from Broderick and Mitchell (1977). 

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 7    Wage Payment 
657
 Soundly administered incentive systems possess important advantages, for 
both workers and management. The chief benefit to employees is that these plans 
make it possible for the employees to increase their total wages, not at some 
indefinite time in the future, but immediately—in their next paycheck. Manage-
ment obtains a greater output and, assuming that some profit is being made on 
each unit produced, a greater volume of profits. Normally, profits increase not 
in proportion to production, but when a higher rate of production occurs, so that 
overhead costs per unit decrease. Also, the higher wages that result from incen-
tive plans improve employee morale and tend to reduce labor turnover, absentee-
ism, and tardiness. 
 In general, the harder the work is to measure, the more difficult it will be to 
install a successful wage incentive plan. Usually, it is not advantageous to install 
incentives unless the work can reasonably be accurately measured. Furthermore, 
it is usually not advantageous to introduce incentives if the availability of work 
is limited to less than 120 percent of normal. Also, wage incentive plans can 
increase production costs and decrease total unit costs. Usually, however, they 
more than compensate for the increased costs of industrial engineering, quality 
control, and timekeeping that may result from their use. 
 One final caveat is that there is a definite trade-off between increasing the 
work pace with an incentive plan and increasing the risk of injury from repetitive 
motion, especially if the job or workplace has not been ergonomically designed. 
The authors have seen many instances, especially in the garment industry, in 
which jobs with low base rates but high incentives (so that to achieve a decent 
wage, the sewers must perform at very high rates—well above 150 percent) have 
experienced high injury rates. Undoubtedly, a better designed job may decrease 
the injury rate. However, even with the best of conditions, high rates (more than 
20,000 hand motions per 8-h shift) may still lead to some injuries. Therefore, 
even neglecting worker health and safety issues, the standards engineer must de-
cide whether the added medical costs, under today’s escalating conditions, offset 
the gains obtained with a given incentive plan. 
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  What are the three general categories under which the majority of wage incentive 
plans may be classified? 
 2.  Differentiate between individual wage payment plans and group-type plans. 
 3.  What is meant by fringe benefits? 
 4.  Which company policies are included under nonfinancial incentives? 
 5.  What are the characteristics of piecework? Plot the unit cost curve and operator 
earning curve for day work and piecework on the same set of coordinates. 
 6.  Why did measured day work become popular in the 1930s? 
 7.  How does IMPROSHARE differ from the Rucker and the Scanlon plans? 
 8.  Define profit sharing. 
 9.  Which three broad categories cover the majority of profit-sharing installations? 

658 
C H A P T E R  1 7 
 10.  Under the cash plan, what does the amount of money distributed depend on? 
 11.  What determines the length of the period between bonus payments under the cash 
plan? Why is it poor practice to have the period too long? What disadvantages are 
there to the short period? 
 12.  What are the characteristic features of the deferred profit-sharing plan? 
 13.  What is the basis for the “share and share alike” method of distribution? 
 14.  What are the fundamental prerequisites of a successful wage incentive plan? 
 15.  Why is it fundamental to keep time standards up to date if a wage incentive plan is 
to succeed? 
 16.  What does unduly high performance indicate? 
 17.  How would you go about establishing a climate to increase worker motivation? 
 18.  What are some of the reasons for the failure of a wage incentive scheme? 
 PROBLEMS  
 1.  In a single-product plant where IMPROSHARE was installed, 411 employees pro-
duced 14,762 product units over a 1-year period and recorded 802,000 clock hours. 
In a given week, 425 employees worked a total of 16,150 h and produced 348 units. 
What would be the hourly value of this output? What percentage bonus would each 
of these 425 workers receive? What would be the unit labor cost in hours for this 
week’s production? 
 2.  Analysts established a standard time of 0.0125 h per piece for machining a small 
component. A setup time of 0.32 h was also established, as the operator performed 
the necessary setup work on incentive. Compute the following: 
  a. 
 Total time allowed to complete an order of 860 pieces 
  b. 
 Operator efficiency, if job is completed in an 8-h day 
  c. 
 Efficiency of the operator who requires 12 h to complete the job 
 3.  A 100-percent participation plan for incentive payment is in operation. The 
operator base rate for this class of work is $10.40. The base rate is guaranteed. 
Compute:  
  a. 
 Total earnings for the job at the efficiency determined in Problem 2(b) 
  b. 
 Hourly earnings 
  c. 
 Total earnings for the job at the efficiency determined in Problem 2(c) 
  d. 
 Direct labor cost per piece from (a), excluding setup 
  e. 
 Direct labor cost per piece from (c), excluding setup 
 4.  A rate of 0.42 min per piece is set for a forging operation. The operator works on 
the job for a full 8-h day and produces 1,500 pieces. Use a standard hour plan. 
  a. 
 How many standard hours does the operator earn? 
  b. 
 What is the operator’s efficiency for the day? 
  c. 
 If the base rate is $9.80 per hour, compute the earnings for the day. 
  d. 
 What is the direct labor cost per piece at this efficiency? 
  e. 
 What would be the proper piece rate (expressed in dollars) for this job, as-
suming that the time standard is correct?  

 
 
C H A PT ER 1 7    Wage Payment 
659
 5.  A 60/40 participation plan is used in a plant (base rate is guaranteed and operator 
receives 60 percent of proportional gain after exceeding 100 percent). The estab-
 lished time value on a certain job is 0.75 min, and the base rate is $8.80. What is 
the direct labor cost per piece when operator efficiency is as follows? 
  a. 
 50 percent of standard 
  b. 
 80 percent of standard 
  c. 
 100 percent of standard 
  d. 
 120 percent of standard 
  e. 
 160 percent of standard 
 6.  In a plant where all the rates are set on a money basis (piece rates), a worker is 
regularly employed at a job for which the guaranteed base rate is $8.80. This 
worker’s regular earnings are in excess of $88 per day. Due to the pressure of work, 
the operator is asked to help out on another job, classified to pay $10 per hour. This 
employee works 3 days on this job and earns $80 each day. 
  a. 
 How much should the operator be paid for each day’s work on this new job? 
Why? 
  b. 
 Would it make any difference if the operator had worked on a new job for 
which the base rate was $8 per hour and had earned $72? Explain.  
 7.  An incentive plan employing a kicker is in use. Below standard performance the 
worker is guaranteed a rate of $6/h, and above standard performance the worker 
is paid $9.20/h. A job is studied and a rate of 0.036 h per piece is set. What is the 
direct labor cost per piece at the following efficiencies? 
  a. 
 50 percent 
  b. 
 80 percent 
  c. 
 98 percent 
  d. 
 105 percent 
  e. 
 150 percent 
 8.  A company would like to evaluate two incentive schemes that take effect once the 
worker exceeds standard performance. In the first case, the benefits are split 50/50 
between the worker and the company. In the second case, the worker receives a 
kicker up to 120 percent earnings and then maintains level performance up to 
150 percent, after which all the earnings go to the worker. 
  a. 
 Plot the normalized unit labor costs for each scheme. 
  b. 
 Derive the equations for worker earnings and unit labor costs for each scheme.  
  c. 
 Find the point at which the two plans break even. 
  d. 
 Which do you think the company would prefer? 
 9.  A company would like to evaluate two incentive schemes that take effect once the 
worker exceeds standard performance. In the first case, the benefits are split 
30 percent to the worker and 70 percent to the company up to 120 percent per-
formance. If the worker exceeds 120 percent performance, all the earnings go to 
the worker. In the second case, all earnings beyond standard performance are split 
50/50 between the worker and the company. 
  a. 
 Plot the earnings for each scheme. 
  b. 
 Derive the equations for worker earnings and normalized unit labor costs for 
each scheme. 

660 
C H A P T E R  1 7 
  c. 
 Find the point at which the two plans break even. 
  d. 
 Which do you think the company would prefer? 
 10.  The operator in Problem 16 in Chapter 10 was performing above standard perfor-
mance, because he was on a standard hour plan at a base rate of $12/h. Calculate 
what the operator would lose ($/hr) if the analyst rated the worker at 100 percent 
across the board. 
 11.  Consider two incentive plans: (1) guaranteed minimum wage up to 100 percent 
performance, incentive pay above 100 percent performance is split 50/50 between 
the workers and the company; and (2) guaranteed minimum wage up to 100 percent 
performance, a kicker up to 120 percent earnings and then a leveler up to 150 per-
cent performance, after which the incentive is direct piece work (100 percent to the 
worker). Plot the unit labor costs for each scheme and find the point at which the 
two plans break even. 
 REFERENCES 
 Fay, Charles H., and Richard W. Beatty.  The Compensation Source Book . Amherst, MA: 
Human Resource Development Press, 1988. 
 Fein, M. “Financial Motivation.”  In Handbook of Industrial Engineering . Ed. Gavriel 
Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1982. 
 Globerson, S.  Performance Criteria and Incentive Systems .  Amsterdam : Elsevier, 1985. 
 Lazear, E. P.  Performance Pay and Productivity . Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of 
Economic Research, 1996. 
 Lokiec, Mitchell.  Productivity and Incentives . Columbia, SC: Bobbin Publications, 
1977. 
 U.S. General Accounting Office.  Productivity Sharing Programs: Can They Contribute 
to Productivity Improvement? Gaithersburg, MD: U.S. Printing Office, 1991. 
 Von Kaas, H. K.  Making Wage Incentives Work . New York: American Management 
Associations, 1971. 
 Zollitsch, Herbert G., and Adolph Langsner.  Wage and Salary Administration . 2d ed. 
Cincinnati, OH: South-Western Publishing, 1970. 
 SELECTED SOFTWARE 
 DesignTools (available from the McGraw-Hill text website at  www.mhhe.com/
niebel-freivalds ). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002. 

 
661
 
661
 
CHAPTER
 
  18 
 
 KEY POINTS 
 •  Train workers to minimize injuries and to reach the standard time more 
quickly. 
 •  Use learning curves to adjust standards for new workers and small batches. 
 •  Recognize and understand worker needs. 
 •  Use job enlargement and job rotation to minimize repetitive injuries and 
increase worker self-esteem.  
 I
 n a 1954 survey on subjects found in industrial engineering curriculums, edu-
cators ranked motion and time study first in a list of 41 subject areas (Bal-
yeat, 1954). A similar survey 10 years later, of more than 8,700 nonclerical 
employees in industrial engineering in 250 large U.S. manufacturing companies, 
found that industrial engineers still spent most of their time on work measurement 
(Anonymous, 1964). A more recent survey (Freivalds et al., 2000) of 61 practic-
ing industrial engineers indicated that traditional work measurement topics (time 
study, standard data, work sampling) were no longer at the top of the list (although 
methods tools were). In their place, several nontraditional work organizational 
items (teamwork, job evaluations, and training) jumped to the top ten. Because of 
this demand, a greater emphasis has been placed on these topics in this book. 
 Another trend is the spread of industrial engineering techniques to all areas 
of modern business, including marketing, finance, sales, and top management as 
well as into the service sector and health management areas. To meet the demand, 
and to reap the benefits of training in this field more quickly, many industries have 
embarked on education programs conducted in their own plants on company time. 
For example, an extensive survey of more than 5,300 U.S. companies revealed that 
80 percent were providing formal training programs for first-line supervisors, and 
42 percent of these training programs dealt with work simplification, methods, and 
lean manufacturing. Therefore, these topics are also emphasized in this chapter. 
 Training 
and Other 
Management 
Practices 

662 
C H A P T E R  1 8 
 18.1 OPERATOR TRAINING 
 TRAINING APPROACHES 
 A company’s labor force is one of its main resources. Without skilled workers, 
production rates would be slower, product quality would be poorer, and overall 
productivity would be lower. Therefore, once the new method is installed and the 
proper standard is set, the operators must be trained appropriately to follow the 
prescribed method and attain the desired standard. If this is done, the operators 
will have little difficulty in meeting or exceeding the standard. Many excellent 
sources of training material, programs, and consultants are readily available and 
are not discussed in detail here. However, it is important to be aware of some of 
the major options in training programs, such as those that follow. 
 On-the-Job Learning  Putting the operators directly on a new job without any 
training is a sink-or-swim approach. Although the company may think it is sav-
ing money, it definitely is not. Some of the operators will muddle along and 
eventually adapt to the new technique, theoretically “learning.” However, they 
may learn the incorrect method and may not attain the desired standard. Or they 
may take a longer time to reach the proper standard. This means a longer learn-
ing curve. Other operators may watch or ask questions of their coworkers and 
eventually learn the new method. However, during this period, they will have 
slowed down both the other operators and overall production. Worse yet, the 
coworkers may be using an incorrect method, which would then be passed on 
to the new operator. In addition, the new operator may experience considerable 
anxiety during the whole learning process, which may hinder that process. 
 Written Instructions  Simple written descriptions of the correct method are an 
improvement over on-the-job learning, but only for relatively simple operations, 
or in situations where the operator is relatively knowledgeable of the process 
and only needs to adjust for minor variations. This assumes that the operator 
understands the language in which the instructions are written or has sufficient 
education to read well. In these days, with greater diversity in the workplace, 
neither can be assumed. 
 Pictorial Instructions  Still pictures or photographs used with written instruc-
tions have proved to be very effective in training operators. This also allows less-
educated workers and non-native English speakers to acquire the new method 
more easily. Line drawings generally have an advantage over photographs in 
emphasizing specific details, omitting extraneous details, and allowing exploded 
views. However, photographs are easier to produce and store and are more true 
to life (Konz and Johnson, 2000), if properly exposed and focused. 
 Videotapes and DVDs  Movies can show the dynamics of the process, such as 
the interrelationships of motions, parts, and tools, much better than still pictures. 
Whether in the form of videotapes or DVD, movies are inexpensive and easy to 
produce and show. Furthermore, they allow the operator the freedom to control 

 
 
C H A P T E R 1 8    Training and Other Management Practices  
663
the time and rate of viewing, backing up if necessary and reviewing procedures. 
Also, both modalities can be easily stored, erased, and rerecorded. 
 Physical Training  Training involving physical models, simulators, or real 
equipment is best for complex tasks. This allows the trainee to perform the job 
activities under valid real-life conditions, experience emergency conditions un-
der safe controls, and have performance monitored for feedback. Such physical 
training is best exemplified by the high-fidelity flight simulators for pilot train-
ing used by several airlines, and the simulated coal mine for roof bolting or con-
tinuous miner operator training at the Bureau of Mines Bruceton research facility 
near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 
 One advantage of physical training is that the operators also undergo  work 
hardening  in the process; that is, they perform muscle exertions or wrist motions 
under controlled conditions and reduced frequencies, so that the body can gradu-
ally build up to the more extreme conditions found on the job. This procedure 
has been quite successful, for example, in reducing work-related musculoskel-
etal disorders for meat packers, mentioned by OSHA in its meatpacking guide-
lines (OSHA, 1990) and recommended by the American Meat Institute in its 
Ergonomics and Safety Guidelines. 
 18.2 THE LEARNING CURVE 
 Industrial engineers, ergonomists, and other professionals interested in the study 
of human behavior recognize that learning is time-dependent. Even the simplest 
operation may take hours to master. Complicated work may take days and even 
weeks before the operator achieves the coordinated mental and physical qualities 
enabling him or her to proceed from one element to another without hesitation or 
delay. This time period and the related level of learning form the learning curve, 
a typical one of which appears in Figure 18.1. 
 Once the operator reaches the flatter section of the learning curve, the prob-
lem of performance rating is simplified. However, it may not always be conve-
nient to wait this long to develop a standard. Analysts may need to establish the 
standard early in the learning process, where the slope of the curve is greatest. 
In such cases, it is helpful to have available learning curves representative of the 
various types of work being performed. This information can be useful, both 
for determining the point in time at which it would be desirable to establish the 
standard, and for providing a guide as to the expected productivity level of the 
average operator. 
 By plotting learning curve data on logarithmic paper, analysts may linearize 
those data, making them easier to use. For example, plotting both the dependent 
variable (cycle time) and the independent variable (number of cycles) shown in 
Figure 18.1 on log-log paper results in a straight line, as seen in Figure 18.2. 
 The theory of the learning curve proposes that as the total quantity of units 
produced doubles, the time per unit declines at some constant percentage. For 
example, if analysts expect an 80 percent rate of learning, then as production 

664 
C H A P T E R  1 8 
 Figure 18.1   Typical productivity increase graph. 
Cycle time
Number of cycles
1
2
3
4
5
6 7 8 910
15
20
25 30
40
50
80 100
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
 Figure 18.2   Estimated cycle times based on a 20 percent reduction each time the 
quantity doubles. 
doubles, the average time per unit declines 20 percent. Table 18.1 illustrates the 
decline in the cycle time as the number of cycles increases; with successive dou-
bling of the cycles, an 80 percent rate of improvement is realized. These are the 
same data as plotted in Figures 18.1 and 18.2. Typical rates of learning are as 

 
 
C H A P T E R 1 8    Training and Other Management Practices  
665
follows: large or fine assembly work (such as aircraft), 70 to 80 percent; weld-
ing, 80 to 90 percent; machining, 90 to 95 percent. Counterintuitively, 70 percent 
is the highest rate of learning, characteristic of a very manual operation, while 
100 percent would be no learning, for fully automated operations.   
 When linear graph paper is used, the learning curve is a power curve of the 
form  y 5  kxn . On log-log paper, the curve is represented by 
 
 log 10  y 5 log 10  k 1  n 3 log 10  x 
 where 
 y 5 cycle time 
 
  x 5 number of cycles or of units produced 
 
  n 5 exponent representing the slope 
 
  k 5 value of first cycle time 
 By definition, the learning in percent is then equal to 
 
k
x
kx
(2 )
2
n
n
n

 
 Taking the log of both sides gives 
 
 
n
log (learningpercent)
log
2
10
10

 For 80 percent learning, 
 
 
n
log
0.80
log
2
0.0969
0.301
0.322
10
10

 

 Also,  n can be found directly from the slope: 
 
 
n
y
x
y
y
x
x
log
log
log
log
log 12
log
4.92
log 1
log 16
0.322
10
1
10
2
10
1
10
2
10
10
10
10
 
 






 Note that  k is 12, and the final equation for the learning curve is 
 
  y 5 12 x 20.322 
 Table 18.2 presents the slopes of the common learning curves as a function 
of the learning percentages. Example 18.1 should help clarify the use of the 
learning curve.   
 Table 18.1   Learning Data in a Tabular Form 
 Number of cycles 
 Cycle time (min) 
 Ratio to previous time 
 1 
 12.00 
 — 
 2 
 9.60 
 80 
 4 
 7.68 
 80 
 8 
 6.14 
 80 
 16 
 4.92 
 80 
 32 
 3.93 
 80 

666 
C H A P T E R  1 8 
 Table 18.2    Relationship of the Slope of the Learning Curve 
to the Learning Curve Percentage 
 Learning curve percentage 
 Slope 
 70 
 0.514 
 75 
 0.415 
 80 
 0.322 
 85 
 0.234 
 90 
 0.152 
 95 
 0.074 
Calculation of Learning Curve 
 EXAMPLE 18.1  
 Assume that it takes 20 min to produce the 50th unit and 15 min to produce the 100th 
unit. What is the learning curve? 
 
 
n
y
x
log
20
log
15
log
50
log
100
1.301
1.176
1.699
2.000
0.4152
10
10
10
10
 








 The learning curve percentage is 
 
 2 0.4152 5 75% 
 To complete the learning curve equation, we substitute one of the data points, such as 
(20, 50), into the equation and solve for  k : 
 
  k 5  y  x n 5 2050 0.4152 5 101.5 
 Thus, the analyst’s costs for the first units produced would be based upon 101.5 min 
of time to produce one assembly, not the 10 min developed from standard data or 
predetermined time systems. 
 The analyst may next wish to determine how many cycles are needed to reach a 
specific time, for example, a standard time of 10 min. Substitute  y 5 10 min into the 
learning equation, take the logs of both sides, and solve for  x , and we get 
 10 5 101.5 x 0.4152 
 log 10 (10101.5) 5 20.4152 log 10 x 
 log 10 x 5 (21.006)(20.4152) 5 2.423 
 x 510 2.423 5 264.8  265 cycles (always round up) 
 Thus, it would take the worker 265 cycles to reach the standard time. 
 Next, the analyst may desire to know how long it takes in actual time to reach 
a standard time of 10 min. This is the area under the learning curve, which may be 
found by integrating under the curve: 
 
 
∫
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
⎡⎣
⎤⎦
+
=
−
+









kx
n
/
1
/ 0.5848
4,424min
dx
k
x
x
Total time
101.5 265.5
0.5
n
x
x
n
n
2
12
1
1
12
1
0.5848
0.5848
2
12
2
12
 Thus, for Example 18.1, it takes a total of 4,424 min, or approximately 73.7 h, to 
reach a cycle time of 10 min. The average cycle time would be 4,424/265 5 16.7 min. 

 
 
C H A P T E R 1 8    Training and Other Management Practices  
667
 Note that there are two learning curve models. The one presented is the 
 Crawford model , also known as the  unit model,  because in this model the im-
provement gained is for a particular unit (Crawford, 1944). The other model is the 
original  Wright model  developed by Wright (1936) for the aircraft industry and 
also known as the  cumulative average model,  because in this model the improve-
ment gained is for the cumulative average unit rather than for a specific unit. The 
cumulative average value is necessarily greater than the unit cost for the  n th pro-
duction unit; however, as the number of units increases, the models will converge. 
Some analysts consider the Crawford model to be more practical because it does 
not mask the individual variability as much as the Wright model does. 
 An interesting question involves what happens when the operator takes a 
vacation. Does the operator forget some of the learning? This does in fact happen 
and is known as  remission  (Hancock and Bayha, 1982). The amount of remission 
is a function of the operator’s position on the learning curve when the break oc-
curs. The amount of remission is approximated by extrapolating a straight line 
from the time of the first cycle to the standard time (see Figure 18.3). The equa-
tion for this remission line is 
 
(
)(
)
y
k
k
s
x
x
1
1
s
 



 
 where 
 s 5 standard time 
 
 xs 5 number of cycles to standard time  
200
Number of cycles
Line of approximate remission
Remission
Operator learning curve
End of first run
Cycle time (min)
50
400
3.5
10
(s)
 Figure 18.3   The effect of breaks on operator learning. 
 ( From: Hancock and Bayha, 1982) (Reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) 

668 
C H A P T E R  1 8 
 Being able to estimate the time for the first unit produced and the time for 
successive units can be extremely helpful in estimating relatively low quanti-
ties, if the analyst has the standard data and learning curve information. Be-
cause standard data are usually based on worker performance when learning has 
leveled off or reached the flat portion of the learning curve, the data must be 
adjusted upward to ensure that adequate time is allowed per unit under low-
quantity conditions. For example, let us assume that the analyst wants to know 
the time needed to produce the first unit of a complex assembly. The standard 
data analysis suggests a time of 1.47 h, which is the cycle time for the  n th unit, or 
the point where the learning curve begins to flatten. The  n th unit, in this case, is 
estimated to be 300 assemblies. Based on other similar jobs, the analyst expects 
a 95 percent learning rate. From Table 18.2, the exponent  n , representing the 
slope, is 0.074. Then  k , the value for the first cycle time, is 
 
 k 5 1.47  300 0.074 5 2.24 h  
Calculation of Learning Curve with Remission 
 EXAMPLE 18.2  
 In Example 18.1, the operator stops after 50 cycles for a two-week vacation. His cycle 
time for the 51st cycle will be determined from the remission function 
 
 
(
)(
)
y
101.5
101.5
10
51
1
1
265
84.17






 The operator’s cycle time without a break would have been 
 
  y 5 101.5 x 0.4152 5 101.5 3 51 0.4152 5 19.84 
 Therefore, there has been a remission of 84.17 2 19.84 5 64.33 min, and a new learn-
ing curve with a new  k 5 84.17 starts. The 51st cycle now becomes the first cycle of 
the new learning curve for which the rate of learning has improved, because the as-
sumption is that the operator will still reach the standard time in 265 cycles. However, 
the total learning will have increased because of the remission. 
 Thus, the analyst’s costs would be based on 2.24 h of time to produce one 
assembly, not the 1.47 h developed from the standard data. 
 Many factors affect human learning. Job complexity is very important. The 
longer the cycle length, the greater the uncertainty in movements, and the more 
C-type or simultaneous motions (see Chapter 13)—the more training will be 
required. Similarly, individual capabilities, such as age (rate of learning declines 
with age), prior training, and physical capabilities all affect the ability to learn.  
 18.3 EMPLOYEES AND MOTIVATION 
 EMPLOYEE REACTIONS 
 Industrial engineers must have a clear understanding of the psychological and 
sociological reactions of employees’ attitudes toward the methods, standards, 
and wage payment. Three points should always be recognized: 

 
 
C H A P T E R 1 8    Training and Other Management Practices  
669
 1.  Most people do not respond favorably to change. 
 2.  Job security is uppermost in most workers’ minds. 
 3.  People have a need for affiliation and are consequently influenced by the 
group to which they belong.  
 Most people, regardless of their positions, have an inherent resistance to 
changing anything associated with their work patterns or work centers. This is 
due to several psychological factors. First, change indicates dissatisfaction with 
the present situation. But the natural tendency is to defend the present way, as it 
is intimately associated with the individual. No one likes others to be dissatisfied 
with his or her work; if a change is even suggested, the immediate reaction is to 
oppose the proposed changes. 
 Second, people tend to be creatures of habit. Once a habit is acquired, it is 
difficult to give up, and there is resentment if someone endeavors to alter the 
habit. For example, anyone in the habit of eating at a certain place is reluctant 
to change to another restaurant, even though the food may be better and less 
expensive. 
 Third, people naturally desire security in their position, which is just as 
basic as the instinct for self-preservation. In fact, security and self-preservation 
are related and form the second level of Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs (see 
next section). Most workers prefer job security over high wages when choosing 
a place to work. 
 Fourth, to the worker, all methods and standards changes appear to be an 
effort to increase productivity. The immediate and understandable reaction is to 
believe that if production goes up, the demand will be filled in a shorter period; 
and without demand, there will be fewer jobs. 
 The solution to the need for job security lies principally in the sincerity of 
management. When methods improvement results in job displacement, manage-
ment is responsible for making an honest effort to relocate those who have been 
displaced. This may include providing for retraining. Some companies have 
gone as far as to guarantee that no one will lose employment as a result of meth-
ods improvement. Because the labor turnover rate is usually greater than the 
improvement rate, the natural attrition through resignation and retirement can 
usually absorb any people displaced as a result of improvement. 
 Fifth, the sociological need for affiliation and the resulting impact of “be-
having as the group wants everyone to behave” also influence change. Fre-
quently, the worker, as a union member, feels that he or she is expected to resist 
any change that has been instituted by management; consequently, the worker is 
reluctant to cooperate with any contemplated changes resulting from methods 
and standards work. Another factor is the resistance toward anybody who is not 
part of one’s own group. A company represents a “group” that has several groups 
within its major boundaries. These individual groups respond to basic sociologi-
cal laws. Change proposed by someone outside one’s own group   is often received 
with open hostility. The worker is associated with a different group than that of the 
methods analyst and tends to resist any effort from analysts that might interfere 
with the usual performance within the individual’s group.  

670 
C H A P T E R  1 8 
 MASLOW’S HIERARCHY OF HUMAN NEEDS 
 Psychosocial factors such as stress, needs, or rewards can be very important 
aspects of worker productivity. Workers naturally want to work with the least 
amount of stress and the greatest amount of rewards. Maslow (1970) quantified 
these wants into a hierarchy comparable to a set of steps leading to the top of a 
pyramid, or the ultimate goal (see Figure 18.4). Each lower want or need must 
be satisfied before a worker will seek rewards at the next-higher level. The low-
est level includes the  physiological needs  corresponding to survival, food, water, 
and health. Job-related factors at this level could be sufficient pay or other mon-
etary rewards. 
 Once these physiological wants are satisfied, the second level,  safety needs , 
becomes important. Safety needs include the need for security, in both the physical 
and psychological sense. These could be as simple as trying to avoid physical in-
jury on the job, or as complex as seeking a “nice” supervisor who doesn’t threaten 
or demean the worker. With the prevalence of company downsizing starting in the 
late 1990s, safety needs could include job security and seniority rights.  
 The third level,  social needs , includes the need for attention, friendship, 
social belonging, and meaningful relationships with coworkers. In the fourth 
level,  self-esteem needs , workers strive for competence and achievement, express 
a desire for self-respect, or seek to satisfy their egos. 
Self-fulfillment
Self-esteem
Social Needs
Safety Needs
Physiological Needs
 Figure 18.4   Maslow’s Hierarchy of Human Needs. 

 
 
C H A P T E R 1 8    Training and Other Management Practices  
671
 At the top of the pyramid, the final or fifth level is  self-fulfillment . The work-
ers have finally achieved all their needs, they are personally fulfilled, and their 
egos are satisfied. This level can vary considerably from individual to individ-
ual. Whereas some people may be satisfied making widgets day in and day out, 
others may only be satisfied running their own businesses. 
 The industrial engineer may wonder what purpose Maslow’s hierarchy 
serves on the plant floor, or how these wants can be satisfied for the production 
worker. Consider the first level of physiological needs. One tactic, though very 
negative in terms of labor–management relationships, is the threat of termina-
tion for failure to meet production quotas, or for violation of safety rules. Other 
scare procedures or hard-sell approaches fall into the same category. A more 
positive approach is the implementation of wage incentives (Chapter 17). This 
is classic conditioning, or positive reinforcement, at its simplest. Many workers 
are willing to work at relatively tedious jobs, or at higher production rates, given 
sufficient monetary incentive. Thus, workers trade increased satisfaction with 
the job, provided by the extra pay, for decreased satisfaction on the job. Unfortu-
nately, with increasing wealth and progressive income taxes, additional income 
becomes less meaningful, and the industrial engineer may need to proceed to 
higher levels of Maslow’s hierarchy. 
 At the second level, safety or security needs, overall job security is the con-
cern, especially with the increasing trend toward downsizing or right-sizing. Tra-
ditionally, in other cultures, especially in Japan, a job was a lifetime guarantee 
with that company. In the United States, it is not unusual for a worker to change 
jobs every five to six years and work for a half dozen employers during his or her 
lifetime. Employment can perhaps be guaranteed for a fixed number of years. At 
the worksite level, specific regulations regarding work practices, physical guard-
ing of unsafe machines, or safety contests can improve the overall safety or the 
working climate. 
 At the third level, social needs, workers seek “belonging” within a social 
system. In terms of work, this could imply having friendly coworkers, com-
fortable interaction with management, participation on ergonomics or safety 
committees, and so on. Such formal organizations are much more common in 
Japan with its quality circles; in Germany, where workers elect a work council 
( Betriebsrat ) to handle grievances and negotiate with management; and in 
Sweden, where auto plants have work groups ( arbetsgrupper ). 
 At the fourth level, the workers seek an increase in self-esteem. This could 
be provided by making the work more challenging, adding more responsibility, 
and providing greater variety. The latter can be done through  job enlargement , a 
horizontal expansion of work. Instead of just tightening one set of bolts all day, 
the worker could perform the complete assembly. This not only increases the 
worker’s sense of responsibility, but also utilizes a variety of his or her muscles 
and joints, dividing the work stress over a larger part of the body and thus re-
ducing the risk of cumulative trauma disorders. Tied into job enlargement is  job 
enrichment , a vertical expansion of work, which allows workers both to start and 
to complete a given task, diversifying duties so that no one person has all of a 

672 
C H A P T E R  1 8 
boring task, delegating decision making, and rotating job assignments.  Job rota-
tion  is similar to job enlargement in that any worker gets the opportunity to do a 
variety of tasks, while adhering to a more rigid schedule. Job rotation has effects 
similar to job enrichment in varying job stressors and allowing fatigued muscles 
and body parts to recover. 
 VOLVO APPROACH 
 All these concepts (job enlargement, job enrichment, job rotation, and work 
groups) were pioneered in the 1960s in Sweden. The impetus was increasing 
absenteeism, wildcat strikes, worker unrest, and general employee dissatis-
faction. Drastic changes had to be made. Therefore, under the direction of its 
president Pehr Gyllenhammer, Volvo devised a revolutionary plan and built 
a completely new auto assembly plant at Kalmar in 1974. The traditional 
conveyor line was replaced by an automated guided vehicle (AGV) system 
on which the car assembly took place. The AGV was guided by an electronic 
system of cables embedded in the floor. A central computer controlled the 
movement of the AGVs throughout the plant, but could be overridden by 
the employees at any time. In addition, there was a drastic change in work 
organization: employees were fully involved and formed work groups that 
received and examined factory orders, decided exactly which group member 
would do which task for the given day, inspected their own work, completed 
paperwork after assembly, and, at the end of the day, had a brief discus-
sion of the day’s happenings and problems. Job enlargement was carried 
out to the highest degree in that one group of workers assembled more than 
25 percent of one car. 
 The Kalmar design was successful from the beginning, as the work became 
more meaningful and workers assumed more responsibility. Absenteeism and 
employee turnover were greatly reduced, while cost and production targets 
were met. Because of the success at Kalmar, similar new plants were opened at 
Uddevalla and Goteborg (Torslunda). Unfortunately, due to a shifting market 
and radically lower sales figures, Volvo eventually closed the Uddevalla and 
Kalmar plants. In 1997, the Uddevalla plant reopened with the production of a 
new sports car. 
 Note that all three forms of job reorganization—job enlargement, job enrich-
ment, and job rotation—were in place in the Volvo plants. Cycle times increased 
to many hours, decreasing the repetitiveness of motion for any one limb or set 
of muscles. 
 At the fifth and highest level of Maslow’s hierarchy, the worker would be 
expected to devote himself or herself completely to the company. Other than 
in Japan, this is probably not feasible in any large-scale company. In contrast, 
in small, start-up companies, not only the owner, but also some of the closest 
colleagues may put in most of their waking hours in keeping the company afloat. 
Then, the company and work truly become one’s self-actualization. 

 
 
C H A P T E R 1 8    Training and Other Management Practices  
673
 MOTIVATION 
 An interesting  motivation maintenance theory  was developed by Herzberg 
(1966), based on a survey of factors leading to satisfaction or dissatisfaction 
for 1,500 employees in 12 different organizations. Similar to Maslow, Herzberg 
found two basic but different needs in individuals. If workers were dissatisfied 
with their jobs, their main concern was the working environment. However, if 
they were satisfied with their jobs, their satisfaction dealt with the actual work 
itself. 
 Herzberg classified the environmental factors as  extrinsic  and potential 
dissatisfiers. These included such factors as the administration, supervision, 
working conditions, salary, and interpersonal relations. The potential satisfiers 
or motivators, which included achievement, recognition, responsibility, and ad-
vancement, he termed  intrinsic factors . The extrinsic factors had little positive 
effect, but could be strong dissatisfiers, leading to large negative feeling. The 
intrinsic factors encouraged workers to be more productive and satisfied. There-
fore, it is in the manager’s interest to maximize the intrinsic factors and mini-
mize the negative effects of the extrinsic factors. 
 One of the most effective intrinsic motivation techniques is job enrichment, 
which is the opposite of job simplification. With work methods and the princi-
ples of motion economy, the typical goal of an industrial engineer is job simpli-
fication. If the job is simple and repetitive, little learning is required and workers 
can be easily interchanged. This approach was developed for the machinelike 
consistency required on an assembly line. However, workers are not machines, 
and when subjected to such conditions, they may become bored and dissatisfied, 
leading to increased absences and job changes. Even worse, as recent statistics 
show, are increased stress levels leading to increases in cumulative trauma dis-
orders. It is not worth saving pennies on more repetitive jobs when thousands of 
dollars are lost to the resulting injuries. 
 Herzberg also found some interesting deviations in the survey results, 
depending on the populations examined. These could be used to a company’s 
advantage, depending on the composition of the worker population. For exam-
ple, younger workers were less concerned about job security than older workers 
and were generally more satisfied with the whole organizational reward sys-
tem. More highly educated and more highly paid workers favored the intrinsic 
rewards. Extrinsic rewards ranked higher overall than intrinsic rewards, but were 
most prized by less-educated, lower-paid, and older workers.  
 18.4  HUMAN INTERACTIONS 
 Interactions between employees at the workplace are an important component of 
morale and productivity. Several approaches can be used to deal and communi-
cate with people, two of which are discussed here: transactional analysis and the 
Dale Carnegie approach. 

674 
C H A P T E R  1 8 
 TRANSACTIONAL ANALYSIS 
 Transactional analysis , as developed by Berne (1964), consists of several com-
ponents: (1) ego states, (2) transactions, (3) stroking and stamps, and (4) more 
complex games and lifestyles. There are three  ego states,  which are found to 
some degree in all people at all times. The parent  ego state  reflects attitudes and 
values absorbed from parents as authority figures and produces a statement such 
as “That’s really a dumb mistake.” Bill Cosby of television’s  Cosby Show would 
be a good example of the parent ego state. The  adult ego state  logically analyzes 
facts, makes rational decisions and conclusions, and operates with phrases such 
as “Let’s examine that problem carefully.” Mr. Spock of the  Star Trek series 
would be a perfect example of the adult ego state. The  child ego state  is more 
complex and may take up to three different forms. A naive state produces re-
sponses such as “Oh, I didn’t know that.” The adaptive state establishes internal 
rules based on social conditioning, such as “Respect your elders.” The manipula-
tive state may fake injuries to get out of something unpleasant, such as pretend-
ing to have a cold to get out of school. 
 Interactions between the ego states occur in the form of  transactions . Par-
ticipants can both send and receive messages from any of the three ego states. 
If the messages are sent and received at the same ego state level, such as adult 
to adult, the transactions are termed  complementary  and are considered to 
result in a positive and successful exchange (Figure 18.5). A parent-to-child 
transaction (Figure 18.6), if occurring at a parallel level, is still considered 
complementary, but may not be as effective as a transaction occurring at the 
same level.  
Production Manager:
 
"The grinding station needs to get back up to rate."
Line Supervisor:
 
"Yes, I'll go over and take care of it."
P
P
A
A
C
C
 Figure 18.5   Complementary transaction: adult to adult—the message is sent and 
received appropriately. 
 (Adapted from Berne, 1964) 

 
 
C H A P T E R 1 8    Training and Other Management Practices  
675
Production Manager (with a troubled facial expression):
 
"I was wondering if you could get those grinders
 
 back up to rate."
Line Supervisor (in a patronizing tone):
 
"Now don't you worry, I'll take care of it."
P
P
A
A
C
C
 Figure 18.6   Complementary transaction: parent to child—this is not as effective as 
the adult-to-adult complementary transaction, but it is still useful. 
 (Adapted from Berne, 1964) 
Production Manager (as adult to adult):
 
"What has been done to correct the material handling
 
problem?"
Line Supervisor (as parent to child):
 
"Don't you have anything better to do but bug me all 
 
the time?"
P
P
A
A
C
C
 Figure 18.7   Crossed transaction—this can result in anger and hostile feelings. 
 (Adapted from Berne, 1964) 
 A  crossed transaction  occurs when each party assumes a different transac-
tion level, and this often results in anger or hostile feelings (Figure 18.7).  Ul-
terior transactions , although appearing logical on the surface, always have a 
hidden meaning, and they form the basis for games (Figure 18.8). As an exam-
ple, a line supervisor conducts an adult-to-adult transaction on the surface, but in 
reality only goes through the motions and produces a parent-to-child transaction. 

676 
C H A P T E R  1 8 
This may be how an operator wants to be treated; if not, the line supervisor 
should not be surprised when the employees complain that nobody ever listens 
to them.  
 Transactional analysis stresses that all people feel the need to be recognized 
in some manner. This need (the fourth step in Maslow’s hierarchy) probably 
starts in childhood and continues well into adulthood. Recognition can come as 
either  positive  or  negative strokes:  positive being based on good attributes, such 
as recognition for intelligence, helpfulness, and compassion; while negative is 
based on bad attributes, such as deceit and selfishness. Only positive strokes 
(“you’re OK”) keep a person mentally healthy. Negative strokes may leave a 
person with a chip on the shoulder and a bad view of the world. Excessive nega-
tive stroking (criticism) in childhood may carry into adulthood, with the person 
seeking transactions leading to sympathy or dependency. Some individuals may 
become extreme positive stroke seekers. 
 As the transactions become more complex, they take the form of rituals, pas-
times, and games. Rituals are the simplest cultural ties, such as simple morning 
greetings, “Hi, how’s it going?” Pastimes are more complex interactions such as 
conversations regarding work, sports, or friends in social functions. Games are 
the most comple x transactional interactions, which may replace intimac y in pri-
vate life or may produce accident-prone behavior (a child seeking forgiveness) 
at work. 
 In general, the industrial engineer or manager should try to have a basic 
understanding of transactional analysis, to interact better with production work-
ers and other personnel. Complex games should be avoided by switching from a 
parent or child ego to the adult ego. This works in “yes, but” situations in which, 
Production Manager (in apparent adult-to-adult transaction):
 
"I'll find out what's causing that machine to jam up 
 
and get back to you."
But is really thinking:
 
"Oh, all right, I'll check on it and get back to you."
Operator hears a condescending tone and sees it as a parent-to-
child transaction.
P
P
A
A
C
C
 Figure 18.8  Ulterior transaction—although this approach appears logical, it can have 
a hidden meaning and form the basis for games. 
 (Adapted from Berne, 1964) 

 
 
C H A P T E R 1 8    Training and Other Management Practices  
677
because of an ulterior motive for one of the participants, the problem-solving 
effectiveness of the situation is reduced. The manager should sense that when 
all suggestions for improving the workstation design are rejected with “yes, but 
can’t” comments, the transaction has proceeded into a parent-to-child mode. 
Switching to an adult-to-adult transaction with “Yes, that is indeed difficult—
what can you do about it?” will short-circuit the game and get directly to the 
problem. In other words, in crossed transactions, it is better to change egos, even 
if they are at a parent-to-child level and are thus less effective than adult-to-adult 
transactions. Finally, it may even be necessary to participate at a lower level 
of games, such as giving or receiving strokes. In many companies, there is a 
“Calamity Jane or Joe” who is always involved in one sort of problem or another, 
whether jamming a machine or damaging a tool. These individuals may have 
carried a quest for negative strokes and forgiveness through from childhood into 
adulthood. Switching to an adult ego with “I accept responsibility for assigning 
you to that job” would eventually stop the game, but may also create an enemy. 
Another approach may be to counteract the negative strokes by providing more 
positive strokes in the form of recognition of the good things done by that opera-
tor (e.g., above-average performance, high quality, etc.) (Denton, 1982). 
 Above all, the industrial engineer should take time to talk to the operators 
and get their ideas and reactions. The work progresses much more smoothly and 
effectively if operators become part of the team. However, they must be asked, 
not instructed, to “join the team.” The operators are closer to their job situa-
tions than anyone else and usually have more specific knowledge of details than 
anyone else. This knowledge should be realized, respected, and utilized. Accept 
operators’ suggestions gratefully; if they are practical and worthwhile, put them 
into effect as soon as possible. If they are used, be sure that the operators are 
appropriately rewarded. If they cannot be used at present, give a complete ex-
planation as to why they cannot be used. At all times, analysts should imagine 
themselves in the workers’ place and then use the approach they would like used 
toward themselves. Friendliness, courtesy, cheerfulness, and respect, tempered 
with firmness, are the human characteristics that must be practiced to be success-
ful in this work. In short, the golden rule must be applied. 
 DALE CARNEGIE APPROACH 
 The human approach to handling people, making people like you, influencing 
the thinking of people, and changing people, was developed to a fine art by Dale 
Carnegie (1936) in his series of courses, still popular today. Carnegie’s prin-
ciples and thoughts are summarized in Table 18.3.   
 18.5 COMMUNICATIONS 
  Industrial engineers as middle-level managers spend a considerable amount of 
their time in interpersonal communications. Therefore, mastery of the ability 
to communicate effectively goes a long way toward selling an argument or a 

678 
C H A P T E R  1 8 
design, even though it may be worthy on its own merit. Communications can be 
divided into five major types: verbal, nonverbal, one-to-one, small group, and 
large audience (Denton, 1982). 
 VERBAL COMMUNICATIONS 
 In verbal communications, words are very powerful and their meanings become 
very important. Thus, the word  production  is all-powerful, while other terms 
 Table 18.3   The Dale Carnegie Approach 
 Fundamental Techniques in Handling People 
 1. Instead of criticizing people, try to understand them. 
 2. Remember that all people need to feel important; therefore, try to figure out the 
other person’s good points. Forget flattery; give honest, sincere appreciation. 
 3. Remember that all people are interested in their own needs; therefore, talk about 
what they want and show them how to get it. 
 Six Ways to Make People Like You 
 1. Become genuinely interested in other people. 
 2. Smile. 
 3. Remember that a person’s name is to him or her the sweetest and most important 
sound in the English language. 
 4. Be a good listener. Encourage others to talk about themselves. 
 5. Talk in terms of the other person’s interest. 
 6. Make the other person feel important—and do it sincerely. 
 Twelve Ways to Win People to Your Way of Thinking 
 1. The only way to get the best of an argument is to avoid it. 
 2. Show respect for the other person’s opinions. Never tell anyone they are wrong. 
 3. If you are wrong, admit it quickly and emphatically. 
 4. Begin in a friendly way. 
 5. Get the other person saying yes, immediately. 
 6. Let the other person feel that the idea is his or hers. 
 7. Let the other person do a great deal of the talking. 
 8. Try honestly to see things from the other person’s point of view. 
 9. Be sympathetic with the other person’s ideas and desires. 
 10. Appeal to the nobler motives. 
 11. Dramatize your ideas. 
 12. Throw down a challenge. 
 Nine Ways to Change People Without Giving Offense or Arousing Resentment 
 1. Begin with praise and honest appreciation. 
 2. Call attention to people’s mistakes indirectly. 
 3. Talk about your own mistakes before criticizing the other person. 
 4. Ask questions instead of giving direct orders. 
 5. Let the other person save face. 
 6. Praise the slightest improvement and praise every improvement. Be hearty in 
your approbation and lavish in your praise. 
 7. Give the other person a fine reputation to live up to. 
 8. Use encouragement. Make the fault seem easy to correct. 
 9. Make the other person happy about doing the thing you suggest. 

 
 
C H A P T E R 1 8    Training and Other Management Practices  
679
such as  safety  or  human factors  may carry a negative connotation, because they 
imply, whether true or not, coddling the workers or slowing down production. 
A person’s name (and family member names) is very important to that person. 
Therefore, managers should know the workers’ names (and a little about their 
background), to stimulate the interest of the other party and to make the conver-
sation more rewarding. 
 One problem in any language is the specific meaning of a given word. With 
greater diversity in the workplace, there is a greater chance that the other indi-
vidual may assign a slightly different meaning, make a different inference, or 
perhaps not even understand the meaning of some words. 
 Managers must also be careful not to dichotomize the world. Categorizing 
things as either good or bad, safe or unsafe, polarizes events and causes individu-
als to concentrate on differences rather than similarities. 
 NONVERBAL COMMUNICATIONS 
 Some data indicate that more than 50 percent of a message, especially related 
to feelings, is presented through nonverbal channels, including voice character-
istics, facial expressions, and body language. In voice characteristics, a rapid 
speech pattern indicates excitement, while a slower rate with pauses indicates 
passive emotion. Facial expressions and body language involve such nonverbal 
behavior as head nodding to indicate attention to the other person’s discourse, 
raising of the eyebrows to indicate surprise, maintaining eye contact to indicate 
trust, crossing of arms or clenching of fists to indicate a defensive attitude, cross-
ing of the legs to indicate superiority or a lack of involvement. 
 Other factors, such as the amount of space around the individual, can also 
affect communications. For example, people try to maintain a certain amount of 
open space around them; closing this space forces a greater amount of discom-
fort even though it may increase interaction. 
 ONE-TO-ONE 
 One-to-one, or  dyadic , communications occur frequently between a manager and 
a worker in a face-to-face situation. The purpose of such communication is gen-
erally to bring about an understanding of the goals between the two individuals. 
One of the two may then seek to obtain approval for a proposed idea, and avail-
able solutions may have to be presented. To obtain the expected solution, it may 
be necessary to use motivational techniques, such as guided questioning, which 
can be either leading questions that guide the answers in a certain direction, or 
closed-ended (yes/no or limited choice) questions to elicit commitment, or open-
ended questions to elicit discussion. 
 Unfortunately, conflicts can arise during the conversation. Simple conflicts 
arise when each side knows the other’s goals, but neither can win without the 
other failing or losing. In such cases, delaying further discussion until both 
sides can cool down and find a rational solution may be appropriate. Pseudo-
conflicts arise because of ineffective communication and can only be diffused 
when accurate data are provided and distortions eliminated. The worst conflicts 

680 
C H A P T E R  1 8 
are ego conflicts that relate to the previously discussed transactional analyses 
(Berne, 1964).  
 SMALL GROUPS 
 Typically, small-group communications are centered on problem solving. Prob-
lems can be quite complex, and no one individual may have all the solutions. 
Therefore, the concept of having a group of individuals working on a problem 
seems logical. Additional benefits are that extreme individual judgments tend to 
be moderated, overall judgments tend to improve in accuracy, and a wider range 
of information or opinions is included in the discussions. There are also trade-
offs. By their very nature, small groups are time-consuming. Also, lack of coor-
dination, low motivation, and personality conflicts among the group members 
can result in failure of the group to meet its objectives. Therefore, it is important 
to organize and administer small groups effectively. 
 The basic problem-solving procedures (e.g., fish diagrams in Chapter 2) 
must be followed in small-group communications. The group must identify the 
problem, analyze the details, develop a variety of ideas, select specific ideas for 
further development, evaluate the different alternatives, and then specify and sell 
the solution. To improve this process, the group’s facilitator must allow easy 
 access to information to encourage the building of trust. High standards and 
proper planning are also very important, as are specific interactional techniques 
that can increase the effectiveness of the process. 
 Facilitating Agreement  Facilitating agreement among all members, such as 
obtaining a consensus, can be improved by positively involving all group mem-
bers, reinforcing their self-esteem, using open-ended questions, summarizing 
each individual’s comments before proceeding to the next person, and summa-
rizing the pros and cons of a discussion before proceeding to the next topic. 
 Role Playing  Role playing can help strengthen a group’s problem-solving 
ability by presenting appropriate situations or events. This can be followed by 
further participation and discussion through  buzz groups  (smaller subgroups). 
One group member may act as recorder to write down the group’s ideas quickly. 
This can easily lead to  brainstorming  sessions, for which these are the basic 
guidelines: (1) ideas are encouraged, regardless of how wild; (2) the more ideas, 
the better; (3) no ideas are criticized (sometimes the contributors are not identi-
fied); and (4) participants are encouraged to build on or combine previous ideas. 
Usually, a time limit of 10 min is set, after which the ideas are ranked, with pos-
sible solutions being included. The pros and cons of each idea are discussed, and 
the potential solutions are voted upon. The top vote getters are further reviewed 
and voted upon again, until the process of elimination leaves only the best solu-
tions (Denton, 1982). 
 Quality Circles  Quality circles  are a small-group format developed in Japan 
in 1963 to assist in solving quality control problems. The essence is participative 
problem solving in groups of 8 to 10 people, including workers, engineers, and 

 
 
C H A P T E R 1 8    Training and Other Management Practices  
681
managers. It is important to have participants from the different departments in-
volved with this product. These volunteers are given special training in statistical 
quality control techniques and typically hold meetings once or twice a month. 
With the help of a facilitator, the group selects a problem that is a cause of prod-
uct defects and could potentially have a solution. Typically, exploratory opera-
tional tools, such as Pareto distributions and fish diagrams (Chapter 2), are used 
to help in identifying the problem and the factors involved. The group then rec-
ommends potential solutions, such as improved procedures or design changes, 
and attempts to implement the solution. All this is done with the cooperation of 
management (Konz and Johnson, 2000). 
 Ergonomics Teams  A logical extension of quality circles, to combat the high 
rates of musculoskeletal disorders in U.S. companies, is the ergonomics team. 
These are typically interdisciplinary teams consisting of an ergonomist (if there 
is one on staff), an industrial engineer, a safety specialist, a medical person 
(typically, the plant nurse), several interested production workers, a labor union 
member, and perhaps a representative from higher management. This commit-
tee typically meets once or twice a month and follows a procedure similar to 
that used by quality circles in seeking solutions to problem-causing jobs. In the 
authors’ experience, many companies, including such large companies as auto 
manufacturers and smaller companies of fewer than 500 employees, have expe-
rienced considerable success in using such teams.  
 LARGE AUDIENCES 
 Industrial engineers or middle managers rarely present information to large 
groups, and this topic will not be considered here. Considerable information on 
producing presentations and using effective delivery techniques for large audi-
ences is available in other sources. 
 LABOR RELATIONS 
 Every business owner recognizes the importance of harmonious labor–
management relations. The lack of consideration of the human element in work 
measurement procedures may cause turmoil and reduce the profitability of 
operations. Management should identify and implement conditions most likely 
to enable employees to achieve the organization’s objectives. 
 To understand the relationship between work measurement and labor rela-
tions, analysts must understand the principal objectives of the typical labor union, 
which usually are to secure for its members higher wage levels, decreased work-
ing hours per workweek, increased social and fringe benefits, improved working 
conditions, and job security. The philosophy underlying the union movement 
has, in the past, had much to do with opposition to incentive systems. Unions 
attempted to unite workers by seeking ends common to all members, and it was 
not to the advantage of the early unions to emphasize differences in workers’ 
abilities and interests. Consequently, organized labor usually sought percentage 

682 
C H A P T E R  1 8 
wage increases for all members of a group, rather than means by which pay 
could be adjusted to the worth of the individual worker. Work measurement ana-
lysts came to be looked upon as means by which management sought to destroy 
the solidarity of workers by stressing the differences in their capabilities. 
 With the recent changes to a more competitive nature of manufacturing, with 
more foreign labor and outsourcing, and with a more fluid movement of capital 
and production facilities, labor unions have lost much of their previous power. 
Unions, therefore, are less combative units than bodies concerned with the or-
derly negotiation of wage contracts for their members. To satisfy most of their 
members, unions must obtain equitable wages (recognizing workers’ different 
skills and qualities), as well as high wages, for all. In fact, unions have already 
done this in many instances. 
 Many unions today train their own work measurement personnel. In most 
instances, however, these time study people are employed to check standard 
times and to explain them to workers, rather than to take part in their initial 
establishment. In many instances, company training of union time study repre-
sentatives has been quite successful as a means of promoting a more cooperative 
atmosphere in the installation and maintenance of methods, standards, and wage 
payment systems. This procedure provides for the joint training of both com-
pany and union personnel. Having received this training, union representatives 
are much more qualified to evaluate the fairness and accuracy of the technique 
and to discuss any technical points relative to a specific case. 
 18.6 MODERN MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 
 LEAN MANUFACTURING 
 Because of its emphasis on a tight and efficient manufacturing process using 
methods similar to those described in previous chapters while enlisting the ac-
tive participation of the worker, the Toyota Production System (TPS) deserves 
special mention. The Toyota Production System was developed by Toyota Motor 
Corporation as a means of eliminating waste in the aftermath of the 1973 oil em-
bargo. Its primary purpose is the improvement of productivity and the reduction 
of costs, following the footsteps of the Taylor system of scientific management 
and the Ford mass assembly line. Yet, it is much broader in concept, targeting 
not only manufacturing costs, but also sales and administrative and capital costs. 
Toyota felt that it would be dangerous to follow the Ford mass production system 
blindly, which worked fine in times of high growth. In times of lower growth, 
it was important to give greater attention to cutting waste, decreasing costs, and 
increasing efficiency. In the United States this TPS approach has been termed 
 lean manufacturing . 
 TPS highlights seven types of  muda  or waste (Shingo, 1981): (1) over-
production, (2) waiting for the next step, (3) unnecessary transportation, 
(4) overprocessing, (5) excess inventory, (6) unnecessary motion, and (7) de-
fective products. These are very similar to the operations analysis techniques 

 
 
C H A P T E R 1 8    Training and Other Management Practices  
683
and methods study approaches presented in Chapters 2 and 3. For example, 
waiting and transportation are elements examined directly with flow process 
charts for potential elimination or improvement through more efficient layouts 
and better material handling. Overprocessing means that energy is being ex-
pended by operators and machines with little value added to the product and 
goes back to the basic questions asked in operations analysis in Chapter 3. 
Wasted motion summarizes the Gilbreths’ lifelong work in motion study, cul-
minating in the principles of work design and motion economy. It also in-
cludes gross movements of the operators, which can be minimized through 
more efficient layout of the workstation or facilities. The wastes of overpro-
duction and inventory are based on common sense in the additional storage 
requirements and material handling requirements to move items in and out of 
storage, in addition to lighting, heating, and maintenance costs. Finally, the 
waste of defective products is obvious, requiring rework. Rather than focusing 
on an acceptable quality level found in mass production, lean manufacturing 
emphasizes just-in-time production, which necessitates a zero-defects policy 
in parts quality. 
 Other key elements of TPS include (1)  keiretsu , a favored vendor system, 
which supplies quality parts in a timely manner; (2)  poke-yoke , a quality con-
trol error prevention system; (3)  just-in-time  (JIT) production with its associ-
ated  jidoka , autonomous error control or stopping machines to prevent defective 
units from disrupting a subsequent process; (4) the  kanban  system, a taglike 
card with product information that follows the product completely through the 
production cycle, to maintain JIT; (5) flexible workforce, such as varying the 
number of workers in response to demand changes; (6)  kaizen , or continuous im-
provement activities (Imai, 1986); and (7) respect for the worker and a “creative 
thinking”worker suggestion system. 
 JIT is based on a  pull system of production control in which the demand for 
parts comes from the downstream station, rather than a  push system , in which 
parts are produced irrespective of the needs of the system, resulting in large 
queues and bottlenecks. A necessary component of JIT is the single-minute ex-
change of die (SMED). SMED is a series of techniques pioneered by Shingo 
(1981) for changeovers of production machinery in less than 10 min. Obviously, 
the long-term objective is zero setup, in which changeovers are instantaneous 
and do not interfere in any way with continuous work flow. 
 A corollary to the seven mudas is the  5S  system to reduce waste and op-
timize productivity by maintaining an orderly workplace and consistent meth-
ods. The 5 S pillars are (1)  sort (seiri), (2)  set in order (seiton), (3)  shine (seiso), 
(4)  standardize  (seiketsu), and (5)  sustain  (shitsuke).  Sort  focuses on removing 
all unnecessary items from the workplace and leaving only the bare essentials. 
 Set in order  arranges needed items so that they are easy to find and use. Once the 
clutter is removed,  shine  ensures further cleanliness and tidiness. Once the first 
three pillars have been implemented,  standardize  serves to maintain the order 
and consistent approach to housekeeping and the methods. Finally,  sustain main-
tains the full 5S process on a regular basis. 

684 
C H A P T E R  1 8 
 Remarkable successes have been shown with the implementation of TPS, 
ranging from Toyota itself to tiny suppliers, such as Showa (Womack and Jones, 
1996). For more details on the Toyota Production System, consult Shingo (1981), 
Imai (1986), and Ohno (1988) for the original sources, and Monden (1993) and 
Womack and Jones (1996) for easier reading and understanding. 
 TOTAL QUALITY 
 Quality is a concept that everybody intuitively understands, but it is difficult to 
define. Everybody can relate to eating out in a restaurant and judging its quality 
by the taste of the food, the promptness and courtesy of the service, cost, and 
ambience. Two aspects that cross all these factors are results and customer satis-
faction. In other words, does the product or service meet or exceed customer sat-
isfaction? Furthermore, quality is an ever-changing state that must be continually 
maintained through a  continuous improvement  program.  Total quality  is a much 
broader concept that encompasses not just the results aspect, but also the quality 
of the process, materials, environment, and people. 
 The total quality movement, like work measurement, could be considered to 
have evolved from F. W. Taylor’s  Principles of Scientific Management (1911). 
Later development came about because of the impact of World War II on U.S. 
and Japanese industries. As U.S. companies were focused more on meeting 
delivery dates than on quality—an attitude that continued well past the war—
Japanese companies were forced to compete with established companies in the 
rest of the world. This could only be done by emphasizing the quality of its prod-
ucts over the next 20 years. 
 The Japanese effort on continuous quality improvement and quality circles 
was initiated primarily by the philosophies and works of three individuals: 
W. E. Deming, J. M. Juran, and A. V. Feigenbaum. Following his work in the 
United States during World War II, Deming became a consultant to Japanese in-
dustries and convinced their top management of the power of statistical methods 
and the importance of quality as a competitive weapon. He is best known for his 
14 points (see Table 18.4) and the Deming prize for quality established by the 
Japanese Union of Scientists and Engineers. 
 Juran is one of the founders of statistical quality control and is best known 
for his  Quality Control Handbook  (Juran, 1951), a standard reference in the 
area. The Juran philosophy is based on the organization and implementation of 
improvements through “managerial breakthroughs” highlighted in the 10 steps 
to quality improvement (see Table 18.5). 
 Feigenbaum was the first to introduce the concept of a companywide qual-
ity control program, in his book  Total Quality Control  (1991, 3d ed.), which 
was widely used in Japan in the 1950s. Only in the late 1980s and early 1990s 
did the total quality concept start gaining wide acceptance in the United States 
under the names of  total quality management  (TQM),  total quality assurance 
(TQA), or more specialized company-specific programs, such as Motorola’s 
Six Sigma.  

 
 
C H A P T E R 1 8    Training and Other Management Practices  
685
 Table 18.4   Deming’s Fourteen Points 
 1.  Create constancy of purpose toward the improvement of products and services in 
order to become competitive, stay in business, and provide jobs. 
 2.  Adopt the new philosophy. Management must learn that it is a new economic age 
and awaken to the challenge, learn its responsibilities, and take on leadership for 
change. 
 3.  Stop depending on inspection to achieve quality. Build in quality from the start. 
 4.  Stop awarding contracts on the basis of low bids. 
 5.  Improve continuously and forever the system of production and service, to 
improve quality and productivity, and thus constantly reduce costs. 
 6.  Institute training on the job. 
 7.  Institute leadership. The purpose of leadership should be to help people and 
technology work better. 
 8.  Drive out fear so that everyone may work effectively. 
 9.  Break down barriers between departments so that people can work as a team. 
 10.  Eliminate slogans, exhortations, and targets for the workforce. They create 
adversarial relationships. 
 11.  Eliminate quotas and management by objectives. Substitute leadership. 
 12.  Remove barriers that rob employees of their pride of workmanship. 
 13.  Institute a vigorous program of education and self-improvement. 
 14.  Make the transformation everyone’s job and put everyone to work on it. 
 Table 18.5   Juran’s Ten Steps to Quality Improvement 
 1.  Build awareness of both the need for improvement and opportunities for 
improvement. 
 2.  Set goals for improvement. 
 3.  Organize to meet the goals that have been set. 
 4.  Provide training. 
 5.  Implement projects aimed at solving problems. 
 6.  Report progress. 
 7.  Give recognition. 
 8.  Communicate results. 
 9.  Keep score. 
 10.  Maintain momentum by building improvement into the company’s regular 
systems. 
 In general, total quality (TQ) is a way of doing business that maximizes the 
competitiveness of a company through the continuous improvement of its prod-
ucts, service, people, process, and environment. The key elements of TQ include 
a companywide strategic focus, even obsession, on quality, with the customer as 
its driver. TQ utilizes a scientific approach, employee involvement (especially 
teamwork), education and training, a long-term commitment, and unity of pur-  
 pose. The process is not always easy to achieve and must be continually worked 

686 
C H A P T E R  1 8 
on to achieve improvements. Also, cost reductions through better awareness of 
life-cycle costs, improved product/process designs, and better process controls 
through the whole manufacturing process are important factors in the success of 
total quality. More details on total quality and specific program components can 
be found in Goetsch and Davis (1997). 
 ISO 9000 
 A very important aspect of total quality is ISO 9000 certification.  ISO 9000 (also 
termed ISO 9001 for the most recent standard) is a set of quality management 
standards used around the world and developed by the International Standards 
Organization (ISO, 1993; www.iso.org). Certification for ISO 9000 ensures that 
a company’s products and/or services are consistently up to a certain level of 
quality, serving to ensure that the company is competitive in the global mar-
ketplace. This is especially important for any company that does business in-
ternationally or that serves customers who expect an international standard of 
excellence. More significantly, though, going through this certification process 
allows the company to create more efficient operations; reduce waste; increase 
customer satisfaction; improve employee motivation, awareness, and morale; 
and ensure an overall better business and workplace (Goetsch and Davis, 2001; 
Evans and Lindsay, 2009). 
 There are four current standards: ISO 9000:2008 Quality Management, ISO 
9001:2008 Quality Management System Requirements, ISO 9004:2009 Manag-
ing for the Sustained Success of an Organization, and ISO 19011:2011 Guide-
lines for Auditing Management Systems (www.iso.org). The ISO itself doesn’t 
certify organization; that is done by various audit organizations or government 
agencies. In the United States, such certification is done by the ANSI:ASQ 
Registration Accreditation Board, staffed jointly by the American National Stan-
dards Institute and the American Society for Quality Control (www.anab.org). 
However, this is a private volunteer group and its certifications do not carry the 
weight of government authorization, as in other countries. 
 The major components of ISO 9000 certification include: 
 1.  A formal statement from management on quality policy, linked to business 
and marketing plans and to customer needs 
 2.  Proof that the quality policy is to be followed at all levels by all employees 
working toward measurable objectives 
 3.  The quality system is regularly audited and evaluated for effectiveness 
based on recorded data 
 4.  Records show how and where raw materials were processed, to allow prod-
ucts and problems to be traced back to the source 
 5.  The company determines customer requirements and a means of communi-
cating with customers all aspects of product information, orders, feedback, 
and complaints 

 
 
C H A P T E R 1 8    Training and Other Management Practices  
687
 6.  For new products, the company plans stages of development with 
appropriate testing and documenting of whether the product meets design 
requirements, regulatory compliance, and customer needs 
 7.  The company regularly reviews performance through audits to deal with 
past and potential problems and to determine whether its quality system is 
working or needs improvement 
 8.  The company has documented all procedures, including those for dealing 
with actual and potential nonconformance to the plan  
 SUMMARY 
 To a large extent, the work of industrial engineers influences labor relations 
within an enterprise. At the least, they should know the nature of training that 
is being provided to the operators and the effect it will have on learning curves 
and the setting of production standards. In addition, because they are affecting 
the wage payment of the operators, they also need to understand the attitudes, 
concerns, and problems of the workers, as well as those of the unions rep-
resenting the workers. In setting new methods and standards, whether using 
traditional tools or more current lean manufacturing approaches, they must 
always act in a manner that is reasonable and fair to both the company and 
the workers. At all times, they must be cognizant of the necessity of using the 
human approach.  
 QUESTIONS  
 1.  Why is training necessary for operators? 
 2.  How is learning quantified? 
 3.  What is the difference between the Crawford and Wright models of learning? 
 4.  What is remission and how does it affect learning? 
 5.  How should the standards analyst utilize learning curves? 
 6.  Which five states related to the psychological and sociological reactions of the 
operator should be recognized by the analyst? 
 7.  What do we mean by the human approach? 
 8.  Name 12 ways you can get people to agree with your ideas. 
 9.  Why is plantwide training in the areas of work measurement a healthy management 
step? 
 10.  Why should experienced analysts be continually checked on their ability to 
performance-rate? 
 11.  Why do unions often train their own time study analysts? 
 12.  What are the ego states in transactional analysis? 
 13.  What is a crossed transaction? 
 14.  What levels of transactions work best in dealing with workers? 
 15.  What is an ulterior transaction? 

688 
C H A P T E R  1 8 
 16.  What is a quality circle? 
 17.  Compare and contrast intrinsic and extrinsic motivators. 
 18.  How does role-playing enter into ergonomic teams? 
 19.  How does total quality management enter into modern management practices? 
 20.  How does job enrichment differ from job enlargement? 
 21.  What are the seven types of waste? 
 22.  What is continuous improvement and why is it important? 
 23.  Define lean manufacturing. 
 24.  What is meant by just in-time production? 
 25.  What is the 5S system? 
 26.  What is the difference between a push and a pull system? 
 27.  What is a Kanban? 
 28.  What does SMED mean and how does it relate to JIT?  
 PROBLEMS  
 1.  A new employee at the Dorben Co. took 186 and 140 min to assemble the fourth 
and eighth assemblies, respectively. The standard time for assembling this product 
is 100 min. 
  a. 
 Calculate this worker’s learning curve. 
  b. 
 How many assemblies does it take the worker to achieve the standard time? 
How long is this? 
 2.  A training expert suggests that one should allocate a minimum of 40 h of learning. 
What time would the worker in Problem I have achieved at this point? 
 3.  Workers new to carburetor assembly take 15 min to complete their first assembly. 
Assuming a 95 percent learning curve, how long would it take them to reach a 
standard time of 10 min? 
 4.  From an MTM synthesis, the standard time for one C assembly is calculated to be 
1.0 min. A new worker typically requires about 2 min for the first assembly, and 
this drops to about 1.7 min by the fifth assembly. 
  a. 
 Calculate and plot the learning curve. 
  b. 
 What is the percent learning? 
  c. 
 How long will it take the new worker to reach standard performance? 
 5.  The Dorben Co. uses a standard hour plan with a base wage of $9/h. It hires an IE 
consultant to plan a batch production run of 300 units. This consultant has a worker 
on the line produce 2 units. The first takes 10 min and the second 9.7 min. 
  a. 
 Find the equation of the learning curve. 
  b. 
 What is the percent learning? 
  c. 
 How long would it take the worker to reach the standard time of 8.0 min? 
  d. 
 Assume that the worker tries to improve and earn the incentive pay. What 
would the worker be paid for the first 20 h under the standard hour plan? 
  e. 
 Assuming that the worker continues to improve her performance, what will 
she be paid for the full batch of 300 units under the standard hour plan? 
  f. 
 What is the unit cost for the first unit made? What is the cost for 300th unit? 

 
 
C H A P T E R 1 8    Training and Other Management Practices  
689
 6.  An analyst has estimated that there will be an 84 percent learning curve for an 
assembly operation. The first assembly takes 48 min, and the standard time is set 
at 6 min. 
  a. 
 How long will it take the operator to reach the standard time? 
  b. 
 Unfortunately, the operator falls ill after the first week on the new assembly 
operation and returns after one week. What will be estimated time for the 
operator to reach standard time now? 
 7.  Find the direct labor costs for a batch order of 100 pumps. As this is a new order, 
some learning will be occurring during the assembly process. The first assembly 
takes 50 min, but the second one takes only 35 min. The standard time is estimated 
as 10.0 min. The base wage is $10/h. 
  a. 
 Find the equation for the learning curve for this assembly. 
  b. 
 How many cycles does it take a worker to reach the standard time of 
10.0 min?  
  c. 
 How long is the overall time to reach 10 min? 
  d. 
 Assume that the operator continuously improves (i.e., follows the learning 
curve). What are the direct labor costs for the total batch of 100 pumps under 
a day work plan? What are the direct labor costs for the total batch of 100 
pumps under a standard hour plan? 
  e. 
 What is the operator’s performance (in %) at the 100th pump, if he or she 
continues learning? 
  f. 
 What is the direct unit labor cost for the company for the last (100th) pump 
under the standard hour plan?  
 8.  A worker assembles two units. The first takes 10 min and the second takes 9.7 min. 
What is the learning curve? What is the % learning? How long would it take the 
worker to reach a standard time of 8.0 min? 
 REFERENCES 
 Anonymous. “Just What Do You Do? Mr. Industrial Engineer.”  Factory , 122 (January 
1964), pp. 83–84. 
 Balyeat, R. E. “A Survey: Concepts and Practices in Industrial Engineering.”  Journal of 
Industrial Engineering , 5 (May 1954), pp. 19–21. 
 Berne, E.  Games People Play . New York: Grove Press, 1964. 
 Carnegie, Dale.  How to Win Friends and Influence People , New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 1936. (www.dalecarnegie.com) 
 Crawford, J. R. “Statistical Accounting Procedures in Aircraft Production.”  Aero Digest , 
(March 15, 1944), pp. 78–81, 222, 224, and 226. 
 Denton, K.  Safety Management, Improving Performance . New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1982. 
 Evans, J. R., and W. M. Lindsay.  Managing for Quality and Performance Excellence. 
Manson, OH: South Western/Cengage Learning, 2009. 
 Feigenbaum, A. V.  Total Quality Control . 3d ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991. 
 Freivalds, A., S. Konz, A. Yurgec, and J. H. Goldberg. “Methods, Work Measurement 
and Work Design: Are We Satisfying Customer Needs?”  The International Journal 
of Industrial Engineering , 7, no. 2 (June 2000), pp. 108–114. 

690 
C H A P T E R  1 8 
 Goetsch, D. L., and S. B. Davis.  Introduction to Total Quality . Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall, 1997. 
 Goetsch, D. L., and S. B. Davis.  Understanding and Implementing ISO 9000 and ISO 
Standards . 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2001. 
 Hancock, W. M., and F. H. Bayha. “The Learning Curve.” In  The Handbook of 
Industrial Engineering . Ed. G. Salvendy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1982. 
 Herzberg, F.  Work and the Nature of Man . Cleveland, OH: World Publishing, 1966. 
 Imai, M.  Kaizen . New York: Random House, 1986. 
 ISO 9000: International Standards for Quality Management . 3d ed. Geneva, 
Switzerland: International Standards Organization, 1993. 
 Juran, J. M.  Quality Control Handbook . New York: McGraw-Hill, 1951. 
 Konz, S., and S. Johnson.  Work Design . 5th ed. Scottsdale, AZ: Holcomb Hathaway, 
Inc., 2000. 
 Maslow, A.  Motivation and Personality . 2d ed. New York: Harper & Row, 1970. 
 Monden, Y.  Toyota Production System . Norcross, GA: Industrial Engineering and 
Management Press, 1993. 
 Ohno, T.  Toyota Production System: Beyond Large-Scale Production . Cambridge, MA: 
Productivity Press, 1988. 
 OSHA.  Ergonomics Program Management Guidelines for Meatpacking Plants . OSHA 
3123. Washington, DC: The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc., 1990. 
 Shingo, S.  Study of Toyota Production System from Industrial Engineering Viewpoint . 
Tokyo, Japan: Japan Management Association, 1981. 
 Taylor, F. W.  The Principles of Scientific Management . New York: Harper, 1911. 
 Womack, J. P., and D. T. Jones.  Lean Thinking . New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996. 
 Wright, T. P. “Factors Affecting the Cost of Airplanes.”  Journal of the Aeronautical 
Sciences , 3 (February, 1936), pp. 122–128. 
 SELECTED SOFTWARE 
 DesignTools, (available from the McGraw-Hill text website at www.mhhe.com/
niebels-freivalds). 
 WEBSITES 
 www.anab.org 
 www.dalecarnegie.com 
 www.iso.org 

 
691
 
691
 3 E’s   The preferred approach for corrective action: 
 engineering redesign to ensure strict safety without 
relying on operator compliance;  education that 
 relies on operator compliance in a positive way; 
and  enforcement of strict rules that may have 
negative connotations. 
 5S   System to reduce waste and optimize productivity 
by maintaining an orderly workplace and consistent 
methods. 
 A 
 abandonment rate   Percent of incoming calls aban-
doned by caller. 
 ABC model   A behavior-based safety model in 
which  antecedent events lead to certain worker 
 behavior patterns that may result in unpleasant  con-
sequences such as accidents. To correct such worker 
behavior, these antecedents must first be modified.  
 abnormal time   Elemental time values that are ei-
ther considerably higher or lower than the mean 
of the majority of observations taken during a 
time study. 
 absolute judgment   Differentiation between two 
stimuli if no direct comparison can be made. 
 accident prevention   A tactical approach to control-
ling workers, materials, tools and equipment, and 
the workplace for the purpose of reducing or pre-
venting the occurrence of accidents. 
 accident-ratio triangle   Theory that claims for 
each major injury there occurred at least 29 minor 
injuries and 300 no-injury accidents, with untold 
hundreds or thousands of unsafe acts leading up to 
the base of the triangle. Cost-effective accident pre-
vention efforts should focus on the large base rather 
than just on the one major injury. 
 actual time   The average elemental time actually 
taken by the operator during a time study. 
 administrative law   Law established by the execu-
tive branch or government agencies. 
 aerobic   Muscular work for which the oxygen intake 
is adequate. 
 affordance   A perceived property that results in the 
desired action, for example, a door with a handle 
that pulls open. 
 after-call worktime   The amount of time an the 
agent spends to finish complete the work related to 
the phone call just completed. 
 agonist   The primary muscle involved in the desired 
motion. 
 algorithm   Step-by-step specifications of the solution 
to a problem, usually represented by a flowchart, 
which eventually is translated into a program. 
 alignment chart   See  nomogram . 
 allowance   The time added to normal time to pro-
vide for personal delays, unavoidable delays, and 
fatigue. 
 alphanumeric   The set of alphabetic letters (a to z) 
and numeric digits (0 to 9). 
 anaerobic   Muscular work for which the oxygen in-
take is inadequate. 
 AND gate   Type of Boolean logic which requires that 
all the inputs occur for the output to occur. 
 antagonist   The muscle that opposes the agonist and 
the desired motion. 
 anthropometry   The science that deals with measur-
ing the physical size of the human. 
 Ashcroft’s method   Tables of machine interference 
times for various servicing times as developed by 
H. Ashcroft. 
 assemble   The act of bringing two mating parts 
together. 
 assignable cause   A source of variation that can be 
isolated in a process or operation. 
 associations   Concrete relationships of a name or 
word with previous knowledge utilizing the user’s 
expectations and stereotypes; useful in maintaining 
long-term memory. 
 
  APPENDIX
 
1
 Glossary 

692 
A P P E N D I X  1
 assumption of risk   Legal concept in which a 
worker, who was aware of the hazards of the job, 
but continued working there, assumed the risks, 
and could not recover damages in case of injury 
even though it occurred through no fault of his or 
her own. 
 ATP   Adenosine triphosphate, the immediate energy 
unit for muscle contraction. 
 attention resources   The amount of cognitive capac-
ity devoted to a particular task or processing stage, 
or simply attention. 
 attention time   Portion of the cycle time when the 
operator is observing a process to maintain the 
efficient progress of the operation. 
 automation   Increased mechanization to produce 
goods and services. 
 available machine time   Portion of a time cycle 
during which a machine could be performing 
useful work. 
 average cycle time    The sum of all average elemental 
times divided by the number of cycle observations. 
 average elemental time   The mean elemental time 
taken by the operator to perform the task during a 
time study. 
 average handle time   The sum of talk time and after-
call worktime. 
 average hourly earnings   The mean dollar-and-cent 
moneys paid to an operator on an hourly basis, 
determined by dividing the hours worked per period 
into the total wages paid for the period. 
 avoidable delay   A cessation of productive work due 
entirely to the operator and not occurring in the 
regular work cycle. 
 B 
 balanced motion pattern   A sequence of motions 
made simultaneously by both the right and left 
hands in directions that facilitate rhythm and 
coordination. 
 ballistic movement   The motion of arms (usually) 
or legs with smooth, flowing, rapid muscle action 
from the start to the termination of the action. 
 bandwidth   The maximum information processing 
speed of a given communication channel. 
 base wage rate   The hourly money rate, paid for a 
given work assignment performed at a standard 
pace by a qualified operator. 
 basic event   Events in a fault tree, identified by cir-
cles at the bottom of the fault tree, that cannot be 
developed any further. 
 basic fatigue allowance   Constant allowance given 
to account for the energy expended while carrying 
out typical work and the alleviation of monotony. 
 basic motion   A fundamental motion related to pri-
mary physiological and/or biomechanical perfor-
mance capabilities of body members. 
 basic times   See  predetermined times . 
 basilar membrane   Membrane containing hair cells 
that splits the cochlea lengthwise. 
 benchmark   A standard that is identified with char-
acteristics in sufficient detail that other classifica-
tions can be compared as being above, below, or 
comparable to the identified standard. 
 beta   The ratio of the height of the signal to the noise 
curves of the response criterion. 
 binomial distribution   A discrete probability distri-
bution with mean 5 np and variance 5 np(1 2 p) 
having a probability function
 
  P(k) 5 C n,k p k (1 2 p) nk for k 5 0, 1, 2 . . . 
 biomechanics   The application of mechanical princi-
ples, such as levers, mechanical advantage, and forces, 
to the analysis of body part structure and movement.  
 bit   The amount of information obtained with two 
equally likely alternatives. 
 body discomfort chart   A method of assessing a 
worker’s health status by checking the level of dis-
comfort for various body parts. 
 bonus earnings   Those moneys paid in addition to 
the regular wage or salary. 
 Borg RPE scale   Rating of perceived exertion scale 
ranging from 6 through 20, corresponding roughly 
to the heart rate (divided by 10); used for assessing 
the perceived exertion during dynamic whole-body 
activities. 
 bottom-up processing   Data-driven information pro-
cessing guided by sensory features. 
 brainstorming   Discussion sessions in which ideas 
are encouraged, regardless of how wild they are. 
 break-even chart   See  crossover chart. 
 break point   A readily distinguishable point in the 
work cycle selected as the boundary between the 
completion of one element and the beginning of 
another element. 

 
 
A PPEN DI X 1  Glossary 
693
 buttons   Isolated picture-in-picture windows within 
a display that can be selected by the user to invoke 
specific actions; an essential part of a graphical user 
interface. 
 buzz groups   Small discussion subgroups. 
 C 
 CAD   Computer-aided design. 
 candela   A measure of the luminous intensity of a 
light source. 
 carpal tunnel syndrome   Median nerve compression 
due to inflammation and swelling within the carpal 
tunnel of the wrist, causing pain and loss of sensa-
tion and motor control. 
 cause–effect diagrams   See  fish diagrams. 
 cervical   The part of the vertebral column located in 
the neck. 
 changeover time   The time required to modify or 
replace an existing workplace. Includes both the 
teardown time for the existing condition and the 
setup of the new condition. 
 channel capacity   See  bandwidth. 
 check time   Sum of the time elapsed before the study 
and the time elapsed after the study. 
 chi-square analysis   A statistical tool used in identi-
fying whether one department is significantly more 
hazardous than another, based on the chi-square 
goodness of fit test between a sample and a popula-
tion distribution in the form of categorical data in a 
contingency table. 
 choice-reaction time   Time for an operator to 
respond to one of several stimuli each with an 
appropriate response. 
 chord keyboard   Type of keyboard requiring the 
simultaneous activation of two or more keys for an 
individual character, as opposed to the sequential 
activation in standard keyboards. 
 chunking   The grouping of similar items to facilitate 
recall. 
 circadian rhythms   The roughly 24-h variation in 
bodily functions in humans. 
 citation   Statement of fault and potential penalties 
issued by OSHA with regard to violations of OSHA 
standards. 
 classification method   A method of job evaluation 
based on a series of definitions to differentiate 
between jobs. 
 clo   The amount of thermal insulation in clothing 
needed to maintain comfort for a person sitting in 
a normally ventilated room at 70°F and 50 percent 
relative humidity; roughly equal to a light busi-
ness suit. 
 cochlea   The coiled fluid-filled structure of the mid-
dle ear, split lengthwise by the basilar membrane. 
 color rendering   The closeness with which the per-
ceived colors of an object being observed match the 
perceived colors of the same object when illumi-
nated by standard light sources. 
 common law   Law derived from unwritten customs 
and typical usage but adjusted and interpreted by 
the courts through judicial decisions. 
 compatibility   The relationship between a stimulus 
and a response that is consistent with human expec-
tations and minimizes conflict; for example, a red 
light is associated with danger or stopping. 
 compensatory damages   Court-awarded payments to 
the plaintiff for medical costs, lost wages, and other 
direct losses. 
 complementary transaction   Transaction sent and 
received at the same level of ego states. 
 cones   Photoreceptors of the eye that are sensitive to 
colors, especially in daylight, and have good visual 
acuity. 
 conservative   Observer behavior as the criterion 
shifts to the right, causing a decrease of both hits 
and false alarms. 
 consistency   The absence of noticeable or significant 
variation in behavioral or numerical data. 
 constant element   An element whose performance 
time does not vary significantly when changes in 
the process or dimensional changes in the product 
occur. 
 constant fatigue allowance   The combination of 
personal needs and basic fatigue allowances, which 
typically are constant for all workers within a 
 company. 
 construction program   A facilities layout program 
generating the best solution from scratch.  
 continuous improvement   An ongoing process 
ensuring total quality in a company. 
 continuous-timing method   An operation study 
method in which the stopwatch is kept running con-
tinuously during the course of the study and is not 
snapped back at elemental termination. 

694 
A P P E N D I X  1
 contrast   The ability of a target to stand out from its 
background; typically measured as the difference in 
luminances between target and background. 
 control-response (C/R) ratio   Ratio of the amount 
of movement in a control to the amount of movement 
in the response; used to define system responsiveness. 
 control system   A system that has as its primary 
function the collection and analysis of feedback 
from a given set of functions, for the purpose of 
controlling the functions. 
 cornea   Outer protective covering of the pupil of the 
eye; also assists in focusing the light rays on the retina.  
 correct rejection   Rejection of a signal when no 
 signal is present. 
 correction   An unintentional hesitation at the 
 terminal point of motion. 
 cost-benefit analysis   Type of analysis in which the 
total expected costs are weighed against the total 
expected benefits for one or more interventions in 
order to choose the best or most profitable option. 
 costing   Procedure for accurately determining costs 
in advance of production. 
 counter   A digital display showing precise numeric 
values. 
 coverage   The number of jobs that have been 
assigned a standard during the reporting period, or 
the number of personnel whose jobs have been 
assigned a standard during the reporting period. 
 CP   Creatine phosphate, the immediate precursor 
to ATP. 
 CR-10 (category ratio) scale   Rating scale for the 
level of pain or body discomfort on a logarithmic 
scale, ranging from 0 to 10; used for assessing mus-
cular exertions. 
 Crawford model    Learning curve model in which the 
improvement gained is defined for a particular unit. 
Also known as the  unit model . 
 criteria of pessimism   A decision-making strategy in 
which the outcome with minimum negative conse-
quence is selected. 
 criticality   Measure of the severity associated with 
the head event in a fault tree. 
 crossed transaction   Transaction between ego states 
that are not parallel. 
 crossover chart   A method for plotting the increase in 
cost as a function of some variable. The point at which 
the two lines cross is known as the crossover or break-
even point, and the cost for each method is the same.  
 cues   Pieces of information used in decision making. 
 cumulative average model   See  Wright model . 
 cumulative trauma disorder (CTD)   Work-related 
musculoskeletal injury due to highly repetitive mo-
tions involving excessive joint motions with high 
force; also termed  repetitive-motion injury . 
 curve   A graphic representation of the relation 
between two factors, one of which is usually time. 
 cycle   A series of elements that occur in regular order 
and make an operation possible. These elements 
repeat themselves as the operation is repeated.  
 D 
 d   A measure of sensitivity in signal detection 
theory; the distance between the mean of the noise 
distribution to the mean of the signal plus noise 
distribution. 
 danger   The relative exposure to or potential conse-
quences of a hazard. 
 data base   A collection of data items that can be pro-
cessed by a variety of applications. 
 day work   Any work for which the operator is com-
pensated on the basis of time rather than output. 
 dBA   A measure of sound intensity on a weighting 
scale approximating the response characteristics of 
the human ear; most commonly used to assess the 
noise exposure of workers. 
 de minimis violation   Type of violation that has no 
immediate relationship to safety or health and typi-
cally has no penalty. 
 deadman control   A control requiring the continual 
application of force. Once released, it returns to the 
zero (or safe) position. 
 deadspace   The amount of control movement result-
ing in no system response. 
 decibel (dB)   The unit for sound intensity; a logarith-
mic ratio of the measured intensity to a reference 
intensity. 
 decimal hour stopwatch   A stopwatch used for work 
measurement, the dial of which is graduated in 
0.0001 h increments. 
 decimal minute stopwatch   A stopwatch used for 
work measurement, the dial of which is graduated 
in 0.01 min increments. 

 
 
A PPEN DI X 1  Glossary 
695
 decision making   Information processing involving 
the evaluation of alternatives and selection of 
appropriate responses. 
 decision tables   A structured approach for evaluating 
information and selecting the best among several 
alternative methods changes. 
 defendant   The person or entity, typically an em-
ployer or the manufacturer of a product, defending 
a suit in court. 
 delay   Any cessation in the work routine that does 
not occur in the typical work cycle. 
 design for adjustability   Anthropometric design 
principle typically used for equipment or facili-
ties that can be adjusted to fit a wider range of 
 individuals. 
 design for averages   “One size fits all” anthropomet-
ric design principle. 
 design for extremes   Anthropometric design princi-
ple in which a specific feature is a limiting factor in 
determining either the maximum or the minimum 
value of a population variable to be accommodated 
(for example, stature for doorways). 
 detection   The determination of whether a stimulus is 
actually present. 
 digitizing tablet   A flat pad placed on the desk-
top that is activated by the movement of a stylus 
across it. 
 direct labor   Labor performed on each piece that ad-
vances the piece toward its ultimate specifications. 
 direct lighting   Type of lighting that places more of 
the light on the work surfaces and the floor. 
 direct material costs   Cost of raw materials and 
components. 
 disassemble   The basic motion that takes place when 
two mating parts are separated. 
 discounted cash flow   Economic tool computing the 
ratio of the present worth of cash flow to the origi-
nal investment. 
 disk (intervertebral disk)   Soft tissue, composed of 
a gellike center and surrounded by onionlike layers 
of fibers, separating the vertebral bones. 
 disk herniation   Bulging of the intervertebral disk, 
causing pressure on spinal nerves with resulting 
pain. 
 display modality   Information format corresponding 
to one of the five senses. 
 dissociability   The property of a desired signal being 
as different as possible from other signals (or noise) 
in terms of its characteristics. 
 distributive laws   Expressions of Boolean logic that 
allow for the simplification of more complicated 
expressions. 
 divided attention   Attention resources applied in a 
diffuse manner to various parts of or even all the 
human information processing system. 
 domino theory   Theory of accident causation in 
which the accident is the fifth occurrence in a 
sequence of related events. 
 downtime   The time represented by operation ces-
sation due to machine or tool breakdown, lack of 
material, and so on. 
 drop delivery   The disposal of a part by dropping it 
on a conveyor or a gravity chute, thus minimizing 
move and position therbligs. 
 dry-bulb  temperature  Basic ambient temperature, 
with the thermometer shielded from radiation. 
 Dvorak keyboard   Alternate keyboard design that 
optimizes the finger loading. 
 dyadic communications   One-to-one communica-
tions, typically face to face.  
 E 
 eardrum   Membrane separating the outer ear canal 
from the middle ear, also known as the  tympanic 
membrane . 
 earned hours   The standard hours credited to a 
worker or a workforce as a result of the completion 
of a job or group of jobs. 
 effective time   Total of all observed time. 
 efficiency   The ratio of actual output to standard 
output. Also, light output per unit energy. 
 effort   The will to perform either mental or manual 
productive work. 
 effort time   The portion of the cycle time that 
depends on the skill and effort of the operator. 
 ego states   The three psychic stages an individual can 
achieve: adult, parent, or child. 
 elapsed time   The actual time that has transpired 
during the course of a study or an operation. 
 element   A division of work that can be measured 
with stopwatch equipment and that has readily 
identified terminal points or break points. 

696 
A P P E N D I X  1
 EMG (electromyogram)   Record of the electrical 
activity in a muscle. 
 equivalent wind chill temperature   The ambient 
temperature that in calm conditions would produce 
the equivalent wind chill index as the actual combi-
nation of air temperature and wind velocity. 
 erector spinae   Primary muscles of the back that pro-
vide the force for lifting loads. 
 ergonomics   The science of fitting the task or work-
place to the abilities and limitations of the human 
operator; sometimes termed  human factors . 
 expense labor   Labor not involved in the manufacture of 
a product; typically engineering, research, sales, cleri-
cal, accounting, and other administrative functions.  
 exponential distribution   A continuous probability 
distribution with mean 5 1/ a and variance 5 1/ a 2 , 
and having a density function 5  ae 2 ax  . 
 extension   Joint motion in which the included angle 
becomes larger. 
 extra allowance   An allowance to compensate for 
required work in addition to that which is specified 
in the standard method. 
 extrinsic factors   Environmental factors such as ad-
ministration, supervision, and working conditions 
in Herzberg’s motivation maintenance theory acting 
as dissatisfiers. 
 F 
 facilitating agreement   Process for obtaining a con-
sensus by positively involving all group members. 
 factor comparison   A method of job evaluation 
based on comparing various job factors. 
 factory cost   Direct material costs plus direct labor 
costs plus factory expense. 
 factory expense   Costs such as indirect labor, tool-
ing, machine, and power costs. 
 fail-safe design   Type of system design such that, in 
the case of failure, it goes to the lowest energy level.  
 fair day’s work   The amount of work performed by 
an operator that is fair to both the company and 
the operator, considering the wages paid. It is the 
“amount of work that can be produced by a quali-
fied employee when working at a standard pace 
and effectively utilizing his time where work is not 
restricted by process limitations.” 
 false alarm   Incorrect identification of a signal when 
no signal is present 
 fatigue   A lessening in the capacity to work. 
 fatigue allowance   Type of allowance providing time 
for the worker to recover from fatigue incurred as a 
result of the job or work environment. 
 fault event   Events in a fault tree, identified by rec-
tangles, that are to be expanded further. 
 fault tree analysis   A probabilistic deductive process 
using a graphical model of parallel and serial com-
binations of events, or faults, leading to the overall 
undesired event (e.g., an accident). 
 feature analysis   The breaking down of objects into 
component geometric shapes or text into words and 
character strings. 
 feed   The speed at which the cutting tool is moved 
into the work, as in drilling and turning, or the rate 
at which the work is moved past the cutting tool. 
 feedback   The return of meaningful information to 
the operator such that performance can be appropri-
ately modified. 
 film analysis   The frame-by-frame observation and 
study of a film of an operation or process, with the 
objective of improving that operation or process. 
 finishing time   The clock time at which a time 
study ends. 
 fish (cause–effect) diagrams   A method of defining 
an occurrence of a typically undesirable event or 
problem; that is, the effect, as the fishhead, and then 
identifying contributing factors, that is, the causes, as 
fish bones attached to a backbone and the fishhead.  
 Fitts’ law   Extension of the Hick-Hyman law with 
respect to movement time; i.e., the longer the 
distance and the smaller the target, the longer the 
movement will take. 
 Fitts’ tapping task   A series of positioning move-
ments to and from targets demonstrating Fitts’ law. 
 fixture   A device that is usually clamped to the work-
station and that holds the material being worked on. 
 flexible compensation plans   Any incentive plan 
that increases employee wages or benefits as a 
function of increased production. 
 flexion   Joint motion in which the included angle 
 becomes smaller. 
 flextime   Shift system in which the starting and stop-
ping times are established by the workers, within 
limits set up by management. 
 float   The amount of material not directly employed 
or worked on in a system or process at a given time. 

 
 
A PPEN DI X 1  Glossary 
697
 flow diagram   A pictorial representation of the lay-
out of a process, showing the location of all activi-
ties appearing on the flow process chart and the 
travel paths of the work. 
 flow process chart   A graphic representation of all 
operations, transportations, inspections, delays, and 
storages occurring during a process or procedure. 
The chart includes information considered desir-
able for analysis, such as the time required and the 
distance moved. 
 focused attention   Attention resources applied in a 
very directed manner, such as a spotlight on a par-
ticular part of the human information processing 
system. 
 footcandle   The measure of light falling on a surface. 
One footcandle equals 10.8 lumens per square  meter.  
 foot-lambert   A unit of luminance (emitted or 
reflected light). One foot-lambert is equal to 
3.43 candelas per square meter. 
 force–length relationship   The inverted-U relation-
ship in which muscle force is greatest at its resting 
length. 
 force–velocity relationship   The trade-off between 
slower movements that provide greater force and 
faster movements that are weaker. 
 foreign element   An interruption in the regular 
work cycle. 
 fovea   Part of retina with greatest sensitivity and con-
centration of cones. 
 frame   The space occupied by a single picture on a 
motion picture film or videotape. 
 frame counter   A device that automatically tabu-
lates how many frames have passed the lens of the 
 projector. 
 frequency of use   Principle used in laying out con-
trols or displays based on how often each is used. 
 fringe benefits   The portion of tangible compensa-
tion that is not paid in wages, salaries, or bonuses 
given by the employer to employees. These include 
insurance, retirement funds, and other employee 
services. 
 from–to chart   See  travel chart. 
 full model   The more complex model in a general 
linear test. 
 functional layout   See  process layout. 
 functionality   The principle used in laying out con-
trols or displays by similar function.  
 G 
 gain sharing   Any method of wage payment in 
which the worker participates in all or a portion of 
the added earnings resulting from above-standard 
production. 
 gang process chart   A chart of the simultaneous ac-
tivities of one or more machines and/or one or more 
workers. 
 Gantt chart   A series of graphs consisting of hori-
zontal lines or bars in positions and lengths that 
show schedules or quotas and progress plotted on a 
common time scale. 
 general duty clause   Introductory paragraph of the 
OSHAct stating that each employer “must furnish a 
place of employment which is free from recognized 
hazards that cause or are likely to cause death or 
serious physical harm to employees.” OSHA some-
times uses this phrase when issuing citations for 
situations not specifically covered in the standards. 
 general expense   Cost for expense labor, rent, insur-
ance, and so on. 
 general linear test   A formalized procedure for find-
ing the best model using statistically significant de-
creases in variances between alternative models. 
 get   The act of picking up and gaining control of an 
object. It consists of the therbligs reach and grasp, 
and move; it also sometimes includes search and 
select. 
 glare   Excessive brightness in the field of vision, im-
pairing visibility. 
 globe temperature   Measure of radiative load, us-
ing a thermometer in a 6-in-diameter black copper 
sphere. 
 glucose   The primary carbohydrates component 
that enters the biochemical pathways for energy 
production. 
 grade description plan   See  classification method . 
 graphical user interface (GUI)   A type of screen 
 interface identified by four main elements: 
 windows, icons, menus, and pointers. 
 grasp   The elemental hand motion of closing the 
 fingers around a part. 
 gravity feed   Conveyance of materials either to or 
away from the workstation by using the force of 
gravity. 
 gross negligence   Higher form of negligence with 
failure to show the slightest care.  

698 
A P P E N D I X  1
 H 
 Hawthorne effect   A phenomenon in which in-
creased employee productivity may be attributed to 
perceived employer interest in improving methods 
or the workplace; however, it also applies to the 
confounded results from uncontrolled or unconsid-
ered variables in a methods change. 
 hazard   A condition with the potential to cause in-
jury or damage. 
 hazard action table   Decision table for specifying 
certain actions for given hazards. 
 heart rate creep   The slow increase in heart rate dur-
ing heavy work, indicating fatigue. 
 heart rate recovery   The return of the heart rate to 
resting levels after work. 
 hertz   The unit of frequency, in cycles per second. 
One hertz equals one cycle per second. 
 Hick-Hyman law   The linear relationship between 
response time and the amount of stimulus informa-
tion conveyed in bits. 
 hit   Correct identification of a signal when the signal 
is present. 
 human factors   See  ergonomics . 
 I 
 icons   Small representations of objects that act as 
windows in a graphical user interface. 
 idle time   The time an operator or a machine is idle 
or not working. 
 illumination   The amount of light striking a surface, 
measured in footcandles. 
 imminent danger   Type of OSHA citation in which 
there is reasonable certainty that a danger exists 
that can be expected to cause death or serious 
physical harm either immediately or before the 
danger can be eliminated through normal enforce-
ment procedures. This may result in a cessation 
of the operation or even a complete shutdown of 
the plant. 
 importance    The principle used in laying out controls 
or displays based on the importance of each. 
 IMPROSHARE   A gain-sharing plan based on em-
ployee productivity as measured in working hours. 
 improvement program   Facilities layout program 
that improves upon an initial layout. 
 incentive   Reward, financial or other, that compen-
sates the worker for high and/or continued perfor-
mance above standard. 
 incentive pace   A performance that is above standard 
level. 
 independent   Descriptive of two events if the occur-
rence of one event doesn’t affect the occurrence of 
another event. 
 index of difficulty   Relationship defining the dis-
tance of movement  D and target width  W as a form 
of information in Fitts’ law: 
 
 Index of difficulty 5log 2 (2 D / W ) 
 indirect labor   Labor that does not directly enter into 
transforming the material used in making the prod-
uct, but is necessary to support the manufacture of 
the product. 
 indirect lighting   Type of lighting in which the ceil-
ing is illuminated, which in turn reflects the light 
downward. 
 ineffective time   The sum of all foreign element 
times. 
 information   Knowledge received regarding a par-
ticular fact or the reduction of uncertainty about 
that fact. 
 information theory   The science of measuring and 
understanding information. 
 inspect   Elemental motion of comparing object with 
standard. 
 interference time   Idle machine time due to insuffi-
cient operator time to service one or more machines 
because the operator is engaged in other assigned 
work. 
 interlock   Type of safety measure involving a 
sequence of steps or mechanisms to ensure that a 
given event doesn’t occur at the same time as 
another event. 
 intrinsic factors   Potential satisfiers in Herzberg’s 
motivation maintenance theory, such as achieve-
ment, recognition, and advancement. 
 isokinetic strength   Type of muscle contraction in 
which the muscle contracts at a constant velocity. 
 isometric strength   Type of muscle contraction in 
which the muscle contracts in a fixed static position 
and produces the maximum force; also known as 
 static strength . 

 
 
A PPEN DI X 1  Glossary 
699
 isotonic strength   Type of muscle contraction in 
which the muscle contracts against a constant force; 
sometimes termed  dynamic strength . 
 J 
 jidoka   Autonomous error control within the Toyota 
Production System, stopping machines to pre-
vent defective units from disrupting a subsequent 
 process. 
 jig   A device that may or may not be clamped to the 
workstation and is used both to hold the work and 
to guide a tool. 
 job analysis   A procedure for making a careful 
appraisal of each job and then recording the details 
of the work so that it can be equitably evaluated. 
 job enlargement   A horizontal expansion or diversi-
fication of work, to avoid repetitive work. 
 job enrichment   A vertical expansion of work, 
 allowing workers to both start and complete a 
given task, providing greater diversification and 
fulfillment. 
 job evaluation    A procedure for determining the rela-
tive worth of various work assignments. 
 job rotation   Similar to job enlargement in providing 
a worker the opportunity to do a variety of tasks to 
avoid repetitive work, but on a more rigid schedule. 
 job safety analysis   A procedure for identifying the 
hazards associated with each step of a job for the 
purpose of improving the safety of the overall job. 
 job/worksite analysis guide   Analysis tool identify-
ing potential problems within a particular job, area, 
or worksite. 
 just-in-time (JIT)   A lean manufacturing technique 
of streamlining production flow by decreasing 
setup times and requiring suppliers to deliver 
parts only as needed rather than maintaining large 
 inventories. 
 just noticeable difference (JND)   The smallest dif-
ference detectable between two stimuli.  
 K 
 kaizen    System of continuous improvement activities.  
 kanban   A taglike card with product information that 
follows the product completely through the produc-
tion cycle to maintain JIT. 
 Karnaugh maps   A graphical tool to simplify 
Boolean algebraic expressions. 
 keiretsu   Interlocking relationship between a 
Japanese manufacturer and its suppliers. 
 key job   A job representative of similar jobs or 
classes of work in the same plant or industry. 
 kicker   A step increase in earnings to induce workers 
to reach a certain level of productivity.  
 L 
 lactic acid   The by-product of anaerobic metabolism, 
causing sensations of fatigue. 
 lean manufacturing   Manufacturing management 
theory in which production engineers work 
together to eliminate waste, cut costs, and increase 
efficiency. 
 learning curve   A graphic presentation of the 
decrease in time to perform a task; improvement of 
performance as a result of learning. 
 lens   Part of eye that focuses light rays on the retina. 
 level of aspiration   A decision-making strategy 
based on an outcome value which represents the 
consequence of what one is willing to settle for if 
one is reasonably sure to get at least this conse-
quence most of the time. 
 liability   The obligation to provide compensation for 
damages or injury. 
 life-change unit theory   Theory in which situational 
factors tax a person’s capacity to cope with stress 
in the workplace, leaving the person more likely to 
suffer an accident as the amount of stress increases. 
 lighting efficiency   Light output per unit energy, 
typically lumens per watt. 
 light pen   A special stylus linked to the computer by 
an electrical cable that senses the electron scanning 
beam at the particular location on the screen. 
 line balancing   The problem of determining the 
ideal number of workers to be assigned to a 
production line. 
 lock in   Type of safety measure to maintain an event 
or a device in an energized status so that it can’t be 
accidentally turned off. 
 lock out   Type of safety measure to prevent 
unauthorized individuals from entering a 
dangerous area. 

700 
A P P E N D I X  1
 long-term memory   Long-term storage of informa-
tion for later use. 
 loose rate   An established allowed time permitting 
the qualified operator to achieve standard perfor-
mance with less than standard effort. 
 lordosis   The natural inward curvature of the lumbar 
portion of the spine. 
 lumbar   The area of the back most prone to injuries; 
approximately at the belt line. 
 lumbar support   Support for the lower back (lumbar 
area) in the form of an outward bulge in the seat 
back or a pad placed at the belt level. 
 luminaire   A lighting source, such as a lamp. 
 luminance   The amount of light reflected from a 
surface, measured in foot-lamberts. 
 luminous intensity   Light intensity of a source, 
measured in candelas. 
 lux   The unit of illuminance equal to 1 lumen per 
square meter, or 0.093 footcandle.  
 M 
 machine coupling   The practice of having one 
employee operate more than one machine. 
 machine interference   Situation in which two or 
more machines have stopped and require operator 
attention; as the operator can only service one of 
the machines at a time, the remaining machines will 
have to wait to be repaired and consequently will 
be nonproductive. 
 machine pacing   The machine or mechanical control 
over the rate at which the work progresses. 
 mapping   A clear representation of compatibility 
between controls and responses. 
 maximum working area   The area readily reached 
by the operator when the arms are fully extended, 
while in a normal working position. 
 measured day work   An incentive system in which 
hourly rates are periodically adjusted on the basis 
of operator performance during the previous period. 
 mental workload   Cognitive demands placed on the 
human information processor. 
 menu   An ordered list of operations, services, or 
information that is available to the user in a graphi-
cal user interface. 
 merit rating   A method of evaluating an employee’s 
worth to a company in terms of quantity and quality 
of work, dependability, and general contribution to 
the company. 
 method   The technique employed to perform an 
operation. 
 methods study (methods engineering)   Analysis of 
an operation to increase the production per unit of 
time and consequently reduce the unit cost. 
 micromotion study   The division of a work assign-
ment into therbligs, accomplished by analyzing 
motion pictures frame by frame and then improving 
the operation by eliminating unnecessary move-
ments and simplifying the necessary movements. 
 Miller’s rule   The upper limit for the capacity of 
working memory, at approximately 7 6 2 items. 
 minimax regret criterion   A decision-making strat-
egy in which a matrix of regret values (differences 
between actual and projected payoffs) is calculated. 
The analyst selects the minimum of maximum 
 regrets. 
 miss   Incorrect rejection of a signal when the signal 
is present. 
 mnemonics   An acronym or phrase, the letters of 
which represent a series of items, to facilitate recall. 
 mod ratio   The ratio of actual losses to losses 
expected of similar employers with 1.00 being 
average; used to set workers’ compensation insur-
ance premiums. 
 modulation   Variation of signal level in a periodic 
cycle so as to increase attentional demands. 
 motion study   The analysis and study of the motions 
constituting an operation, to improve the motion 
pattern by eliminating ineffective motions and 
shortening the effective motions. 
 motivation maintenance theory   A motivational 
theory by F. Herzberg in which extrinsic factors 
(administration, working conditions) act as poten-
tial dissatisfiers and intrinsic factors (achievement, 
recognition) act as satisfiers. 
 motivation-reward-satisfaction model   Behavior-
based safety model using a positive feedback cycle 
in which the better the worker performs, the bet-
ter the worker is rewarded, the more the worker is 
satisfied, and the greater the worker’s motivation to 
perform better. 
 motor unit   The functional unit of muscles com-
prised of a nerve fiber and all the muscle fibers that 
it innervates. 

 
 
A PPEN DI X 1  Glossary 
701
 mouse   A handheld device with a roller ball in the 
base for controlling cursor position. 
 move   Hand movement with a load. 
 MTM (methods-time measurement)   A procedure 
for analyzing any manual operation or method, to 
determine the basic motions required to perform 
the operation, and to assign a predetermined time 
standard to each motion, based on the nature of the 
motion and the conditions under which it is made. 
 muda   In Japanese industry, wastes to be eliminated. 
 multiple causation   Extension of the domino theory 
holding that behind each accident or injury there 
may be numerous contributing factors, causes, and 
conditions. 
 multiple-criteria decision making   A quantitative 
decision-making procedure in the presence of 
conflicting information. 
 multitasking   Performing several tasks simultaneously.  
 musculoskeletal system   The system of muscle and 
bones in the body allowing for movement. 
 mutually exclusive   Boolean state in which two 
events cannot intersect. 
 myofibrils   Subdivision of muscle fiber containing 
thick and thin protein filaments.  
 N 
 natural frequency   The internal frequency of 
vibration within a system, determined by its mass, 
spring, and dashpot characteristics. 
 negligence   The failure to exercise a reasonable 
amount of care in preventing injury. 
 negligence perse   Higher form of negligence, with 
no proof needed. 
 network analysis   A planning technique used to 
analyze the sequence of activities and their interre-
lationships within a project. 
 NIOSH lifting guidelines   A set of guidelines for 
manual lifting developed by NIOSH to provide 
a measure of safety in preventing overexertion 
injuries resulting from job demands exceeding a 
worker’s capacity. 
 noise   Sensory stimulation such as unwanted sound 
that interferes with the detection of a signal. 
 noise dose   Total daily noise exposure, consisting 
of exposures to several different noise levels, each 
resulting in partial doses. 
 noise reduction rating   Measure of earplug 
effectiveness, in terms of decibels of noise level 
attenuation. 
 nomogram   A graph that usually contains three par-
allel scales graduated for different variables, so that 
when a straight line connects values of any two, the 
related value may be read directly from the third at 
the point intersected by the line. 
 nonschedule injury   A permanent partial disability 
that is of less specific nature; such as disfigurement, 
with payments prorated to a schedule injury. 
 nonserious violation   Type of OSHA violation that 
probably would not cause death or serious physi-
cal harm; incurs a penalty of up to $7,000 for each 
violation. 
 normal distribution   A continuous probability distri-
bution with mean 5  and variance 5  2 and hav-
ing a density function equal to
 
=
−⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
e
1
2
f x)
x
(
)
−
x
2
2
2
s
P
m
s
 
 normal time   The time required for the standard 
operator to perform the operation when working at 
a standard pace, without delay for personal reasons 
or unavoidable circumstances. 
 normal working area   The space at the work area 
that can be reached by either the left or right hand 
when both elbows are pivoted on the edge of the 
workstation. 
 NOT   Type of Boolean logic indicating the negation 
of an event. 
 O 
 objective rating   Method of rating that establishes 
a single work assignment to which the pace of all 
other jobs is compared. 
 observation   The gathering and recording of the 
time required to perform an element, or one watch 
reading. 
 observed time   The elemental time for one cycle, 
obtained either directly or by subtracting successive 
watch times. 
 observer   The analyst taking a time study of a given 
operation. 
 octave-band analysis   Noise analysis with a special 
filter attachment to the sound-level meter that de-
composes the noise into component frequencies. 

702 
A P P E N D I X  1
 operation   The intentional changing of a part to-
ward its ultimate desired shape, size, form, and 
 characteristics. 
 operation analysis   An investigative process dealing 
with operations in factory or office work. Usually, 
the process leading to operation standardization, 
including motion and time study. 
 operation card   A form outlining the sequence of 
operations, the time allowed, and the special tools 
required in manufacturing a part. 
 operation process chart   A graphic representation 
of an operation, showing all methods, inspections, 
time allowances, and materials used in a manufac-
turing process. 
 operator attention time   See  attention time. 
 operator process chart   See  two-hand process 
chart. 
 OR gate   Type of Boolean logic that needs at 
least one of the inputs to occur for the output to 
occur.  
 OSHA 300 log   Form for maintaining records of 
occupational injuries and illnesses required by the 
OSHAct. 
 outline process chart   A simple graphic representa-
tion of all the operations used in a manufacturing 
process. 
 output   The total production of a machine, process, 
or worker for a specified unit of time. 
 overhead   Any costs of a business above prime costs. 
 oxygen debt   The increased metabolic activity after 
work to repay the oxygen deficit. 
 oxygen deficit   The deficit of oxygen incurred dur-
ing the initial or heavy stages of work; supplied by 
anaerobic metabolism.  
 P 
 pace rating   Method of speed rating using a series of 
benchmarks to assist in defining performance. 
 pallet   A load carrier, usually with a rectangular 
standardized load carrier. 
 parallel   Arrangement of components in a system, 
such that the total system succeeds if any one com-
ponent succeeds. 
 Pareto analysis   An exploratory tool in which 
items of interest are identified and measured on a 
common scale and then are ordered in ascending 
order, creating a cumulative distribution;  typically 
20  percent of the ranked items account for 80 per-
cent or more of the total activity, leading to the 
alternative term  80-20 rule . 
 payback method   Economic analysis tool that 
uses the time to return the cost of the original 
investment. 
 perception   The comparison of incoming stimulus 
information with stored knowledge to categorize 
the information. 
 performance   The ratio of the operator’s actual pro-
duction to the standard production. 
 performance rating   The assignment of a percentage 
to the operator’s average observed time, based 
on the actual performance of the operator as 
compared to the observer’s conception of standard 
performance. 
 permanent partial disability   Type of disability 
in which the worker will not fully recover from 
injuries but can still perform some work. It is 
further subdivided into schedule and nonschedule 
injuries.  
 permanent total disability   Type of disability that is 
so serious that the employee will be prevented from 
ever working in regular employment. 
 personal digital assistants (PDAs)   Pocket-sized 
PCs operated with a stylus. 
 personal needs allowance   A percentage added to 
the normal time to accommodate the personal needs 
of the operator. 
 PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Tech-
nique) chart   A planning and control method that 
graphically portrays the optimum way to attain 
some predetermined objective, generally in terms 
of time. 
 phototropism   Tendency for the eyes to be drawn 
directly to the brightest light source. 
 physiological needs   First step in Maslow’s hierar-
chy of human needs: basic concerns regarding sur-
vival, food, water, and health. 
 piecework   A standard of performance expressed in 
money per unit of production. 
 pinch grip   A type of grip in which not all fingers are 
involved, as opposed to a power grip; consequently, 
less power but more precision is produced. 
 plaintiff   The person originating a suit in court. 
 plan   A basic motion involving the mental process of 
determining the next action. 

 
 
A PPEN DI X 1  Glossary 
703
 plunger criterion   An optimistic decision-making 
strategy in which the best outcome is expected, re-
gardless of the alternative chosen. 
 point   A unit of output identified as the production 
of one standard operator in one minute. Used as 
a basis for establishing standards under the point 
system. 
 pointer   A device for directly manipulating an icon 
or cursor on a graphical user interface. 
 point size   Size of type; one point equals 1/72 in 
(0.035 mm). 
 point system   A method of job evaluation in which 
the relative worth of different jobs is determined by 
totaling the points assigned to the various factors 
applicable to the different jobs. 
 Poisson distribution   A discrete probability distribu-
tion, with mean 5l and variance 5l, and having a 
probability function equal to
 
 


P k
e
k
k
( )
k
!
for
0,1,2
k
 
 poke-yoke   The quality control error prevention 
system within the Toyota Production System. 
 policy allowance   Allowance to provide a satisfac-
tory level of earnings for a specified level of perfor-
mance for exceptional circumstances. 
 position   An element of work that consists of locat-
ing an object such that it will be properly oriented 
in a specific location. 
 positive reinforcement   A Skinnerian concept in 
which response strength increases as the stimulus 
strength is increased. 
 postlunch dip   Dip in performance and circadian 
rhythms after midday. 
 power grip   Optimal cylindrical grip for power that 
utilizes all digits and in which the thumb barely 
overlaps the index finger. 
 predetermined times   Times assigned to fundamental 
motions that cannot be precisely evaluated with ordi-
nary stopwatch time study procedures but are the 
result of detailed videotape studies of many 
 operations. They are predetermined because they 
are used to predict standard times for new work as 
a  result of methods changes; they are sometimes 
termed  synthetic in that they are often the result of 
logical combinations of therbligs; they are also  basic  
in that further refinement is typically not possible.  
 predetermined time  system  System based on basic 
motion times used to calculate a standard time. 
 preposition   A basic motion that consists of position-
ing an object in a predetermined place so that it 
may be grasped in the position in which it is to be 
held when needed. 
 primary task   The task to which an operator devotes 
the greatest amount of attention resources. 
 prime cost   Direct material costs plus direct labor 
costs. 
 principle of combined motions   If one hand per-
forms two motions simultaneously, the longer time 
is counted in certain predetermined time systems. 
 principle of insufficient reason   A decision-making 
strategy in which the conditions or states are con-
sidered as being equally likely. 
 principle of limiting motions   For two different mo-
tions performed simultaneously by the left and right 
hands, the longer time is used in certain predeter-
mined time systems. 
 principle of simultaneous motions   Motions per-
formed simultaneously with both hands cannot 
always be performed in the same time as the same 
motions performed by each hand separately; thus, a 
time penalty may be added in some predetermined 
time systems. 
 privity   Legal doctrine requiring a direct relationship, 
as in the form of a contract, between the two con-
testing parties. 
 process   A series of operations that advances the 
product toward its ultimate size, shape, and 
specifications. 
 process chart   A graphic representation of a manu-
facturing process. 
 process layout   Type of layout in which worksta-
tions or machines are grouped by the similarity of 
the process or function; also known as  functional 
layout. 
 productive time   Any time spent in advancing 
the progress of a product toward its ultimate 
 specifications. 
 product layout   Type of layout in which worksta-
tions are located along a continuous line such 
that the flow from one operation to the next is 
minimized for any product class; also known as 
a  straight-line layout. 
. . .

704 
A P P E N D I X  1
 profit sharing   Any procedure in which an employer 
pays to employees special current or deferred sums, 
in addition to good rates of regular pay, based not 
only on individual or group performance, but also 
on the prosperity of the business as a whole. 
 pronation   Rotation of the forearm such that the 
palm faces down; opposite of supination with the 
palm up. 
 psychophysical strength   Type of strength in which 
the operator subjectively determines the acceptable 
load to be lifted. 
 pull system   Type of just-in-time production control 
system in which the demand for parts comes from 
the downstream station. 
 punitive damage   Additional court-awarded pay-
ments to the plaintiff, but specifically used to pun-
ish the defendant. 
 pupil   The opening in the eye that lets in light. 
 put   The act of moving an object under control to a 
new position. It consist of the therbligs move and 
position. 
 push system   Type of production control system in 
which parts are produced irrespective of the needs 
of the downstream stations.  
 Q 
 qualified operator   An operator who can achieve 
the established standard of performance when fol-
lowing the prescribed method and working at a 
standard pace. 
 quality circles   Small groups for participative prob-
lem solving. 
 queuing theory   Mathematical analysis of the laws 
governing arrivals, service times, and the order in 
which arriving units are taken into service. 
 QWERTY keyboard   Popular type of keyboard with 
the sequence of the first six leftmost keys in the 
third row being QWERTY.  
 R 
 rad   Unit of radiation dose equivalent to the absorp-
tion of 0.01 joule per kilogram (J/kg). 
 radial deviation   Bending of the wrist such that the 
thumb moves toward the arm. 
 random servicing   The interaction between the op-
erator and machine that occurs on a random basis. 
 random variable   A chance number resulting from a 
trial from among the set of numbers  x 1 ,  x 2 , and so on. 
 range effect   Tendency to overshoot close targets 
and undershoot far targets, typically resulting from 
fatigue. 
 ranking method   A method of job evaluation that 
arranges jobs in the order of their importance or 
 according to their relative worth. 
 rapid rotation   Type of shiftwork in which the 
worker changes shifts every 2 or 3 days. 
 rate   A standard expressed in dollars and cents. 
 rate setting   The act of establishing money rates or 
time values on any operation. 
 rating   See  performance rating . 
 rating by the watch   An incorrect rating procedure 
whereby the analyst uses previously observed times 
to rate the operator. 
 rating method   Method of job evaluation based on 
arranging jobs in order of importance. 
 rating of perceived exertion   Means for assessing 
exertion during dynamic whole-body activities. 
 ratio delay study   See work sampling 
 Raynaud’s syndrome   Cold-induced occlusion of 
blood flow to the hands, reducing dexterity. 
 reciprocal inhibition   Type of reflex in which the 
agonist muscle is activated and the antagonist is 
inhibited so as to reduce counterproductive muscle 
contractions. 
 recommended weight limit (RWL)   From the 
NIOSH lifting guidelines, an optimum weight that 
can be handled by almost everyone, with adjust-
ments to it for various factors related to variables 
in a lifting task. 
 recording error   Percent error for unaccounted time 
during a time study. 
 red circle rates   Employee rates higher than that 
called for by the job evaluation plan. 
 red flagging   Signal for a potential safety problem 
indicated by injuries going above an upper control 
limit. 
 reduced model   The simpler model in a general 
 linear test. 
 redundancy   The reduction of information from the 
maximum amount possible due to unequal prob-
abilities of occurrence of the alternatives. 

 
 
A PPEN DI X 1  Glossary 
705
 reflectance   Percentage of light reflected from a surface. 
 regression to the mean   Tendency of a novice ana-
lyst to rate closer to standard performance than the 
true performance. 
 regret matrix   See  minimax regret criterion . 
 rehearsal   Mental repetition of items to facilitate recall.  
 relationship chart   Chart expressing the relative 
degrees of closeness among different activities, 
areas, departments, rooms, and so on, for facilities 
layout purposes. 
 relative judgment   Differentiation between two 
stimuli based on a direct comparison. 
 reliability   The probability of the success of a sys-
tem, which necessarily depends on the reliability or 
the success of its individual components. 
 rem   Roentgen equivalent man; the equivalent dose 
from any type of ionizing radiation that produces a 
biological effect of 1 roentgen of X-rays in humans. 
 remission   Increase in cycle time on the learning 
curve due to forgetfulness. 
 repeated violation   Type of OSHA violation issued 
upon reinspection and finding the recurrence of a 
previously cited violation. Each repeated violation 
can bring a fine of up to $70,000. 
 repetitive-motion injury   See  cumulative trauma 
disorder . 
 resonance   Situation in which forced vibrations 
induce larger-amplitude vibrations in a system. 
 response criterion   Level of sensory stimulation 
used to decide if a signal is present. 
 resting length   Length of the muscle while it is in a 
neutral, uncontracted state. 
 retina   Layer of photosensitive receptors at the back 
of the eyeball. 
 return   Most activity of walking back to the workstation 
 return on investment   Method of economic analysis 
using the ratio of the yearly profit to the life of the 
product. 
 return on sales   Method of economic analysis using 
the ratio of the yearly profit to the yearly sales. 
 risk analysis   A probabilistic process for determining 
what risk factors are present, their characteristics, 
and the overall value for success or failure. 
 risky   Observer behavior as the criterion shifts to the 
left, causing an increase of hits but at the cost of a 
corresponding increase of false alarms. 
 rods   Photoreceptors of the eye that are sensitive to 
black and white, especially at night, and have poor 
visual acuity. 
 roentgen   A unit of radiation exposure that measures 
the amount of ionization produced in air by X or 
gamma radiation. 
 Rucker plan    A gain-sharing plan based on employee 
productivity as measured by one or more of the fol-
lowing: gross production, net sales, and inventory 
changes.  
 S 
 safety factor   The ratio of the strength of a structure 
to the maximum stress applied; for safety, it should 
be well above 1. 
 safety management   A strategic approach to the 
overall planning, education, and training of safety 
activities. 
 safety needs   Second step in Maslow’s hierarchy of 
human needs: the need for security on the job. 
 Scanlon plan   A gain-sharing plan based on 
employee productivity as measured by one or more 
of the following: gross production, net sales, and 
inventory changes. 
 schedule injury   A permanent partial disability that 
is allocated a specific payment for a specified time 
period according to a specific schedule. 
 secondary task   A task that must be performed in 
addition to the primary task. 
 self-esteem needs   Fourth step in Maslow’s hierarchy 
of human needs: a desire for competence, achieve-
ment, and self-respect. 
 self-fulfillment   Final achievement of all the desired 
needs in Maslow’s hierarchy. The worker is person-
ally fulfilled and the ego is satisfied. 
 sensitivity   Resolution of the sensory system, mea-
sured as the separation between the signal and noise 
distributions. 
 sensory store   The transient memory located at the 
input stage of a sensory channel. 
 sequence of use   Design principle in which controls 
and displays are placed in physical locations corre-
sponding to the order in which they are used. 
 series   Arrangement of components in a system, such 
that every component must succeed for the total 
system to succeed. 

706 
A P P E N D I X  1
 serious violation   Type of OSHA violation in 
which there is substantial probability that death or 
serious harm could result, stemming from a hazard 
about which the employer knew or should have 
known. 
 service level   Percent of calls picked up in a certain 
time period. 
 servicing time   Total time an operator interacts 
directly with a machine; could include loading, 
unloading, maintenance, etc. 
 setup   The preparation of a workstation or a work 
center to accomplish an operation or a series of 
operations. 
 shiftwork   Working at times other than daytime 
hours. 
 short-term memory   See  working memory . 
 signal   Sensory stimulation that yields information. 
 signal detection theory   Theory used to explain a 
situation in which an observer needs to identify a 
signal from confounding noise. 
 simo chart   A two-hand process chart with times 
measured with a microchronometer as part of a 
micromotion study. 
 simple reaction time   Time for an operator to 
respond to a single stimulus with a predetermined 
response. 
 simultaneous motions   Two or more elemental 
motions performed simultaneously by different 
body members. In MTM, for difficult motions, a 
penalty is added. 
 situational awareness   An evaluation of all cues 
received from the surrounding environment. 
 size principle   The orderly recruitment of motor 
units, from small to large. 
 skeletal muscle   The muscles attached to the bones 
that provide the driving force for motion. 
 skill   Proficiency at following a prescribed method. 
 sliding filament theory   Theory of muscle contrac-
tion in which the component filaments slide over 
one another. 
 slipped disk   See  disk herniation . 
 slotting   The placement of jobs, standards, etc., in 
specific categories. 
 SMED (single minute exchange of die)   A series of 
techniques for changing over production machinery 
in less than 10 min. 
 snapback timing   Time study technique in which, 
after the watch is read at the break point of each 
element, the time is returned to zero. 
 social needs   Third step in Maslow’s hierarchy of 
human needs: need for attention, friendship, and 
social belonging. 
 special allowance   A variety of allowances that are 
related to the process, equipment, materials, etc.; 
further subdivided into unavoidable delays, avoid-
able delays, extra, and policy allowances. 
 speed-accuracy trade-off   The inverse relationship 
between speed and accuracy; that is, as accuracy 
increases, the response time becomes slower. 
 speed rating   Method of rating in which the analyst 
measures the effectiveness of the operator against 
the concept of a qualified operator doing the same 
work at standard performance. 
 stamps   Strokes collected as a form of debt to be 
repaid. 
 standard costs   Prepriced or budget costs on which 
production runs and sales decisions are made. 
 standard data   A structured collection of normal 
time values for work elements, codified in tabular 
or graphic form. 
 standard hour plan   A wage incentive plan using 
day work up to 100 percent performance and piece-
work beyond 100 percent performance. 
 standard performance   The performance expected 
from a qualified operator when following the pre-
scribed method and working at a standard pace for 
an 8-h shift without undue fatigue; for example, 
walking at 3 mi/h.  
 standard time   A unit time value for a work task, as 
determined by the proper application of appropriate 
work measurement techniques by qualified personnel.  
 starting time   The clock time at which a time study 
starts. 
 statute law   Written law enacted by legislators and 
enforced by the executive branch. 
 storage   Handling for the purpose of positioning and/
or securing goods in the space intended. 
 straight-line layout   See  product layout . 
 strict liability   Higher level of liability, in which the 
plaintiff need not prove negligence or fault. 
 strokes   Positive recognition of an individual and the 
individual’s accomplishments. 

 
 
A PPEN DI X 1  Glossary 
707
 Stroop color-word task   The presentation of con-
flicting color and word stimuli showing effects of 
redundancy and interference. 
 supination   Rotation of the forearm such that the 
palm faces up; opposite of pronation with the 
palm down. 
 sustained attention   The ability of an operator to 
maintain attention resources and remain alert over 
prolonged periods of time; also termed  vigilance . 
 synchronous servicing   An ideal case in which both 
the worker and the machine interact on a fixed, 
 repetitive cycle. 
 synthetic rating   A system of performance rating 
in which elemental observed times are compared 
to times developed through predetermined time 
systems. 
 synthetic times   See  predetermined times . 
 T 
 talk time   The amount of time the agent spends actu-
ally speaking to a customer. 
 temporary partial disability   Type of disability in 
which the worker is incapable of performing any 
work for a limited time, but full recovery is 
expected. The worker can still perform most duties 
but may suffer some lost time and/or wages. 
 temporary standard   A standard established for a 
limited number of pieces or a limited time, to 
account for the newness of the work or some unu-
sual job condition. 
 temporary total disability   Type of disability that 
is sufficiently serious to prevent an employee from 
ever working in regular employment. 
 tendinitis   Inflammation of a tendon, caused by 
repetitive work. 
 tenosynovitis   Inflammation of tendon sheaths, 
caused by repetitive work. 
 therblig   One of 17 basic motions or work elements 
defined by the Gilbreths. 
 thick filaments   Microscopic filaments in muscle 
fibers comprised of long proteins with molecular 
heads called  myosin; thicker in size than the mating 
thin filaments; both needed for muscular contrac-
tion to occur. 
 thin filaments   Microscopic filaments in muscle 
fibers comprised of globular proteins called  actin; 
thinner in size than the mating thick filaments; both 
needed for muscular contraction to occur. 
 thoracic vertebrae   The 12 vertebral bones of the 
upper back. 
 threshold limit value (TLV)   Level of a chemical 
substance to which a worker can be exposed day 
after day for a working lifetime without adverse 
health effects. 
 tight rate   A time standard that allows less time than 
that required by a qualified operator to do the work 
while working at a standard pace. 
 time check   Error-checking procedure in a time study 
done by accounting for all the times recorded dur-
ing the study. 
 time elapsed after study (TEAF)   The stopwatch 
time readout when the analyst snaps the watch at 
very end of a time study at the master clock. 
 time elapsed before study (TEBS)   The stopwatch 
time readout when an analyst snaps the watch at the 
start of the first element of a time study. 
 timesharing   See  multitasking . 
 time study   The procedure using stopwatch timing to 
establish standards. 
 time study board   A convenient board used to sup-
port the stopwatch and hold the time study form 
during a time study. 
 time study form   A form designed to accommodate 
the elements of a given time study, with spaces for 
recording their durations. 
 time value of money   Economic concept of a dollar 
today being worth more than a dollar in the future. 
 time-weighted average   The sound level that would 
produce a given noise dose if a worker were con-
tinuously exposed to that sound level over an 8-h 
workday. 
 toolbar   A collection of buttons or icons on a graphi-
cal user interface. 
 top-down processing   Conceptually driven informa-
tion processing using high-level concepts to process 
low-level perceptual features. 
 total recorded time   The sum of check time, effec-
tive time, and ineffective time during a time study. 
 total quality   A Japanese management approach that 
encompasses quality in all aspects of a business 
(processes, materials, people, environment) through 
a continuous improvement process. 

708 
A P P E N D I X  1
 touchpad   A form of digitizing tablet integrated into 
the keyboard for controlling cursor position. 
 touchscreen   Screen with a touch-sensitive overlay 
on the screen that is activated as the finger 
approaches the screen. 
 trackball   An upside-down mouse for controlling 
cursor position. 
 track point   A force joystick in the middle of a key-
board used to control the cursor. 
 transactional analysis   An approach to dealing and 
communicating with people using the concepts of 
(1) ego states, (2) transactions, and (3) stroking and 
stamps. 
 transactions   Interactions between ego states in 
Berne’s transactional analysis. 
 travel chart   A table that provides distances traveled 
between points in a manufacturing or business facility.  
 trigger finger   Tendinitis in the index finger, caused 
by repetitive triggering of a power tool. 
 two-hand process chart   A chart showing the 
motions made by one hand in relation to those 
made by the other hand, and using standard therblig 
abbreviations or symbols. 
 tympanic membrane   Membrane separating the 
outer ear canal from the middle ear, also known as 
the  eardrum. 
 U 
 ulnar deviation   Bending of the wrist such that the 
little finger moves toward the arm. 
 ulterior transactions   Transactions with a hidden 
meaning. 
 unaccounted time   Time miscounted during a time 
study; the difference between elapsed time and 
recorded time. 
 unavoidable delay   An interruption in the continu-
ity of an operation that is beyond the control of an 
operator. 
 unit labor costs   Employee wages divided by the 
productivity or worker performance. 
 unit load   A material in a packed state. Frequently, a 
standardized-size transport unit. 
 unit model   See  Crawford model. 
 use   A basic motion that occurs when either hand or 
both hands have control of an object during that 
part of the cycle when productive work is being 
performed. 
 V 
 value engineering   A method for evaluating alterna-
tives using values and weights for alternatives in a 
payoff matrix. 
 variable element   An element whose time is affected 
by one or more characteristics, such as size, shape, 
hardness, or tolerance, such that as these conditions 
change, the time required to perform the element 
changes. 
 variable fatigue allowance   Fatigue allowances that 
typically are adjusted for individual workers within 
a company depending on job or working conditions.  
 variance   The difference between actual and standard 
or budgeted costs. 
 vasoconstriction   The occlusion of peripheral blood 
vessels due to cold conditions. 
 vasodilation   Increased peripheral blood flow due to 
hot conditions. 
 vertebrae   The bones that form the structural support 
of the back. 
 vigilance   See  sustained attention . 
 visibility   Ability to see fine detail. 
 visual angle   The angle subtended at the eye by the 
target. 
 W 
 wage incentive   A financial inducement for effort 
above standard performance. 
 wage rate   The money rate, expressed in dollars and 
cents per hour, paid to the employee. 
 waiting time   The time when the operator is unable 
to do useful work because of the nature of the pro-
cess, or because of the immediate lack of material. 
 warehouse   An installation for storing products dur-
ing long gaps between production stages, or for 
storing finished products. 
 Warrick’s principle   Principle of display design 
in which points closest on the display and control 
move in the same direction, providing the best 
compatibility. 
 watch time   Time recorded from a watch reading. 
 WBGT (wet-bulb globe temperature)   Heat stress 
index based on a weighted average of wet-bulb, 
globe, and dry-bulb temperatures. 
 Weber’s law   A rule stating that the ratio of the just 
noticeable difference to the stimulus level remains 
constant over the normal sensory range. 

 
 
A PPEN DI X 1  Glossary 
709
 Westinghouse rating system   Method of rating 
developed at Westinghouse Corp., based on four 
factors: skill, effort, conditions, and consistency. 
 wet-bulb temperature   Measure of evaporative cool-
ing, determined by using a thermometer with a wet 
wick and natural air movement. 
 white finger   The occlusion of blood flow to the 
hand due to the effects of vibration. Results in loss 
of dexterity and feeling. 
 wild value   See  abnormal time . 
 willful violation   Type of OSHA violation intention-
ally or knowingly committed by the employer; i.e., 
the employer is aware that a hazardous condition 
exists and has made no reasonable effort to elimi-
nate it. 
 wind chill index   Cold stress index describing the rate 
of heat loss by radiation and convection as a func-
tion of ambient temperature and wind velocity.  
 windows   Areas of the screen, in a graphical user in-
terface, that behave as if they were an independent 
part of the screen. 
 work cycle   The total sequence of motions and 
events that constitute a single operation. 
 work design   The design process that uses ergonom-
ics to fit the task and workstation to the human 
operator. 
 worker-machine process chart   A chart showing 
the exact relationship in time between the working 
cycle of the operator and the operating cycle of the 
machine or machines. 
 workers’ compensation   A form of insurance that 
provides medical care and compensation for 
employees and their families in the event of injury 
in the course of employment regardless of fault or 
negligence. 
 work hardening   Physical training on a simulated 
job to acclimatize the worker to production line 
conditions. 
 working memory   Temporary storage of informa-
tion while it is being processed for a response; also 
termed  short-term memory . 
 work measurement   One of several procedures 
(time study, work sampling, and predetermined 
time systems) for establishing standards. 
 work pace   The rate at which an operation or activity 
is done. 
 work sampling   A method of analyzing work by tak-
ing a large number of observations at random inter-
vals, to establish standards and improve methods. 
 workstation   The area where the worker performs 
the elements of work in a specific operation. 
 Wright model   Learning curve model in which the 
improvement gained is defined for the cumulative 
average unit rather than for a particular unit. Also 
known as the  cumulative average model . 
 Wright’s formula   Machine interference time 
expressed as a percentage of mean servicing time 
for seven or more machines.  
 Y 
 Yerkes-Dodson inverted-U curve   Theory that 
explains the change in performance as a function of 
arousal, which has an inverted-U shape, that is, low 
performance at very low and high levels of arousal, 
and best performance at some intermediate level of 
arousal. 

This page intentionally left blank

 
711
 
711
 
  APPENDIX
 
2
 Helpful Formulas 
 
(1)  Quadratic 
 
  Ax 2   Bx   C  0 
 
 


=
x
B
B

AC
A
4
2
2
 
 
(2)  Logarithms 
 
=
=
=
b
a
b

a
b
a
b
a
n
=
a
a
n
a
x
x
=
log
log
log
log 1
n
n
log
l
=
ab
og
g
log
l
a
g
log
1 log
0
log
1 44271
2
 
 
(3)  Binomial theorem 
 




b
a
n
 a
b

n
a
b

n
n
n
n
(
)
a
b
+
(
1

n
)
2!
1
2
2
b





n
n
a
b

n
(
1

n
)(
2)
3!
3 3
 
 
(4)  Circle 
 
  
 Circumference  2π r 
 
  
 Area  π r 2 
 
(5)  Prism 
 
  
 Volume   Ba 
 
(6)  Pyramid 
 
  
 Volume  13  Ba 
 
(7)  Right circular cylinder 
 
  
 Volume  π r 2 a 
 
  
 Lateral surface  2π ra 
 
  
 Total surface  2π r ( r   a ) 

712 
A P P E N D I X  2
 
(8)  Right circular cone 
 
  
 Volume  13 π r 2 a 
 
  
 Lateral surface  π rs 
 
  
 Total surface  π r ( r   s ) 
 
(9)  Sphere 
 
  
 Volume  43 π r 3 
 
  
 Surface  4π r 2 
 (10)  Frustum of a right circular cone 
 
  
 Volume  13π a ( R 2   r 2   Rr ) 
 
  
 Lateral surface  π s ( R   r ) 
 (11)  Measurement of angles 
 
 
 
 

=
=
1 degree
180
0.0174rad
 
 
  
 1 radian (rad)  57.29 degrees 
 (12)  Trigonometric functions 
 a.  Right triangles: 
 •  The sine of the angle A is the quotient of the opposite side divided 
by the hypotenuse: sin 

A
a
c  .
 •  The tangent of the angle A is the quotient of the opposite side 
divided by the adjacent side: tan 

A
a
b  .
 •  The secant of the angle A is the quotient of the hypotenuse divided 
by the adjacent side: sec 

A
c
b  .
 •  The cosine, cotangent, and cosecant of an angle are, respectively, 
the sine, tangent, and secant of the complement of that angle. 
 b.  Law of sines: 
 
 
 
 


sin
a
A
b
B
c
C
sin
s
B
in
 
 c.  Law of cosines: 
 
 
 
 a 2   b 2   c 2  2 bc cos  A 
 (13)  Equations of straight lines 
 a.  Slope-intercept form 
 
 
 
 y   a   bx 
 b.  Intercept form 
 


x
a
y
b
1
  

 
APPENDIX
 
3
 Special Tables 
 Table A3.1   Natural Sines and Tangents 
 Angle 
 Sin 
 Tan 
 Cot 
 Cos 
   
 0 
 0.0000 
 0.0000 
 ∞ 
 1.0000 
 90 
 1 
 0.0175 
 0.0175 
 57.2900 
 0.9998 
 89 
 2 
 0.0349 
 0.0349 
 28.6363 
 0.9994 
 88 
 3 
 0.0523 
 0.0524 
 19.0811 
 0.9986 
 87 
 4 
 0.0698 
 0.0699 
 14.3007 
 0.9976 
 86 
 5 
 0.0872 
 0.0875 
 11.4301 
 0.9962 
 85 
 6 
 0.1045 
 0.1051 
 9.5144 
 0.9945 
 84 
 7 
 0.1219 
 0.1228 
 8.1443 
 0.9925 
 83 
 8 
 0.1392 
 0.1405 
 7.1154 
 0.9903 
 82 
 9 
 0.1564 
 0.1584 
 6.3138 
 0.9877 
 81 
 10 
 0.1736 
 0.1763 
 5.6713 
 0.9848 
 80 
 11 
 0.1908 
 0.1944 
 5.1446 
 0.9816 
 79 
 12 
 0.2079 
 0.2126 
 4.7046 
 0.9781 
 78 
 13 
 0.2250 
 0.2309 
 4.3315 
 0.9744 
 77 
 14 
 0.2419 
 0.2493 
 4.0108 
 0.9703 
 76 
 15 
 0.2588 
 0.2679 
 3.7321 
 0.9659 
 75 
 16 
 0.2756 
 0.2867 
 3.4874 
 0.9613 
 74 
 17 
 0.2924 
 0.3057 
 3.2709 
 0.9563 
 73 
 18 
 0.3090 
 0.3249 
 3.0777 
 0.9511 
 72 
 19 
 0.3256 
 0.3443 
 2.9042 
 0.9455 
 71 
 20 
 0.3420 
 0.3640 
 2.7475 
 0.9397 
 70 
 21 
 0.3584 
 0.3839 
 2.6051 
 0.9336 
 69 
 22 
 0.3746 
 0.4040 
 2.4751 
 0.9272 
 68 
 23 
 0.3907 
 0.4245 
 2.3559 
 0.9205 
 67 
 24 
 0.4067 
 0.4452 
 2.2460 
 0.9135 
 66 
   
 Cos 
 Cot 
 Tan 
 Sin 
 Angle 
(continued)
 
713

714 
A P P E N D I X  3
 Angle 
 Sin 
 Tan 
 Cot 
 Cos 
   
 25 
 0.4226 
 0.4663 
 2.1445 
 0.9063 
 65 
 26 
 0.4384 
 0.4877 
 2.0503 
 0.8988 
 64 
 27 
 0.4540 
 0.5095 
 1.9626 
 0.8910 
 63 
 28 
 0.4695 
 0.5317 
 1.8807 
 0.8829 
 62 
 29 
 0.4848 
 0.5543 
 1.8040 
 0.8746 
 61 
 30 
 0.5000 
 0.5774 
 1.7321 
 0.8660 
 60 
 31 
 0.5150 
 0.6009 
 1.6643 
 0.8572 
 59 
 32 
 0.5299 
 0.6249 
 1.6003 
 0.8480 
 58 
 33 
 0.5446 
 0.6494 
 1.5399 
 0.8387 
 57 
 34 
 0.5592 
 0.6745 
 1.4826 
 0.8290 
 56 
 35 
 0.5736 
 0.7002 
 1.4281 
 0.8192 
 55 
 36 
 0.5878 
 0.7265 
 1.3764 
 0.8090 
 54 
 37 
 0.6018 
 0.7536 
 1.3270 
 0.7986 
 53 
 38 
 0.6157 
 0.7813 
 1.2799 
 0.7880 
 52 
 39 
 0.6293 
 0.8098 
 1.2349 
 0.7771 
 51 
 40 
 0.6428 
 0.8391 
 1.1918 
 0.7660 
 50 
 41 
 0.6561 
 0.8693 
 1.1504 
 0.7547 
 49 
 42 
 0.6691 
 0.9004 
 1.1106 
 0.7431 
 48 
 43 
 0.6820 
 0.9325 
 1.0724 
 0.7314 
 47 
 44 
 0.6947 
 0.9657 
 1.0355 
 0.7193 
 46 
 45 
 0.7071 
 1.0000 
 1.0000 
 0.7071 
 45 
   
 Cos 
 Cot 
 Tan 
 Sin 
 Angle 
Table A3.1  (continued)

 
 
A PPEN DI X 3  Special Tables 
715
 Table A3.2   Cumulative Probabilities of the Standard Normal Distribution 
 Entry is area  A under the standard normal curve from  to  z ( A ). 
z(A)
A
 z 
 0.00 
 0.01 
 0.02 
 0.03 
 0.04 
 0.05 
 0.06 
 0.07 
 0.08 
 0.09 
 0.0 
 0.5000 
 0.5040 
 0.5080 
 0.5120 
 0.5160 
 0.5199 
 0.5239 
 0.5279 
 0.5319 
 0.5359 
 0.1 
 0.5398 
 0.5438 
 0.5478 
 0.5517 
 0.5557 
 0.5596 
 0.5636 
 0.5675 
 0.5714 
 0.5753 
 0.2 
 0.5793 
 0.5832 
 0.5871 
 0.5910 
 0.5948 
 0.5987 
 0.6026 
 0.6064 
 0.6103 
 0.6141 
 0.3 
 0.6179 
 0.6217 
 0.6255 
 0.6293 
 0.6331 
 0.6368 
 0.6406 
 0.6443 
 0.6480 
 0.6517 
 0.4 
 0.6554 
 0.6591 
 0.6628 
 0.6664 
 0.6700 
 0.6736 
 0.6772 
 0.6808 
 0.6844 
 0.6879 
 0.5 
 0.6915 
 0.6950 
 0.6985 
 0.7019 
 0.7054 
 0.7088 
 0.7123 
 0.7157 
 0.7190 
 0.7224 
 0.6 
 0.7257 
 0.7291 
 0.7324 
 0.7357 
 0.7389 
 0.7422 
 0.7454 
 0.7486 
 0.7517 
 0.7549 
 0.7 
 0.7580 
 0.7611 
 0.7642 
 0.7673 
 0.7704 
 0.7734 
 0.7764 
 0.7794 
 0.7823 
 0.7852 
 0.8 
 0.7881 
 0.7910 
 0.7939 
 0.7967 
 0.7995 
 0.8023 
 0.8051 
 0.8078 
 0.8106 
 0.8133 
 0.9 
 0.8159 
 0.8186 
 0.8212 
 0.8238 
 0.8264 
 0.8289 
 0.8315 
 0.8340 
 0.8365 
 0.8389 
 1.0 
 0.8413 
 0.8438 
 0.8461 
 0.8485 
 0.8508 
 0.8531 
 0.8554 
 0.8577 
 0.8599 
 0.8621 
 1.1 
 0.8643 
 0.8665 
 0.8686 
 0.8708 
 0.8729 
 0.8749 
 0.8770 
 0.8790 
 0.8810 
 0.8830 
 1.2 
 0.8849 
 0.8869 
 0.8888 
 0.8907 
 0.8925 
 0.8944 
 0.8962 
 0.8980 
 0.8997 
 0.9015 
 1.3 
 0.9032 
 0.9049 
 0.9066 
 0.9082 
 0.9099 
 0.9115 
 0.9131 
 0.9147 
 0.9162 
 0.9177 
 1.4 
 0.9192 
 0.9207 
 0.9222 
 0.9236 
 0.9251 
 0.9265 
 0.9279 
 0.9292 
 0.9306 
 0.9319 
 1.5 
 0.9332 
 0.9345 
 0.9357 
 0.9370 
 0.9382 
 0.9394 
 0.9406 
 0.9418 
 0.9429 
 0.9441 
 1.6 
 0.9452 
 0.9463 
 0.9474 
 0.9484 
 0.9495 
 0.9505 
 0.9515 
 0.9525 
 0.9535 
 0.9545 
 1.7 
 0.9554 
 0.9564 
 0.9573 
 0.9582 
 0.9591 
 0.9599 
 0.9608 
 0.9616 
 0.9625 
 0.9633 
 1.8 
 0.9641 
 0.9649 
 0.9656 
 0.9664 
 0.9671 
 0.9678 
 0.9686 
 0.9693 
 0.9699 
 0.9706 
 1.9 
 0.9713 
 0.9719 
 0.9726 
 0.9732 
 0.9738 
 0.9744 
 0.9750 
 0.9756 
 0.9761 
 0.9767 
 2.0 
 0.9772 
 0.9778 
 0.9783 
 0.9788 
 0.9793 
 0.9798 
 0.9803 
 0.9808 
 0.9812 
 0.9817 
 2.1 
 0.9821 
 0.9826 
 0.9830 
 0.9834 
 0.9838 
 0.9842 
 0.9846 
 0.9850 
 0.9854 
 0.9857 
 2.2 
 0.9861 
 0.9864 
 0.9868 
 0.9871 
 0.9875 
 0.9878 
 0.9881 
 0.9884 
 0.9887 
 0.9890 
 2.3 
 0.9893 
 0.9896 
 0.9898 
 0.9901 
 0.9904 
 0.9906 
 0.9909 
 0.9911 
 0.9913 
 0.9916 
 2.4 
 0.9918 
 0.9920 
 0.9922 
 0.9925 
 0.9927 
 0.9929 
 0.9931 
 0.9932 
 0.9934 
 0.9936 
 2.5 
 0.9938 
 0.9940 
 0.9941 
 0.9943 
 0.9945 
 0.9946 
 0.9948 
 0.9949 
 0.9951 
 0.9952 
 2.6 
 0.9953 
 0.9955 
 0.9956 
 0.9957 
 0.9959 
 0.9960 
 0.9961 
 0.9962 
 0.9963 
 0.9964 
 2.7 
 0.9965 
 0.9966 
 0.9967 
 0.9968 
 0.9969 
 0.9970 
 0.9971 
 0.9972 
 0.9973 
 0.9974 
 2.8 
 0.9974 
 0.9975 
 0.9976 
 0.9977 
 0.9977 
 0.9978 
 0.9979 
 0.9979 
 0.9980 
 0.9981 
 2.9 
 0.9981 
 0.9982 
 0.9982 
 0.9983 
 0.9984 
 0.9984 
 0.9985 
 0.9985 
 0.9986 
 0.9986 
 3.0 
 0.9987 
 0.9987 
 0.9987 
 0.9988 
 0.9988 
 0.9989 
 0.9989 
 0.9989 
 0.9990 
 0.9990 
 3.1 
 0.9990 
 0.9991 
 0.9991 
 0.9991 
 0.9992 
 0.9992 
 0.9992 
 0.9992 
 0.9993 
 0.9993 
 3.2 
 0.9993 
 0.9993 
 0.9994 
 0.9994 
 0.9994 
 0.9994 
 0.9994 
 0.9995 
 0.9995 
 0.9995 
 3.3 
 0.9995 
 0.9995 
 0.9995 
 0.9996 
 0.9996 
 0.9996 
 0.9996 
 0.9996 
 0.9996 
 0.9997 
 3.4 
 0.9997 
 0.9997 
 0.9997 
 0.9997 
 0.9997 
 0.9997 
 0.9997 
 0.9997 
 0.9997 
 0.9998 
 Selected Percentiles 
 Cumulative probability  A : 
 0.90 
 0.95 
 0.975 
 0.98 
 0.99 
 0.995 
 0.999 
 z ( A ): 
 1.282 
 1.645 
 1.960 
 2.054 
 2.326 
 2.576 
 3.090 
 Source: J. Neter, W. Wasserman, and M. H. Kutner,  Applied Linear Statistical Models. 2d ed. Homewood, IL: Richard D. 
Irwin, 1985. Reproduced with permission of the McGraw-Hill Companies. 

716 
A P P E N D I X  3
 Table A3.3   Percentage Points of the  t Distribution 
 Probability  P 
 n 
 0.9 
 0.8 
 0.7 
 0.6 
 0.5 
 0.4 
 0.3 
 0.2 
 0.1 
 0.05 
 0.02 
 0.01 
 0.001 
 1  0.158  0.325  0.510  0.727  1.000  1.376  1.963  3.078  6.314  12.706  31.821 
 63.657  636.619 
 2  0.142  0.289  0.445  0.617  0.816  1.061  1.386  1.886  2.920 
 4.303 
 6.965 
 9.925 
 31.598 
 3  0.137  0.277  0.424  0.584  0.765  0.978  1.250  1.638  2.353 
 3.182 
 4.541 
 5.841 
 12.941 
 4  0.134  0.271  0.414  0.569  0.741  0.941  1.190  1.533  2.132 
 2.776 
 3.747 
 4.604 
 8.610 
 5  0.132  0.267  0.408  0.559  0.727  0.920  1.156  1.476  2.015 
 2.571 
 3.365 
 4.032 
 6.859 
 6  0.131  0.265  0.404  0.553  0.718  0.906  1.134  1.440  1.943 
 2.447 
 3.143 
 3.707 
 5.959 
 7  0.130  0.263  0.402  0.549  0.711  0.896  1.119  1.415  1.895 
 2.365 
 2.998 
 3.499 
 5.405 
 8  0.130  0.262  0.399  0.546  0.706  0.889  1.108  1.397  1.860 
 2.306 
 2.896 
 3.355 
 5.041 
 9  0.129  0.261  0.398  0.543  0.703  0.883  1.100  1.383  1.833 
 2.262 
 2.821 
 3.250 
 4.781 
 10  0.129  0.260  0.397  0.542  0.700  0.879  1.093  1.372  1.812 
 2.228 
 2.764 
 3.169 
 4.587 
 11  0.129  0.260  0.396  0.540  0.697  0.876  1.088  1.363  1.796 
 2.201 
 2.718 
 3.106 
 4.437 
 12  0.128  0.259  0.395  0.539  0.695  0.873  1.083  1.356  1.782 
 2.179 
 2.681 
 3.055 
 4.318 
 13  0.128  0.259  0.394  0.538  0.694  0.870  1.079  1.350  1.771 
 2.160 
 2.650 
 3.012 
 4.221 
 14  0.128  0.258  0.393  0.537  0.692  0.868  1.076  1.345  1.761 
 2.145 
 2.624 
 2.977 
 4.140 
 15  0.128  0.258  0.393  0.536  0.691  0.866  1.074  1.341  1.753 
 2.131 
 2.602 
 2.947 
 4.073 
 16  0.128  0.258  0.392  0.535  0.690  0.865  1.071  1.337  1.746 
 2.120 
 2.583 
 2.921 
 4.015 
 17  0.128  0.257  0.392  0.534  0.689  0.863  1.069  1.333  1.740 
 2.110 
 2.567 
 2.898 
 3.965 
 18  0.127  0.257  0.392  0.534  0.688  0.862  1.067  1.330  1.734 
 2.101 
 2.552 
 2.878 
 3.922 
 19  0.127  0.257  0.391  0.533  0.688  0.861  1.066  1.328  1.729 
 2.093 
 2.539 
 2.861 
 3.883 
 20  0.127  0.257  0.391  0.533  0.687  0.860  1.064  1.325  1.725 
 2.086 
 2.528 
 2.845 
 3.850 
 21  0.127  0.257  0.391  0.532  0.686  0.859  1.063  1.323  1.721 
 2.080 
 2.518 
 2.831 
 3.819 
 22  0.127  0.256  0.390  0.532  0.686  0.858  1.061  1.321  1.717 
 2.074 
 2.508 
 2.819 
 3.792 
 23  0.127  0.256  0.390  0.532  0.685  0.858  1.060  1.319  1.714 
 2.069 
 2.500 
 2.807 
 3.767 
 24  0.127  0.256  0.390  0.531  0.685  0.857  1.059  1.318  1.711 
 2.064 
 2.492 
 2.797 
 3.745 
 25  0.127  0.256  0.390  0.531  0.684  0.856  1.058  1.316  1.708 
 2.060 
 2.485 
 2.787 
 3.725 
 26  0.127  0.256  0.390  0.531  0.684  0.856  1.058  1.315  1.706 
 2.056 
 2.479 
 2.779 
 3.707 
 27  0.127  0.256  0.389  0.531  0.684  0.855  1.057  1.314  1.703 
 2.052 
 2.473 
 2.771 
 3.690 
 28  0.127  0.256  0.389  0.530  0.683  0.855  1.056  1.313  1.701 
 2.048 
 2.467 
 2.763 
 3.674 
 29  0.127  0.256  0.389  0.530  0.683  0.854  1.055  1.311  1.699 
 2.045 
 2.462 
 2.756 
 3.659 
 30  0.127  0.256  0.389  0.530  0.683  0.854  1.055  1.310  1.697 
 2.042 
 2.457 
 2.750 
 3.646 
 40  0.126  0.255  0.388  0.529  0.681  0.851  1.050  1.303  1.684 
 2.021 
 2.423 
 2.704 
 3.551 
 60  0.126  0.254  0.387  0.527  0.679  0.848  1.046  1.296  1.671 
 2.000 
 2.390 
 2.660 
 3.460 
 120  0.126  0.254  0.386  0.526  0.677  0.845  1.041  1.289  1.658 
 1.980 
 2.358 
 2.617 
 3.373 
 ∞ 
 0.126  0.253  0.385  0.524  0.674  0.842  1.036  1.282  1.645 
 1.960 
 2.326 
 2.576 
 3.291 
 Source: Reprinted from Table III of R. A. Fisher and F. Yates,  Statistical Tables for Biological, Agricultural, and Medical 
Research (Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd, Ltd.), by permission of the authors and publishers. 
Note: Probabilities refer to the sum of the two tail areas; for a single tail, divide the probability by 2. 

 
 
A PPEN DI X 3  Special Tables 
717
 Table A3.4   Percentiles of the  2 distribution 
 Entry is   2 ( A ; ) where  P {  2 (  ) ≤   2 ( A ;   )}   A 
X2 (A;v)
A
 A 
 
 0.005 
 0.010 
 0.025 
 0.050 
 0.100 
 0.900 
 0.950 
 0.975 
 0.990 
 0.995 
 1 
 0.0 4 393 
 0.0 3 157 
 0.0 3 982 
 0.0 2 393 
 0.0158 
 2.71 
 3.84 
 5.02 
 6.63 
 7.88 
 2 
 0.0100 
 0.0201 
 0.0506 
 0.103 
 0.211 
 4.61 
 5.99 
 7.38 
 9.21 
 10.60 
 3 
 0.072 
 0.115 
 0.216 
 0.352 
 0.584 
 6.25 
 7.81 
 9.35 
 11.34 
 12.84 
 4 
 0.207 
 0.297 
 0.484 
 0.711 
 1.064 
 7.78 
 9.49 
 11.14 
 13.28 
 14.86 
 5 
 0.412 
 0.554 
 0.831 
 1.145 
 1.61 
 9.24 
 11.07 
 12.83 
 15.09 
 16.75 
 6 
 0.676 
 0.872 
 1.24 
 1.64 
 2.20 
 10.64 
 12.59 
 14.45 
 16.81 
 18.55 
 7 
 0.989 
 1.24 
 1.69 
 2.17 
 2.83 
 12.02 
 14.07 
 16.01 
 18.48 
 20.28 
 8 
 1.34 
 1.65 
 2.18 
 2.73 
 3.49 
 13.36 
 15.51 
 17.53 
 20.09 
 21.96 
 9 
 1.73 
 2.09 
 2.70 
 3.33 
 4.17 
 14.68 
 16.92 
 19.02 
 21.67 
 23.59 
 10 
 2.16 
 2.56 
 3.25 
 3.94 
 4.87 
 15.99 
 18.31 
 20.48 
 23.21 
 25.19 
 11 
 2.60 
 3.05 
 3.82 
 4.57 
 5.58 
 17.28 
 19.68 
 21.92 
 24.73 
 26.76 
 12 
 3.07 
 3.57 
 4.40 
 5.23 
 6.30 
 18.55 
 21.03 
 23.34 
 26.22 
 28.30 
 13 
 3.57 
 4.11 
 5.01 
 5.89 
 7.04 
 19.81 
 22.36 
 24.74 
 27.69 
 29.82 
 14 
 4.07 
 4.66 
 5.63 
 6.57 
 7.79 
 21.06 
 26.68 
 26.12 
 29.14 
 31.32 
 15 
 4.60 
 5.23 
 6.26 
 7.26 
 8.55 
 22.31 
 25.00 
 27.49 
 30.58 
 32.80 
 16 
 5.14 
 5.81 
 6.91 
 7.96 
 9.31 
 23.54 
 26.30 
 28.85 
 32.00 
 34.27 
 17 
 5.70 
 6.41 
 7.56 
 8.67 
 10.09 
 24.77 
 27.59 
 30.19 
 33.41 
 35.72 
 18 
 6.26 
 7.01 
 8.23 
 9.39 
 10.86 
 25.99 
 28.87 
 31.53 
 34.81 
 37.16 
 19 
 6.84 
 7.63 
 8.91 
 10.12 
 11.65 
 27.20 
 30.14 
 32.85 
 36.19 
 38.58 
 20 
 7.43 
 8.26 
 9.59 
 10.85 
 12.44 
 28.41 
 31.41 
 34.17 
 37.57 
 40.00 
 21 
 8.03 
 8.90 
 10.28 
 11.59 
 13.24 
 29.62 
 32.67 
 35.48 
 38.93 
 41.40 
 22 
 8.64 
 9.54 
 10.98 
 12.34 
 14.04 
 30.81 
 33.92 
 36.78 
 40.29 
 42.80 
 23 
 9.26 
 10.20 
 11.69 
 13.09 
 14.85 
 32.01 
 35.17 
 38.08 
 41.64 
 44.18 
 24 
 9.89 
 10.86 
 12.40 
 13.85 
 15.66 
 33.20 
 36.42 
 39.36 
 42.98 
 45.56 
 25 
 10.52 
 11.52 
 13.12 
 14.61 
 16.47 
 34.38 
 37.65 
 40.65 
 44.31 
 46.93 
 26 
 11.16 
 12.20 
 13.84 
 15.38 
 17.29 
 35.56 
 38.89 
 41.92 
 45.64 
 48.29 
 27 
 11.81 
 12.88 
 14.57 
 16.15 
 18.11 
 36.74 
 40.11 
 43.19 
 46.96 
 49.64 
 28 
 12.46 
 13.56 
 15.31 
 16.93 
 18.94 
 37.94 
 41.34 
 44.46 
 48.28 
 50.99 
 29 
 13.12 
 14.26 
 16.05 
 17.71 
 19.77 
 39.09 
 42.56 
 45.72 
 49.59 
 52.34 
 30 
 13.79 
 14.95 
 16.79 
 18.49 
 20.60 
 40.26 
 43.77 
 46.98 
 50.89 
 53.67 
 40 
 20.71 
 22.16 
 24.43 
 26.51 
 29.05 
 51.81 
 55.76 
 59.34 
 63.69 
 66.77 
 50 
 27.99 
 29.71 
 32.36 
 34.76 
 37.69 
 63.17 
 67.50 
 71.42 
 76.15 
 79.49 
 60 
 35.53 
 37.48 
 40.48 
 43.19 
 46.46 
 74.40 
 79.08 
 83.30 
 88.38 
 91.95 
 70 
 43.28 
 45.44 
 48.76 
 51.74 
 55.33 
 85.53 
 90.53 
 95.02 
 100.4 
 104.2 
 80 
 51.17 
 53.54 
 57.15 
 60.39 
 64.28 
 96.58 
 101.9 
 106.6 
 112.3 
 116.3 
 90 
 59.20 
 61.75 
 65.65 
 69.13 
 73.29 
 107.6 
 113.1 
 118.1 
 124.1 
 128.3 
 100 
 67.33 
 70.06 
 74.22 
 77.93 
 82.36 
 118.5 
 124.3 
 129.6 
 135.8 
 140.2 
 Source : Reprinted, with permission, from C. M. Thompson, “Table of Percentage Points of the Chi-Square Distribution,”  
Biometrika 32 (1941), pp. 188–89. 

718 
A P P E N D I X  3
 Table A3.5   Random Numbers III 
 22  17  68  65  84 
 68  95  23  92  35 
 87  02  22  57  51 
 61  09  43  95  06 
 58   24  82  03  47 
 19  36  27  59  46 
 13  79  93  37  55 
 39  77  32  77  09 
 85  52  05  30  62 
 47   83  51  62  74 
 16  77  23  02  77 
 09  61  87  25  21 
 28  06  24  25  93 
 16  71  13  59  78 
 23   05  47  47  25 
 78  43  76  71  61 
 20  44  90  32  64 
 97  67  63  99  61 
 46  38  03  93  22 
 69   81  21  99  21 
 03  28  28  26  08 
 73  37  32  04  05 
 69  30  16  09  05 
 88  69  58  28  99 
 35   07  44  75  47 
 93  22  53  64  39 
 07  10  63  76  35 
 87  03  04  79  88 
 08  13  13  85  51 
 55   34  57  72  69 
 78  76  58  54  74 
 92  38  70  96  92 
 52  06  79  79  45 
 82  63  18  27  44 
 69   66  92  19  09 
 23  68  35  26  00 
 99  53  93  61  28 
 52  70  05  48  34 
 56  65  05  61  86 
 90   92  10  70  80 
 15  39  25  70  99 
 93  86  52  77  65 
 15  33  59  05  28 
 22  87  26  07  47 
 86   96  98  29  06 
 58  71  96  30  24 
 18  46  23  34  27 
 85  13  99  24  44 
 49  18  09  79  49 
 74   16  32  23  02 
 57  35  27  33  72 
 24  53  63  94  09 
 41  10  76  47  91 
 44  04  95  49  66 
 39   60  04  59  81 
 48  50  86  54  48 
 22  06  34  72  52 
 82  21  15  65  20 
 33  29  94  71  11 
 15   91  29  12  03 
 61  96  48  95  03 
 07  16  39  33  66 
 98  56  10  56  79 
 77  21  30  27  12 
 90   49  22  23  62 
 36  93  89  41  26 
 29  70  83  63  51 
 99  74  20  52  36 
 87  09  41  15  09 
 98   60  16  03  03 
 18  87  00  42  31 
 57  90  12  02  07 
 23  47  37  17  31 
 54  08  01  88  63 
 39   41  88  92  10 
 88  56  53  27  59 
 33  35  72  67  47 
 77  34  55  45  70 
 08  18  27  38  90 
 16   95  86  70  75 
 09  72  95  84  29 
 49  41  31  06  70 
 42  38  06  45  18 
 64  84  73  31  65 
 52   53  37  97  15 
 12  96  88  17  31 
 65  19  69  02  83 
 60  75  86  90  68 
 24  64  19  35  51 
 56   61  87  39  12 
 85  94  57  24  16 
 92  09  84  38  76 
 22  00  27  69  85 
 29  81  94  78  70 
 21   94  47  90  12 
 38  64  43  59  98 
 98  77  87  68  07 
 91  51  67  62  44 
 40  98  05  93  78 
 23   32  65  41  18 
 53  44  09  42  72 
 00  41  86  79  79 
 68  47  22  00  20 
 35  55  31  51  51 
 00   83  63  22  55 
 40  76  66  26  84 
 57  99  99  90  37 
 36  63  32  08  58 
 37  40  13  68  97 
 87   64  81  07  83 
 02  17  79  18  05 
 12  59  52  57  02 
 22  07  90  47  03 
 28  14  11  30  79 
 20   69  22  40  98 
 95  17  82  06  53 
 31  51  10  96  46 
 92  06  88  07  77 
 56  11  50  81  69 
 40   23  72  51  39 
 35  76  22  42  92 
 96  11  83  44  80 
 34  68  35  48  77 
 33  42  40  90  60 
 73   96  53  97  86 
 26  29  13  56  41 
 85  47  04  66  08 
 34  72  57  59  13 
 82  43  80  46  15 
 38   26  61  70  04 
 77  80  20  75  82 
 72  82  32  99  90 
 63  95  73  76  63 
 89  73  44  99  05 
 48   67  26  43  18 
 46  40  66  44  52 
 91  36  74  43  53 
 30  82  13  54  00 
 78  45  63  98  35 
 55   03  36  67  68 
 37  56  08  18  09 
 77  53  84  46  47 
 31  91  18  95  58 
 24  16  74  11  53 
 44   10  13  85  57 
 61  65  61  68  66 
 37  27  47  39  19 
 84  83  70  07  48 
 53  21  40  06  71 
 95   06  79  88  54 
 93  43  69  64  07 
 34  18  04  52  35 
 56  27  09  24  86 
 61  85  53  83  45 
 19   90  70  99  00 
 21  96  60  12  99 
 11  20  99  45  18 
 48  13  93  55  34 
 18  37  79  49  90 
 65   97  38  20  46 
 95  20  47  97  97 
 27  37  83  28  71 
 00  06  41  41  74 
 45  89  09  39  84 
 51   67  11  52  49 
 97  86  21  78  73 
 10  65  81  92  59 
 58  76  17  14  97 
 04  76  62  16  17 
 17   95  70  45  80 
 69  92  06  34  13 
 59  71  74  17  32 
 27  55  10  24  19 
 23  71  82  13  74 
 63   52  52  01  41 
 04  31  17  21  56 
 33  73  99  19  87 
 26  72  39  27  67 
 53  77  57  68  93 
 60   61  97  22  61 
 61  06  98  03  91 
 87  14  77  43  96 
 43  00  65  98  50 
 45  60  33  01  07 
 98   99  46  50  47 
 85  93  85  86  88 
 72  87  08  62  40 
 16  06  10  89  20 
 23  21  34  74  97 
 76   38  03  29  63 
 21  74  32  47  45 
 73  96  07  94  52 
 09  65  90  77  47 
 25  76  16  19  33 
 53   05  70  53  30 
 15  69  53  82  80 
 79  96  23  53  10 
 65  39  07  16  29 
 45  33  02  43  70 
 02   87  40  41  45 
 02  89  08  04  49 
 20  21  14  68  86 
 87  63  93  95  17 
 11  29  01  95  80 
 35   14  97  35  33 
 87  18  15  89  79 
 85  43  01  72  73 
 08  61  74  51  69 
 89  74  39  82  15 
 94   51  33  41  67 
 98  83  71  94  22 
 59  97  50  99  52 
 08  52  85  08  40 
 87  80  61  65  31 
 91   51  80  32  44 
 10  08  58  21  66 
 72  68  49  29  31 
 89  85  84  46  06 
 59  73  19  85  23 
 65   09  29  75  63 
 47  90  56  10  08 
 88  02  84  27  83 
 42  29  72  23  19 
 66  56  45  65  79 
 20   71  53  20  25 
 22  85  61  68  90 
 49  64  92  85  44 
 16  40  12  89  88 
 50  14  49  81  06 
 01   82  77  45  12 
 67  80  43  79  33 
 12  83  11  41  16 
 25  58  19  68  70 
 77  02  54  00  52 
 53   43  37  15  26 
 27  62  50  96  72 
 79  44  61  40  15 
 14  53  40  65  39 
 27  31  58  50  28 
 11   39  03  34  25 
 33  78  80  87  15 
 38  30  06  38  21 
 14  47  47  07  26 
 54  96  87  53  32 
 40   36  40  96  76 
 13  13  92  66  99 
 47  24  49  57  74 
 32  25  43  62  17 
 10  97  11  69  84 
 99   63  22  32  98 
 10  27  53  96  23 
 71  50  54  36  23 
 54  31  04  82  98 
 04  14  12  15  09 
 26   78  25  47  47 
 28  41  50  61  88 
 64  85  27  20  18 
 83  36  36  05  56 
 39  71  65  09  62 
 94   76  62  11  89 
 Source: Reprinted with permission from Random Numbers IV of Table XXXIII of R. A. Fisher and F. Yates,  Statistical 
Tables for Biological, Agricultural, and Medical Research (Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd, Ltd.). 

 
 
A PPEN DI X 3  Special Tables 
719
 Table A3.6   Useful Information 
 To find the circumference of a circle, multiply the diameter by 3.1416. 
 To find the diameter of a circle, multiply the circumference by 0.31831. 
 To find the area of a circle, multiply the square of the diameter by 0.7854. 
 The radius of a circle  6.283185  the circumference. 
 The square of the circumference of a circle  0.07958  the area. 
 One-half the circumference of a circle  one-half its diameter  the area. 
 The circumference of a circle  0.159155  the radius. 
 The square root of the area of a circle  0.56419  the radius. 
 The square root of the area of a circle  1.12838  the diameter. 
 To find the diameter of a circle equal in area to a given square, multiply a side of the 
square by 1.12838. 
 To find the side of a square equal in area to a given circle, multiply the diameter by 
0.8862. 
 To find the side of a square inscribed in a circle, multiply the diameter by 0.7071. 
 To find the side of a hexagon inscribed in a circle, multiply the diameter of the circle 
by 0.500. 
 To find the diameter of a circle inscribed in a hexagon, multiply a side of the hexagon 
by 1.7321. 
 To find the side of an equilateral triangle inscribed in a circle, multiply the diameter of 
the circle by 0.866. 
 To find the diameter of a circle inscribed in an equilateral triangle, multiply a side of 
the triangle by 0.57735. 
 To find the area of the surface of a ball (sphere), multiply the square of the diameter 
by 3.1416. 
 To find the volume of a ball (sphere), multiply the cube of the diameter by 0.5236. 
 Doubling the diameter of a pipe increases its capacity four times. 
 To find the pressure in pounds per square inch at the base of a column of water, multi-
ply the height of the column in feet by 0.433. 
 A gallon of water (U.S. standard) weighs 8.336 lb and contains 231 in 3 . A cubic foot 
of water contains 7 1 /2 gal and 1,728 in 3 and weighs 62.425 lb at a temperature of 
about 39°F. 
 These weights change slightly above and below this temperature. 

720 
A P P E N D I X  3
 Table A3.7   15 Percent Compound Interest Factors 
 Single Payment 
 Uniform Series 
 n 
 Compound 
Amount 
Factor 
caf  
 Present 
Worth 
Factor 
pwf  
 Sinking 
Fund Factor 
sff 
 Capital 
Recovery 
Factor 
crf 
 Compound 
Amount 
Factor 
caf 
 Present 
 Worth 
Factor 
pwf 
   
 Given  P 
 To find  S
 (1 i ) n 
 Given  S  
To find  P 
(
)
+++
i
n
 
 Given  S  
To find  R 
−−−1
(
)
+++
i
n
 
 Given  P  
To find  R 
−−−1
(
)
(
)
+++
i( +++
n
n
 
 Given  R  
To find  S 
−−−1
(
)
+++
n
i
 
 Given  R  
To find  P 
−−−1
(
)
+++
(
)
n
i( +++
n
 
 1 
 1.150 
 0.8696 
 1.00000 
 1.15000 
 1.000 
 0.870 
 2 
 1.322 
 0.7561 
 0.46512 
 0.61512 
 2.150 
 1.626 
 3 
 1.521 
 0.6575 
 0.28798 
 0.43798 
 3.472 
 2.283 
 4 
 1.749 
 0.5718 
 0.20026 
 0.35027 
 4.993 
 2.855 
 5 
 2.011 
 0.4972 
 0.14832 
 0.29832 
 6.742 
 3.352 
 6 
 2.313 
 0.4323 
 0.11424 
 0.26424 
 8.754 
 3.784 
 7 
 2.660 
 0.3759 
 0.09036 
 0.24036 
 11.067 
 4.160 
 8 
 3.059 
 0.3269 
 0.07285 
 0.22285 
 13.727 
 4.487 
 9 
 3.518 
 0.2843 
 0.05957 
 0.20957 
 16.786 
 4.772 
 10 
 4.046 
 0.2472 
 0.04925 
 0.19925 
 20.304 
 5.019 
 11 
 4.652 
 0.2149 
 0.04107 
 0.19107 
 24.349 
 5.234 
 12 
 5.350 
 0.1869 
 0.03448 
 0.18448 
 29.002 
 5.421 
 13 
 6.153 
 0.1625 
 0.02911 
 0.17911 
 34.352 
 5.583 
 14 
 7.076 
 0.1413 
 0.02469 
 0.17469 
 40.505 
 5.724 
 15 
 8.137 
 0.1229 
 0.02102 
 0.17102 
 47.580 
 5.847 
 16 
 9.358 
 0.1069 
 0.01795 
 0.16795 
 55.717 
 5.954 
 17 
 10.761 
 0.0929 
 0.01537 
 0.16537 
 65.075 
 6.047 
 18 
 12.375 
 0.0808 
 0.01319 
 0.16319 
 75.836 
 6.128 
 19 
 14.232 
 0.0703 
 0.01134 
 0.16134 
 88.212 
 6.198 
 20 
 16.367 
 0.0611 
 0.00976 
 0.15976 
 102.443 
 6.259 
 21 
 18.821 
 0.0531 
 0.00842 
 0.15842 
 118.810 
 6.312 
 22 
 21.645 
 0.0462 
 0.00727 
 0.15727 
 137.631 
 6.359 
 23 
 24.891 
 0.0402 
 0.00628 
 0.15628 
 159.276 
 6.399 
 24 
 28.625 
 0.0349 
 0.00543 
 0.15543 
 184.167 
 6.434 
 25 
 32.919 
 0.0304 
 0.00470 
 0.15470 
 212.793 
 6.464 
 26 
 37.857 
 0.0264 
 0.00407 
 0.15407 
 245.711 
 6.491 
 27 
 43.535 
 0.0230 
 0.00353 
 0.15353 
 283.568 
 6.514 
 28 
 50.065 
 0.0200 
 0.00306 
 0.15306 
 327.103 
 6.534 
 29 
 57.575 
 0.0174 
 0.00265 
 0.15265 
 377.169 
 6.551 
 30 
 66.212 
 0.0151 
 0.00230 
 0.15230 
 434.744 
 6.566 
 31 
 76.143 
 0.0131 
 0.00200 
 0.15200 
 500.956 
 6.579 
 32 
 87.565 
 0.0114 
 0.00173 
 0.15173 
 577.099 
 6.591 
 33 
 100.700 
 0.0099 
 0.00150 
 0.15150 
 664.664 
 6.600 
 34 
 115.805 
 0.0086 
 0.00131 
 0.15131 
 765.364 
 6.609 
 35 
 133.175 
 0.0075 
 0.00113 
 0.15113 
 881.168 
 6.617 
 40 
 267.862 
 0.0037 
 0.00056 
 0.15056 
 1,779.1 
 6.642 
 45 
 538.767 
 0.0019 
 0.00028 
 0.15028 
 3,585.1 
 6.654 
 50 
 1,083.652 
 0.0009 
 0.00014 
 0.15014 
 7,217.7 
 6.661 
 ∞ 
   
   
   
 0.15000 
   
 6.667 

 
 
A PPEN DI X 3  Special Tables 
721
 Table A3.8   Tables of Machine Interference Time  i and Machine Running Time  m for Selected Servicing 
Constants ( k   l / m ) 
(Values expressed as percentages of total time, where  m 	  l  	  i  100 percent) 
   
 (a) 
 (b) 
 n 
 i 
 m 
 i 
 m 
 k   0.01 
 1 
 0.0 
 99.0 
 0.0 
 99.0 
 10 
 0.1 
 99.0 
 0.1 
 98.9 
 20 
 0.1 
 98.9 
 0.2 
 98.8 
 30 
 0.2 
 98.8 
 0.4 
 98.6 
 40 
   
   
 0.6 
 98.4 
 50 
   
   
 0.9 
 98.1 
 60 
   
   
 1.3 
 97.8 
 70 
   
   
 1.8 
 97.2 
 80 
   
   
 2.7 
 96.3 
 85 
   
   
 3.4 
 95.7 
 90 
   
   
 4.2 
 94.9 
 95 
   
   
 5.2 
 93.8 
 100 
   
   
 6.7 
 92.4 
 105 
   
   
 8.5 
 90.6 
 110 
   
   
 10.7 
 88.4 
 115 
   
   
 13.4 
 85.8 
 120 
   
   
 16.3 
 82.9 
 121 
   
   
 16.9 
 82.3 
 122 
   
   
 17.5 
 81.7 
 123 
   
   
 18.1 
 81.1 
 124 
   
   
 18.8 
 80.4 
 125 
   
   
 19.4 
 79.8 
 126 
   
   
 20.0 
 79.2 
 127 
   
   
 20.6 
 78.6 
 128 
   
   
 21.2 
 78.1 
 129 
   
   
 21.8 
 77.5 
 130 
   
   
 22.4 
 76.9 
 131 
   
   
 22.9 
 76.3 
 132 
   
   
 23.5 
 75.7 
 133 
   
   
 24.1 
 75.2 
 134 
   
   
 24.6 
 74.6 
 135 
   
   
 25.2 
 74.1 
 136 
   
   
 25.7 
 73.5 
 137 
   
   
 26.3 
 73 .0
 138 
   
   
 26.8 
 72.5 
 139 
   
   
 27.3 
 71.9 
 140 
   
   
 27.9 
 71.4 
 141 
   
   
 28.4 
 70.9 
 142 
   
   
 28.9 
 70.4 
 143 
   
   
 29.4 
 69.9 
 144 
   
   
 29.9 
 69.4 
 k   0.02 
 1 
 0.0 
 98 .0
 0.0 
 98.0 
 5 
 0.1 
 98.0 
 0.2 
 97.9 
   
 (a) 
 (b) 
 n 
 i 
 m 
 i 
 m 
 k   0.02 (cont.)
 10 
 0.2 
 97.8 
 0.4 
 97.6 
 15 
 0.4 
 97.7 
 0.7 
 97.4 
 20 
 0.6 
 97.5 
 1.1 
 97.0 
 25 
 0.8 
 97.2 
 1.6 
 96.5 
 30 
 1.2 
 96.9 
 2.2 
 95.9 
 35 
   
   
 3.1 
 95.0 
 40 
   
   
 4.3 
 93.8 
 45 
   
   
 6.1 
 92.0 
 50 
   
   
 8.7 
 89.5 
 51 
   
   
 9.3 
 88.9 
 52 
   
   
 10.0 
 88.3 
 53 
   
   
 10.7 
 87.6 
 54 
   
   
 11.5 
 86.8 
 55 
   
   
 12.3 
 86.0 
 56 
   
   
 13.1 
 85.2 
 57 
   
   
 14.0 
 84.3 
 58 
   
   
 14.9 
 83.4 
 59 
   
   
 15.9 
 82.5 
 60 
   
   
 16.8 
 81.5 
 61 
   
   
 17.9 
 80.5 
 62 
   
   
 18.9 
 79.5 
 63 
   
   
 19.9 
 78.5 
 64 
   
   
 21.0 
 77.5 
 65 
   
   
 22.0 
 76.4 
 66 
   
   
 23.1 
 75.4 
 67 
   
   
 24.2 
 74.4 
 68 
   
   
 25.2 
 73.3 
 69 
   
   
 26.2 
 72.3 
 70 
   
   
 27.2 
 71.3 
 71 
   
   
 28.2 
 70.4 
 72 
   
   
 29.2 
 69.4 
 k   0.03 
 1 
 0.0 
 97.1 
 0.0 
 97.1 
 5 
 0.2 
 96.9 
 0.4 
 96.7 
 10 
 0.5 
 96.6 
 1.0 
 96.2 
 15 
 1.0 
 96.2 
 1.8 
 95.4 
 20 
 1.6 
 95.5 
 3.0 
 94.2 
 25 
 2.8 
 94.4 
 4.7 
 92.5 
 26 
 3.1 
 94.1 
 5.2 
 92.1 
 27 
 3.4 
 93.7 
 5.7 
 91.6 
 28 
 3.8 
 93.4 
 6.2 
 91.1 
 29 
 4.3 
 92.9 
 6.8 
 90.5 
 30 
 4.8 
 92.4 
 7.4 
 89.9 
 31 
   
   
 8.1 
 89.2 
   
 (a) 
 (b) 
 n 
 i 
 m 
 i 
 m 
 k   0.03 (cont.)
 32 
   
   
 8.9 
 88.5 
 33 
   
   
 9.7 
 87.7 
 34 
   
   
 10.6 
 86.8 
 35 
   
   
 11.6 
 85.9 
 36 
   
   
 12.6 
 84.9 
 37 
   
   
 13.7 
 83.8 
 38 
   
   
 14.9 
 86.8 
 39 
   
   
 16.1 
 81.4 
 40 
   
   
 17.4 
 80.2 
 41 
   
   
 18.8 
 78.9 
 42 
   
   
 20.1 
 77.5 
 43 
   
   
 21.6 
 76.2 
 44 
   
   
 23.0 
 74.8 
 45 
   
   
 24.4 
 73.4 
 46 
   
   
 25.9 
 72.0 
 47 
   
   
 27.3 
 70.6 
 48 
   
   
 28.7 
 69.2 
 k   0.04 
 1 
 0.0 
 96.2 
 0 .0
 96.2 
 2 
 0.1 
 96.1 
 0.2 
 96.0 
 3 
 0.2 
 96.0 
 0.3 
 95.9 
 4 
 0.2 
 95.9 
 0.5 
 95.7 
 5 
 0.3 
 95.8 
 0.7 
 95.5 
 6 
 0.5 
 95.7 
 0.9 
 95.3 
 7 
 0.6 
 95.6 
 1.1 
 95.1 
 8 
 0.7 
 95.5 
 1.3 
 94.9 
 9 
 0.8 
 95.4 
 1.5 
 94.7 
 10 
 1 .0
 95.2 
 1.8 
 94.4 
 11 
 1.1 
 95.1 
 2.1 
 94.1 
 12 
 1.3 
 94.9 
 2.4 
 93.8 
 13 
 1.5 
 94.7 
 2.8 
 93.5 
 14 
 1.8 
 94.5 
 3.2 
 93.1 
 15 
 2.0 
 94.2 
 3.6 
 92.7 
 16 
 2.3 
 94.0 
 4.0 
 92.3 
 17 
 2.6 
 93.6 
 4.5 
 91.8 
 18 
 3.0 
 93.3 
 5.1 
 91.3 
 19 
 3.4 
 92.9 
 5.7 
 90.7 
 20 
 3.9 
 92.4 
 6.4 
 90 .0
 21 
 4.5 
 91.8 
 7.1 
 89.3 
 22 
 5.2 
 91.2 
 8.0 
 88.5 
 23 
 6.0 
 90.4 
 8.9 
 87.6 
 24 
 6.8 
 89.6 
 9.9 
 86.7 
 25 
 7.9 
 88.6 
 11.0 
 85.6 
 26 
 9.0 
 87.5 
 12.2 
 84.5 

722 
A P P E N D I X  3
   
 (a) 
 (b) 
 n 
 i 
 m 
 i 
 m 
 k   0.04 (cont.)
 27 
 10.4 
 86.2 
 13.4 
 83.2 
 28 
 11.9 
 84.7 
 14.8 
 81.9 
 29 
 13.6 
 83.0 
 16.3 
 80.5 
 30 
 15.5 
 81.3 
 17.9 
 79 .0
 31 
   
   
 19.6 
 77.4 
 32 
   
   
 21.3 
 75.7 
 33 
   
   
 23 .0
 74 .0
 34 
   
   
 24.8 
 72.3 
 35 
   
   
 26.6 
 70.6 
 36 
   
   
 28.4 
 68.9 
 37 
   
   
 30.1 
 67.2 
 k   0.05 
 1 
 0 .0
 95.2 
 0 .0
 95.2 
 2 
 0.1 
 95.1 
 0.2 
 95 .0
 3 
 0.2 
 95.0 
 0.5 
 94.8 
 4 
 0.4 
 94.9 
 0.7 
 94.5 
 5 
 0.5 
 94.7 
 1.0 
 94.3 
 6 
 0.7 
 94.6 
 1.4 
 94 .0
 7 
 0.9 
 94.4 
 1.7 
 93.6 
 8 
 1.1 
 94.2 
 2.1 
 93.3 
 9 
 1.4 
 93.9 
 2.5 
 92.9 
 10 
 1.6 
 93.7 
 3 .0
 92.4 
 11 
 2.0 
 93.4 
 3.5 
 91.9 
 12 
 2.3 
 93.0 
 4.1 
 91.4 
 13 
 2.7 
 92.6 
 4.7 
 90.8 
 14 
 3.2 
 92.2 
 5.4 
 90.1 
 15 
 3.8 
 91.7 
 6.2 
 89.3 
 16 
 4.4 
 91.0 
 7.1 
 88.5 
 17 
 5.2 
 90.3 
 8.1 
 87.6 
 18 
 6.1 
 89.5 
 9.1 
 86.5 
 19 
 7.1 
 88.5 
 10.4 
 85.4 
 20 
 8.4 
 87.3 
 11.7 
 84.1 
 21 
 9.8 
 85.9 
 13.1 
 82.7 
 22 
 11.5 
 84.3 
 14.7 
 81.2 
 23 
 13.4 
 82.5 
 16.5 
 79.6 
 24 
 15.5 
 80.5 
 18.3 
 77.8 
 25 
 17.8 
 78.2 
 20.2 
 76.0 
 26 
 20.3 
 75.9 
 22.2 
 74.1 
 27 
 22.8 
 73.6 
 24.3 
 72.1 
 28 
 25.3 
 71.2 
 26.4 
 70.1 
 29 
 27.9 
 68.8 
 28.5 
 68.1 
 k   0.06 
 1 
 0.0 
 94.3 
 0 .0
 94.3 
 2 
 0.2 
 94.2 
 0.3 
 94 .0
 Table A3.8   (continued)
   
 (a) 
 (b) 
 n 
 i 
 m 
 i 
 m 
 k   0.06 (cont.)
 3 
 0.4 
 94 .0
 0.7 
 93.7 
 4 
 0.6 
 93.8 
 1.1 
 93.3 
 5 
 0.8 
 93.6 
 1.5 
 92.9 
 6 
 1.1 
 93.3 
 2.0 
 92.5 
 7 
 1.4 
 93.1 
 2.5 
 92.0 
 8 
 1.7 
 92.7 
 3.1 
 91.4 
 9 
 2.1 
 92.4 
 3.7 
 90.8 
 10 
 2.6 
 91.9 
 4.5 
 90.1 
 11 
 3.1 
 91.4 
 5.3 
 89.4 
 12 
 3.8 
 90.8 
 6.2 
 88.5 
 13 
 4.5 
 90.1 
 7.3 
 87.5 
 14 
 5.4 
 89.2 
 8.4 
 86.4 
 15 
 6.5 
 88.2 
 9.7 
 85.2 
 16 
 7.8 
 87.0 
 11.2 
 83.8 
 17 
 9.3 
 85.6 
 12.8 
 82.3 
 18 
 11.1 
 83.9 
 14.6 
 80.6 
 19 
 13.2 
 81.9 
 16.5 
 78.8 
 20 
 15.6 
 79.7 
 18.6 
 76.8 
 21 
   
   
 20.8 
 74.7 
 22 
   
   
 23.1 
 72.5 
 23 
   
   
 25.5 
 70.3 
 24 
   
   
 27.9 
 68.0 
 25 
   
   
 30.3 
 65.8 
 k   0.07 
 1 
 0 .0
 93.5 
 0 .0
 93.5 
 2 
 0.2 
 93.2 
 0.4 
 93.1 
 3 
 0.5 
 93.0 
 0.9 
 92.6 
 4 
 0.8 
 92.7 
 1.4 
 92.1 
 5 
 1.1 
 92.4 
 2.0 
 91.6 
 6 
 1.5 
 92.1 
 2.7 
 91 .0
 7 
 1.9 
 91.7 
 3.4 
 90.3 
 8 
 2.4 
 91.2 
 4.3 
 89.5 
 9 
 3.1 
 90.6 
 5.2 
 88.6 
 10 
 3.8 
 89.9 
 6.3 
 87.6 
 11 
 4.7 
 89.1 
 7.5 
 86.4 
 12 
 5.7 
 88.1 
 8.9 
 85.1 
 13 
 7 .0
 86.9 
 10.4 
 83.7 
 14 
 8.6 
 85.4 
 12.2 
 82.1 
 15 
 10.4 
 83.7 
 14.1 
 80.3 
 16 
 12.6 
 81.6 
 16.2 
 78.3 
 17 
 15.2 
 79.3 
 18.5 
 76.2 
 18 
 18.1 
 76.6 
 21.0 
 73.9 
 19 
 21.1 
 73.7 
 23.5 
 71.5 
 20 
 24.4 
 70.7 
 26.2 
 69.0 
 21 
   
   
 28.9 
 66.5 
   
 (a) 
 (b) 
 n 
 i 
 m 
 i 
 m 
 k   0.08 
 1 
 0.0 
 92.6 
 0.0 
 92.6 
 2 
 0.3 
 92.3 
 0.5 
 92.1 
 3 
 0.6 
 92 .0
 1.2 
 91.5 
 4 
 1.0 
 91.7 
 1.9 
 90.9 
 5 
 1.4 
 91.2 
 2.7 
 90.1 
 6 
 2.0 
 90.8 
 3.5 
 89.3 
 7 
 2.6 
 90.2 
 4.5 
 88.4 
 8 
 3.4 
 89.5 
 5.7 
 87.3 
 9 
 4.3 
 88.6 
 7.0 
 86.1 
 10 
 5.4 
 87.6 
 8.5 
 84.8 
 11 
 6.7 
 86.4 
 10.1 
 83.2 
 12 
 8.4 
 84.8 
 12.0 
 81.4 
 13 
 10.4 
 83 .0
 14.2 
 79.5 
 14 
 12.8 
 80.8 
 16.5 
 77.3 
 15 
 15.6 
 78.2 
 19.0 
 75.0 
 16 
 18.8 
 75.2 
 21.8 
 72.4 
 17 
 22.2 
 72.0 
 24.6 
 69.8 
 18 
 25.7 
 68.8 
 27.6 
 67.1 
 19 
 28.2 
 66.5 
 30.5 
 64.4 
 k  0.09 
 1 
 0 .0
 91.5 
 0.0 
 91.7 
 2 
 0.4 
 91.4 
 0.7 
 91.1 
 3 
 0.8 
 91.0 
 1.4 
 90.4 
 4 
 1.3 
 90.6 
 2.3 
 89.6 
 5 
 1.9 
 90.0 
 3.3 
 88.7 
 6 
 2.6 
 89.4 
 4.5 
 87.7 
 7 
 3.4 
 88.6 
 5.8 
 86.5 
 8 
 4.5 
 87.6 
 7.3 
 85.1 
 9 
 5.7 
 86.5 
 9.0 
 83.5 
 10 
 7.3 
 85.0 
 10.9 
 81.7 
 11 
 9.3 
 83.2 
 13.1 
 79.7 
 12 
 11.7 
 81.0 
 15.6 
 77.5 
 13 
 14.5 
 78.4 
 18.3 
 75.0 
 14 
 17.8 
 75.4 
 21.2 
 72.3 
 15 
 21.5 
 72.0 
 24.2 
 69.5 
 16 
 25.3 
 68.5 
 27.4 
 66.6 
 17 
 29.2 
 65.0 
 30.6 
 63.7 
 k   0.10 
 1 
 0.0 
 90.9 
 0 .0
 90.9 
 2 
 0.4 
 90.5 
 0.8 
 90.2 
 3 
 1.0 
 90 .0
 1.8 
 89.3 
 4 
 1.6 
 89.5 
 2.8 
 88.3 
 5 
 2.3 
 88.8 
 4.1 
 87.2 
 6 
 2.2 
 88.0 
 5.5 
 85.9 

 
 
A PPEN DI X 3  Special Tables 
723
   
 (a) 
 (b) 
 n 
 i 
 m 
 i 
 m 
 k   0.10 (cont.)
 7 
 4.4 
 86.9 
 7.1 
 84.4 
 8 
 5.8 
 85.7 
 9 .0
 82.7 
 9 
 7.5 
 84.1 
 11.2 
 80.8 
 10 
 9.7 
 82.1 
 13.6 
 78.5 
 11 
 12.4 
 79.8 
 16.3 
 76.1 
 12 
 15.6 
 76.8 
 19.3 
 73.4 
 13 
 19.2 
 73.4 
 22.5 
 70.4 
 14 
 23.3 
 69.8 
 25.9 
 67.4 
 15 
 27.4 
 66.0 
 29.4 
 64.2 
 16 
 31.5 
 62 .0
   
   
 k   0.15 
 1 
 0.0 
 87 .0
 0 .0
 87.0 
 2 
 0.9 
 86.2 
 1.7 
 85.5 
 3 
 2.1 
 85.1 
 3.6 
 83.8 
 4 
 3.9 
 83.8 
 6 .0
 81.8 
 5 
 5.5 
 82.2 
 8.7 
 79.4 
   
 (a) 
 (b) 
 n 
 i 
 m 
 i 
 m 
 k   0.15 (cont.)
 6 
 8 .0
 80.0 
 11.8 
 76.7 
 7 
 11.2 
 72.2 
 15.4 
 73.5 
 8 
 15.2 
 73.7 
 19.5 
 70 .0
 9 
 20.1 
 69.5 
 23.8 
 66.2 
 10 
 25.5 
 64.8 
 28.4 
 62.3 
 11 
 31.0 
 60.0 
   
   
 k   0.20 
 1 
 0.0 
 83.3 
 0 .0
 83.3 
 2 
 1.5 
 82 .0
 2.7 
 81.1 
 3 
 3.6 
 80.4 
 5.9 
 78.4 
 4 
 6.3 
 78.1 
 9.8 
 75.2 
 5 
 10.0 
 75.0 
 14.2 
 71.5 
 6 
 14.7 
 71.1 
 19.2 
 67.4 
 7 
 20.6 
 66.2 
 24.6 
 62.8 
 8 
 27.3 
 60.6 
 30.3 
 58.1 
 9 
 32.6 
 56.1 
   
   
   
 (a) 
 (b) 
 n 
 i 
 m 
 i 
 m 
 k   0.30 
 1 
 0 .0
 76.9 
 0 .0
 76.9 
 2 
 3 .0
 74.6 
 5.1 
 73 .0
 3 
 7.4 
 71.3 
 11.1 
 68.4 
 4 
 13.3 
 66.7 
 18 .0
 63.1 
 5 
 21.1 
 60.7 
 25.4 
 57.4 
 6 
 29.9 
 53.9 
 33 .0
 51.6 
 k   0.40 
 1 
 0.0 
 71.4 
 0 .0
 71.4 
 2 
 4.8 
 68 .0
 7.5 
 66 .0
 3 
 11.8 
 63 .0
 16.3 
 59.8 
 4 
 21.2 
 56.3 
 25.6 
 53.1 
 5 
 31.9 
 48.6 
 34.9 
 46.5 
 Table A3.8   (continued)
 Note: All tables assume random calls for service. Column (a) is for constant servicing time and column (b) for an exponential 
distribution of servicing times. It is hoped that the missing values in column (a) can be secured by approximation in the near 
future. Where no entry appears in column, the figures were not available. 

724
   
 
 Table A3.9   Metric System Conversion Chart 

 Table A3.9   (continued)
 
725

This page intentionally left blank

 3 Es (engineering, education, 
enforcement),   338 
 3D Static Strength Prediction Program,  165 
 5S pillars of standardization,  74, 97f, 683 
 7 Mudas,  74, 78, 682–683 
 8-h time-weighted average (TWA),  
250, 253 
 80-20 rule,  22, 23f 
 100 percent inspection,  82 
 Abandonment rate in call center,  633 
 ABC model,  330 
 Abnormal posture, allowances for,  466 
 Absolute judgment,  300 
 Accident causation, basic philosophies of, 
 326–333 
 Accident prevention,  326f, 333–341 
 Accident-ratio triangles,  329, 330f 
 Accident statistics,  338–341 
 Accuracy, checking time study for,  494 
 Actin,  131 
 Action distance (A),  532–533 
 Activators in ABC model,  330 
 Activity relationship diagram,  116f 
 Actual elapsed time in time study,  437 
 ADA.  See Americans with Disabilities Act 
 Adenosine triphosphate.  See ATP 
 Administrative law,  357 
 Adult ego state,  674 
 Aerobic energy,  139 
 Aerobic metabolism,  156, 157, 159 
 Affordance,  206 
 After-call worktime in call center,  633 
 Agonist muscles,  130 
 Agreement, facilitating,  680 
 Air motion at worker,  261t 
 Air velocity,  260f, 261t 
 Aisles, safety requirements for,  369 
 ALDEP,  118 
 Alignment (I),  538f 
 Allowance chart, clean machine,  478t 
 Allowances,  40, 435, 462–479 
 applying,  479 
 attention time,  478 
 determining through work 
sampling,  574 
 for abnormal posture,  467 
 for atmospheric conditions,  470 
for illumination, 472
 for machine interference,  477, 477e 
 for mental strain,  474–475 
 for monotony,  475 
 for muscular force,  467–469t 
 for noise level,  470–472e 
 for tediousness,  476 
 for visual strain,  473–475e 
ILO, 466t
 machine interference,  477, 477e 
 policy,  479 
special, 476–478
 types of,  464f 
 typical industrial,  463t 
 Alphanumeric characters for labels, 
 307–308 
 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 
 16, 185, 405–406 
 Anaerobic energy,  139 
 Anaerobic metabolism,  156, 157, 159 
 Analysis tools,  29–41 
 Analysts, time study,  451 
 training of,  460–462 
 Analytical formulas,  495–500 
 AND gate,  351, 352e, 354, 355e 
 Annoyance,  251 
 ANSI/HFS 100 standard,  311, 313 
 Antagonist muscles,  130 
 Antecedents in ABC model,  330 
 Anthropometric Source Book,  181 
 Anthropometry,  181 
 design and,  181–185 
 Antifatigue mats,  192 
 APPLY PRESSURE (A),  519 
 Arc,  26 
 Arm, positions of,  210f 
 Ashcroft’s method,  54–55e 
 Assembly line balancing,  55–58 
 with six workstations,  58f 
 Assembly time analysis for 
window,  628t 
 Associations,  289 
 Assumption of risk,  358 
 Atmospheric conditions, 253–258 
 allowances for,  470–471e 
 ATP (adenosine triphosphate),  154–157 
 Attention,  294–298, 308 
 Attention time allowance,  478 
 Attentional resources,  294–298 
 Audit for production jobs,  612–614 
 Auditory information, 300t, 308–309 
 Auditory information, 308–309 
 Automated guided vehicle (AGV), 
 104–105, 672 
 Available work, determining workforce 
versus,  618 
 Average handle time (AHT) in call 
center,   633 
 Avoidable delays,  464, 477 
 Babbage, Charles W.,  9 
 Back belts,  174–175 
 Back compressive forces,  165f, 166f 
 Bandwidth,  281, 293 
 Bar coding,  91, 109 
 Barth, Carl G.,  12 
 Basic events,  351 
 Basic fatigue allowances,  464–465 
 Basic motion times,  507 
 BasicMOST,  532–542 
 activities and subactivities of,  533f 
 calculation form,  540 
 data card for,  535–537f 
 Basilar membrane,  246 
Bayes’ rule, 343
 Behavior-based safety models,  330–333 
 Behavior in ABC model,  330 
 Bell Laboratories,  351–352 
 BEND & ARISE (B),  520, 523 
 Beta (SDT),  283 
 Bill of materials for window,  627t 
 Binary digit,  280 
 Binomial distribution,  556 
 normal approximation of,  557–560e 
 Bird and Germain accident ratio triangle, 
 329, 330f 
 Bit,  280 
 Blue ticket time,  652 
 Body dimensions and weights,  182t 
 Body discomfort chart,  210, 211f 
 Body motion (B),  533, 534f 
 Boolean algebra,  341–342t 
 Boolean truth tables,  342t 
 Borg Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE) 
scale,   161–162t 
Borg category ratio scale (CR-10), 210–211f
 Bottom-up processing,  282 
 Brainstorming sessions,  680 
 Brandeis, Louis,  10 
 Break points of elements,  425, 427, 428 
 Break-even charts,  384, 386f, 625f 
 Broadband noise,  248–249 
Brouha heart rate criteria, 161
 Buzz groups,  680 
 CAESAR (Civilian American and 
European Surface Anthropometry 
Resource),   181, 184 
 INDEX
Page numbers followed by e, f, g, and t refer to examples, figures, glossary, and tables, respectively.
 
727

728 
I N D E X
 Call centers,  632–634 
staffing requirements, 634t
 Candelas (cd),  236–237f 
 Carbide tools,  99 
 Cardiac muscle,  130 
 Carpal tunnel,  208, 209f 
 Carpal tunnel syndrome,  208, 222 
 Cash profit-sharing plans,  647 
 Category ratio scale (CR-10),  210, 211f 
 Cause-and-effect diagrams,  23 
 Cervical vertebrae,  161, 162f 
 Chair for seated operator,  187–189 
 adjustable,  188f 
 Channel capacity,  281 
 Cheaper by the Dozen (Gilbreth and 
Gilbreth),  12 
 Check time in time study,  437 
 Chi-square analysis,  333–334e 
 Child ego state,  674 
 Choice reaction time,  290, 296 
 Chord keyboard,  309 
 Chunking,  288 
 Circadian rhythms,  265–266f 
 Citations by OSHA,  363–364 
 Civilian American and European Surface 
Anthropometry Resource.  See 
CAESAR 
Classification method, 293e, 398
Classification of movements, 147–148
 Clo,  258 
 Cochlea,  246 
 Coding, 299–303 
 Cognitive work, 279–298
 Cognitive work evaluation checklist,  298f 
 Cold stress,  257–258 
 Color,  244–245 
 and emotional,  245t 
recommendations, 370
 rendering,  240 
 Combined motions, principle of,  521–522f 
 Combined profit-sharing plans,  647, 648 
 Common law,  357 
 Communications, types of,  677–682 
 dyadic,  679–680 
 nonverbal,  679 
 one-to-one,  679–680 
 regarding labor relations,  681–682 
 small group,  680–681 
 verbal,  678–679 
 Compatibility,  206 
 of coding,  302 
 Compensatory damages,  357 
 Complementary ego states,  674 
 Complementary transaction, 674f, 675f 
 Component approach for fire,  352–353f 
 Composite lifting index (CLI),  170 
 Compressed workweek,  270–271 
 Computer-aided layout,  117–118 
 Computer-controlled (CNC) machining,  90 
 Conceptual compatibility,  302 
 Condition–action statements,  380 
 Conditional AND,  351 
 Conditions, Westinghouse system ratings, 
 454–455t 
 Cones,  236 
 Consequence in ABC model,  330 
 Conservative behavior,  284 
 Conservative inspector,  285e 
 Conservative rater, examples of,  462f 
 Consistency, Westinghouse system ratings, 
 454–455t 
 Constant element in time data,  486 
 Constant fatigue allowances,  464 
 Constant-velocity dynamometers,  135 
 Continuous improvement program,  684 
 Continuous timing on stopwatch,  419, 
427–429f 
 Contrast,  237, 238 
 Contributory negligence,  358 
 Control charts,  566, 568–570e 
 red flagging with,  341f 
 Control displacement criteria,  203t 
 Control resistance,  204t 
 Control-response (C/R) ratio,  203, 205f 
 Control size,  202t 
 Controlled move,  532, 538f 
 Controls,  199–206 
 CORELAP,  118 
 Cornea,  235, 236f, 243 
 Corporate reengineering,  5 
 Correct rejection,  283–285 
 Correlated observations 563,  564e 
 Corrosive materials,  371 
 Cost, elements of,  625f 
 Cost and machining tolerance,  81f 
 Cost-benefit analysis,  354–357e, 381–384 
 Costing,  622–628 
 of picture window,  626–628e 
 Counters, pointers, and scales, comparison 
of,  305t 
 Coupling multiplier,  167f–169t 
 CP (creatine phosphate),  155, 157 
 CRAFT, 117–118 
 CRANK (C),  519 
 Crashing,  27–29t 
 Crawford model of learning curve,  667 
 Creatine phosphate.  See CP 
 Criterion of pessimism,  389 
 Critical path,  26, 28 
 Criticality, measure of,  354 
 Crossed transaction,  675–677 
 Crossover analysis, 384–388f 
 Crossover charts,  386f, 388f 
 Crossover point,  384, 388f 
 CTD risk index,  211–212f 
 Cues,  290 
 Cumulative average model of learning 
curve,  667 
 Cumulative trauma disorders (CTDs),  206, 
208–212 
 Cursor keys,  311 
 Customer service,   622 
 Cutoff operation,  382–384e 
 cost-benefit analysis for,  384 
 decision table for,  383t 
 expected changes in,  382t 
 value engineering analysis for,  383t 
Cycles, in time study, 432–433
d, 284–285 
Dale Carnegie approach,   677, 678t 
Damages, 357
 Danger,  367 
 Data 
 collecting,  489–491 
 plotting,  491–494 
 Day work,  637, 638, 639f 
 De minimis OSHA citation,  363 
 Deadman control,  204, 368 
 Deadspace,  204 
 Decibel (dB) scale,  246–248f 
 Decibel values of typical sounds,  247f 
 Decimal minute stopwatch,  418, 419f 
 Decision making,  289–294 
 tools for,  380–394 
 Decision tables,  380 
 Decision tools, economic,  391–394 
 Defendant,  357 
 Deferred profit-sharing plans,  647–648 
 Deming, W.E.,  684 
 Deming’s Fourteen points,  685t 
 Design for adjustability,  184 
 Design for extremes,  184 
 Design for the average,  185 
 Detection,  282 
 Development costs,  624 
 Dials 
 design of,  304f 
 panels of,  306f 
 Digital displays,  303 
 Digitizing tablet,  312 
 Direct labor costs,  622, 623 
 Direct lighting,  242 
 Direct material costs,  622, 623 
 Direct work,  588 
 Disabilities 
award schedule, 359 
permanent partial,   359 
 permanent total,  359 
 temporary partial,  359 
 temporary total,  359 
 Discounted cash flow method,  392 
 Disk herniation,  164–165 
 Disks,  163, 192 
 Display design checklist,  310–311f 
 Display modalities,  299–300 
 Displays, 303–308 
 basic features of,  305 
 for quantitative information,  304f 
 panel of dials,  305 

 
 
I N DEX 
729
 Dissociability of signal from noise,  309 
 Distribution of coin toss,  561f 
 Distribution of light,  237f, 239–243 
 Divided attention,  295 
 Domino theory,  326–329 
 of accident sequence,  327f–328f 
Dose (noise), 249–250
 Dose (radiation), 264–265 
Drill press work, formulas for,  495–497 
 Drill travel distance,  495f 
 Drop delivery,  195 
 Dry-bulb temperature,  254, 255 
 Dummy activities,  26 
 DVDs, training through,  662–663 
 Dvorak keyboard,  309 
 Dyadic communications,  679–680 
 Dynamic information,  299 
Ear, 246f 
Eardrum,  246 
Earplugs, 253
 Economic decision tools,  391–394 
 Economic justification  of method,  393–394 
 Effective time in time study,  437 
 Effective utilization,  416, 615–616 
Efficiency, 10, 55, 619, 621
 Efficiency engineering,  12 
 Efficiency of light,  239–240 
 Effort,  Westinghouse system ratings, 
 453–454t 
 Ego states,  674 
Elapsed time, 437
 Elbow flexion torque,  137e 
Elbow height, 185–186
 Electromagnetic spectrum,  236f 
 Electromyograms (EMGs),  143 
 Electronic stopwatch,  418–419f 
 Element times, calculating brief,  487–488e 
 Elements,  436 
 analyzing,  489–491 
 dividing operation into,  424–425 
 Empirical data, formula construction 
from,  489–494 
 Employee stock-ownership plans 
(ESOPs),   646 
 Employees 
 motivation of,  668–673 
 reaction to change of,  668–669 
Endurance, muscle, 140f  
Energy costs of activities,   158f 
 Energy expenditure, workload guidelines 
for,  154–159 
 Energy sources,  157f 
 Engineering controls,  366 
 Equal pay for equal work,  405 
 Equipment purchase, determining new, 
 617–618 
Equivalent sound levels, 248f
 Equivalent wind chill temperature,  
257, 258t 
 Erector spinae,  163 
 Ergonomics, 13,  181 . See also Work 
Design
 teams,  681 
 Ergonomics program.  See OSHA 
ergonomics program  
 ESOP.  See Employee stock-ownership plan 
 Essential functions,  406 
 Evaluation points for labor grades,  
403–404f 
 Exclusive OR,  351 
 Expense, standard data for,  600–602 
 Expense labor,  585, 624 
 factors affecting standards,  587–589 
 guide for establishing standard,  607t 
 standards for,  597–599 
 Exploratory tools,  22–28 
 Exponential distribution,  591–592f 
 Extension,  208, 210f 
 elbow,  130 
 External precision grip,  213f–214 
 Extra allowance time,  652, 478 
 Extra allowances,  464, 478–479 
 Extrinsic environmental factors,  673 
 EYE ACTION (E),  519 
 Eye fixations,  148 
 Factor comparison method of job 
evaluation,   400 
 Factor selection for job classification, 
 401t–403 
 Factory expense,  622, 623 
 FactoryFLOW,  118 
 Fail-safe designs,  368 
 Failure minimization,  368 
 Fair day’s work,  416 
 False alarm,  283–285 
Fans, 258–259
 Fatigue allowances,  464–476 
 basic,  464–465 
muscle, 139–141, 144
variable, 465–476
 Fault events,  351 
 Fault tree, 350–357 
 analysis of fire,  352–353e 
 and cost-benefit analyses,  355–357e 
 symbols,  351f 
 Feedback,  206 
 Feigenbaum, AV.,  684 
 Filaments,  131 
 Financial plans, indirect,  650 
 Finger action, repetitive,  217 
 Finger flexion forces,  218t 
 Finger press,  213f–214 
 Finishing time in time study, 437 
 Fire extinguishers, categories of,  373 
 Fire triangle,  372 
 Firm cost basis,  622 
 Firm order scheduling,  619 
 Fish diagram,  23, 24f 
 Fitts’ Law,  293e 
 Fitts’ Tapping Task,  294–295f 
 Fixed-scale, moving-pointer design,  303 
 Fixture as holding device,  199, 200f 
 Flammable materials,  372 
Flashing light, 307
 Flexible compensation plan,  637, 638–650 
 characterization of,  656t 
 Flexible workforce,  683 
 Flexion,  208, 210f 
 elbow,  130 
 Flextime,  271 
 Float,  27–28 
 Floor plan,  116f 
 Flow diagram,  35–38f, 39f 
 Flow process chart,  33–37f, 597 
 Focused attention,  294 
 Follow-up for production jobs,  612–614 
 FOOT (F),  520 
 Foot-lamberts (fL),  237 
 Foot-operated machine tool,  149f 
 Footcandles (fc),  236–237f 
 Force–length relationship,  132–133 
 Force-velocity relationship of skeletal 
muscle,  134 
 Forearm motion,  146f 
 Foreign elements in time study,  428, 430, 
436 
 Fork trucks, net load for,  106e 
 Formula construction,  489–494 
 Formulas standard data,  495–500 
 Fovea,  236 
 Frequency-independent LI (FILI),  170 
 Frequency-independent RWL 
(FIRWL),   170 
 Frequency multiplier (FM) table,  167t 
 Frequency-of-use principles,  196 
 Fringe benefits,  637–638t 
 From-to charts,  112, 113f 
 Full model,  492 
 Functional layout,  111 
 Functionality,  196–197 
 Gain control (G),  533, 534f 
 Gain-sharing plans,  643–649 
Games, 676
 Gamma ray,  264 
 Gang process chart,  41–43f, 55 
 Gantt, Henry Laurence,  12 
 Gantt chart,  24, 25f 
 Garg’s metabolic prediction model,  158 
 General Duty Clause,  165, 361 
 General expense,  622, 624, 625f 
 General housekeeping for safety,  369–373 
 General industry OSHA standards,  361 
 General linear test,  492 
 General move,  532, 534f, 542 
 Get,  533, 534 
 GET (G) categories,  517–519 
 GET WEIGHT (GW),  519 

730 
I N D E X
 Gilbreth, Frank and Lillian,  11–12, 129, 
149, 151, 152, 395 
 classification of movements,  293e, 398 
 Glare,  243–244 
 reflected,  243 
 Globe temperature,  255 
 Gloves,  222 
 Glucose molecule,  156 
Grade description plan, 398
 Graphical user interface (GUI),  314 
 Features Checklist,  316f 
 Grasp as GET,  517, 518 
 Gravity bins,  195, 197f 
 Gravity chutes,  195 
 Grip span for two-handled tools,  219–220 
 Grip strength, 214f,  215f 
 Grip surface, 221 
 Grip types, 213f 
 Gross negligence,  357 
 Gross profit, elements of,  625f 
 Group incentive scheme,  642 
 Group technology,  97f 
 Hand, positions of,  210f 
 Handheld PCs,  313 
 Handle (H),  522 
 Handle configuration of power tools,  223 
 Handle design,  216f–221 
 Handle diameters,  217 
 Handle lengths,  218–219 
 Handles, appropriately shaped,  220–221 
 Handling facilities,  106–107 
 Hawthorne effect,  396–397 
 Hazard,  367 
 Hazard action tables,  380, 381t 
 Hazard control,  366, 367–369 
 Health care,  630–632 
 Hearing loss,  247–249 
 Heart rate 
 for different workloads,  160f, 161f 
 guidelines,  159–161 
 Heart rate creep,  160–161f 
Heat balance equations, 254
 Heat stress,  254–257 
 controls of,  256–257 
WBGT, 254–256
Herniated disk, 164
 Heinrich accident-ratio triangle,  329, 330f 
 Hick-Hyman law,  290–294 
 illustrated in wiring task,  294f 
 Hit,  283–285 
 Holding forces, rest allowances for,  468f 
 Hook grip,  213f 
 Housekeeping, 369–373
Human capability,  principles of,  132–148 
 Human-computer interaction 
 hardware considerations in,  309–313 
 software considerations in,  314–316 
 Human ear,  246f 
 Human eye,  236f 
Human factors, 11
Human Factors and Ergonomics 
Society, 14
 Human information processing model, 
 281–298 
 in wiring task,  292–293e 
 Human interactions,  673–677 
 Icons,  314 
 IESNA.  See Illuminating Engineering 
Society of North America  
 Illuminance,  236–239 
 Illuminating Engineering Society of North 
America (IESNA) standards for 
illumination,  238 
 Illumination,  236–245 
 calculation of required,  242–243e 
 measuring,  239 
theory,  235–237 
 Illumination levels 
 allowances for,  472–473t 
 recommended interior,  240t 
 weighting factors in selecting,  241t 
 Imminent danger OSHA citation,  364 
 Importance principles,  196 
 IMPROSHARE,  643, 645–649 
 Incentive plans 
 comparison of two,  649 
 failure of,  654–655 
 Incidence rate (IR),  340 
 Independent and not independent events, 
 343–344e 
 Index of difficulty,  293 
 Indicator lights,  306–307t 
 Indirect financial plans,  650 
 Indirect labor,  585 
 costs,  623 
 factors affecting standards,  587–589 
 fundamentals of,  600 
 guide for establishing standard,  607t 
 standard data for,  600–602 
 standards for,  586–600 
 Indirect lighting,  242 
 Ineffective time in time study,  437 
 Information coding 
 display modalities for,  299–300 
 general design principles, 
 299–303  
Information model, 282f  
Information theory,   279–281 
 Inspection,  82, 285–287, 362–363, 475e 
 Installation of plan,  394–397 
Institute of Industrial Engineers, 14
 Insulation required,  259f 
 Interference time,  53–55 
 Interlock,  356, 368 
 Internal precision grip,  213f 
 International Labour Office (ILO),  
 recommended allowances, 
465–467 
 International MTM Directorate,  514 
 Intervertebral disks,  163 
 Intrinsic environmental factors,  673 
 Ischemia,  215 
 ISO 9000 certification,  686–687 
 Isokinetic,  135, 138  
 Isometric strength, 135,   141f 
 changes with age,  142f 
 Isotonic contractions,  134–135 
 Jidoka, 683
Job analysis,  399f 
 Job classification,  403 
Job difficulty adjustment factor, 457
 Job enlargement,  671, 672 
 Job enrichment,  671, 672, 673 
 Job evaluation,  397–405 
 factor comparison method of,  400 
 installing program for,  403–405 
 ranking method of,  400 
 systems,  398–401 
Job hazard analysis, 334
 Job rating and substantiating form,  402f 
 Job rotation,  671, 672 
 Job safety analysis (JSA),  333–337 
 Job security, need for,  669 
 Job/worksite analysis guide,  28–30f 
 Joysticks,  312 
 Juran, J.M.,  684 
 Juran’s ten steps to quality improvement,  685t 
 Just noticeable difference (JND),  301 
 Just-in-time (JIT),  97–98 
 Kaizen,  683 
 Kanban system,  683 
 Karnaugh maps,  348–350 
 Keiretsu,  88, 683 
 Keyboards, computer,  309–311 
 Knob design,  201f 
L5/S1, disk, 164
Labels, 307
 Labor efficiency, determining, 
 619, 621 
 Labor grades,  403–404t 
 Labor relations,  681–682 
 Labor unions,  681–682 
 Lactic acid,  157, 159 
Laptops, 313
 Lateral pinch,  213f 
 Lathe work, formulas for,  497 
 Lean manufacturing,  74, 682–684 
 Learning curve,  663–668 
 calculation of,  666e 
 Crawford model of,  667 
 cumulative average model of,  667 
 plotting data for,  663, 664f, 665t, 666t  
 remission,  667–668e
unit model of, 667 
 Wright model of,  667 

 
 
I N DEX 
731
 Lens,  235, 236f, 243 
 Level of aspiration,  387 
 Leveling,  453 
 Liability,  357 
 Life change units (LCUs),  329–331t 
 Lift tables,  105f 
 Lifting, 169–178 
 guidelines for multitask,  169–172 
NIOSH guideline, 165–169
 safe procedure for,  173f 
 Lifting index (LI),  169 
 Light distribution of,  237f–240 
 Light meter,  239 
 Light pen,  312 
 Lighting,  242–244f 
 Line balancing,  55–63 
 precedence matrix for,  61f 
 Lock in,  368 
 Lockout,  368 
 Long-term memory,  287, 289 
 Loose rate,  462 
 Lordosis,  189–190f 
 Lost-time analysis,  622f 
 Lot-by-lot inspection,  82 
 Low back compressive forces,  161–165 
 Lumbar support,  189 
 Lumbar vertebrae,  161, 162f 
 Luminaires,  242 
 for lighting,  243f, 244f 
 industrial ceiling-mounted,  242f 
 Luminance,  236–237 
 Luminous intensity,  236 
 Machine, using full capacity, of,  99 
 Machine coupling,  39 
 Machine evaluation checklist,  207–208f 
 Machine guarding, safety requirements 
for,  370 
 Machine interference, allowance for,  477e, 
 Machine interference time,  53–54e 
 Machine utilization in work sampling, 
 571–574 
 Machining tolerance and cost,  81f 
 Major life activity,  406 
 Management practices, modern,  682–687 
 Manual lifting, general guidelines for, 
 172–174 
 Manual operations, mechanizing,  90–91 
 Manual work, design guidelines for, 
 154–175 
 Manufacture sequence and process,  88–95 
 Manufacturing costs, classification of, 
 622–625f 
 Mapping,  206 
 Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs,  395, 
670–672 
 Master, relationship,   357 
 Material 
 choosing correct,  83–88 
 easier to process,  84–85 
 finding less expensive,  83 
 finding lighter,  83–84 
 salvage,  86–87 
 standardizing,  87 
 using economically,  85–86 
 Material flowchart,  33 
 Material handling,  100–110 
 10 principles of,  110 
 careful,  107–109 
 equipment for,  102–103f 
 mechanized,  102–106 
 picking up,  101–102 
 warehousing of,  103f 
 MaxiMOST,  532 
 Maximum acceptable weights lifted,  138t 
 Maynard Operation Sequence Technique 
(MOST),  532–542 
 analysis of flashlight assembly,  541f 
 three levels of,  532 
 Meaningful noise,  248, 249 
 Measured day work,  642–643 
 Measurement of sound,  246–247 
 Mechanical facilities, operating 
efficiently,   92 
 Mechanizing manual operations,  
90–91f 
 Memory,  287–289 
 Mental strain, allowances for,  474–475 
 Mental workload,  296 
 Menus,  314–315 
 Methods 
 objectives of,  8–9 
 progress made in,  17–18t 
 scope of,  4–5 
steps, 6f
 Methods analysis,  543–547 
 MTM-2 checklist for,  544–545f 
 simplifying,  543, 546 
 Methods engineering.  See Methods 
 Methods improvements,  407 
 for auto-starter,  408e 
 in T-shirt turning,  546–547f 
Methods safety analysis, 334
 Methods-time measurement (MTM), 
 508–532 
 fundamental motions in,  508 
 See also MTM-1, MTM-2, MTM-3, 
MTM-V, MTM-C, MTM-M, 
MTM-MEK, MTM-UAS, MTM-
LINK, MTM-HC  
 Metronome,  423 
 Micromotion studies,  11, 149, 150 
 Microscope, time system for,  527 
 Miller’s rule,  287–288, 300, 305 
 Milling machine work, formulas for, 
 497–500 
 Minimax regret criterion,  390 
 MiniMOST,  532 
 Minimum-cost design, methods 
for,  79t 
 Miss,  283–285 
 Mod ratio,  360 
 Modality compatibility,  302 
 Modulation of auditory signals,  308 
 Monitor screens,  312–313 
 Monitoring accidents,  338–341 
 Monotony, allowances for,  475 
 Monte Carlo simulation,  595–597 
 results of machine downtime,  597t 
 to determine optimum number of 
operators,   595–597e 
 MOST.  See Maynard Operation Sequence 
Technique  
 Motion economy checklist,  150f 
 Motion study,  11, 149–154 
 Motivation maintenance theory,  673 
 Motivation-reward-satisfaction model, 
 330, 332f 
 Motor unit,  143 
 Mouse,  312 
Move as PUT, 517
 Move controlled (M),  534, 538f 
 Movement, classification of, 
 146–148f 
 Movement compatibility,  302 
 Moving-pointer, fixed-scale 
design,  303 
 MTM.  See Methods-time measurement 
 MTM Association for Standards and 
Research,   514 
 MTM systems, comparison of,  517f, 
530–532 
 accuracy of various,  531f 
 MTM-1,  508–514 
 MTM-2,  514–521 
check list 544f–545f
 analysis of flashlight assembly,  523f 
analysis of T-shirt turning, 546f
 MTM-3,  521–524 
 MTM-C,  524–527 
 MTM-HC,  530 
 MTM-LINK,  524, 530 
 MTM-M,  527–528 
 MTM-MEK,  529–530 
 MTM-TE,  528–529 
 MTM-UAS,  530  
 MTM-V,  524 
 Muda,  74, 78, 682–683 
 Multimedia Video Task Analysis (MVTA), 
 420, 422–423 
 Multiple causation of accident,  328 
 Multiple-criteria decision making 
(MCDM),   384–391 
 Multiple-resource modes of 
attention,  296 
 Multitask lifting, NIOSH,  169–172 
 Multitasking,  295 
 Multivariate regression techniques,  494 
 Muscle, structure of,  131f 
 Muscle contraction, 132, 142–143

732 
I N D E X
Muscle fatigue,  139–141, 144, 467 
 Muscle recovery after fatigue,  467–468f 
 Muscle recruitment,  143f–144 
Muscle strength, 132–139, 141–142
 Muscular force, allowances for,  466–470 
 Musculoskeletal disorders,  206, 365, 366 
 Musculoskeletal system,  130f–132 
 Muther’s Systematic Layout Planning, 
 112–117e, 197, 381 
 Mutually exclusive events,  343 
 MVTA software,  420, 422–423 
 Myofibrils,  131 
 Myosin,  131 
 National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health.  See NIOSH 
 Natural frequency, 145,  262 
 Natural wet-bulb temperature (NWB),  255 
 Negative strokes,  676, 677 
 Negligence,  357 
 Negligence per se,  357 
 Nerve deafness,  247–248 
 Net shape, manufacturing near,  92–93 
 Network diagram,  26–29 
 NIOSH,  16, 256, 361 
 lifting guidelines, 105,   165–169 
 NIOSH index (LI),  169 
 NIOSH lifting analysis,  170–171e 
 NIOSH Multitask Job Analysis Worksheet, 
 171, 172f 
 Noise,  245–253 
 performance effect of,  250–251 
 Noise control,  251–253 
 Noise dose,  249–250 
 Noise exposures, OSHA permissible,  249t, 
271t  
 Noise level 
 allowances for,  470–472e 
 calculating relaxation allowance 
for,  472e 
 OSHA-permissible,  249t, 471t 
 Noise reduction, octave-band,  252t 
 Noise reduction rating (NRR),  253 
 Noise theory,  245–253 
 Nomograms,  488–490f 
 Nonfinancial performance motivation 
plans,  655–656 
 Nonserious violation OSHA citation,  363 
 Nonverbal communications,  679 
 Normal distribution,  183e 
 Normal time (NT) in time study,  420, 
435, 436 
Normal working area, 192–194f
 Notebooks,  313 
 Numerically-controlled (NC) machining, 
 90, 97 
 NWB.  See Natural wet-bulb temperature 
 Objective rating method,  456–457 
 Observation frequency, determining, 
 565–566 
 Observations, recording work study, 
 570–571 
 Observed time (OT) in time study,  420, 427 
 Occupational illness,  361 
 Occupational injury,  361 
 Occupational Safety and Health Adminis-
tration.  See OSHA 
 Octave-band analysis,  249 
 Octave-band noise reduction,  252t 
 On-the-job learning,  662 
 One-to-one communications.  679–680 
 Operation analysis,  5, 71–118 
 Operation process chart,  29–33 
 Operation purpose,  76–77f 
 Operations 
 analysis checklist,  121–122f 
 combining,  89f 
 mechanizing manual,  90–91 
 rearranging,  89–90 
 Operator process chart,  151 
 Operator training  662–663 
 Operator utilization in work sampling, 
 571–574 
 OR gate,  351, 354, 355 
 Organization chart,  3f 
 Organizations, professional,  13–15 
 Oscillations in human body,  262 
 OSHA,  16, 165, 360–367 
 citations by,  363–364 
 workplace inspections by,  362–363 
 OSHA 300 log,  361, 365 
 OSHA ergonomics program,  364–367 
 OSHA noise dose, calculation of,  250e 
Outlier, 434, 436
Outline process chart, 31
 Overhead,  623 
 Overtime,  269–270 
 Oxidizing agents,  372 
 Oxygen debt,  157 
 Oxygen deficit,  157 
 Palm pinch,  213f–214
Parallel arrangement, 345f  
 Parent ego state,  674, 677 
 Pareto analysis,  22, 23f, 95 
 Pareto, Vilfredo,  22 
 Part design,  77–80 
 Partial setups,  441, 443 
 Patient handling,  108f 
 Payback method,  392 
Percentile, 183e
 Perception,  281–287 
 Performance distributions,  613f, 614f 
 Performance evaluation,  403 
 Performance rating in time study,  449, 
451–457, 459t. See also Rating 
 Permanent partial disabilities,  359 
 award schedule for lost-limb,  359t 
 Permanent total disabilities,  359 
 Perronet, Jean Rodolphe,  9 
 Personal digital assistants,  313 
 Personal needs allowances,  464 
 PERT (net work) chart,  24–28 
Pessimism criterion, 389
 Photometer,  239 
 Phototropism,  243 
 Physical training,  663 
 Physiological measures of stress,  296 
 Physiological needs,  670, 671 
 Pictorial instructions, training through,  662 
 Piecework plan,  640–641 
 Pinch grip,  213–214 
 Pinch-strength,  219–220f 
Pistolgrip, 214
 Placement (P),  533–534f 
 Plaintiff,  357 
 Planning elements,  588 
 Plant capacity determination,  617 
 Plant layout,  110–118 
 evaluating alternatives in,  117f 
 types of,  111–112 
 using SLP,  112–117e 
 Plot data,  491–494 
 Plunger criterion,  389 
 Point system,  399–400 
 Pointers,  314–315 
 Pointers, scales, and counters, comparison 
of,  305t 
 Pointing devices for computers,  311–312 
 Poisson’s probability distribution,  589–592 
 Poke-yoke,  683 
 Polarizing filters,  243–244 
 Policy allowances,  464f, 479 
Position as PUT, 517
 Positional weight,  61–62 
 Positive reinforcement,  330 
 Positive strokes,  676, 677 
 Postlunch dip,  265 
 Postural flexibility,  192 
 Posture checklist,  174f 
 Posture in weightless condition,  133f 
 Power grip,  212–213, 217, 220 
 Power test,  491 
 Power tools, 222–224 
 Precedence chart,  60f, 61f 
Precision grip, 212–214
 Predetermined time systems,  507–547, 616t 
application,  542–547 
MOST, 532–542
MTM, 508–532
 Predetermined times,  507 
 Prehension of hand,  212–214 
 Primary task,  296 
 Prime cost of product,  622–623, 625f 
 Principle of combined motions,  521–522f 
 Principle of insufficient reason,  389 

 
 
I N DEX 
733
 Principle of simultaneous motions, 
 521–522f 
 Privity, doctrine of,  358  
 Probability distribution,  183–184e, 
559f, 561 
 Probability methods for accidents,  
341–343 
 Probability of event P(X),  342–344e 
 Process, manufacturing,  88–95 
 Process layout,  111–112 
 Process time (X),  534, 538f 
 Product layout,  111 
 Production control 
 improving,  618–619 
 Production control manager,  3f 
 Production operation card,  439f 
 Productivity as function of working 
hours,  270f 
 Productivity improvement,  1, 5 
 Productivity sharing plans,  643 
 Professional performance standards, 
 602–606 
 Profit sharing,  646–649 
 Program Evaluation and Review 
Technique.  See PERT 
 Pronation,  208, 210f 
 Psychophysical strength,  138 
 Pull forces,  139t 
 Pull system of production control,  683 
 Pulp pinches,  213f–214 
 Punitive damages,  357 
Pupil 235–236f
 Push forces,  139t 
 Push system of production,  683 
 Put,  533, 534 
 PUT (P) categories,  517–519 
 algorith for determining,  518f 
 comparing insertion and 
alignment,  519t 
 PUT WEIGHT (PW),  519, 520 
 Qualified employee,  416 
 Qualified operator,  434 
 Quality circles,  680–681, 684 
 Quality Control Handbook (Juran),  684 
 Quality of work life plans,  656 
 Quantitative tools,  41–63 
 Queuing theory,  588–594 
 to establish standard time for inspection, 
 593–594e 
 to establish standard time for toolroom 
service,   594e 
 QuickTS time study program, 
 421, 422f 
 QWERTY Keyboard,  309 
 Rad,  264 
 Radial deviation,  208, 210f 
 Radiation,  264–265 
 Random servicing,  49–52e 
 Range effect,  203 
 Ranking method of job evaluation,  400 
 Rapid rotation of shifts,  267–268f 
 Rating accuracy,  461f, 462f 
 Rating, 420, 434–435, 452–462
accuracy, 461f, 462f
analysis,  457–460 
 application,  457–460 
 by the watch,  452 
 characteristics, sound,  451–452 
 factors, record of analyst’s,  461f 
 methods,  452–457 
speed, 452–453
 training,  460–462f 
Westinghouse, 453–456
 Ratio-delay study,  555 
 Raynaud’s syndrome,  209, 264 
 Reach as GET,  517 
 Reaction torque bars,  224 
 Rearranging operations,  89–90 
 Reasonable accommodations,  406 
 Reciprocal inhibition,  144 
 Recommended weight limit (RWL),  166 
 Recording error in time study,  437 
 Recording tools,  29–41 
 Red circle rates,  405 
 Red flagging,  341f 
 Redesigning parts,  77–80f 
 Reduced model,  492 
 Redundancy,  280–281, 302 
 Reflectance,  237, 239 
 of finishes,  238t 
 recommended for offices,  243f 
 REGRASP (R),  519 
 Regression to the mean,  462 
 Regret matrix,  390 
Rehearsal, 288
 Relationship chart,  112, 114f 
 Relative judgment,  300 
 Release as GET,  517 
 Reliability, 343–350 
 of four-engine airplane,  347–348e 
 of two-stage amplifier,  346–347e 
 Rem,  264 
 Remission of learning curve,  667–668e 
 Repeated violation OSHA citation,  363–364  
 Repetitive motion injuries,  206 
 factors leading to,  208 
 Resistance to change,  395–396 
 Resonance,  262 
 Resonant frequencies for body,  262t 
 Response bias,  284 
 Response criterion,  283, 284 
 Response execution,  294 
Response selection, 289–294
 Rest allowance. See Allowances
Resting focus (eyes), 313   
 Resting length of muscle,  131 
 Retina,  235–236f 
 Return,  533, 534 
 Return on investment method,  392 
 Return on sales method,  391 
 Risk, assumption of,  358 
 Risk analysis,  337–33 9f 
 Risky behavior,  283 
 Robots, use of,  93–95 
 Rods,  235 
 Roentgen (R),  264 
 Role playing,  680 
 Rucker plan,  643, 644–645 
 RWL.  See recommended weight limit 
 Sacrum,  162f, 163 
 Saddle chair,  191f 
Safe lifting, 173f
 Safety factor,  368 
 Safety legislation,  357–360 
 Safety management,  326 
 Safety models, behavior-based,  329–333 
 Safety needs,  670, 671 
Salient, 290
 Salvage materials,  86–87 
 Scales, counters, and pointers, comparison 
of,  305t 
 Scanlon plan,  643–644 
 Schedule injury,  359 
Scientific management, 10, 74, 684
 Seat 
 adjustment ranges,  188–189t 
 adjustability in,  192 
 Seating design,  186e  
 Seating postures,  190f 
 Secondary task,  296 
 Self-esteem needs,  670, 671 
 Self-fulfillment,  671 
 Self-observation through work sampling, 
 577–578 
 Sensitivity of sensory system,  284–285 
 change with time,  288f 
 Sensory store,  287 
 Sequence  manufacturing,  88–95 
 Sequence of use,  196 
 Series arrangement,  343, 345f 
 Serious violation OSHA citation,  363 
 Servant relationship,  357 
 Service level in call center,  633 
 Service work, standards in,  629–634 
Servicing, 41–55
Set in order, 683
 Setup standards,  440–441 
 Setup,  95–97 
 evaluation checklist,  96f 
 Setup times, 97–98, 441 
 Severity rate (SR),  340 
 Shape coding,  200–201f 
 Share and share alike plan,  648 
 Shift rotations, examples of,  267t, 268t 

734 
I N D E X
 Shiftwork,  265–269 
Shine, 683
 Sholes, C. L.,  309 
 Short-term memory,  287 
 Signal detection theory (SDT),  282–284f 
 applied to glass inspection,  285–287e 
 Simo chart,  151 
 Simple reaction time,  291 
 Simultaneous motions, 520f–522f 
 Single-minute exchange of die 
(SMED),  97, 683 
 Single-task lifting index (STLI),  170 
 Single-task RWL (STRWL),  170 
 Sit/stand stools,  194f 
 Situational awareness,  290 
 Size coding,  200–201f, 202t 
 Size principle,  143 
 Skeletal muscles,  130–131f 
 force-length relationship of,  132f 
force-velocity relationship of, 134f
 Skill,  Westinghouse system ratings, 
 403–454t 
 Sliding filament theory,  131–132 
 Slipped disk,  164 
 Slotting,  601–602 
SLP. See Muther’s SLP
 Small group communications,  680–681 
 Smartphones,  313 
 SMED.  See Single minute exchange of die 
 Smooth muscle,  130 
 Snapback timing on stopwatch,  419, 421f, 
427–428 
 study of die-casting operation,  421f 
 Social needs,  670, 671 
 Social services,  630–632 
 Societies, professional,  13–15 
Sort, 683
 Sound level contours, equivalent,  248f 
 Space relationship layout,  114, 116f 
 Space utilization,  615, 617 
 Spatial compatibility,  302 
 Special allowances,  464, 476–479 
 Specifications,  80–82 
 Speed rating,  452–453t, 458 
 Speed–accuracy trade-off,  144, 291 
 Spine 
 anatomy of human,  162f 
 posture when standing and 
sitting,  190f 
 SPIRAL,  118, 119f 
 Spot inspection,  82 
 Staff occupancy in call center,  633 
 Stairs, safety requirements for,  369 
 Standard costs,  628 
 Standard data, 485–502 
development of elements, 486–488, 
542–543
 for blanking and piercing strip stock, 
 500t 
 for turret lathes,  501t 
 for window,  627t 
formulas, 489–500
 using for time study,  500–501 
 Standard hour plan,  641–642 
 Standard pace,  416 
 Standard performance,  450 
 Standard time (ST), 435 
 calculating,  437–438, 575–576e 
 maintaining,  612–614 
 Standardize, 683 
 Standards,  8, 438–443, 449 
follow up, 611–634
 in service work,  629–634 
indirect and expense labor, 585–607
 objectives of,  8–9 
 progress made in,  17–18t 
review, 614–615
 scope of,  4–5
using, 614–622 
 Standards review,  614–615 
 Standing workplace dimensions,  188f 
 Starting time,  426 
 Static indeterminancy,  137e 
 Static information,  299 
 Static muscle endurance,  140f 
 Static muscle loading,  214 
 Static muscle strength data,  135f, 136t 
 Statistical control limits,  340f, 341f 
 Statute law,  357 
 STEP (S),  520 
 Step and foot motions (SF),  523 
 Stopwatch for time study,  418–419 
 Straight-line layout,  111 
 Stranger, relationship,  357 
 Striated muscles,  130 
 Strict liability,  357 
 Stroboscopic effect,  244 
Strokes, 676, 677
 Stroop Color-Word Task,  291 
 Subjective measures of mental 
workload,  296 
 Subjective ratings of perceived 
exertion,  161–162t 
 Substantial impairment,  406 
 Supervisory standards,  598–599e 
 Supination,  208, 210f 
Sustain, 683
 Sustained attention,  296 
 Symbols, process chart,  34f, 35f 
 Synchronous servicing,  41–49 
 Synthetic rating,  456–457t 
 Synthetic times, 456, 507. See also 
 predetermined time systems   
 Systematic layout planning (SLP),   
112–117e  
 Tabular data,  488 
 Talk time measure in call center,  632 
 Task evaluation checklist,  174f 
 Taylor, Frederick W.,  9–11, 74, 507, 684 
 Tediousness, allowances for,  476 
 Temperature,  253–258 
 Temporary partial disabilities,  359 
 Temporary standards for operation,  438 
 Temporary total disabilities,  359 
 Tendinitis,  208, 209 
 Tennis elbow,  209 
 Tenosynovitis,  208 
 Texture coding,  200–201f 
 Therblig analysis checklist,  155–156f 
 Therbligs,  151, 152t, 154–156, 195 
 Thermal comfort zone,  254, 255f 
 Thermal neutrality,  254 
 Thick filaments,  131 
 Thin filaments,  131 
 Thoracic vertebrae,  161–162f 
Threshold value limits, 262–263f   
 Tight rate,  462 
 Time check in time study,  437 
 Time elapsed before study (TEBS) in time 
study,  437 
 Time-measurement unit (TMU),  509 
 Time standards, 614–622. See also 
 standards 
 comparison of methods for  
establishing,   616t 
 guide for selecting appropriate method, 
 617t 
 scheduling through,  618–619 
 Time study, 415–443, 616t 
 adding allowances to,  435 
 calculating,  435–437 
 choosing operator for,  423–424 
 determining number of cycles in, 
 432–434e 
 difficulties in,  428–432 
 dividing operation into elements, 
 424–425 
 equipment for,  418–420 
 forms,  420, 426f, 429f, 431f, 442f 
 rating operator performance in, 
 434–435 
 software for,  421–423 
 training equipment for,  423 
 Time value of money,  392 
 Timesharing,  295
Time weighted average (TWA), 
250, 253 
 Tissue compression, avoiding,  215–216 
 TMU,  509 
 Tolerances,  80–82 
 Tool and equipment use,  532, 538 
 Tool balancers,  196f, 224 
Tool design, 212–224
 Tool evaluation checklist,  225f 
 Tool weight,  221 
 Tooling, 95–96f, 99–100f 
 Top-down processing,  282 
 Total performance,  403, 404 
 Total quality (TQ),  684–686 

 
 
I N DEX 
735
 Total quality assurance (TQA),  684 
 Total Quality Control (Feigenbaum),  684 
 Total quality management (TQM),  
 684, 685f  
 Total recorded time in time study,  437 
 Touchpads,  312 
 Touchscreen,  311 
 Toxic materials,  372 
 Toyota Production System (TPS),  74, 
682–684 
 TPS.  See Toyota Production System 
 Trackball,  312 
 Track points,  312 
 Track sticks,  312 
Training, 662–663
 Transactional analysis,  674–677 
 Transactions,  674–677 
 complementary,  674f, 675f 
 crossed,  675, 675f, 677 
 ulterior,  675, 676f 
 Transport (T) motion,  523 
 Travel charts,  112, 113f 
Trigger, tool, 218f
 Trigger finger,  209, 217 
 Truth tables,  342f 
 Twelve Principles of Efficiency 
(Emerson),   12 
 Twisting motions,  214 
Two-button press, 371f
 Two-hand process chart,  151, 153f 
Two stage signal, 308
 Tympanic membrane,  246f 
 Ulnar deviation,  208, 210f 
 Ulterior transaction,  675, 676f 
 Unaccounted time in time study,  437 
 Unavoidable delays,  464, 476–477, 587 
 Unions,  681–682 
 Unit model of learning curve,  667 
 Universal indirect labor standards (UILS), 
 600–602 
 Universal Product Code (UPC),  109 
 Value engineering,  380–381, 383t 
 Variable element in time data,  486 
 Variable fatigue allowances,  464, 465–476 
 Variances,  628 
 Vasoconstriction,  222 
 Vendors, finding best,  88, 683 
 Ventilation,  258–261 
 guidelines for,  260f 
 Verbal communications,  678–679 
 Vertebrae,  161–163 
 anatomy of,  162f, 163f 
 Vertebral bones,  163 
 Vertical storage machine,  104f 
 Vibration,  261–264 
 exposure zones,  263f 
 parameters of,  261 
 Videotape camcorders,  419–420 
 Videotapes, training through,  662–663 
 Vigilance,  296–297f 
 Visibility,  237–238 
 Visibility curves, factors in determining, 
 473–474 
 Visible light,  235–236f 
 Visual angle,  237 
 Visual information 
 displaying,  303–308 
 presentation,  300t 
 Visual strain,  allowances for,  473–475e 
 Volvo approach to motivation,  672 
 Wage incentives, 615, 637–657 
 administration of,  651–654 
 checklist for sound plans,  654t 
 design of,  651 
 failure of,  654–655t 
 implementing,  650–655 
 Warehousing material,  103f 
 Warning lights,  306–307t 
 Warrick’s principle,  206 
 Watch time (WT) in time study,  420 
 WBGT.  See Wet-bulb globe temperature 
 Weber’s law,  301f 
 Westinghouse rating system,  453–456 
 Wet-bulb globe temperature (WBGT), 
 254–256 
 White finger syndrome,  209, 222, 264 
 Wickens’ multiple-resource model,  296 
 Willful violation OSHA citation,  363 
 WIMP (windows, icons, menus, 
pointers),  314 
 Wind chill index,  257 
 Windows,  314 
 Work design,  5, 7–9, 13, 17–18t, 118–120 
 Work design, principles for,  
environment, 235–271
human capabilities, 132–149
 machines and equipment,  199–206 
 tools,  212–224 
 workplace,  185–198 
 Work elements,  58, 59, 60, 62 
Work environment check list, 273f
 Work groups,  671, 672 
 Work hardening,  663 
 Work-related musculoskeletal 
disorders,  206 
 factors leading to,  208–212 
 Work rest cycles,  141 
 Work sampling,  463, 555–579, 616t 
 advantages over traditional time study, 
 556 
correlated observations, 563–564e
 designing form for,  566 
 determining allowances through,  574 
 determining number of observations, 
 562–564 
 determining observation frequency for, 
 565–566 
 determining standard time,  574–577 
 number of observations needed in, 
 562–564 
 observation frequency for,  565–566 
 planning the study,  562–570 
 recording observations,  570–571 
self observation, 577–578
 selling,  561–562 
 theory of,  556–561 
 using control charts in,  566, 568–570e 
 Work sampling software,  579 
 Work simplification,  5 
 Work station check list,   198f 
 Work surface height, 187–188f   
 Worker and machine process chart,  
38–41 
 Worker and machine relationships,  41–63 
 Workers’ compensation,  358–360 
 categories of disability for,  359 
 Working areas 
 in horizontal plane,  194f 
 in vertical plane,  195f 
 Working memory,  287 
 Workload analysis in service industry, 
 631–632e 
 Workplace inspections by OSHA,  
362–363 
 Workstation, properly adjusted,  193f 
 Workstation evaluation checklist,  198f 
 Wright model of learning curve,  667 
 Wright’s formula,  53 
 Writing grip,  214 
 Written instructions, training 
through,  662 
 X-rays,  264 
 Yerkes-Dodson inverted-U curve,  
296–297f 
 Zoning restraints,  59–60 

