NINA KIRIKI HOFFMAN
KEY SIGNATURES
AS FAR AS THE SYSTEM WAS concerned, Zita Wilson came into existence one
September morning at 8:56 a.m. when she was about two and a worker found her
on
the welcome mat at the Social Services Offices.
At eighteen, she got out from under the system's scrutiny, but she couldn't
escape the sense that she needed more than the food, shelter, and care rough
and
tender but never permanent that the system had given her.
Ten years and eight moves later, she arrived in Spores Ferry, Oregon.
Angus's workshop was a basement room with fiddles hanging all over the walls,
and a workbench holding a bunch of blue horsehair, vice grips, and scattered
mysterious tools and bits of wood. The air smelled of oil, glue, and furniture
polish. Angus, a hunched old man with a disarming chipped-tooth grin and
black-framed glasses, pulled a battered fiddle from the constellation on the
wall and handed it to Zita, then equipped her with a bow after tightening the
hairs.
Zita had sung in choral groups at some of the high schools she had gone to.
She
could carry a tune. She had even taken piano lessons for a year at one foster
home, paying for a half hour lesson a week with money she got from doing extra
household chores. She had had a sense that music was waiting just beyond her
ability to play, and it saddened her when she had had to move on and lost her
lessons and access to a piano.
Unlike the piano, the fiddle had an infinite capacity to sound horrible, the
piano's capacity to sound bad being limited to how many keys she could push
down
at once. The fiddle sounded dreadful as soon as she touched bow to string.
Angus, who told her he had been playing sixty-two years -- "Built my first
fiddle from a cigar box when I was six," he said -- picked up another fiddle
and
drew a bow across the strings, sounding a sweet, clear note. "Only difference
between a fiddle and a violin is attitude," he said. "If you were playing a
violin they'd tell you all these things about how to hold this and where to
put
that, but in my old time fiddle class I just want you to have fun. If you get
a
tune out of it, all the better." He grinned at her and made the bow dance
across
the strings. A wonderful bouncy tune jumped out, making her feet itch to jig.
She handed him a hundred dollars and became owner of the battered fiddle, a
beat-up case lined with worn yellow fake fur, a bow, and a lump of rosin.
A week later, Zita went to her first class in the new community. The Old Time
Fiddle by Ear class met seven to ten Thursday nights in the cafeteria of an
area
elementary school. Zita had walked into more than enough new situations; she
didn't hesitate on the threshold, but strolled in and chose a seat in the

circle
of chairs set out on the institutional beige linoleum. Angus greeted her,
calling her Rita, and introduced her to a man six and a half feet tall and
more
than sixty years old. "This is Bill," said Angus.
Bill was wearing a guitar, cowboy boots, jeans, and a western shirt with pearl
snaps. He had a villain's mustache, and the portable atmosphere of a cigarette
smoker. He also had flesh-colored hearing aids in each ear. He gave Zita a
wide
grin. "Always like to meet a nice young lady," he said.
"Bill's our accompaniment," Angus said.
Zita switched her case to her left hand and shook Bill's right.
Other people were wandering in, setting their fiddle cases on the tables and
getting out instruments, tightening bows and tuning. Though this was the first
meeting of the class, many seemed to know each other already. Zita smiled at
Bill, then went over to set down her own case. She had practiced scraping the
bow across the fiddle strings at home, and received angry calls from people in
the upstairs apartment. She needed to find somewhere else to practice.
By the end of class she figured she had picked the wrong thing to take this
time. She took different classes in each new community, searching for
something
she could belong to. Playing the fiddle was too hard; the weird position she
had
to twist into to hold the fiddle to her chin and get her hand around the
fiddle's neck tired her, and she couldn't get a good sound out of the damned
thing.
The next morning she got up to go to work and noticed aches and pains she had
never had before. The next night, she practiced (her upstairs neighbors had
gone
to a movie) and finally got a real note from the fiddle.
She was hooked.
At the sixth class of the ten-week term, Bill came to her and said, "You're
getting real good on that thing. You ought to come out to the grange Friday
night."
She had heard people in class talking about granges-- there was a grange dance
every Friday, rotating between four granges monthly. She had heard, but hadn't
listened. She wasn't ready to perform for anybody, even though every week in
class she had to stand up and play when her turn came. It wasn't scary in
class.
Other people played along, helping her keep time and rhythm and, in the wildly
hard tunes, notes. She felt like she knew everybody in class as well as she
had
known anybody in her life, and they were all friendly.
"Come on," Bill said. "Why, I'll pick you up and take you out there, bring you
home whenever you say."
Her secret life began the next night.
Sitting at her window in the bank, she wondered what the other tellers would
say

if they knew of her secret life. Most of them went home to television and
children and exhaustion; to Zita it felt odd how her present life was
fragmenting within itself, her job in one fragment, her fiddle class in
another,
and the grange dances in a third, different sets of people in each fragment,
though Bill and Angus and a few other fiddle students overlapped two.
The granges were miles out of town, and gathered dancers and musicians from
their local populations, she never saw people in town that she had met at the
granges, aside from fiddle class people. She felt like a superhero. She could
put on a whole different set of clothes and assume another identity, flirting
and dancing with the men, gossiping with the women, pretending she was a
country
girl when she had spent most of her life in metropolitan areas. They knew
nothing about her, but they accepted her without question. At first she knew
nothing about them. She gathered bits and snippets of information and took
them
home to warm her in the silence of her apartment.
On her first night she had listened to the musicians and realized none of them
would ever make a record. Some of the fiddlers were talented and some were
very
untalented. After six three-hour classes she could play a tune as well as the
worst of them, better than a few. The guitar players just played chords and
kept
time. An occasional bull fiddle, mandolin, harmonica, or banjo lent spice to
some of the meetings, but even without them the dances went fine. Some people
sang but their voices weren't the kind you heard on the radio; syllables got
swallowed, pitch varied from true, and sometimes they forgot the words.
When she shook off her competitive edge she started listening in a different
way. She heard the music saying something in a language she could almost
understand. It had warmth in it, an invitation. Come. Here is home. Her heart
wanted to open, but the scar tissue was too thick.
She got books of lyrics out of the library and studied the words to the tunes
she had learned on the fiddle, "Take These Chains," "You Are My Sunshine,"
"Have
I Told You Lately that I Love You," "The Wild Side of Life," "Wildwood
Flower."
Most of the songs had been written thirty or forty years earlier. That made
sense. Most of the musicians and dancers were upwards of fifty; one of the
fiddlers was eighty-seven, another ninety-one.
Some of the other tunes had titles but no words, and those, she thought, were
older, brought to this new world from over the sea, passed down through
families, trailing history with them; some had probably originated in the
mountains to the East. Most of the people at the granges came from out of
state,
Minnesota, Arkansas, Kentucky, Tennessee.
Travelers, like she was, ending up in Oregon, as she had. Jetsam, washed up on
this particular beach.
The Thursday night after class had disbanded for the summer, Bill called Zita
and asked her if she'd like to go play music in Kelly's garage. Zita had
picked
up a few tales from Kelly and Bill, though she couldn't always understand
their
accents or their habit of speaking almost too softly to hear. Kelly and Bill

had
driven taxis together in San Diego after they left the navy following World
War
II, and before that they had both come from Arkansas, though they hadn't known
each other when they were younger, had only met after they had gone around the
world. They had both moved to Spores Ferry in the late fifties, raising their
children as friends, their grandchildren as mutual.
Zita had met Kelly on one of his visits to the fiddle class, and she liked
him.
She and Kelly sometimes made faces at each other at the granges. Kelly, whose
hair was thick and white, who wore silver tips on the points of his collar and
sported a turquoise bolo tie, could roll his eyes faster than anybody else
Zita
had ever seen.
Waiting for Bill to pick her up and take her to Kelly's, Zita took her fiddle
down from the wall (one of the first things Angus told his class was, "Hang
your
fiddle on the wall, where you can grab it and play any old time. Don't make it
hard to get to.") and thought of her lives in other places, how she had made
an
effort to meet people but usually ended up spending all her nonwork time in
her
apartment, communing with the television and all the friends there who never
answered when she spoke to them. In her various foster families there had been
brief sparks of warmth -- a gentle haircut from one woman, a secret alphabet
with a foster sister they could write coded notes to each other in, a
treasured
doll for her eleventh Christmas -- and brief sparks of violence, shock,
disillusionment. And long stretches of sadness.
She nested the fiddle in its case and looked at its battered face. "Tell you
what," Angus had said when he sold the fiddle to her, "this fiddle used to
belong to Jack Green. I think he got it from his granddaddy. Saw him play it
many a time. After his death his widow sold it to a pawn shop, and I found it
there. You take good care of it and don't leave it where the sun can get it,
specially not in a locked car, hear met"
Her fiddle had a longer history than she did.
But then, most instruments probably outlasted their players.
The door bell rang, and she closed and picked up her fiddle case. Never before
had she had a date to go to someone's garage. She opened the door and smiled
at
Bill, and he smiled back.
Kelly's house was just another small suburban house in a neighborhood full of
such houses. She had lived in houses like that herself. Grinning, Kelly pushed
the garage door up to let Zita and Bill duck under, and inside there were six
chairs arranged in a circle, and three other old men sitting with instruments
on
their laps.
"Hey, it's a girl," said the one in the cowboy hat and flowing white beard.
His
blue eyes gleamed behind his glasses.
"This here's Sid," Kelly said, pointing to the bearded man, "and that's Harve,

and that's Walt. They came down from Angel Home." Kelly turned to the seated
men. "This little gal's just started playing, and she's picking it up real
fast."
Zita smiled at them. A foster mother's warning about being alone with men
flashed through her head and vanished. Bill was one of the nicest people she
had
ever known, though she had been suspicious of so much kindness at first. He
had
been lavish with praise, and cheered her when she learned to return
compliments,
a skill she had to learn from him. "Hi," she said.
"Sit right down," said Kelly, gesturing at an unfolded metal chair. "Want
coffee?" Its warm brown scent flavored the air. He poured a mugful for her
from
an industrial-sized thermos, handed it to her. Bill sat next to her. A
butterfly
waved wings in her chest. She had finally gotten up the nerve to play a tune
at
a grange dance last Friday, with Angus playing along beside her and covering
up
her mistakes with his own loud accuracy. The experience was amazing: people
had
danced, and she had played the tune they danced to. She had felt a queer sense
of power that almost scared her.
There was less room here for her sound to be swallowed by someone else's. What
if they expected her to be perfect?
She put a mute on the bridge of her fiddle. Even she couldn't hear herself
play.
After half an hour of her playing tiny tentative notes and hoping they fit the
tunes the others were playing Harve (large in overalls, and wearing a billed
cap
that bore the logo of a tractor rental company in Oklahoma) said, "Take that
thing off. Better to make noise than silence."
"Your turn to play a tune, anyway, and you got to play it so we can hear,"
said
Bill.
She glanced sideways at him. She wanted to try "Chinese Breakdown," but she
didn't know it well enough yet. She thickened out and played "Wabash
Cannonball," which was so simple she had locked it down by the third class.
"Shaping up to be a fine fiddler," Kelly said when she had done. She smiled at
him, then looked at the cracked cement floor.
Bill sang an old Hank Williams song.
"Remember the first time I heard that," said Sid. "We used to have
battery-operated radios --"
Zita, picturing the big garbage-can-sized radios she had seen in thirties
movies, said, "Weren't they wired to plug in?"
"Sure, you could get them that way, but we didn't have electricity in the
cabin," said Sid. "After the sun went down you could pull in the Grand Ole
Opry.

And those big old batteries would be running out of juice and we'd scootch
over
closer to the radio and listen harder and the sound would fade and we'd
scootch
closer, and . . . " He cupped his ear and grinned.
Wait said, "When I went to war I was in the Navy, and they broadcast updates
from the ship I was on. I didn't know about it till later, but my mama said
she
figured as long as those broadcasts came through I was okay."
"Hey, you wanna talk, save it for the telephone," said Kelly, and struck up a
tune on his mandolin, "There's More Pretty Girls than One."
Zita played along, feeling her bow slide smoothly over the strings, not
bumping
and jumping and jiggling out dreadful screechy hiccuping sounds the way it had
when she first started. She thought of Sid as a boy, inching closer to his
radio
to catch scratchy distant music, and suddenly a vision opened up inside her, a
vision of a web the music made, stretching across time and space, entering the
ears of a girl a hundred years ago, edging out her fingers for her children to
hear eighty years ago, coming out in hums from those same children now grown
fifty years ago, in the hearing of their own children and maybe the children
of
strangers, melting from one form into another, threads of tune catching up
different beads of words, carrying them, dropping them, threading through
others, transforming and traveling and yet carrying the original signatures of
the first drums, the first lyres, the first flutes, the first voices.
Here was a heredity, handed out freely, gathering in sons and daughters, only
asking to be learned and known and passed on. She looked at these five men,
who
had come from five different directions and ended up here in the garage with
her, joining her in the instant family that shared tunes created.
She smiled wide at all of them, and they smiled back.
"Here's an oldie but a goodie," said Walt. "The Log Cabin Waltz."
"Teach me," said Zita.

