Ashida Kim                     DOJO PRESS 2000 
 
NINJA MIND CONTROL is, without doubt, one of the best selling and most widely read 
books on Ninja Meditation ever written. It has been translated into six languages and distributed 
worldwide with excellent result. Achieve mastery over your own mind and possess the key that 
unlocks the secrets of the cosmos. The true Mystic-Warrior prevails without unsheathing his 
weapon. He is master of the bloodless coup. With his mental and physical abilities he evades, 
confuses, and “clouds the mind” of any opponent. Revealed here are the Breathing Exercises 
and Kuji-Kiri hand positions that enable you to collect, cultivate, and circulate Qi, the vital life-
force that surrounds, permeates, and flows within the body. Through these methods, mind read-
ing, hypnosis and suggestion, the Ninja controls himself, and, in so doing, the outcome of every 
encounter as well. Includes the Five Element Exercises and Mi Lu Kata, the Lost Track Form, 
of self defense that can turn even the most humble into a fighting champion.  
Ninja Mind Control was first published in 1984 and is still sold and distributed domestically 
and abroad by unscrupulous editors and literary agents who reverted all publishing rights back 
to the Author in 1996. This DOJO PRESS  Electronic Book Edition is the ONLY publication 
authorized by Ashida Kim and has been reproduced from original manuscript and photos to pre-
clude ANY claim of copyright infringement by the former publishers.  

                      Contents 
 
Introduction         3 
 
The Warrior-Mystic: Levels of Training        5 
 
The Nei Ching     10 
 
   Chi Kung: Breathing Exercises     13 
 
Kuji-Kiri: The Nine Levels of Power     15 
 
The Five Elements    22 
 
Nei Kung: Internal Strength    27 
 
Mental Powers     30 
 
Mi Lu Kata: The Lost Track Form      36 
The Hidden Masters: Spirit Helpers   66 
Postscript    69 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DOJO PRESS  Edition, 2000 
 
Copyright C) 1985 by Ashida Kim 
All rights reserved.  No part of this book may be reproduced in any form, except by a newspaper or magazine reviewer who 
wish to quote brief passages for the purposes of  review. Neither the author nor the publisher assumes arty responsibility for the 
use or misuse of information contained in this book. 
 
DOJO PRESS  books may be purchased in bulk at special discounts for sales promotions, fund-raising, or educational purposes.  
Special editions can be created to specifications Editorial, sales and distribution, rights and permissions inquiries should be ad-
dressed to DOJO PRESS, P.O.Box 209, Lake Alfred FL 33850 USA or AshidaKim.com 
 
 
Manufactured in the United States of America 
ISBN 0-8065-0997-X 

Introduction 
 
"There are no extraordinary men, only ordinary men in extraordinary situations. 
 
Those who have purchased this volume with the idea of employing mind control to further 
their own selfish motives will be sadly disappointed.  Indeed, such manipulations would be con-
sidered by some to be "black magic," and thus "evil." Such attempts will almost certainly bring 
about the self-inflicted downfall of the perpetrator. 
What we shall teach is far more valuable: You shall learn how to control your own mind.  You 
are about to participate in a great adventure.  You are about to experience the awe and mystery 
that reach from the inner sanctum of the mind to the outer limits of reality. 
These pages contain the most profound and ancient exercises ever recorded.  Do not begin 
them lightly, or without proper respect, for they are powerful in the extreme and will almost 
certainly change your life for the better.  Once begun, there can be no going back to the past, or 
leaping forward into the future.  There is only the reality of now. 
These movements will balance the flow of energy in the body, thereby healing old wounds 
and filling the self with vitality.  That is their first benefit.  It is often said, "What good are all 
the treasures of the earth, if one does not have health?" These exercises will give you health.
   This will not happen immediately, of course.  The effects of all yogic postures, like those of 
meditation, are cumulative.  One simply starts, and before long, one notices that some ache or 
pain, which was obvious at the outset, now seems much improved or has vanished altogether.  
Surely these rewards of daily exercise, the maintenance and well being of the body, are worth a 
few minutes of time.  Surely you did not expect to read one chapter and have instant mind con-
trol over the masses.  Whatever effort would have been expended toward that goal can much 
better be spent on the improvement of oneself; that is a far nobler mission, to be certain. 
The second benefit of these techniques is the gradual development of the ability to direct, or 
conversely, to act in accordance with, the flow of energy within the physical body.  With this 
power, one transcends the lower levels of consciousness that impede progress toward the reali-
zation of one's true nature and place in the universe. 
Once we have acquired self-knowledge and understand the way of Nature, it is clearly evident 
that no one can control the actions of another.  In fact, if we can learn to control our own wants 
and needs, let alone our fears and desires, we shall have accomplished a great deal.  When that 
is achieved, we shall no longer seek to control others, or even to interfere in their lives by giv-
ing advice.  We shall glow with the vitality and energy of inner peace. 
Seeking only to improve ourselves, we shall be seen as good examples to follow; and divest-
ing ourselves of petty ambition in order to pursue this great goal, we-shall be known as follow-
ers of peace.  Because we know our inner strength cannot be threatened, we are unlikely to feel 
the need for power over others.  In this way, the true power can be achieved, because others, 
motivated by self-interest, will want to know how we can do the things we shall learn herein. 
And when they ask, we must tell them freely, and share all that we have, so that they, too, can 
find the Way. 
 
                                                                       3 

Kinjiru, pronounced "ken-jeh-roo," is Japanese for "forbidden" or "secret." Beware, those 
who would journey here.  Beware, those who would begin the inner quest in search of the 
Light, for there are dangers here.  You will meet creatures of the id, the masks of ego.  Dare 
you pass between the pillars of self-doubt and gaze into the mirror of self-knowledge?  These 
techniques can light the path for you, where many have gone before.  They can lead the way 
to the source, where all questions are answered and all things made clear.  There is power 
here, enough to destroy you; there is love here, enough to make you immortal; and there is 
wisdom here, which is knowing the difference. 
The key is practice.  Wisdom may come in a day, in a single flash of insight; or it may grow 
slowly over the years-but come it will.  A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single 
step.  The journey does not end until you concede that you have reached your goal. Once the 
wheel is set in motion, it goes on forever.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                           4 

The Warrior-Mystic 
Levels of Training 
 
"To be a Ninja, one must be strong; one must know; one must dare; and one must keep silent." 
 
ONE MUST BE STRONG 
 
The principal attribute of a warrior is strength.  There are two kinds of strength, the outer and 
the inner.  The outer strength is apparent and fades with age; while the inner is subtle, unseen, 
and eternal.  The Ninja may be possessed of either or both. 
Normally, the strongest individual will be the leader in any group of Ninja with a similarity 
of purpose.  This occurs naturally and without need for contest.  Having trained and studied in 
the martial arts for long periods, the Ninja are considered masters of weaponry.  Furthermore, 
their skill and versatility are so great that virtually anything can be employed as an implement 
of destruction.  This does not even take into account the Ninja's lethal use of the hands and 
feet. 
The Ninja have both fighting ability and a high level of extrasensory acuity, which grants 
them a psychological as well as physical "edge" in any combat.  They not only possess the 
"strength of ten because their hearts are pure," but their calm in the face of the storm often de-
termines the outcome.  All Ninja are men of peace, and must always remain so or lose many 
of the special powers they have developed. 
Beyond this, the Ninja are also adept at field-craft, infiltrating, and espionage.  Because of 
their scouting skills and peripheral kinesthetic sensitivity, Ninja customarily surprise their op-
ponents slightly more than half the time.  This may be a result of creeping up on the enemy 
and striking from behind, or of using a feint or sucker punch when fighting head-on.  Much of 
this ability is due to constant and rigorous training, as well as a vast amount of study.  After 
that, the Ninja creates his own form. 
Other benefits of being a Ninja warrior include the power to size up an opponent by his 
stance, and the concurrent knack of reading the body language of others, which enables the 
Ninja to determine the covert goal of an individual.  By these means, the Ninja develops a 
sphere of influence within which relative safety can be maintained. 
Ninja also have the ability to treat their own wounds, the minor injuries that are incurred by 
even the most scrupulous and careful practitioner in the course of training.  With that, they 
also have the power to help others.  Most common ailments are avoided by virtue of regular 
exercise and attention to diet, so good health follows naturally. 
After a certain level of experience has been attained, the Ninja gains the ability to employ 
powers that in many circles would be considered almost psychic.  The charisma of such a 
fighter is such that he attracts to himself, without effort, a body of followers.  These followers 
may appear as students or associates, and they are completely loyal upon initiation.  They may 
band together for a common goal or seek counsel; but in either event, they will remain loyal 
only as long as the behavior of the leader is constant. 
 
                                                                           5 

ONE MUST KNOW 
 
To develop the talents associated with the mystic side of Ninja training, in addition to pos-
sessing strength, one must "know." To know means to have intelligence.  This does not refer 
to the I.Q. so often quoted as a measure of intellect, but rather to an understanding or ability to 
learn. 
Many people limit themselves to leading boring, dull lives by accepting the judgment of oth-
ers that they are of low intelligence.  This is not so.  Just because one does not process sensory 
information and replay it the same way as everyone else-which in any case would be boring in 
the extreme and mark the extinction of creativity-does not mean that there is a lack of compre-
hension or interest. Just because a person does not understand another's purpose does not 
mean that he is confused. 
The Ninja possess mental powers of an informational, offensive, or defensive nature; but it is 
only during the latter stages of training that these techniques actually become effective in 
hand-to-hand combat.  That is to say, after much practice one is able to defeat the enemy with-
out physical contact.  By that time, the student has mostly transcended motives that would 
land him in a situation where these paranormal powers would be warranted. 
Ninja mysticism may take many forms.  The simple form makes it possible to deflect nega-
tive vibrations and defend oneself against psychological assault merely by maintaining one's 
emotional balance.  The more complex forms require mantras, somatic components, and 
elaborate rituals for maximum efficiency.  The individual must first determine the methodol-
ogy of his or her own psychological thought forms or constructs.  Since one of the primary at-
tributes of the spy has always been a good memory, most agents have never written down 
their techniques, although some tora-maki, or sacred scrolls, do exist. 
Through the study of the mind, the Ninja hopes to gain wisdom and become a man of knowl-
edge.  As such, he attains an almost spiritual level of dedication to his art, which confers upon 
him a high degree of skill at arms.  Many such accomplished Ninja are known by the eternal 
symbols they have adopted to signify their quests, but in time even these are put aside.  At this 
level, the reverence for life becomes so great that the Ninja will no longer kill, and their pow-
ers are directed only toward revitalizing, protecting, and encouraging the efforts of others. 
The goal of the true seeker is to become a sage, or superior man.  There are certain immuta-
ble laws of the universe, which the sage must be in harmony with.  Different Ninja sects es-
pouse some laws in particular, according them greater significance than the others.  But each 
law is essential in its own right, and must be considered equal to the rest. 
 
The Law of Balance.  Even the most ancient sages have pointed out that all things are pos-
sessed of an equal and opposite counterbalancing force in reality.  The high rests upon the low; 
the front follows the back.  One can know beauty as beauty only because there is ugliness. 
 
The Law of Extremes.  When two counterbalancing forces are carried to their limits, they are 
seen to be identical.  One is blinded by a brilliant light as effectively as by darkness. 
 
 
 
                                                                        6 
 

The Law of Karma.  All things are interrelated, and everything affects everything else.  Thus 
whatever we send into the lives of others comes back into our own life, with threefold strength. 
 
The Law of Change.  All things proceed sequentially through an orderly series of progressive 
steps.  The one thing that can be depended upon to remain constant is that things will continue 
to change in a logical and cyclical manner. 
                                                                         
A Ninja who has attained the level of sage is so at peace and in harmony with the way of Na-
ture that he remains virtually untouched by the passage of time or the change of regimes.  Such 
a warrior views Yin and Yang as balancing forces of the universe and recognizes the endless 
cycle of change, inevitable and inexorable. 
The sage communicates with the Hidden Masters and is in touch with the "cosmic conscious-
ness" by means of his ability to direct, or flow in harmony with, the psychokinetic energy of the 
mind and body as one.  This is spoken of in many arts, but is achieved by few.  It is often 
known as channeling the chi, or vital life force.  Thus it may be said that the superior man has a 
secret language of his own, and can communicate by telepathic means. 
This level of skill is so high that there are seldom more than a few such masters known in any 
one generation.  They rarely live in or near cities, preferring the solitude of rural or ascetic set-
tings.  They have been known to "interfere" in the affairs of men from time to time, however.  
This is the basis for the legends of the Old Man of the Mountain, a figure that recurs in both 
Chinese and medieval stories and mythology. 
By virtue of their simple, monastic existence, the sages are readily able to find or manufacture 
for themselves almost any item or device necessary for their survival.  They are patient and dili-
gent, and they are generally considered excellent craftsmen and gracious hosts.  Because of 
their highly developed senses and their perception of the foibles of mankind, they often appear 
to embody, or to have, what might be considered supernatural powers. 
Unlike the Ninja who have accomplished the lower stages, the superior man attracts no band 
of followers, imparting to each pilgrim enough knowledge at one time that prolonged study 
with the sage is unnecessary. 
 
ONE MUST DARE 
 
The third requirement for the avid Ninja is to "dare." This refers to the Ninjas' talents and 
abilities that allow them to overcome the enemy with nonviolence.  The Ninja at this level are 
the agents in the field who are masters of the bloodless coup, those who win without fighting, 
the magicians of Ninjitsu.  Dexterity is their trademark; prestidigitation, or sleight of hand, is 
the principle of their magical working.  While the warrior contends with force and strength, the 
mystic battles with cunning and stealth.  These attributes comprise the Ninja art of invisibility. 
In Ninjitsu, dexterity is as much mental as physical.  To this end, agents practice codes and ci-
phers in addition to other mental gymnastics, such as puzzles or mazes.  This enables practitio-
ners to open all manner of locks and pass unhindered through areas loaded with traps and death-
dealing devices.  The Ninjas' level of skill is determined by individual cleverness and a thor-
ough knowledge of such devices.  Much of this skill also depends on astute powers of observa-
tion and an understanding of basic motivations and social patterns. 
By these means, and the ability to remain unseen, the Ninja have gained a reputation for in-
visibility.                                                            7 

In practical application, such techniques depend largely upon methods of concealing oneself 
in shadows or other inconspicuous cover.  The Ninja must also maintain adequate balance to 
enable him to move silently from one point of hiding to another without detection.  A useful ad-
junct to this type of activity is wall-climbing kung, a technique which enables the Ninja to as-
cend vertical surfaces quickly and quietly-a practical method of vanishing from view and dan-
ger. 
The primary function of the Ninja is spying, gathering intelligence either for his own use or 
for the purpose of espionage.  Anyone may be recruited as a spy, given sufficient incentives, ei-
ther of financial reward or threat of harm.  Depending on the difficulty of the assignment, fees 
may be quite high.  Of course, the level of skill of the potential agent is also a determining fac-
tor. 
The "zealot" factor must also be considered.  A zealot might be, for instance, an individual 
with a personal motive for revenge so overpowering that it ensures complete dedication to the 
cause.  Or, through intensive training and psychological manipulation, an elite team of fanatic 
followers can be trained to sacrifice even their own lives to accomplish a given mission.  In bat-
tle, these trained zealots behave much like the Viking berserker warriors, remaining virtually 
impervious to injury or pain until either the conflict is resolved or they are forcibly overcome 
by sheer weight of numbers and loss of blood.  When sent out as assassins, such warriors use 
any covert means available to them to isolate the target and destroy it mysteriously.  If captured, 
which is highly unlikely, they will kill themselves rather than reveal their identity. 
One notable example of this kind of warrior is provided by the Japanese kamikaze pilots of 
World War 11, who flung themselves upon the enemy of their people as human bombs, for the 
sake of giri-duty, honor, and glory. 
Ninja were once known as the men who could fight or vanish.  Using the principle that the en-
emy could not hit what he did not see, the Ninja devised many methods of getting behind the 
opponent, thereby forcing him to look over his shoulder to catch sight of the agent.  Not many 
people can fight well in that position.  Then, too, an attack from behind is doubly effective since 
the adversary cannot adequately prepare for it or defend against it. 
Furthermore, Ninja are adept at dodging and evading the attacks of the opponent.  This ability 
gives the accomplished Ninja a better than 50 percent chance of successfully avoiding a missile, 
such as an arrow or thrown dagger.  This is true even if the missile is launched from out of 
sight, which would catch any normal man unawares. 
Most Ninja fight better unarmed.  Striking with the hands and feet, as well as using throwing 
and falling techniques, enables the practitioner to initiate multiple attacks or to strike multiple 
opponents simultaneously.  Such open-hand strikes may be sufficient to stun or kill the enemy 
with a single blow, unless he is of exceptional stature. 
Ninja at this level train almost constantly, honing their reflexes, "sharpening their tools," forg-
ing their bodies in the fire of their will.  They are the epitome of the Ninja legends, believing 
that nothing is impossible.  They are beyond the stage of competition with other martial art-
ists. instead, each Ninja plays against himself, the only adversary worthy of contention. 
                                                                         
 
 
 
 
                                                                        8 

ONE MUST KEEP SILENT 
 
The concept of "silence" in Ninjitsu is not meant to imply secrecy, or reticence to share in-
formation on any level.  Rather, it conveys the lack of necessity for comment.  Those who 
know do not need to be told; and those who do not know seldom listen. 
Prolonged study of esoteric forces along with practicing the exercises that develop conscious 
control of the energy centers of the body bring concurrently a subconscious knowledge and 
intuitive understanding of the forces of Nature.  This enables the Ninja to develop certain 
powers that are latent in all humans. 
First, due to self-knowledge and confidence, the Ninja is resistant to all forms of flattery, 
suggestion, and intimidation.  The ability to mask his mind against interrogation and conceal 
the true motive of an assignment evolves simultaneously, thus lending an implacable air of 
calmness to the Ninja's demeanor. 
Second, by controlling his body, the Ninja can induce states of diminished respiration and 
heart rate sufficient to simulate death.  This is the power of suspended animation of the Hindu 
masters.  With this, the Ninja acquires the skill of healing wounds by meditative means alone, 
if need be. 
These first two powers lead to acquiring the power of empathy, not only with other people, 
but also with pets and wild animals.  Some Ninja report a certain rapport even with plants.  
This enables the practitioner to move in harmony with Nature, thus rendering him invisible for 
all practical purposes. 
In the final stages, the Ninja learns to direct the energy of the earth and influence change in 
accordance with his will.  This is the level of the "Vibrating Palm," in which the mere wave of 
a hand may be sufficient to cause death, either instantly or on a delayed basis.  This is the 
foundation of the dim mak or "death touch." 
With an understanding of the cosmic forces, the Ninja automatically gains an air of calm dig-
nity.  Any need to prove himself in battle is long past, as is any trepidation accompanying the 
initiation into the art of love by a member of the opposite sex.  Until that initiation, the mys-
teries of the universe remain concealed behind an almost mystical veil.  Thereafter it becomes 
apparent that every being possesses all the latent elements of sexuality, in one form or another.  
This is seen as Yang and Yin.  Yang is positive, masculine, and white, representing the right 
side and a force from above; and Yin is negative, feminine, and black, representing the left 
side and rising from below.  Yang could also be described as "power," restless and in perpet-
ual pursuit; and Yin as "love," passive and enveloping.  Yin is ever circling Yang, which is al-
ways striving to move forward.  From this action is formed the whirling staircase of the uni-
verse. 
Each individual carries both aspects, Yin and Yang, positive and negative, within the self.  
When the electric energy dominates, the person is said to be more masculine; when the mag-
netic holds sway, the person is said to be more feminine.  Few are capable of complete bal-
ance.  Therefore people tend to seek, or fall prey to, an energy that is complementary.  This is 
the meaning of the phrase "water seeks its own level" and provides the foundation for virtually 
all interaction between humans. 
 
 
 
                                                                 9 

The Nei Ching 
 
            Before presenting the mind-control exercises of the Ninja, it is important to have some 
idea why they work.  Therefore I have started this section of the book with excerpts from the 
Nei Ching, the world's oldest known book on medicine.  This begins with the Su Wen, a tran-
script of conversations between Huang Ti, the Yellow Emperor of China circa B.C. 3000, and 
Ch'i Po, his master physician. 
 
“I have heard that in ancient times, the people lived to be over one hundred years old, and 
yet remained active and did not become decrepit in their activities.  But in our time, they 
only reach half that age and become weak and failing.  Is it that mankind is degenerating 
through the ages and is losing his original vigor and vitality? 
In ancient times, the people understood the Tao, the great principle of the universe.  They pat-
terned themselves upon the laws of Yin and Yang, were sober and led regular simple lives in 
harmony with Nature.  For these reasons, they were healthy in mind and body, and could live to 
a ripe old age.  In our time, they drink alcohol as if it were water, seek all manner of physical 
pleasure and abandon themselves to intemperance.  Their passions exhaust their vital forces, 
their cravings dissipate their true essence, they do not know how to find contentment within 
themselves.  They are not skilled in the control of their spirits and devote all their attention to 
the amusement of the mind.  For these reasons they degenerate and do not live beyond the age 
of fifty.  The sage teaches us to lead a simple and peaceful life; keeping energy in reserve pre-
vents attack by illness; guarding against desires, the heart will be at peace; so while the body 
may fatigue, the mind does not.  In this way one may still reach the age of one hundred. Yin in 
the interior is the guardian of Yang; Yang in the exterior motivates Yin.      
Yin and Yang are the Tao of heaven and earth (the laws of unity and opposition), the fun-
damental principle of the ten thousand things (which creates all matter and its transmuta-
tions), the originators of change, the beginning of birth (creation) and death (the destruction 
of all things), and the storehouse of all that is mysterious in the natural world.... The treat-
ment and prevention of disease must be sought in this basic law. 
Now the Yin and Yang have name, but no form.  Thus they can be extended from one to 
ten, ten to a hundred, one hundred to a thousand, then to ten thousand, so that they include ' 
all things.  All things may be classified according to their nature. 
When speaking of Yin and Yang, the exterior is Yang, the interior Yin; when speaking of 
the body, the back is Yang, the abdomen Yin; when speaking of the solid and hollow or-
gans, the liver, heart, spleen, lungs, and kidney are solid and Yin; the gall bladder, stomach, 
large intestine, small intestine, [and] bladder ... are all hollow and Yang.  Thus, the back is 
Yang and the Yang within the Yang is the heart; the Yin within the Yang is the lungs.  The 
abdomen is Yin and the Yin within the Yin is the kidneys; the Yang within the abdomen is 
the liver and the spleen. 
Yin and Yang wax and wane.  Functional movement belongs to Yang, which is electric, 
while nourishing substances are Yin, or magnetic; nor can one exist without the other.  
Thus are the myriad things able to come to birth.  Yin and Yang acting upon one another, 
producing change.” 
 
                                                                 10 

   In acupuncture, there is a facet of treatment known as “obtaining chi,” whereby the physi-
cian determines if the point selected for treatment is applicable and appropriate for the patient.  
This may be done by slightly irritating the point, or by pinching gently.  In either event, if the 
proper reaction occurs, that is the site of treatment.  The method relies on the circulation of en-
ergy in the meridians of the body to be effective. 
The Nei Ching says, "Man possesses four seas and twelve meridians, which are like rivers 
that flow to the ocean" (Chart of the Body).  The Sea of Nourishment represents the stomach.  
If there is too much energy, there is swelling of the abdomen; too little, and the patient cannot 
eat.  The Sea of Blood is the meeting point of the twelve rivers.  When there is excess, one 
feels heavy; when there is a deficiency, one feels uneasy.  The Sea of Energy passes through 
the Gate of jade, at the base of the skull; when it is affected, one feels pain in the chest, pre-
sents a flushed expression, and has a sensation of breathlessness; when there is not enough en-
ergy, one cannot speak.  Last is the Sea of Marrow.  When it is overfull, one experiences an 
excess of energy; when it is empty, one experiences dizzy spells, tinnitus, pain in the calf mus-
cle, and fainting. 
Likewise, each organ stores the vital energy (except for those that transform and transport it).  
From these reservoirs, the Ninja may draw sufficient power, in the form of chi, to perform his 
will.  This requires an understanding of the nature of energy, as well as knowledge of how it 
circulates in the body.  In the demonstration of tameshiwara, the breaking of bricks or stones 
with the bare hand, the chi forms a protective glove that prevents serious injury. 
The means whereby chi may be summoned are few.  All obey the laws of acupuncture.  It 
should be mentioned that one cannot truly direct the energy of the body; rather, by study and 
practice it is possible to establish a certain harmony, to become attuned, which makes it possi-
ble to attain the higher levels of consciousness.  Then and only then, if it is necessary, can one 
see the mysteries.  If one knows what to do and how to do it, one can make the impossible 
seem commonplace.                                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 

 
Chinese Chart of  
the Human Body  

CHI KUNG/QI GONG 
Breathing Exercises 
 
            Essentially, Chi Kung, or Qi Gong (the former being the Wades-Giles Method of spell-
ing and the latter being the more modern Pinyin Method) is the art of breath control.  Inhaling 
fresh air, one saturates the blood with oxygen.  Through the device of mental imagery, which 
results in unconscious tensing of the appropriate muscles, the "charged" blood arrives at the 
designated site, promoting the general health and well being of the selected tissue.  Even more 
profound effects are possible when one is operating on a hormonal level, and beyond that, on 
the psychic level.  This is an art of self revelation, which is self-regulating and mysterious. 
            All of the chi kung and Kuji-Kiri techniques presented are methods of directing the flow 
of energy within the body to specific areas, organs, or points.  These techniques are derived 
from the ancient yogic and tantric traditions that predate recognized civilization.  Each posture 
is designed to act on the body in a precise manner to improve the circulation: They can be used 
to maintain good health, heal injuries, and cure disease. 
 
WARNING:  The exercises demonstrated in this and the next chapter are profound and power-
ful in the extreme, and the reader is most earnestly warned and cautioned not to attempt any of 
these movements without first consulting his or her physician.  The channeling of vital life-
force in the body is not to be taken lightly.  These meditation techniques are the foundation of 
the art of Ninjitsu.  They should not be performed in excess, or to the point of fatigue.  Do not 
overexert yourself.  A Ninja never strains. 
 
COLLECTING THE CHI 
 
Having achieved the first level of skill in the development of psychic abilities, i.e., the cultiva-
tion of and recognition of the energy source we refer to as chi, it next becomes necessary to 
practice the collection and transmission of this force. 
Filling the Hara with chi is the first step.  The Chinese classics refer to inhaling, drawing the 
air deep into the Hara, then holding the breath for extended periods while imagining the circu-
lation of energy within the body.  Take care in practicing this method, since you may rupture 
the small vessels in the neck and face by improperly trying to retain the breath.  Likewise, don't 
inhale as much as you can and expect to keep it all.  Let out about half the inhalation; this is 
easier to hold and more relaxing to the body.  Count your heartbeats at first; after a while, it will 
not be necessary.  Practice twice a day. 
At first it will be difficult to sit still for long.  The legs will ache or fall asleep from lack of cir-
culation.  The hands may tingle or the palms itch.  If this happens, fold the fingers around the 
thumbs to prevent the chi from flowing out through them.  It is best to practice in a quiet place, 
but even then a leaf may fall.  When these things are no longer distracting, merely noticed ob-
jectively, you have reached the level known as "tranquility." That is to say, even sudden noises 
do not startle you.  At that point you may hear a ringing in the ears, soft whistles, or whispers; 
you may see flashes of light or geometric patterns.   
                                                                        13 
 

All of these have meaning to the seeker and manifest upon the universal plane of symbolism.  
Thus they are known to all, but not all know them. A word must be spoken about the concentra-
tion and repeated emphasis on breathing and breath control.  Respiration is the link between the 
conscious and subconscious minds.  It is one of the few physical responses over which every-
one has power.  All the others-walking, control of the organs of digestion and elimination, not 
belching in public must be learned.  But everyone can hold his breath on command; even in-
fants do it instinctively when dropped into pools of water to learn swimming. 
Further, respiration rates often indicate mood.  Rapid and shallow breathing indicates fear, 
deep and slow breathing suggests sleep.  Conversely, altering the respiration rate alters the 
mood.  By concentrating on relaxation and relaxing images, the student can program a calmer 
personality. 
The concept of chi may seem mysterious to the Westerner.  The idea that some sort of psychic 
nourishment could be obtained from the air seems farfetched until one remembers that the an-
cients had no way of describing the differences among nitrogen, oxygen, and carbon dioxide.  
They simply understood that air contained the "vital life force," because when breathing 
stopped, so did life. 
By focusing attention on breathing, the autonomic and conscious nervous systems establish a 
rapport together, much like two dancers, and the mind and body are in harmony.  With practice, 
a high degree of control over the body can be achieved.  Likewise, this leads to an understand-
ing of oneself, and a calmness and inner peace in one's daily life.  If one learns nothing else, this 
power of relaxation is worth the time required to develop it.  That itself leads one to all the 
other questions and answers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                          14 
 

KUJI-KIRI 
The Nine Levels of Power 
 
            The Japanese have a name for the finger-knitting exercise of the Ninja.  It is called Kuji-
Kiri, or literally, the "nine cuts." In the Hindu and Tibetan traditions, they are called mudras.  It 
is believed that when one reaches a certain level of training, the hands automatically form the 
finger-locks in times of contemplation or stress.  Some schools add chants or mantras; others 
vigorously rub beads between their hands.  Regardless, the hands are regarded as a microcosm 
of the body, so to stimulate or sedate the flow of energy and blood therein is certain to have an 
effect, even a mild or moderate one, upon the rest of the system. 
            By associating specific meanings and symbols to each of these interlocking patterns, the 
Ninja were able to program themselves to withstand any torture or accomplish any feat.  This 
gave rise to the legends of their superhuman prowess.  And while the finger patterns had an ef-
fect on the user, because the knowledge of the connections of the hands to the body are known 
to everyone, albeit on a subconscious level in most cases, the patterns also had an effect on the 
audience.  Thus, Kuji-Kiri is the Ninja art of influencing the minds of others as well as one’s 
own with unconscious gestures.  When properly performed, the subject is totally unaware of be-
ing manipulated. 
            Certain extrasensory perception (ESP) tests involve the transmission of rudimentary im-
ages from one mind to another.  This, of course, is only possible with visually oriented subjects.  
Additionally, the symbols used must be those found in antiquity that have meaning for all on a 
subconscious level, and which are thereby easily recognizable even to the uninitiated.  Further-
more, certain gestures are unconsciously received and recognized. 
            The hands have always been of tremendous significance in Chinese cosmology, repre-
senting a microcosm of the elemental relationships of the universe.  Placing the open palms to-
gether before the chest is a symbol of peace or prayer.  A fist symbolizes aggression or anger.  
In Ninjitsu, the open left palm covering the closed right fist is known as the Sign of Eternity, 
and means "hidden knowledge." The connections, or circuits, formed by the finger-knitting ex-
ercises serve to circulate the energy along prescribed pathways within the body. 
            Some years ago, in a motion picture called The Last Ninja, there was a scene in which a 
government representative was trying to encourage a Ninja agent to become involved in an as-
signment.  When the camera looked over the Ninja's shoulder so we could see what the other 
man was saying, the Ninja performed Kuji-Kiri by rubbing his fingertips with his thumb, the 
sign for money.  When shown from the government man's perspective, the agent's hands ap-
peared to be resting, not moving at all. 
            The manipulation involved here is so subtle that it appears to be invisible, so profound 
that it works every time; therefore the victim is helpless before it.  In fact, many principles of 
modern-day advertising rely on the same subtle cues and control of the subject's mind.  Because 
the uninitiated have no chance against a master of this art, the skill of Kuji-Kiri is not taught 
outside the inner circle of adepts.  It is taught only to those who have mastered themselves so as 
to be devoid of selfish motives, and who are therefore unlikely to use the Way of the Nine Cuts 
for unscrupulous purposes.                               15 

THE NINE LEVELS 
 
       In Chinese medicine, the body is divided into three regions: the 
upper, 
middle, 
and 
lower.  The upper refers to the region above the diaphragm; the middle refers to the area be-
tween the upper and the navel; and the lower refers to everything below the navel, including the 
legs.  This trio is traditionally used to designate the internal organs of the body.  The topmost 
section includes the heart and lungs; the middle includes the liver, spleen, and stomach; while 
the lower includes the bladder, kidneys, and the small and large intestines.  In Western terms, 
the three regions refer to the thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic cavities. 
         Where the Chinese speak of three regions, the Ninja define nine levels of power.  This is 
because each of the three levels also generates an electromagnetic field or "aura," and each of 
these generates an accompanying specific frequency of vibrational energy, giving a total of 
nine.  To harmonize these various components is the goal of meditation. 
         In Ninjitsu it is taught that one must know the nine levels of power.  These are contained 
and represented in the finger-knitting positions of the Kuji-Kiri practice.  Details of the charac-
teristics and attributes of each position are given in another work, Secrets of the Ninja.  Here 
they are presented as taught in the Japanese system, as one complete set of movements, flowing 
from first to last rhythmically, in conjunction with breath control.  They are derived from the 
Tibetan lama chanting practice, whereby one may attain enlightenment.  These are the oldest 
exercises of this type, and have survived from prehistoric times. 
The nine levels of power are as follows: 
 
1.    Rin-"Strength" of mind and body; in Chinese, chu; 
2.    Kyo- "Direction of energy"; in Chinese, shen; 
3.    Toh-"Harmony" with the universe; in Chinese, tai; 
4.    Sha-"Healing" of self and others; in Chinese, sha; 
5.    Kai-"Premonition" of danger; in Chinese, kai; 
6.    Jin-"Knowing the thoughts of others"; in Chinese, jen; 
7.    Retsu-"Mastery of time and space"; in Chinese, tung; 
8.    Zai-"Control" of the elements of nature; in Chinese, hua; 
9.    Zen-"Enlightenment"; in Chinese, tao. 
 
         The Kuji-Kiri positions that embody the nine levels of power are used as a mnemonic 
device to train the Ninja both mentally and physically.  The progression of movements from 
one to another symbolizes the movements of the chi within the body. 
         When one is only beginning to learn, however, each level of energy and power is con-
templated in turn during individual sessions so that one may fully explore the potential of each.  
Then, after much practice, they may be strung together as a mystical in-sign, or occult salute, 
between members of the same ryu. 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          
 
                                                                                          16 

 
I. STRENGTH 
 
         The first finger-knitting position of the mystic 
Kuji-Kiri salute has the fingers interlocked outside, 
with the middle fingers, representing the fire element, 
extended with their tips touching (Figure 1).  While 
exhaling, concentrate the gaze on the point where you 
feel a pulse.  This kanji, or mudra, is the symbol for 
strength of mind and body.  It is said that to be a 
Ninja, one must first be strong, then know, then dare, 
then be silent.  The Tao Te Ching says, "Work is 
done, then forgotten; thus, it lasts forever." One en-
dures, not taking credit, doing what must be done.  
This is known as inner strength.  This posture is not 
based on hoping for a better afterlife or incarnation, 
doing penance for past deeds, or preparing for future 
possible difficulties.  Rather, it is concerned with the 
spirituality of daily activity.  To accomplish this, one 
must wait, and take pleasure in the waiting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II. DIRECTION OF ENERGY 
 
         Extending the index fingers and curling the 
corresponding middle finger around each while keep-
ing the other fingers interlocked forms the second 
kanji (Figure 2).  This represents the ability to direct 
the flow of energy within the body.  The first posture 
develops the student's sensory withdrawal skills, mak-
ing one aware of the internal sounds and vibrations.  
In time, the power to harmonize with this flow of in-
ternal energy enables one to develop psychokinetic 
abilities.  The finger entwining is similar to, and sym-
bolic of, the two serpents on the medical caduceus.  In 
fact, the caduceus may have been the source from 
which this kanji was derived.  In Hindu Hatha Yoga, 
as well, there are two intertwining channels of energy 
that unite the various centers of power within the 
body. 
 
                                                                                           17 

III. HARMONY 
 
         When one understands the concept and principles 
of meditation, all differences between oneself and the ob-
ject of concentration disintegrate and one develops an 
awareness of the universe.  Good health flows naturally 
to the practitioner.  The finger position here represents 
the fire element.  One begins to follow the proper path 
instinctively, with the hands automatically forming the 
correct linkage, or kanji (Figure 3). At this stage, an ap-
preciation of all life becomes manifest.  Animals can 
sense this inner peace, making it seem that the practitio-
ner can almost speak with them.  One could walk safely 
through a pit full of serpents without coming to harm, 
since the animals can recognize this presence.  This is 
analogous to a bee-keeper mentally picturing a hexagon, 
which sets up a harmonic vibration throughout his person 
that the insects consider non-threatening. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV. HEALING OF SELF AND OTHERS 
 
         The power to kill and restore life is symbolized 
by the finger-knitting position in which the index fingers 
are extended, with the other fingers interlocked (Figure 
4).  One who displays this gesture understands the ener-
gies of the body and can direct them to heal injuries and 
cure disease, within both himself and others.  In the latter 
case, the practitioner does not transmit energy to the pa-
tient; instead, he generates the patient's own energy, then 
directs it to the appropriate site.  Thus in its positive as-
pect this kanji confers great healing ability; conversely, 
it also confers the power to take life as well.  All of the 
vital points of the body and the internal organs are made 
vulnerable by this exercise.  Feel the pulse between the 
fingertips in this position.  The source of power for this 
skill is the solar plexus. 
 
                                                                                          18 

V.  POWER OF PREMONITION 
 
The hand-clasping gesture of this kanji reassures and 
calms the mind (Figure 5).  Merchants often rub their hands 
together before a negotiation, to relax themselves and in an-
ticipation.  Shiatsu, the art of acupressure, also advocates 
warming the hands by rubbing them before touching a pa-
tient, so as not to shock him or her.  Place the palms to-
gether and interlace the fingers from above.  Not only does 
this movement serve to calm oneself in times of danger, it 
also is the key to developing the sixth sense that permits the 
premonition of danger.  Users of this ability can feel the 
emotions of those around them, and often develop sensitiv-
ity to psychic impressions.  Further, it conveys to the practi-
tioner certain powers over his physical body, including sus-
pended animation and the power to withstand extremes of 
heat and cold. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VI. KNOWING THE THOUGHTS OF OTHERS 
 
Point the fingertips down and interlace them.  Then fold 
the palms down over the fingers by lowering the elbows 
and cross the thumbs (Figure 6).  This gesture represents 
inner knowledge, signifying that the practitioner has the 
power to read the thoughts of others.  It signifies further 
that the validity of the mental impression may be con-
firmed by other secret tests.  This is the Saimenjitsu 
("Way of the Mind Gate" spelled HsiMenJitsu in Chinese) 
symbol for telepathy, which also permits nonverbal com-
munication with other like-minded individuals.  Concur-
rent with this ability, one also learns to form a mental bar-
rier against the thoughts of others, and to project an im-
pression that is false.  This is called "masking the inten-
tion." Persons skilled in this art make excellent negotiators 
and are capable of great empathy and compassion.  Exhale 
while focusing on this hand position.  Concentrate on lis-
tening to the inner voice. 
 
                                                                                          19 

VII. MASTERY OF TIME AND SPACE 
 
            This 
finger-knitting 
mudra 
is 
formed by curling the fingers of the right 
hand around the extended index finger of 
the clenched left hand, and pressing against 
the outside edge of the fingernail with the 
right thumb (Figure 7).  In acupuncture, 
this point is known as Sho Yo, the "Young 
Merchant" point.  Used in the treatment of 
fever and diarrhea, the method is to press 
inward strongly with a sharp object, while 
inhaling for nine heartbeats (seven to ten 
seconds), and to do this three times.  In 
meditation one need only touch this point, 
the large intestine meridian point number 
one, to remember it.  This gesture imparts 
mastery of time and space at a range of three to five feet, depending on the student's level of ac-
complishment.  It is related to the third eye, and can be employed to freeze an opponent psychi-
cally, much as the Kiai does with sound.  With multiple opponents, a sufficiently baleful stare 
can intimidate them long enough to permit an escape.  It can be used then to suspend or hold 
time in proportion to one's degree of concentration.  In advanced stages, it can be set to block a 
doorway, prevent pursuit, or slow the action of poison or fire. 
 
 
VIII. CONTROL OF THE ELEMENTS OF NATURE 
 
This kanji represents control of the ele-
ments of Nature.  In this case, it would be 
more accurate to say that it is a state in 
which one perceives the way of Nature 
and elects to act in harmony with it, 
rather than to imply that one bends the 
elements to one's will, which, of course, 
is quite impossible.  The gesture itself 
(Figure 8) is symbolic of the "Thousand 
Petaled Lotus," the actual cortical surface 
of the brain.  It symbolizes the physio-
logical aspects that arise when hormone-
enriched blood, full of the endorphins 
chemically produced by the body as a result of the meditation exercises, suddenly flood over 
the brain, bringing a sense of oneness and profound well-being.  Although the ancient physi-
cians had no way of adequately describing such an anatomical phenomenon to their students, 
their intuitive concept is quite accurate in all respects.  Obviously, such an experience cannot be 
adequately described by mere words.  Therefore, little more can be explained regarding this 
Kuji-Kiri technique.  At this stage one attains true invisibility.  Acting in harmony with all, 
there is no contention.                                        20 

IX. ENLIGHTENMENT 
 
The Hidden-Hand gesture (Figure 9) indicates that 
the initiate has attained Satori, nirvana, or ultimate 
bliss.  Whichever name is used, the meaning is clear: 
final understanding of oneself and others.  Having 
passed through the pillars of self-doubt, and looked 
long and deeply into the mirror of self-knowledge, 
one comes to know oneself.  One ceases regretting 
and blaming the past for current misfortunes; one 
stops awaiting the coming of a better tomorrow; one 
is able to be here now, to enjoy each bite of food at 
the meal.  This lesson can only be learned by those 
who have been hungry.  To stare in awe at the sun-
rise, marveling at the intricacy of life itself upon this 
planet-this is known as following the middle way.  
Those who present this gesture and know its true 
meaning are often known as Teachers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUMMARY OF THE STEPS IN 
LEARNING KUJI-KIRI 
 
1.     Sensory withdrawal-sitting alone in a comfortable position in a quiet place. 
2.     Relaxation response-elicited by fixing attention on breathing. 
3.     Sensitivity to psychic impressions-from cultivating and collecting chi within the body. 
4.     Circulation of energy-having awareness of the ebb and flow of energy in Nature and the 
ability to move with it. 
5.     Balance-internal rapport; physical and mental equilibrium that brings with it understanding 
of self and others. 
6.     Harmony-external rapport; the power to absorb and reflect energy from other sources in 
such a way that, when you prevail, the opponent opens his heart to you and becomes an 
equal; thus all conflict vanishes. 
7.     Application-learning to do anything by doing it; the key is practice, then patience and per-
severance.  Setting realistic goals and seeing things clearly; sharing your knowledge with 
other seekers. 
 
 
 
 
                                                                           21 

The FIVE ELEMENTS 
 
         In order to become a warrior-mystic, the student must fill his body with the chi energy 
he has collected and cultivated in the Hara.  The classics refer to the Hara , or Tan T’ien, as the 
"Golden Stove" in which the various elements of alchemical magic are blended together into 
the elixir of immortality. 
         The primary attribute of the warrior is strength; that of the mystic is intelligence.  The 
combination of these two produces the Ninja, who draws upon his occult powers to develop his 
strategy, and upon his understanding of the way of Nature to choose his tactics. 
         The Ninja seldom wear armor, since to do so implies the existence of an external threat 
as well as a willingness to engage in battle.  Instead they practice in private, making no show, 
developing their balance and martial ability concurrently with both mental and physical exer-
cises.  In the beginning, many Ninja keep notes, fostering the belief in sacred scrolls and tori-
maki.  But eventually the mind becomes developed to the extent that memorization is not only 
possible but preferred.  Then too, as understanding becomes greater, less and less structures and 
thought forms are required; lists and long litanies of creed are relied on much less. 
         In the previous section, it was indicated that each finger represents an element.  In this 
section, we will go further and demonstrate how each also represents an organ.  The progressive 
elevation of energy symbolized by the successive finger-knitting positions acts to channel heal-
ing, oxygen-enriched blood through the body in accordance with the laws of the five elements.  
This serves to maintain the health and well being of the Ninja as well as to teach the secrets of 
the universe. 
         Each of the fingers is associated with a specific organ of the body by virtue of the net-
work of nerves, blood vessels, acupuncture meridians, and psychic channels.  Likewise each or-
gan is representative of one of the five primary elements, earth, water, fire, air, and wood 
(void).  The old texts say that this is because there are five elements and five fingers; it makes 
perfect sense, in light of ancient logic.  Even if all the fingers are not present, as in the case of 
the Yakuza, (Japanese gamblers), who sometimes cut off parts of their fingers in a ritual of 
"token suicide" for a debt they cannot pay, the energy shell remains continuous.  That is, as cir-
culation is restored to an area of injury, along with it comes chi, which pervades and passes 
through all things and is found in abundance everywhere. 
         You should understand that the symbolism of gestures and the mental direction of en-
ergy is far more important than the physical act of connecting various circuits, although the ges-
tures do tend to reinforce the practice and act as significant triggers for physiological and psy-
chological responses. just as Pavlov's dogs salivated at the sound of a bell, so too can man pro-
gram himself for whatever purpose is desired. 
            The elements are each represented by an exercise or special breathing technique de-
signed either to tone up or sedate a particular type of energy within the body.  These are called 
the Five Elements Exercises.  Two require moving, two are static, and the last is a combination 
of both. 
 
 
                                                                           22 

       The Nei Ching says: "The five elements-wood, fire, earth, air, and water-encompass all 
the phenomena of Nature.  It is a symbolism that applies itself equally to man." just as things 
may be classified according to their Yin and Yang aspects, they may be further divided into 
their elemental components.  These interact in specific and prescribed manners, the alteration 
of which is not possible and the study of which may consume a lifetime. 
   The Nei Ching says further: 
 
“Fire creates earth (ash), which creates air (smoke), which creates water (condensation), 
which creates wood (life), which creates fire (energy).  This is the cycle of creation.  
Wood destroys earth (by covering), fire destroys air (by combustion), earth destroys water 
(by retention), air destroys wood (by smothering), water destroys fire (by extinguishing).  
This is the cycle of destruction, the Yin and Yang of Nature, the inevitable law of 
change.” [ Figure 10]  
 
 
 
 
 
            If there is excess energy in an organ, it may be dissipated at the point of sedation 
for that organ.  The organ which follows in the circulation of energy will then receive the 
excess energy and the preceding one will be sedated.  Therefore the sedation point for one 
organ is the point of tonification for the next one in sequence. 
            Each organ meridian is also possessed of a master point known as the source; a 
lo point, which acts on coupled organs; a connecting point with other meridians; an ap-
proval point on the bladder meridian; an alarm point on the abdomen; an ancient control 
point; and a point that is forbidden. 
 
 
                                                                                          23 
 
Kidney 
Water 
Bladder 

EARTH 
 
         Interlock the fingers, keeping the tips of the thumbs touching; 
exhale and empty the lungs, tensing the Hara (Figure 11).  The earth 
element is related to the spleen.  It is the center of the physical and 
spiritual body.  When concentrating on this level, one will experience 
sensations of taste and feel.  Worry injures the spleen, which governs 
the liver in the circulation of energy; sitting too long is also a strain. 
            Inhale deeply and fully, filling the lungs from bottom to top, 
as if pouring water into a glass.  Imagine the vital energy (prana, chi) 
of the air being drawn deeply into the body, filling it with energy, Lift 
the hands with fingers laced up to throat level (Figure 12).  If you 
wish, mentally repeat, "In comes the good air." Turn the hands over 
and push upward above the head as you exhale.  Recite, "Out goes 
the bad air," removing all impurities and poisons.  Hold this position, 
then lower the hands to the top of the head, thinking, "Enter the heal-
ing white light." Exhale, returning the hands to the lap.  Repeat this 
exercise nine times. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                   WATER 
 
            Begin with the hands resting lightly on the 
knees.  Let the hands float upward as if suspended 
from the wrists, inhaling deeply as before (Figure 
13).  Then exhale, emptying the lungs fully, as the 
hands lower slowly once again (Figure 14).  Re-
peat nine times.  This encourages oxygen-saturated 
blood to be pumped to the kidneys, representing 
the water element, which heals and stimulates the 
power of the will.  Water is the symbol of love; 
and fear as well. When utilizing this type of en-
ergy, one experiences hearing sensations, some-
times known as the "music of the spheres." This 
technique maintains and invigorates the anti-
specific immune system of the body.  Do not 
overdo it.  If one is ill or has allergies, this exercise 
is of great benefit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          24 

 
 
 
FIRE 
 
         The heart represents the fire element.  This is 
the site of all psychic energy.  With fingertips almost 
touching, raise the arms in a circle as shown (Figure 
16).  Inhale, imagining the energy entering the right 
fingers, passing through the heart, and exiting out 
through the fingers of the left hand as you exhale.  
Repeat three times.  The physiological symbolism 
here is of the abdominal aorta and the ascending 
aorta. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIR 
 
            The air element is represented by the lungs and 
the large intestine.  In Hatha Yoga, the finger position 
shown here is used to press against the acupuncture point 
that invigorates the large intestine.  This exercise does 
likewise.  With hands resting on the lap, in the position 
shown (Figure 15), breathe deeply and silently, in and 
out through the nose, and imagine that the energy is cir-
culating up the back and down the front of the body.  Re-
peat this exercise seven times.  This calms the mind and 
improves the digestion.  It also stimulates the chi, or vital 
energy of the body.  Lying down too much is injurious to 
this organ.  The lungs are the Yin, or empty, side; while 
the colon is the Yang, or full side. 
 
 
 
 
 
               25 

WOOD 
 
         The liver is the body's expression of the wood ele-
ment.  Remember, earth and fire are linear; water and air 
are circular in nature; and wood, or the void as it is some-
times known, symbolizes circular growth about a linear 
axis, thus uniting the two types of energy. 
         Inhale, lifting the arms out to the sides, with palms 
down, then up above the head.  Now exhale, pulling down 
an imaginary pillar directly in front of the body's centerline 
(Figure 17).  Stop at throat level, holding without strain 
one half of the full breath.  Look between the hands and 
imagine you are holding a ball of energy.  After a while, 
you will feel a tingling in the palms.  Later, you may begin 
to see the energy itself.  Repeat this exercise nine times. 
         Wood is related to the planet Jupiter, known even 
in ancient times and highly regarded in alchemical circles.  
It is the source of the spirit and the seat of the higher self.  
This energy may be used for whatever purposes the practi-
tioner desires, for by the time this level is achieved, all 
thoughts of self and personal gain have been put aside.  
The liver is related to the eyes; thus, it is often said that 
those with this power have flashing eyes or can kill with a 
look.  The Tiger style of kung fu, based on the wood ele-
ment, may lead its students to visual sensations.  One must 
have great strength of will not to fall prey to hallucinations 
at this level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          26 

NEI KUNG  
Internal Strength 
 
            Prolonged practice of the internal exercises shown here enables the practitioner to gain 
some degree of control over his or her physical being.  When this is accomplished, the genin, or 
lower self, is quieted and calmed, which permits liberation of the higher levels of being.  Inter-
estingly, the term genin is also applied to the field agent in Ninjitsu, indicating to the higher 
ranks (chunin and jonin) that he is not above the third level of comprehension, and so is con-
cerned with survival and conquest rather than peace and harmony. 
         Control of the body leads to control of the mind.  When one knows how to control one's 
mind, the impossible becomes commonplace.  To demonstrate this for the edification of others 
is an expression of ego.  There is no need to prove one's power to anyone other than oneself.  
Those that have it, know it; those who do not can never recognize it.  There is no proof of any-
thing; there are only lessons and tests. 
 
CONTROL OF THE BODY 
 
         By concentrating on one's breathing, the mind becomes aware of internal sounds.  In 
time this will develop into the ability to withdraw the consciousness from the physical being to 
the inner sanctum and fortress of the mind.  In such a state of meditative balance, the body is 
sustained and protected by the energized electromagnetic aura which Western science has only 
recently acknowledged.  This permits the user to withstand extremes of heat and cold that are 
unbearable for the untrained, to breathe underwater, to be buried alive, and to walk through 
flames unharmed.  Fakirs who walk on hot coals or sit on beds of nails are demonstrating this 
power.  Depending on the student's degree of mastery, this state may be maintained for as long 
as concentration permits. 
         With more experience, the disciple may develop superior balance, allowing him to ad-
just the weight of his body by muscular tension.  This makes it possible to walk tightwires, 
climb walls, move silently, and fall without injury.  The art of ukemi, Judo break-falling) is 
based on this, as well as the technique of expanding or reducing the size of the body.  The best 
example of this was the famous Houdini, who puffed up his chest when being bound with 
ropes, then relaxed and had sufficient slack to wriggle free of the bonds.  Conversely, the Hindu 
who folds himself into a trunk or jar that appears too small to contain him illustrates reduction.  
With this mental control, any part of the body can withstand injury without harm and may 
equally be used as a weapon.  These techniques are referred to in ancient texts as the Iron Body 
styles and require kime (focus) and genshin (balance). 
         Naturally, all this requires an expenditure of energy.  In China, the ability to work stead-
ily at a task until its completion without food or water is highly valued.  Meditation enables one 
to calm these desires temporarily, but an equal amount of time must be spent replenishing the 
source.  This power makes it possible to suspend all outward appearance of life and not awaken 
until the time or signal chosen by the practitioner. 
                                                                        27 

TAMIESHIWARA 
 
       Tamieshiwara, or the art of breaking, requires the channeling of chi from the organ of 
generation and storage, along the meridians and pathways of the body, to the part of the fist 
making impact.  In this case, chi is channeled to the edge of the hand.  This strike simulates a 
death-blow to the back of the neck of an enemy who has been thrown facedown.  Only sixteen 
pounds of pressure are required to break the neck/ brick in this manner; but the stone is harder 
than the bones of the hand.  Therefore, the Ninja develop kime, or focus of concentration.  
While pressing down on the enemy's skull with the left hand to set the vertebrae (Figure 19), 
strike down with a sharp blow, using the sword hand (Figure 20).  Concentrate on driving 
through the target; you must want to injure the brick.  This anger injures the spleen, so the 
practitioner must take care not to use it too often. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          28 

DRAGON CLAW 
 
The Dragon Claw technique is a powerful gripping attack that requires great finger strength.  
This strength is only acquired after ten years of carrying heavy jars by the mouths in each hand.  
It is characteristic of the Black Dragon ryu.  Ripping a telephone book in half is a demonstra-
tion of this skill.  Using the wrists, twist and snap the spine of the text, breaking it in two 
(Figures 21 and 22).  Gripping the pieces, rip the pages apart in a single shredding tear (Figure 
23).  One with this ability can knock a man out by squeezing his skull; or rupture him by grip-
ping the rectus abdominus, or stomach muscles. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                           29 

MENTAL POWERS 
 
         The Ninja develops his mental powers to a fine art.  His powers include mind reading, 
hypnosis, suggestion, impressment, and other techniques of controlling the outcome of any 
situation. 
 
MIND READING 
 
         Everyone has the power to intuit the thoughts of others.  Some have developed mind 
reading to a fine art, while others continue to deny its existence.  It is not that we "hear voices," 
although this is possible; nor that we can transmit and receive symbols visually, the most com-
mon ESP test.  It means that when we find a beloved family member deeply saddened by a loss, 
and we seek to comfort that person by touching him or her, at that point we feel a physical sen-
sation of change: we have established a rapport.  We can now experience in some small way, 
the grief or joy of another soul.  This feeling of oneness is characteristic of telepathy, or thought 
transference, and is heightened by emotional stimulation or patient practice. 
         The goal of mind reading, then, is the establishment of mental rapport with the subject.  
First, we must determine which type of person we are dealing with: visual, audial, or tactile.  
Artists are essentially visual, dealing with color, shape, and visual images; musicians exemplify 
the audial category, concerning themselves with tone, range, and sound; while sculptors might 
best express the tactile group, working with texture and form.  It is interesting to note that touch 
is the customary test of reality for most people.  Seeing an unusual object, they approach cau-
tiously, then reach out to feel if it is there.  Likewise an eerie note or whistle emanating from 
behind a grate will eventually lead the curious to feel for the vibrations at the source of the 
sound. 
         The way to determine what type of person we are dealing with is to observe his or her 
eyes.  "The eyes are the windows to the soul." Visual thinkers look up when trying to remember 
or figure things out; listeners look from side to side (toward the ears); and touchers look down 
when thinking (Figure 24 Map of the Face).  Observe to which quadrant the subject glances 
when thinking.  Those who look above the level of the eyes, or appear unfocused, think and re-
member in pictures.  Those who look side to side are listening.  Those who glance down and 
left remember by rote or chant; those who glance down and right are touchers.  Looking to the 
left indicates memory; to the right, reasoning.  Holding the forehead (the third eye), rubbing the 
ears, and stroking the chin are all gestures used to stimulate or encourage mental processes. 
         Having determined in which category the subject should be placed, we must then adjust 
ourselves to his or her mode of operation.  This is necessary because most people have no idea 
how they process information; they only know that they do better in some areas than others.  
When speaking to one who is visually oriented, use words like "see," "get the picture," or “it 
looks like." This will make it easier for the subject to understand what you are saying and apply 
it to his own constructs or thought forms.  Likewise for listeners, phrases such as "it sounds 
like," "it has been said," and "I hear what you are saying," are appropriate.  For touchers, physi-
cal contact is best, but terms like "sensation...... feeling," or "impression" can be applied. 
                                                                                    30 

                                    Map of the Face  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       We have now altered ourselves to conform to the framework of the subject, since we 
cannot hope to alter him.  The Ninja knows that to influence the affairs of men, one must be 
outside the circle that presses them; we cannot hope to change others until we have control of 
ourselves. 
       Another method whereby this may be accomplished, and one that is the most basic form 
of meditation, is to adjust one's rate of respiration to that of the subject.  When experimenting 
with associates, or practicing techniques together, always begin with this exercise.  When the 
breathing of both parties is synchronized, rapport is achieved.  This method may also be used 
on the unaware subject, since it is so subtle that it goes unnoticed.  Nonetheless it is extremely 
powerful and effective. 
       Also, synchronizing your body language with that of the subject can increase rapport.  
For example, you can feel how closely united soldiers on parade are, or church members with 
their heads bowed in prayer.  This must be done carefully, or the subject may accuse you of 
mocking him derisively. 
                                                                      31 

       Once sufficient rapport has been achieved, it then becomes possible to direct the activi-
ties of the subject by "leading" him.  This is a subtle form of hypnosis, not suitable for stage 
performance, but adequate for sharing a burden or giving advice.  It is impossible to make an-
other person do your bidding by sheer force of will; but if you can get him to follow you, he 
may accomplish things far beyond any imagined limitations, and you may be permitted to 
watch, hear, or feel the experience with the subject. 
       The following is a good test of rapport: When you think you and the subject resonate 
like tuning forks placed near each other, intentionally begin changing the breathing rate, then 
the posture, then the tone of the conversation, to a topic of your choosing.  If the subject is 
sad, remind him, in terms he can use, of happier experiences.  If he has won a great or even 
modest victory, rejoice in it with him.  Feel the electricity of each moment.  Experience the 
magnetism of charismatic individuals, relive fond memories through the eyes of the elderly, 
marvel at the wonder of an infant's curiosity. 
       This is as close as one may come to telepathy, or mind reading.  It may be applied with 
equal facility to negotiation, investigation, or conversation.  If one knows how, one can make 
the impossible seem commonplace. 
       Although these methods are not readily reproducible in the laboratory, they exist none-
theless.  Those who practice soon find how well they work and how powerful they are. 
       One thing should be noted with regard to reading body language.  Whenever an individ-
ual makes one of the gestures indicated as a Kuji-in position, he or she is unconsciously indi-
cating which state or mood is predominant at that moment.  The hands need not be folded to-
gether in the elaborate ritual shown here, but anytime one hand covers the other, it indicates 
hidden knowledge.  Whenever the arms, legs, or fingers are crossed, it is a gesture of defense.  
There are many such mudras," the study of which may consume a lifetime. 
       Likewise, if one wishes to set the mood, it is possible to do so subtly by discreetly form-
ing the mudras and not calling attention to them.  In this way, they are perceived on a subcon-
scious level.  For instance, yawning is a semiconscious gesture, and one easily suggested to a 
group.  Next time you are at a meeting which is exceptionally boring, sit in a comfortable po-
sition and yawn.  You need not yawn widely; in fact, make it appear that every effort is being 
made to conceal the yawn out of respect for the speaker.  By this or other subtle cues, the rest 
of the audience can soon be made to doze off.   
       This works well in classrooms, and may be of some value in hostage situations.  The 
more relaxed or even sleepy you appear, the greater the chance that others, even a kidnapper, 
may either be calmed or made to feel greater stress by having to stay alert.  Also, if you, as the 
hostage, are asleep, you are non-threatening and that inhibits feelings of hostility on his part.  
Further, he may pay less attention to guarding you, perhaps providing an opportunity to es-
cape. 
 
 
                                                             
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                           32 

HYPNOSIS 
 
       The ability to hypnotize others is largely dependent upon their belief that you possess 
some type of supernatural power.  In fact, the Ninja does: he possesses the power to control 
himself.  Stage hypnotism is a performance in which both the performer and the volunteer 
subconsciously agree to participate.  In this way, the member of the audience becomes a part 
of the show, fulfilling his hidden desire to share the stage.  Only those who are natural leaders 
and have a good self-image come forward.  Nor should the reticent be unduly called or en-
couraged to take part, since they will become too easily embarrassed and self-conscious.  
       Basically, the collusion between the players implies that the hypnotist will not injure or 
insult his assistants while they are onstage with him.  If more than one volunteer is employed, 
most will go along with the gag, since they have their eyes closed, but can still hear the move-
ments of the others as they comply with the simple directions of the performer.  He, of course, 
acts as the director.  By having his "actors" follow his "commands," and by informing the au-
dience what they are witnessing, he allows the imagination of each to do most of the work.  
For the most part, this is the secret of extra-corporeal mind control. 
       The imagined power of the hypnotist has its dark side, as well.  After all, if one spends 
day after day repeatedly manipulating the will of those who step forward at one's beck and 
call, albeit for simple tasks only, one might come to believe in one's powers, oneself. 
 
                                                            SUGGESTION 
 
         Suggestion is the ability to plant a seed in the mind of someone else.  If the beholder has 
an active imagination and sufficient motivation, that seed may grow and flourish.  This is the 
basis for many legends of witch doctors "praying a man to death." Conversely, if the listener 
has sufficient self-confidence and a strong moral code, such seeds of destruction fall on deaf 
ears, only to wither and die. 
         A hypochondriac can be made physically ill by repeatedly asking him if he feels well.  
The supposedly objective feedback requires his participation, since he must answer the ques-
tion, either aloud or internally.  Eventually his mind will fix on some minor ache and magnify 
its importance until it consumes all his waking thoughts.  The imaginary injury will then begin 
to manifest itself upon the body.  This is sometimes known as psychosomatic, mind-over-body 
illness.  In Catholicism, there is a history of people manifesting spontaneous bleeding from cer-
tain parts of the body.  This is known as stigmata. 
         Of course, good seeds may also be planted and watered with sincerity.  If, every day, 
one is told that he or she is looking fit and trim, whether or not it is true, sooner or later it will 
begin to sink in.  The object of the remarks will actually begin to look and feel better in an un-
conscious effort to live up to the positive feedback. 
         Suggestion is a simple and only partially effective technique.  To be truly effective, it 
requires a long period of repetition.  That way, the likelihood that the seed will be discredited or 
cut down is lessened, and it is more likely for the subject to accept the suggestion on his own 
volition and act on it independently. 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          33 

IMPRESSMENT 
 
         Impressment is a technique for securing the cooperation of someone sympathetic to 
one's cause.  Take, for example, the case of the stage hypnotist who calls for volunteers.  Those 
who volunteer are predisposed to being on stage with the mentalist.  Either they would like to 
catch a glimpse of the hypnotist's power in action, or else they would like to challenge him to 
overcome them.  Even the latter can be induced to comply, however, by a simple mechanism. 
         Suppose the mentalist has written a prediction on a card and sealed it inside an enve-
lope.  He asks for a member of the audience to come up and choose one of several cards from a 
tray upon which stand several pasteboards, facing the crowd.  As the assistant comes behind the 
table, he sees a note on the back of one of the cards.  It reads, "Choose this card for a reward af-
ter the show." Or there might be a dollar bill taped to the back to induce him to choose a par-
ticular one.  In either event, when he has made his choice, miraculously it is the same as the 
prediction! 
         Impressment is also used in military basic training.  An individual is chosen from the 
ranks, either for his exceptional skills or lack of same, and directed to perform for the rest of the 
platoon.  If he has any sense of self-pride, he is obliged to do his best, both by his own self-
discipline and by the pressure of his peers, those with whom he must continue to interact.  From 
time to time this method reveals natural leaders. 
Also, impressment is a form of discipline used in prison camps, where inmates are obliged to 
follow orders for fear of punishment or reprisals.  In either event, it differs from suggestion in 
that the former is subliminal, while the latter is a question of choice. 
 
CONTROLLING OPTIONS 
 
         This technique involves having the subject appear to make a free decision while actually 
being made to select the item that is desired.  For instance, hold a piece of candy in one hand 
and nothing in the other.  Extend both toward a child and say, "Pick one." If the child selects the 
fist with the sweet, you may congratulate him or her and present the prize.  If, however, the sub-
ject chooses the empty hand, then say, "Very well, we eliminate that one, leaving you with the 
prize!" Again the child "wins," strictly at the whim of the magician. 
         A similar example can be seen at the breakfast table, when the youngster is asked, 
"What do you want for breakfast, oatmeal or cereal?" This question implies that the child will 
eat something, regardless of whether or not he wanted any breakfast in the first place. 
         Another example is the loaded question, to which no answer is appropriate.  When 
asked, "Have you stopped beating your wife?" if one answers no, it may be understood that one 
is continuing with the practice.  If the answer is yes, then one has confessed to having done the 
violence previously.  If no response is made, the persecutor can claim that the subject is afraid 
to respond out of guilt; and if the subject claims a trick question, he can be accused of being 
overly sensitive or paranoid. 
         Essentially, this method relies on controlling the options of the subject, so that only one 
decision, the one desired, is possible, while at the same time, creating the illusion that the sub-
ject is free to choose as he pleases. 
 
 
 
                                                                           34 

HYPNOSIS IN COMBAT 
 
         In combat, His-men-jitsu ("Way of the Mind Gate"), means the ability to make the en-
emy do what you want in spite of his own best interests.  As previously described, we can make 
it appear that his self-interest will be served by impressment and so on, but it is also possible to 
manipulate his behavior by means of trickery. 
         The late Bruce Lee often spoke of what he called "motor-setting" the opponent in battle.  
Advance, making a simple attack, and let the enemy parry it.  Do this twice.  On the third repe-
tition, advance as before, but attack to a different quarter.  The enemy, having been pro-
grammed by the simple pattern of strike and parry, will observe the advance cue and begin his 
block a third time.  This time, however, the strike is to a different target.  According to the crea-
tor of Jeet Kune Do, this tactic works almost every time. 
         A simpler version is the classical feint.  The Dragon style is a good example of this: If 
one makes alternating flying and low-sweeping attacks, the enemy, in defending against one, 
opens himself to the other. 
         Another effective tactic is to use psychological ploys, such as making the enemy angry 
by taunting him, thus encouraging him to attack wildly.  Feigning injury or helplessness to draw 
the enemy into range for a strike may be placed in this category, as well.  A third, very effective 
tactic for the Ninja is target denial.  By using his evasive abilities, the Ninja avoids the enemy's 
thrusts and strikes.  This, of course, frustrates him. 
General Sun Tze has said, "The art of war is based on deception"; it is also based on reflex and 
misdirection. 
 
EXPERIENCING CHI IN BATTLE 
 
         We have spoken before of how energy circulates in the body.  Most students have found 
the following an adequate description of the sensations of chi in combat. 
         First, the Hara feels warm.  The Chi/Qi ascends the spine, making it feel as if covered 
with armor.  The feet are rooted to the ground, no matter what the surface, and one feels solidly 
planted, i.e., balanced and poised, yet not tense.  If there is any tension in the front of the body, 
it is felt mildly in the Hara and along the insides of the legs.  In most instances, the hands a-re 
raised defensively in front of the chest.  In Ninjitsu, one feels the Chi/Qi being directed forward 
as a sphere of energy, capable of absorbing and reflecting any attack from whatever quarter.  
Head and eyes seem detached, seeing everything at once, as if not part of the conflict at all.  
The mind is calm, expecting nothing and reacting instantly. 
            This is the state known as "no-mind" in the writing of Miyamoto Musashi, the famous 
Zen swordsman, who survived over sixty duels in feudal Japan and died peacefully in his bed. 
Having accomplished this, one need only apply it to proper movement.  In olden times it was 
said one must already be a Yudansha (Black Belt) to study Ninjitsu.  That is because at this 
level, one must return to one's original teachings and apply the principles of movement to them.  
All martial arts teach meditation on the Hara, but few know why.  It is because, for proper 
movement, the waist must move first.  One could learn any style or system and miss this impor-
tant lesson.  Having learned it, however, one returns to the practice forms with renewed interest 
and enthusiasm.  Thus there is nothing new to learn, only further understanding. 
 
                                                                           35 

MI LU KATA 
The Lost Track Form 
 
         There are very few formal exercises in Ninjitsu.  This is because it is a science of princi-
ples rather than of techniques.  Still, the history of an art can be traced through its ritual prac-
tices and in the case of Ninjitsu, that means the kata. 
 
KATA 
 
         Kata, pronounced "gata," is a Japanese word meaning "dance." In Ninjitsu this term is 
applied to a formal set of exercises, performed in proper sequence, demonstrating a specific se-
ries of techniques in logical combination.  Some kata are historical in nature.  That is, they tell a 
story of some past adventure or some legendary hero.  An example of this might be the Hawai-
ian fire and sword dancers.  Some kata are purely for health and self-defense.  Still others are 
technical, and illustrate a specific principle or strategy upon which the various movements are 
based.  An example of this would be Heian One of Shotokan karate. 
         The kata forms are designed to be learned by rote, since man long ago found that that 
was an effective method of transmitting a complicated body of information from generation to 
generation.  But even when taught in this primitive ritualistic manner, while the fundamental 
principles and foundations remain intact, each student who learns a kata and then attempts to 
pass it on must, of necessity, color it with his or her own experience and interpretation.  So the 
art or style evolves and changes, yet remains the same.  This is the meaning of the saying: "The 
way that can be told is not the eternal way." Of course, the more classical the artist, the more 
exact his forms are, that is, the more successful he is at imitating his instructor, who, it must be 
hoped, was equally accurate in his own study.  Even then, some masters hold back some tech-
niques from poor students.  These, also, are lost to the sands of time. 
How kata forms came about is an interesting story.  During the many "sword-hunt" episodes 
of the Far East, whether they were Chinese, Japanese, Korean, or Okinawan, unscrupulous rul-
ers tried to disarm their subservient peoples by forbidding them to possess weapons.  At first 
this applied primarily to katana, swords; but when the peasants proved themselves still too 
strong, any device was considered deadly.  To this day, knives with blades longer than two 
inches are forbidden in some districts.  Thus the population was reduced to fighting bare 
handed.  And when they became too good at that, boxing was forbidden.  Even to practice a 
martial art was considered insurrection, so secret societies were formed, and training was con-
cealed. 
One of the methods by which this was accomplished was kata.  By combining the practice 
movements with the rhythm of music, students could claim they were only dancing, and since 
they were not striking each other, it was difficult to disprove.  In modern times, forms competi-
tion accompanied by music is still a popular aspect of tournament play.  The tune, melody, and 
tempo all contribute to the mood, allowing the performer a free rein to flow with the expecta-
tions and attention of the crowd. 
                                                                        36 

         Emperors and rulers never seem to learn that when repressive measures are imple-
mented, regardless of their justification, the people will tolerate it just so long; then they will 
find some means of fighting back.  Ideas cannot be killed, nor can spirit be crushed.  At one 
time in history, in many parts of the world it was forbidden even to whisper the name of the Si-
lent Way; but it is still here. 
 
 
IMAGINARY ENEMY 
 
         When practicing kata it is important to visualize an opponent.  We will discuss later how 
everyone possesses, in one form or another, certain guides and spirit helpers to aid him or her in 
the quest for understanding and enlightenment (see Chapter 9).  This is true for all.  So it is that 
each also has a secret enemy.  It is this individual with whom one "dances" in kata practice. 
         The fact that many people turn to, or are led to, the martial arts for the purposes of re-
venge is a sad commentary on mankind's inability to communicate.  With time, which heals all 
wounds, most people learn to overcome this desire and become better men for the experience.  
This normally occurs just as they become highly competent fighters, capable of extracting 
whatever retribution they desire.  Thus it may be said that the martial arts turn cowards into he-
roes and bullies into gentlemen. 
         Until that moment of enlightenment, however, one must cope with the need to "get 
even" or "mete out justice." The Sage has taught that such feelings of anger may be diverted to 
energy; and since it is a powerful force, difficult to deny, it should not be wasted.  Therefore, in 
kata we fight an imaginary enemy. 
         At the beginning of many forms, the performer is asked to stand for a moment and com-
pose himself before beginning the exercise.  When training, extend this interval and imagine 
your deadliest enemy within arm's reach.  Practice every move as if defending against him.  If 
your powers of visualization are not adequately developed, listen for the sound of his heartbeat.  
When properly executed, kata can lead to the real sensation of touch, and evoke the mood of the 
warrior when he fights.  All this is part of the kata.  The imagery enhances every aspect of form 
practice, making it not only more enjoyable for the student, but also more entertaining for those 
who may be watching.  Know also that whenever you bow and start your dance, someone is 
watching.  Therefore you must always do your best, if not for applause, at least for the sake of 
living up to your own standards. 
         There are very specific techniques for invoking your imaginary enemy.  Before begin-
ning kata, sit for a moment in seiza (kneeling posture).  Think hard and mentally repeat a se-
lected "trigger" word.  This word must be chosen carefully so as not to evoke any negative im-
agery in normal daily existence.  One would not choose a common word, for instance; nor 
would it be wise to choose something overly complicated.  It may simply be the enemy's name, 
or just "enemy," or "kill." Tense your muscles as if preparing to fight.  Mentally replay the inci-
dent that threatens your self-image as many times as necessary.  Let your anger build, feel the 
pulse in your temple, the heat on your cheeks.  When you stand, imagine your enemy in front of 
you watching, mocking you.  Show him! 
 
 
 
                                                                        37 

         Perform the exercise with force and power.  Visualize the destruction and impact of 
every punch and kick.  Put emotional content into each movement.  When you finish, do so 
with a flourish.  Bow crisply.  That way, if your enemy were watching, he would be intimi-
dated. 
         Depending on the length and type of technique, you could become totally winded by the 
addition of this facet of the training.  The idea is to use up your anger in practice.  Repeat the 
form as many times as necessary, until you are exhausted, if need be.  Every time you do it, the 
technique becomes better and the anger becomes less.  Eventually you will no longer need to 
psyche yourself up.  You will need only to think of the trigger word.  This single technique will 
enhance your practice a hundredfold. 
         It is really not very difficult to perform this trick.  Almost everyone has had, or heard of, 
an imaginary friend in childhood.  At first it might be hard to face an unpleasant memory or 
frightening experience.  But all psychologists and shamen agree that the fear must eventually be 
faced and overcome, either by "flooding" (sudden inescapable confrontation) or 
"immersion" (gradual examination and understanding).  Otherwise, strong emotions are either 
consciously suppressed or subconsciously repressed leading to psychological disorders. 
         Eventually, after decades or a lifetime of practice, one comes to understand that there 
are no enemies but those we make in our own minds.  At that point, the imaginary enemy be-
comes an ally, since, even from the first, it was merely a representative facet of one's own self.  
Every major religion and philosophy teaches that anger directed at another is merely the ego 
condemning some aspect of its own personality with which it disagrees.  Anger is the child of 
frustration and is the last resort of the ignorant.  The best fighter is not angry. 
 
THE PRINCIPLES OF MAGIC 
 
Magic-sleight of hand, prestidigitation, and all manner of conjuring-is based on five basic 
principles that are encompassed and historically taught as the Lost Track form, or Mi Lu Kata 
of Ninjitsu.  In Japanese, mi is "hidden, secret, unfathomable"; lu is "track, path, guidance." 
This kata is divided into elemental sections relating to the cosmology of the ancients, each of 
which is further broken down into subdivisions. 
1.  Angle Method.  If one regards invisibility as maintaining a lack of presence rather than 
achieving it, the basis of this principle is apparent.  In sleight of hand it is said, "If I can see it, 
you can't." This means that an object cupped in the palm, with the back of the hand to the spec-
tator, is unseeable and will remain so unless the angle is changed to reveal it.  So it is with 
punches: The uppercut slides up the enemy's chest, making it impossible for him to see unless 
he looks down his nose. 
2. Blinding Method.  There is an old Ninjitsu saying: "A grain of sand in the eye can hide a 
mountain." If the enemy closes his eyes or looks away, then, again, everything vanishes.  In 
stage magic, this may take the form of creating clouds of smoke to conceal some action.  In 
combat, anything that can be thrown toward the enemy's face to make him flinch or blink long 
enough for the Ninja either to close the gap and strike him or duck out of sight is classified in 
this category. 
 
 
 
                                                                        38 

3.      Misdirection Method.  An ancient sleight-of-hand proverb states that to conceal a move-
ment of one hand, move both hands.  Tactically, this means simultaneously striking at two tar-
gets, believing that the enemy can only block one effectively.  It also includes attracting the 
enemy's attention to one area and then striking with the other hand.  This is sometimes re-
ferred to as a "sucker punch." Furthermore, the practice of feinting many simple attacks to 
gauge the enemy reaction falls into this division. 
4.      Scarf Method.  An invaluable aid for many magicians is a large silk scarf, beneath which 
he can create the illusion of space and shape.  From this principle is derived the Japanese tech-
nique of Ametori-No-jitsu, in which the Ninja filled his uniform with straw or suspended it in 
such a way that the enemy thought he was standing in one place, while actually he had already 
escaped or was hiding in ambush. 
5.      Mind Method.  By making a conscientious study of the psychology of the human mind, 
the Ninja was able to play on the emotions of an enemy by means of the five feelings and five 
desires.  The art of Hsi Men jitsu ("Way of the Mind Gate") was part of the curriculum of every 
agent.  This not only made him less susceptible to such trickery himself, but enabled him to ma-
nipulate the enemy in a manner similar to that of a stage hypnotist with a volunteer from the au-
dience. 
         It was stated at the outset that this text would include no techniques which would enable 
the practitioner to control the mind of the enemy or any other human being, but only those 
whereby one might learn to control oneself.  This ability often makes the Ninja appear to pos-
sess some secret power or hidden strength that enables him to perform amazing feats and seem-
ing miracles.  But anyone, with practice and diligent effort, can duplicate these efforts or any 
others which may be desired. 
         No one else has the power to make our wishes come true for us, but each of us has the 
power to make our own wishes come true.  In fact, we are the only ones in a position to do so, 
since we are the only ones who know the true intent of the wish or prayer, and we must decide 
when the conditions of the contract have been satisfied. 
         Knowledge is the key.  If one knows what to do, and how 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          39 

CEREMONIAL BOW 
 
"The greatest warrior wins without fighting." 
Sun Tzu 
 
       In any formal match, the opponents tra-
ditionally begin by bowing to each other.  This 
is often interpreted as a sign of respect for each 
other's skill and ability.  It is also the case that 
a good fighter, having studied extensively, will 
be aware of the many styles and systems; 
therefore he will be able to classify an adver-
sary according to his stance and preparatory 
steps.  Naturally, if one were attacked in an 
ambush, there would be no time for such pleas-
antries; but a true master could avoid such an 
attack, and still warn his assailants by a gesture 
or password. 
       In Chinese cosmology, the closed right 
fist represents Yang, the positive force, while 
the left symbolizes Yin, the encircling force.  
When the left palm covers the right fist, that is 
known as the Sign of Eternity, which means 
that the agent possesses secret knowledge.  
Other fighters who recognize this sign do not 
contend further, unless they believe themselves 
to be of equal or greater skill.  In one sense this 
is because they might consider themselves 
"brothers of the same school"; in another 
sense, they would be foolish to fight with a 
professional, whose hands are considered le-
thal weapons. 
       Always end the kata with the same bow, 
to prove to any onlookers that you did know 
what you were doing, and that the enemy was 
fairly warned before he killed himself by forc-
ing the fight. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                     40 

RAISING THE CURTAIN 
 
From the bow, the Ninja steps 
back with his left foot and folds 
his arms over his chest defen-
sively. This is called Kasumi 
Stance. The Scarf application of 
this technique is as follows: Us-
ing the cape or blanket, lay the 
cloth across the chest and fold 
the arms as shown. To the ob-
server it appears that the cape is 
draped on the shoulders and the 
edges wrapped about the body, as 
would be customary. This is the 
illusion of form within the scarf.  
 
 
    DRAGON-SPREAD WINGS 
 
The Ninja spreads his arms in a slow, dramatic motion, holding the corners of the cloth by the 
fingertips, to present a solid sheet.  To an observer it would seem that the Ninja has opened his 
cape to make himself appear larger.  This is a psychological ploy as well, an intimidating ges-
ture that may be sufficient in itself to dissuade further conflict.  In reality, the cape now hangs 
in between the combatants, instead of around the agent.  From this stance, it can be thrown over 
the enemy's head, blinding him while you escape. [Editor’s Note: For more techniques utilizing 
the cape or blanket in combat, see NINJA Cloak of Invisibility] 
 
HALF STEP 
 
In combat, half of the battle involves closing 
the gap between the fighters safely, in order to 
bring the enemy within striking range.  The half 
step employs the misdirection method, and relies 
on the fact that movement attracts the eye.  The 
enemy is compelled to watch both of your hands, 
since they represent the potential strike.  Spread 
your hands and assume the Dragon-Spread 
Wings, placing your hands at opposite sides of 
the enemy's vision.  Take advantage of this split 
focus of attention, and simultaneously slide the 
rear foot quietly behind the lead, thereby advanc-
ing one half step unseen.  Snap-kick the enemy 
in the groin, which is now in range. 
 
                                                                                          41 

 
 
 
 
 
42 
 
 
FRONT SNAP KICK 
 
As the enemy is distracted by the movement 
of the arms, he does not see the subtle sliding 
forward of the rear foot, which advances the 
Ninja one-half step. It is an old Boxing 
maxim that “to strike the head, one should 
take a full step, to strike the body, only one-
half step. Bend the left knee sharply and 
quickly, raising it to chest level to defend the 
torso. Then snap the left foot smartly forward 
from the knee with the toes curled back to 
expose the ball of the foot as the striking sur-
face.  
APPLICATION OF THE FRONT SNAP 
KICK 
The Front Snap Kick is one of the most basic 
of all marital arts techniques. It relies on speed 
and accuracy for effectiveness. Ninja seldom 
kick higher than solar plexus level in order to 
maintain their balance while standing on one 
leg. This enables the kick to strike the enemy 
anywhere from the knee, a crippling blow; to 
the groin, a devastating strike; or to the solar 
plexus for the knockout.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          43 
DOUBLE FRONT SNAP-KICK 
 
Without putting the lead foot down from the half step, 
snap-kick again, striking the enemy's head as he falls 
forward as a result of the first kick to the midsection.  
This devastating double attack is performed in a quick 
staccato fashion and is an example of the principle of 
feinting.  Even if the first attack is blocked, the second 
usually will get through. The target is the enemy’s 
chin. Having stunned him with the first kick, the sec-
ond snaps his head back, rendering him unconscious. 
In Japanese, kicking the enemy chin with the ball of 
the foot is called ago-geri, literally, "chin-kick." It is 
quite capable of rendering the enemy unconscious or 
killing him due to the whiplash type of injury inflicted 
by snapping the head violently backward.  Few Ninja 
kick above the waist level, since high kicks require 
more balance.  In this case, the first kick has already 
brought the target down to the proper height. 
DOUBLE KICK 
 
Many martial arts styles teach that a 
“double” technique, such as  the Dou-
ble Front Jumping Kick are highly 
effective in combat. The first kick is 
thrown at the enemy. Then, leaping 
up off the platform leg, the combatant 
throws a second kick with the other 
leg. This is often seen in Crane Style 
Gung Fu. The Ninja, on the other 
hand, merely kick twice with the 
same leg. An equally effective 
method. In this case the left leg Snap 
Kicks the opponent in the belly and 
bends him over, making it unneces-
sary for the Ninja to execute a “high” 
kick to reach his chin.  

 
 
 
                                                                                          44 
FOLLOW-UP SWORD HAND 
 
The logical follow through for any 
Snap Kick is the Vertical Sword Hand 
Chop. Even if the kick misses, by step-
ping downward and forward with it, 
one gains enough ground to reach the 
enemy’s head and the momentum of 
moving forward adds weight to the 
impact. The Vertical Chop may be 
performed to the outside line as 
shown, or inside, by deflecting the en-
emy arm aside.  
SWORD HAND 
 
Some styles of Karate insist that a proper snap kick 
is only performed when the foot returns to it original 
position. That is fine for forms, but, in most cases, es-
pecially high kicks, the natural tendency is to fall for-
ward. The Ninja takes advantage of this momentum 
to further advance on the enemy. Maintaining a firm 
guard with his left hand to deflect any attack by the 
enemy, the agent strikes down diagonally onto the 
side of the enemy neck with a vertical chopping ac-
tion of his right hand. The intent is to stun the enemy 
by hitting the large muscle on the side of the neck, or 
break the collarbone. Either way, it is a disabling 
blow.  

                                                                                          45 
TEARING 
DOWN 
THE 
DOOR 
 
Having disposed of the first 
adversary, the Ninja then con-
fronts the second, who immedi-
ately steps in.  He leans back 
slightly to avoid the imagined 
attack and raises both hands de-
fensively.  He then steps for-
ward into the attack by taking a 
full step with his right foot.  
Historically, this action is de-
rived from simultaneously hold-
ing a door and jamming it with 
the foot. 
 
 
ENTANGLING ARMS 
 
Swing the arms in a wide counterclockwise arc, keeping 
the hands an equal distance apart, as if wiping a large mirror 
with a cloth.  This action effectively sweeps aside any linear 
attack made by the enemy.  The scarf application is to cast 
the blanket over the enemy's head from the side.  Rock back 
slightly as you circle the arms, thereby withdrawing before 
the intended strike while pressing the enemy attack down 
and to the side.  The arms act to entangle the enemy's arms 
and forestall him. The arms, working together, deflect and 
engage the enemy, preventing him from making an effective 
strike.  Try to make his arm cross the line of engagement.  
That is, try to get his arm between the two of you, where it 
will interfere with his intended tactics.  This will also tend 
to confuse him and disrupt his balance.  Remember, a force 
of one thousand pounds can be turned by four ounces. 
 

 
PUSHING THE DOOR 
 
Rock forward over the leading 
leg as you push forward from the 
rear hip with both hands, as if 
closing a door.  Push slightly up-
ward in an effort to "uproot" the 
enemy.  This double palm push 
with shoulders square enables the 
practitioner to withstand a power-
ful force directed against him.  
Again, the analogy is that of hold-
ing a doorway closed.  Focus the 
chi to the front and direct it 
through the palms. 
 
 
APPLICATION OF PUSHING THE DOOR 
 
In this instance, the left hand acts as the soe-te, or 
"entangling arm," while the right is called mu-te, the 
"striking arm." In the continuation of this action, the en-
emy's left arm is carried down and to the Ninja's left; 
again, across the line of engagement.  Crossing one of 
the enemy's arms atop the other to trap him is called 
Juji-Uke.  By rocking forward with the push, one can 
shove the enemy aside. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          46 

 
 
DRAGON-TAIL KICK 
 
The 
spinning-back 
leg 
sweep is one of the simplest 
and most effective of any in 
the martial arts. it illustrates 
the angle method, since the 
Ninja drops out of sight be-
fore taking down the enemy.  
From the double-palm push, 
drop to all fours and extend 
the left leg.  Pivot on the 
right knee, using the hands 
for balance, and swing the 
left leg 180 degrees to the 
rear. Used properly, this leg 
sweep knocks the enemy's 
legs out from under him.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          48 
SAND IN THE EYES 
 
Following the Dragon-Tail kick, you are 
now facing in the opposite direction from 
where you started, in a low kneeling stance.  
While this limits the angles from which the 
enemy can strike you, it also gives him the 
advantage of higher ground.  Using the 
blinding method, the Ninja scoops a hand-
ful of sand in each fist as the enemy ap-
proaches. 
 
APPLICATION OF SAND IN THE EYES 
 
Dropping low to avoid any attack by the advanc-
ing enemy, the Ninja grabs two fists-full of sand 
as his weapon. Rising quickly, he will use an un-
derhanded toss to throw the missiles into the en-
emy’s face. With very little practice this can be 
an incredibly effective self-defense technique for 
even the most passive student.  There is hardly a 
man alive that can block a handful of sand.  Even 
if he tries, his attention is diverted from the as-
sault long enough to permit the prudent Ninja to 
flee. 
 
 

 
 
                                   49 
SAND IN THE EYES 
THROW 
 
Then, pushing off with a 
rear leg, the Ninja throws 
both hands upward toward 
the enemy's face as he 
stands, launching the sand 
into his eyes.  This tech-
nique is so effective that 
even if no powder or sand 
is thrown, the enemy will 
still flinch in an instinctive 
reaction to protect the 
eyes.  This technique per-
mits the agent either to 
strike while the enemy is 
blinded and at a disadvan-
tage, or to disappear. 
Editor’s Note: This is the first of several techniques practiced and 
used by the Ninja to temporarily blind an opponent so an escape 
can be effected. Such a tactic would be considered “dishonorable” 
to a Samurai, and a “dirty trick” by most fighters. The Ninja, on 
the other hand, fall back on the old adage that, “All’s fair in love 
and war.” And seek to end the conflict with as little violence as 
possible. For that reason they developed an entire fighting system 
based on stealth, misdirection, and escape. Including the primitive 
manufacture of Metsubishi-Ko, or “black eggs,” filled with vari-
ous “blinding powders” such as Cayenne pepper, metal filings, 
ashes and dust, that could be easily cracked open and thrown at an 
attacker. The Mi Lu Kata are the only practice forms known to 
man that include the practice of this simple and effective self de-
fense technique. 

 
MI LU STEP (PIVOT) 
 
The principle of getting behind the en-
emy in order to be invisible to him is an-
other example of the angle method.  The 
enemy cannot hit what he cannot see.  
This step is one way of turning the corner 
to evade the enemy attack.  From the pre-
vious position with the right foot for-
ward, take one full step straight ahead 
with arms raised for balance.  When per-
formed in combat this will place you 
shoulder to shoulder with the enemy, fac-
ing in opposite directions. 
 
 
APPLICATION OF MI LU STEP 
 
The Ninja has stepped through the narrow gap be-
tween himself and the enemy while pivoting on the 
ball of the lead foot and is now halfway behind the 
enemy. In order to pass his enemy, he has turned 
his back during the second in which the enemy’s 
eyes were closed by his instinctive blinking at the 
sand or pebbles thrown in his face.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   50 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          51 
SPIN-BACK PIVOT 
 
From the previous pose, pivot clock-
wise on the toes of the left foot, bring-
ing the right foot near the left ankle 
without setting it down.  Step out to the 
right with the right foot into a horse 
stance for balance, and bring the arms 
up, either defensively or to strike the 
enemy from behind. This is sometimes 
known as the boxing step, or the hsiao 
pu, ("melting/vanishing step"). It places 
the practitioner belly to back with the 
enemy. 
 
APPLICATION OF THE SPIN BACK PIVOT 
 
The Ninja has stepped behind the enemy into a modi-
fied Horse Stance and strikes the enemy behind the ear 
with a sharp Shuto, or Sword Hand Blow, to render 
him senseless. His shoulders are now square to those 
of the adversary and they are facing in the same direc-
tion. When fighting more than one opponent, this is 
useful in providing a “Human Shield” between your-
self and any remaining attackers.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          52 
SCRAPING SIDEKICK 
 
Following the previous technique, you 
axe once again facing in the original 
starting direction.  Strike out directly to 
the side.  For instance, if you began fac-
ing north, this kick is aimed west.  This 
is a low sidekick, intended to strike the 
enemy's leg just below the knee with the 
edge of the foot.  This is a crippling 
blow in itself, but the Ninja adds to its 
effectiveness by falling forward with the 
kick so the blade of the foot scrapes 
painfully down the enemy's shin and the 
heel stamps down hard on the instep. 
 
APPLICATION OF SCRAPING SIDEKICK 
 
In this illustration, the enemy has been trapped by 
the Ninja's weight.  This technique exemplifies the 
misdirection method, forcing the enemy to direct his 
attention to his foot, down and away from the in-
tended target, his head.  Note that the lead hand is 
carried low, in preparation for the Backfist strike, 
and that the Ninja continues to lean away from the 
enemy as well as keep his lead shoulder toward him, 
to present as small a target as possible. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          53 
BACKFIST 
 
With the enemy's foot pinned to the 
ground, effectively trapping him to the 
spot, the Ninja whips out his leading 
hand to strike the enemy at the base of 
the skull with the back of the first two 
knuckles.  This is a quick, snappy ac-
tion designed to produce a sharp blow 
to the skull and stun the opponent.  
This is an easy punch to learn and is so 
effective and sneaky that it is illegal in 
Western boxing. 
 
 
APPLICATION OF BACKFIST 
 
When the enemy looks down, the Ninja shifts his 
weight over the forward leg to immobilize him and 
lashes out with the Backfist strike.  The rear hand 
remains near solar plexus level in a defensive mode.  
This technique works almost every time, but only 
once per opponent. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          54 
DOUBLE BLOCK 
 
At the end of the previous posture, 
you were facing forward, or north, in a 
wide horse stance, looking west, or to 
the left.  In kata it is presumed that the 
next attacker steps up quickly, ap-
proaching perpendicular to your line of 
balance (an imaginary line running be-
tween the soles of the feet).  A force 
acting along this line, from the side for 
example, has little effect; a force acting 
at 90 degrees to this line can easily 
push you over backward.  This is a 
quick block covering a large area, using 
the arms alone. 
 
 
APPLICATION OF DOUBLE BLOCK 
 
The left arm forms Chudan, the middle block, as 
the right simultaneously performs Gedan, the 
down block. This protects everything from the 
eyebrows to the groin, and clears the centerline of 
any incoming attack. This movement is designed 
to give you a second to retreat from or advance to-
ward a head-on attack. 

 
 
                                                                                          55 
APPLICATION OF COIN TOSS  
 
As the enemy nears, the Ninja steps 
back to maintain the gap between him-
self and the enemy and stay out of 
range. 
At the same time, his right hand 
reaches across to the left hip and takes 
hold of the "coin purse.”  In the field, 
this may take the form of any easily 
opened container filled with powder, 
sand, or metal filings. 
 
 
COIN TOSS 
 
The Ninja were always lovers of peace, even in feu-
dal times.  When confronted by bandits on the road, 
they would sometimes resort to tossing a small bag of 
coins to the thief as a token payment.  This "road tax" 
was cheap if it saved a fight.  When the Ninja were 
being chased, the same stratagem often stopped less 
than enthusiastic guards, or caused passersby to im-
pede the pursuit in their efforts to grab a few coins 
thrown into a crowd.  Such a purse or pouch was of-
ten carried on the hip at waist level, where it could 
easily be pulled free. 
In the kata, this action begins by showing the coins in 
the open palm as you step back with the left foot.  
Once the enemy's attention is on the bag, throw it, or 
the loose coins, upward into his face.  This will cause 
him to blink, thus representing both the blinding and 
psychological methods.  This move is equally effec-
tive when done as a single-hand sand throw, in which 
instance the hand would be closed until the toss. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          56 
Then the Ninja whips 
his palm upward and out 
to cast the coins or 
blinding powder into the 
enemy's face.  A little 
practice with a handful 
of flour can make a war-
rior 
out 
of 
anyone.  
Again, this illustrates the 
blinding method in solo 
application.  This is an 
extremely 
dirty 
trick 
which, if it fails, is al-
most certain to incite the 
enemy to fury and rage. 
 
 
Editor’s Note: Throwing sand in the eyes of the enemy is the hall-
mark of Ninjitsu. It is a simple technique developed by non-
violent priests who knew the value of human life and can be 
learned by anyone without practice as an effective means of self 
defense. The great advantage provided by this technique enables 
even the small, frail, or weak to overcome any attacker, regardless 
of size, physical strength or superior numbers. Ninjitsu, the Art of 
Invisibility, fulfills the promise made by all martial arts, without 
the years of grueling practice and obescience to sometimes brutal 
teachers. The motto of the Ninja is “Train yourself and be your 
own master.” Rather than “Live and die by your duty and honor.” 
Ninja were most often peaceful peasants, content to live in har-
mony with Nature, until attacked. Glory, honor, duty, all mean 
little to a man concerned with family, culture, and peace. Know-
ing that all war is futile, the Ninja overcame the enemy quickly 
and quietly, invisibly. And all of the principles of their strategies 
and tactics are contained within these practice forms.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          57 
SPIN BACKFIST 
 
This is one of the most devastating 
strikes in Ninjitsu.  It is often seen even 
in the professional kick-boxing ring.  
From the cross-leg stance, pivot 
quickly on the balls of both feet, spin-
ning 180 degrees to the rear.  As you 
turn, move the head more swiftly than 
the body to sight in on the target; load 
the right elbow across the chest at 
shoulder level.  If you are too close, 
strike with the elbow; if not, snap out 
the fist. 
APPLICATION OF THE CROSS STEP 
 
In application against a single opponent, the Ninja 
closes the gap between the combatants by lashing 
out with his Backfist While surreptitiously Cross-
Stepping in back, out of sight of the enemy. If begun 
from long range, the enemy can fairly easily see and 
deflect this strike. It is most effective if several ad-
vances are made first as probing attacks, and the this 
move is used to actually gain ground. Always strike 
as if sincerely trying to hit the enemy in the temple. 
It might work, and he will seldom react to a half-
hearted feint.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          58 
APPLICATION OF SPIN BACKFIST 
 
From the cross step, whip around to strike the 
enemy from an unexpected angle.  One may 
use the Backfist, as shown; or, if closer, the lat-
eral elbow strike; or, by dropping low, a Ham-
merfist to the liver, or reverse "Monkey Steals 
the Peach" strike to the groin.  Keep the chin 
tucked into the shoulder for protection, and 
practice "spotting" (picking the target and fix-
ing on it before unleashing the strike). 
 
SPIN BACKFIST 
 
This is one of the most devastating strikes 
in Ninjitsu.  It is often seen even in the pro-
fessional kick-boxing ring.  From the cross-
leg stance, pivot quickly on the balls of both 
feet, spinning 180 degrees to the rear.  As 
you turn, move the head more swiftly than 
the body to sight in on the target; load the 
right elbow across the chest at shoulder level.  
If you are too close, strike with the elbow; if 
not, snap out the fist. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          59 
BEAT-DOWN BLOCK 
 
After the last position, you are 
facing east.  Now look north over 
the left shoulder, and swing both 
arms together in a wide arc, as if 
turning a great wheel.  Both hands 
make fists.  As you turn, shift your 
weight from the right to the left 
foot, establishing that as the plat-
form leg, preparatory to zen kutsu 
dachi, or the frontal stance.  The in-
tent is to beat down on the enemy 
attack, which is imagined as com-
ing from the north.  Both of the 
arms must move together for the 
follow-up technique. 
 
APPLICATION OF BEAT DOWN BLOCK 
 
Regardless of the enemy attack, whip the arms over and 
down, striking forcibly with a Hammerfist or Inverted 
Fist Strike. The intent is not so much to block him as to 
break his arm. This Beat Down Block is used in Ninja 
Kumi Uchi to escape a rear chokehold. Thereafter, one 
may open the fist and trap the enemy advance, thus 
opening the line of engagement.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          60 
POWER PUNCH 
 
Using the momentum of the arm-
swinging, hurl the right fist in a hooking 
arc to strike the enemy's head in what is of-
ten known as a roundhouse punch.  Add 
power to this strike by turning the shoul-
ders forward, squaring them to the front of 
the enemy.  If he evades by fading, or 
launches a secondary attack, this overhand 
beating action can also strike that aside; if 
not, the hit can take the form of a hook, or 
Tiger Claw fist. 
 
 
APPLICATION OF POWER PUNCH 
 
Drive the right fist into the enemy strongly 
enough to knock aside any defense he may put 
up. In motion pictures, the hero often uses this 
punch, which employs all of his weight, as his 
finishing technique on an otherwise difficult op-
ponent. Practice it a few times, imagining your 
worst enemy as the recipient. Take care not to 
throw your shoulder out or twist your torso too 
far.  

 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          61 
DOUBLE THUMB GOUGE 
 
Following the previous strike, face north with the left foot forward.  Assuming that the previ-
ous double strike merely beat aside the enemy defense, take advantage of the opening to step up 
with the right foot and drive both thumbs deep into the enemy's eyes.  Grab hold of his ears and/
or hair for a good grip on his head.  Kiai, or scream, as you step forward and, if unmasked, 
make a ferocious face to frighten the enemy and make him flinch. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                          62 
KNEE STRIKE 
 
If you are holding the enemy's head, lift the left knee and drive it against the skull to crush the 
face and finish him off.  If the thumbs miss or you have only partial control of the enemy, drive 
the knee into the groin to break the pubic arch and effectively cripple him.  This is an excellent 
close-in fighting technique, requiring little actual strength and having a profound effect. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          63 
OPENING THE CURTAIN 
 
This move is sometimes known as 
"Parting the Veil." Facing north with the 
hands palm up, describe two small cir-
cles in opposite directions, moving the 
hands from the Hara level, where they 
ended in the previous movement, to eye-
brow level.  The hands separate as if 
parting the folds of a curtain to allow a 
performer to step on stage.  The left foot 
is forward, having been set down gently 
after the knee strike.  The body is square 
to the enemy, but slightly withdrawn in 
a defensive stance with 70 percent of the 
weight on the rear leg. 
 
APPLICATION OF OPEN THE CURTAIN 
 
This technique is very effective for opening the line 
of engagement between oneself and the opponent. 
As he advances with arms outstretched to grapple, 
drop low or fade back to reduce the area of your 
body that is vulnerable to attack. This is called 
“target denial.” Swing the arms up in simultaneous 
Mirror Blocks to separate the enemy’s arms and 
open his centerline for attack.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          64 
MONKEY STEALS THE PEACH 
 
This is the classical name for the upward 
groin slap.  Drop to the right knee, swinging 
the arms like windmills to distract the enemy 
and deflect any defense he may offer.  The 
left arm ends in jodan, the rising forearm 
block, protecting the head as you drop low 
and slide forward without stepping.  The right 
arm swings up and back, circling from the 
shoulder.  Turn the palm up as it swings be-
tween the enemy's feet to stun him. 
 
APPLICATION OF MONKEY STEALS A 
PEACH 
 
Whip the arms as described and strike the en-
emy's groin with the open palm, fingers bent at 
the first joint in a Monkey Paw or Tiger Claw 
fist.  The impact will lift the enemy off the 
ground.  Those skilled in chi kung can direct 
energy up the Chueng Mo channel of the body 
and stop the heart.  Followers of the Iron Hand 
styles immediately clench their fists tightly, 
with a crushing grip, and jerk the hand sharply 
back to the near hip, effectively ripping away 
the genitals.  Massive blood loss causes death. 

 
 
TO FINISH 
 
When you stand following the groin 
strike, draw your left foot back 
slightly and fold your arms across 
your chest, left over right.  Lean 
back.  You are now back in the origi-
nal starting position, except you are 
exactly reversed, i.e., when you 
started the kata your right foot was 
forward, now your left foot is. 
Start again from the beginning and 
perform every movement in the Mi 
Lu kata again, this time on the other 
side.  In the past, one requirement for 
training as a Ninja was that the stu-
dent be ambidextrous.  By repeating 
the movements on the other side, one 
is able to react quickly to any attack, 
no matter which quarter it is 
launched from, and thus end the con-
flict decisively, with a minimum of 
technique and effort. 
 
 
 
 
At the completion of the second, or "mirror," repetition, end by covering the right fist, folded 
around the thumb, with the left open palm to form the Sign of Eternity .  This identifies the per-
former as one schooled in the secrets and mysteries of the Art, and possessed of deeper under-
standing than may be apparent to the casual observer. 
Each of the techniques of the Lost Track form illustrates a specific principle of magical sci-
ence.  "If one wishes to disguise the movement of one hand, move both hands," is a canon of 
prestidigitation that illustrates simultaneous attack.  "Sand in the eye can hide a mountain" em-
bodies the method of blinding or flinching.  "One cannot hit what one cannot see" is demon-
strated by the angle method.  "Feinting an attack to the head raises the enemy guard" is an ex-
ample of misdirection.  "The only thing to fear is fear itself" typifies the psychological or mind 
method.  One might suspect that this system of fighting was developed by magicians.  And it 
was-the warrior-mystics of Ninjitsu. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          65 

HIDDEN MASTERS 
Spirit Helpers 
 
"The way is known to all, but not all know it.  " 
 
When you obtained this book, it was because you were in search of occult power.  It has been 
said, however, that no one may find such power without personal instruction from one skilled in 
the dark arts, and that is so.  So how may we contact these secret teachers-if, indeed, we wish to 
pursue this quest?  The answer is simple: we must follow their example. 
True knowledge endures without regard for the sands of time, and the immutable laws of the 
universe carry each of us to our fate, whether we take notice or not.  There are many paths to 
the Universal Mind, the Cosmic Consciousness.  One may follow the Eightfold Path and grow; 
or one may embrace the Way of the Spiritual Devotee.  All paths lead to the dwelling place of 
Vishnu, who knows all, sees all, and tells all.  At this level of mind, anything is possible. 
If we seek to become one with Nature, then, and to experience communion with this All-Wise 
Consciousness, we must concede that we conceive of it as being "outside" of ourselves.  At that 
point we feel loneliness, which causes us to seek the counsel of others.  Most people are moti-
vated by self-interest, however; there are those who would take advantage of this motivation.  
So finally we are left completely abandoned.  Every living being passes through this test of self-
doubt.  This is the Dark Night of the Soul, when one decides between life and death and finds 
the inner strength, with or without "help." 
"I have no friend; I make my mind my friend." These words are taught in Zen meditation and 
are part of the Japanese creed of the samurai.  The Ninja carry this one step further with Hsi 
Men jitsu, the Chinese art of psychology.  Hsi Men jitsu teaches that there are three facets of 
every personality.  Dr. Eric Berne called them child, adult, and internalized parent.  The an-
cients referred to them as heaven, earth, and man (shen, chi, and ching).  The Hidden Masters 
are the high self, the jonin, the upper man, the internalized mores and behaviors we have 
learned from authority figures. 
Invoking and communicating with the Hidden Masters serves three functions: First, it enables 
one to act as an actual parent, thus promoting survival of the race; second, it makes many re-
sponses automatic, in accordance with the principle of cause and effect; and third, the spirit 
helper acts as a counsel and guide when we are lost, a friend when we are alone, and a teacher 
of secret knowledge.  Everyone has such an ally who can be trusted completely and consulted 
on any question. 
The purpose of the exercises in this book is to calm the "lower" self, the chakras or energy cen-
ters of the body that are concerned only with gratification of the physical desires: air, water, 
food, shelter, sex.  In so doing, the energy of the body can be raised and, with it, the level of 
consciousness.  When this has been accomplished, we become sensitive to the forces of Nature 
and can act in accordance with the laws of the universe. 
 
 
                                                                           66 

   To accomplish this, one need only begin.  It may require more effort for some than others, and 
it may need to be attempted several times, even at different ages, to effect a sufficient rapport 
with the alter ego.  Nevertheless it can be done.  It has been done before, and will be done 
again. 
   Many cultures have secret ceremonies whereby one may find or summon one's spiritual advi-
sor; and, of course, everyone has a different concept of the appearance and/or mode of commu-
nication of this personage.  For most, it is an automatic and unconscious process, but when cou-
pled with the power of imagination, it becomes a powerful ally.  It may be the memory of a be-
loved relative that appears to counsel us, or a combination of several people who have had a 
powerful or guiding influence, or even a figure from history. it may even be the little voice of 
our conscience which keeps us out of trouble most of the time, that whispers in our ear- As long 
as we are aware of the benevolent and guiding nature of these advisors, we may be assured of 
their assistance and support.  The more frequently they are consulted, the more influence they 
can have and the greater the ease with which they may be contacted. 
   History and experience have shown that whatever form these imaginary friends take, they 
have certain common characteristics.  Since they represent authority figures, all are firm and 
honest in their advice and directions.  Since they are the idealized creation of a teacher or sage, 
they are never upset or angry; and their explanations, or the flashes of insight that they provide, 
fully answer and explain any question.  This invariably has a calming effect on the practitioner 
and helps to allay any fears or anxiety that may be present.  Lastly, since they are friends, they 
possess a sense of irony and humor.  This enables us to see ourselves as others see us, and real-
ize that most of our problems are self-induced and really of little consequence in the scheme of 
the universe.  This leads to humility. 
   In the 1920s and '30s, the United States was inundated by spiritualists and mediums who 
claimed miraculous curative powers far beyond those of mortal men.  They possessed, or so the 
story goes, a "spirit guide" from beyond this human plane, with whom they communicated 
while in a deep trancelike state.  During these manifestations, the spirit guide was able to speak 
through the medium's voice, although the voices of each were distinctly dissimilar.  We shall 
not attempt so profound a materialization at this juncture, but it should be noted that these medi-
ums were merely persons who publicly acknowledged their imaginary friend. 
There are hundreds of meditation techniques that help one contact one's spirit ally.  Each relies 
on artificially altering the chemical state of the blood, either by deep breathing 
(hyperventilating) or holding the breath (hypoventilating).  Each must be practiced carefully, 
lest the increased oxygen in the bloodstream make one conscious of the heartbeat.  In many 
cases, this leads to anxiety; but that is easily calmed by simply holding the breath for a moment.  
Charlatans frequently insist that the resulting phenomenon is the result of some manipulation of 
their own, when in fact it is a simple physiological effect. 
We present only the most rudimentary method here, one which, practiced patiently over a long 
period, will lead the curious to discover any helping agent that may be required.  Rudyard 
Kipling wrote, "There is a certain calming influence that one may experience by the mere as-
sumption of a comfortable position and the slow repetition of one's name." Likewise, such a 
practice also develops an awareness and understanding of Self.  But before one requests of the 
Hidden Masters an ally-one who may act as sentry, scout, or spy, who is in contact with the 
Universal Mind of all mankind, and who has access to all things and all knowledge, hidden or 
revealed-one must make some preparation. 
                                                                           67 

The degree of detail which is attributed to the ally contributes greatly to its realism and subse-
quent effectiveness; nevertheless one should not become so enamored of the fantasy relation-
ship that it takes precedence over reality.  Instead, one should be like a child making believe, 
pretending; one should suspend for a few moments the press of everyday life.  This allows a 
certain surcease from the crush of responsibility, and that is called "reducing stress." 
You may decide beforehand what type of advisor you desire, and prepare sketches or descrip-
tive poetry, all of which enhance the experience.  But in the end, it is the subconscious mind 
that determines the form you will perceive.  If it matches or is similar to your preconceived im-
age, then you already possess significant personal insight and self-knowledge.  If not, then the 
high self will most often be the counterpoint of the child facet of your personality, thereby bal-
ancing the Yin and Yang in the adult self which must function in the real world. 
Lie down in a comfortable position, so that all parts of the body are equally supported.  Close 
your eyes.  Become aware of the sounds around you.  Do not be distracted by them, just be 
aware.  Inhale deeply and fully, without strain, as you mentally count, "one, two, three, four." 
Hold the inhalation for the count of two.  Relax and let the air flow easily out of the lungs as 
you count, "one, two, three, four." Hold the exhalation for the count of two.  Repeat three times. 
At first, the speed of the count will reflect your conscious state of mind.  Later it will synchro-
nize with the heartbeat.  Finally it will regulate the heartbeat.  When holding the breath in, do 
not constrict the muscles of the throat; this damages the blood vessels in the neck and face.  On 
the exhalation, push the air out with the Hara. 
Think of the most pleasant experience you have ever had.  Take three deep breaths and as you 
exhale each time, count backward from three to one.  This is a deepening exercise that enables 
one to develop a more contemplative state.  Furthermore it focuses the attention on the breath-
ing, which helps to elicit what some Boston researchers have described as the “relaxation re-
sponse" present in all humans.  Feel the relaxation in your body.  Any sounds that you may hear 
do not distract you from this contemplation.  If left to random chance, most people at this stage 
drift easily into a light sleep. 
The Ninja have a saying: "All men have three names: the one they are called, the one they are 
known by, and the one they share with no one else." So it is with the spirit helper.  Having de-
cided to contact this personage, we may do so leisurely, waiting for its appearance, at which 
time it will be recognized and subsequently named.  Alternatively, you may seek to contact a 
specific entity, in which event the procedure now requires that you speak the name you have 
chosen.  Repeat it three times, softly.  This will be your own personal "mantra"; you are not to 
tell anyone else this mantra, since to do so invites comparison and/or criticism from those less 
imaginative. Communication with the alter ego that you have contacted may take many forms, 
verbal, visual, or kinesthetic.  It may even take the form of telepathy, since it is a dialogue of 
two minds. 
 
When you are alone, or troubled, or need a helping hand 
Close your eyes and think of me and speak my name out loud 
And I will come. 
Look for me in the sky of a summer day, 
Listen for the sound of my footsteps on the path, 
Lift the rock and I am there. 
                                                                                                            -Cheyenne Indian chant 
 
                                                                           68 

POSTSCRIPT 
"There is no secret except in the mind of the seeker.  " 
 
It has always seemed that the masters perform with ease things which we mere mortals find in-
conceivable.  They know the "trick"; that is what makes them mystics.  To employ that knowl-
edge properly is to be a warrior.  That means accepting responsibility for one's actions.  To kill 
is easy, and to win is easy; one need only cheat.  One need only have the will to accomplish 
anything.  But not cheating-that is what separates mankind from man-beast.  To members of the 
animal kingdom, every situation is life or death.  Only man can differentiate between good and 
evil, discriminating whether he must use all his powers to survive, or whether what is transpir-
ing is merely the blustering of the ego; either his own or another's. 
The mood of the warrior is one of waiting; he waits for time and circumstance to stir his will.  
He is patient and tolerant.  To occupy himself, he trains to perfect his skill, his kung fu 
("ability").  He studies to increase his understanding of himself and others, knowing them to be 
one and the same.  He is a man of peace who fights like ten tigers.  He is the keeper of the se-
cret knowledge.  He is the warrior-mystic, who, in silence so deadly, destroys the enemy un-
seen.  He is the Ninja. 
Thus the Game can begin.  To play is simple: One merely follows one's true nature, which is 
beyond illusion or delusion.  One strives for the perfection of character by fostering the spirit of 
effort.  One defends the paths of truth, honoring the principles of etiquette and guarding against 
impetuous courage.  One acquires merit by doing good works, seeking to discover new means 
and new companions with which to enjoy the quest.  There is no enlightenment outside of one-
self.  One may play the Game or ignore it.  It goes on forever, regardless. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                           69 

