
For your convenience Apress has placed some of the front 
matter material after the index. Please use the Bookmarks 
and Contents at a Glance links to access them. 

 
v
Contents 
About the Author ............................................................................................................. ix 
Acknowledgments............................................................................................................. xi 
Preface ................................................................................................................................... xiii 
Chapter 1: The No-Drama Project Manager ............................................................... 1 
Chapter 2: Project Management Success ....................................................................15 
Chapter 3: Identify Requirements.................................................................................29 
Chapter 4: Prioritize ........................................................................................................45 
Chapter 5: Manage Change.............................................................................................59 
Chapter 6: Align with the Client ...................................................................................75 
Chapter 7: Testing Assumptions ...................................................................................89 
Chapter 8: Identify Decision Makers..........................................................................105 
Chapter 9: Communicate Effectively..........................................................................123 
Chapter 10: Develop a Plan............................................................................................143 
Chapter 11: Prepare for Problems................................................................................155 
Chapter 12: Establish Metrics.........................................................................................171 
Chapter 13: Know the Roles..........................................................................................187 
Chapter 14: Handling the Truly Unexpected .............................................................205 
Chapter 15: The End of Drama .....................................................................................223 
Index 
..................................................................................................................................241 
 
 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
1 
The No-Drama 
Project Manager 
“We have enough drama around here, without 
you adding to it…” 
People have likened being a project manager to being one part professional 
bull fighter, one part air-traffic controller, one part toddler daycare director, 
and one part therapist. It’s a job that can be filled with enormous levels of 
stress, vast amounts of accountability, and often virtually no actual authority. 
Couple that with the need to make frightening decisions on a nearly daily 
basis, with limited (and sometimes inaccurate) information, while supporting 
a team that has as varied and diverse a set of needs as any group imaginable, 
and you begin to understand what a project manger goes through. 
Rarely does the project manager have the authority to fire someone, hire 
someone, give someone a bonus or pay cut, or even decide which person 
works on which project. In fact, many project managers have to beg just for 
the ability to take their team out to lunch once in a while. Yet they’re en-
trusted with project budgets in the millions of dollars in the hopes they can 
achieve objectives worth hundreds of millions.  
Even with this in mind, over 500,0001 people have received certification 
from the Project Management Institute (PMI) in the last 40 years, and many 
                                                
1 Source: www.pmi.org/About-Us.aspx. 

Chapter 1 | The No-Drama Project Manager 
 
2  
of the practitioners couldn’t imagine having any other career. And the peo-
ple who employ project managers have difficulty figuring out how they’d 
ever make progress without them. Few jobs are as important, as misunder-
stood, as difficult, and as maligned as that of project manager. 
With this as a backdrop, let’s take a look at why we run projects in the first 
place, and what the roles and responsibilities are for the players involved.  
Why We Run Projects 
Based on the description of project management, the first question that may 
come to mind is, “Why would anyone want that job?” In fact, many project 
managers are used to getting that exact comment from their team, their 
customers—and even their bosses at times. The phrase, “I don’t envy 
you…” is one that experienced project managers are accustomed to hear-
ing, and they know to shrug it off. If people can’t understand why we run 
projects, there’s no way to explain it to them, and it’s almost certainly not 
worth trying. 
But there are good reasons. When asked, project managers generally list 
several explanations as to why they love project management. They usually 
break down into one of the following three themes: 
 
You get to learn new things, work with new people, and gain and 
sharpen skills that you never would have otherwise. 
 
You’re on the leading edge of innovation. If what you were being 
asked to do was mundane and well understood, you wouldn’t be 
needed. 
 
You get to launch products and services that the market has never 
seen before. 
The first motivation—the changing nature of the job, the ability to learn from 
others, and the chance to work with a diverse and fluid team—is one of the 
most cited reasons why project managers love their jobs. The core skills that 
make up being a project manager—the ability to plan, to mitigate risk, and to 
execute—are immutable. However, the business domain, technical chal-
lenges, and obstacles to overcome change with each project. You can find 
yourself solving problems for energy dependence one year, and figuring out 
how to take e-commerce payments using the barter system the next. And 
each new assignment brings a new batch of subject-matter experts and team 
members who are there to help get you to where you want to go. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
3  
The second motivation is equally powerful. Some project managers view 
themselves as trailblazers who create the paths that others follow. There 
are plenty of jobs for those who want to take what you’ve done and opti-
mize, support, and maintain it. But while they’re off doing that, you’re doing 
whatever is new, shiny, and interesting. Long after what you built is deemed 
“operational,” you’ve built two or three more things that strive to make the 
first creation obsolete. You live way out on the edge of safety. 
Finally, as a project manager, you get to do something that relatively few 
other managers get to do—you get to launch. You get to enter a space 
where there is nothing, and you get to create. Some of the things you build 
will fizzle into inconsequence, probably before the last cheese puff from the 
celebration party is eaten. But sometimes, what you build will change the 
course of an industry or be used by millions who quickly wonder how they 
ever lived without it. It’s this thrill that we get to experience, year in and 
year out, that our brothers and sisters in delivery don’t. Many of them envy 
project managers and our willingness to launch and watch, rather than have 
to figure out the details and the total cost of ownership.  
 Note  Not everything you launch is destined to change the world, but it’s the chance that it will 
that keeps many project managers going. 
But before you can take on the mantle of project manager, you must under-
stand what your job is and what it isn’t. Not only that, but you may have 
dozens or hundreds of people on your team, all playing different roles. You 
need to look at what these people will be doing, how they will interact, and 
how you can best utilize them on your team. 
Why Roles Are Necessary 
In football, playing defense involves a concept of gap assignments. Those are 
the areas on the field or in the formation that a specific player is supposed 
to cover. During the course of the play, it’s possible that nothing will happen 
in that area, leaving that player underutilized and feeling like they didn’t con-
tribute to the team, at least for that snap. What the player often doesn’t re-
alize is that simply by covering that area, he makes it possible for the coach 
and the rest of his teammates to focus on other things without having to 
worry about whether the gaps were covered. Although everyone wants to 

Chapter 1 | The No-Drama Project Manager 
 
4  
directly contribute as often as possible, sometimes allowing the rest of the 
team to focus on their own contributions is just as valuable. 
The same is true when constructing a project team. In a one-person project, 
you know who is doing everything; if you don’t do it, then it’s not getting 
done. In a two-person project, you can make a similar distinction: if you 
aren’t doing something, you can ask your partner if they are. If both of you 
say no, then you know that no one is doing it. But once a project gets to 
three or more people, knowing what everyone is responsible for, what 
they’re focusing on, and even more important, what they aren’t doing, be-
comes incredibly important. 
Much like the football coach who needs to know that his middle linebacker 
will indeed be in the middle should the need arise, the project manager 
needs to know that the engineers are engineering, the analysts are analyzing, 
and the creatives are creating. Equally important, the amount of effort being 
spent on each position is an explicit decision. You may choose to have four 
quality-control people instead of eight, or try to get by with one graphic art-
ist. This team balance is carefully crafted as part of the project plan, and hav-
ing team members unwind it, by either not knowing what their role is or 
because you never made it clear to them, will only result in a team that is 
headed in different directions with different goals in mind. 
Because of this, clarity, consistency, and adherence to project roles can be-
come even more important than the people who fill those roles. Better to 
have your second-string linebacker in the correct position than to have your 
all-star freelancing and off in the wrong spot—just as it’s better to have 
your business analyst focusing on the problem at hand and not something 
else that may have come up. 
Finally, you may hear comments that project management is easy, or at least 
not that hard, based on how effortlessly you seem to be able to do it. Take 
this as a compliment. It isn’t a sign that the project is easy or that the role of 
project manager is simple. What it is a sign of is that everyone on the team 
knows what the projects goals are, knows what their roles and assignments 
are, and can execute their tasks without anyone being out of position at a 
critical moment. Crisis management is a real skill, but learning how to avoid 
a crisis by always having someone at the ready is a much more important 
and difficult endeavor. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
5  
Role of the Project Manager 
So, what is the role of the project manager? The project manager is respon-
sible for three completely different functions. For simplicity, let’s break them 
up into the What, the How, and the How It’s Going. A good project man-
ager is tasked with executing on all three roles, sometimes separately, some-
times overlapping, sometimes simultaneously. Failure at any one of the three 
will probably cause the project to fail. Conversely, if all three are done well, 
you’ll get the comments that the project was easy, because everything 
seemed to go so smoothly. 
First, the management of the What. Even if you’re blessed with a project that 
is completely understood, with full and robust requirements and complete 
alignment among your stakeholder community when the project starts, eve-
rything is subject to change, beginning with the first meeting. And you’re 
rarely blessed with such projects to begin with. Later, this book talks about 
requirements gathering and prioritization, both of which are key components 
of the What. But even that isn’t enough to fully handle this task. 
To be a master at gaining alignment around the goals of the project, you 
need to keep the following questions in mind: 
 
What problem or opportunity are you trying to address? 
 
How will this project help address it? 
 
What are the key successes this project hopes to have? 
Keeping these three questions in mind will continue to frame your thinking 
around creating clarity and alignment about the goals of the project, the ac-
tual deliverables the project needs to create, and what the key wins ought 
to be. The more clear you are on the answers to those three questions, the 
more clear your team will be, and therefore, the more efficiently your team 
will operate. 
Second is the management of the How. In this role, the project manager is 
responsible for making certain that the team delivers the project. This 
means doing regular project-management tasks, such as developing a project 
plan, managing tasks and performance, and managing the full life-cycle of the 
delivery. Similar to creating clarity around the project goals and aims, each 
task and subtask must have equal clarity. This clarity needs to exist not only 
for the details of the task itself, but also for how it aligns with the overall 
goal of the project. 
Some project managers manage the project team directly, assigning individ-
ual tasks to each contributor. Other managers delegate large parts of this 

Chapter 1 | The No-Drama Project Manager 
 
6  
responsibility to team leads or senior members of the project team. Which-
ever style is used in your environment makes little difference. You’re the 
one who is accountable for getting everything done. The clearer the task 
description, and the more obvious the alignment between the task and the 
overall goal, the greater your chances of success. 
 Note  Project managers often have three different groups they need to manage and keep 
aligned. In this case, being successful in two out of three areas can be pretty bad. 
Finally, the project manager should be accountable for all project communi-
cations—the How It’s Going. This means mundane things like status report-
ing and meeting minutes, all the way to interesting things like issue escalation 
and risk mitigation. The project manager should facilitate collaboration within 
the team and among groups across teams, as well as drive communications 
both upward and outward. Everyone will be looking to the project manager 
for information, and if they aren’t getting it or aren’t getting enough, or are 
getting it in a way they don’t like, then they will pin that failure on the pro-
ject itself. 
In many projects, communication is most of the work. Preparing team up-
dates, status reports, and weekly reports can take a lot of time. Often, the 
project manager gets frustrated, thinks “nothing happened this week,” and 
decides that sending an update isn’t necessary. This is almost always the 
wrong decision. Even if you’re right, and every member of the project team 
was on vacation this week, sending out a “nothing happened” update is con-
siderably preferable to a communication vacuum that leaves people wonder-
ing where your project stands. However, it’s rarely the case that nothing hap-
pened—that’s just your perception from being too close to the project. Deci-
sions are always being made, and some progress is always happening some-
where. If you don’t let people know, then no one will ever hear about it. 
But team updates aren’t the only communication tasks that need doing. 
There are things like steering committee meetings, which can take dozens of 
hours of preparation for only an hour of discussion. The same is true of ex-
ecutive updates, roadshows, and client presentations. Being able to send the 
How It’s Going message to everyone is a daunting task that can take up a lot 
of the project manager’s time. 
Oh: and of course, the manager is responsible for actually delivering on the 
project. Let’s not forget that. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
7  
Role of the Project Team 
Most project management literature says that the project team is responsi-
ble for doing the stuff that the project manager tells them to do. This is, at 
best, an oversimplification of the role of your project team. Certainly you 
hope that the members of the team faithfully execute the tasks you put be-
fore them; but if that is all they do, then you probably aren’t getting as much 
value from them as you should. And at least some of the time, this is your 
own fault. 
 Note  If all your project team does is the things you tell them to do, then you have missed out on 
a great opportunity. 
Yes, as project manager, your job is to fully specify individual tasks that can 
then be assigned to individual project members for delivery. String enough 
of these together, and you wind up with a project, a deliverable, or even a 
product you can bring to market. But there is a major weakness in this kind 
of thinking. The more you fully specify exactly what you want and exactly 
how you want it, the less your project team needs to understand the goals 
of the project and the thinking behind what they’re doing. Granted, in cer-
tain situations, this is desirable. But in many situations it isn’t. You wind up 
with a much better result at the end of the project if the team understands 
the goals—understands what you’re trying to do—and understands roughly 
the tasks it will take to deliver on those goals. When you set up this kind of 
environment, you can sometimes get major over-delivery by your team 
without them even realizing it. 
What you need to expect from your team is a modicum of leadership. This 
can be specifically team or task leadership, meaning you may be able to 
delegate individual task assignments to team or group leaders and let them 
handle the details. Alternately, you can assign very broad-based require-
ments to these leaders and rely on them to break the requirements down 
into smaller pieces that can then be managed and delivered by the rest of 
the team. These leaders probably know their team’s strengths and weak-
nesses, and they probably have a better sense of who should be doing what 
than you do. If your team has this kind of structure, you would be foolish 
not to make good use of it and let the team leads help with resource plan-
ning and assignment. 

Chapter 1 | The No-Drama Project Manager 
 
8  
But even this won’t get the maximum value from your team. This kind of ar-
rangement still requires that all the ideas for what you’re building, and all 
the knowledge about how each piece will eventually add up to a greater 
whole, resides within a few people. Unless you have a completely outsour-
ced team or no real team at all, this approach won’t get you maximum 
value. 
This is why the roles of a high-performing project team are the following: 
 
Understanding the goals of the project 
 
Delivering tasks that support the goals of the project 
 
Suggesting current and future work that further the ultimate goals 
of the business 
When you treat your team members as active participants in reaching the 
goal, you get a much better result. To make this work, they must know 
what you’re trying to do, and why. With this knowledge, the team can make 
hundreds of day-to-day decisions correctly without having to ask your help 
or guidance every time, saving escalations only for when they don’t under-
stand or are stuck on a solution. 
It’s okay if the entire team doesn’t act this way. In fact, it’s probably prefer-
able. Some of your team members may be on other projects, or they may 
not be on your project for very long, or maybe they simply aren’t that in-
terested in the project in the first place. They don’t really want to fully en-
gage with the project—they want to know what their deliverables are and 
when they’re due. A project needs a balance of team members who are 
committed to the delivery of the project and members who are committed 
to the success of the project. Delivery of tasks can be just as important as 
delivery of value, particularly to a project manager. 
Role of the Program Manager 
Your program manager, who is also sometimes called a portfolio manager or 
group project manager, has many different responsibilities to balance. In some 
ways, thinking of your program manager as a portfolio manager frames your 
thinking about him in the proper light. Consider portfolio managers in the 
financial sense. They’re holding a basket of investments, perhaps of several 
different kinds, and are tasked with maximizing the return on their invest-
ments while managing risk. This view reflects an important difference be-
tween your program manager and a project manager. 

No-Drama Project Management 
9  
A project manager is responsible for maximizing the return on a project. A 
program manager is responsible for maximizing the return on all the pro-
jects within their portfolio. Sometimes, these two goals conflict. A program 
manager may decide to under-invest in a project that doesn’t have a high re-
turn or overinvest in one that does. They may also decide to take a flier on 
a project that is very risky, with a low likelihood of success, but would have 
an amazing return if it worked. Additionally, the program manager may de-
cide to have a set of low-investment, low-return projects merely as ballast 
for the portfolio.  
The comparison to an investment portfolio manager is not only accurate, 
it’s the same thinking in just about every way. Projects are individual invest-
ments of money, resources, time, or focus. The collection of those individ-
ual investments is what your program manager is tasked with maximizing. 
And just as no investment manager would be evaluated on the success of a 
single stock within their portfolio, no program manager is evaluated on the 
return of a single project. 
This is an important distinction to make. Although your program manager 
will be thrilled if your project is an unexpected success, they aren’t counting 
on it. In fact, your project may be near the bottom of the program manager’s 
list in expected return on investment (ROI). Knowing what kind of invest-
ment you’re managing will greatly change how you run your project. But how 
do you get your program manager to tell you where you are in the portfolio? 
It’s not easy. The program manager must treat all projects somewhat equally. 
If it becomes obvious that someone is running a project with low expecta-
tions, then human nature will take hold and the project will live up to its 
lowered goals. Conversely, if a project has lofty or risky goals, then the man-
ager will feel obligated to live up to those, as well. There is very little upside 
for the program manager to let the project manager know if they’re running 
a high-risk/high-reward project or one on the lower end of the scale. 
 Note  Your project exists within a portfolio of other projects. Finding out your place within that 
portfolio may not only be difficult, it may be counterproductive. 
With that in mind, the program manager’s role is to get as much return out 
of the project as possible. Sometimes, this means program managers pay a 
lot of attention to your project, add resources or help with certain obsta-
cles, or generally look on your project favorably. Sometimes, the opposite 

Chapter 1 | The No-Drama Project Manager 
 
10  
happens. They’re fine with supporting your project as long as everything 
goes correctly. As soon as extra resources need to be applied or anything 
else happens that changes the ROI calculation, they may decide to pull the 
plug, not support it, or simply not approve scope or cost increases.  
So, as a project manager, what should you do? You need to understand the 
ROI goals of your project, but you never hear that your goals are low. You 
also need to understand how your project interacts with the other projects 
in the portfolio and how it may be a risky project or a risk-mitigation project. 
Most important, you need to personally track the ROI of your project. If 
you’re about to make a decision, request, or scope change that will affect the 
expected value of the project, then your program manager needs to know 
immediately. Even if it seems small or trivial, you need to make them aware of 
what you’re doing. Your program manager needs to maximize the value of all 
the projects, not just yours, and if they don’t have a clear understanding of 
the return on the project you’re currently managing, you make their job im-
possible to do correctly. And in the long run, they won’t like that. 
Role of the PMO 
In some organizations, there is little distinction between the Project Man-
agement Office (PMO) and the program manager. Although this setup may 
work, the two roles have very different goals and expected outcomes. Your 
program manager is mostly concerned with the value that the portfolio cre-
ates and the short- and long-term ROI of all the efforts going on. Good pro-
ject-management practices will probably lead to a better project, but most 
program managers turn a blind eye to less-than-stellar management that 
drives outstanding results. 
Conversely, the PMO should be much more concerned with how a project is 
run, enforcing standards and best practices, and creating a consistent process 
for projects. Members of a PMO don’t view themselves as at odds with pro-
gram managers, even if that opinion isn’t always reciprocated. Depending on 
your organization, value may come first, or adherence to standards may take 
priority. Ideally, you can do both at the same time, but not always. 
 Note  Best practices should not be at odds with value creation. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
11  
I once was the manager of a very large integration with a retail partner that 
had over 1,500 physical locations. My company was focused entirely on 
value, the other company entirely on process. At one point, we were asked 
to create a multi-hundred-page document that would describe the integra-
tion to the finest detail—and would never be read by anyone who mattered. 
However, their PMO would not let the project proceed without this docu-
ment completed. We toiled on this thing for weeks until we came to a sec-
tion that we were unwilling to put into the document: details of our own 
security measures. 
Somewhat dejected, I contacted the lead engineer on the other side, asking 
for his advice on how to proceed. He said something that stuck with me for 
the rest of the project. He said, “The document must exist, my friend. It 
doesn’t need to be accurate.” With that wise counsel in mind, the docu-
ment was completed very quickly. Although it contained no inaccuracies—
that wouldn’t be the right thing to do—it also didn’t contain anything useful 
for anyone who would read it. Luckily, as predicted, no one did. 
If your company has a PMO, its reasons for being are standards and consis-
tency. In themselves, these are laudable goals. Your clients want to experi-
ence a consistent process each time they engage with you, and the PMO is 
tasked with sharing knowledge and ideas among all the project managers in 
the organization in an effort to raise the level of performance of everyone in 
the function. 
Dealing with the PMO is usually easy. Many of the things they want you to 
do, you would do anyway: things like gathering requirements, gaining sign-
off, having a release plan and a risk-mitigation plan, and so on. These are all 
things that any competent project manager should be doing. Often, the only 
requirements the PMO enforces involve simple adherence to certain tem-
plates, or certain timeframes or tollgates. The retail partner I described had 
a tollgate that no engineer could be assigned until that document existed. It 
gave me a good incentive to get the document completed. 
The PMO can be your friend as a project manager, but they can be enemies 
to your project at the same time. When it comes to training, advice, sam-
ples, and support, they can be wonderful. If there are new advances or 
theories in project management, articles or books you should be reading, or 
classes you should be taking, the PMO is where to get them. But when it 
comes to running a live project, the project manager needs to walk the bal-
ance between what is good for the project and what the PMO expects.   

Chapter 1 | The No-Drama Project Manager 
 
12  
Role of the Project Sponsor and/or Client 
Project sponsors or clients share a specific attribute: they’re the top-level 
people who support the project that is going on. This support can be liter-
ally money or resources, or it can simply be political capital and vocal sup-
port that gets the project approved and keeps it running. It’s difficult to run 
a project without someone in this role—without someone either to cham-
pion the project or to pay for its execution. If you find yourself running a 
project without someone in this role, you should probably recruit someone. 
What does this person actually do, though? Your sponsor or client has two 
very important functions. First, they’re the one with final say about any con-
troversial or direction-setting decisions. During the course of the project, 
you may hit unknown constraints or be faced with choosing one option 
over another that may change the course of the project. The project man-
ager and business owner—sometimes called the product manager—do share 
responsibility for determining what the options are and, often, coming up 
with a recommended solution. But sometimes you need to check with the 
client or sponsor about an issue before going ahead.  
The second responsibility of this person is to make introductions and con-
nections. This is generally more true of an internal sponsor than an external 
client, but it’s not unreasonable to expect this from either of them. Your 
sponsor has a different view of the landscape than you do; rather than fo-
cusing on a single project or effort, they should be looking across the com-
pany or division to see what else is going on and who the key players are. 
When your project needs the time of someone outside of the project, 
whether to get some work done or to provide advice, it’s often the sponsor 
you should turn to for help. Although there is probably nothing stopping 
you from contacting the person on your own, you may not know the right 
person to start with or how to approach them. Plus, you may get a better 
or faster response if the person knows you’re coming. This is a benefit not 
to be undervalued. 
In order for sponsors to be effective in this role, they must stay informed 
about the project. Staying informed can take many different forms. They can 
read project updates, or they can stay in touch with you or the business 
owner on an informal basis. They can also sit on steering committees, or 
they may request that they be updated personally in a different way. Many 
times, project managers don’t see the value in this: they think that having 
upper management or the client know too much about the project invites 
meddling or interference. To be fair, this is indeed a risk, but it’s a risk 
worth taking. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
13  
Finally, the sponsor will have some impact on your career. If you succeed in 
a project with a certain sponsor, the likelihood of that person either re-
questing you or supporting you in the future increases. Additionally, the 
connections made through your sponsor during the project should endure 
throughout your project-management career, or at least during your tenure 
within that environment, and can be used in later projects. In many cases, 
the people you meet in conjunction with one project turn out to be ex-
tremely helpful and supportive in later ones. Of course, being successful in 
your first interaction goes a long way in turning this into a positive for you. 
 Note  The value of the project sponsor goes well beyond this one project and can usually impact 
your career. 
When you’re setting up your project, identifying who will play this role is a 
critical step. Sometimes it’s obvious—it’s the person who is getting the in-
voice. Other times it’s much less clear, such as if you’re working on a 
multidiscipline project or if your project has several possible beneficiaries. 
Figuring out who to lean on, even if you have to find someone yourself to 
play the role, will prevent many problems from occurring much later in the 
project.  
Summary 
Being a project manager can often be a demanding, thankless task. If you’re 
doing your job well, observers may claim that your job is easy or that the 
project wasn’t much of a challenge. Rarely will they say that it was your own 
skill in coordination and management that made it look easy. Yet you love 
the position because you get to do new things, learn new subjects, and 
launch projects and products into the marketplace that no one has seen be-
fore. And the chance that something you work on will make an impact on 
the company, the industry, or the world is one of the aspects that keeps 
project managers going and interested in continuing to drag efforts over the 
finish line. 
One of the ways project managers can avoid drama and unnecessary stress is 
to understand the roles and responsibilities of everyone involved. As a pro-
ject manager, you’re responsible for many tasks, including identifying goals, 
creating tasks and work plans, and constantly and consistently communicating 

Chapter 1 | The No-Drama Project Manager 
 
14  
how the project is going—to the team, executives and clients, and other 
members of the organization. 
Project team members have the base responsibility of executing the tasks 
put in their queues, but a handful of them should also be actively engaged 
with the desired outcome, to help guide the solution and to think of other 
ideas and possibilities that will help you reach the end.  
Your program manager has responsibilities beyond and above your project 
and is seeking to extract maximum value from the investment placed in your 
hands. Sometimes, this can mean limiting investment in order to increase 
the ROI, rather than attempting to increase the return. Similarly, the PMO 
is responsible for how you run the project, usually without much of an eye 
to the value you’re creating. Learning and spreading best practices, training, 
and techniques, as well as enforcing some consistency among projects, are 
key to the success of a PMO. 
Finally, the client or sponsor has responsibilities to the project as well as to 
the project manager. Because sponsors usually have a view of the effort that 
goes well beyond the project itself, they should be helping with the bigger 
picture and helping you and the team understand where the project lives 
within some larger strategy. Also, they should be able to introduce you and 
the project team to other people and resources who can help, while also 
helping to remove barriers the project is facing. And your sponsor should 
be able to help you make relationships that will last much longer than the 
length of your project and can be used for years to come. 
Much of the drama we face as project managers comes from people not 
knowing or understanding their roles. Generally, when people know what is 
expected of them, they perform well. When they don’t know their expecta-
tions, they rarely do well. It’s our job to make sure that doesn’t happen. 
  
 

C H A P T E R 
2 
Project  
Management  
Success 
“What do you mean ‘Expect the expected?’ ” 
A project sometimes fails. Some of the time, it’s a spectacular failure. Other 
times, it merely fizzles out into insignificance. Whatever the case, the project 
didn’t go as planned. Your program manager—sometimes called a portfolio 
manager or engagement manager—probably won’t be all that surprised. 
Some projects succeed, some projects fail; what matters is that the portfolio 
is acting as it should. Some projects die out because the idea was bad, or the 
product is bad, or the market isn’t ready. Others encounter wildly unfore-
seen circumstances, such as a breakthrough technology that renders a prod-
uct obsolete nearly immediately, or a crisis or legislation that makes bringing 
something to market impossible. Unforeseen, unmitigable problems cause 
portfolio managers to shrug, curse a little, and then cut their losses. No 
sense throwing good money after bad. 
 Note  If projects always went as planned, project managers wouldn’t be needed. 

Chapter 2 | Project Management Success 
 
16  
But if you want to frustrate a portfolio manager and have them muttering 
that they should have been a farmer, the easiest way to do it is to fail for a 
reason that was expected. That is, the project itself was fine—it was the 
management of it that caused it to fail. In other words: you. Hundreds of 
thousands of projects are currently being managed by nearly as many people, 
who identify themselves as project managers. Of those projects that get cut 
short, die off, or otherwise go to the project graveyard, a significant portion 
don’t succeed for reasons that could have been predicted before the project 
began. These include the usual suspects, such as communication and risk 
management, as well as a few more items learned only through hindsight, like 
identifying key decision makers or waiting to unleash your development team 
until you’re ready to manage them. 
Your goal as a project manager is not to make every project you manage a 
rousing success. That’s overly optimistic. Your goal should be to let your 
mistakes be chalked up to novel circumstances or something unknown. Your 
portfolio manager has in the back of their head a list of what former United 
Sates Defense Secretary Don Rumsfeld called “known unknowns.” Having 
your project run afoul of one of them won’t be greeted with a smile and pat 
on the head. Sure, you didn’t know where the problem would come from, 
what form it would take, or when it could come; this is true. But you knew, 
or should have known, that it would come eventually. Failing to be ready for 
it—or failing to actively manage it—is just as bad as having your dependency 
chart be missing a step, or having your Gantt chart not line up. That is to say, 
it’s not okay at all. 
You should strive to make your projects succeed or, if not, to catch fire in 
some very interesting way. A project that misses the mark in a predictable 
ways makes no one happy, your manager least of all. Learning how to identify 
and avoid some of these “known unknowns” is what this book is about. This 
way, at the very least, your project post-mortems can be full of new and 
educational stories, not just the same list of bullets from your last project 
with nothing but the headers changed.  
When project managers get together to swap stories, the good ones aren’t 
those that begin, “Remember that project where the communication was 
poor?” That doesn’t really narrow it down, plus that isn’t the making of an 
interesting story. It’s a problem we’ve all faced and will face again in the fu-
ture, so no one wants to hear you recount it. They want to hear something 
they’ve never heard before, or something they can learn a lesson from. Even 
more preferable would be both. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
17  
The following sections offer a rundown of the known unknowns that no-
drama project managers keep in mind. Each topic is developed further in 
the book.  
How to Irritate Your Program Manager 
Having fun stories to tell your colleagues is an interesting motivator for suc-
cess. But an even better one is making sure your next assignment is a good 
one, and not a project that no one seems to care about.  
There is no quicker way to find yourself back in the minors than doing things 
that irritate your program manager. Having your project become a failure 
isn’t enough to do this; many projects fail despite the best efforts of the 
team. In order to really get on your program manager’s bad side, you need 
to have your project fail either because you didn’t anticipate something obvi-
ous, or because you did something that wound up creating a headache or 
problem for your program manager to have to deal with.  
Failing at the Obvious 
Your program manager knows that not all projects will be successful. If it 
were that easy to have a great idea and run the project perfectly, then your 
job wouldn’t be nearly the challenge that it is. But the way to really bother 
your program manager is to have a project fail thanks to mistakes made by 
you or your team. Your program manager is more than willing to write off a 
project if it turns out to be too difficult, or the landscape shifts, or it’s just a 
bad idea. What they can’t dismiss is you failing to plan properly, or a fore-
seeable problem that takes you completely unaware. 
The thing is, you can be running your project without issue, meeting all your 
deliverables, and keeping everything seemingly on track. If you use a stop-
light-type dashboard, you may be reporting your project as “green” every 
week or month. Everything seems to be working fine, and you have no issues 
to report to the client or to your program manager. Your plan is to carry on 
doing what you’ve been doing. And then, something changes. It could be that 
client isn’t aligned with what your project is producing, and possibly never 
was. Maybe the person you went to for validation wasn’t authorized or 
skilled enough to grant you the validation on which you were basing your 
progress. Possibly you were doing really well on the low-priority items, but 
you hit your first snag on a higher-priority one. Whatever the cause, the cli-
ent no longer believes you when you say everything is on track. 

Chapter 2 | Project Management Success 
 
18  
Alternately, it could be a problem in the way you’re running the team. Maybe 
they thought they were doing the right thing, but it turns out they misunder-
stood you. Or maybe your plan wasn’t resilient enough to withstand an oth-
erwise fairly benign change. Perhaps you’re doing well against the metrics 
you’re using, but those aren’t the measurements your client or your program 
manager is using. In addition to your client disbelieving that your project is 
going well, perhaps now the team is thinking the same way. And this from a 
project that was doing so well just recently. 
Being a Headache 
A friend of mine often says that being able to run a project is table stakes for 
being a senior project manager. It seems like a silly or obvious statement, but 
his meaning is clear: if I can’t trust you to run the projects I assign to you, 
then you can’t be on my team. Of course, project managers have all levels of 
skill and experience, and it’s the program manager’s job to make sure the 
project difficulty matches the capabilities of the project manager. But if 
you’re given a project that you should be able to handle, then you should be 
able to manage it without causing your program manager headaches. 
 Note  One of your primary tasks is to reduce stress on your program manager, not increase it. 
There are few better ways to create headaches for your program manager 
than out-of-channel escalations. These are direct contacts with the program 
manager from someone on the team or someone on the client side who 
doesn’t think that the project is being run correctly. This isn’t you hitting a 
problem that you need help solving or a decision for which you need the 
program manager’s approval. It’s not even you going to the program man-
ager to admit a mistake or alert them about something that’s coming. You 
expect those situations, and those are actions you expect you to take. 
The headache comes when the initiator of one of these conversations is 
someone other than the project manager. For instance, the client may believe 
there is a failure in communication, or someone on the team may think there 
is a flaw in the plan. Perhaps another manager witnessed something they think 
needs more oversight, or someone saw some bad behavior and wanted to 
report it. Whatever it was, it has caused stress for the program manager. 

No-Drama Project Management 
19  
This kind of escalation can cause a lot of work for a program manager. They 
first need to ascertain whether the topic being discussed is worthy of being 
escalated. Next, they need to determine if the escalation is true, partially 
true, or not true. Then, depending on the veracity and severity of the inci-
dent, the program manager probably needs to act on the information. This 
is a lot of work, and work they’d rather not be doing; they hired you to run 
the project, after all. 
Still, this situation may not be all bad. It’s possible that something happened 
while you were away or doing something else. You can’t be everywhere. Or 
perhaps someone knows something you don’t, but they’re unsure how to get 
you the information. Or maybe the issue is something so innocent or minor 
that it doesn’t wind up causing much work. What is bad is when someone 
escalates something that should be foundational to the project. When a pro-
gram manager discovers that basic items are being missed, they realize that 
they have a project manager they can’t trust. And that’s going to cause them 
headaches. 
 Note  The level of drama in a program manager’s portfolio is directly related to how much they 
can trust the project managers on their team. 
A project manager’s job consists of two overlapping but fairly distinct areas: 
client management and team management. Expected problems can come 
from either vector or sometimes from both at the same time. What follows 
in this chapter and the rest of the book is an exploration of some of these 
issues and why you, as a project manager, need to focus on making sure the 
problems you bring to your program manager aren’t on this list.  
Expected Problems in Client Management 
Many times, client management isn’t about giving clients what they want. Of-
ten it’s about convincing them that they want what they’re getting. One of 
your roles as a project manager is to guide the team toward delivering what 
the client is asking for while simultaneously guiding the client toward what 
the team is delivering. Managing this middle ground is tricky, but it’s vital to 
creating a satisfied client.  
However, there are some sure-fire ways to create a dissatisfied client that 
every project manager has lived through at one point or another. You want 

Chapter 2 | Project Management Success 
 
20  
to avoid them. Although it’s possible that you’ll eventually disappoint, it’s of-
ten more acceptable to do so in an unexpected way rather than in one of 
the standard ways projects tend to go awry. From your program manager’s 
point of view, the following failures are a lot less acceptable than finding a 
new way to fail. 
Requirements 
A good project manager knows that you need to gather requirements from 
the customer. You can’t have a project unless you have requirements. So, 
many project managers are diligent about the process, and they schedule a 
lot of time with customers who tell them everything they want done. The 
project manager, again being a diligent worker, takes all the things they hear 
and creates a requirements document. This document is approved by the 
client, contains specific and actionable items, and is used as the primary 
source for the project going forward.  
It may also completely miss the point. 
One of the things your program manager does not want to hear is that the 
requirements you were building were signed off on, that won’t rescue you. 
Obviously, if you are dealing with a contractual or governmental obligation, 
then having your document approved is a very good thing. But if your goal is 
client satisfaction or project success, then having a document that details 
each specific task for the entire project doesn’t help you much. A project 
isn’t just a collection of individual tasks, or at least it shouldn’t be. A project 
should be greater than the sum of its parts.  
Although there is a lot of comfort in figuring out what those parts are, writ-
ing them down, and having someone deliver them, you may be missing 
where you need to add value. There is a question that can help you focus 
your efforts and those of the client toward the goals of the project, and not 
just specific tasks: “What are we actually trying to do with this project?” If 
during or near the end of the project, you tell your program manager that 
you delivered everything the client wanted but the project is a failure, then 
your program manager will start to doubt your ability to gather the real re-
quirements. Spending too much time on low- or no-value items is just as 
bad as spending no time on the project at all. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
21  
Prioritization 
Similar to gathering requirements, you must also help the client and the pro-
ject team focus on prioritization. If you aren’t paying close enough attention, 
you may wind up spending a lot of time on requirements that turn out to be 
not valuable and not critical to the success of the project. You may find that 
you’re working on a lot of tasks, and probably getting a lot of them done, 
but you aren’t any nearer to your goal. This becomes motion without pro-
gress, which looks good for a little while but gets you nowhere. 
A good prioritization exercise helps the project team and the client dis-
cover where the expected value of the project lies, and how you plan to ad-
dress it. Without doing this exercise, you have only a vague notion of what 
clients think they’re trying to accomplish; and, at best, you can only hope to 
deliver things that are related to that goal. A highly skilled project manager 
can probably accumulate enough of these kinds of tasks to eventually create 
something that drives significant value for the client. But it shouldn’t take a 
vast amount of project skill to find out what the client is actually trying to 
do. Getting your arms around the project’s primary goals should be job 
number one. 
And here again you hit what a no-drama project manager needs to be pre-
pared to handle. Being able to focus the client and the team on the top pri-
orities is an important way to limit indecision and confusion in your project. 
Conversely, if the project manager lets the team spend significant resources 
on lower-priority tasks, no matter how compelling they sound, then they’re 
asking for trouble. Even worse is telling your program manager that, due to 
expending too much time and effort on lower-value items, you now need to 
extend or expand your project budget. Without question, this line of rea-
soning will get you in hot water with your program manager, and probably 
your client as well. 
Change 
Change in your project is inevitable; in fact, it’s probably welcome, because 
change is normally the result of a refinement in the idea or the goals of the 
project. However, in order to reduce the level of anxiety your team feels, 
you need to be sure you’re making changes in a transparent and intentional 
way. The change, whatever it is, will impact the people, the project, and the 
situation in the organization. It’s important to treat this impact with respect. 
Making a change assertively, rather than allowing it to happen on its own, is 
an important step to managing the change effectively. 

Chapter 2 | Project Management Success 
 
22  
 Note  The theme of making intentional decisions is one you hear throughout this book. 
After a change happens, it’s important to look back on what remains, to see 
if the project is still recognizable. If the focus or goals of a project have al-
tered drastically enough, then trying to continue with the project as cur-
rently constructed may be counterproductive. You should confirm that the 
project is still worth doing and that your current approach is adequate to 
deliver it.  
Doing neither of those things is a way to invite drama into your project. If 
you’re facing change but ignoring it, hoping that it will go away or manage it-
self, then you leave your team feeling undirected and confused. They will 
notice and wonder why you aren’t doing anything. And if, after the change, 
you’re left with a potentially disappointing deliverable, your client will won-
der why you aren’t acting on it, either.  
Alignment 
You need to adhere to two different types of alignment. The first is align-
ment of your project to corporate or organizational strategy. You should be 
very aware of where your project exists in the overall strategy of the com-
pany or client. What was once a vital part of the strategy may change over 
time, even if your project doesn’t. Although it’s beneficial for many reasons 
to work on a project that is in perfect alignment with the corporate objec-
tives, that isn’t always the case. But knowing where the project lives in the 
corporate ecosystem is important. 
Second is the alignment of your stakeholders with the project’s goals. Even 
if your project is well aligned with the overall desires of the organization, if 
your clients, stakeholders, and team aren’t aligned with the goals of the pro-
ject, then you won’t get anywhere. Like a shopping cart with one wheel that 
isn’t pointing in the right direction, one element pulling in a slightly different 
direction can cause a very large negative impact on your ability to deliver. 
Misalignment is another primary source of drama in projects. If you’re run-
ning a project that is misaligned with organizational strategy and vision, 
then people will question why you’re doing it at all. And if team members 
or stakeholders don’t agree about what the project is trying to accomplish, 
the result is friction within the project that has to be overcome every time 
you try to make progress. Both levels of alignment are vital to a well-
functioning project. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
23  
Assumptions 
Projects, like life, run on assumptions. Without them you can’t make pro-
gress, because you would wait until you had perfect and complete informa-
tion before making any decisions. As it happens, most assumptions either 
turn out to be true or turn out not to matter as much as you once thought. 
For these reasons, you make assumptions about projects all the time, and 
you’ll often find that your projects benefit from it. 
 Note  You make assumptions frequently, and your life and projects are better for it. 
However, when you make an assumption, you need to be clear that you’re 
making one. It’s easy to base a project on something you believe to be a 
fact, when it’s actually only something that you’re assuming to be true. As-
sumptions can be difficult to spot, because often they appear to be asser-
tions of fact, and sometimes they come from people who are expert enough 
to know the difference. Also, discovering how much confidence you have in 
an assumption, and whether it’s more of a guess or wish, is vital to creating 
a solid project. Constant vigilance over your foundational data is required of 
a project manager who needs to understand that data. 
When you’ve identified your project assumptions, you need to constantly 
validate, update, and test them. Most of them will turn out to be true and 
can eventually be retired. But some of them will wind up either not being 
true or being less true than you’d like. These become full-fledged risks, and 
they must be managed like other risks. Just because you base your project 
on an assumption doesn’t give you license to ignore it and hope it eventually 
turns out okay. 
Identifying Stakeholders 
Many a project has gone wrong because the project manager improperly 
identified decision makers. In many ways, basing your project on decisions 
made by the wrong people is worse than making no decision at all. Your 
team may have been confidently headed off in a direction, only to find that 
the direction isn’t correct, or that the person who made the decision had 
no authority to make it, correct or not. This can be a little deflating, espe-
cially if it takes you a while to figure out who can validate or approve the 
decision and who actually has final say. 

Chapter 2 | Project Management Success 
 
24  
Then there are the stakeholders who aren’t in the direct line of the project. 
These people have indirect influence on the project, either because they 
have something the project needs, such as access to a key resource or in-
formation, or because they have the trust of the people who are making the 
final decisions. The more  that you, as project manager, are able to correct 
identify these kinds of stakeholders, the more you can make sure all the key 
decision makers, both direct and indirect, have a voice in the project and 
make decisions that stick. 
Expected Problems in Team Management 
As mentioned, the role of project manager lies at the intersection of client 
management and team management. Although many things can go wrong in 
your handling of the client, many of them are eventually reversible. Relation-
ships tend to be malleable, and what looked like trouble one day can be-
come a strength the next. Your clients’ opinion of you can change for the 
better overnight, and the past has little bearing on the future.  
When it comes to team management, that isn’t always the case. It takes 
longer to recover from mistakes, and getting over a loss of trust can take 
even longer. This effect is compounded when the error was foreseeable,  
or the team knew about it and figured that you knew about it as well. For-
tunately, the converse is also true. If you make a wise decision or make a 
difficult decision correctly, you may be able to win over the team enough 
so that the next time you have difficulty, they’re more inclined to follow 
your lead. 
The following issues are ones that all project managers face and have to 
overcome. Some of them may seem obvious, whereas others don’t seem 
like that big of a deal. Probably both viewpoints are true. But without a 
good understanding of the foundation of team management, you can’t hope 
to do a good job managing your team or managing upward when your team 
is having a problem. Unless you perform well in these areas, the rest of your 
team-management skills are unlikely to matter. 
Communication 
Communication is the means by which project managers can lead and grow 
their teams, manage their clients, and run projects. In fact, communication is 
the only way to do these things. Many things contribute to effective com-
munication, including form, content, and medium. The only way you can de-
cide on a communication style and method is to understand your message 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
25  
and your audience. Your team, your client, and your management differ in 
what they want to hear and how they want to hear it. 
Treating your communications as deliverables will assist you greatly in making 
this kind of determination. For a large portion of your project engagement, 
communication is the only thing you can provide the client. Until you get to 
the stage where you have a prototype or other tangible items to show, your 
communication ability is the way the project community can judge how a pro-
ject is going. Communication needs to be considered an important activity in 
its own right, not something that gets done when you have time. 
This means gathering requirements. It also means determining how people 
want to get information, what they want to get, and how often they want to 
get it. It means testing your messages for effectiveness by asking people if 
they find what you’re providing to be useful and adequate. And it means 
managing change: just as the needs of a project can change along the way, so 
too can the needs of your audience. Being sensitive to this and adapting is as 
important as managing the changing nature of your project. 
Planning 
Planning is something that all project managers must do—and must do well 
to be successful. There is a tremendous amount of value in knowing where 
you’re headed before you begin; if you start without a plan, you have no 
idea what you should do next. Project managers usually have to make sev-
eral kinds of plans, from project schedules to work-breakdown structures, 
risk-mitigation plans to meeting plans, contingency plans to rollout plans. In 
fact, some project managers create plans of plans, because there are so 
many to keep straight. 
Plans are certainly important. Without them, you have no means to plot out 
your progress and track how you’re doing against your goal. However, it’s 
possible to fall into the trap of managing the plan rather than managing the 
project. Plans exist to aid in the project, but they aren’t the deliverable. If you 
follow your plan perfectly, but you produce something substandard, you can’t 
get away with claiming victory. Project management is a blend of creating and 
executing plans, and being flexible enough to adjust when the time comes. 
Preparing 
Often, a project manager’s ability to prepare sets high performers apart 
from others. Preparing is similar to planning: you think about what to do in 

Chapter 2 | Project Management Success 
 
26  
the future. However, planning is done based on things you know will hap-
pen: you know certain tasks need to be completed, you know when people 
will be on vacation, and you know the dependencies and ideal sequencing of 
tasks ahead of you. Preparation is the opposite: you’re planning for things 
that you don’t know will happen, but that you do know will affect the pro-
ject if they arise. 
This process goes under many names, such as risk-mitigation planning, sce-
nario planning, and “what if” analysis. The outcome isn’t a concrete plan that 
drives the solution forward. Rather, the desired outcome is a flexible set of 
plans that can be ready just in case something happens that greatly impacts 
the project. It can be very difficult to be ready for any possible occurrence. 
There simply are too many possibilities to try to be fully prepared for each 
of them. However, there are usually a finite number of impacts that you 
need to be prepared to handle. And that’s what the goal of the project man-
ager should be. 
 Note  Planning is for things you know about. Preparing is for things you don’t. 
Once you have these kinds of preparations created, the final piece of the 
puzzle is recognizing when you can use them. Challenges and opportunities 
present themselves in all manner of different ways, and it can be very easy 
to think that you haven’t thought of this specific scenario. It’s probably true 
that you haven’t, but you’ve thought of one that’s close enough that the so-
lution remains the same. Recognizing this is one of the keys to being a suc-
cessful project manager. 
Establishing Metrics 
Knowing what you’re trying to accomplish is important in all walks of life. If 
you don’t know what your goals are, you won’t know when and if you’ve 
reached them. However, relatively few of life’s or business’s goals are black 
and white. It’s fairly rare that you’re either a complete success or a com-
plete failure. This is where the concept of Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs) comes in. During the process of your project, you likely have several 
KPIs that you’re trying to improve. Some of them will be more successful 
than others, and some of them may go down in the service of making others 
go up. This is normal. 
But if you don’t do the analysis ahead of time to determine what the KPIs are 
and what changes you hope to achieve, you don’t know how to make these 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
27  
kinds of decisions intentionally. You need to know what you’re measuring, 
how you plan to do the measuring, and what change you think is acceptable.  
 Note  Without KPIs, you don’t know how well you’re doing. 
You can also use metrics to measure the project. This helps answer the 
question, “How am I doing as a project manager?” It’s possible that a dismal 
failure of a project is run fairly well. It’s also possible to have a rousing suc-
cess be successful mostly in spite of the work of the project manager. If all 
you do is look at the project’s output, you don’t get a full picture of the pro-
ject manager’s performance.  
Knowing how the project is measured is key to determining whether it’s a 
success—especially in an environment where to make something better, you 
may need to make something worse. Being able to measure change is impor-
tant to crafting a final story. Equally important is being able to measure your 
own performance and not conflate the results of the project with the skill of 
the project manager. Having a well-reasoned set of KPIs can help with both 
needs and is the primary way for you to declare victory or suffer defeat. 
Project Roles 
On a high-performing team, everyone knows what position they’re playing. 
This is true of all kinds of teams, from sports teams to project teams. In the 
project context, just as in sports, people can play two different kinds of 
roles based on where they’re situated and how much influence they’re sup-
posed to wield. Sports teams name captains, who are usually obvious be-
cause they tend to have the letter C embroidered on their uniform. Project 
teams don’t generally go that far, but the concept is the same. Some people 
on the team are expected to be leaders, and others aren’t. If someone is 
unclear which they are, they’re more likely to cause disruption than to be-
have correctly. 
Like many other things in project management, this is an expectation-setting 
task. People need to know what position they’re playing, so they know 
which tasks they should be prioritizing and what they’re being counted on 
to produce. If team members don’t know what skills and talents they’re ex-
pected to use while on a project, they can only guess the right way to work. 
Guesses are sometimes correct, but if so, it’s usually by accident. And you 
need to limit these kinds of accidents in your effort to limit drama. 

Chapter 2 | Project Management Success 
 
28  
Additionally, your leaders need to know that they’re expected to lead. It 
sounds simple, but it can be easy for leaders to slip into being followers, ei-
ther causing a void where you need someone or necessitating someone else 
stepping into the role. A great way to cause confusion in your project is to 
expect people to set direction who don’t know they’re supposed to do that 
or are unwilling to do so. That’s a problem you need to correct immediately. 
Not All Problems Are Expected 
It would be unfair to expect a project manager to anticipate every single 
thing that can possibly go wrong. But you do need to do a little investigation 
before you declare a problem completely unforeseeable. Before you assert 
that something that has come up is a complete surprise, be sure it’s true. If 
you attempt to blame problems on unforeseen issues, and it turns out that 
you might have been able to prepare for those issues, you lose a lot of 
credibility with your team, your client, and your program manager. 
That said, when something does come up that you haven’t prepared for, you 
have several options. Each option has different outcomes, pros, and cons, so 
choosing carefully is important. This is where your relationship with the 
team and client come into play. If you wisely decide how to handle these is-
sues, you can set the project on a good path to success. If your team and 
client don’t trust your judgment due to other issues, you can wind up going 
in the wrong direction and find it harder and harder to recover. 
No-Drama Project Management 
The rest of this book contains deep dives into each of the topics described 
in this chapter. Each subject is nuanced and particular, and each has the po-
tential to cause significant drama in your project if not handled correctly. As 
a project manager, you should be willing to deliver value to your clients, en-
able their success, and launch impactful new projects into the marketplace. 
But at the top level, you’re trying to build a long-term history of successful 
implementations and client engagements. 
As you hear later in the book, this breaks down into two questions: 
 
Does the team want to work with you again? 
 
Does the client want to work with you again? 
You can be sure that the answers to these questions are directly related to 
the amount of drama you create and invite into your projects.  

C H A P T E R 
3 
Identify  
Requirements 
“Tell me again, what are we trying to do here?” 
It feels somewhat obvious to say that knowing what you hope to accomplish 
within the confines of your project is the very first step toward success. 
However, it isn’t uncommon for projects to get well on their way without 
really knowing what they’re trying to do. Some projects even manage to 
launch without ever figuring this out. Most such projects don’t do well once 
they hit the marketplace, if they’re able to find a market at all. 
In Alice in Wonderland, Alice asks the Cheshire Cat, “Which way should I go 
from here?” The Cat replies, “That depends a good deal on where you want 
to get to.” When Alice confesses to not knowing where she wants to wind 
up, the Cat tells her that it then doesn’t matter which way she goes. This 
kind of thinking is unfortunately found in many organizations, companies, 
and projects. They don’t have an agreed-upon, or even a well-understood, 
destination, but they’re merrily marching along a road to somewhere. 
Simply having a dutifully well-documented list of requirements isn’t enough, 
however. You’ve probably seen examples of requirements documents that 
weren’t all that helpful, or were the opposite of helpful. For instance, a 
document may be specific down to the finest detail (such as how many pix-
els wide the logo on a web site is supposed to be) but unclear or silent 
about who will be using the web site. Or it may reference style guides that 
talk about which shade of red to use, or which font size and face to display 
in, but have a section titled “Twitter Integration Goes Here.”  

Chapter 3 | Identify Requirements 
 
30  
If you’re handed a requirements document at the beginning of your project, 
don’t be fooled into counting pages and using that number to determine the 
document’s completeness. The document’s contents may be true and accu-
rate, but that doesn’t mean it contains everything you need to know. On 
the contrary, people tend to do the things they understand well at the start 
of a project, leaving the unknown until later. This is a valid strategy, because 
as time passes you learn more about those unknowns. But there will come a 
time when you have a document that does an excellent job telling the 
reader what everyone already knows and makes no mention of the things 
that are truly difficult or interesting. 
Note  People tend to document the things they already know, not the things that they haven’t fig-
ured out yet. 
The worst of all offenses comes when a requirements-gathering effort fo-
cuses too much on system and tactical requirements and not enough on 
what you’re actually trying to accomplish. Many millions of project hours 
have been spent building features that seemed interesting to someone at the 
time but were never used by customers or clients. Similarly, teams spend a 
lot of time building systems that support processes that are either obsolete 
by the time the system is ready or, worse, help speed up a process they 
hoped to retire. 
There are many ways to avoid this kind of requirements-gathering. Most of 
them focus on either use case–based requirements or user stories, depend-
ing on the methodology used. Dozens of fabulous books have been written 
about how to use these techniques in drafting your requirements, so this 
book doesn’t cover them. But the principle behind use cases and user sto-
ries is important. They view the system you’re building from the user’s eyes 
and determine exactly what the user is trying to do while interacting with 
the project. Sometimes the goal is to do things better, sometimes it means 
faster or more efficient, but sometimes it can mean making connections or 
inferences that otherwise would go unnoticed. The point of these method-
ologies is simple: if you don’t know what you users are trying to do, then 
you have little hope of building something useful for them. 
This chapter is a microcosm of the essence of No-Drama Project Management. 
The key things to focus on are determining why you’re doing what you’re do-
ing, figuring out who the players are and how they interact, avoiding getting 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
31  
hung up on details that don’t matter, and thinking about things through the 
eyes of your customers. If all you remember are those four principles, then 
you’ll understand the rest of this book. 
Customer Identification 
The very first part of requirements-gathering is figuring out who the pro-
ject’s customers are. Often, the customers and the users are the same peo-
ple, but not always. Customers are the people for whom you’re doing the 
work. A customer can be a division head, an executive, or an outside client 
or company. Customers can also be people important in the organization, 
no matter what title or role they currently carry. All projects have a short 
list of people who can determine whether the project was a success. You 
need to identify these people. 
Once compiled, the list may surprise you. Although it will contain many 
people you expected, there may also be people on the list whom you didn’t 
realize carried so much influence. They may be important due to their ten-
ure, role, or subject-matter expertise, or merely because they have signifi-
cant respect within the organization. Figuring out who these people are and 
determining their keys to success is vital to your project.  In Chapter Eight, 
we will talk about Stakeholder Analysis, and how people that seem to be 
unrelated to a project can have a large impact in determining whether or 
not it is successful. 
Additionally, some people are negative indicators. That is, they can’t tell you 
if you did the right thing, but they can certainly tell you—loudly—if you did 
the wrong thing. This list can include people who do this kind of activity for 
a living, such as those in legal, compliance, and audit, as well as individuals 
who are simply resistant to your project. In some cases, these people spec-
ify requirements that are true project constraints; your project will be 
deemed a failure if it isn’t compliant with regulations, standards, or what-
ever. In other cases, these requirements are land mines that you need to 
navigate throughout the course of your project. Someone may say they’re 
must-haves, but that doesn’t necessarily make it so. 
The customer list now includes four types of people: 
 
The people who are supporting or paying for your work 
 
The people who will use the outcome of your work 
 
The gatekeepers, who make sure your work is in compliance 
 
The obstructionists, who have objections, real or imagined 

Chapter 3 | Identify Requirements 
 
32  
To a degree, all of them are important, but some more than others. But 
without identifying your constituent base and deciding which of the catego-
ries a specific person belong in, it becomes a serious challenge to manage 
their expectations and elicit their requirements in any meaningful way. This 
is true in both directions: you can’t allow the gatekeepers to determine 
what the functional requirements should be, nor can you allow your end us-
ers to decide what would pass compliance and what wouldn’t. 
Note  All projects have constituents. Understanding these groups will help you gather better  
requirements. 
How do you find out who is in which group? You simply ask them about their 
interest in the project. You should be able to tell which people are interested 
in the solution to a problem or the opportunity the project presents. Equally, 
you should be able to spot the people who have little excitement about the 
project itself—as long as it doesn’t mess up end-of-quarter reporting. And fi-
nally, you should find the people who are entirely negative about the project 
even though they don’t seem to have any real stake in the outcome. 
Only now are you ready to start interviewing for requirements. If you begin 
without taking the time to identify your sources and identify your customer 
groups, then you don’t have the context to understand what you’re gather-
ing. In fact, you may find yourself in front of a gatekeeper, beginning a sen-
tence with, “But I was told that…,” never realizing that that person who 
gave you compliance requirements wasn’t in a position (or didn’t have the 
knowledge) to do so. Don’t fall into this trap. 
Like almost everyone, I have a fairly embarrassing story of my own to go 
along with this advice. Long ago, I was working on a new payroll system for 
our HRIS department. Everyone was working under the assumption that July 
1—the first day of the fiscal year—was an important date on the calendar. 
All paychecks turned over on that date, all expense reimbursements were 
due, and all sorts of activity occurred on that day. This date requirement 
(which was worded as a constraint) seemed incredibly real. Everyone I spoke 
with was certain about the importance of the beginning of the year and that 
if we messed with it, we would have to start over. 
Our solution worked with this information as if it were immutable. We had 
a long series of flow charts and sequence diagrams, and we created a very 
elaborate, elegant design that allowed for all processing to take place within 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
33  
that short window of time but let the turning of the new year happen with-
out incident. It took quite a bit of extra work, and we had to cut out some 
features in order to make it fit, but the business owners agreed that it was 
worth it because the constraint was so important. 
Except that it wasn’t. Everything happened on July 1 just out of convenience. 
Back when people worked with paper, pencils, and ledger books, it was 
much simpler for the bookkeepers to perform many tasks on one day while 
the information was pulled out and available. When they switched to the 
miracle tool that is Excel, around 15 years ago, there was no longer a need 
for all the activities to happen on July 1—they just saw no reason to change. 
If we needed to swap the date around to make the project easier, we should 
have gone ahead and done it. 
Of course, I learned this well after the cost had been paid. The designs were 
finished, and most of the work was completed. When I informed the busi-
ness owner of the project that the constraint we were working under wasn’t 
real, his only response was, “Well, I’ll be darned. Oh well.” And then he in-
stantly forgot about it. The key constraint that had kept my team working 
for months was for nothing. And all because I didn’t take the time to realize 
who I was talking with. I was taking financial gate-keeping requirements from 
HR, and I shouldn’t have been shocked to learn that they were wrong. The 
fact that everyone in HR told me the same thing didn’t make their miscon-
ception any more true. 
To this day, as far as I know, the company still does everything on July 1. I 
don’t know whether they’re still using the systems that my team built years 
ago, but I suspect if the systems were redone, some other poor project 
manager heard the same advice I did: “Don’t mess with the magic day.” And 
like me, they probably listened.  
Top-Down Thinking vs. Bottom-Up 
Thinking 
Relatively few things make me more nervous about a project than what I’ll 
call bottom-up requirements gathering. These projects can also be called laun-
dry list projects or aggregation projects. You’ve probably been faced with run-
ning these kinds of efforts. A business owner, a group, or an executive has a 
bundle of unused resources but no idea what to do with them. Instead of 
coming up with a good idea, they create a project out of the wish list of 
everyone on the team, department, or division. Because the project needs 
to be managed and coordinated, it needs a project manager. And that’s you. 

Chapter 3 | Identify Requirements 
 
34  
As a program manager, I’m always reluctant to start these kinds of projects, 
preferring to break them into smaller projects if possible. However, some-
times these kinds of projects happen organically. It’s possible that a project 
began with a well-formed idea and a fairly clear objective. But as you start 
collecting requirements and talking with people about the problem domain, 
you learn more things that you really should be doing. Usually, you’re 
right—those things ought to be done. They just shouldn’t be done as a part 
of your project. 
Note  Wish-list projects can happen—and grow—organically if you let them. 
This kind of project, where you talk with a lot of people and come up with a 
bunch of good (if disconnected) ideas, isn’t a project at all. You may call it 
that, and you may have a project kickoff and team meetings, and actively 
manage all the people assigned to you. But without a clear, short list of ob-
jectives and key success criteria, and a very small number of decision mak-
ers, you don’t have a project. You have a mess. 
A much better approach is to operate top-down. Of course, in order to do 
this, you must identify who the top is. It may be a single executive, the man-
ager of a department, or someone who is playing the role of client or cus-
tomer. Focus on what this person wants done, and distill that information 
into a very short list of key success criteria. A list of key objectives with only 
one item on it isn’t a bad thing and in some cases may be preferable. Every-
thing you gather that doesn’t line up with the success criteria should be ruth-
lessly cast overboard, no matter how objectively good the idea seems to be. 
That’s not to say that these aren’t good ideas—they probably are. You 
should document them and prepare to use them in a future project.  
You need to continually ask the owner of the project, “What are we trying 
to do here?” Only accept an answer that can fit on one side of a 3 × 5-inch 
index card. If you don’t have that, try again. Consider using an actual card if 
it helps. 
Why is this important? One of the key points in John Gray’s book Men Are 
from Mars, Women Are from Venus, is the idea of people using a different 
scoring system when valuing acts and actions. One side believes that as long 
as you deliver the very top priority, even if that is all you deliver, that makes 
up for missing everything else. The other side believes that everything on 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
35  
the list is of equal value, and as long as you deliver enough of it, they’re 
pleased with the outcome.1 This is a problem you’re going to face. 
The top-down method is the former type. You should work on require-
ments, features, and capabilities in strict priority order. There is no sense in 
working on priority number seven if priority number one isn’t done and is 
at risk. Many prioritization strategies teach this. Work on your tasks in pri-
ority order until they’re finished, and then and only then move on to the 
next item on the list. There is a significant amount of sense to this approach. 
Most of your project constituents know they will get another chance to hit 
their lower priorities later, but this is their chance to get their top needs or 
problems addressed. 
Avoid thinking that you can get away with delivering on the latter strategy—
delivering quantity instead of quality—without compromising your current 
and future projects. Even if your business owner thinks that quantity over 
quality is acceptable, you always have someone say, “The project accom-
plished a lot, but they missed out on the top opportunity.” More than likely, 
that person is an executive, project sponsor, or someone who can influence 
the perception of the project and of you as a project manager. Delivering on 
bottom-up thinking can be attractive, but the people keeping score are un-
likely to agree with your decision. 
The final key to working top-down is to think about how you want the pro-
ject to be remembered. The day or week or month after launch, everyone 
will know what you delivered and will be able to recall everything that is 
new. But a quarter or a year later, all of that will fade into a distant memory, 
except the top thing you delivered. If that top thing isn’t memorable, then 
your project won’t be memorable either. You want people to remember 
your project for its key success: its “top 1” contribution. Otherwise, your 
project is just like all the others. 
Outside-In Requirements Gathering 
Now that you understand about focusing on top-down requirements gath-
ering, let’s examine one more directional topic. Just as you want to make 
sure you’re delivering on the highest-value requests, you also need to make 
sure your requirements are viewed as outcomes rather than as system or 
internal requirements. There is plenty of literature you can read about the 
specifics and techniques that make up outside-in requirements gathering, but 
                                                
1 Another “skill” of program managers is oversimplification. 

Chapter 3 | Identify Requirements 
 
36  
the concept is the same as in the other sections: deliver what your clients 
want and need. 
For instance, let’s go back to a dark time in our history, the Y2K problem.2 I 
worked on one of these problems myself. As a team lead at the time, I was 
incredibly focused on the idea that we needed to move from two-digit years 
to four-digit years, to account for the change from 1999 to 2000. Looking 
back, I realize that not a single one of my customers was asking for this. They 
were telling me, “Make sure our systems don’t break when the date rolls 
over.” The requirement to move to a four-digit date came from within my 
development team. That is, the hard requirement to move to the full year 
was generated from inside my team and was pushed out to the customer. 
Sometimes this isn’t a bad approach. Your customers don’t necessarily un-
derstand the systems and limitations they need to deal with. Your team may 
say something like, “In order to solve this problem, they need to get used to 
typing out the full year,” or something equally pithy. These are real con-
straints and requirements, and they need to be discussed, communicated, 
and agreed on. Put another way, if your customers are going to object, bet-
ter to find out now than after the solution is designed and delivered. 
Note  Be sure to understand the difference between a requirement and a constraint. 
But it’s important to note that these aren’t requirements. These are con-
straints. In order to meet the requirements, these are the specific limitations 
the customer faces. Constraints are okay. In fact, they’re a very good way to 
understand the cost of what customers are asking for and how much effort 
or inconvenience will go into getting your customer the solution they want. 
But in the days before Y2K, virtually no customer was asking for a four-digit 
year. They were asking for their systems not to break. Mixing up require-
ments and constraints this way can result in communication challenges. 
This isn’t to be confused with what many project-management guides call 
nonfunctional requirements. These are requirements about how the system 
needs to operate; they aren’t constraints. Topics such as performance, op-
erability, security, and maintainability are true requirements that your team 
needs to balance and prioritize along with all the functional requirements. 
Often, these types of requirements can be worded as if they’re being 
                                                
2 If you weren’t around at the time, look it up. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
37  
viewed from the outside: for example, “Must load within 8 seconds” or 
“Must be able to be maintained by an untrained operator.” Both of those 
are true requirements that you need to manage.  
Too often, project teams view their requirements about solutions as actual 
requirements. When you’re in this stage of the project, remember the Y2K 
problem example. No one was asking for a four-digit year, but now you see 
it everywhere. Did we get it right? Was going to the full four-digit year the 
correct call? It may have been. But many of us treated it as if it were the 
stated requirement, when it almost never was. Now, every time you’re 
forced to type in 20 at the beginning of the year your credit card expires, 
you can thank those of us who made this a requirement. 
The Value of Focus 
Let’s talk briefly about the value of focus. Much as in the discussion of top-
down and outside-in requirements gathering, there is hidden importance to 
focus. The ability to focus is one of the scarcer resources you have to man-
age. You can hire a lot of people and do a lot of things, but you, as a project 
manager, can only pay attention to a few things at any given time. Some stud-
ies have shown that you can keep only four things on your mind at once.3 
What this means to you, your project, and your clients is that deciding which 
requirements get your focus is a nontrivial decision. Deciding which require-
ment is number four instead of number five or number six can make the dif-
ference between that requirement being successfully met or not met at all. 
Note  Good project managers can focus on about four different items. Some can handle less than 
that. 
A good way to message this issue is to be completely transparent and say 
something like, “You just made that my fifth priority. I’m pretty good at 
counting on my fingers, but once I reach my thumb, I start to get confused…” 
Yes, that’s a joke, and isn’t to be taken literally, but it does get the point 
across: you’re focusing only on the top four priorities (maybe fewer), and al-
though you can surely give the old college try to numbers five and up, you 
can’t and won’t promise anything. 
                                                
3 I didn’t make this up: www.livescience.com/2493-mind-limit-4.html. 

Chapter 3 | Identify Requirements 
 
38  
You want your customer, client, or sponsor to value your focus. In return, 
you want to respect what you’re focusing on. If you’re going to actively 
manage four separate threads, then make sure you complete all four suc-
cessfully, even at the expense of numbers five through infinity. If those 
lower priorities are actually important, then you can always propose a fol-
low-on project, or some other effort, to pick them up. No project manager 
gets a pat on the back for partially delivering ten different requirements in-
stead of locking down and solidly launching the top four. This isn’t Family 
Feud—this is pure value-focused management. 
Communication Strategy 
Determining project requirements is key to success of a project. However, 
equally important is your ability to communicate your decisions to the 
larger project community. A very large, very unreadable document may hold 
up in a court of law or be useful if you’re working on a defense contract. 
But most of the time, attempting to cover yourself with large documents 
doesn’t do you any favors. Although these types of documents may let the 
project proceed and eventually deliver, you’re unlikely to be called back for 
another project if you don’t deliver what the customer truly wants. 
This is where top-down, outside-in strategies can help you. Most people 
want to know whether their requirement is in scope or if it isn’t going to 
get done. Being able to describe to this community what functionality your 
project will allow and what it won’t goes very long way toward communi-
cating your requirements decisions. This is also why limiting the number of 
primary use cases or user stories is essential. Focus your project community 
on the half dozen or so new things you can accomplish, not the 20 or 30 
items that go along with them or the 200 or 300 things you can’t do as part 
of the project. 
You want everyone to think of your project and its top few bullets all at the 
same time. For example, when people think about Project Rodeo,4 they 
should immediately be able to list the very few things the project will de-
liver. You read previously about the ability to keep four things in mind at 
any one time. Although that was in terms of the project manager and pro-
ject team, it’s also true of your customers. Any bulleted list of features be-
yond four become noise. It doesn’t matter if the list is 6 or 60 items long. 
You need to continually focus your customer base on the top four things 
you’re delivering and see that they remember them. 
                                                
4 I’m not embarrassed to say that this was the code name of one my favorite projects. 

No-Drama Project Management 
39  
How do you do this? Figure out a way to describe your top 4 user stories in 
25 words or less each. At the top of every project document, update, e-mail, 
and other communication, list them. Be open and honest, and say, “This pro-
ject will do the following things…” This messaging should exist on your pro-
ject portal and even in your e-mail signature if necessary. This 100-words-or-
less message becomes the so-called elevator pitch for the project and the an-
chor people can use when they decide whether your project should continue. 
If your insistence on having these 100 words at the top of every presenta-
tion and e-mail become a running joke among your team and your custom-
ers, don’t take offense. To the contrary, you should take pride in the fact 
that everyone involved has read those points so many times that they feel 
comfortable making fun of you for continuing to include them. They’re that 
important. 
Note  You can say 100 words in less than two minutes. It shouldn’t take you much longer than that 
to hit the highlights of your project. 
After a few dozen or a few hundred times, your team and your customers 
should be able to spout most of this information from memory. You should 
continue to stress it. At this point in the project, you’re no longer trying to 
sell the project to the project team—they have already bought into it. And 
you’re ready if an executive asks you what is going on, or you get cornered 
by a project sponsor who wants to know what features they can expect. 
But you aren’t ready for an executive who isn’t keeping up with the project 
to ask for an update from someone else who also isn’t keeping up with the 
project. 
The worst thing that can happen in this case is for the person to say, hon-
estly, that they don’t know, or that they don’t understand what the project 
is trying to do. Although these people probably haven’t seen your 100 
words repeatedly for the past several months, they should have seen them a 
few times and be able to list one or two of the highlights. Failing that, they 
can go back to their desk, open last week’s e-mail, find your list of key high-
lights, and immediately forward them to the person who asked. 
Sure, your project is doing many things, probably too many to list in a docu-
ment that anyone would read. And most certainly your development team 
couldn’t proceed without fully understanding requirement 4.2.1.3(a) and its 
implications on the rest of the systems. But that’s not what I’m talking about. 

Chapter 3 | Identify Requirements 
 
40  
I mean this simple question from an executive: “What am I going to be able 
to do after the project launches that I can’t do right now?” If you can’t an-
swer this question, then you should be prepared to have your project scut-
tled or restarted. If your value proposition takes you more than a few bullets 
to describe, then your project probably isn’t worth doing in the first place. 
Sign-off 
The milestone of “Requirements sign-off” is an important one.  At this stage, 
the project team and the client sponsor or client indicate that they agree 
with what the project will be delivering. This is often the result of weeks or 
months of work, analysis and negotiation. The two kinds of agreement that 
we look at next are formal sign-off, the actual language that creates a con-
tract of sorts between the client and project, and informal sign-off. Informal 
signoff occurs via conversation or through a relationship, where you ask the 
question, “Is this really what you need?” 
Formal Sign-off   
Virtually all project management guides talk about the importance of formal 
signoff of project requirements. Some organizations still do a literal signoff, 
where the project manager has a clipboard and a pen, and stakeholders 
physically put ink to paper in order to show acceptance. This might strike 
people as something between silly and archaic, but there is a lot of symbolic 
value in asking people to sign their names. Before people are willing to put 
their names down for posterity, they generally make sure they agree with 
whatever it is they’re signing. 
If used this way—as a way to sink into people’s minds that this is really it—
then a formal signoff can be a very powerful tool. You’re asking people to 
make a final determination about what is in scope and what isn’t. If used in 
any other way, particularly as a weapon for later, then it can still be a pow-
erful tool, but one rife with stress and arguments. In some cases, such as 
high-end consulting engagements or projects where changing requirements 
is very expensive, this is exactly the kind of situation you want to create. If 
you’re running a normal project for your company, then this is the kind of 
environment you want to avoid. 
Note  A formal signoff can be a very powerful tool if used intentionally and carefully. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
41  
You want to view this signoff step as outlining baseline requirements. You 
did a great job gathering, consolidating, explaining, and clarifying what your 
project ought to do. You’ve distilled what you’ve been told and figured out 
over the course of weeks or months into a single document that describes 
everything you know about the project to date. You should be proud of this 
accomplishment. But the key phrase to remember is, to date. The document 
you just put together codifies everything known about the project at the 
time that the document was written. Attempting to insist that from this 
point on, nothing is allowed to change will drive you mad. 
Not only will it drive you crazy, it will also drive your sponsors, team, and 
clients crazy—all for virtually no gain. Your requirements document can ei-
ther remain open and living, with you updating it as you learn more or as 
things change, or it can be a point-in-time document that baselines what you 
thought the project was going to be at the time. Both are valid approaches. 
If you work with your project stakeholders to help them understand that 
the purpose of the document isn’t to lock out changes or to require signifi-
cant work if something has to happen, then you can have a much smoother 
and probably more productive conversation about it. Unless you’re actually 
signing a contract, don’t treat it as one. Treat it as a recording of everyone’s 
understanding at that specific point in time, and acknowledge that things will 
change, the market will shift, and better ideas will be formulated. But for 
now, right now, this is what everyone seems to agree on. Framing your 
signoff that way will greatly improve your interactions when you’re standing 
in front of them with a notepad and Sharpie.  
Informal Sign-off   
The phrase informal signoff sounds a little like an oxymoron. Either they’re 
signing off or they aren’t, right? That would be true if every signature on the 
document carried the same importance to you. The to you in that sentence 
is important, as well, because there are people who need to approve your 
requirements who have high-level titles or command respect but aren’t key 
stakeholders for your project. 
For instance, years ago I ran a project for which our Vice President of Tax 
was adamant about how we needed to tax the sale of postage stamps. (We 
were actually selling stamps to customers with a small markup.) He 
wouldn’t sign off on our requirements unless his tax system was in the 
document with assurances that we would build it to his specifications. We 
heard this and treated it as an important requirement; if we did something 

Chapter 3 | Identify Requirements 
 
42  
wrong with regard to the tax code, we would probably get in trouble 
somewhere down the line. 
But the VP of Tax wasn’t my customer, a client, or even a key stakeholder 
for the project. My job as project manager wasn’t to please him, only not to 
anger him or cause him to derail the whole effort. I did have a little bit of a 
vested interest; I’d probably need him on future projects, so I didn’t want 
him thinking of me as the Guy Who Messed Up Our Taxes, but that was a 
minor consideration. What was important is that my key sponsors agreed 
with the document they signed off on. 
Following up   
Getting signoff is an event, and one to celebrate. It should mark a true mile-
stone in the project that that took weeks or months of hard work, com-
promise, and tears to obtain. It’s okay to take a quick breather and reflect 
on how the project has gone so far. Shortly after that, however, you should 
be asking the project owner, sponsor, or client if they like the document 
they just signed. This is an easy step to miss, but it’s vital to the health of 
your project and team. 
This takes the form of a simple question: “How do you feel about the re-
quirements document?” It’s rare that everyone loves everything on those 
pages. The document is the result of compromise, negotiation, giving in, and 
previously unknown rules and constraints. If you did a good job, you leave 
most people with the feeling that you did the best you could have done. As 
much as I love getting the feedback that I did as well as could be expected, 
I’d much rather hear that I did well, full stop. 
Note  Doing as well as can be expected isn’t the same as doing well. 
What you want to hear at this point from your sponsor is the but, as in, “I 
like what we’ve done, but…” This means either that there are things missing 
from the project that the client thinks are important, or that some negotia-
tion didn’t go the client’s way. You need to find these things out now. It’s 
important to determine whether the project as described is still worth doing, 
or if the place you wound up is no longer compelling enough to move for-
ward. The worst thing you can do is to plow ahead with your project simply 
because the requirements are acceptable. You need to keep communicating 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
43  
with your key stakeholders and make sure they like what the project will be 
and aren’t just settling for what they wound up with. 
Summary 
Requirements gathering and transcribing is one of the first actions and deliv-
erables of a project. A certain order will greatly improve your outcome, if 
done properly. Too often, project managers begin to document require-
ments from several different sources without first understanding who the 
customer of the project actually is. The very first thing you should do is fig-
ure that out. More to the point, until you figure this out, you don’t truly 
have a project. 
When you know who the project’s ultimate customer is, whether it’s an 
outside client, an executive, or your boss, you can ask, “What are we trying 
to do?” Focusing top-down and outside-in on requirements elicits the sto-
ries and use cases that you need in order to build your system. If you start 
talking font sizes or logo colors, then you’ve greatly missed the point, unless 
you work for a company that makes fonts or logos. You should be relent-
less about finding out who is benefitting and what they want or need. Once 
you figure this out, sorting out the details is a much easier task. 
You can only focus on so many things, and this is something you should be 
ready to admit. Of course, you’re willing to try to do more, but you can 
only promise the stuff at the top; so choose the things at the top carefully. 
From these top items, you should be able to craft your pitch for the project 
so that everyone involved and anyone who asks can get a two-minute sum-
mary of the highlights. Make sure this statement is compelling: if it isn’t, start 
over with new requirements. 
When you have all this down, you need to take two different paths with 
your synthesized requirements. First, you need to get the formal signoff, or 
approval, of everyone who could derail the project. These are the people 
who don’t care if you succeed, as long as you don’t mess them up in the 
process. This is painstaking, often frustrating work. But even after you have 
formal signoff, you aren’t finished. Eventually you have a document of 2 to 
2,000 pages, which contains the summary of all agreements and knowledge 
to date. This is the time to ask the client or sponsor, “Now that we know 
what this project is, do you still want it?”  
That question may yield a wide array of answers, from an excited “Yes” to 
a bland “Not really.” Usually the response is something in between, leaning 
more toward yes than no. But there is no way for you to manage your  

Chapter 3 | Identify Requirements 
 
44  
client and stakeholders without knowing where on this spectrum they fall. 
No project manager should consider going ahead with a “not really” pro-
ject. You’re wasting everyone’s time if you do.  

C H A P T E R 
4 
Prioritize 
“Which is more important: critical, must-have, 
or essential?” 
It would be difficult to overstate the important of prioritization—in your 
daily life, in projects, or even in deciding what to have for lunch. Without 
knowing what is most important, what comes after that, and what comes af-
ter that, it becomes very difficult for your team and you to decide what to 
work on next. A significant source of drama in projects is caused by mis-
communication and misperception about priorities, and how they differ 
from person to person and project to project. 
Even worse is when the priorities of the project were never decided in the 
first place, leaving a vacuum of prioritization where order and guidance 
should exist. It’s forgivable for people to have debates, arguments, and ne-
gotiations over the priorities of a project; in fact, it’s both desired and ex-
pected. Unforgivable, however, is not having such debates, and not having 
thoughtful deliberations about the decisions you eventually make.  
If you were to let these discussions happen without direction, you would 
wind up with nothing but top priorities, and no real order from the chaos of 
goals and objectives. It isn’t unusual for customers, clients, and sponsors to 
view each and every requirement as an absolute must-have, worthy of hold-
ing up the entire project in order to get it completed. This is a lofty desire 
that might work in a perfect world with infinite resources, time, and 
budget.1 Unfortunately, most projects don’t live in that world, and you’re 
tasked with making hard choices, or at least helping others make them. 
                                                
1 But probably still wouldn’t. 

Chapter 4 | Prioritize 
 
46  
In Chapter Three, I talked about how a normal project manager can handle 
four different major threads of work at any given time. This means distin-
guishing between objective number four and objective number five—it’s 
critical when deciding what to do. Without doing the hard work and making 
the hard decisions about what is important, you may know which things are 
of high importance and which are low, but you don’t know which are high 
enough for you to pay close attention to, which aren’t. And it’s likely that 
too many things will wind up being labeled critical—probably more than 
your project could ever hope to accomplish. 
This is an area where project managers differ from engineering managers 
and executives. Other disciplines sometimes talk about prioritization, using 
the idea of above the line (A-priority items at left in Figure 4-1) and below the 
line (C-priority items). Everything above the line is committed as in scope 
for the project—that is, it’s part of the project—and everything below is 
out of scope. This approach is alluring and sometimes better than nothing, 
but it’s not correct. Savvy project managers, and those who wish to limit 
drama within their project, have a second line. And this is the line you need 
to pay attention to. As you can see at right in Figure 4-1, being able to 
commit to a certain level of delivery while allowing yourself the flexibility to 
sacrifice important items (the B-priority ones) for truly critical items (the A 
priorities) can be important to the health of the project.  
 
Figure 4-1. Two-level prioritization 
 Note  Project management is often about drawing lines. One line is often not enough. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
47  
In your world of everything being critical, you have to think of the two dif-
ferent levels of must-have. It seems almost silly to consider them differently, 
but imagine your house. In New England, a reliable source of heat is vital in 
the winter for survival. Without it, you die. However, you don’t need a 
four-zoned house with climate control in each room. In fact, you can survive 
without heat in every room. Of course, your house would be much better 
off if you did have it, but the entire family could sleep in the same room and 
not perish.  
This is an example of the two kinds of critical requirements: 
 
Requirements without which the project will be a total failure  
(A items) 
 
Requirements without which the project will be less successful than 
it could have or should have been (B items) 
Without a doubt, both are critical. You certainly don’t want to fail, nor do 
you want to underachieve. Part of the reason you run projects is to launch 
successful things into the marketplace, right? But for many reasons, you 
need to know and understand this distinction. 
The Importance of Prioritization 
One of the key exercises that project and portfolio managers must go 
through is prioritization. Even the most rookie project manager can take a 
list of requirements and draw a line somewhere, asserting, “Stuff below this 
line is out; stuff above it is in.” More experienced project managers draw 
that second line: maybe it isn’t as dark, and maybe they don’t draw it with 
permanent marker, but it’s there all the same. This is the “must-have vs. 
should-have” list, or as I like to call them, As and Bs. If all you have is a list 
of things that must happen, then everything is top priority—and everything 
is bottom priority. In other words, your list is useless.  
Why is having the second line so important? Why is a project nearly certain 
to fail without it? There are many reasons: 
 
You and your team should always be focused on the highest-priority 
items on the list. If you don’t know which things are high priority 
and which are high/medium, then how do you know what to work 
on next? 
 
When things happen and you lose time, you as a project manager 
need to know what functionality can suffer in order to make the im-
portant stuff shine. To make this work, you need to know both sides: 

Chapter 4 | Prioritize 
 
48  
which is the important stuff, and which part can suffer. And you need 
to decide this before you need it, and not when the crisis hits. 
 
Without it, you’re setting an unrealistic expectation—that you’re 
perfect. Unless you draw the line incredibly tight, then you’re pledg-
ing 100% delivery. This is no way to properly set expectations with 
the client. 
 
Conversely, if you do set the line very conservatively, then you aren’t 
being aggressive enough. You need the ability to over-deliver, or wow 
your client, in order to make up for misses somewhere else. Bs 
clearly aren’t worth as much as As, but delivering on them without 
adding additional cost to the project does draw the client’s attention. 
 
You need to know how to staff your team. Because you should be 
optimizing for the A requirements, you know to put your better, 
more experienced people on them. Having a pile of B requirements 
does a lot for you. It allows you to build bench depth and strength; it 
can be used for employee morale if a B is particularly interesting; or it 
can be used as a bargaining chip with QA, your team, or your client. 
I’ve seen requirements lists 40 items long, with 39 of them must-haves. Such 
a list may as well not exist. As a project manager, you need to relentlessly 
put the work in some kind of priority order. That may mean literal cardinal-
ity; but really, just figuring out what is a high priority and what isn’t makes a 
gigantic difference in your ability to deliver. 
Some things to keep in mind: 
 
No B requirement should ever cause an A to slip. You won’t get 
any love from your client if you miss an A because you were deliv-
ering a B. 
 
Bs should never be critical to the project, business, or client. You’re 
sending the message “The team will do as many Bs as possible, but 
maybe not this one.” If the client can’t stomach that, then you’re 
looking at an A (or a larger issue). 
 
There is no shame in working on a B. Bs exist for lots of reasons in-
cluding training, scheduling, keeping a team together, and so on. Just 
because an item is lower on the list doesn’t mean it isn’t hard or in-
teresting. Just know that if you’re working on one, you may be dis-
rupted at any time to work on an A priority instead. 
Without prioritizing your “in” list, you wind up in an impossible situation. 
You’ve sent the message to the client that they can expect perfect delivery, 

No-Drama Project Management 
49  
and you’ve removed any flexibility that you may have had when running the 
project. Don’t do that to yourself. 
The True Critical Path 
Project managers generally know what the critical path is for a project, how 
to determine it, and how to represent it. Traditional project-management 
techniques tell you to find the dependency chain that takes the longest to 
complete; when that sequence of tasks is complete, your project is finished. 
This is very good advice, and I would be foolish to try to convince you oth-
erwise; the end date of your project is indeed when the last critical task is 
complete. I’d rather redefine what complete means in a no-drama context. 
The traditional definition of complete is also the dictionary definition. The pro-
ject is complete when all the tasks are finished. Any task that lies on the path 
that takes the longest is therefore on the critical path. What is hidden in this 
is that it uses the wrong meaning of critical. This strategy uses critical in the 
medical sense: if this part of the project is running late, then your project is in 
critical condition. What you ought to do is use the definition of critical that is 
closer to “important,” indicating what you’re really trying to accomplish. 
 Note  You should use the definition of critical that means “important” rather than the one that 
means “unhealthy.” 
Somewhere in your project plan lies the delivery that your client, sponsor, 
or customer truly cares about. Depending on the project, the client, and the 
need, this delivery can be as simple as a beta version of the product or as 
complex as needing the client’s entire staff trained and using the new sys-
tem. This milestone can happen six months before the project is over or six 
years later. As project manager, you must identify what this critical delivery 
is and where it falls on the project plan. 
Many clients believe in the concept of sine qua non, which means something 
like “that without which”: no matter what else happens in the project, if this 
piece or function isn’t a success, then neither is the entire project. This 
definition changes from project to project and client to client. However, it’s 
your task as project manager to figure out what this critical deliverable is, 
and when and where it’s going to be delivered. Then, during your project, 

Chapter 4 | Prioritize 
 
50  
you need to keep track of not only the traditional definition of the critical 
path, but also the no-drama definition. 
If you have a project with multiple stakeholders (and don’t we all), you may 
have many of these critical deliverables. For instance, if you’re creating a 
new system to replace an existing one, one stakeholder may be focused on 
when it’s in place, whereas another may be mostly interested in when the 
old system is completely deleted. This is not only okay, it’s the information 
that you need: you need to know when each of your clients or stakeholders 
will be satisfied with your delivery. And it’s expected that none of these 
critical deliveries line up with the “end” of the project. Being finished with 
the work doesn’t necessarily mean the value has been captured. This is an 
important lesson to remember. 
Prioritization Games 
Even with this in mind, it’s easy to fall into the trap of playing games with 
your priorities. It’s a common ploy to put the B+ requirements (those that 
really are should-haves) early in a project schedule. The project owner then 
saves the actual A requirements for later, when you have no choice but to 
attempt to deliver them. They get not only all their A requirements, but 
also many of the Bs, simply because they convinced you to do the B re-
quirements earlier in the schedule. Don’t allow this. 
This strategy usually manifests as a client, sponsors or customer being very 
agitated or animated about an idea, a concept, or a requirement that sounds 
important but isn’t truly critical for the success of the project. The argu-
ment supporting it seems logical, and even an objective observer would 
agree that whatever it is, it’s worth doing. But there is a huge difference be-
tween something that is worth doing and something that is vital to the suc-
cess of a project. 
One of my project managers once ran a “Ratings and Reviews” project, al-
lowing customers to rate and review our products on the web site. For 
some reason, many of the executives were worried about abuse and the use 
of foul language or other offensive content in the reviews. They were so 
worried about it that they wanted us to build in an automated bad-word 
blocker so that if someone typed in a word on a predetermined list of 
known bad words, the submission would be rejected. This sounded like a 
valid, very reasonable request. 
However, we were already building in a mechanism for a human being to 
approve comments before they went live to the public, as well as a way for 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
51  
this approver to delete comments that had already gone live. So, for an in-
appropriate comment to be exposed to customers and stay exposed to cus-
tomers would require a human being to approve it in the first place and also 
neglect to remove it later in the process. In other words, working hard to 
automate rejecting the comment wasn’t all that valuable. 
Additionally, my project manager asked a reasonable question: “How many 
inappropriate comments do we expect to get?” The answer, depending on 
who we asked, turned out to either be a really low number or a much more 
truthful, “We don’t know.” With this in mind, the project manager was able 
to call this a non-requirement. He pledged that we would monitor the 
comments that came in, and if abusive ones were coming in with a significant 
regularity, then we would absolutely build something to automatically filter 
them out. In the past 2 years, we’ve gotten about one really bad submission 
every 6 months, which takes a reviewer about 30 seconds to delete. Had 
we built this functionality, we would have saved ourselves about a minute of 
effort per year.  
 Note  Beware of requests that sound critical but actually add little value. 
At one point, our sponsor declared this automated review requirement to 
be a showstopper for the project. I was willing to play chicken with him. In 
fact, I was willing to sign up people on my team to actively monitor com-
ments, to ensure that nothing untoward was released for public consump-
tion. This allowed the project team to focus on the true A requirements 
and deliver a solution that worked and provided the value that we needed 
the project to handle. Had they spent any energy on this B requirement 
(which turned out to be a C), then something at the top would have suf-
fered, and actual value would have been lost. 
Pairwise Prioritization 
Prioritization can be difficult in the best scenario. If you’re launching a prod-
uct with ten similar features, deciding on the prioritized order of those ten 
can be a chore both intellectually and emotionally. But once those ten fea-
tures become disparate or not comparable to each other, the exercise be-
comes nearly impossible. How do you compare the safety of your product 
versus the number of colors it’s available in? How do you choose stability 

Chapter 4 | Prioritize 
 
52  
over speed, or transparency over correctness? Although these aren’t items 
that are mutually exclusive, they’re hard to compare against each other. 
For instance, years ago I ran a project that included a vendor selection for a 
critical piece of functionality. The list of requirements included “Accuracy,” 
“Performance,” and “Is produced by a company that won’t go out of busi-
ness right after we buy it.” I understood that all these requirements were 
important, but it was difficult to decide how to balance them. We had an 
option that would have been tolerable; it was from a company that was 50 
years old and incredibly stable. However, none of the evaluation team 
thought it was the best option when considering the other requirements. 
We had a total of five top-level requirements for this search. The other two 
were “Stability” and “Ease of use.” All of these five are laudable, good re-
quirements. But trying to find a solution that maximized all five would lead 
us either to a bad answer or to no answer, because if we tried to achieve all 
five requirements with equal weight simultaneously, it would take us years 
to find the right solution. 
What we did was put the five top-level requirements in order, using what is 
sometimes called pairwise prioritization, which Wikipedia calls the Analytic Hi-
erarchy Process.2 This process requires taking all your requirements, con-
straints, and needs, and comparing them against each other in a pairwise 
fashion. The needs of a project are usually very difficult to prioritize in a 
straight line, because they’re so different from each other. That makes it dif-
ficult to determine which is the most important and which is the least. Even 
though it is difficult, pairwise prioritization can be extremely illustrative. You 
will be asking people to compare things such as  security vs. performance, or 
usability vs. advanced functionality, things that often aren’t compared to  
each other.  Having this conversation not only helps to clarify  requirements, 
but it can also give you insight into the overall needs of the client. 
When I learned this method years ago, the sample problem was, “Where 
should we go for lunch?” We gathered the following requirements: 
 
Should be close to the office 
 
Should not be Chinese food 
 
Should allow us to be back within 90 minutes 
 
Should cost less than $20 each 
 
Should have table service 
                                                
2 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Analytic_Hierarchy_Process. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
53  
This is a decent list, but it’s very difficult to prioritize without doing a true 
head-to-head comparison. Because we all had a very important meeting in 
90 minutes, that priority was more important than being close, or costing 
less than $20, or offering table service, or the kind of food. So, it came first. 
We decided that we wanted table service (and the chance to talk with each 
other) more than we wanted to spend less than $20. We then decided that 
spending $20 or less was more important than it not being Chinese—only 
one person didn’t like Chinese food, and either he wouldn’t come, or he 
could just eat rice. And then we decided that being close to the office was 
least important, as long as we were back within 90 minutes. The final priori-
tization was as follows: 
1. Should allow us to be back within 90 minutes 
2. Should have table service 
3. Should cost less than $20 each 
4. Should not be Chinese food 
5. Should be close to the office 
As we went down the list, each thing on the list was less important than the 
things above it and more important than the things below. We shouldn’t 
seek to spend less than $20, for example, if it meant we couldn’t talk with 
each other. But even if we had a great solution for items 2–5, if we couldn’t 
get back within 90 minutes, then we couldn’t go. This pairwise prioritiza-
tion—“This is more important than that”—is a very clear, but very challeng-
ing, way to prioritize. But the outcome is well worth the effort. 
Back to the business problem. Using this method, the final ordering was Ac-
curacy, Speed, Stability, Company Life and Ease of Use, in that order. This 
prioritization had a profound impact on how we were talking with potential 
vendors. No longer were we focused on how easy their system was to use, 
or whether we thought they’d remain in business. Instead, we were able to 
spend 90% of our time on the accuracy and speed of their systems. 
Due to the pairwise prioritization of requirements, we came up with a much 
different answer than if we had tried to value all the requirements equally. 
We decided to choose the vendor that had the most accurate results, with 
the fastest speed, and we sacrificed all the other needs unless they were 
huge detractors. If the first two requirements were super-positive and the 
bottom three were neutral, then that was enough to put a vendor ahead of 
a solution that was merely positive on all five. As it was, we chose the solu-
tion that met the accuracy and speed needs, and the vendor promptly went 

Chapter 4 | Prioritize 
 
54  
out of business (actually, it was bought by another holding company) within 
a year. That system is still running, and we don’t regret the choice. 
 Note  Pairwise prioritization can tell you that priorities 1 and 2 may be more important than 3 
through 10 combined. 
Pairwise prioritization can also be powerful when dealing with project re-
quirements. You need to deal with limited resources, budget, and time. You 
simply can’t spend an equal amount of time on priority 10 and priority 2. If 
you do, then you endanger delivery of all your priorities. This rank ordering 
should happen very early in the project, when everything seems okay. For 
example, you can ask, “If making sure the product passes compliance means 
we can only produce it in one color, is that okay?” Seems like an obvious 
answer—it’s no good to have a noncompliant product in ten colors if that 
means you can’t sell it. But the power of this question and this decision 
shouldn’t be minimized. Focusing on the important things is what project 
management is all about. 
The Value of Deprioritization 
Let’s talk for a moment about the flipside of prioritization, which is active 
deprioritization. This refers to the explicit decision not to do something. 
When you have your full list of requirements, you wind up with things that 
fall in three buckets: those you must do, those you should do, and those 
you may do if you have time. That last category is code for “don’t do.” In 
fact, if your program manager finds that you’re working on the “may do” 
tasks in your project without a very good reason, he is very likely to cut 
your budget or resourcing. 
In Figure 4-1, the “may do if you have time” items are the C requirements. 
They’re out of the project, won’t be delivered, and should be thought of as 
if they never existed. The message to your client, sponsor, or customer is 
simple: “We aren’t working on this.” Why is this valuable? It’s an interesting 
and fair question. Over the course of a project, you’re barraged with re-
quests, questions, and invitations to discuss lots of things. Among those 
things are items you’ve already decided are C requirements, or items that 
are specifically and intentionally out of scope for the project. Unless you 
have a strategy for handling requests for analysis on low-priority tasks you’ll 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
55  
spend a lot of time—probably including a lot of your own personal time—
managing things that should never have risen to the top of the list. 
Agreeing ahead of time what is out of the project is a valuable time-saver 
for you and your team. The reason may not be obvious at first, but consider 
this situation that happens often: an idea comes up that is tangential but 
somewhat related to your project. Although it seems like a good idea, and 
perhaps it’s a requirement that should be done at some point, it has no 
bearing on the success of the project you’re currently managing. However, 
the allure of the idea’s quality compels you to discuss it. Or worse, you fall 
prey to the notion that you need to discuss it so you can know for sure that 
you want it to be out of scope. 
 Note  Don’t be tricked into discussing something just to be sure you don’t want to discuss it. 
This kind of thinking wastes the valuable time, energy, and focus of your 
team; and as I’ve said before, focus is one of the more scarce resources you 
need to manage. Unless the C requirement somehow helps you reach pro-
ject objectives in a way that they aren’t being met already, then investing an 
hour thinking about it takes an hour away from working on the things that 
are making the project successful.  
Project managers often fall into this trap, saying things like, “It’s only one 
meeting,” or “I won’t make any commitments.” Unfortunately, both those 
statements tend to turn out to be false. Yes, it’s only one meeting for now; 
but when you’ve given the idea some of your attention, then the next time 
someone wants to talk about it—next week, next month, or next year—
they will turn to you. Even if you successfully deflect the idea to someone 
else, you still need to help transfer whatever knowledge you have to them. 
And of course you won’t commit to adding a requirement to your pro-
ject—you’re more competent than that—but you’re committing a portion 
of your brain space to it. And even that is too much. 
How to Deprioritize 
The proper way to deprioritize is both simple and difficult. Often, clients are 
unable to understand the difference between “no” and “not right now.” But 
that truly is the message you need to deliver. Their idea might be a good 
one. In fact, it may be so good that it’s worth stopping the project entirely, 

Chapter 4 | Prioritize 
 
56  
to focus on that instead. Even if that is the case, it’s almost never the cor-
rect course of action to add this requirement to your current effort. 
Chapter 12 discusses success criteria for a project and the fact that no pro-
ject should begin without that list. You need it so you have a good way to 
help prioritize your requirements. When something comes up that sounds 
like a good idea but that doesn’t get you further along your project’s suc-
cess path, you need to say so. And this is where the difficult part comes in. 
I once ran a project for a company that provided data to salespeople. It was 
a subscription-based project, and the main goal was to reduce churn: the 
number of people who were cancelling their subscriptions. Increasing the 
number of months that the average subscription lasted by three would have 
had a very meaningful impact on the company’s bottom line. In the course of 
discussing ideas for how we could do that, the idea of adding a premium of-
fering into the package was brought up. 
This was a pretty good idea. We could add a premium data source as an op-
tion to the product. But to do so, we would have to charge more. So, as 
project manager, I was forced to ask the question, “Will adding this option 
decrease churn?” The answer was no, it wouldn’t—but it would increase 
the company’s profit from those who took the option. This was a very help-
ful discussion, because I was able to ask the business owner if the most im-
portant goal was decreasing cancellations or increasing the value of the sub-
scriptions that remained. I was unwilling to accept both as an answer, and 
the business owner knew and understood this. She chose decreasing cancel-
lations, and the premium option was put aside for the length of the project, 
not to be considered again. 
 Note  A good idea that doesn’t further the goals of your current project sounds like a great idea 
to work on—in another project. 
This is precisely the level of attention you need to pay to your prioritization 
activities: how does this idea, requirement, or task help further your goal? If 
the answer is “It doesn’t, but it’s a good idea,” then you’re in a very good 
position. You can agree with the person who made the suggestion, and say 
you also think it’s a good idea and one that should be followed up—just not 
now, and not as part of this project. Short of changing the success criteria 
for whatever you’re currently working on, anything that doesn’t help you 
reach that goal is keeping you from it. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
57  
Summary 
Prioritization is vital to a well-run project. Without knowing what the key 
deliverables are, you wind up working on many things without any real 
sense of their importance. This can cause you to thrash about from task to 
task in an uncoordinated way, making lots of movement, but possibly not 
making much progress. 
Good prioritization tells you the order in which to work on tasks and also 
reveals where the true value in the project lies. This priority list may be dif-
ferent than the tasks that take the longest to complete. This concept of a 
critical path is different than the traditional project-management definition: 
it’s the path toward delivering the critical part of the project, rather than 
the path that is most likely to make the project unhealthy. 
One trick to get to this kind of prioritization is pairwise, or hierarchical, 
prioritization. Rather than deciding what the top ten requirements are, put-
ting them in rank order may illuminate something you would otherwise 
miss. In many cases, the first three requirements are worth more than the 
rest of the project combined. Without doing this exercise, you can’t know 
which requirements are at the very top of the value pyramid and which are 
only near the top. And not having this information can make running a pro-
ject extremely difficult. 
Finally, knowing when and how to deprioritize requests is also important. 
Deprioritize is another way to say “don’t work on this.” You need to have a 
firm grasp of your project’s success criteria and how each of the things 
you’re delivering meet that criteria. If you find that you’re spending any ef-
fort on something that doesn’t add to the value of the project, you need a 
way to stop. Even if the idea is a good one, that doesn’t mean it needs to be 
part of your current project. 
Without good and specific priorities, your team won’t know what to do 
next and where to spend their time. Your client will be confused and frus-
trated by the progress your team is making; and although your project may 
still be a success, it will spend resources unnecessarily or even wastefully in 
pursuit of work that isn’t key to the project. No-drama project managers do 
not want to find themselves in any of these situations.  
  
 
 

C H A P T E R 
5 
Manage Change 
“Sure, this changes things, but nothing has 
really changed…” 
As Winston Churchill famously said during World War II, “He who fails to 
plan, plans to fail.”1 In a similar way, project managers who fail to manage 
change are allowing change to manage them.  
 Note  Change management is a part of project management, not the other way around. 
Project managers are faced with change throughout the life of a project, 
leading many to believe that project management and change management 
are the same thing. You may even hear that planning isn’t necessary, because 
everything will change anyway. Any experienced project manager will tell 
you that this isn’t the case, no matter what it looks like from the outside. 
But first, let’s talk about the two totally different kinds of change manage-
ment: one that is within the purview of the project manager, and one that 
isn’t. When you read management books about effecting change or leading 
through change, what they’re often referring to isn’t how you run your pro-
ject, but the result of your project. Whatever you deliver will have an impact 
on someone’s life, job, or day-to-day activities. Driving this change from 
                                                
1 I’m pretty sure it was Churchill, anyway. 

Chapter 5 | Manage Change 
60  
concept through adoption is an art form that takes a large number of skills 
that may seem similar to those utilized by a project manager but are actually 
distinct to change management. Although you, as a project-management 
professional, should participate in, support, and influence this process, man-
aging this kind of change is often outside the scope of your skills and re-
sponsibilities. 
I’m talking about what I’ll refer to as project change. This is the difference be-
tween what was originally agreed on as the full scope of a project, and what 
was actually delivered. Normally, this nets out to a list of things that were 
originally going to be in the project that was scoped out, coupled with a list 
of things that were originally out and are now in. Of course, it can also in-
clude straight adds or straight deletions; but normally clients want the total 
cost of a project to be somewhat close to the original, causing them to stay 
within shouting distance of the originally agreed-on scope. 
A few years ago, I did an analysis of my portfolio and found that about half 
of the original agreed-on project requirements were delivered. This fact 
drove my team a little nuts. It suggested that all the work they did to gather, 
document, cost, and estimate requirements was wasted. A requirement be-
ing in the project at the beginning didn’t mean it would be in the project at 
the end. This discovery was coupled with the knowledge that the average 
project added a little over 60% more scope than initially approved.  
The net result was that the normal project in my portfolio cost about 15% 
more than initially specified and delivered less than 55% of the initial func-
tionality. The team wondered, why should we bother making plans in the 
first place? I was thrilled with this question. Even though my team felt a lit-
tle dejected, the answer helped show the value of what we were doing and 
how we were having a positive impact on the client, even in the things we 
weren’t doing. 
We took away two important things from the analysis, even if my team 
didn’t pick up on them right away. First, the final cost turned out to stick 
remarkably close to the original estimate. On average, our projects were 
running about 15% bigger, but no project ran more than 30% bigger. This 
alone was a great outcome in my opinion. Even though we misjudged what 
needed to be in the project by roughly half, we were close enough on the 
overall budget that we could consider it a rounding error. A few people 
criticized this outcome, saying we “backed in” to the budget; because we 
had already baselined a cost, we made sure our final estimate was very well 
aligned with the initial figure. Although their criticisms were true, I had a 
hard time considering them negatives. Yes, we set a budget ahead of time, 
and we did a passable job of staying within it. How is that a negative? 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
61  
The second important part of this discovery involves a theme that runs 
throughout this book: making decisions in a transparent way. Before a pro-
ject begins, you spend a fair amount of time gathering and estimating re-
quirements. And yes, it’s unfortunate that nearly half of them don’t move 
forward. However, a worse outcome would be to deliver on requirements 
that weren’t going to provide the value the project needed! By fully under-
standing and specifying what the project wanted from us, we were able to 
consciously reject or remove requirements as it went along. By intentionally 
removing things from the project and adding other items of greater value, 
we were able to deliver a much better project containing much less useless 
functionality. If we hadn’t done this work up front, we never would have 
known enough to make those decisions. 
This process doesn’t work if you leave it to chance. In order to properly 
manage project change, you must understand its importance and how it in-
teracts with project methodologies. You also need to understand what 
causes project change, how it can impact the people on the project as well 
as the project itself, and how to best make sure that through change, you 
remain aligned with project goals. Not all good ideas should be pursued if 
you want to hit your goal. 
The Importance of Change  
Management 
Some of the primary causes of drama in projects include confusion and lack 
of communication. When people don’t know for certain what is going on, 
or don’t feel they’re being communicated with, they tend to assume the 
worst. They then start seeking out their own information, causing friction 
and chatter. That leads to stress and anxiety around your project. 
Change is by far the biggest source of stress and confusion in a project. 
Consider the project lifecycle. You spend significant time up front docu-
menting requirements and creating a volume of paperwork for signoff that is 
circulated to everyone to read and approve. Then consider how much time 
is spent on changes, even large ones, and how they’re communicated. Your 
project quickly goes from being one that is well understood by everyone, to 
one that is completely understood by relatively few people. 
 Note  You generally spend much more time on initial requirements than you do on changes, 
even if changes represent more than half of the project. 

Chapter 5 | Manage Change 
 
62  
Often, changes to a project are only communicated to those who need to 
know or are directly affected. This can include the team members who need 
to change what they’re working on, the owner or sponsor who may need to 
know what how the budget or delivery will change, and anyone else who is 
directly impacted. But many other people are either indirectly impacted or 
are merely interested. These people used to know, more or less, everything 
that was in scope for the project. Now they don’t know, but they don’t 
know that they don’t know. 
This is usually okay because people don’t really need to know things that 
don’t affect them. In fact, communicating too much change too often may 
cause your project to look like it’s disorganized or poorly managed. But pic-
ture this scenario: a fairly senior person on your project team is eating 
lunch with one of his friends at work, who isn’t on the team. The friend 
says, “Hey, I hear you guys are only coming out with one size of the product 
instead of three, and even so, you’re going to be six months late.” Your 
team member, who knows about the project schedule, says, “Yeah, it’s go-
ing slower than we hoped, which caused the delay. But we’re still coming 
out with all three sizes.” He was wrong; you did decide to reduce the scope 
to one size. You just made your senior team member look somewhat fool-
ish; he knew about the schedule change because it affected him, but he 
didn’t know about the change in the number of sizes available because it 
didn’t affect him. Even though the reason you’re in this position is perfectly 
logical and reasonable, you still wound up doing the wrong thing. 
Change can be difficult to manage, and it’s even more difficult to find the 
right level of communication required. It’s worth recognizing that your pro-
ject may be made up more of changes than initial requests, which can leave 
portions of your project team in the dark. It’s worthwhile to understand 
what causes change, how it impacts different parts of your project, and what 
you ought to do about it. 
Drivers of Change 
Projects change for a huge number of reasons. Some drivers of project 
change are positive, such as capitalizing on new advances or new markets 
that were unknown at the start of the project. Others may not be as posi-
tive, such as problems in execution or lack of clarity in goals. Most of them 
lie in the middle, though, and are a result of a shifting landscape and evolving 
priorities. These can be both good and bad at the same time. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
63  
Understanding what causes change is just as important as understanding what 
is changing. You, as project manager, need to know if you’re facing a positive, 
reactive, negative, or neutral change, so you know how to respond and how 
to communicate the need for the change to the team. As with many things in 
project management, knowing the reasons is sometimes more important 
than knowing the actual requests. Let’s look at a few of the main drivers of 
change and what they mean. 
The Business or Client Organization Has 
Changed 
This means the actual organization structure has changed. Because projects 
are often approved months before they start and can run for several months, 
quarters, or years beyond that, it isn’t unusual for the client or business or-
ganization to change shape. This can result from basic business restructuring, 
mergers or an acquisition, or a new CEO or business leader taking charge. 
It isn’t uncommon, in the face of organizational change, for projects to be re-
evaluated to make sure they’re in alignment with the new reality. Projects 
can be canceled outright; others change course, shape, or ultimate goals. If 
your project is canceled, it may not be a sign that the project wasn’t a good 
idea or that you were running it poorly. It’s a sign that the new organization 
values different things more highly than the previous organization did. If you 
can, leave your project in good shape, even lobbying for a little time to do so 
if necessary. Although it may be you who picks it up if it ever gets restarted, 
chances are it won’t be. You not only want to leave the next person with a 
project in good shape, you also want to be known a project manager who 
knows how to close down a project. But be prepared to put your project 
away and move onto the next one. 
 Note  Project change due to organizational change is so common that you might anticipate it be-
fore it happens. 
If you’re on a project that is facing material change to be better aligned with 
a new organization, make sure you’re making this change thoughtfully and in-
tentionally. Depending on how much things have changed, you may be faced 
with running a project that no longer makes sense. It may have half old re-
quirements and half new ones, and they don’t add up to a complete, cohesive 

Chapter 5 | Manage Change 
 
64  
project. Beware of running two or three sets of project objectives mashed 
together. Running a project that has confusing or conflicting goals will cer-
tainly add drama to your project and should be avoided if at all possible. 
New Advances Make Your Project Obsolete 
The technology landscape is always changing. While you’re trying to make 
something out of existing components, the companies that make those com-
ponents are improving them, modifying them, and releasing new versions. 
Sometimes, this means the project you’re in the middle of building has already 
been built (perhaps better) by someone else. This is usually a good thing in 
the long run, no matter how disappointing it feels when the change happens. 
A long time ago, I was working for a web consultant shop. We realized that 
many of our clients were having the same problem. The web was stateless 
(it still is, actually), and the only way to keep track of customers was a tech-
nological nightmare. So, we decided we should be building a state solution, 
which we could then resell to our customers as part of the value-add equa-
tion in the engagement. Apparently this was an obvious, industry-wide prob-
lem, because by the time we were half done, several well-known companies, 
from Microsoft to F5, had come out with their own solutions. We were 
pleased as a team to know that we were on the right track and that the so-
lutions other companies were releasing turned out to be very close to our 
design. But it still meant someone else beat us to the punch, and our project 
was now obsolete. 
This kind of change tends to take one of two paths. The first is that the pro-
ject is halted immediately while you analyze the available third-party solu-
tions. Rather than constructing something, the project is now about evaluat-
ing options. The team that does this kind of work is usually different, and 
much smaller, than the team that was tasked with building a new solution. 
This changes the project into something else completely, and it’s often bet-
ter to have a different team do the work. 
Sometimes, though, it moves from being a construction project to being one 
of integration. Your project plan should include how to get your new capa-
bility to work with existing systems. You probably built in the beginnings of 
a rollout plan, including some systems analysis, timing, and other factors. 
Much of this information and planning may still be valid. What has changed 
in your plan is which solution you’re integrating and rolling out, although you 
still need to meet the same needs, goals, and objectives. 
Depending on what shape this change takes, you may either pack up your 
stuff and move on or hunker down and figure out how to make the new 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
65  
technological advance work. This should usually be considered a positive 
change; if so many people were experiencing the problem that it caused a 
vendor to create a commercial solution, then you were probably on the 
right track. Some of your team members may be disappointed that they 
didn’t get to build the solution themselves, but at least you can still hit your 
objectives—and solve your client’s problem. 
Changing Priorities of Your Client or  
Organization 
This reason for change can be one of the more frustrating for you and your 
team. Your project is still good, the need still exists, and your goals and ob-
jectives are still valid. However, the company has decided that it either has 
higher priorities or has more urgent needs, so it’s going to drastically 
change your project, if not cancel it entirely. In my experience, cancelling or 
“putting on hold indefinitely” is much more merciful than the other op-
tion—a seemingly random change in direction. 
This option, which I’ve seen far too often, is a challenge to explain to your 
team. Some organizations call this “repurposing” or even “redeployment.” 
But what it means to you and your team is a lot closer to “do something 
else with the team that they aren’t necessarily well suited to do.” Your or-
ganization or client may have decided to lower the priority on its social-
networking efforts, for example, to focus on lean manufacturing. Some wise 
executive says, “Can you take the social media team and put them on manu-
facturing? They’re all engineers, right?” Adding to the joy of this kind of de-
cision is that the project manager is rarely consulted before the decision is 
made and is even more rarely heeded. “There is no doubt that this is a well 
functioning team with a capable project manager. So why not? Your team is 
better than no team at all, right?”  
 Note  From a high enough perch, all project teams look the same. 
Worse than being cancelled, and maybe even worse than getting rede-
ployed, is being allowed to continue. You may find yourself running a pro-
ject that is still a good idea and always was. But the project is no longer a 
priority of anyone in the business or client organization. If you succeed, 
great. If you fail, no big deal. But you get a strong, implied message: “Please 

Chapter 5 | Manage Change 
 
66  
don’t ask for more resources or budget, because your project isn’t that im-
portant.” And good luck getting any executive or sponsor to pay any atten-
tion to the project. There is little to no incentive to complete it on time or 
to complete it at all. If you find yourself in this situation, you should be pre-
pared to be redeployed sometime in the future, but do the best you can in 
the meantime. 
New Sales Channels 
New channels are a great example of how new shiny things can cause a dis-
ruptive change. Many executives believe that opening new channels some-
how cures the shortcomings or defects in the current product line. They 
seem to be thinking, “Sure, here’s a bunch of people who have no experi-
ence with our products, so they don’t yet know what our weaknesses are. 
We should capitalize on that and make as much money as we can until they 
find out.” This is a business strategy that I’ve seen used, and seen work. 
Some fairly nonsensical requirement requests come from this kind of change. 
For instance, “We have bought air time on a bunch of children’s shows on 
Nick Jr. Do you think you can make our product talk?” When you reply, 
“Uh… we make flux capacitors,” you realize that has no meaning to the per-
son with whom you’re speaking. And you think about something pointy to 
poke them with. 
New channels, in themselves, do nothing. Great: now you’re on the shelves 
at Walmart and being sold by the Home Shopping Network. This doesn’t 
change the fact that your product catches fire if left on for more than ten 
hours, right? But you get requests via the new channel to make changes that 
have no real positive impact, such as slimming the width of the packaging by 
half an inch to take up less shelf space, or to put a bunch of Samurai swords 
on the cover to appeal to the Asian market. 
When this happens, you have a conundrum. Your clients, sponsors, and ex-
ecutives are probably putting pressure on you to deliver something that will 
have, at best, value for the next few months, and no value after that. This can 
even come at the expense of things that you think will generate long-term 
value to the company or organization. What is a project manager to do?  
As much as it goes against your instincts, the best approach is to try to 
change the principles of the project. If your client and sponsor want you to 
optimize your time for whatever new channel they have created, be open 
and honest about it. Put “appeal to Asian consumers” right alongside “don’t 
catch fire” in the list of things you’re trying to accomplish. This will do one 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
67  
of two things. It may shame your client into realizing that what they’re ask-
ing you to do is the wrong thing, and maybe they will change their outlook. 
Or if that doesn’t happen, you have permission to act as if this new channel 
requirement is as important as all the others. And getting this decision made 
explicitly will serve you well in the months to come.  
New Legislation 
This is an example of a change about which I have no good, clear advice. 
Sometimes, mid-project, new laws are passed, or new regulations are issued, 
or new compliance rules need to be adhered to. They come out of nowhere. 
Legislation, at its heart, is a constraint and not a requirement. So, you need 
to consider it a new project constraint that you didn’t know about before. 
 Note  Legislation is really a constraint, not a requirement. 
I recently consulted for a company that wanted to participate in the Grou-
pon phenomenon. The company wanted to use Groupon as a way to attract 
new customers and to try out offers in a captive, opted-in market. We came 
up with a pretty compelling offering, wrote all the backend web-site stuff to 
make it work, and released the offer into several test markets to see how it 
would do. In our initial testing, it did better than we imagined. Not only 
were more people buying our Groupons, but they were also coming to our 
site and buying other items that weren’t on sale as part of the deal. This ef-
fort was incredibly positive. 
But while this was happening, certain states were changing their tax laws 
with respect to online commerce. New York started to tax online sales to 
its residents. Connecticut, Illinois, and South Carolina quickly followed. We 
did the analysis and determined that although losing these four states hurt 
our business, it wasn’t a killer; we decided to simply block sales in those 
states and continue. But when California enacted similar legislation, that left 
us unable to sell in 20% of the country. This was a problem. 
In order to be compliant with state tax regulations, we had to make a signifi-
cant change in how we calculated sales tax. Because no one from the tax 
team was on the project, and no one on the team wanted to touch tax, this 
caused a lot of drama. I could have non-tax people, who didn’t want to do 
the work, make the changes in our tax systems. Or, I could acknowledge 

Chapter 5 | Manage Change 
 
68  
that this change in requirements meant we had to acquire different skills 
than we had. I was faced with a bad choice that I didn’t relish making. 
In the end, I wound up splitting my project in two. We moved ahead with one 
team building out the capabilities we needed to make our Groupon involve-
ment work, and we spun up a second team with a different project manager 
to work on the taxation part. Had we gone a different direction, I would have 
had two teams of engineers who were both unhappy with the situation. 
The Impact of Other Projects 
While you’re running your project, many other teams are executing on 
theirs. Theirs could be in the same portfolio as yours, or they could be in a 
separate business unit. It may seem to all involved that their projects are 
unrelated to what you’re trying to accomplish. Yet they can affect you, both 
negatively and positively, and often in ways you would never expect. 
Depending on the other projects and how they manifest themselves in your 
world, you may be facing a new constraint, a new requirement, or both. For 
instance, a new corporate security project may require that all password 
entry fields need to be done over an encrypted line. This is a constraint, and 
you must add the functionality to your project. Sometimes, this information 
comes to you late—maybe even after you’ve launched—which causes sig-
nificantly more work than if you had known about it in the first place. Other 
projects may turn a constraint into a requirement, such as a project that 
expands the number of characters available for a SKU from three to four. 
 Note  If your company or client is running more than one project at a time, be ready for that 
other project to affect yours. 
If your company or client is big enough to be running more than one project 
at a time, then there is a good chance that other projects will impact you in 
some way. It may make your life more difficult or easier, but it’s likely to be 
a source of change to your project requirements. Finding this out before it’s 
too late isn’t the project manager’s responsibility (although good project 
managers do have their sources of information). Paying attention to this 
kind of activity is the responsibility of your portfolio manager. But no matter 
how you find out—on your own, from your manager, or on release day—it 
doesn’t matter: you will be impacted and need to be prepared. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
69  
Failure in Execution 
This source of change probably causes the most drama. The failure can be 
something like a poor design, or a missing requirement, or unknown show-
stopping constraints that are uncovered late in the project. It can also be 
something that isn’t aligned with a single incident, but rather with multiple 
unfortunate decisions spread out over the length of the project. Whatever 
form it takes, there is little doubt as to the ultimate cause: somewhere along 
the line, the project team failed to execute. 
I once ran a project for a data company that was supposed to take a huge 
amount of disparate information, create a hierarchical tree from it, remove 
duplicates, and display it in a graphical form to the user. The solution chosen 
by our engineering team was clever and produced perfect results. We were 
all excited by what we were going to deliver, and our tests consistently 
passed manual QA as being 100% accurate.  
It turned out we were correct to an extent. The design was elegant and did 
produce perfect results—as long as there were fewer than 500 data points. 
Beyond that threshold, the report took so long to produce that it entirely 
consumed a server for several minutes—a big problem when we had thou-
sands of concurrent users and only a handful of servers. We needed to 
completely redo the design. 
This caused massive amounts of drama for the project. Not only did we have 
to go back and start over, but we also had to be doubly sure our design was 
performing. We had to scrap all the advanced features we were going to im-
plement but still extend the project. In the end, we produced the bare mini-
mum needed to call the project a success, but we went over schedule and 
over budget and didn’t get to half of what we were supposed to deliver. Not 
one of our best moments. 
These are only some of the drivers of project change. Some of them are 
understandable and can be good things, such as technological advances or 
changes that remove constraints. Some of them aren’t as favorable, how-
ever, such as a client losing focus as they chase a new opportunity, or failure 
in the project team. Whatever the cause, change is inevitable, and it needs 
to be managed properly or it will soon manage you. 
Be Aware of the Situation 
If change has come to your project, it can be disruptive if you let it. It can 
add a lot more drama to the project than the actual change would imply. To 

Chapter 5 | Manage Change 
70  
limit the amount of stress it causes, you need to be aware of the situation. 
This includes gaining an understanding of the change and its causes, under-
standing how the company or client has handled similar changes in the past, 
and determining how the change is likely to affect your team and other in-
terested parties. This kind of situational awareness helps you determine 
how to best manage the change and limit the disruption. 
The first thing you need to do is understand the change: 
 
Is it the result of a large shift in priorities, an external factor, or dis-
satisfaction with the project?  
 
Will it require a small adjustment or a wholesale alteration of the 
project?  
 
Will it affect the entire team, part of the team, or a single individual?  
 
When will this change take place? Will it happen immediately, or is 
it a few months away?  
Having this information in hand helps determine who needs to know about 
the change immediately, and who doesn’t need complete communication 
until everything is figured out. 
Depending on the client or the organization, the first thing that comes out 
of people’s mouths when they learn about the change may be, “Here we  
go again.” If it is, this tells you a lot about how you need to manage your 
team and your project. Are changes like this frequent? Are they usually a 
disruption? Do they usually make things better, or are they generally 
viewed as random? Have projects in the past survived this kind of change? 
Have they thrived? 
Then move on to the specific change. You want to find out three things:  
 
Whether your team members believe in the person who is request-
ing the change 
 
Whether they believe in the reason for the change 
 
Whether they believe in the change itself 
You need to know if you’re faced with drama not only as a result of the 
change, but also because of something specific to the change. It’s not un-
common to have both to deal with. 
Finally, you need to analyze who is impacted by the change, including people 
on your team and people in the client organization. Something that has a 
great impact on your business or client may have little impact on your pro-
ject. The opposite is also true. And within your project, the change may af-
fect the whole team, a small subset, or just one person (or maybe only you.)  

No-Drama Project Management 
 
71  
 Note  People are impacted by change in different ways, and not often in the same magnitude as 
the organization. 
Knowing the nature of the change, how the organization feels about change 
in general and specifically, and how much of your team or client will be im-
pacted is critical to knowing what kind of drama you may need to manage. It 
can range from very little to soap-opera level. And of course, every project 
and situation can be different.  
Be Aware of the People 
As you determine who is affected, keep in mind that you need to consider 
two very different groups of people: the team or other people in your deliv-
ery organization, and those on the client or business side. And sometimes, 
you need to deal with both simultaneously. For instance, the organization 
deciding that now is the time to do a large-scale enterprise resource planning 
(ERP) rollout affects not only the finance folks in your business community 
but also the finance developers and IT staff who may be on your team. 
So consider your team members and how they’re impacted by the change 
that is occurring. This impact may be specifically what they’re working on to-
morrow or next week, or it may affect their careers or their positions in the 
company. Although doing anything about the latter is usually outside a project 
manager’s scope, you still need to know that it will affect your team member. 
And knowing this will help you navigate managing the rest of the project. 
When you think you understand how the change will affect your team, you 
need to understand how it will affect your clients or customers. This can be 
twofold, because your customer community is made up of leaders and indi-
vidual contributors, each of which can feel very differently about the same 
change. The people you work with every day are usually the front-line em-
ployees who are most likely to be anxious about the change. They need to 
know that even amidst chaos, you have the project and the situation under 
some control. 
Customer leaders are a different story. Executives may be betting their repu-
tation or their career on this change of direction. Or this change may have 
been forced on them, and they expect to deliver it, even if they aren’t totally 
sold on it. More important for you, if an executive was an important piece of 
your project, as a decision maker, an advisor, or a steering committee mem-

Chapter 5 | Manage Change 
 
72  
ber, then they will now be distracted. If they have time for the project, they 
will be much worse prepared and probably much less effective. You may not 
realize it now, but this is a bigger problem for you than the change itself. 
 Note  One of the scarcest project resources is executive focus. Change can limit that in ways 
you don’t expect. 
Being aware of the impact of change on the people involved in a project is 
vital to your ability to run the project. These people include your team and 
the project’s immediate customers. But the people most affected may be 
the executives or sponsors of the project who now have other priorities or 
other things on their minds. They may not be there for you and your pro-
ject if you need them. 
Be Aware of the Project 
Finally, you need to understand whether and how this change impacts the 
project itself. You’ve already considered the people and the situation, but 
you haven’t considered whether this change affects the way you need to run 
your project, or if you need to step back and redo some of your deliver-
ables to adjust for the change that just came along. 
Large changes come with a certain amount of risk by their very nature. But 
usually, you do risk analysis only for the direct change that is happening, not 
for its indirect changes to your project. This can bring many types of risks 
upon you. It can be schedule risk, where a change delays your ability to launch 
your project. Perhaps it’s resource risk, in which the change consumes re-
sources you need for your project to be successful. It could also be market 
risk; your project relied on certain market conditions that are no longer pres-
ent when you’re trying to deliver. Or maybe something else you need to add 
to your risk-mitigation strategy wouldn’t exist if not for this change. 
Even if the change doesn’t carry a large amount of risk for you, it may re-
quire that you revisit virtually all of your plans and documents. Constraints 
or requirements may have changed. You may need to adjust your rollout 
plan or alter your testing strategies based on the new situation. If the 
change is big enough, you should consider reevaluating all the work you’ve 
done to date to make sure it’s still valid and relevant. If it isn’t, now is the 
time to find that out, not later in the schedule. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
73  
Keeping Aligned 
Staying relevant isn’t something you should take for granted. When you 
started out, you had goals and objectives, and you had a customer base with 
a problem that needed solving. You worked hard to come up with a set of 
principles that would help solve this need, and your team has been heading 
merrily toward this resolution, comfortable that it’s doing the right thing. 
It’s important to determine whether all these things are still true. You need 
to work with your team and with the decision makers in your project com-
munity to make sure your project should continue down the path you’re al-
ready on. Certain members of your project environment may feel a little de-
flated or discouraged due to the change, and in that case you need to remind 
them that the problem you’re trying to solve still exists and your solution is 
the best way to address it. 
You should be very visible and transparent in making the decision to con-
tinue on the same course. If your team or your clients think you’re burying 
your head in the sand or otherwise ignoring what is going on around you, 
they will start to lose faith in your ability to lead. Do the work to make sure 
your project is still the right thing to do, and then confidently continue to 
lead it. And don’t be afraid to get the opposite answer—maybe your project 
no longer makes sense. If so, go confidently in the other direction. 
Summary 
Change is a constant in life and ubiquitous in projects. You should expect it 
to happen: failing to plan for it will cause you to be a marginal or ineffective 
project manager. 
The first key is to manage change intentionally, just as you do everything else. 
Don’t try to pretend that it’s not happening or that it isn’t impacting you or 
your efforts. Before you can begin managing the change, however, you need 
to know what is driving it. The drivers of change are many and varied. The 
cause can be a combination of factors that necessitate a course correction. 
But knowing why things are happening will help you take the next few steps. 
And those steps are to understand and become aware of how the situation, 
the people, and the project are affected. Note that each can be altered in 
different ways, and people on the same team may view this change differ-
ently—perhaps very differently. As much as you can, being aware of the new 
environment will help you and your team. 

Chapter 5 | Manage Change 
 
74  
Finally, make sure your project makes sense in this new reality. Your project 
is probably still necessary, and you should continue to try to deliver on it. 
But it’s also possible that the project you’re trying to run is obsolete or no 
longer a priority. Either way, you should be doing this kind of analysis trans-
parently and with clear direction. Whether you cancel your project or dou-
ble-down and start working on it even harder, make the decision with a full 
understanding of the situation. You’re probably doing the right thing. 
 

C H A P T E R 
6 
Align with the  
Client 
“Hmm … I don’t remember talking about that.” 
Let’s envision this fairly typical experience for a project manager. She 
launched her project a few weeks ago, finished the operations manual, 
trained the IT staff, and held a celebratory lunch. The functional manager 
has agreed that the project is closed and the hand-off deliverables are com-
plete. In other words, the project manager is all done. 
Catching her breath, she takes a two-week vacation someplace warm and 
sunny, and is now back at work, ready to pick up a new project. New pro-
jects are exciting and often come with that “new project smell.” However, 
even new projects are usually somewhat old and can use a bit of freshening 
up. Many project managers have been given a project that has a name with a 
year in the title—after that year has already past. 
So, the project manager is having the kickoff meeting with her boss, who 
hands her a packet of information and starts talking about the project. 
Somewhere in the conversation is an offhand comment about “reconfirming 
what the business needs” and “seeing if anything has changed.” These kinds 
of statements are commonplace and often overlooked. But project manag-
ers who disregard such remarks do so at their own peril. 
The project in this project manager’s hands may have been approved a 
month ago, a quarter ago, or a year ago. It may have been a really good idea 
at that time, based on what the reality was then and what capabilities existed 

Chapter 6 | Align with the Client 
 
76  
at the time. In today’s fast-paced environment, virtually none of the assump-
tions may still be true. 
 Note  Even decisions made yesterday can be out of date. All preexisting discussions should be 
considered suspect. 
Before our hero can begin working on her project, she needs to make sure 
the goals of the project, the customers, and the project team are all very well 
understood and very much agreed upon. In fact, as discussed in other chap-
ters, she should also reconfirm that the team, customers, and stakeholders 
are still the same as they were when the project was first approved. Failing to 
gain this alignment is not only a very obvious way to have a project fail, it’s 
also a failure in project management. A project manager who attempts to de-
liver without full agreement—or at least full understanding—on what’s being 
delivered isn’t doing the job correctly. 
Why Alignment Is Important 
In just about every way, proper alignment provides a higher level of execu-
tion. If you consider an automobile with one tire slightly off—or even a 
grocery-store shopping cart that has one squeaky wheel—you can under-
stand what misalignment feels like. No matter how good the other three 
wheels are, how new, how perfect, they’re limited by the one that isn’t. 
The person trying to push that shopping cart through the parking lot is in 
for a rude surprise. 
When everyone on the team is aligned, which means literally pointed in the 
same direction, then the team can operate at a totally different level than 
they did in the past. The shopping cart now speeds downhill instead of ca-
reening off to the side. Complex issues become minor annoyances, and mi-
nor annoyances disappear.  
Equally important is the impact of alignment on the team’s morale and per-
formance. When everyone understands the goals of the project and can 
draw a line connecting what they’re working on to how it will help achieve 
one of the goals, something magical happens. Team members begin to work 
together better, they stay focused longer, and they think two or more steps 
ahead and consider how their component or whatever they’re building will 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
77  
be used. They start thinking as if they’re going to be a permanent resident of 
the new world you’re building, and they act accordingly. 
Alignment can even make contentious discussions much more calm and fo-
cused. Your team anticipates each other’s needs, simply because they’re 
thinking about them earlier. Even when they don’t, they work on shared 
problems together. There are fewer statements such as, “I built my com-
ponent to spec; your requirement wasn’t documented anywhere.” When 
everyone on the team has the same goal, they feel like a team and stop act-
ing as individuals. 
 Note  A bunch of people heading in the same direction together is a team. A bunch of people 
heading in the same direction individually is a race. 
Alignment with the customer1 is even more important. A customer who feels 
aligned with the team will also be able and willing to help when problems and 
differences arise. If everyone wants the same thing, and everyone understands 
each other’s needs, then figuring out and negotiating details becomes much 
simpler, and large amounts of drama are removed from the process.  
Aligning with the Client 
Before you can gain alignment with the project team, you first need to un-
derstand the goals and objectives of the project. And before can start that, 
you need to understand where and how the project fits into the organiza-
tional strategy.  
Consider Figure 6-1, which illustrates the strategy pyramid. At the very top 
is the long-term strategic vision of the company. This is the kind of thing 
that rarely changes and can take several years or decades to achieve. Below 
this level is what is called strategic direction. This is a list of near-term strate-
gies that may take five or more years to reach fruition.  
Below this are the projects that help support the strategic direction. As a 
project manager, this is where you come in. You’re given a project that 
                                                
1 Throughout this book, I use customer, client, business owner, product owner, and similar 
words interchangeably. They all have the same meaning: the person, persons, or representa-
tive who is telling you want they want done. 

Chapter 6 | Align with the Client 
 
78  
maps to one or more of the company’s strategic directions, and it’s up to 
you to break that down into discrete tasks that must be achieved to be suc-
cessful. These tasks are what make up the bottom layer. 
 
Figure 6-1. The strategy pyramid 
So, how do you get started? The best way is simply to ask. Chapter 8 talks 
about stakeholder identification. Now is the time to interview the group of 
people you uncovered. Not only does doing so get you the information you 
need to gain clarity, it also helps show the community that you’re listening 
and that you care about its needs and objectives. This is true even if you de-
cide to ignore their thoughts because they’re different than those of other 
stakeholders. At the very least, you can find out that some people disagree, 
and you can inform them that they won’t be getting what they want out of 
the project. Better to say it now than to have them find out when it’s just 
about time to deliver. Of course, the importance of each stakeholder is dif-
ferent, as you see later. 
The goal is to get people talking but not lead them too far. You should act 
as if you know nothing about the project and are learning the possibilities 
via this conversation. And you should act that way because for the most 
part, it’s the truth. Here are some interview questions you can ask: 
 “How does this project assist in furthering the company’s strategic direc-
tion?” Virtually everyone you ask will have a different opinion, and the 
responses will range broadly. This is not only normal, it’s desirable. It 
helps give you the full spectrum of choices for what the project could 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
79  
be. Ask for reasons and details about the answers people give. You 
may find that some of your stakeholders are unaware of the vision 
and goals of the project—or even that they disagree with them! The 
more people you ask, the more you’ll find commonalities and themes. 
You use these a little later. 
 “What do you hope this project delivers?” Achieving the strategic direc-
tion will most likely require several projects over several years. 
Your project is usually just a single part of it. With that in mind, 
what do the stakeholders hope you can achieve? If the responses 
seem very aspirational or even impossible, now would be a good 
time to try to reset their expectations. You can do this with a ques-
tion like, “Do you think we can accomplish all that within the scope 
of this project?” It’s difficult to ask this without it sounding like a 
leading question, but usually that reminds them that projects are 
temporary, and strategies aren’t. Your goal is to take several steps 
in the right direction, but rarely does a project get you all the way 
to the end. 
 “What do you think other people hope this project will deliver?” Coming 
at the question from a different angle helps uncover conflicts, 
grudges, or past negotiations that had nothing to do with you, the 
project, or the goal. Your operations manager will use their answer 
as a way to warn you about demands of marketing, and marketing 
will tell you that the IT group doesn’t understand the business. Each 
group reveals a little about themselves in the process and gives you 
a hint about where conflict points exist so you can avoid them. 
 “If this project does only one thing, what do you hope it is?” Asking each 
stakeholder this question helps you get alignment and focus on 
what’s really important. It’s very important to focus on the “one 
thing” and not accept a list of several. This kind of question is very 
powerful and should cause your interviewee to think. Along the 
way, you’ve been asking similar questions and getting a verbal bullet-
point list of what the stakeholders hope to get accomplished. These 
lists are unlikely to be identical, but they should overlap at least a 
little. When you ask for one-item answer, some groups have the 
same top priority, whereas others have very different priorities. 
This is exactly what you want to discover. 
4

Chapter 6 | Align with the Client 
80  
 Note  Differences in alignment before the project begins are okay and do not necessarily mean 
conflict is coming. 
The following sections show what you do with all this information; for now, 
it’s enough just to have it. Without this information, you can’t proceed. But 
you need to do more with it before you can truly claim to be aligned on the 
project aims. 
Aligning with the Team 
By now, you should have a sense for what the business, client, or customer 
hopes to achieve from the project. Now it’s time to ask your team mem-
bers what they want. This list is very different than the list you already have 
in hand, and that is okay and perfectly normal. Keep in mind that your client 
community is interested in the outcomes—they want you to build or do 
something that they can then use to achieve some other goal. In other 
words, to your client, the project isn’t a goal in itself. 
Your project team, however, probably won’t use the project’s final deliver-
able. Team members are much more interested in the process, what new 
skills they may acquire as part of this project, and how this will impact their 
career and what they do next. These desires may seem a little selfish, but 
this is the point in the project when it’s okay to be selfish. You need to let 
your team members express their desires now, before there is a deadline, 
and before making decisions for the good of the team or the good of the 
project becomes necessary. 
 Note  Remember that your project team is made up of people who have needs that go well be-
yond the scope of your project. 
Your project has two separate sets of goals: those of the project and cus-
tomer, and those of the team members. Attempting to manage while only 
knowing one or the other will leave you with a disappointing result. Worse 
than that, without knowing what your project team hopes to accomplish, 
both separately and individually, you can’t understand people’s motivations 
and how to keep morale high throughout the lifetime of the project. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
81  
How do you, as project manager, get this information? The same way you 
got information from the client, although you need to handle the process a 
little differently. Depending on the size of the project, you should meet with 
the key people on the team before the work begins. If the project is too big, 
or parts of it are outsourced, or doing so simply isn’t feasible, then ask 
yourself, “Which of these people do I want to work with again?” This list of 
key people may be long, short, or equal to the number of people on the 
project. However, under no circumstances should it be zero. If you don’t 
think there are any key people on your project with whom you hope to 
work again, then you’re missing an opportunity to create a long-term rela-
tionship. Even if your project seems to be full of team members you’d 
rather forget, there’s a good chance you’ll see them again elsewhere. Before 
the work begins, take time to interview your team, just as you did your cus-
tomers. The questions are similar to the ones earlier, but slanted differently: 
 “What are your hopes for this project?” This is the easiest question and 
a very interesting way to get someone talking about their goals, 
without having to give them a direction. Some team members will 
talk about the project itself and say they want to make an impact or 
reach certain financial targets or Key Performance Indicators (KPIs). 
Others will say that they would love to work on a project that 
launches on time, or on that even launches at all. Other responses 
will range from a desire to travel to the client location (or a desire 
not to), to hoping to be finished before they go on vacation, to any 
number of random desires. What’s important here is that they’re 
telling you what’s important to them. So listen and pay attention. 
You may not act on all the responses (in fact, you probably won’t), 
but you do need to know what they are. 
 “What do you hope to learn from this project?” Everyone has some-
thing they can learn, and most of your team members have certain 
skills, technologies, or arts they’d like to either gain or improve. 
This can range from presentation skills through the newest coding 
language. You need to know these desires for two reasons. First, if 
people are hoping to learn something that your project won’t pro-
vide, it’s best they learn that now, not half-way into the build. Sec-
ond, you, as project manager, need to be looking for opportunities 
to give people what they’re looking to do. If you don’t know which 
team members want to learn more user interface programming, and 
you have UI tasks to dole out, you miss a great way to motivate and 
reward your team. 

Chapter 6 | Align with the Client 
 
82  
 “What do you think you’re best at?” This is a trick question, if done 
subtly. You want to let your team members tell you how great they 
are, and you should make sure you’re listening and reacting. People 
answer with resume bullets, or a description of their passions, or 
both. This is useful information and exactly what you want. Just as 
when you asked people what they hoped to learn, you can use this 
feedback to give work assignments, to figure out whom to turn to 
when there is a problem or a schedule delay, and whenever you 
need an expert.  
Projects are often the victim of turnover; the project and project manager 
remain, but the team is constantly changing. This is increasingly true the 
longer your project runs. When a new person joins, you should ask them 
these questions right away. Turnover may happen at a bad time: a new 
member may come on board during a crunched release or right before an 
executive update. But this meeting has a very high return on investment. 
Skip it only in the most extreme circumstances. 
Just as you need to get to know who your clients are and what they want, 
you need to get to know your team members and what they want. You also 
need to recognize that these lists at best overlap, but more likely contain 
two entirely different sets of goals. It’s your job as project manager to figure 
out how to reach the project goals while maximizing the number of team 
goals you’re able to deliver. Your team will understand if you have to sacri-
fice a team goal for the good of the project, but they won’t forgive you if 
you miss a chance to achieve one for no gain—and they will probably feel 
even worse if you never found out their personal goals in the first place. 
Communicating Alignment 
There comes a point in the project when you’ve talked with everyone about 
what you’re going to be building and, more important, what you aren’t going 
to be building. You also have a handful of technical requirements, restric-
tions, and constraints that you must navigate in the course of delivering the 
project. You probably have more of each than you can possibly convey in a 
simple manner. But you must communicate this information to your team, 
stakeholders, and management at minimum. Depending on the project, this 
list may also include vendors, third parties, regulatory bodies, legal, public 
relations, compliance, and a list of groups too lengthy to fathom. 
You must get the information out to all these groups in a way that doesn’t 
require dozens of hours of your time, that isn’t ambiguous, and that doesn’t 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
83  
require constant changing and altering. These statements of alignment are 
called project principles. They’re statements about the project that clearly de-
fine the direction the project is taking and highlight any key constraints or 
obstacles. These aren’t meant to be requirements statements or wish lists. 
A good principle should be clear: there aren’t multiple ways to interpret 
what it means. It shouldn’t use code words—words that have a different 
meaning to the project team than to someone who hasn’t been closely fol-
lowing the project. It should seek to address everyone’s top needs, even at 
the expense of some other needs. A healthy balance between goals and 
constraints is a good thing, and you need the customers to see that their 
needs are being addressed. At the same time, the team and other project 
stakeholders need to be certain that you heard them.  
 Note  Project principles should cover the entire project, and not just one stakeholder group. 
More important, these project principles should rarely, if ever, change. They 
should endure for the length of the project, even if requirements, team 
composition, or stakeholders change. If something happens that causes you 
to violate, change, or otherwise ignore these principles, then that is a sign 
that you have a material change on your hands, something that may change 
the project’s direction completely. 
Once you have this list of principles, you need to distill them down into the 
following parts: 
 
The principle itself: a single sentence that asserts the statement of 
principle 
 
Why this principle is important: one or two sentences about why 
this principle is on the list, and why it matters 
 
Risks that this principle introduces to the project 
Let’s consider an example. Imagine you’re a bearing manufacturer, and you 
currently make 3"-diameter ball bearings. Your project is to make 3" cylin-
drical bearings to sell into the same market. You could have a principle that 
looks like this: 
 
Principle: We will use existing machines, lathes, and equipment to 
manufacture the cylindrical bearings. 
 
Why this is important: The business case is predicated on not having 
to buy new equipment to manufacture this product. Our staff is 

Chapter 6 | Align with the Client 
 
84  
trained on the machines we have, and floor space in our manufac-
turing facility is expensive. 
 
Risks: Our existing equipment might not be appropriate for the 
manufacture of this item. Alternately, our existing equipment may 
create a substandard product. 
These five sentences are all you need to express your statements of princi-
ple. Anyone, no matter what function they represent, can clearly understand 
the decision that was made, why it was made, and the implications of the 
decision. Even if you disagree with the direction, it’s difficult to claim to not 
understand it and base all future decisions on it. Remember, alignment 
doesn’t necessarily mean everyone is happy with the direction; it means 
everyone understands and accepts the decisions that have been made. 
Understanding Differences 
As you go through this process, you’ll find differences of opinion. This isn’t 
unusual, but there are scenarios in which you, as project manager, need to 
address them. The longer you let the project run in a misaligned state, the 
harder it will be to bring it back on course. You’ll have the urge to figure 
things out as you go or worry about issues as they come up. Try to resist 
this whenever possible, especially with foundational, goal-affecting issues. 
You’ll have differences along the way, such as, “Should the new bearings be 
silver or black?” This kind of difference can be postponed. However, if you 
run into someone who doesn’t think the goal is to sell as many bearings as 
you can, then you probably have an issue. 
There are two main flavors of differences: interdepartmental and intradepart-
mental. Department in this case can mean division, function, geography, or 
even company if you’re managing a multicompany project. The main idea is 
that sometimes groups don’t agree with each other, and other times a 
group can’t seem to agree with itself. Both situations present very different 
challenges and can cause different kinds of disruption to your project along 
the way.  
Interdepartmental differences tend to be caused by groups that have very dif-
ferent goals. A classic example is the operations department, which wants to 
have a stable, supportable capability, and the business, which favors speed to 
market over everything else. Both groups are acting correctly based on their 
own needs and goals. Solving these differences usually involves straight-
forward negotiations about project scope, project timing, or something  
else. Assuming that in the end all the key decision-makers do want to sell 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
85  
more bearings, you’ll eventually come up with an answer that everyone can 
agree with. 
 Note  Although you should try to meet the needs of as many stakeholders as possible, you 
needn’t meet them all at the same point in the project. 
Intradepartmental squabbles are a much different problem. A lack of internal 
alignment is often enough to pause, delay, or even cancel a project. This 
kind of disagreement comes when you translate the goals of the project 
with the strategy. Some stakeholders agree with the strategy but disagree 
that this project is the right way to make progress toward it. Or they dis-
agree with the validity of the constraints, or they think the risks going into 
the project are too great. Sometimes they disagree just to be disagreeable. 
The root cause isn’t as important as recognizing when you have a lack of in-
ternal alignment.  
One thing to do when you find yourself in this situation is to go back to 
your executive and stakeholder interview notes. Perhaps you and the pro-
ject team mistranslated the original goals into the list of tasks and principles 
you’re taking on. Conversely, perhaps the stakeholder or stakeholder group 
who doesn’t agree doesn’t have the same context about the project you 
have. Either way, this is why having this information is so important. To be 
able to draw a top-down line from strategy, to interview, to project, to pro-
ject task creates a very clear picture. 
Unfortunately, this often isn’t enough to get people back on the same page. 
So, you need to gather even more information. One way is to interview the 
person or group that is in disagreement. You can start with a bold question 
such as, “Do you think we should halt this project?” Note that you need to 
resist the urge to move ahead with this disagreement looming; often, forcing 
this kind of yes-or-no question can help frame the next discussion. If the an-
swer is that yes, you shouldn’t begin, then you have a clear task. You need 
to find the person or group who approved the project, and a few others, 
and see if the objection is real and worth changing the course of the project 
and portfolio. More likely, the answer will be, “No, you can get started, but 
…” Here’s where you need to be very careful and are likely to get yourself 
into trouble if you do move forward.  

Chapter 6 | Align with the Client 
 
86  
 Note  It can be tempting to move ahead without alignment. Don’t. 
At this point, you can try to get confirmation about the success criteria 
you’ve collected, look at the “one things” your interviews indicated people 
want to achieve, and see if you can bring the group back into alignment. If 
the objection isn’t strong enough to halt the project, then there probably is 
room to work things out. There may be success criteria that some people 
didn’t know about, or they may disagree with the criteria you’ve collected. 
This situation isn’t uncommon, and a good project manager should be ready 
to deal with it. Continue to communicate your top-down distillation of re-
quirements and goals, and resist allowing new goals to come in from the 
sides or, worse, bottom-up. Although doing this to the best of your ability 
may not be enough, not being prepared and not being ready to have this 
discussion will certainly cause you not to succeed.   
Amount of Aggressiveness 
An old chestnut talks about under-promising and over-delivering. This is the 
ideal, but it’s particularly difficult to do. Your client, and probably your Pro-
ject Management Office (PMO) or program manager, knows that if you de-
liver everything you promised and nothing more, you probably weren’t be-
ing aggressive enough. Because you know that work expands to fill all avail-
able space, if you complete all your tasks, there is nearly always room for 
one more. But if you promise more than you eventually deliver, you look 
like a poor project manager, and clients are disappointed at what they get. 
What’s a project manager to do? 
Earlier, the book talked about managing scope and how important it is to 
have more than one in/out line. Items that are below the out line should 
stay out. They may be removed for lots of reasons, only one of which is 
availability of resources. However, you still have varying degrees of in items, 
and this is where project managers can reach for a little more while still set-
ting the proper expectations. 
The discussion of project principles left out project-management principles. 
These are the principles that exist from project to project and are more ap-
plicable to you—the project manager and your portfolio team—than they 
are to the task at hand. One of these project-management principles should 
always be, “Everything not in the A list is at risk of not happening.” This is a 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
87  
statement you should repeat at every meeting, after which you should wait 
for a sign of acknowledgement.  
However, you should also plan to deliver as far down the list of require-
ments as you possibly can while still maintaining the level of stability you 
need for your final delivery. Although you’re saying, “We’re only doing the 
As,” you need to create credibility with the business or client for the next 
project that some of the Bs and Cs will get done. This is especially helpful if 
you run into issues and need to pull all the Bs and Cs off the table for a cer-
tain project. You at least give the appearance of trying, which is just as im-
portant as actually delivering for gaining and maintaining alignment. 
Remaining Aligned 
Finally, you must have a plan to keep your team and your stakeholder com-
munity in alignment as the project goes forward. This activity is separate 
from tracking progress, status updates, issue logs, and so on. It’s a constant 
reminder of what the project is doing, what its goals are, and what everyone 
will see at the end. Your project principles should help with this. 
As you move forward in the project, be certain that your principles remain 
both true and active. If you violate the project principles, then you generate 
confusion among the people who agreed to them in the first place, and you 
may start to get requests to violate more of them for random reasons. 
Remaining aligned through the life of the project is difficult, especially as 
conditions change, team members change, and the market changes. But you 
have a simple mechanism to keep up: use your principles, keep them alive, 
and keep communicating them. You know you’ve done it enough when  
everyone is tired of seeing them and knows them by heart. That’s the sign 
you’re looking for. 
Summary 
Gaining proper alignment is vital to the project. You need everyone to be 
heading in the same direction, even though the members of the project 
team may all have different goals. The easiest way to do this is to map your 
tasks to your project, and your project to corporate direction, and the di-
rection to the overall vision of the organization. You can distill all this into a 
handful of principles, which you can then use to communicate clearly and 
easily with all groups. Once you have agreement on the project, you must 

Chapter 6 | Align with the Client 
 
88  
keep it that way with consistent, accurate reminders of the project princi-
ples. And, as project manager, you must stick to your principles. 
If, midway through a project, you tell your portfolio manager or PMO, “My 
stakeholders don’t know what their goals are,” you aren’t likely to get much 
sympathy. Disputes over requirements, ideas, or individual tasks are fine, 
but disputes over goals never are.  
  
 

C H A P T E R 
7 
Testing  
Assumptions 
“Well, when we started this project, we were 
assuming…” 
Life runs on assumptions. Every day, you assume that your alarm clock will 
wake you up, that your shower will have hot water, and that solar flares 
won’t fry the electrical grid and broadband network that power your life. In 
fact, you couldn’t live without assumptions; if you needed to verify each lit-
tle thing every single day, it would be bedtime again before you were certain 
that everything you were assuming was true could be proven in the affirma-
tive. And as luck would have it, a huge percentage of these assumptions do 
turn out to be true, allowing you to live in relative constancy.  
Projects are very similar. In order to get started on a project, you need to 
begin with a certain number of things decided (or at least pretended to be 
decided). If you go ahead with nothing settled, then you’re inviting disaster 
along the way. However, if you wait until you have enough information and 
details to make all these decisions, then the market and the project will pass 
you by. You have to make intelligent guesses about facts not yet in evidence. 
These are facts that either you have a reasonable expectation are true or 
can be made true through the course of the project. 
The Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) tells you to docu-
ment all your assumptions up front and get them approved and signed off 

Chapter 7 | Testing Assumptions 
90  
on. This is all very well, but although it somewhat covers you, the project 
manager, in the event that one or more assumptions turn out not to be 
true, it does nothing to help the project succeed. What you really need to 
do is make your assumptions up front, figure out how to test them, and 
then either retire them from the list of assumptions or turn them into full-
fledged risks. The more time passes, the less acceptable it is to have and 
make assumptions. Part of the job is to learn along the way, determine 
whether assumptions are real, and decide what to do about them. No pro-
ject manager gets much credit for identifying assumptions, because that’s 
less than half of the job.  
 Note  Merely identifying assumptions is almost never enough. You must do something about 
them, too. 
If you work in an environment where failure is fine as long as it’s fully docu-
mented ahead of time, then the PMBOK advice is probably your best bet. 
Even if you don’t work in such an environment, it’s always good to docu-
ment and create visibility and plans around the assumptions you’re making. 
However, if that is all you do, then not only are you asking for trouble, but 
you’re asking for either your client or your program manager to come 
knocking on your door with a well-justified feeling of disappointment in you. 
This puts a project manager in bind. You must have assumptions to kick off 
your project, but you can’t rely on them to save you if they turn out to be 
faulty. If you don’t constantly manage them, they can blow up on you and 
sink your project. And although you may not suffer for them personally, 
your project will, and no project manager wants that to happen on their 
watch. With that in mind, let’s look as assumptions and how you can best 
use them. You can’t live without them, so you may as well learn a little 
about how to turn them into a positive for the project. 
What Is an Assumption? 
Let’s start with the easiest question. An assumption is a statement of fact 
without enough supporting evidence to prove its veracity. Assumptions 
mostly come into play during the initial planning stages of a project, but they 
can arise all the way up to the launch date as new information and evidence 
are uncovered. For the purposes of the project, you decide that a certain 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
91  
statement is true, and you proceed with planning the project as if it were 
proven to be true. 
Let’s go back to the bearing example from Chapter 6. You have a project 
principle of “Must use existing equipment.” This principle includes some de-
scriptions and a risk analysis. Baked into that principle, but left somewhat 
unstated, are two assumptions: 
 
The existing equipment can create the bearings you need at the 
level of quality the market requires. 
 
Your current staff’s training on the equipment is applicable to creat-
ing this new product with the existing methods. 
Someone reading that principle can probably pick up on these assumptions, 
because they’re either explicitly called out as risks or they’re stated in other 
words. Because you’ve decided that this constraint is real, you need to 
make some decisions about the assumptions. You can’t state that you’ll get 
the best equipment for the job, nor does it seem you have the ability to re-
train your manufacturing team.  
Additionally, there is no way for you to test that both assumptions are true 
until you get far into the project. You probably won’t know the quality of the 
product that comes off the line until it actually starts coming off the line. And 
although you may pilot production with a few well-skilled team members, it’s 
unlikely that you can give everyone a test run in order to make sure they’re 
properly trained. Nor is it necessarily true that the skill of your pilot mem-
bers is representative of the staff at large. This single principle causes you to 
make an awful lot of decisions without the information required to know if 
you’re correct. In other words, you have to make some assumptions. 
Before you can make any assumptions, however, you need to do at least a 
little due diligence on the topic. This includes doing market research, or 
learning or understanding industry best practices. It can mean adding a sub-
ject-matter expert to the team or calling a consultant who does this kind of 
thing for a living. If none of those options are available, you may need to hire 
someone who knows the space to be part of the project. What it doesn’t 
mean is guessing or making ill-informed statements. Having someone from 
accounting make assumptions for manufacturing, or having someone from 
manufacturing make a decision about sales forecasts, is likely to lead you 
down the wrong path and eventually cause someone to object.1 Even if it 
does turn out to be correct, an assumption made without any diligence is 
                                                
1 They may even object if the decision turns out to be true, just on principle. 

Chapter 7 | Testing Assumptions 
 
92  
better termed a guess. And guesswork rarely factors into a well-formulated 
project plan. 
 Note  The level of due diligence you perform on an assumption keeps it from being nothing 
more than a guess, and perhaps an uneducated one at that. 
This brings you to the final important point about assumptions: they must be 
highly likely to be true—and 51/49 isn’t nearly good enough. The bar you’re 
trying to reach is that when an assumption is proven false, many people, in-
cluding subject-matter experts, are surprised. An assumption must be some-
thing that most people, on first read, assume is true, and this should include 
people who truly know what they’re talking about. Failure to perform this 
level of investigation before listing an assumption indicates to your project 
team, your client, or your managers that you took a guess and had no confi-
dence in going forward with what you had. 
The Importance of Assumptions 
Even with these caveats, it’s difficult to overstate the importance of assump-
tions in life. Some of the assumptions you make in your daily living are truly 
life or death, such as assuming that people will stop at red lights and won’t 
push you into the path of a speeding train. Although your project assump-
tions may not get anyone killed, they may mean life or death to the project 
itself. Many assumptions can cause projects to be halted if they turn out to 
be false; or, looking at it another way, if you knew some of your assump-
tions were false when you started, you might never have approved the pro-
ject to begin with. As a project manager, you never want to be working on a 
project that was approved on false or faulty premises: for a while—perhaps 
even for a long while—everything appears to be fine, but there is such a 
fundamental flaw that no amount of hard work or cleverness can overcome 
it. Don’t put yourself in this situation. 
This is why it’s so important at the beginning of a project to have a list of 
critical assumptions that are highly likely to be true. Critical assumptions 
may include such things as, “A vendor can be located that provides the re-
quired materials we need at an acceptable price.” Or, “Customs regulations 
will allow this kind of cross-border transaction.” These are added to the list 
of assertions on which the project is founded. (Assertions include the key 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
93  
assumptions, constraints, and value positioning of the project.) From these 
assertions, project principles, and requirements, forecasts are built. Without 
them, you can’t have a project.  
You need a problem statement, as well as an idea about how you’re going to 
address the problem, to have a project. Assumptions help with both. They 
help define the problem, and they help define the intended solution. Without 
them, you don’t have enough to know where to begin. And a project man-
ager needs to have a high degree of confidence that the decisions being made 
are based on things that are either certainly true or at least probably true. 
For instance, before you can begin a project that has an assumption about 
the availability of a vendor, you should do enough research to know that 
such vendors exist. When you start making plans based on things that might 
be true, you wind up swapping your role for that of a fortune teller. 
 Note  Listing assumptions is no replacement for getting a good answer from the subject-matter 
experts or impacted function. 
It’s important not to let the use of assumptions act as a shortcut for com-
munication. It can be tempting to list certain things as assumptions without 
checking with the person, group, or function that could determine the 
proper course of action. When you as project manager begin passing around 
a list of assumptions that include things from other groups, your boss will 
ask, “Did you ask [person x, y, or z] about this?” Woe be unto the project 
manager who begins listing assumptions without at least asking a few simple 
questions. Your guesses are mere wishes. A wish implies that you were 
afraid to ask, because you knew what the answer might be. That is no way to 
begin and no way to instill confidence in your project team. 
Assumptions are important to the project. Indeed, the project almost cer-
tainly won’t be approved without them. It’s the project manager’s job to 
understand what assumptions are made when the project is approved and 
to verify them. There are things on the list that can’t be known until well 
into the project, but it’s the project manager’s role to move each one up 
the chain from wish to guess to well-reasoned assumption, and finally to ei-
ther something that’s proven true or a risk that must be managed. 
As you can see in Figure 7-1, the more due diligence you do, the more 
you’re able to move an assumption higher up the value chain. This doesn’t 
necessarily mean that investigation will prove an assumption to be true. 

Chapter 7 | Testing Assumptions 
 
94  
Turning an assumption into a risk should be seen as good project manage-
ment, not the reverse. However, even assumptions that turn out to be false 
need to be managed and may not end a project. Managing risk is something 
every project manager should be accustomed to and should have well-
documented plans to address. Managing the unknown is a much more diffi-
cult task; managing things that you’re intentionally leaving unknown is simply 
inviting trouble when there is no need. From this perspective, “known un-
knowns” are little better than “unknown unknowns,” and they may be a sign 
of something else. 
 
Figure 7-1. The lifecycle of an assumption 
How to Identify Assumptions 
You have to worry about two different classes of assumption: pre-project 
assumptions and assumptions made by the project team. They each come 
from different sources, and represent different kinds of risks and challenges. 
Pre-Project Assumptions 
The first are the ones put together before the project was approved. They’re 
usually pretty up front in the project approval and are easy to find. They ap-
pear as constraints, principles, or some other correct-sounding assertion, but 
they rely on unproven information. These assumptions are usually formulated 
by people who are well-intentioned but very much out of their depth. These 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
95  
kinds of assumptions are usually the easiest to manage, because whoever put 
them in usually did very little investigation about them ahead of time. Some of 
them will seem silly, much like, “Assuming I can still eat chocolate cake, I will 
go on that diet.” These types of assumptions really aren’t assumptions at all, 
or at least not in the traditional project sense. They can often be managed 
through relationships, collaboration, and other means of influence. “C’mon, 
you knew you weren’t going to get away with eating all that cake. What did 
you really mean by that?”  
Examples of these kinds of assumptions are, “We can open an office in New 
York City without being subject to New York state sales tax.” Or, “The 
rockets we need to build are narrow enough to fit through railroad tun-
nels.”2 Probably no one checked these things, but common sense tells you 
they’re probably true. 
Occasionally, you run into a pre-project assumption that someone either 
believes strongly about or holds dear for some reason or other. You mostly 
find this when you’re dealing with executives who have been removed from 
a function or information for a substantial period of time, but still feel they 
know the way things are run and are current on the best practices and limi-
tations of the function. This is trickier to handle than the cake example, but 
the solution exercises the same muscles. I once worked with an executive 
who had a deep background in call centers. One of the key constraints from 
back in his time was that the world was running out of 1-800 numbers, and 
that those numbers were precious commodities. He was adamant that our 
solution needed to conserve the use of these numbers, because they were 
expensive and hard to obtain. Of course, since he left that function, 888, 
877, and 866 numbers have been added; and although they aren’t infinite, 
they’re much less limited. The executive nearly placed a constraint on the 
project that wasn’t real at all. 
Unless you happen to be an expert in the same area, you can easily position 
yourself as a neutral party. In fact, this is preferable—you aren’t on anyone’s 
side; you’re on the side of the project. If you’re able to put yourself in this 
situation, then you probably find yourself between an executive on one hand 
(the one who knows how things used to be) and the subject-matter expert 
or experts on the other (the ones who know how things are). From here, 
it’s a fairly simple conflict-resolution exercise; and more often than not, the 
issue is resolved without much of your involvement. There is either an in-
formation gap or a leadership gap that needs to be repaired, but both of 
them should exist outside the charter of your project. You have two key 
                                                
2 www.snopes.com/history/american/gauge.asp. 

Chapter 7 | Testing Assumptions 
 
96  
tasks: making sure the conflict is resolved somehow, and making sure you’re 
aware of the final outcome.  
In the 1-800 example, once we understood that the executive was working 
from a belief that was true years ago but no longer true, we were able to 
walk him through why we didn’t need to worry about his constraint. It was 
a very easy conversation to have. It wasn’t that he was wrong, it was that 
things had changed around him. 
The pre-project assumption is the easy type. It’s usually well-intentioned and 
made by someone who either wants the project to succeed or needs a little 
more education on new realities. Both of those types of people can easily be 
a friend to the project and, by extension, to the project manager. 
Assumptions Made by the Project Team 
The second type of project assumption is much more difficult to spot. These 
are assumptions made by the project team itself after the project is under 
way. They aren’t made by optimistic executives but by normally cautious 
subject-matter experts. Often, these folks offer statements as if they’re veri-
fied, even when they aren’t. Because you, the project manager, don’t have 
the level of expertise they do, it can be very easy to accept such statements 
at face value and move on. In so doing, you wind up building your project on 
unverified statements that you haven’t captured anywhere.  
I once witnessed a project that was essentially a complete rewrite of the 
company’s order process. The team made the assumption that the only 
group that needed to be involved was the ordering team, and they convinced 
the project manager they were right. The project manager, being thorough, 
had the names of the other groups on the list of stakeholders, but due to the 
information gained from his team, never contacted them. When the new 
process went live, the order-processing team was up and running, but every-
one else was down. The chief designer simply shrugged and said, “Huh. We 
never knew.”  
This kind of problem usually comes up months later, when you’re facing a 
problem and ask the expert who made the initial statement something like, 
“But I thought you said …” This is usually followed by the person shrugging 
sheepishly and admitting they based their statement on unverified informa-
tion at the time—information that turned out to be wrong. The role of the 
project manager is not to be proficient in all areas, but rather, to be profi-
cient in understanding how to manage these kinds of people and how to de-
termine their level of confidence in their statements. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
97  
 Note  Project managers don’t need to know everything, but they do need to know how to com-
municate with experts. 
Level of Confidence 
The process of determining level of confidence isn’t all that difficult; the 
problem becomes knowing when to do the questioning. There are obvious 
signs that someone isn’t totally sure of themselves. They can include the 
phrases “I’m pretty sure that …” and “I think that …,” or the answer may 
come haltingly or after a pause. If you’ve been managing people and projects 
for a while, you can recognize the signs of someone saying something they 
aren’t completely sure about. But what happens when someone states 
something confidently and clearly, but in their heads, they realize they need 
to check something before they can be sure of the answer? 
You need to ask three different types of questions at this point: 
1. “How sure are you?” Ask this when you sense someone is unsure. 
Often you get a fairly weak answer like, “Pretty sure.” Keep prob-
ing, asking what they aren’t sure about, what information they need, 
and who they need to talk with. Sometimes that person is you or 
someone to whom you have ready access. Other times it’s that per-
son’s boss, or a co-worker, or someone more senior in the organi-
zation. It could also be that the person is certain, but they need to 
look up one fact or single piece of information. However, they may 
be taking a wild or uneducated guess. This is okay as long as the 
person knows they’re doing it and that they’re on the hook for 
closing the certainty gap. 
2. “You sound very sure of that. What makes you so confident?” Ask this 
kind of question when a person states something with no sense of 
uncertainty in their voice. A person who really knows has a very 
good, very quick answer. It often takes the form of, “We did this 
before,” or, “I just looked this up for another project,” or some-
thing that sounds like they did their diligence before talking with 
you, even if accidentally. But if a person is using confidence to mask 
uncertainty, this second question (or sometimes, a follow-up) leads 
them back into the “pretty sure” type of vocabulary. If that happens, 
you know exactly how to handle it. 

Chapter 7 | Testing Assumptions 
 
98  
3. “Of all the assumptions or decisions we made today, which one do you 
feel least confident about?” The two previous types of question are 
in-the-moment exercises. But you need to do one more thing at the 
end of meetings and at regular intervals along the way: ask what 
people are uncertain about. This can make people question their 
own confidence, or it can cause someone else on the team to ask 
for further verification, either of which can cause one of the two 
previous types of discussions to take place. During regular project 
meetings or status updates, you can ask, “Which of the tasks ahead 
of you are you least certain about?” Doing so can uncover decisions 
that are vague or simply wrong. People are generally unwilling to say 
that someone else is wrong; they’re more willing to say that they’re 
unsure about something. This can cause assumptions to surface that 
are trending closer to false than true, allowing you to manage them.  
Whenever you’re coordinating a meeting in which decisions are being made, 
you should be on the lookout for the confidence level people show in their 
decisions. This is particularly true when the impacted function isn’t repre-
sented in the meeting; but representation doesn’t always mean you have the 
right representative, or that they will give you the right information. Use 
your own abilities to figure out how confident people are in their statements, 
figure out why they feel confident, and double check as often as you can. 
Avoiding Standard or Implicit Assumptions 
Listing and tracking your assumptions is important. However, there is an en-
tire class of assumption that shouldn’t appear on your list: the assumptions 
that are always valid for any project. These are mostly assumptions that can 
be cut and pasted from a past project with only the name of the project 
changed. Examples of this kind of assumption include the following: 
 
Developers will be assigned and staffed when needed. 
 
Budget for project will remain as stated in project charter. 
 
Subject-matter experts will be available for consultation on an as-
needed basis. 
These assumptions aren’t very useful, and listing them in your project will 
never help you. If your development team gets pulled to do something else, 
having these assumptions won’t change anything. Telling your client or your 
program manager that in order to do 2,000 hours worth of development, 
you need 2,000 hours of developer time only shows that you know how to 
add. It doesn’t show you managing anything; in fact, it may show you abdi-
cating the management of the project. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
99  
If you start micromanaging these kinds of assumptions, you stop managing 
the project. These assumptions aren’t deliverables, and they shouldn’t be 
treated as such. Sure, you need 2,000 hours of developer time in order to 
deliver. But what if you only get 1,990? Does that mean your project will fail? 
What happens at 1,600 or 1,200 hours? Can you deliver on a portion—or 
maybe just the highest-value requirements? What happens if your budget 
gets cut or a key expert is assigned elsewhere? Are you willing to state ahead 
of time that this will cause your project irreparable harm? In so doing, you 
may limit your own management ability before the problem even occurs. 
 Note  Some things that look like assumptions are actually risks that you need to actively manage. 
The fact is, these aren’t assumptions: they’re risks. And many of them are 
the project manager’s responsibility to solve. A project manager who says 
that a project failed due to the lack of availability of an international tax ex-
pert, even though the expert’s availability was clearly called out as an as-
sumption in the project documents, won’t be greeted with kindness by the 
program manager. You don’t get to reduce your responsibility to manage 
project risks by assuming them away. To do otherwise is to stick your head 
in the sand and hope for the best. As pointed out elsewhere in this book, 
hope has no place in a project plan. 
Assumptions vs. Risk 
How do you know if something is a risk instead of an assumption? When 
you list an assumption, see where it falls in Figure 7-2. On one axis, plot 
your ability to influence the problem. On the other, plot resources under 
your control to help overcome or work around the problem. There are 
things you have no ability to influence. For instance, you may make an as-
sumption that no new legislation will be passed in your subject area for the 
life of the project. Impacting legislation is usually outside of the scope of 
project managers. And you may have no flexibility regarding some aspects of 
the solution; sometimes either you are compliant or you aren’t. But these 
kinds of problems aren’t the norm. More frequently, either what you’re 
afraid of is within your ability to change, or reasonable alternatives exist if 
you need to alter course. For instance, your new product may not be a suc-
cess if it’s only marketed to people without cell phones. Ideally, you have 
the ability to influence the marketing campaign even if you aren’t in control 

Chapter 7 | Testing Assumptions 
100  
of it. In many ways, the ability to influence the course of events is at least as 
important as being in control of them completely. 
Figure 7-2. Types of assumptions and risks 
In your four-quadrant diagram, only the items that fall at lower left truly are 
assumptions. These are things that you, as a project manager, can’t hope to 
change, and if they don’t go your way, your project is probably materially 
harmed. In the upper-right quadrant are things you can impact before they 
happen, and if they do happen, you have options for how to recover. They 
are mitigable risks. In the lower-right quadrant are unmitigable risks. You 
may be able to prevent them, but if they happen, there’s little you can do 
about them. Finally, in the upper-left quadrant are assumptions that are 
mitigable. Something may happen beyond your control, but if it does, you 
have ideas for how to work around it. This quadrant may involve more 
time, more money, decreased scope, or something else, but you can at least 
move forward with the project. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
101  
 Note  Determine whether the issue you’re facing is preventable by you, and if not, what level  
of flexibility you have in overcoming it. This helps you understand if you’re facing an assumption or 
a risk. 
Knowing where your issues fall is very important when you need to explain 
them to your client or program manager. Although there are problems that 
you can’t do anything about and would be fatal to the project, many issues 
are manageable. It’s important that you, as a project manager, know where 
each of the problems falls on the spectrum so you can talk confidently about 
how, and whether, you should proceed. If you don’t make this determina-
tion ahead of time, your program manager will attempt to move everything 
into the upper-right quadrant and tell you to figure out a solution. You need 
to have a firm understanding of the issues before they occur. Failure to do 
this is a failure in project management, not simply an unlucky break. 
I once had a project in my portfolio that was completely at the mercy of the 
New York State legislature. There was almost nothing we could to do 
change the trajectory of the legislation they were about to pass, and if it 
went against us, the project would have to materially change. In terms of 
Figure 7-2, this was a lower-right risk. I asked the project manager what we 
would do if it didn’t go our way, and he said he was considering some op-
tions. This was great news, because it moved the project from lower-right 
to upper-right and made it something we could work with. The problem 
was, the project manager was wrong. The team had no options, and there 
was nothing we could do—the new law sunk the project. By not considering 
this ahead of time, the project manager gave false hope, and we wound up 
with a bigger failure than necessary. 
Continually Testing and Tracking  
Assumptions and Risks 
You have four classes of assumptions and risks: 
 
The kind you can do nothing to prevent: if it happens, you need to 
rethink your project 
 
The kind you may be able to stop, but if you aren’t successful, 
you’re once again stuck 
 
The kind you can’t prevent but can do something about 
 
A project risk that should be managed as such 

Chapter 7 | Testing Assumptions 
 
102  
Along the way in a project, you make lots of assumptions. Usually, this is 
due to imperfect information, lack of representation in decision making, or a 
lack of understanding of the problem. Whatever the reason, you have a list 
of things that fall somewhere along the spectrum of Figure 7-2. As project 
manager, you need to continue to move your assumptions up and to the 
right along this continuum. You do this with consistent and thoughtful pres-
sure, sometimes just by asking your subject-matter experts, team, and ana-
lysts if things have changed. Remembering to keep the focus on these items 
will help them come to a solution, one way or the other. 
 Note  The goal with assumptions is to either retire them entirely or make them mitigable risks.  
As mentioned earlier, one of the easy ways to uncover these things is to ask 
your team which decisions they feel least confident about. As this list grows, 
you should continually ask, “Do you still lack confidence in this decision? 
What would make you more confident? Do we have options if you turn out 
to be wrong? Is there anyone else we can get involved to help?” Continue 
to do this with each person on a consistent basis. Your attention and focus 
will help retire some of these issues—people will eventually become confi-
dent as they gain new information or will do the work to get the informa-
tion needed in order to eliminate issues from the list. Other issues will re-
main uncertain, but your team may figure out contingency plans, moving 
them up into the upper-left quadrant. Or the team may know how to stop 
an issue from happening, thereby moving it to upper-right.  
Merely tracking the risks and assumptions doesn’t help you. You need to  
actually change their state into something you can manage, mitigate, or  
influence. Although you’re still left with a handful of assumptions, they should 
only be a handful. And they should be the kind you would have no trouble 
chalking up to misfortune rather than poor or inattentive management. 
What to Do When an Assumption Is Wrong 
Sometimes, alas, you make an assumption that resides in the lower-left 
quadrant, and this assumption turns out to be wrong. There is nothing you 
can do to prevent it and nothing you can do to mitigate it. If you find your-
self in this situation, then the first thing you need to do is be certain. You 
need to have a high degree of confidence that you’re faced with a lower-left 
problem. When you’re certain, you need to call it. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
103  
Your program manager won’t like you coming to them with a problem 
without a recommended solution. But they will dislike you even more if you 
sit for too long on an important problem that you can’t overcome. When 
you hit this point—there is a fatal flaw in your original thinking, and you 
can’t stop it or work around it—you must inform your program manager. 
All you can do is recommend making a material change to the project, stop-
ping the project entirely, or doing something else. Whatever the final deci-
sion, it’s probably not yours to make as project manager; this is a portfolio-
level decision.  
The key is to remember that this kind of problem, although not terribly 
common, also isn’t terribly rare. Your program manager has faced such is-
sues before and should have some idea what to do. You should plan on be-
ing a participant and providing options and input, but you shouldn’t try to 
solve the problem yourself. In fact, attempting to do so will probably hurt 
more than it helps. Remember this definition from earlier: “If we had known 
this from the start, we probably wouldn’t have begun this project.” If that is 
where you are in the process, don’t charge ahead and hope for the best. 
That way lies madness, and you shall have none of that. 
You never know: if you’ve kept your project in good order and have man-
aged it well up to this point, then when or if the situation changes, you may 
get another crack at it. Or maybe you’ve moved on, and someone else will 
pick up where you left off and run with it (one of the ultimate tests of a 
good project manager). But if the decision is made to put the project aside, 
recognize that it’s in everyone’s best interest—most of all yours—to stop 
investing in something that can’t work, so you can get started on something 
that might. 
Summary 
Assumptions are incredibly important not only to projects, but to everyday 
life. You make them all the time, usually without knowing it. Project manag-
ers, however, don’t have the luxury of making assumptions casually. As-
sumptions need to be made on purpose, tracked, and monitored. Project 
managers need to move their projects forward, so they sometimes need to 
make decisions using imperfect, or no, information. 
Identifying assumptions can be tricky, because sometimes they appear to be 
facts, or the person making them seems to be certain. One way to pick 
these out is through people’s vocabulary: phrases like “I think” and “I’m 
pretty sure.” If you hear this kind of statement from a subject-matter expert 

Chapter 7 | Testing Assumptions 
 
104  
or get a firm statement from someone who isn’t an expert, you may be 
looking at something between a guess and an assumption. 
Although it’s important to track and monitor assumptions, you need to 
make sure you aren’t tracking everything. An assumption like “There won’t 
be a global economic meltdown” doesn’t help anything. You need to track 
the assumptions that you can actually do something about and that will be-
come risks to your project, not the world in general. Listing too many things 
only distracts you from the real issues you need to manage and monitor. 
Once you have a list of issues, you need to continually test and validate 
them. Many of your assumptions will turn out to be true and can be crossed 
off your list. Some of them will remain open while you continue to test 
them, and others will turn from assumptions into risks. Risk management is 
its own discipline, but it’s much clearer to manage them than to manage the 
lack of information. 
When a project assumption turns out to be wrong, you need to judge 
whether it has a material impact on the project. If it does, you need to make 
sure the new information gets to the right people. The fact that an impor-
tant assumption has turned out to be false isn’t your fault, but not acting on 
it appropriately would be. Assumptions can be the foundation of a project, 
just as they are of your life; and when they change, you need to be ready to 
change your project to match. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
8 
Identify Decision 
Makers 
“Whose call is this, anyway?” 
Projects are a function of inertia, just like anything else. Steady forward mo-
tion, like that of a ball rolling down a hill, can be powerful and difficult to 
stop. This motion, however, is dependent on decisions being made in a way 
that makes sense to the people who have the authority and ability to make 
them, and not having those decisions overturned after you’ve based your 
project plan around them. In order to ensure this, the project manager must 
do a very deep analysis of a project’s stakeholders and identify who the key 
decisions makers are, what they want, and how to treat them. Managing this 
stakeholder group is one of the critical tasks of the project manager—and it 
does more to ensure success than nearly anything else. 
Note that I mentioned two separate groups: project stakeholders and deci-
sion makers. Often, these people are the same. For example, the customer, 
sponsor, regulator, or implementer of a project is usually both a stakeholder 
and a decision maker. However, this isn’t always the case. You may find that 
the person who makes the ultimate decision about a project isn’t someone 
you think of as a client or a sponsor. You may also find that the primary 
beneficiary of your work has very little say in how the project is run or even 
what the project delivers.  
This can cause an interesting problem for the project manager. You’re trained 
to understand the needs of the client; elicit requirements, constraints, and 

Chapter 8 | Identify Decision Makers 
 
106  
goals; and then deliver a solution that maximizes value while minimizing cost, 
risk, and other factors. But doing so doesn’t guarantee that your project is 
well received or viewed as a success. To achieve that, you need to grasp who 
the stakeholders are, who the decision makers are, how they relate, and how 
to manage them. 
 Note  Stakeholders aren’t always decision makers, and decision makers aren’t always stake-
holders. 
As you move deeper into a project, your program manager assumes you’ve 
done enough diligence to determine who the end users are, what they want, 
and probably what their bosses want. More to the point, if you aren’t doing 
this, then your program manager knows you aren’t doing your job. But if 
you hope to do your job well, then you need to do a lot more than just 
meet the needs of your end users and their boss. You need to understand 
the entire ecosystem in which your project lives and determine what suc-
cess looks like from the outside. Sometimes, success doesn’t mean maximiz-
ing the value of the deliverable. Sometimes it’s a combination of factors to 
which you need to pay attention. 
As a project manager, it can be comforting to think only about the project 
you’re working on. Figure out what needs doing, deliver as much as you can 
within time and budget, and move on. Sometimes this approach works. In 
fact, this is largely what consultants do: they figure out the maximum value 
they can provide and then do exactly that, without factoring in all the other 
considerations you need to worry about if you plan to work with this team 
or this client again. This is one of the many reasons consultants can get a bad 
reputation; they deliver what they promised, but it doesn’t fit. It can be kind 
of like making a wish that a genie grants, and then discovering that although 
your specific wish was granted, everything around it was made worse.  
If your goal is to manage a portfolio of projects and clients, then you need 
to learn how to understand that portfolio and how to deal with the multi-
project give-and-take tradeoffs that can come with it. You need to under-
stand when doing the right thing for the project may be the wrong thing for 
the portfolio or the relationships you hope to build within that portfolio. 
But before you’re able to do this kind of analysis, you must figure out who 
the decision makers are and what they want out of the project. The closer 
those are to each other, the better, but you can’t assume they’re identical 
unless you do the research. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
107  
When it comes time to identify the stakeholders and decision makers, you 
need to think of the topics in the following sections and use them as a 
yardstick to figure out who you’re servicing in this project. Without doing 
this analysis, you’re left pleasing the wrong people, and you may damage 
your career. 
Who Is Paying the Bill? 
The first way to figure out who has the real authority when it comes to 
making the decisions for a project is to determine who is footing the bill for 
the work. Payment can come in many ways. It can consist of engineering 
hours, budget, hiring outside consultants, physical resources, or raw dollars. 
In a large organization, it can be as blatant as who signs the timecards. As a 
project manager, you should be able to figure out who is signing the checks 
that allow this project to exist. This is the person to start with when it 
comes to stakeholders. 
Often, this person is in the management chain of the project’s ultimate 
beneficiary. If you’re building an internal tool, it’s probably the boss or ulti-
mate boss of the person or group that will use the end product. If you’re 
building a product or a new sales tool, then it may be the marketing or sales 
department head. If you’re working on a Human Resources Information Sys-
tem (HRIS) or finance tool, there’s a good bet that it may be the head of HR 
or finance. This person should immediately reach the top of your list of 
people to talk with. 
It’s rare, but it does happen, that the person paying for the work either isn’t 
an important stakeholder or has abdicated the role for one reason or an-
other. Consider someone in sales management investing in a new commis-
sion-calculation application that resides in the finance department, or some-
one in customer service sponsoring a manufacturing change that will lower 
complaints. Or, imagine someone in a field office using their own resources to 
make a change to the way corporate does business, hundreds or thousands of 
miles away. In these cases, the people providing the funds that support the 
project either may not have the decision authority to decide how things are 
done or may feel they lack the skill to make the final decisions. This isn’t nec-
essarily a sign of a problem. In fact, it can be a good sign. The worst thing a 
project manager can have to deal with is a decision maker who lacks the skill 
to make the correct decisions but wants to make them anyway. 

Chapter 8 | Identify Decision Makers 
 
108  
 Note  It may not be a problem that the person or group that is funding a project isn’t the final de-
cision maker. 
Although this is a fairly unusual case, it’s one you should be prepared to 
manage if required. More likely, the person who is ultimately funding the 
project will want the final say on key decisions.  
The thing you must do is figure out who this person is. Depending on the 
size and cost of your project, and depending on the skill and seniority of the 
business owner, you may discover that the person who appears to be han-
dling the bills actually has little authority. The task can be delegated, and 
managers often act as if they’re the ones with final authority, but this isn’t 
always the case. Sometimes the manager you’re dealing with needs to go up 
the chain every month to get authority to keep the project going; this can 
happen if the project’s needs exceed the manager’s signature authority. It’s 
also not unusual for a manager to be able to comfortably fund a project out 
of their own budget and not want the expenditure exposed higher or any-
where else. The truth of the matter is often not as obvious as you would 
like it to be. 
How do you figure out who’s paying the project’s bills? If you’re working 
with business owners who are acting as if they have final payment ability, 
how do you find out for certain? As usual, there is only one way. You need 
to ask questions like these: 
 
Is the funding for this project hitting your budget? 
 
Is anyone else chipping in? 
 
If we need to get more funding, can you approve it, or do I need to 
help you make the case to someone else? 
These three questions tell you all you need to know, but it’s important how 
you frame them. If you ask someone whether they have enough money to 
pay for the project, they will almost certainly say yes. Think about walking 
into a luxury car dealership: are you going to tell the salesperson that you 
don’t have enough cash to buy one the show cars?  
You need to ask your clients, subtly, if they’re the ones signing the checks, if 
they’re the only ones signing the checks, and whether they have any more to 
spend. And you need to ask in such way that the questions don’t sound in-
sulting. A car salesperson will ask something like, “Is anyone helping you out 
with the down payment?” Or, “How high can you go on your own?” These 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
109  
questions are exactly the same thing—the salesperson wants you to be able 
to make the decision yourself but needs to prove that you’re able to do so. 
Starting with the person who is providing funding is a very good idea. Most 
of the time, finding this person is fairly easy: work your way up the chain of 
the person from whom you’re gathering requirements. As with anything 
else, though, there can be complications. Maybe the person is getting help 
paying for the project, or perhaps they were granted a budget specifically 
for this purpose with no flexibility, or maybe they’re sharing the expense 
with someone else. Learning this person’s level of authority and autonomy is 
vital to determining the identity of the final decision makers. 
Who Has the People? 
Some say that it takes two things to make a project: money and people. 
You’ve looked at the money, and how the person who signs the checks of-
ten makes the final call. It can be hard to dispute the Golden Rule1: “He 
who has the gold makes the rules.” But many environments have a different 
scarce resource: people. It’s not unusual for managers to have more budget 
than they have people to spend it on, causing a competition for resources 
that can frustrate and confuse business leaders. This is one of the reasons 
companies use consultants and outsourced development; there are business 
leaders with money to spend and nothing to spend it on. They often decide 
that it’s better to spend their budget inefficiently on an outside company 
than it is to not spend it at all. They’re wrong, but it’s hard to convince 
them of that. 
But that’s not the situation here. You have a project team identified, and all 
of them know that they’re assigned to the project. That doesn’t eliminate 
their boss, manager, work leader, or resource owner from being a major 
decision maker in the project. Realize that if you’re in this type of environ-
ment, resource owners can be very selective about what their people work 
on. A manager may ask questions like, “What makes your project special?” 
“Why should my people work on your project instead of working with 
someone else who is willing to pay the same amount?” “What does my 
group gain from working on your idea rather than another one?” 
                                                
1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Golden_Rule#Alternate_.22Golden_Rule.22_cited_in_ 
business_and_politics 

Chapter 8 | Identify Decision Makers 
110  
 Note  Resource ownership can mean money, people, or access to something. Each of these 
can carry its own weight and can rule the others. 
Compounding the problem in a normal project, you probably have several 
such people to work with. Unless your project team consists entirely of 
people who work for the same manager, several managers will have those 
same prioritization questions. You need to convince each of them, consis-
tently, that they’re making the correct choice. Losing one or two project 
members can sometimes spell the end of a project, even if most or nearly all 
of the people are still on board. 
The good news is that this type of decision maker rarely has the go/no-go de-
cision in their hands. Nor do they have much say in prioritization or require-
ments gathering. However, they do make one important decision: whether 
their person continues to work on your project. This decision doesn’t seem 
like a big deal; but if the team member is a rare or unique person, particularly 
a person who is in high demand from other projects, then the manager may 
decide to pull the person away and thus derail your project. 
One again, there are three questions you should ask each manager of the 
people on your project team. If doing so isn’t feasible, you can sometimes 
ask the team members themselves, so they can relate the information and 
stories back to their manager, should the topic ever arise. The questions are 
as follows: 
 
Do you believe in the business value of the project? 
 
How is this project helping the career paths or growth plan of the 
people on the team? 
 
Other than the business requirements, what else do you think this 
project should deliver? 
Here you hit on all three inputs into the decision that the resource owner 
needs to make: belief in the project, belief in the side benefits of the project, 
and whether the project is good for the person’s career or growth plan. A 
large percentage of the time, it takes a positive answer to only one of these 
questions to get the resource owner on board.  
If you can get resource managers to believe in the value of the project on its 
face, then you’ll almost always get their support. These folks have seen pro-
jects come and go, many of which they didn’t believe in to begin with, and 
they turned out to be right. It takes a bit of selling and a spark of a good 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
111  
idea to change their mind from thinking your project is just like all the oth-
ers. If you have a good idea, then you should be touting it for all it’s worth. 
 Note  If your project seems like a good idea on its face, then you have an advantage in any pri-
oritization discussion. 
The second question addresses another problem that managers have on 
their minds: how to grow their teams. This can cover a wide array of topics, 
including cross-training, leadership growth, new skills acquisition, and pro-
viding an opportunity to someone who deserves it. Even if managers don’t 
totally believe in the project, this can be a powerful motivator for them to 
support it. They have to live with the person for much longer than you do, 
and creating and delivering on opportunities can be one of the harder chal-
lenges that managers face. If your project can provide the solution to one of 
these problems, then the manager will probably favor it over others, simply 
because keeping people happy and engaged is a top priority. 
Finally, if neither of these topics appeal to the manager, the last topic you 
can cover involves the other things you plan to do with the project. During 
the course of your project, you may plan to retire some legacy system that 
the manager no longer wants to support. Or maybe you’re going to address 
an architectural weakness that has been plaguing the manager for years. 
Possibly you’re going to fix a handful of bugs from the issue system during 
the course of your project, and that alone will make the manager happy. 
But this is the weakest of the three motivators, for two reasons. First, these 
managers have played this game before, and they know that the improve-
ments you plan to make and are willing to put in the project plan now are 
the first to get thrown overboard once the schedule gets short and re-
sources wear thin. They won’t be offended by the decision; they may even 
support it. But this means they know they can’t count on it. Second, this 
kind of promise isn’t unique to your project. Many projects include prom-
ises to make things better, improve weaknesses, or fix bugs. Although each 
of the promised improvements may be different, they’re all desired. Because 
managers know not to count on such promises, all they need to know is 
that the promise exists. 
Resource owners usually have one important decision to make: whether to 
let their people work, and continue to work, on this project. In order for 
them to make the decision in your favor, you need to either convince them 

Chapter 8 | Identify Decision Makers 
 
112  
of the value of the project (unless you’re lucky and the project’s value is ob-
vious) or solve one of their more difficult challenges: helping to grow their 
team. If you can do neither, then you’re stuck with telling the manager what 
is in it for them and their team if the project launches. Be careful not to 
overpromise—the manager has had that happen before. But if you think you 
really can make things a little better, don’t be afraid to play your card. De-
livering on this promise will most likely put you in the top half of the re-
source owner’s favorite project managers. You can use that later, too. 
Who Is the Customer?  
Few things can end a project earlier than having the primary beneficiary of 
the project declare that they don’t want it. Having the customer decline to 
use whatever it is you’re building—even before you’re done building it—can 
kill a project immediately, and often it won’t be considered again. You 
should never allow this to happen. For this discussion, let’s consider the 
customer to be whoever is going to use the thing you’re building, buy it, or 
use it to create value. This customer can be internal to the company or can 
be an end customer in the marketplace. It doesn’t matter. A project that is 
suspected to be a failure in the marketplace will lose support, inertia, and, 
more likely than not, funding and resourcing. 
The tricky thing is that customers may not be asserting that they don’t want 
the outcome of your project. They may be saying they would rather have a 
solution to a totally different problem. This is akin to you saying that you 
don’t want your housecleaner, because you really want someone to mow 
your lawn. If you’re in charge of the housecleaning project, this can be a dif-
ficult problem to overcome, but you need to overcome it if you hope to 
have your project make it through delivery. 
 Note  Sometimes, the client will claim to not want something, when what they really mean is that 
they want something else. 
This is why aligning with the client, as described in Chapter 6, is so impor-
tant. It can be easy for the customer to start asking for things you aren’t 
prepared to deliver—and aren’t even tasked with delivering. When you tell 
clients that they aren’t getting any of those things, they will become more 
dissatisfied with what they are getting. This can be depressing when what 
you’re planning to deliver is of provable value. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
113  
I once had a project manager working for me who was tasked with helping a 
company revamp its strategy for contacting customers. There was some 
light engineering support, but the primary focus was on using existing sys-
tems and changing the business strategy and workflows. About a month into 
the project, the project manager made a request for a substantial number of 
engineering hours, which amounted to about a 500% increase in the project. 
The client was willing to pay for it, so there wasn’t a problem finding the 
people. The problem was that the project was heading in an odd direction. 
Troubled, I asked the project manager what was going on. She told me that 
the company didn’t want to address the contact strategy until it redid its e-
mail, phone, and direct-mail systems. This would include vendor selection 
and a fairly large development task. The project manager was excited, be-
cause the project had suddenly become a much bigger engagement and in-
volved doing some interesting work. However, this wasn’t just a slight al-
teration in the original project—it was a material change in what we were 
expected to deliver.  
This put us in a bind. The company did need a new campaign-management 
system, but doing that first was putting the cart before the horse. If we built 
a new way to touch customers before we determined what the company’s 
plans were, then we were pretty likely to build the wrong thing. However, 
the company was certain that it needed new systems, new hardware, and 
probably a new department. 
We wound up starting a new project to run in parallel with the original pro-
ject. The original project manager was assigned to the new project, and I 
put someone on the first project who was less inclined to suggest a soft-
ware build for a strategy engagement. If this had gone the other way, we 
could have built the company exactly what it was asking for, and it would 
have paid. But I’m convinced the company eventually would have blamed us 
for producing a really slick system when they had no real direction on how 
they should use it. 
To avoid such problems, you need to do two tasks. First, determine if what 
you’re delivering solves a valuable problem. You may not be dealing with the 
customer’s biggest pain point or primary area of opportunity, but you need 
to confirm that what you’re working on is of value. If you talk with the client 
and discover that what you’re working on won’t make much of a difference, 
then you may be better off stopping it and working on something else. But if 
you and the client agree that you’re adding value, then you know you’re on 
the right track.  

Chapter 8 | Identify Decision Makers 
 
114  
Second, you need to understand what the client’s biggest problem or op-
portunity is and whether its value is worth the risk of disrupting your pro-
ject. Your client may be willing to say that your project, which is providing 
value, isn’t needed, in an attempt to get a different project approved. That 
is, the client may be willing to play chicken with the process that approves 
projects, and risk getting no project at all, to try to solve their biggest prob-
lem. Sometimes this is the correct call. Often, it isn’t.  
Your task, as project manager, is to help customers understand their 
choices. It may be a question of delivering a solution for something that is a 
real problem and should be solved, or trading it for the solution behind door 
number one. There is no telling what will be back there when the curtain is 
raised, and you need to help the client do the math and make the decision.  
The key, and what your program manager should drill into you, is the im-
portance of making this decision intentionally. Clients can do damage to 
themselves by stopping a project that is in flight and getting nothing to re-
place it. If the calculations indicate that this is worth the risk, then you 
should be prepared for it to happen. But if the change doesn’t seem worth 
it, or if the client doesn’t realize the cost of what they’re attempting, then 
you need to help them understand. Decisions made intentionally are usually 
correct, but decisions made with blatant disregard for the facts often aren’t. 
Who Has Signature Authority? 
Sometimes, the person with final authority isn’t the person paying for the 
work, the person who controls the people, or the end client. Depending on 
your project, final approval may reside in the finance department, compli-
ance, legal, or the nebulous “brand” department. That is to say, the final sig-
nature authority on your project may be someone who otherwise has little 
stake in the project’s success. Their job may be made easier if your project 
fails to deliver on what it promises. 
This is one of the harder situations for a project manager to navigate. In the 
scenarios discussed so far, you could at least count on the notion that eve-
ryone involved wanted the same thing: to create value for the business. 
Once you start involving groups that don’t have stake in the success of the 
project but are willing to limit your choices, you have an unfortunate con-
flict of interest to adjudicate. This can be especially difficult because the 
group you’re referring to may be right, using some metrics, but they aren’t 
using the metrics that the project team feels are the correct ones. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
115  
These groups tend to be risk minimizers, meaning their entire function is to 
approve only that which exposes the company to the least risk. Few com-
panies succeed if they operate this way. The good news is that most people 
working in these kinds of groups realize that the business must take risks in 
order to succeed. The bad news is that risk mitigation is what they do for a 
living, all day, every day. 
As soon as you determine that a group like this is taking interest in your 
project, you need to act. These groups, by nature, tend to be obstructionist; 
but worse than that, they tend to be slow. I’ve known compliance investiga-
tions to take several months and even make a project obsolete, because by 
the time they declared a product compliant, it was no longer needed in the 
market. If you wait, or allow these groups to operate at their own speed, 
then time will pass you by, and you might as well spend your time knitting.  
There is a fine line you need to deal. If you proactively take your project to 
each of these groups and ask if they want to review it, the answer is more 
likely to be yes than no. That outcome is rarely positive for the project. But 
if you don’t get clearance from these groups ahead of time, they can cause a 
sizable disruption when they decide to take an interest. What’s a project 
manager to do?  
 Note  Some groups exist merely to obstruct you. Deal with them carefully. 
The answer is both simple and hard. You must build relationships within 
these groups, outside of the projects you’re running. You need to find out if 
one of these groups is going to start paying attention to your project, but in 
a way that doesn’t draw attention to your project. You don’t want to fall 
prey to the observer effect—having such a group observe you change their 
level of interaction with the ultimate decisions. You, or your program man-
ager, need to float the principles of the project through these groups as hy-
potheticals: if, say, you were to do this kind of thing, how much regulatory 
or compliance attention would be necessary? 
This isn’t an attempt to skirt legal or compliance review of your work—far 
from it. But you need to make sure that if your project is going to undergo 
a fairly intensive review, it’s actually necessary. Realize that these groups ex-
ist to do these kinds of reviews, meaning their default mode is to hold up 
progress. If your project needs the review, then you should be prepared and 
ready to face it head on. If your project doesn’t need it, then you don’t want 
to spend resources on it. It’s a careful balance. 

Chapter 8 | Identify Decision Makers 
 
116  
Your job is to figure out whether one of these groups needs to be involved 
and, if so, when to involve them. Compliance (or any of these groups) can 
sink a project on its own. Your task is to not let such a group get involved 
unless they’re needed, and if they’re needed, to figure out how to comply 
with their demands. The worst scenario, and one that will get you little 
sympathy from your program manager, is having to comply with regulations 
that aren’t particularly relevant to your project, simply because you failed to 
properly communicate with those groups. 
Any Other Influencers? 
Every stakeholder discussed so far has been fairly direct. These people can, 
through a single decision or signature, change the course of a project or 
cancel it completely. But these aren’t the only stakeholders you need to 
worry about in the course of your project. Another class of people you 
have to consider aren’t exactly stakeholders, in that they have little or no 
stake in the outcome, but are heavy influencers. These people, if they aren’t 
on board with the idea or the project, can slowly and inexorably derail the 
entire effort. 
These tend to be employees who have a long tenure with the company or 
were on a similar effort in the past. They can also be people who agree or 
disagree strongly with the idea. People who have been with the company for 
a long time sometimes feel like stakeholders simply because of their per-
ceived ownership in the company—ownership gained through the time they 
have invested. And employees who have worked on an effort like yours in 
the past may either be rooting for it to succeed or rooting for it to fail, de-
pending on how they feel about the idea. 
Whatever the cause for their feelings, these people usually have the ability to 
create either a cheering section or a subtle infection for the company, project 
team, or project manager. Knowing who these people are gives you a great 
advantage when you’re dealing with the general attitude toward your project. 
 Note  Sometimes your greatest influencers come from outside your stakeholder community. 
For instance, years ago, I was managing a program that was trying to get a 
social media project off the ground. It was approved several times, but each 
time it was stopped before it got started. Every time the project got ready 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
117  
to start, the project manager and team—new each time—were full of en-
ergy and excitement for the new idea and new technology. But as it got 
closer, doubts among influential people started to creep in. Was there really 
a good reason to do this project? How important was social media to our 
strategy, anyway? Were the numbers used to make the case accurate, and 
was the value really there? 
These comments never came from anyone on the project or in the project 
approval chain (obviously, because they kept approving the effort). They 
came from outside the project and outside the group, from a host of people 
who didn’t want the project run, or wanted us to work on something else, 
or wanted to be the ones who were on the project instead. Inevitably, 
enough negative comments came from the gallery that project momentum 
slowed, facts needed to be checked and double-checked, and the project 
was delayed while the company “reassessed the opportunity.” 
After the third year in a row of having this happen, the primary business 
owner gave up on the idea and moved on to other areas of the company. At 
the start of year four, the project-prioritization committee asked, incredibly, 
“Where is the proposal for the social media project?” A new business 
owner was identified, a new business case was created, the project was 
once again approved—and a few months later, it was unceremoniously can-
celled. I could probably have predicted it. 
Does Anyone Want This to Fail? 
And that brings the discussion to the last kind of project decision makers 
you have to work with: people who want the project to fail, for one reason 
or another. These people can exist at any level, from team member to 
executive, from a sponsor of the project to someone in a different division. 
Few of them will come out and tell you this, which makes the prospect of 
discovering them all that much harder. 
For instance, the VP of HR may want the new HRIS project to fail because it 
means she will have to lay off 20% of her staff, even though she is sponsor-
ing the project. Or someone in sales may want a new project initiative to fail 
because he wants the company to focus on improving the quality of existing 
products. Maybe another project manager, who failed in delivering this kind 
of project in the past, doesn’t want someone else to succeed. Or perhaps 
someone doesn’t believe the project is worth doing. 
Whatever the reasons, from jealousy through good citizenship, you may find 
that key influencers want your effort not to succeed. As usual, the way to 

Chapter 8 | Identify Decision Makers 
 
118  
find these types of people is to ask and interview. When you’re interviewing 
or chatting about the project with team members and stakeholders, ask 
them, “What are your concerns if this project succeeds?” There are two 
important unstated inferences in this question: 
 
You’re assuming the project will succeed. This is specifically the tone 
you want to set, not only within your project team, but with every-
one. They need to envision the project launching, in order for them 
to get their fears out in the open. 
 
You’re assuming they do have concerns. You aren’t asking whether 
they have concerns; you’re asking what those concerns are. This 
gives them permission to have these concerns and a way to talk 
about them in a safe environment. 
Finally, at the end of every discussion like this, you should ask, “Do you 
know anyone else who would be concerned with this?” The result will be 
honesty. People are usually willing to conjecture about what other people 
are thinking. You get statements like, “I don’t know if she’s worried about it, 
but this system is going to take the place of ten HR reps. I wonder what the 
VP of HR is going to do about it?” Or, “When we tried this last time, one of 
the architects was adamant that it couldn’t be done. I don’t remember his 
reasons, only that he seemed certain.” These are the people you should talk 
with next, to ask them about the concerns you’re giving them permission to 
have. Sometimes, just allowing them to voice their complaints is enough to 
win them to your side.  
Conversations like these almost always have a positive ROI. Giving up 30 
minutes or an hour can win you back months of project time, either by pre-
venting a problem or by getting a key person aligned. This is exactly what 
you need. 
How to Manage Stakeholders 
When you’re dealing with this disparate group of stakeholders, you need to 
find out where they lie on the influence/interest graph shown in Figure 8-1. 
Influence can be measured in many ways, from having budgetary and re-
source control all the way to being one of the popular engineers at the 
lunch table. All of these people have the ability to set your project on a dif-
ferent trajectory, sometimes without you around to do anything about it. 
Determining where they fall on the matrix presented in Figure 8-1 helps you 
figure out how to deal with them. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
119  
 
Figure 8-1. The influence/interest matrix 
Some people have a high degree of influence but don’t have a lot of interest 
in your project, or they’re unwilling to spend their influence on your pro-
ject. These people need to be passively managed. It’s important that they 
maintain a positive opinion of the project, but it’s not important that they 
stay informed about the project’s details or progress. However, you need 
them to keep thinking the project is running fine, has a competent team, and 
is a reasonably good idea. You should provide these folks with roadshow-
type communication: on an infrequent basis, you hit the highlights of what is 
going on, what is complete, and what is yet to come. Whether your project 
is ahead of schedule, over budget, or at risk of total collapse has little bear-
ing to these people. Give them a highlight reel once a month or less, and let 
them go on thinking about other things. 
Other people have a low amount of influence and a low amount of interest 
in your project. They may not be thinking about your project at all. How-
ever, they may start paying attention if something interesting or disastrous 
happens with the project. These people should receive little or no communi-
cation from you after your initial discussion with them. They should know 
where your project portal is, how to get into your wiki and find your docu-
ments, and your email address. If they want more information about the  

Chapter 8 | Identify Decision Makers 
120  
project, they should either search it out or ask you. You don’t have enough 
time in the day to keep everyone up to date, and this group will have to do 
some homework if they want to be in that group. Careful, though: if people 
you’ve identified as being in this quadrant begin seeking out information, they 
may be moving into a different classification.  
The lower-right quadrant of Figure 8-1 contains an important set of people 
for your project. They care quite a bit about the project but have no author-
ity or ability to change it. This group is often made up of individuals who 
have either thought about the problem a lot or been brainstorming solutions 
or alternate approaches on their own. They can be a huge asset to you and 
your team, because they can sometimes be used as free resources—that is, 
their level of interest may be so high that you may be able to get work (even 
if it’s just a single thought or idea) out of them without having to put them 
on your project. This is doubly in your favor, because good ideas can come 
from someone who has other responsibilities but is motivated enough to 
send their thoughts to you.  
You should actively update this group. Keep them on your regular commu-
nications list, offer weekly updates, and let them know whatever is going on. 
Spare some time to chat with them every now and again, especially if you 
have a problem or challenge you think they may be able to help with. These 
people want to help you, so do what you can to give them the information 
they need. If you do this well, you turn them into active supporters, which 
can be valuable if the project needs them in the future. 
Finally, the upper-right quadrant is made up of people who pay a lot of at-
tention to the project and have the authority to materially impact its future. 
These people may be executives, division heads, managers, or anyone men-
tioned earlier as having the power to create change. This is your primary 
customer group, and you need to keep them happy throughout the length 
of your project. The worst scenario for you is if they don’t feel they know 
what is going on; and it can be difficult for you to control what they feel.  
Keeping this group happy doesn’t mean just giving them the good news or 
hiding problems or issues from them. They have something invested in the 
outcome of this project, such as time, money, resources, or success. In or-
der to be satisfied, they need to believe that the project is being managed by 
a competent manager, and that they know enough about what is going on 
that they can see it for themselves. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
121  
Note  Many executives are watching you run your project but aren’t focused on the project itself. 
This group should get a treatment that is a combination of the other three 
groups. Of course, they should get the location and access information for 
your project portal and documentation. And you should share project suc-
cesses with them. But you also need to actively meet with them to find out 
what they’re thinking, give them the current status, both good and bad, and 
make them feel like part of the team. The value of this group can’t be over-
estimated. Not only can they stop a project with a single e-mail, they can 
also do the reverse and add resources, budget, or time. They can remove 
obstacles or make a key introduction. In short, a well-cultivated relationship 
in this group can be a project benefactor or even fairy godmother.  
Neglecting to provide this group with the attention it needs can be a double 
negative for your project. A bunch of influencers will be seeking information 
about the project on their own, and you may miss out on the kind of assis-
tance that only someone in this quadrant can provide. One of those two 
reasons is enough to make the time to communicate, but having the poten-
tial for both makes it a must do. 
Summary 
Identifying your project’s stakeholder community is vital to the project’s 
success. This community includes people with heavy influence on the pro-
ject, key gatekeepers of money and resources, people who have a lot of in-
terest in the effort, and people who have a lot riding on the outcome. There 
are also some negative influencers to manage: those who want to stop the 
project in order to fund something else, or even want the project to fail. 
Knowing who these people are, and knowing their level of power and en-
ergy for the project, is important for knowing how to best manage them—
and whether you should manage them at all. Not finding your stakeholders 
and decision makers means they have to find you. That is a situation you 
should strive to avoid. 
  

C H A P T E R 
9 
Communicate  
Effectively 
“I must not have gotten that e-mail…” 
Virtually every project post-mortem starts with the same item in the Do 
Better Next Time column. The session facilitator dutifully writes Commu-
nicate Better on the white board, turns to the team, and says, “What 
else?” Although “Communicate Better” is written in dry-erase marker, it 
might as well be written in Sharpie, because it seems to be a permanent 
member of the project wrap-up process. 
This always wounds the project manager. They’re thinking, “We had weekly 
meetings, a status e-mail every Friday, monthly updates, and a quarterly ex-
ecutive briefing. We even had a few daily meetings during construction. I felt 
like all I was doing was communicating!” The project manager is probably 
correct—they were doing an awful lot of communicating. But to be fair, the 
software engineers were also doing a lot of coding, and the analysts were 
doing a lot of analysis. As with many other things in life and work, the im-
portance of the quantity of delivery pales in comparison to the quality. 
 Note  Communicating better doesn’t necessarily mean communicating more. 
Your team isn’t asking you for more communication. In fact, they may be 
asking you for less of it. But what you do provide needs to be higher quality, 

Chapter 9 | Communicate Effectively 
 
124  
be in a different format, include different content, or differ in some other 
way. As a project manager, you need to keep two things in mind, each of 
which differentiates your role from the members of your team. 
First, although you may be very clear about what the project is attempting 
to do, the goals, the current risks, and where you are in the plan, not eve-
ryone on the team has this knowledge. Sure, you may have wonderfully 
concise, pithy, and direct project principles, and you may have printed the 
project charter on posters and hung them around the meeting rooms. But 
no one on the team is living the project like you are, and even if they’re 
hearing the information, few are internalizing it. That’s your job, not theirs. 
Second, information sharing isn’t the same as communicating. In meetings, e-
mails, reports, and updates, you may feel fortunate if people are paying at-
tention half the time and reading everything a quarter of the time. Any com-
munication that is meant for more than one person almost certainly con-
tains information that isn’t relevant to any particular reader. Your team 
members know this, and they have built reading habits because of it. Even 
formatting certain things in bold red doesn’t help, because although those 
lines catch the eye, the first time someone reads a highlight and it isn’t rele-
vant to them, they begin to distrust your highlights. 
In today’s environment, one of the key areas of focus is return on invest-
ment (ROI). This used to be reserved for decisions related to budget, capi-
tal expense, or resourcing hours. Now you calculate ROI on nearly every-
thing, including your attention and personal time. If an activity such as read-
ing an e-mail proves to have too low a return (value), then you limit your 
investment (time spent) on that activity until you reach the proper ratio. 
And once your communications dip below the positive line, it can be very 
difficult to get anyone to listen to what you have to say, no matter how im-
portant it is. 
Your task as a project manager is to deliver information and foster good 
communication across multiple team members, multiple functions, and per-
haps even multiple locations, geographies, or time zones. Technology has 
handed you several new communication channels, and you need to use them 
appropriately and wisely in conjunction with the old and archaic ones. Finally, 
you must make certain your messages are worth reading and, even more im-
portant, worth understanding. Without proper communication, a project is 
very unlikely to succeed as you intend. 
A program manager doesn’t want to hear this from a project manager: “I 
sent him an e-mail….” It shows the program manager that you didn’t do 
your job. E-mail, reports, and updates in themselves aren’t communication—

No-Drama Project Management 
 
125  
they’re communication vehicles. In project management, the medium is not 
the message. In your case, the message is the message. 
The Importance of Communication 
Projects are coordinated efforts performed by several people, all with the 
same goal in mind. That may be a simplistic definition, but it’s as good as any 
other. It’s possible for disparate groups of people to all work toward the 
same goal, doing incremental tasks that eventually reach the correct result, 
without active coordination and management. Lots of important advances in 
civilization were made this way. No one can claim to have been the project 
manager for project “creation of fire” or “use of the wheel” or even “ubiq-
uity of e-commerce.” But these efforts took decades or centuries to deliver 
and propagate. If you have deadlines that measure in months (or weeks!), 
this is probably not the best strategy. 
When enough smart people are aligned on a problem and can work together, 
build on each other’s successes, and understand their role in the solution, 
magic can happen. You’re tasked with creating this magic over and over again, 
often out of thin air. And it’s primarily your skill in communication that allows 
you to make it happen. A project can survive a subpar design, execution that 
is only adequate, and even a below-average team. But few projects can suc-
ceed with poor communication and the misalignment that usually results. 
Chapter 6 talked about project alignment and the fact that no matter how 
slick your vehicle, if one wheel is misaligned, it creates significant drag on 
your progress. If more than one of your wheels is pointing in the wrong di-
rection, you can probably forget about getting wherever it is you want to 
go, plus you’ll have a pretty bumpy ride along the way. Effective communica-
tion is the primary instrument you use to create this alignment. 
As much as this seems like a tautology, it’s disheartening to note how often 
communication shows up on the “do better next time” list. If the team rec-
ognizes the importance of it, and everyone makes serious efforts, then why 
is it still a problem? The answer is both simple and complex. What is effec-
tive to one person isn’t effective to another; you may need to reach several 
different audiences, each with a different preferred method of getting infor-
mation. Or perhaps the specific skills that you have as a project manager 
don’t suit the audience you need to address. For example, you may be fabu-
lous at creating and giving presentations, but your team is so geographically 
diverse that there is no forum to do so. And finally, there is no single cor-
rect answer. What worked last time may or may not work this time. You 
won’t know until you try. 

Chapter 9 | Communicate Effectively 
 
126  
The struggle is that talking about communication isn’t enough. Think of the 
situation a baseball pitcher faces. Each batter is a new and different challenge 
and requires a new strategy. A pitcher who has only one pitch can’t vary his 
style, and what may have gotten the previous batter out won’t necessarily 
work this time. Not recognizing that each batter is different, and treating 
them accordingly, leads to mistakes or a subpar performance. 
Effective project communication is similar. You must recognize that each in-
teraction can be different and require a different set of skills to properly exe-
cute. To do that, you need to excel at more than one communication style 
and be able to match your approach to the situation. However, unlike in the 
baseball example, where each interaction is purely one on one, your commu-
nication tasks take on a wide variety of forms, from individual, to group, to 
many communicating to many. So you need several ways to communicate 
with several different types of people and to a varying audience size. It’s no 
wonder that effective communication shows up in so many project post-
mortems; it’s a complicated and difficult thing to get right. 
Differentiating Communication for  
Different Audiences 
For most projects, you communicate with at least four different audiences, 
and each has a different set of needs and challenges: 
 
The internal team 
 
The extended team 
 
Other departments or functions 
 
Executives and customers 
Let’s look at the communication needs of each group. 
Communicating with the Internal Team 
The internal team is made up of the people who are working on the project 
and have at least some responsibility in making it a success. I often refer to 
this team as the people who self-identify as being on the project. They 
aren’t merely contributors—they’re full-fledged members of the team. This 
group has the most communication needs simply because they’re managed 
the most. It’s also the team for whom the content of the message is more 
important than the message’s style, medium, or format. Your team needs 
clarity and consistent realignment on the following: 
3

No-Drama Project Management 
 
127  
 
Roles, responsibilities, and goals: Team members need to be clear on 
what their roles are, what they’re responsible for, and what the 
goals of the project are. This is even more true if any of these things 
change. Over the course of a project, you may well need one of 
your team members to switch a role, or one of the goals of the 
project may be altered. But even if nothing changes, a constant re-
minder of what everyone should be doing is vital. 
 
Task coordination: Your team is working on tasks, both large and 
small, as the project moves forward. If you have more than one 
project team member, then their work requires some degree of 
coordination. Often, the team can be counted on to manage this 
kind of collaboration themselves; but just as often, a little help from 
the project manager can go a long way. After all, you want your 
team focused on delivering, not necessarily on coordinating deli-
very with others. 
 
Project updates: This is frequently the most bland of the communica-
tion needs, but it’s important. Everyone on the project needs to 
know how the project is tracking to the plan, what the risks and 
challenges are, and what the successes have been to date. It’s im-
portant to send this kind of communication on a regular basis. If you 
need to tell your team something impactful, you want a standard ve-
hicle to do so. A project manager who doesn’t send out regular up-
dates raises eyebrows when they send information to the team; it 
seems more out of place than it probably should. 
 
Decisions and changes: During the life of the project, certain key de-
cisions are made and unmade, the project may alter course, or ac-
tions may be blocked awaiting some action. Sometimes, your team 
is awaiting a go-ahead signal or permission to proceed with some-
thing. It’s important that all decisions are well known to the entire 
team and that people aren’t waiting for an answer that has already 
been made. 
Communicating with the internal team happens in several ways: e-mail, 
meetings, instant messaging, telephone, and simply walking around and talk-
ing to people if you’re co-located. It isn’t uncommon to have interactions 
with everyone on your team several times a week. Some of this happens on 
an as-needed basis, and some of it comes on a regular schedule. The format 
and frequency is less important than getting the information out. 

Chapter 9 | Communicate Effectively 
 
128  
 Note  With your internal team, making sure the message content is received quickly and accu-
rately is more important than the format or style you use to convey it. 
Communicating with the Extended Team 
The extended team is made up of the people who are working on the pro-
ject but don’t consider themselves team members. These are mostly people 
who have a limited role, are providing a key service, or are otherwise con-
tributing but have little or no real responsibility for the success of the pro-
ject. It can be someone as vital as the IT guy who is setting up your project 
server or an artist who is providing a few graphics for the launch.  
This group is similar to the internal team, but its information needs are 
somewhat different: 
 
Requirements, deadlines, and deliverables: These types of people are 
often on multiple projects at once. Because of that, they don’t have 
the personal bandwidth to carry a deep understanding of your pro-
ject in their head at all times. People in this group need to know 
what they’re supposed to be doing, how they’re supposed to be do-
ing it, and by what date you need it. Your project is but one of 
many, so they’re likely to prioritize based on the nearest deadline, 
not necessarily on which project is the most important. The worst 
thing that can happen is that someone ready to work on your re-
quest lacks the information to do it or finds it unclear. This will al-
most certainly result in your task being moved to the back of the 
line, being delivered incorrectly, or arriving past the time you need 
it. Clarity of communication is the key. 
 
The value of the work: Most people on your project team know why 
they’re doing whatever task you have them doing. All the items on 
their list are worth completing, and they tend to understand the 
value of tasks that seem unrelated or tangential to the project be-
cause they have a good grasp of the greater goals. This is rarely true 
of your extended team. Often, all they have is a window into your 
request, without context or knowledge of why it’s important to 
your project. With your internal team, telling them what you want 
done is usually enough to get them started. With your external 
team, the “what” needs to be accompanied by the “why,” so they 
understand the value of what they’re doing. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
129  
 
Project status: This is different than the project status you communi-
cate to the internal team. In this case, the extended team needs to 
be reassured that your project is still running, that your requests 
are still needed, and that someone is waiting on them to complete 
it. Conversely, if none of these are true, if your project is cancelled 
or on hold, or if the task has sunk lower in priorities, they need to 
know this as well. You don’t want extended team members servic-
ing requests that are no longer needed. Although it may not hurt 
you right now, it lowers your credibility for the next time. 
Communications with the extended team most often occur via non-real-
time methods, such as e-mail, reports, or a request system like a ticketing 
system. This is usually because when the project manager has information to 
impart, recipients aren’t ready to receive it. They may be working on some-
thing else, or they won’t be handling the request for weeks or months in 
the future. They care and they want the information, they just don’t want it 
right now. And the more you press them to make sure they understand, the 
more time you take away from someone else.  
Communicating with Other Departments and 
Functions 
The largest group you need to communicate with are other departments or 
functions. These people need to be notified about what you’re working on, 
when it will be delivered, and what it means to them. However, they have 
very little stake in the outcome, if any. Many of the people in this group 
have no context about the goals of the project and why it’s important. Nor 
do they necessarily have the time and inclination to learn. Even so, your 
project will likely run better if you include them in communications. 
 Note  Even groups that have very little to do with your project need to be communicated with. 
This group may contain people who happen to have knowledge you need, 
contacts you can use, or an opinion you value. They need to know exactly 
two things: 
 
The problem you’re trying to solve: Your project is trying to solve a 
problem or expand an opportunity, or possibly both. Other de-
partments need to know what you’re attempting to achieve for two 

Chapter 9 | Communicate Effectively 
 
130  
reasons. First, you find out whether anyone else has already at-
tempted it and has insight or information you can use. Second, you 
may learn that the problem is more widespread than you realized, 
that there are requirements you’re missing, or that resources are 
available to you if people know what you’re doing. There is usually 
no downside1 to letting enough people know what your goals are 
and seeing if they’re willing to help. 
 
Roughly how, and about when, you plan to solve it: This doesn’t mean 
you need to share your solution design or master project schedule 
with everyone. Normally, taking a guess at what quarter the project 
will launch is precise enough. And giving a hint about how you’re at-
tempting to solve the problem, even at a very high level, gives the 
rest of the organization some level of understanding of why it will 
take as long as you propose. If you’re solving a simple problem with 
a simple solution, but you publish a four-year timeline, people will 
ask questions. Similarly, if you’re solving a hard problem in a difficult 
manner, but you plan to be done by next week, you’ll probably get 
some sarcastic remarks.  
People in different divisions or departments should know as much about 
your project as fits on a 3 × 5 inch card. Include what the problem is, 25 
words or less about the solution, and roughly when they can expect to see 
it. This is enough to get the information across to those who aren’t inter-
ested but need to know and to spark the interest of those who have a stake 
or something to add to the project team. 
Communicating with Executives and Clients 
Originally, I planned to list communicating with executive or clients as two 
separate audiences. A deeper analysis shows, however, that they have similar 
needs and require similar treatment. If you look under the surface, execu-
tives and clients tend to share a common characteristic: they’re usually the 
ones paying for the work. They want to know what is going on, and they 
want to have a high degree of confidence that things are proceeding as they 
should be, but they don’t want to manage the project—that’s why they hired 
you in the first place. What makes this group slightly different is that your 
                                                
1 Originally this sentence was missing the “usually,” but we’ve all had projects that needed to 
be kept secret for one reason or another. If that is the case with your project, you probably al-
ready know about it and control your communication accordingly. 

No-Drama Project Management 
131  
communication with them should be equal parts what they need to know 
and what you need them to know. Sometimes, those are different things.  
Three classes of information are relevant for this group: 
 
Expectations: What can the client or executive expect from the pro-
ject, and when can they expect it? Those are the two questions this 
group is always thinking about. It’s your job as project manager to 
manage both sets of information. They may be getting features, 
functionality, savings, opportunity, or a host of things. When they 
will get it can be a flexible answer. A project goes through several 
stages, from feature complete, to ready for testing, to a beta launch, 
to a worldwide external launch, plus points in between. Make sure 
your project has enough time to deliver on its commitments while 
putting something in your clients’ hands as soon as possible. Often, 
the “what” side of the equation doesn’t move much during the pro-
ject, but pay attention to your definition of “when.” The more 
skilled you are at positioning the various types of release dates, the 
more you can simultaneously show progress and continue to work 
on your solution.  
 
Status, risk, and progress updates: This isn’t much different than other 
groups, other than the fact that you’re talking at a higher level. Ex-
ecutives and clients don’t care much for internal milestones, particu-
larly ones that seem made up, such as “50% complete.” They want 
to know if the project is on track and what risks exist that may 
change that. If your project isn’t on track, you should be upfront 
and honest and not attempt to omit or obfuscate bad news. But if 
your project is doing fine, more or less, then you should feel com-
fortable saying that, too.  
 
What they can do to help: Any good executive will end the discussion 
with this question: “What can I do to help?” You must go into the 
interaction knowing your answer. Often, the answer is “Nothing.” 
The project is proceeding as planned, and there’s nothing they can 
do to help at this moment. But sometimes, you can make requests 
that greatly increase your chances of success. Don’t hesitate to 
make such a request, but plan it ahead of time. Failure to do so 
leaves you unprepared in your attempt to ask for help—which 
doesn’t instill confidence. 

Chapter 9 | Communicate Effectively 
 
132  
 Note  Sometimes, being prepared with your answer is as important as the answer itself. 
Communicating with your client or executive team can be high risk / high 
reward. If you aren’t successful in properly setting expectations, you can 
wind up with disappointment at the end of the project. If you aren’t pre-
pared with requests for help, then your opportunity to get assistance may 
pass you by. And finally, they’re expecting you to manage the project. If they 
sense that you’re struggling, or that the project would benefit from a change 
in management, they probably won’t hesitate to make a change. Using the 
communication techniques outlined here is how you convince them that 
things are going well and a change isn’t necessary. 
Each group you’re dealing with has a different set of communication need. 
Figure 9-1 diagrams these concerns. No wonder it’s impossible to send a 
worthwhile e-mail to the entire list of people involved in the project—no 
matter how complete, most of it won’t be relevant to someone. 
 
Figure 9-1. A communication diagram 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
133  
Challenges of Different Audiences 
In addition to having different needs, each group also comes with its own set 
of challenges. Not only does each group need different content in their mes-
sages, but you also need to be mindful of how you’re delivering those mes-
sages. You must also be aware of certain pitfalls that may be in your way. 
For instance, let’s talk about your project team. This is the team you work 
with most often. You probably know most or all of the members, and you 
feel comfortable talking with them through many different mechanisms—
and you do so often. However, with that trust comes a certain level of re-
sponsibility. For example, imagine a fairly benign statement like, “Let’s be 
more careful this time.” If it came from someone outside of the team (say, 
an executive or client), then it would seemingly be directed at the entire 
team. But coming from the project manager, it can be taken as a personal 
attack on the person who wasn’t careful last time. You, the project man-
ager, know who that person is; and an apparently tame, impersonal state-
ment may be construed as calling someone out specifically. Be careful not to 
damage relationships you’ve built due to sloppy communication. 
Or consider your extended team. They may have built-in skepticism and ask 
for evidence with regard to value and deadlines. Everyone thinks their re-
quest is the most important and needs to be done as soon as possible; 
you’re not alone in this situation. So, when you make repeated requests, 
people stop believing your assessment of their urgency; and the more you 
stress their importance, or yell, or stamp your feet, the more likely they are 
to feel correct in their distrust. With this crowd, you need to be rational, 
understanding, and accommodating, while applying gentle pressure and pro-
viding information that will get your requests completed.  
 Note  Not everyone involved in your project will be inclined to believe you. You need to manage 
this in your communications as well. 
Another challenge comes when you’re speaking with your project’s execu-
tives, sponsors, or clients. Chances are, they have been lied to in the past; 
and more often than not, they’re suspicious of good news or anything that 
feels overly aggressive. They want to know what you aren’t telling them, and 
they will poke at most of your statements to try to ascertain their veracity. 
If you plan to make an assertion that everything is going well in the project, 

Chapter 9 | Communicate Effectively 
 
134  
then you not only need to be sure it’s the truth, but also have enough evi-
dence and information to provide a level of comfort that you’re correct. 
When you speak with your project team, they’re inclined to believe you. 
When you speak with your client, they’re inclined to believe the evidence, 
so you need to have it in order to win the day. 
When you’re dealing with multiple audiences, you must take into account the 
information they need as well as the challenges you need to overcome to get 
them that information. These challenges should inform what you say and also 
how you say it and how much care you take during your preparation. Treat-
ing all groups as if they have the same needs and the same obstacles can lead 
to communication that is ineffectual or damaging to your project. 
Treat Communication as a Project  
Deliverable 
For a considerable amount of time during a project, the main thing you pro-
vide your clients and stakeholders is communication. Reports, updates, pro-
totypes, decisions, documents, and so on form the bulk of what you’re pro-
ducing. This is even true using iterative methodologies. Until you have 
something that is working enough to launch into the market, all you have is 
your word and your skill to provide to your stakeholder community. For 
many projects, your communications are all they receive for at least half of 
the project duration. With that in mind, you need to treat your communica-
tions as a project deliverable—and one of the more important ones. 
Consider your communication efforts as similar to the product or project 
you’re building. You should gather requirements, constraints, needs, and 
expectations. You should test your assumptions, gather risks, and produce a 
communications plan and schedule—and stick to it. The less work you do in 
this area of the project, the more likely you are to get your communications 
wrong in content, form, or frequency. 
One of the worst things you can hear about your project is that people who 
feel they should be informed aren’t. It’s even worse when the person who 
claims to not know what is going on is on your monthly (or weekly) update 
list, gets all the documents and e-mails, and has the same access to the pro-
ject wiki page or portal that everyone else does. You may be bewildered 
that people can claim to be uninformed when everyone else seems satisfied 
with the level of interaction they’re getting from you. 
Chances are, if you’re in this situation, it’s because you never asked those 
people what they wanted—you never gathered their requirements. You 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
135  
don’t know if they prefer a PowerPoint presentation to an e-mail, or if they 
know how to check the wiki. Maybe they need a ten-minute phone call once 
a month, or maybe what they really want is for you to keep someone on 
their staff informed. The key is that you probably don’t know because you 
never asked. 
 Note  How your stakeholder community wants to be communicated with is a key piece of infor-
mation that you must have if you hope to be effective. 
Look at it this way. Not ensuring that you have all the requirements of your 
stakeholder base collected, prioritized, and analyzed would seem to be a 
failure in project management. If a key stakeholder says that production 
must be done in the United States, and you don’t know it or haven’t deter-
mined the impact that will have on the project, then you haven’t done your 
job correctly. It’s the same when it comes to communication. Talking with 
every key stakeholder, and finding out what they want to know about the 
project, how they want to learn it, and how often they want to keep in 
touch is must-have knowledge. Without knowing what their desires are, you 
can’t make an intelligent choice about your communications plan. 
But even this isn’t enough. Assuming you know how your stakeholders want 
to be communicated with, and you’ve taken pains to reach a compromise or 
discovered a way to tailor your style to their needs, you still need to know 
how you’re doing. Just as you send software through QA and test the first 
few widgets that roll off the production line for adherence to specification, 
you must test your communications. And the way to do that is by continu-
ing to ask. Every so often, ask the stakeholders if they’re getting the infor-
mation they think they want, or if they feel informed about the project. The 
act of simply checking will almost certainly be illuminating. You may find that 
your messages haven’t been read or understood. Maybe there was an orga-
nizational change of which you were unaware, and you’re now talking with 
the wrong people. Or perhaps there are opportunities for you to do better 
or to take advantage of something else that is going on to make your task 
easier or make your communications more effective.  
Treating communications as a deliverable should emphasize in your mind 
how important they are. You need to know what people expect to receive, 
how, and when, and you should constantly test and improve your communi-
cations. For much of the project, communication is all you provide, and not 

Chapter 9 | Communicate Effectively 
 
136  
knowing what you’re supposed to do and keeping track of how you’re per-
forming means you’re executing blindly on a key part of your project. 
Communication Channels 
So far, this chapter has talked a lot about what to communicate and how to 
tailor not only the message but the style of communication depending on 
the audience. Now, let’s cover some of the important communication chan-
nels that are available to you as a project manager and some of the 
strengths and weaknesses of each. Often, you’re expected to work with lots 
of different people over several different channels, sometimes simultane-
ously. Let’s break these channels into three groups: broadcast, individual, 
and closed circuit. 
Broadcast Communications 
The first type of communication, broadcast, is the one project managers use 
most frequently. Consider the way broadcast television or radio works: con-
tent is created entirely out of sight of the audience and then revealed to eve-
ryone at the same time without affording them the ability to ask questions or 
change things along the way. This kind of communication usually takes the 
form of update e-mails; reports; updates to the project’s shared area such as 
SharePoint, a wiki, or a project portal; and documents such as requirements 
and issue lists. Project managers generally work on these on their own and 
then publish them broadly to the entire project team or community.  
 Note  Don’t assume that all your broadcasts are read by everyone; in fact, assume the opposite. 
Broadcast communication is generally best when you want to send a lot of 
information to a very large crowd, but you don’t have the time or inclination 
to accept input from that same crowd before you publish. This could be be-
cause the information isn’t all that impactful, such as a regular status e-mail; 
or it could be because the group you’re sending it to needs to be notified 
about the information but is powerless to change it. As a project manager, 
you should never expect that your broadcasts are seen by everyone, just as a 
TV station shouldn’t assume that everyone watches all of its programming. 
But it’s important for your project team to know when to expect these 
communications from you and where to find past “episodes” for reference. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
137  
Individual Communications 
Individual communication can take several different forms. It can be a one-on-
one meeting, a phone call, an e-mail, an instant message, or a hand-written 
note. The purpose is to tell a specific person something and make sure they 
understand it. These communications run the gamut from true real-time, 
such as a face-to-face meeting; to real-time or near real-time, such as an in-
stant message or phone call; to delayed reaction in an e-mail or a note. 
Whatever the case, you’re asking for a response, even if that response is 
“message received.”  
You use individual communication to assign tasks, answer questions, thank or 
appreciate someone, or ask what people want for lunch. This kind of com-
munication is how relationships are built and teams are forged. The ability to 
connect with your team on an individual level greatly improves your ability  
to manage them, both in this project and in future projects. In large teams, it 
can be tempting to not attempt this kind of communication and only talk 
with leaders who then relay your message to others. Depending on the size 
and scope of your team, this may be okay; but individualized messages, even 
if they come very infrequently, are valued by nearly every recipient. 
Closed-Circuit Communication 
Finally, there is the kind of channel I refer to as closed-circuit communication. 
This kind of structure involves more than two people, but you must be pre-
sent at the time in order to participate. Such communications include meet-
ings, conference calls, large teleconferences, and chat rooms. The venue is 
intended to be interactive like individual communication but also to have 
some of the best parts of broadcast communication. For many meetings, the 
facilitator can prepare the information ahead of time in the form of a pres-
entation or other meeting materials, but still seek feedback and field ques-
tions in real time. Additionally, the participants can see and hear each other, 
and can react and build on statements made by others. 
This kind of channel is best used for two things: fostering alignment and driv-
ing to a decision. It’s difficult to align a team one member at a time. Team 
members like to ask questions and register objections in a way that everyone 
can see and discuss. They also like to see other people agreeing, because it 
makes it easier for them to agree, as well. Alternately, you may have a difficult 
decision that needs to be made, or you need to escalate something to allow 
for discussion. One of the best ways to do this is to gather the key decision 
makers together and have them make a decision. As soon as the number of 

Chapter 9 | Communicate Effectively 
 
138  
people you need to align is greater than two, attempting to do it any other 
way takes significantly more time. 
Understanding the content, style, and channel for your communications is 
important in making them effective. Each group has different needs, and 
each comes with its own challenges. Selecting what form your communica-
tions take is often as important as what you say and how you say it. Make 
this choice intentionally. 
Determining Whether You’re Being  
Effective 
Even if you feel you’re recognizing your audience, tailoring your message 
and medium to the group, and getting the responses you want, you need a 
way to determine if you’re truly being effective. As you probably can guess 
by now, the best way to do this is by asking. You want to know three things 
from your audiences: are they getting the content they need, are they get-
ting it in the form they want, and are they getting it with the frequency they 
desire? Actually, there is a fourth question: do they still want to receive any-
thing from you at all? 
The best time to ask this question is right after a communication event. Ask-
ing this kind of question after sending a weekly status update, or after a 
meeting or a phone call, is a perfect time to get feedback on the level of sat-
isfaction your recipient has with your communication. This is a one-on-one 
type conversation. Many project managers include a line such as, “If you no 
longer wish to receive these e-mails, or know someone who should, please 
contact me.” However, the person who needs to act on that request 
probably isn’t reading your e-mails to begin with. 
Trying to poll everyone in your project community may not be feasible, and 
you shouldn’t try. But without asking your key constituents, there is no way 
for you to learn whether your communications are valuable, helpful, and go-
ing to the right people. And without knowing that, your communications are 
mostly worthless. 
 
 
 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
139  
Several years ago, one of my project managers was kicking off a project that we had 
tried to get off the ground before. We were going to scrape executive information di-
rectly off company web sites, as a way to have the best and most accurate exec-
utive listings. We had also failed at this before, but old ideas die hard. 
I knew that one of the VPs from back then, a guy named Brad McCain, had a lot of 
thoughts about the project. He had moved on to a different division, but he was a 
pretty smart guy, and I remember he felt strongly about the idea, so I suggested that 
my program manager reach out to him. A few weeks later, I asked her if Brad had 
anything interesting to say, and she replied that she sent him an e-mail and added 
him to the status-update list, but she hadn’t heard back. Not a big deal, people are 
busy, or maybe he no longer cared. 
A few more weeks passed, and I happened to bump into Brad at lunch. I asked him 
his thoughts about us spinning that old project back up. Of all the responses I was 
expecting, the one I never considered was, “I had no idea. When did it start?” After 
filling him in a little, I went back to my project manager and asked about it. Turns 
out she had contacted a different VP, a guy name Brad McCarty. That Brad had no 
interest in or knowledge of the project and was filing away her e-mails unread. She 
was sending information to the wrong person, and she never knew it! 
Other Benefits of Effective  
Communication 
Communication is a core skill of project managers, and it’s the primary way 
you can manage your projects, direct your teams, and satisfy your clients. 
You need to be able to communicate effectively in order to create align-
ment around project goals and requirements. Without that alignment, you 
can’t hope to deliver. But the advantages of effective communication include 
much more than that: fostering team growth, better use of communication 
avenues, better expectations for your clients, and improved visibility for the 
project manager.  
Only two questions matter at the end of a project: does the client want to 
work with you again, and does the team want to work with you again? As 
many project managers know, working with the same team on multiple pro-
jects is a huge advantage.  
The best way to grow this team is through effective communication. You 
want the people on your team to feel that they know how to get the infor-
mation they need, when to expect it, and how and when to voice whatever 
was on their mind. This helps create a team that is more engaged with the 

Chapter 9 | Communicate Effectively 
 
140  
project and with you as project manager. It also fosters the desire to work 
with you again. 
During the project, your team should know how to communicate with you, 
the client, and each other. If you leave management of communication chan-
nels to chance, you wind up with an unpredictable and unstable network in 
which some people collaborate wonderfully and others not at all. This isn’t a 
good situation. You want everyone on the team and outside of the team to 
know what to expect, how to talk with each other, and what the communi-
cation pathways are. Without this kind of clarity, information gets lost, and 
your project loses time and efficiency while trying to make up for it. 
 Note  The perception of good communication can be as important as the communication itself. 
You face two different client-communication problems. The first is the cli-
ent not knowing what is going on or how to find out. The second is equally 
deadly: the client perceiving that they don’t know what is going on. It’s in-
teresting to note that it’s usually easier and quicker to bring someone who 
was confused up to speed than it is to change someone’s perception about 
how in-the-loop they are. And when clients perceive that they aren’t being 
communicated with, they tend to expect the worst. Good team and pro-
ject communication prevents the client from thinking bad thoughts without 
knowing the real story—or at least who to ask for the real story. Ensuring 
that the client doesn’t jump to conclusions, and knows how to get the in-
formation they need, is at least half the battle. 
Finally, good communication has a positive impact on you and your career. 
Many executives you deal with have only a passing interest in your project, 
but they have a much deeper interest in you. They want to see how in con-
trol of your project you are, how well you can work with upper manage-
ment as well as your team, and how you handle clients. In short, they’re try-
ing to evaluate you for future opportunities, based on how you handle the 
current one. Because they rarely see you, and almost always in a communi-
cations venue, this is the best way to impress them—and the best way to 
disappoint them, as well. If you’re seen as a good collaborator who pro-
duces good results, then you may be given a better project, a more impact-
ful part of the business, or more opportunities next time. Life isn’t always an 
audition for something else, but in this case, you may be evaluated on some-
thing other than how your project is doing. 

No-Drama Project Management 
141  
Summary 
There is no task more important to a project manager than communication. 
It is the only means by which we can manage our teams, inform our clients, 
and keep the entire project community informed about what is going on 
with the project. More than anything else, a project manager communicates; 
it is therefore important that we do it well. 
Communicating well requires a good understanding of two different con-
cepts in communications: audience and channel. You will be working with 
people who have different affiliations with the project. This includes full and 
extended team members, other departments, your client or sponsor, and 
executives. Each group requires a different set of information; it is difficult 
to craft one message that is applicable to all. Similarly, each group may want 
their information to come to them in different ways. Some people may pre-
fer to read information in an e-mail, while others may want to be informed 
in person. Some may want to interact with you while you are delivering 
content, while others may not. Knowing your audiences and the best chan-
nels to deliver your information to them greatly improves the effectiveness 
of your communication. 
The way to best understand your audience and the proper channel to reach 
them is to treat your communication like you would any other deliverable. 
You should be gathering requirements, testing results, asking for feedback, 
and making changes along the way. After you “launch” a message, you 
should be measuring its effectiveness, and seeing how you can do better 
next time. This way, your carefully managed communication is no different 
than something you are building for the project itself. Making sure that your 
team is aligned is too important to not do intentionally, and this strategy will 
ensure that you do. 
Beyond the value to your project, there is significant value to yourself and 
your career when you communicate well. Many things happen to projects in 
the course of their delivery. Some get cancelled, some change focus or 
shape, others launch with little fanfare or success. But that isn’t the only way 
that you can make an impression on the people you are working with. A 
project community that stays well-informed, well-aligned, and delivers on 
communications that are effective and well-received is a sign of a good pro-
ject manager, and one that will get more work in the future. 

C H A P T E R 
10 
Develop a Plan 
“Let’s just get started—we know what we 
need to do.” 
I can imagine an experienced project manager reading the title of this chap-
ter and deciding to skip ahead. I’m sure you think you know how to plan a 
project, and you probably have the documents and scars to prove it. But to 
a no-drama project manager, planning isn’t just about creating a schedule, a 
Gantt chart, or a work-breakdown structure. Well, it’s also that; but plan-
ning is mostly a mindset, and it’s possible to have all the artifacts of a plan, 
such as a schedule, without committing any acts of planning.  
 Note  Planning isn’t just about creating schedules. 
It’s also possible to have the correct frame of mind but not be terribly 
skilled at putting it in whatever project-planning software your organization 
uses. Ideally, you would be able to do both, but it’s much more important to 
have the proper focus than it is to have the proper printout. As discussed in 
Chapters Three and Four about requirements and priorities, making sure 
you know what you should be doing is critical to ensure that you’re doing 
the right thing. Seems obvious, I know. 
They key differentiator is to act intentionally. About a year ago, a project 
manager on my team was running a project that was essentially a complete 
rewrite of an existing system. Almost everyone from the engineers to the 

Chapter 10 | Develop a Plan 
 
144  
business owners was sure they knew what to do and that we should get 
started working. This conversation took place, nearly verbatim: 
Project manager: “What should the system do?” 
Business owner: “It should do what it does now, but with new fea-
tures that we’ll figure out as we go.” 
PM: “Okay, well, what does it do now?” 
BO: “Just make it work the same way.” 
PM: “And how is that, again?” 
This discussion went on for much too long, with the business owner insist-
ing that the best way to start the project was to rebuild the old system us-
ing newer technologies while we determined what to add to it. Then, the 
owner said, when the new system was ready, it would be easier to add new 
features on top of the new platform. Making things worse, the engineers 
agreed. Through some mix of being tired of dealing with the old system and 
a belief that they knew what the system did, they combined forces and got 
the project moving. 
My project manager was outnumbered and outvoted, and eventually he gave 
in. Against his instincts, he wrote a requirements document that essentially 
said, “Make it work the way it currently works,” and a test plan that wasn’t 
much more than “Make sure nothing breaks.” As program manager, I caved 
as well; the business owner basically refused to give us requirements, and 
the engineering team was at the starting gate trying to push their way out. 
Better to open the gate and hold on tight before the horses leave without 
us—or so I thought. 
I should have listened to the project manager. The engineers got started 
building while the business owner and the project manager began working 
on the new requirements for the system. Because we weren’t rigorous 
about figuring out what the new system was supposed to do (beyond “not 
break”), it was very difficult to manage its construction. And as it turned 
out, the engineers didn’t know how the system worked. 
When it became clear that the rebuilt system was breaking things and was 
slower and throwing more errors than the old one it was intended to re-
place, the project manager had to disengage from specifying new require-
ments to focus on repairing the construction. As you can imagine, this was 
just short of disastrous. He had to go back and find all the use cases and de-
tails for the system, begin testing them, and figure out what needed doing. 
By the time the budget for the project ran out, he had wrestled it to the 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
145  
ground. The newly built system was as functional as the old one, and it was 
in much better health as a system.  
But we still don’t know everything it does, and now we may never know. I 
hope this is the last time I make the mistake of allowing a project to proceed 
without clear intention, but I’m doubtful. 
Acting Intentionally 
I often state that decisions made on purpose are usually the correct ones. 
This is true for everyone and every decision. As a project manager, it’s more 
important because you’re making decisions not only for yourself but also for 
your team and sometimes for an entire organization. The worst thing you 
can do is let things happen by accident, or let entropy and inertia take con-
trol and decide for you. Some efforts are small enough that you don’t need 
to actively manage them. But in nearly every project worth doing, at least 
one decision should be made intentionally, even if it’s only to decide to work 
on the project in the first place. 
In order to behave this way, you need a firm grasp of what you’re doing and 
why you’re doing it. In the previous example, no one on the team was cer-
tain what they were doing or why. They only knew what they were working 
on. They had no good idea what they were trying to achieve or what the 
correct result should look like. Worse, they didn’t know when they were 
done. This was the result of acting coincidentally, not intentionally. That is, the 
work they were doing coincided with a handful of outcomes, but it was 
never clear what the ultimate result should be. 
This is a major source of drama in projects. It’s possible to have a team of 
people all working diligently on their deliverables without worrying about the 
bigger picture. Eventually, they want whatever they’re working on to fit into 
the puzzle; they want to visualize progress and understand their place in the 
world (or the project). The client wants to see these kind of results as well. 
A client once said to me, “I see a lot of bricks, but I don’t see a building yet.” 
He was right. We had built a lot of bricks—pieces of functionality, large and 
small—but we had yet to put them together in any meaningful way. When 
we did start assembling them, we discovered that we could have stopped 
much earlier—we were finished with the project and didn’t know it. 
 Note  Without knowing what you’re doing, you won’t know when you’re done. 

Chapter 10 | Develop a Plan 
 
146  
Making decisions intentionally seems like an obvious statement. But all too 
often, major decisions either aren’t made actively or are left until only one 
possibility remains. This kind of passive decision-making is rarely done out 
of laziness, but more out of uncertainty or insecurity. Few people are ener-
gized by making decisions before they’re needed.1 The problem is that it can 
be hard to recognize when decision time is at hand. When the time to de-
cide has passed, you’re left in a confused state or with a limited number of 
options; or maybe you’re in a corner where no options remain, and you 
have to work your way out.  
Removing drama from projects is sometimes about removing confusion and 
uncertainty. Being thoughtful in your direction-setting helps eliminate confu-
sion and leads to a much more peaceful, and usually productive, project team. 
Scheduling and Traditional Planning 
The last thing I want to do is impugn traditional project planning and sched-
uling. I have seen many projects saved by a solid plan that the team followed 
and updated religiously. A well-executed work-breakdown and dependency 
plan can be a thing of beauty. And if everything goes the way it’s supposed 
to—that is, it goes according to plan—then eventually the project manager 
no longer needs to actively manage anything, and the schedule drives the 
project to completion. 
However, traditional planning suffers from three weaknesses that this chap-
ter discusses in the context of running projects drama-free: diminishing re-
turns that sometimes happen when you have a zealous project manager, 
false information that plans sometimes provide, and inflexibility when plans 
are taken too literally. You can’t have a project without plans and schedules, 
but it’s possible to create them in such a way that they detract as much or 
more than they help. 
Overplanning Project Managers 
The basic artifacts of a project plan must be in place. This means things like 
Gantt charts, a work breakdown structure (WBS), a dependency chart,  
vacation schedules, and shared lab space time. Additionally, as an academic 
exercise, these elements the only way to answer fundamental questions like, 
“Do I have enough budget and resources to complete the project?” and 
                                                
1 And you should probably watch out for people who are. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
147  
“When will we be finished?” Such artifacts are usually detailed down to the 
hour, scenarios are planned, and risk sections are identified. All important 
tasks, to say the least. But this is no way to run a project. 
 Note  Managing a project isn’t the same as managing a project schedule.  
The level of detail required to answer these fundamental questions is the 
wrong level of detail when you’re trying to manage the day-to-day operation 
of a project. And therein lies the dilemma. Proper management of a project 
requires tasks, milestones, and deadlines. It shouldn’t be so overly prescrip-
tive of people’s time that taking a 90-minute lunch shows up on the project 
plan. And yet, frequently, plans are measured in minutes, with tasks listed in 
30-minute or smaller increments. 
This doesn’t have to be a big deal, as long as the project manager isn’t 
overly restrictive about the minutiae of the project schedule. When some-
one asks questions like, “Are you 87% complete or 89% complete?” or con-
stantly updates the project plan when tiny slippages occur, then you wind up 
with the exact wrong outcome. People begin avoiding giving real status up-
dates, because they don’t want to deal with the anxiety associated with the 
fallout, and eventually everyone is unclear where the project stands. And as 
you know, lack of clarity is a primary driver of drama. 
False Information in Plans 
Although lack of clarity caused by a reaction to a micromanaged project can 
create drama, it may be worse when the project manager thinks their aca-
demic exercise is real and a good indication of how the project is doing. This 
type of project manager asserts that because all the project tasks are 60% 
complete, as per the plan, then the project is also 60% complete; or that the 
project is on track because nothing has yet happened to cause the ship date 
to change in the project plan. If I ask a project manager how a project is 
trending toward its intended release date, I expect them to know what things 
are ahead and what are behind, and to have a sense for how the project is do-
ing. If they have to consult their project chart first, I know we’re in trouble. 
A long, long time ago, I was a team member on a project whose manager ran 
it exactly this way. Her project plan was a thing of beauty, and it was printed 
on a 2-foot × 3-foot piece of paper and displayed on the wall of the war 

Chapter 10 | Develop a Plan 
 
148  
room. Whenever changes were made, she printed a new plan and took down 
the old one. I was inexperienced enough to think this was a good thing.  
The project’s release date was in the distant future, and few of us on the pro-
ject could understand it. We all felt that we were making good progress and 
might be able to go beta within a few months, not a few quarters. But the 
project manager was very firm that the ship date was at least nine months 
out, and she had a detailed plan that showed why. It was difficult to dispute. 
Then one day, an engineering director came into the war room and looked 
at the plan. He too thought the project was going well and wanted to un-
derstand why the ship date was so far away. Looking at the plan, he noticed 
something incredibly trivial on the critical path that by itself was causing a 
four-month delay in the schedule. The task was something like, “Get key-
card for server room.” The director picked up the phone and talked for a 
few minutes to someone in IT. He hung up, flipped his card on the table, and 
said, “Here, take mine. They’ll issue me a new one.” 
The next day, a new plan was up on the wall: it showed a release date six 
months sooner. I never saw the project manager again, and the plan on the 
wall was never updated again, either. However, for the rest of the project, 
our perceptions of how we were doing was much more aligned with what 
our project manager was telling everyone else. 
 Note  If your team is more optimistic than your schedule seems to be, the problem probably isn’t 
with your team. 
Inflexible Plans 
The final weakness that I often see in a project manager who over-plans is a 
high degree of inflexibility when it comes to the plan. As program manager, 
I’m often forced to move people from one project to another. Sometimes 
it’s a temporary reassignment; other times it’s a full shuffle of project teams. 
I have seen project managers insist that removing one of their engineers 
(even in a team of ten or more) will cause a day-for-day slip in the project. 
This isn’t the way to win my trust. 
But this kind of statement is provable. For example, a project manager re-
moved a person from the project for a day, and the software they were us-
ing indicated that doing so would indeed push out the final release date from 
Monday to Tuesday. This kind of inflexibility wasn’t helpful. I then asked, 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
149  
“What happens if I remove all ten of your engineers for a day?” The same 
thing happened. If I took one or ten engineers off the project, the ship date 
moved out by one day. The project manager wasn’t pleased. The software 
told him exactly what he was asking, but his brain was telling him otherwise.  
In the end, he figured out how to release the engineer for a few days to do 
something else I needed. But rather than considering the request2 for a few 
minutes and deciding he could accommodate it, his reliance on an inflexible, 
brittle plan nearly made us reach the wrong outcome. 
Of course, you must make plans. That’s what you do. And of course, having 
a plan for how to execute is significantly better than the opposite. As long 
as you recognize that managing a project isn’t the same as managing a plan, 
and you understand where you are in the project based on higher-level con-
cepts, you’ll do fine. 
Making Other Plans 
Project schedules aren’t the only kinds of plans you need to construct. You 
need to make decisions ahead of time about many things regarding situa-
tions that may occur as the project progresses. You may need to haul these 
out and put them in motion if something does happen. Let’s look a few ex-
amples and talk about why they’re important to consider. 
Earlier, we talked about making intentional decisions and that when you do 
so, you’re much more likely to make the correct choice. In certain in-
stances, you want to make choices not only thoughtfully and on purpose, 
but also before the decision point occurs, allowing you some distance to 
make a call without the pressure of the situation upon you. It can be irritat-
ing to take a few days to decide how to put out a fire, even if that gets you 
an optimal answer. 
Three types of plans are common to many projects: staffing plans, communi-
cation plans, and risk-management plans. Not every project has all of these, 
and many projects have lots more than these, but this sample highlights some 
of the major challenges you face as a project or portfolio manager. 
Staffing Plans 
Ideally, every project has a staffing plan. Using no-drama terminology, it means 
thinking ahead of time about the skills the project requires to be successful, 
                                                
2 It wasn’t really a request, but it may have seemed like that to him. 

Chapter 10 | Develop a Plan 
 
150  
how long they’re needed, and what training is required or what outside skills 
must be brought in. It shouldn’t include people’s names, nor should you take 
advantage of knowing that one of your database guys is also a whiz at web-
site user interfaces. This plan represents your full request.  
If you’re able, match this up to the client’s budget, if there is one. This can 
be measured in dollars, hours, or some other unit. If the client or your or-
ganization has no concept of budgeting, try to make sure the value you pro-
vide matches the amount of resources you’re requesting. If I were your 
program manager, I would ask you to do an analysis comparing the level of 
staffing you’re requesting with the value you’re providing—please have a 
good answer. 
Finally, you should think about scenarios. What happens if the program man-
ager give you only half of your full request? What if they give you all of it ex-
cept a single scarce resource? What if they give you more than you’re re-
questing? Or, the more likely scenario, what if they ask you to take on some-
one junior, because that person needs to learn something your project can 
provide? You should be ready to answer these kinds of questions if they arise. 
Why is this kind of staff planning important? As much as I’d like to say that 
people are people and everyone is the same, they aren’t. Every project man-
ager has one or two favorite team members, artists, analysts, engineers, or 
the like, with whom they feel a certain rapport and can get more work 
done. You must assume that you aren’t going to get them on your team, 
and plan accordingly. Additionally, you need to be prepared for the types of 
resourcing games that portfolio managers are forced to play. Because they 
have a target ROI for their entire portfolio, they may over-invest or under-
invest in your project.  
Here’s how to avoid taking it personally: think ahead of time about what 
your contingency plan will be if your ideal plan doesn’t materialize. If you’ve 
already thought of this possibility and have an idea what you’d do, then get-
ting a less than ideal staff is much less likely to cause stress on you and your 
project. Conversely, if you don’t do this exercise, then your team will know 
you aren’t happy with the outcome, and whatever anxiety you feel will 
greatly affect the project.  
Risk-Management Plans 
Risk-management plans are stressful by their nature; they assume something 
will go badly. Your task is to think of everything that can go wrong with the 
project, determine the degree of likelihood and impact, and then come up 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
151  
with a plan of action if those risks do materialize. Even better, take steps 
now that will help you avoid risks before they happen. In other words, solve 
problems you don’t yet have.  
Figure 10-1 shows a simple risk matrix. It includes two values, high and low, 
but I have seen project managers use from three values (high, medium, low) 
to a 100-point scale. The matrix plots the likelihood of a risk occurring ver-
sus the impact it would have on the project. Whichever scale you decide to 
use, it’s important to think about your risks using such a matrix. When 
something comes up and you need to communicate it, you should to be able 
to describe where on this chart it lies. 
 
Figure 10-1. Risk-management matrix 
This kind of thinking removes drama in two ways. The first is the simple 
communication tool provided by a 2 × 2 matrix. You, your team, and your 
client can all agree where things fall on the matrix and easily determine 
whether you need to worry. The more complicated your scoring system is, 
the less obvious it will be to someone who isn’t as knowledgeable about the 
details. And clarity of communication is key. 
Secondarily, having the plan admits two things: that you expect something to 
go wrong and that you’re ready for it. Both of these statements relieve your 
team and sponsors. So many things go wrong in daily life that you almost ex-
pect something to come along and ruin everything. You need to prevent that 

Chapter 10 | Develop a Plan 
152  
kind of thinking from happening. You must show your team that you’re pre-
pared if something goes wrong—and it will—and don’t intend to let it make 
your project fail. This kind of attitude goes a long way in solving problems. 
 Note  The right attitude sometimes can limit drama better than avoiding it entirely. 
Communication Plan 
The last kind of plan is very important in all phases of the project: the com-
munication plan. It seems silly to new project managers that they need to 
communicate a plan that expresses the plan for how they will communicate. 
And yet, you most certainly do. Deciding who will receive communications, 
what form they will take, and how often they will happen is vital to main-
taining proper visibility into your project. You don’t want someone to think 
they’re in the dark about your project, because when that happens, they in-
variably imagine the worst. 
How do you make a communication plan? You start by talking to those with 
whom you plan to communicate. Chapter Nine discussed asking stakeholders 
what kind of communication they want, who should get communications, and 
all sorts of ideas for how to get in touch. You learned about following up to 
make sure your communications are what stakeholders want and need in or-
der to stay in touch with the project at the level they desire. You use this 
plan to confirm such things with them. 
When someone says they aren’t getting enough information, or the correct 
kind, or on time, don’t get defensive or make excuses. Doing so drives drama. 
Instead, point at your communication plan and explain that you were follow-
ing it, but that it clearly isn’t accurate. Promise to update the plan based on 
this new understanding, and follow the new plan going forward. That doesn’t 
mean you should say, “I was only doing what the plan says to do!” Although 
that may be true, it isn’t helpful.  
But without this plan to support you, you have no choice but to apologize 
or make things up. And without a plan, you may forget to change the way 
you’re communicating, or your communications may be erratic or difficult 
to understand. It’s wonderful to give clear and concise updates to everyone 
who wants them, but it’s more important to have a plan, stick to it, and 
adapt when it’s not working. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
153  
Sticking with the Plan 
Having a good set of plans is a great way to avoid drama in your project. 
Whenever something seemingly unexpected (and bad) comes up, there is 
tremendous power in being able to say, “We thought of that, and we have a 
plan for it.” This kind of statement takes all the wind out of a problem’s sails 
and turns people from focusing on the problem to curiosity about what the 
resolution will be. The act of not being caught unaware brings a measure of 
comfort to your team and your clients, even if your plan doesn’t turn out to 
be that great. 
However, if you create a plan to manage risk, communications, or anything 
else, and you don’t consult it, you may be worse off than if you didn’t have 
one at all. This means you thought of a possibility before it occurred, and 
you decided what you would do if the situation arose, but when the situation 
did arise, you didn’t use your plan. Rather than appearing unprepared, you 
seem foolish, which is much worse than simply being wrong. You can legiti-
mately tell your program manager that months ago when your plans were 
drafted, you were unable to think of everything. That’s okay. But panicking 
your team, your client, and your project is a much harder situation from 
which to recover.  
This doesn’t mean you’re bound to a plan you created months ago using in-
complete information. You bring out the plan and make an active decision 
about whether you should still follow it. Months ago, you probably thought 
of this contingency, determined a course of action, wrote it down, and had 
it approved. In the time that has passed, though, things have changed, the 
environment may be different, and you’ve learned a lot. It’s not awful for 
your plan to no longer be the right course of action; but if that’s the case, 
you must consciously reject it. 
 Note  Even the decision to change your mind should be done intentionally. 
This goes back to intentional decision-making. If you decide not to follow 
your preexisting plan, you need to do so assertively. Think about the follow-
ing statement: “We had a feeling this might happen, and we planned what we 
would do if it did, but now we don’t think that’s the best course of action. 
Now we think the best thing to do is …” This shows you weren’t caught un-
prepared and that you’re in control of the situation. Your confidence in your 
actions is what everyone needs to see. 

Chapter 10 | Develop a Plan 
 
154  
So, something comes up: a risk, a change in staffing, or any of a lot of other 
things. If you don’t have a plan already in place, it’s no big deal—you can’t 
think of everything. But if you did think of it, all the better, and even better 
if your plan turns out to be the preferred solution. However, don’t be so 
inflexible that you proceed with a plan that may be outdated. Consider 
whether it’s the right course of action, and if it isn’t, actively change your 
mind. Allowing problems to run wild, or deviating randomly from preexist-
ing plans, may make your team, your client, and your program manager 
lose faith in your project. 
Summary 
Planning is a primary competency of project managers—sometimes so much 
so that the amount of time you spend making plans can frustrate your team 
or your clients because they perceive a lack of forward progress in the pro-
ject. It’s your job to explain the value of knowing where you’re going before 
you start running full speed. If you don’t map the road at least a little before 
you accelerate, you won’t have much control over where you wind up. 
Planning your route is one strand of a larger concept: making intentional de-
cisions. It’s very easy to just let decisions happen, or to delay making them 
until all your options are gone. It’s also easy to never make decisions in the 
first place and let a team member choose whatever turns out to be easiest 
for them. When you make decisions on purpose, you almost always make 
the right one. When you don’t, you may still wind up in the right spot, but 
only by accident, by luck, or through more work than you should have spent 
making the call. 
You have to make many types of plans for your projects. However, it’s im-
portant to recognize that you’re managing projects: not plans, not project 
schedules, and not a bunch of documents. You’re managing a client with a 
goal and a team that needs to deliver. Failing to manage the team or the cli-
ent, no matter how well you’re managing your schedules and project arti-
facts, leads to a bad relationship with your program manager in the end. 
Finally, sticking with your plans is a tricky concept. It’s great if you have 
plans that cover contingencies and that you thought about them ahead of 
time. The next chapter talks about being prepared and how certain kinds of 
unexpected problems should be thought about and planned for before they 
occur. But just because you’re prepared doesn’t mean you need to use all 
your preparations. It’s much better to have options ready so you can inten-
tionally choose which one to use. Without options, and without making an 
intentional choice, all your pretty plans go to waste. 

C H A P T E R 
11 
Prepare for  
Problems 
“Honestly, we hoped this wouldn’t be a  
problem.” 
When a troop of Boy Scouts decides to go into the woods, they know to 
bring along things like bug spray, matches, and rain gear. This seems overly 
obsessive; they don’t know ahead of time that there will be insects where 
they’re going. And it’s highly unlikely that they can use both their rain gear 
and their fire-starting equipment; they probably need one or the other. 
However, this kind of detailed preparation is what the Boy Scout pledge is 
predicated on. There is no way for them to know what problems they will 
encounter, but they do know what troubles are likely to happen. They also 
know that if the bugs start biting, no one will give them any sympathy for 
forgetting their repellant. 
I polled half my project-management staff and discovered that none of them 
were Boy Scouts. But they know I expect them to act as if they were. In 
project management, an awful lot of things can go wrong, and many of them 
are foreseeable, or at least shouldn’t come as a surprise. 
Expecting the Expected 
The basis of this book is that many causes of project failures are the same 
over and over again. The original working title was Expect the Expected, which 

Chapter 11 | Prepare for Problems 
 
156  
means that many of the problems you face are ones that you could have pre-
dicted you would face. Projects can fail for all sorts of reasons. Some of those 
reasons are interesting and a complete surprise, but they aren’t the norm. 
When things go south for unusual reasons, it adds to the list of stories you 
have to tell at the next post-mortem. Novel reasons are good. 
 Note  A lot of project management is simply avoiding the problems that you expect. 
Your portfolio manager has seen a lot of these problems before and is likely 
to be irritated if you try to explain that your project is the very first one so 
affected. I would venture to say that at least 80% of the “unexpected” prob-
lems a project faces were expected—you hoped they wouldn’t occur. As I’ve 
heard said many times, “Hope isn’t a plan.” If a project manager falls prey to 
the problems nearly everyone faces, it’s not hard to say who is at fault. 
You, as project manager, may not be blamed by the client, the sponsor, or 
the team. The portfolio manager will work hard to get you off the hook and 
make it clear that a unique problem sank the project, not the way you man-
aged it. But you and the portfolio manager know better. You could have 
done better, thought about these kinds of issues before they occurred, and 
perhaps prevented them in the first place. 
Earlier, this book talked about how a well-run project is nearly indistinguish-
able from a project that is easy to run. But few projects are easy, so if a pro-
ject appears simple, you probably headed off some issues before they mani-
fested. Although you may not get all the blame if your project fails, you 
won’t get any credit either. And if your portfolio manager can’t trust you to 
you deliver, then your projects will wind up being uninteresting and routine. 
I used to keep a list of expected problems, but I eventually gave up. Each 
passing project added another issue to the list—sometimes more than one. 
Before projects began, I gave the list to the project team and implored them 
not to come to me with a project that was failing for one of those reasons. 
If you’re currently a project manager, your portfolio manager will appreciate 
you failing for an interesting reason, but not one of these. 
There are two parts to expecting the expected. The first is knowing what 
you face in every project and learning not to be shocked when those issues 
appear. The second is learning how to identify such problems and what to 
do about them when they crop up, because they will. If you came to me  
and said, “The problem is…” followed by one of the issues discussed in the 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
157  
following sections, my immediate response would be to ask what you’re do-
ing about it and why you didn’t see it coming. 
 Note  Many of the problems all project managers face are actually the same short list of issues. 
Although the list that follows isn’t intended to be exhaustive, it gives you an 
idea about the kinds of problems your portfolio manager won’t consider 
unexpected. Many projects are faced with more than one of these at a time. 
A few of them are the responsibility of the client or the situation, but a few 
are things the project manager or the team must figure out how to mitigate. 
And some sneak up on you and don’t seem like problems until it’s too late 
to do anything about them. 
Unclear Project Ownership 
This is one of my favorite things that a project manager should have recog-
nized before the project began. Chapter 8 talked about stakeholder identi-
fication, and how vital it is to a successful project. The primary person the 
project manager needs to identify is the project owner. If the project man-
ager can’t determine who this person is, they should continue trying to 
identify the project owner and not run the project yet.  
Certain organizations have a “one project, one owner” rule, meaning exactly 
one person must be identified as the owner of the project. It’s fine if the pro-
ject impacts several groups and you need to gather requirements and restric-
tions from all of them. But when it comes down to it, you want to know 
who, by name, you can go to in order to get project decisions made. It’s 
pretty hard to overestimate the importance of this. 
In the course of the project, decisions need to be made, compromises ana-
lyzed, trade-off decisions adjudicated, and general direction determined. As 
soon as the number of people making these decisions becomes more than 
one, the time required to decide increases geometrically. One person is 
preferable, two is manageable, but three turns out not to be three times as 
hard, but nine times as hard. And when you get over four, you need another 
project manager simply to manage that group of “owners.” 
But how does a project manager recognize this? It mostly comes down to 
decision making. It’s normal for a business or project owner not to have final 
say on the entirety of a project. For instance, if you’re running a business-

Chapter 11 | Prepare for Problems 
 
158  
development project, you don’t want the business owner to have final say on 
compliance issues. However, if the owner is having difficulty making decisions 
within their own domain, that’s a sign that the “owner” isn’t really an owner.  
Another sign is too many of the business owner’s decisions being reversed. 
They can be reversed by executives, or the owner’s manager, or someone 
from another group. This happens occasionally, and it’s not alarming on its 
own. However, if this happens more than once, team members start doubt-
ing that “final” decisions are actually final, and they don’t treat them as such. 
Or they ask for validation of decisions before they begin working, which is 
just as damaging. 
One way to handle this is the same approach salespeople use when they’re 
trying to sell a product. You ask, point blank, “Are you able to make this 
decision yourself, or do you need to check with someone first?” Then you 
need to listen for the tone of the reply. If it’s a weak “Yes,” or something 
noncommittal, then you may have a problem that you need to follow up on. 
If you get such a firm “Yes” that it covers areas you don’t believe—“Of 
course I can decide on tax law issues!”—then you should also beware.  
If you find yourself in this situation, it’s an excellent opportunity to whisper it 
to your program manager. This isn’t escalation; it’s asking for help. If you 
think your business owner—your prime decision maker—is unable, unwilling, 
or unempowered to make the decisions you need them to make, then that’s  
a problem you must address. Usually, this can’t be done at the project-
manager level; your program manager and the business owner’s command or-
ganization must deal with it. But before you act on too many shaky decisions, 
be sure the decision is being made correctly, and by the correct person. 
Slow Turnaround  
Turnaround may not be the right way to think about this issue, because slow 
turnaround is an effect, not a cause. By turnaround, I mean the length of time 
it takes to complete anything that needs to be done by the client or busi-
ness owner: deciding which logo to use, determining budgets or expected 
launch dates, and so on. While you’re waiting, your team drifts in a random 
direction, or you set a direction by making a best guess, or the team does 
nothing. You’re gated by the client and acting inefficiently while you wait. 
This problem is similar to unclear ownership but manifests itself differently. 
In general, it means one of two things: prioritization issues or uncertainty 
about the project’s future.  

No-Drama Project Management 
 
159  
Assuming you have a good project owner who is empowered to make the ne-
cessary decisions and perform the necessary actions, then you’re most likely 
looking at a prioritization problem. The project owner may be doing several 
other things that they believe are higher priority. This isn’t necessarily an in-
correct assessment on their part; everyone has multiple things on their plate 
at any one time and must decide for themselves which are most important. 
Sometimes that means you get slow or nonexistent responses, or responses 
that don’t appear to be well-reasoned or thought through. They may know 
they need to respond to you, but they don’t have time to do it well, so they 
do the best that they can with the time available. Depending on how little that 
time turns out to be, you may get an answer that is barely any use. This is a 
big warning sign. 
But it’s much better to find out your project owner or client thinks the pro-
ject is important, just not as important as other things going on, than it is to 
learn that your project has an uncertain future. Sometimes, the cause of slow 
response time is that the project owner is thinking of halting the project. 
Rather than giving you an answer and potentially more work to do, they’re 
sitting on your request. If you’re a consultant, the owner may not want to 
incur any more billable hours; otherwise, they may feel guilty about you 
wasting effort on a project that’s headed for cancellation.  
 Note  Slow response times mean that either the client has more important things to do or they 
think your project isn’t essential. 
Sometimes this issue is hard to spot. You regularly find yourself waiting for 
the client, but not often enough to cause alarm. Or they give you a plausible 
excuse, such as waiting to talk to the CFO, who is on vacation for two 
weeks. Or your program manager asks you how things are going, and you 
don’t have an update since last week or month, because you’ve done noth-
ing but wait for something to be delivered to you. 
Again, this is the time to tell your program manager something like, “I can’t 
get the client’s attention.” Because that’s really what you need—you need 
the client to pay attention long enough to give you whatever is currently 
stopping your progress. Or you need them to tell you to stop working. An 
honest answer that the client is busy with something else and won’t get 
back to you for a few months is fine; you know how to deal with project de-
lays and rescheduling. What you can’t deal with is thinking for weeks or 
months that something will arrive “day after tomorrow.”  

Chapter 11 | Prepare for Problems 
 
160  
This kind of miscommunication can cause an awful lot of drama in your 
team. They think they’re waiting for one piece of information or decision, or 
permission from the client, and then all will be fine. In the meantime, pro-
gress is stalled, milestones are missed, and the project schedule looks more 
and more scary. Either you or your program manager must recognize when 
this is happening and have a heart-to-heart with the project owner. The in-
clination is to advocate for your project, but that’s the wrong approach. In-
stead, advocate for the client and let them know you understand: priorities 
change, people get busy, and emergencies happen. You need to know 
whether you should continue working, delay for a few months, or stop. 
Approaching a client like this often yields very interesting results. If you 
don’t feel comfortable doing it, then you have your program manager do it. 
Either way, it must be done before you drive your team crazy with inaction. 
Lack of Fundamental High-Level Agreement 
Back in Chapter 10, we discussed the peril of moving forward without actu-
ally knowing where you want to go. Sometimes this is okay. You don’t need 
to decide if your new product will be red, blue, or purple until later. But it’s 
possible to attempt to move forward before gaining alignment that the new 
product should be produced at all. Doing so is almost always a mistake. 
I once worked for a company that was very successful at making low-end, 
low-cost products. We sold a lot of these items at prices that couldn’t be 
found anywhere else. But there existed a natural upgrade to one of our 
products that would cost several orders of magnitude more than what we 
currently sold. After some discussion, we got the go-ahead to build it out. 
Even though we had approval, we didn’t really have alignment with the 
executive team. Some of them thought our service model would have to 
change: if we were going to sell a high-end product to our low-end custom-
ers, they would demand a different level of service. Some of the executives 
were willing to give the product a try, but because our customers were 
low-end buyers, they didn’t believe those customers would upgrade to the 
offering. A few others were excited because we could offer this higher-end 
product at a lower-end price and it might dominate the market. We had no 
high-level alignment on why we should create this product or what it would 
mean to the company. 
Along the way, we ran into some meaningful challenges. We needed to 
change virtually everything about the way we did business, but only for the 
customers who bought this product. We built out instructions and self-help, 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
161  
tutorials, and human help in order to educate customers and interest them 
in buying the product. Eventually we gained some traction, but not as much 
as we hoped. Perhaps the executives who said we were targeting the wrong 
market were correct. 
Whatever the cause, we launched a product that was two or three levels 
above our other products. And we did so without knowing what we would 
do with it, how we would support and market it, and how we would main-
tain it. As a result, we did none of those things, and sales were disappoint-
ing. The program manager in me looks back and says, “Of course sales were 
disappointing. How could they be otherwise?” 
You can anticipate this issue at the start of the project. When you’re inter-
viewing your client, sponsors, and stakeholders, try to get at the key ques-
tion: “Why are we doing this in the first place?” If you get as many different 
answers as people you ask, then you don’t have anything approaching align-
ment in your project.  
 Note  If a project’s sponsors all have different reasons for wanting it, then you may still be okay, 
but you don’t have alignment. 
Sometimes this is okay. Just because multiple executives have different rea-
sons for wanting a project doesn’t mean you should do it. That is, as long as 
everything goes well. As soon as you need to make tradeoffs and prioritiza-
tion decisions, you begin eating into an executive’s personal success criteria, 
and you may wind up losing their support.  
As project manager, you can try to gain the high-level alignment your pro-
ject doesn’t have. This falls somewhere between being a tall task and an im-
possible one. If you think you have a chance of getting all the possible spon-
sors on board, then your program manager will allow you to try—but won’t 
expect you to succeed. More important is understanding the misalignment 
and being open and honest about how your decisions may cause you to lose 
the support of certain people. 
In the case I described, we decided not to invest in human beings to help 
support our high-end product. Instead, we relied on videos and other self-
service type aids. These were better than nothing, but no one thought they 
were good. They did have a very good ROI: we could build them once and 
never pay for them again, and they provided a basic level of help to our 
customers. 

Chapter 11 | Prepare for Problems 
162  
When we made this decision, we knew we were running the risk of losing 
our head of client services as a supporter of the project. And we did lose 
her, practically before the project launched. We made a calculated decision 
that if the product wasn’t a success, the self-help tools would be sufficient. 
But if it was a success, then we could afford to invest in more staff and 
more support for our customers. 
It wasn’t a success, and many believed it was a self-fulfilling failure. Our deci-
sion to wait to see if it was worth it to provide customer support for the 
product wound up ensuring that the product wasn’t well received, which in 
turn caused us not to invest in any more support for it. Seems pretty obvi-
ous when you look at it that way, but at the time no one did. Least of all the 
project manager. 
Skill Gaps 
This problem is a lot more tactical. It’s not uncommon for a project team to 
be missing one or more critical skills that are necessary for a good outcome. 
Often you staff a project without knowing exactly what you need and what 
the team has to know in order to deliver. Sometimes you make the explicit 
decision that although no one on your team possesses the knowledge you 
need, you can put smart people on the team and they’ll figure it out. 
As project manager, you should know the cause of a skill gap. Did you not 
know what experience was necessary, and you guessed incorrectly? Did you 
decide that training your staff would be part of your project? Is the resource 
you need so scarce that you decided your project wasn’t worth it and you 
could make do with whatever you got? Or did you hope your team would fig-
ure it out? As a program manager, I’ve gone each of these ways several times. 
Depending on the reason, you need to respond differently, which is why 
you must understand the project at a deep level. If it’s part of your respon-
sibility to train your staff, then you need to build that into the plan. If you’re 
expected to make do with what you have, then you have to factor that into 
your plan, as well. If you think your portfolio manager made a mistake, well, 
maybe they did. But you should ask about that, too. 
 Note  There are many reasons your team may be lacking the skills you need. Some of happen 
on purpose. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
163  
So you find yourself managing a project without the critical resource, per-
sonnel or otherwise, you need in order to be successful. You have a couple 
of options. You can ask for another resource or a personnel swap. There is a 
chance this could work; but more likely, if your program manager wanted 
you to have someone with that skill, you’d already have them. You can adjust 
your schedule in a way that’s transparent to both your manager and your cli-
ent, to compensate for the lack of the skill. There is risk in this, however, 
because you “don’t know what you don’t know.” You have to guess how 
long your team will take to learn the necessary skills. Finally, you can refuse 
to proceed without getting an addition to you team. Play that card wisely. 
No matter what tactic you decide to take, you need to talk with whomever 
approves project staffing as soon as possible. Find out whether the person is 
missing due to an oversight, because of a lack of knowledge about what the 
project needs, or on purpose for any of a variety of reasons. Ideally, this 
person is also interested in your project’s success, so you can plot a course 
through the problem. If not, take the most conservative stance and assume 
your project must proceed with unskilled team members. Scope and sched-
ule accordingly. Your job is not to mislead or lie to the client and tell them 
all is well. Your job is to be honest and let them know that although you’re 
optimistic, you think this is a risk for delivery. This message may get around, 
which is okay. A little honesty can often solve a lot of problems. 
Breaking the Process 
As many engineers are happy to explain, processes exist for a reason. They 
cover years of experience, and they attempt to mitigate unseen and unknow-
able project risks by their very existence. This accumulated operating proce-
dure is the result of many projects in the past that ran into some problem or 
another, after which a process was added to avoid that specific problem in 
the future. Some processes are old enough that no one remembers why you 
do things the way you do. All you know is that when you follow the process, 
things go correctly. 
But the process has a weakness: it’s slow, it’s cumbersome, and it usually 
feels like overkill. Little or none of it seems to apply to your project or 
situation. And often, when asked, the process engineers can only provide 
outdated or unspecific reasons why you should follow the process in the 
first place. Because everyone follows it, you don’t have examples of what 
happens when you don’t. 
As a project manager, you’re always looking for ways to save time and effort 
by eliminating low-value tasks or tasks that don’t apply to you. Some of 

Chapter 11 | Prepare for Problems 
 
164  
these procedures appear to fit the bill: they aren’t useful in your case, and 
they don’t provide much protection, so you may as well skip them. In other 
words, you’re probably about to make a mistake. 
Years ago, when I worked for a data-feed company, we had a very lengthy, 
very ridiculous process for acquiring a new feed and getting the content into 
our main feed. No matter how much content we were talking about, the 
process was the same. I was running a project to integrate a very small, very 
niche data source from Canada into our primary product. The process to 
get this feed into our core product was longer than the project was sup-
posed to last. Instead of having a healthy respect for the process, I laughed 
openly at it; we were expected to have the new feed in place in 12 weeks, 
and the process took 15. Obviously, I thought, the problem is the process, 
not the project. 
Not only did I decide to ignore the process, but I was certain I was right. So 
certain that I was able to convince most of our engineering staff that my pro-
ject was special and should have different rules. The process wasn’t meant to 
be used in situations like mine, and I should be exempted from having to use 
all of it. Maybe we could create a new process specifically for future such 
projects so they wouldn’t be saddled with an archaic checklist to get simple 
work done. 
Or maybe I could have my project ignore the right way to do things and to-
tally mess things up not only for itself but also for anything that touched the 
new product. The full-blown way to do things was full of checks and bal-
ances—safety mechanisms I decided weren’t needed for my project and that 
we’d be fine without.  
I suspect you can see where this story ends. 
 Note  Your project isn’t a special case. 
The feed didn’t work, and the system was less stable now than before I be-
gan, because we cut a bunch of corners. This was the first time I heard the 
fateful question that should be the mantra of a no-drama project manager. 
My boss asked me, “What did you think was going to happen?”  
Ignoring the approved way to do things was a risk, but it was a risk I was 
willing to take because I misunderstood it. I was encouraged by my ability to 
sell the idea to the staff, and I convinced myself that even though we had a 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
165  
procedure that exactly applied to what I was trying to do, I could safely ig-
nore it. I couldn’t have been more wrong. 
I also had no good answer to the question from my boss. I was about to re-
ply that I thought my project was different and would go fine. Part of me 
was ready to say that the project was going better because I had ignored the 
lengthy and expensive process for getting things done, which moved my 
project into having a much higher return. 
But then I envisioned his follow-up question: “What evidence did you have 
that suggested to you that you were right?” The answer was “None”—I had 
no evidence whatsoever that skipping the operating procedures was a valid 
thing to do. All I knew was that I was saving project hours by not doing 
things in the tried-and-true fashion.  
Additionally, this caused anxiety in my team. Although they were ready to 
admit that I might have been right, and we could safely do it the way I said, 
they weren’t sure. But they were sure that if we did it the correct way, the 
project would have a good result. I was working with seasoned profession-
als who knew their jobs; I was the one who didn’t know what he was doing. 
In your projects, you may be tempted to cut corners, particularly ones that 
you don’t see as adding value. But some of those corners exist for a reason, 
and often that reason isn’t readily apparent. The excuse “I didn’t realize” or 
“I didn’t know” won’t work with your client or your program manager, and 
probably not even with your team. If you didn’t know, then why did you act 
on that lack of knowledge rather than finding out or keeping things the way 
they were? Short of having a reason backed by evidence or a strong hy-
pothesis, you’re likely taking a risk that will cause you problems in the end. 
Underestimating Complexity 
Most projects are trying to do something complex. If they weren’t, they 
wouldn’t need project managers. You aren’t hired to manage routine tasks. 
It’s the nonroutine tasks that you’re hired to deliver. It’s true that some of 
the greatest projects happened because people either ignored or chose to 
overcome an immense amount of complexity, difficulty, and complication. 
But most of them didn’t have a client who was paying by the hour, or a 
business that was eagerly awaiting—or had its future riding on—a new 
product launch. 
One of my least favorite phrases to hear from a client is, “Can’t we just…?” 
This is usually followed by an inane oversimplification, such as, “Can’t we 
just put a note right above that button and tell people not to push it?” Or, 

Chapter 11 | Prepare for Problems 
 
166  
“Instead of buying a new size of shipping carton, can’t we just use one of the 
bigger ones and stuff it with newspaper?” These examples and other, equally 
jaw-dropping ones have actually been asked of me. This is what makes me 
sad when I find myself or my project managers doing the same with teams. 
 Note  The answer to “Can’t we just…?” should default to “No,” unless proven otherwise. 
To be fair, one of the roles a project manager has to play is to both limit and 
manage complexity. One strategy for doing so is to suggest simple solutions 
and see if any of them stick. I recall the movie Dave, in which Kevin Kline 
pretends to be President of the United States. Kline is trying to find a way to 
generate extra funding for a children’s program, so he decides to pour a 
bunch of money from the Treasury into a regular savings account in order to 
earn interest. The Secretary of the Treasury is first very confused but even-
tually admits that this idea may work. Kline generates more than $100 mil-
lion doing something I taught to my son when he was eight years old. 
What the movie doesn’t show is that although this approach may be techni-
cally possible, it’s difficult to actually do. In order to keep the money FDIC 
insured, they would have to find hundreds or thousands of banks to put the 
money in. Because of that, they would probably need to hire several people 
to deal with the statements and details of opening these accounts and mak-
ing sure they weren’t lost. The ongoing cost of this “simple” solution would 
likely be much more than originally anticipated. 
But when you’re trying to be creative with solutions, often you’re focused 
on the solution, not the implications. Your simple solution may indeed 
work; but worse, it may appear to work at the beginning but crumble at the 
end. One sign of this is when your team, client, or manager is more skepti-
cal about your solution than you are. Another is when you start hearing re-
plies like those Dave heard: “I suppose that may be technically true….” It 
may mean you haven’t appreciated the actual complexity of your problem 
space and are one mishap away from failure. 
The drama this can create within your team or with your client isn’t worth 
it. If your team begins to doubt that the solution they’re building will work, 
then they may have misgivings about delivering it. Your client may be more 
worried about the long-term impact of what you’re doing than about the 
speed with which you reach a solution. And the people who have to imple-
ment your idea (those suckers who had to open all those bank accounts) 
may be silently cursing you and your project. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
167  
 Note  People are generally skeptical of simple solutions to difficult problems.  
It’s okay to be optimistic about your decisions and projects. But it’s not 
okay to be blind to the challenges that reside within the problem you’re try-
ing to solve. If you do go down this road, someone, somewhere will ask 
you, “Well, what did you think was going to happen?” 
Risk Introduced by Schedule “Make Up” 
Your project has fallen behind schedule. Not uncommon, and not all that 
unexpected. Your client or program manager asks you for strategies to 
“make up” the time and get the project back on schedule. And, of course, 
the client doesn’t want to trim any functionality. They want everything in-
cluded that they were originally supposed to get. In other words, to meet 
the schedule, they want you to work faster. 
But you realize that asking everyone to work late isn’t good for the team; 
and worse, unless you get them to work very late for a very long time, it 
won’t make up the shortfall. So, you start to look for things to cut—cuts 
that introduce risk to the project but may not be noticeable by the client. 
Perhaps you decide that your project doesn’t need to be load tested. You 
rely on the skill of the engineers to make sure performance is good. Maybe 
instead of sending every single permutation and combination through quality 
assurance (QA), you only send a representative sample. Or perhaps you 
take on some of the tasks yourself, such as copywriting or graphic design. 
Whatever way you choose to make up time in your schedule, you introduce 
risk to the project. You’re either reducing quality control or having tasks 
done by people who aren’t skilled to do them. In essence, you’re hoping that 
those steps weren’t needed in the first place and nothing bad will happen.  
The alluring part is that some evidence supports you. Perhaps the last sev-
eral projects you ran did fine under load. Maybe you think you did a good 
job picking representative examples of what you want tested, and you’re 
convinced you’ve covered all the major possibilities. Or perhaps you’ve sub-
stituted one deliverable for another of significantly less cost, but also signifi-
cantly less value. In the ideal situation, no one will notice, and nothing will 
go wrong. 
But your team knows that things do go wrong, and they go wrong often. 
The team enjoys having safety nets because they’re free to try things and get 

Chapter 11 | Prepare for Problems 
 
168  
them wrong; someone will catch problems before they reach the client. 
Removing these precautions has the effect of making your team both more 
cautious and less confident. This is the worst intersection for your team: 
they’re working more slowly because they need to compensate for the lack 
of double-checking, and they don’t feel as sure of what they’re doing. 
At one of my past gigs, we had a brilliant performance engineer named Tim. 
The phrase “Tim tested it” was the equivalent of “We’re certain of its per-
formance.” Whenever a project wasn’t working as expected, someone could 
expect to hear, “Did Tim test this?” Project managers who answered “No, 
there wasn’t enough time” immediately realized they were saying the wrong 
thing, because they were actually saying, “We were running late, so I took a 
risk and skipped that part. I hoped it would be fine. Looks like it isn’t.” 
Adding risk to a project is sometimes the right thing to do. But you must 
treat it the same way you treat other risks to your project. Make the choice 
intentionally and transparently. If you decide to pursue a “speed up” strat-
egy that will make you and your team less comfortable about the quality of 
what you’re delivering, make sure your client or program manager knows 
about it. There is little value in keeping it to yourself, no matter what you 
think at the time. Present it as an option, just as you would anything else. 
Let your program manager or the client have a chance to talk you out of it 
or accept it as a risk and move on. Don’t keep it a secret.  
Summary 
As I said at the beginning, this wasn’t intended to be an exhaustive list of all 
possible expected problems. I could probably fill another book and call it 
Things Project Managers Consider Bad Luck That They Should Have Seen Coming. 
That said, this chapter has shown you samples of the types of things your 
client and program manager see all the time across multiple projects. 
These foreseeable problems span all facets of the project, from client man-
agement and participation, to team management, to how you decide to de-
liver. Every part of a project has elements that can go wrong and have gone 
wrong many times in other projects, and your program manager has proba-
bly seen all of them. In fact, program managers are generally more excited if 
you bring them problems they haven’t seen before, because at least they’re 
dealing with something new. 
When you’re ready to bring problems to your client or your program man-
ager, ask yourself if you could have foreseen them. Then ask yourself if you 
did anything to cause them or make them worse. Many project issues fall in 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
169  
one or both categories. This is okay—these are common problems for a 
reason. But you need enough awareness to not call them bad luck, “perfect 
storms,” or unexpected problems. There is no better way to lose the faith 
of your team or management than being unable to expect the expected.  

C H A P T E R 
12 
Establish Metrics 
“Who is keeping score around here?” 
As in many organizations, a project manager on my team is responsible for 
more than just delivery of a set of requirements that they or someone else 
may have gathered and documented. In this case, the project manager is re-
sponsible from the time someone has a bright idea about something we 
ought to be doing, to the time it’s delivered and creating value for the com-
pany. This opens the window quite a bit from the narrow responsibilities of 
simply delivering on the goals of the project. Instead, project managers are 
involved all the way from beginning and discovery to the end of deployment 
and transition planning. 
Because of the broad nature of the role, it’s difficult to come up with a sim-
ple mechanism to determine whether the project manager is doing a good 
job. A project manager who is excellent at conceptualizing may fall short 
when it comes to operationalizing. One who is great at planning and schedul-
ing may be poor at risk mitigation. Or you may be a generalist—superlative 
at nothing, but competent in all facets of project management. 
This is a world of metrics, where everything is quantified and measured, and 
financial ratios are applied, such as return on investment (ROI), return on 
equity, and other things of that nature. As a project manager, you’re proba-
bly not being held to financial metrics like those, but you need a way to 
know whether you’re doing a good job. 
Complicating this problem is that every project is different and can have 
different goals. Executing on a well-known project plan, one that you’ve 
done before, should have a much tighter expectation for delivery metrics. 

Chapter 12 | Establish Metrics 
 
172  
Managing a project the likes of which no one in the organization has previ-
ously attempted may have a very different set of goals and success criteria. 
 Note  Lack of clarity around project metrics isn’t a reason to ignore them entirely. 
That being said, although it’s okay to adjust the values you hope to achieve 
in the metric you’re tracking against, it isn’t okay to avoid having metrics in 
the first place. If you don’t measure how you’re doing, then you gain no 
knowledge for the next time you do something similar, and a lot of organi-
zational learning is gone. 
Top-Level Metrics 
Projects usually have one or two top-level metrics that you’re tracking to-
ward. These are usually profitability, ROI, customer satisfaction, or some-
thing similar. From a business perspective, whatever mechanisms you use to 
achieve the goal, even if not best practice (or even good practice), are okay 
because they further the goals of the project. Short of doing anything unethi-
cal or illegal, a very poorly run project can still produce spectacular results. 
But that doesn’t help you become a better project manager. First, you 
probably don’t have much influence over your projects’ profitability. You 
can do everything correctly, and salespeople can sell your products at a loss, 
or the market may receive the offering poorly, or it may be shelved shortly 
after launch due to a change in priorities. Second, doing whatever it takes to 
deliver does nothing to help you grow in the practice of project manage-
ment. You’re interested in knowing how you did as project manager, with 
the items outside your sphere of influence removed. To improve your man-
agement technique, you must know what you’re currently doing and find a 
non-anecdotal way to determine if you’re improving. 
Because project management is multifaceted and heavily nuanced, it’s diffi-
cult to find any single metric that lets you know how you’re performing. 
And because maximizing one part of project management doesn’t tell the 
entire story, you’re faced with using several metrics at the same time to 
help build the complete picture of the project’s management. Such metrics 
are called indicators because all they can do is give you an indication of how 
well the project is being run. Taken collectively, however, they can spin a 
powerful and understandable tale. 

No-Drama Project Management 
173  
There are dozens of indicators you can use, but relatively few provide proba-
tive information about the project’s performance. These metrics are there-
fore called Key Performance Indicators (KPIs). You can use these KPIs, in part, 
to help give visibility into your projects. It’s vital for your team, your client or 
sponsor, and your management to have a clear picture of how a project is 
going. Without this visibility, you wind up with anxiety, or you’re stuck using 
anecdotes to determine your current status. And that kind of confusion and 
lack of clarity eventually causes drama in your projects and disruption in your 
project team.  
What Are KPIs? 
At their heart, KPIs for project management are measurements that are quan-
tifiable and can be used to measure a project’s health. They can provide infor-
mation and visibility into the project, and they can be used to make decisions 
without seeing what the project is actually delivering. If a project is going off 
course or needs changes in structure or management, waiting until the deliv-
ery date is often too late to save the project. Better to measure along the 
way and track how you’re doing, in order to make adjustments. 
Often, project KPIs are measured and reported on a regular basis. This is 
done either passively, during the project’s standard update, or actively, dur-
ing something like a project audit. They’re used either to instill confidence in 
the client or sponsor, or as a way to prove that things are going right—or 
going wrong. Both messages are important for a project manager to have 
available, and data that supports either side is helpful in many situations. 
Many things make a KPI a good one to track. However, a good KPI must 
have at least three traits. It should:  

Align with the goals of the organization 

Drive the right behavior 

Be based on valid data that can be proven 
Without these characteristics, KPIs wind up doing more harm than good. 
They can cause the wrong behavior, obfuscate reality, or lead a project 
astray because the wrong thing is being measured. Let’s look at these three 
traits in more detail. 
Align with the Goals of the Organization 
All organizations have goals. I worked for a company whose stated goal was 
to disrupt and dominate an entire industry. In fact, “Crush the Competition” 

Chapter 12 | Establish Metrics 
 
174  
was often specifically stated among the company’s goals, products, projects, 
and efforts. Our goals were not things like “Provide an easy lifestyle for our 
employees” or “Give lots of money to worthy charities.” Although we did 
our fair share of the latter, the former was specifically not in the charter of 
any manager. 
Every now and again, a business owner or project manager would include 
items in their project that didn’t have to do with profitability or increasing 
market share. Whenever this happened, I’d have to say to them, half-jokingly, 
“Are you new here?” It would certainly be nice to give our customers a 
wonderful experience, or figure out how to provide a better product at the 
same cost, or do some other objectively “good” thing, but that simply wasn’t 
what the organization was all about. 
 Note  The KPIs need to match the organization, not the other way around. 
Not surprisingly, the company was laser-focused on ROI. Because the goal 
was to dominate the industry and crush the competition, making sure every-
thing we did had a proper level of ROI was crucial to project and business 
success. Project managers could do little to influence the R part of the equa-
tion, so their main impact was on making sure the I part was well known 
and well tracked. Making sure the KPIs being tracked were aligned with the 
goals of the company were critical to their usefulness. 
If you find yourself running a project where the goals aren’t aligned with the 
company, you should be prepared for disruption. Obviously, if they’re com-
pletely misaligned, then you have a whole set of problems to deal with, but 
this is rare. More likely, you’re running some projects that include good 
elements, but other projects include “nice to have” items. In the organiza-
tion I mentioned, someone was running a project to donate our “imperfect” 
products to charities. The original project statement was wonderfully phil-
anthropic and talked about fairness, enriching lives, and doing well. What 
was missing from the statement was “maximizing tax benefits.”  
I tried to get that written in as a high-level goal, but I wasn’t successful. Not 
surprisingly, before the project finished, we decided to give the imperfect 
products to the nearest charity that was willing to come pick the stuff up 
from us. The team was then reassigned to do something that would increase 
corporate profits. Can’t say I was surprised. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
175  
Drive the Right Behavior 
There is a statement in management that you “get what you measure.” If 
you want to measure employees based on how many phone calls they can 
make in an hour, you can bet they will make those calls as fast as possible. 
They may not generate sales with those calls, but they will make a lot of 
them. This is an example of an unhelpful KPI. 
Another example comes when you give conflicting goals to different groups. 
For instance, you may give the sales group the goal of raising the average 
value of a customer and while the production group the goal of lowering 
costs. While the sales group is out trying to sell premium upgrades and ex-
tolling the virtues of the product’s quality, the production team is looking 
for ways to shave a little off each corner in order to meet their goals. Best 
case, someone from sales calls the manufacturing team and convinces them 
to find cost savings elsewhere. Worst case, you wind up with customers 
who pay for a high-end product, but receive the cost-cut version, instead. 
 Note  It’s not uncommon for two groups to maximize their own performance while harming the 
company or project performance. 
It’s simple human nature to try to maximize performance while minimizing 
effort (what I have called personal ROI elsewhere). This isn’t incorrect for 
employees to do. By giving them something on which they will be measured, 
you explicitly tell them what you care about. So, employees are completely 
correct in trying to do their best against those metrics, even if they don’t do 
much to create success for the company or the overall effort.  
Your measurements should do the following things: 
 
Drive the behavior you want. 
 
Optimize the success of the project or organization. 
 
Help with making decisions. 
I have already discussed the importance and pitfalls of making sure you’re 
creating and supporting the right behavior. The other two are equally  
important.  
Metrics that measure an individual’s performance create the desired perfor-
mance from that individual, even if that’s not the right thing to do. The em-
ployee who is incented on making lots of phone calls may not spend time 

Chapter 12 | Establish Metrics 
 
176  
teaching the person next to them how to make calls, because that will cost 
the employee 20 minutes and maybe keep them from reaching their goal. 
Also, if used individually, such a metric can be used as a way to blame 
someone for “not pulling their weight” when they were doing the right thing 
by the organization or the company. 
As with anything else, measurements need to be seen from a portfolio view. 
You have a group of people, a group of metrics, and a window of time. If 
you try to narrow this portfolio to a single instant in time, a single metric, 
or a certain individual, then you’ll be misled. It’s important to note that you 
should be trying to maximize the value across your entire project over time, 
and do the measuring that way. 
Finally, a useful metric helps with making decisions. It’s not helpful to measure 
things that people don’t have to decide to do. For instance, the metric “Curse 
at the customer less than once per day” isn’t all that necessary—you don’t 
want anyone cursing your customers at any time. But more important, it’s 
very easy to have metrics that don’t change anyone’s behavior, either posi-
tively or negatively. These aren’t necessarily bad metrics; they just do nothing. 
For instance, at a past gig, we had a metric for “days between requirements 
finalization and sign off.” I suppose this was a fine thing to check. We didn’t 
want our requirements lingering too long without being settled. But so what? 
No value was created when a project manager got this time down to hours 
or minutes, rather than days or weeks. No decisions were made differently 
based on when the documents were signed and completed. The only behav-
ior this metric drove was the level of harassment the project manager felt 
empowered to give the people with signature authority, which they didn’t 
appreciate.  
When choosing what you measure, you need to determine what behavior 
will change based on the metric, whether the metric maximizes the correct 
thing, and whether the existence of the metric will help alter decision mak-
ing. If what you’re choosing to measure doesn’t do those three things, then 
you may have a metric that feels good but doesn’t create any value. And 
that’s if you’re lucky. If you aren’t careful, you may create a measurement 
that fosters the wrong behavior or optimizes for the wrong thing entirely. 
Be Based on Valid Data That Can Be Proven 
The first two criteria—making sure your KPIs are aligned with the organiza-
tion, and making sure they’re changing behavior in ways that you want—are 
both strategic requirements for a good metric. But a metric can pass both 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
177  
tests but still fail if you don’t have good data to measure it accurately, and in 
a way that everyone believes. If the people or projects being measured feel 
as though their metrics are more subjective than objective, then they will 
discount them entirely. 
For instance, I once consulted for a company that had this goal: “One mil-
lion satisfied customers.” As a vision, it worked. It was a big round number 
and a result we all could hope to accomplish. Shortly after the announce-
ment of this new vision, “thermometer” tracking posters started showing up 
around the office. People stopped viewing the lofty, nonspecific goal as a vi-
sion and began viewing it as a metric. And as soon as that happened, dis-
putes started. 
This four-word phrase was so ambiguous that it was practically useless. By 
one million, did the company mean households or unique customers (do a 
husband and wife count as two)? One million customers ever, or that have 
purchased in the past year? What is a customer, anyway—someone who 
bought something? How about someone who bought something but then 
returned it? How about someone who buys every week? Should they be 
counted more than once? And what does satisfied mean? 
The company did manage to hit this goal, but it was much more of a morale 
boost than an actual financial event—not that there is anything wrong with 
that. As something for the company to measure and march toward, it was 
terribly confusing. A good metric must be clearly understood, must be de-
termined by something akin to a mathematical formula, and must include a 
value for the goal. 
 Note  When it comes to metrics, math is good. 
I worked for a company that sold a product that was purchased as a sub-
scription with a recurring monthly fee. One of our biggest problems was 
subscription churn: the number of subscribers who canceled or didn’t renew 
when their subscription expired. But even that definition wasn’t precise 
enough. We decided to define churn as follows: 
The number of subscribers we have now, that we also had twelve 
months ago, who haven’t gone out of business, merged with another 
company, or discovered a conflict of interest, and haven’t canceled, 
downgraded or otherwise stopped paying for their subscription, divided 
by the number of subscribers we had twelve months ago. 

Chapter 12 | Establish Metrics 
 
178  
This turned out to be the most complete definition of churn we had ever 
compiled, and it’s the one the company still uses today. It was specific and un-
ambiguous enough for us to measure against, and we had a huge amount of 
very obvious, very valid data to use. (Did the customer send a check or not?) 
However, it also left a little wiggle room where healthy debate could happen, 
leaving the team in a position where specific situations could be discussed.  
But it wasn’t enough to merely come up with what we were measuring. We 
needed to determine our historical measurement of this metric, and we 
needed a forward-looking goal. What was interesting was that the company 
had always thought it had a roughly 25% churn rate, based on billings and 
what people knew about our accounts. This was frustrating: one in four cus-
tomers decided to cancel or otherwise drop after a year. When this more 
precise metric was applied, the churn rate turned out to be closer to 20%, 
moving it from one-in-four to one-in-five, which immediately made a bunch 
of people happy.  
 Note  Sometimes measuring something in a new way provides valuable insight. 
The company set a very ambitious goal of cutting this number in half, but 
there was a strong recognition that this would be a team effort, and no one 
project could be responsible for the overall goal. We were able to give spe-
cific targets to certain products and projects, such as reducing churn by 50 
basis points for subscribers to a specific product or those who had used a 
specific feature. It was a great way to measure the value of a project while 
still aligning very tightly with the goal of the entire organization. 
Making sure what you’re measuring is actually measurable in a way that is 
probably true is a very important aspect of a good metric. Without a re-
peatable, almost auditable way to validate how you’re doing, your metric 
will be disputed, distrusted, and eventually, disused.  
Some Example Project-Management  
Metrics 
You now know why metrics are important, and you know what makes a 
good one. But it would be a huge waste of time and effort to re-create new 
metrics for every situation. From afar, many projects look the same: a bunch 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
179  
of experts working together to reach a particular outcome, with a project 
manager at the helm. The team changes, the project manager changes, and 
the challenges change, but at heart, projects have a lot of overlap. Because 
of that, many projects reuse metrics from other projects or other organiza-
tionally well-known goals. 
There is also a side benefit to using metrics that are well known and well un-
derstood. For a metric to be useful, it must resonate with the people on the 
team. There are few ways to bring drama into a team faster than telling mem-
bers you’re going to measure them on something complicated, or something 
they have never heard before. It’s even worse for project managers. You 
know how metrics work, and you’re very comfortable with them. But if 
you’re given one that makes no sense or doesn’t apply in your situation, then 
you’ll either ignore it or worry about it. Both of those situations cause you 
anxiety and stress, and your team recognizes it. 
With that in mind, project and program managers can use two well-known 
metrics to measure in-flight project performance. They have to do with how 
well you’re using the resources and people that were given to you as part of 
the project, and how well you’re tracking toward delivery. The former is 
generally tracked fairly simply and can be done with normal project artifacts 
such as time cards and expense reports. The latter can be determined using 
the concept of earned value, which I describe shortly. 
Resource Utilization 
Depending on your organization, resources can mean different things. It can 
be people such as software engineers or consultants, it can mean money or 
budget, it can mean time in the lab, or it can mean the use of some fairly 
scarce piece of equipment. Whatever it turns out to be, at the start of your 
project, a predetermined bit of this resource was set aside for your use. 
The question becomes, did you use it? And did you use it wisely? 
The second of these two questions makes for a very poor KPI. “Using re-
sources wisely” is hard to measure objectively in any agreed-upon manner. 
Sure, if you took the entire project budget and bought lottery tickets with 
it, a case could be made for unwise use of resources; but short of that, al-
though hindsight may disagree with your choices, it’s difficult to know if you 
are using your resources wisely before your project is delivered. 
The first question is easy, however. It’s a pretty straight calculation. Of the 
resources you were given, how much did you use? To be fair, there is nu-
ance involved. Resources are granted ahead of time after some analysis of 

Chapter 12 | Establish Metrics 
 
180  
what the project requires. After the project begins and is better understood, 
it may turn out that some of the resources on the project are no longer 
needed. This isn’t unusual. In my organization, project managers are obligated 
to release resources back to the available pool as early as they’re able. There 
is even a metric for this. If you’re scheduled to use a resource but decide 
three or more weeks ahead of time that you aren’t going to use it, then you 
can release it and have it removed from your project. If you wait too long, 
then even if you don’t use the resource, it becomes attached to your budget. 
I sometimes have a difficult time explaining this to my team. Surely, coming 
in under budget must be a good thing, they say. Don’t get me wrong—it’s 
good not to go over budget. But there is a cost associated with resource 
utilization that is hidden from project managers: opportunity cost. Let’s use 
a simple example and say you’re talking about money. At the start of your 
project, you ask for $100,000. Halfway through, you realize that you proba-
bly only need $50,000, but you hang onto the extra, just to be sure. The to-
tal comes to, let’s say, $55,000, and at the end of the project you return 
$45,000 with a smile. But as portfolio manager, I won’t be smiling back. 
 Note  Opportunity cost is often more expensive than the cost itself. 
What you aren’t appreciating is that the $45,000 could have been used else-
where. Another existing project could have used it, or I could have funded a 
new project—and maybe even hired someone to run it. So although yes, 
you’re returning $45,000, those are last year’s dollars. I should have had a 
team turning them into this year’s dollars. 
Resource utilization involves being a wise steward of a project’s budget. 
Don’t be over, and don’t be too far under (without releasing your hold): in 
the former situation you’re spending more than you have, and in the latter 
you’re wasting time. This is what makes resource utilization such a good 
metric to follow. It’s easy to understand, because resources are usually 
measured in hours or dollars, and it’s not difficult to track. Additionally, this 
is one of the things most in the project manager’s control. Between proper 
scoping and proper planning, it should be a fairly straightforward exercise to 
stay within tolerance. To put it the opposite way, not staying within toler-
ance is almost always a failure in project management. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
181  
Earned Value 
One of my favorite methods of tracking the performance of a project is 
earned value. An earned-value chart tracks three things simultaneously and 
plots them against each other: scope, budget, and time (as created in the ini-
tial project plan). Scope refers to an objective measure of value creation, such 
as function points, features, or use cases completed. It’s meant to show how 
much of the project is complete. 
This value is then plotted against both time and money. You wind up know-
ing how deep you are into the value the project is supposed to deliver, and 
how much time and budget remain. If you’ve delivered 10% of the project’s 
value but have used 90% of the scheduled time, that might be a problem. 
Also, because it’s a chart, you can track the slope of the line and determine 
whether your project is slowing down, speeding up, or has plateaued. 
If you’re familiar with a burndown chart, it’s somewhat similar, although 
with a very different focus. Burndown charts measure how much work re-
mains and show how much work is left to do in order to deliver on all the 
original requirements of the project. The focus of an earned-value chart is 
to show the client or customer how much value has been created (or 
earned) by the project to date. Showing a burndown to your clients reminds 
them of how much work is left not done, rather than how much has been 
accomplished. 
As a program manager, I can learn a lot about a project and its manager from 
this chart. Because you’re plotting actual value creation versus planned, 
showing the budget, and laying it over time, you can quickly determine 
whether a project is in the right ballpark of being on track. Some deviations 
are to be expected: sometimes a project gets ahead, sometimes it falls be-
hind, but this isn’t alarming. This chart also shows direction; if the project 
was behind two cycles ago and now is even more behind, that may indeed be 
alarming. Or the reverse—it was behind two cycles ago and has now closed 
some of that gap. Such a project may be headed in the right direction. For 
such a simple graph, it’s amazingly powerful. 
Figure 12-1 shows what I mean. Consider a project that is scheduled to run 
for ten cycles and that is currently finishing cycle six. The Planned Value line 
represents the original project plan: you were going to hit 100,000 units of 
value (say, function points) by the end of cycle ten. Therefore, to be directly 
on target, you’d be halfway done by the end of cycle five. The Earned Value 
line represents actual performance. As you can see, you started out a little 
ahead but fell behind around cycle four and now seem to be losing ground. If 
you extrapolate that line, you see that without some changes, the project will 

Chapter 12 | Establish Metrics 
 
182  
disappoint. And although it does seem that costs are tracking lower than ex-
pected, cost is trending up and may shortly surpass the actual value created. 
 
Figure 12-1. An earned-value chart 
For a single view, this chart is a wonderful picture of a project’s status. It 
does have a few weaknesses, however. First, it’s helpful only for a finite, dis-
crete project. If you have an ongoing effort or a project that doesn’t have 
good completeness criteria, then the Planned Value line is always in motion, 
which defeats the purpose of the graph. Additionally, although this tech-
nique does have a notion of things being “complete,” it doesn’t ensure that 
delivery is “good.” Quality of delivery needs to be tracked separately. 
Of course, project managers track many other metrics, such as schedule 
and cost variance, which essentially mean how close you are to the original 
plan. Project managers also track defect rate, milestone completion, and 
tollgates that have been passed through. In general, however, I look at the 
resource-utilization and earned-value KPIs to get a sense of how a project is 
doing while it’s running. Depending on your situation, there are other things 
to keep in mind; but even with just these two, you can get by fine. 

No-Drama Project Management 
183  
The Two KPIs Your Program Manager 
Cares About 
In medicine, there is an old chestnut that goes something like, “The opera-
tion was a success, but the patient died.” This somewhat flippant statement 
contains quite a bit of truth. Every indicator along the way told you that you 
were doing well, but the final result wasn’t what you hoped for. In other 
words, you hit all your KPIs, but the project itself was a failure.  
Realize that your program manager cares about the project KPIs and will 
ask about them and track them. But managing an active project is the job of 
the project manager, not the program manager. That’s why you were hired 
in the first place. At the end of the project, the program manager cares 
about only one thing concerning you, the project manager: what your pros-
pects are for running a project again. And for that question, there are two 
audiences: the client and the team.  
The client has many meanings. It can be the literal client, the executives in-
volved, or the end user of the project. The team usually means the project 
team: people who self-identify as being on the project. But it can also mean 
the people who are on the extended team, or other interested parties to 
what you’re building. But the question is the same: do they want you manag-
ing their project next time? Let’s take a deeper look. 
Client Satisfaction 
In this context, client satisfaction doesn’t mean clients are happy with the re-
sult they got or whatever the project was supposed to deliver. Nor does it 
mean whether the project added to the client’s success, was profitable, or 
met any of the objective measures of process success. I usually phrase this 
as follows: “Would you want this project manager on your next project?” 
This single question bakes in an awful lot of topics. 
Several aspects go into client satisfaction. Among them are quality and speed 
of delivery, collaboration ability, judgment and decision making, and level of 
expertise both in the problem domain and in project-management best 
practices. Every client has a few of their own, as well. Virtually everything on 
which a client can measure, judge, and evaluate a project manager can be 
wrapped up in that singular question. 
Answers to this question cover a wide range: 
 
The project didn’t go as well as we hoped, but that wasn’t the fault 
of the project manager. I’d happily have them on my next project. 

Chapter 12 | Establish Metrics 
 
184  
 
The project suffered from poor communication but was otherwise 
well run. I’d take the project manager back, but only if someone can 
work with them on their communication and messaging skills. 
 
I’m sure the project manager knows what they’re doing, but I think 
they’re wrong for the next project I have in mind. 
 
Please, no. Anyone else would be fine. 
Of course, there are lots of steps in between. But I have had a lot of success 
with this specific question, because it puts the evaluation in the real world. 
All projects are difficult to run, and they all have issues; this isn’t a surprise. 
A client may be satisfied that they got as much as they could out of the team 
and the situation, but the client may feel they should have gotten more. 
Maybe they got the exact delivery they expected, but they didn’t enjoy 
working with the project manager. Or maybe they’re unwilling to question 
the competence of another professional, but they can give the program 
manager the message by being firm that they don’t want to work with that 
person again. 
This is a much more powerful question than the normal end-of-project sur-
veys that are sometimes used to measure performance. It’s possible to give 
the client exactly what they wanted and have them be dissatisfied. Likewise, 
it’s possible to disappoint the client but do so with such client-management 
skill that they would be happy to give you another try. Keep this question in 
mind during the project, and know that most effective portfolio managers 
will ask it when the project is over. 
Team Satisfaction 
The counter-balance to how your client feels involves finding out how your 
team feels about your management. Even if the client wants you back, if the 
team you were working with won’t work with you again, then you still have 
a problem. And again, the question is the same: “Would you like to work 
with this project manager again?” Much as with the client, the question can 
reveal a lot. 
Team members have lots of different reasons why they may have enjoyed 
working on your project. Maybe you were particularly hands-on or hands-
off. Perhaps you have incredible skill at documentation and written commu-
nication. It could be that your meetings were well run and highly efficient, or 
that you did an excellent job fostering a good team atmosphere, one they’d 
like to participate in again. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
185  
The opposite is also possible. You may have held too many meetings that 
were a waste of time. Possibly you had no expertise in the area of the pro-
ject and were unable to add much value to discussions, even as a facilitator. 
(Or worse, you had no expertise in the area but were participating well 
above the level you should have.) The reasons a team member wouldn’t 
want to work with a project manager are varied and wide ranging—and not 
all of them are valid. You’re looking for an aggregate opinion and trends.  
Project management in an organization is a balancing act. You can’t always 
favor the client at the expense of the team, nor can you favor the team at 
the expense of the client. Both sides know this and are willing to be flexible, 
given the situation and a certain degree of fairness. The judgment call on 
which side takes the brunt of a decision is one that even very senior project 
managers struggle with. But it’s the kind of thing that you need to work 
work on. 
Summary 
Project management is at least as much an art as it is a science. Because of 
this, project managers are sometimes resistant to put measurements, or 
KPIs, on their performance. This is almost always a mistake. Without some 
way to tell whether a project manager is doing a good job, a program man-
ager can’t know what is happening during a project or how to evaluate the 
project manager after the project has finished. 
To be worthwhile items to measure, however, the KPIs you use must be 
aligned with the goals of the organization, foster the kind of behavior and 
performance you want, and be based on valid and verifiable data. If you cre-
ate metrics that don’t reach your organizational objectives, or that create 
(or even incent) the wrong behavior, then your KPIs are leading you in the 
wrong direction. Additionally, if you create ones that can’t be proven or are 
very subjective, then they will be discounted and disbelieved by many. 
The two measurements I find useful to evaluate in the middle of a project 
are resource utilization and earned value. The former is a measurement of 
the project manager’s judgment of how to use budgeted resources, which 
may be people, money, or a limited supply of something. Knowing that re-
sources are being used as planned is very important to a program or port-
folio manager. The latter is much more of a way to track project delivery. 
The two put together give a good, although incomplete, picture of a pro-
ject’s status. 

Chapter 12 | Establish Metrics 
 
186  
When the project is over, two questions need to be answered. Would the 
client like to work with you again? And would the team like to work with 
you again? Both are vital pieces of information as your program manager 
decides what your next assignment should be, or whether there should be 
a next assignment at all. The balancing act between advocating for the client 
and supporting the team is difficult, but it’s important for your long-term 
career and place within the organization. 
  
 
s

C H A P T E R 
13 
Know the Roles 
“Hey coach, tell me again what position I’m 
playing?” 
The way the project manager structures a team is perhaps the single most 
important factor in determining how the team will function going forward. 
Do you want a balance of skills and expertise, or do you want to make the 
team heavy in one aspect? How much interaction with the customer or 
business owner do you want the team to have? Do you expect that mem-
bers of the team to work together constantly, or only at the edges? These 
decisions and many more largely determine what kind of project you run 
and how it operates. 
Additionally, each person on the team needs to understand their role. Chap-
ter 1 discussed the roles in the overall project, including project manager, 
program manager, sponsor, and others. That chapter briefly mentioned a 
role called team member and talked about the team members’ responsibilities 
to the client and to the project. What I didn’t mention was their responsibil-
ity to each other and what they need to do to truly become a project team. 
That’s what we will explore here. 
Usually, the project manager is responsible for the organization of the pro-
ject team. Sometimes the project manager is handed a group of team mem-
bers. Other times they’re told to recruit or develop them. However the 
project manager acquires a team, they need to make the most of it. And no 
single solution work for every project or every team. 

Chapter 13 | Know the Roles 
 
188  
Depending on how much history the project manager has with the organiza-
tion or client, there are different strategies for creating a team. For instance, 
I’ve had project managers who develop talented team members and then 
bring them along from project to project, because they know and trust 
those members’ abilities. I’ve had other project managers who were indif-
ferent to history and instead always chose or recruited the best person for 
the job that needed doing. I’ve seen both strategies work, and I’ve seen both 
strategies fail. There is no one answer. 
 Note  Building a team is much more art than science; there is no one right answer. 
What I have seen fail often is a project organization that doesn’t do this kind 
of resourcing intentionally. Recently, my portfolio included a project that I 
believe was staffed with what I will charitably call “leftovers.” These were 
the men and woman no one else wanted on their projects. None of them 
individually was a problem; in fact, many successful projects have run with 
them as team members. But I had never seen a successful team made up ex-
clusively of these kinds of people. I told the project manager that I would be 
willing to either restaff the project or cancel it. He declined both options. 
About a month later, he was regretting it. 
What Makes a Project Team? 
Before a project team can be forged and structured, it’s imperative that the 
project manager understand what makes a project team in the first place. 
Project teams are slightly different than standing teams, functional teams, or 
many other kinds of teams. Because the team is brought together for a spe-
cific purpose, for a finite amount of time, many of the considerations that 
other teams need to take into account are less important, and a few others 
are more important. 
When you’re thinking about your project team, consider that it’s a group of 
professionals who are responsible for performing project tasks, both as a 
team and individually. This group helps to achieve project goals and objec-
tives for the primary purpose of reaching a small set of success criteria as 
set out by the owner of the project. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
189  
Things Team Members Must Know and Do 
Everyone on your team needs to be able to handle the following: 
 
Understand the needs and objectives of the project. 
 
Execute on project tasks. 
 
Express status. 
Without a common ability to perform these items, then your team will 
never reach a high-performing stage. If you have team members who can’t 
fulfill these needs, then you need to either locate suitable replacements find 
a different role for those individuals to play in the project. 
Understanding the Needs and Objectives of the 
Project 
I nearly said “business” or “client” here, instead of “project.” But on reflec-
tion, I think knowing the objectives of the project are enough. It would be 
fantastic if every team member had a grasp of the business need, how the 
client will use the outcome of the project to be successful, and how the 
project itself helps contribute to that success. But that may be too high a 
bar for every team member to reach. 
 Note  It’s not important for team members to internalize the goals of the client, but they should 
be able to understand the goals of the project. 
It may be good enough if all team members know the project goals and un-
derstand how their part helps reach those goals. They may not need to 
know how what they’re working on will eventually contribute to the suc-
cess of the client, but they must understand how what they’re working on 
will add to the project’s success. Without this knowledge—and the interest 
to gain this knowledge—it’s very difficult for a team member to remain in 
alignment with the goals of the project. 
Executing on Project Tasks 
Many pieces make up proper execution. They include planning tasks for 
yourself as well as others, estimating how long items will take to deliver, and 
w

Chapter 13 | Know the Roles 
 
190  
then delivering them. You may think these are necessary skills that anyone 
would have, but that isn’t an assumption a project manager should make. 
Although I’d like to be able to say that only the most junior people need 
help in this area, experience teaches that this isn’t true. The ability to create 
a plan and then deliver on that plan isn’t a skill many people are born with. 
I’ve worked with many otherwise brilliant, very senior people who couldn’t 
plan their own workday, let alone the delivery of a complex task. This is 
okay, as long as you recognize it from the start and are willing to work with 
the person to make sure they’re on the right track. If you don’t have the 
time or inclination to do so, you may need someone else on your team. 
Expressing Status 
Similar to being able to execute on their own tasks, your team members 
need to be able to communicate how they’re doing, either to the project 
manager or to each other. This skill is similar to the ability to plan your own 
work. If you can understand how much work needs to be done, then you 
should be able to express how much is left to do. But even when you can’t 
do this, your team members should be able to say they’re finished, or not 
started, or more than half done, or less than half complete. 
Complicating matters is the idea of effort time versus actual time. Developers 
have said to me, in complete honesty and sincerity, “I need ten more hours 
to complete this task. It will take me six months before I can get ten free 
hours.” Many team members aren’t in control (or necessarily consulted) 
about their assignments. This leads them to say that they only need a day or 
two to get something done; but when a day or two, or a week, passes, the 
task still isn’t finished. They look at you, puzzled, and continue to say that 
they only need a day or two—and if you, the project manager, can help 
them find that day or two, then they can finish the task. If only it were actu-
ally that easy. 
These three skills are essentially baseline team-member skills. The first is be-
ing able to and possessing a willingness to understand the objectives of the 
project and make sure that whatever you’re delivering contributes to meet-
ing those objectives. The second is being able to do the work that is as-
signed, including planning and delivering. And the third is being able to ex-
plain how you’re doing in a way that the project manager or client can digest 
and comprehend. If team members don’t seem able to fulfill all three of these 
requirements, you should consider dismissing them from the team or figure 
out how to properly manage them without doing their work for them. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
191  
The Three Levels of Team Members 
If you’re familiar with the parable of the chicken and the pig,1 what follows 
shouldn’t be a surprise. Essentially, a chicken and a pig decide to get together 
to make breakfast. The chicken is able to make its contribution—some 
eggs—and then move on to the next task. The pig, however, needs to be to-
tally committed to making this breakfast, because in order to contribute 
some bacon, it has to leave a piece of itself behind. 
There are three kinds of team members: leaders, members, and contribu-
tors. Virtually every project includes people in all three roles, and large pro-
jects have multiple people in each role. Each person should self-identify into 
one of those roles. If people’s opinions of their roles don’t match what you 
believe, then you’ll eventually have a conflict and a problem to resolve. 
Leaders 
There should be relatively few leaders within your project. This doesn’t mean 
you should have few people with leadership skills, characteristics, or instincts. 
But projects can only survive if a limited number of people—you and a few 
others—are yelling “Follow me!” The smaller the project, the fewer leaders it 
should include.  
Leaders are people who provide guidance to the team and are accountable 
for the delivery of the project tasks. The role includes development and 
skills training of project team members, as well as understanding their moti-
vations and personal drivers for completing the project. In some cases, 
leaders can take a very positive stance and gently guide the team in the di-
rection they want to go. In other cases, the leaders need to take a firmer 
position and direct people specifically. Either way, a project can’t survive 
without someone leading it. 
 Note  Leadership is an important role in a project team. Your project most likely can’t survive 
without a leader. 
                                                
1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Chicken_and_the_Pig 

Chapter 13 | Know the Roles 
 
192  
The leaders on the project should be recognizable by everyone inside and 
outside the team. Depending on the size of the project, there can be one 
leader or many leaders. Sometimes the project manager takes on the role of 
client management, development manager, and deployment manager. In 
larger projects, multiple people may play each role, each with a slightly dif-
ferent nuance. The important point is that every project needs at least one 
person whom everyone knows to look to when they need help, guidance, 
or direction. 
Team Members 
Team members are people who would self-identify as being on a project: if 
someone asked them what team they were on, they would list your project 
among the things they were doing. This is a key distinction that you should 
consider at different points in the project. These people are directly ac-
countable to the project (not just a single task or a handful) and are actively 
managing its delivery or scope.  
In some cases, project managers call these folks their core team. They’re 
with the project for a long time; they have an interest in its success, if not 
an actual stake; and they expect to get something out of the delivery of the 
final result. They’re also looking to the project for other reasons, such as 
career growth or skills development, or they’re motivated by the project’s 
expected outcome.  
I understand the notion of calling these people core, but it’s not a good way 
to think about them. The people in this category are your team, and taking 
care of them and their delivery for the life of the project is your job. 
Team Contributors 
In contrast to team members, team contributors deliver on a series of tasks 
for the project but aren’t accountable for the project’s success—merely the 
delivery of their specific tasks. These are your chickens from the earlier par-
able. Projects can’t survive without these types of people: they set up your 
servers, or get you access to something you need, or have a very specialized 
skill that you occasionally require. 
Team contributors take tasks from the project leaders but take direction 
from their functional or permanent home. No matter what pressures a pro-
ject is under, contributors follow the proper procedures to deliver on their 
tasks, even if the decisions aren’t exactly right for the project. This is correct 

No-Drama Project Management 
193  
behavior for them. They’re likely to be responsible for the health of the pro-
ject’s infrastructure long after you’ve moved on. Convincing them to cut 
corners or steps in their process may help in the short term, but at a long-
term cost. 
 Note  Project contributors are often more concerned about the long-term health of your deliver-
able than you are. 
A project manager must understand the difference between contributors and 
team members. I once had a project manager running a fairly simple project 
that required a novel use of clustering in our web farm. This task was scoped 
to be about ten hours of work, so a network IT guy was slated on the pro-
ject for those ten hours. At the end of the first month, he had booked five 
hours to the project. When we went over the time cards, I casually asked 
the project manager if that meant the IT guy was about half finished. 
The project manager said, “Oh, no, he hasn’t started yet.” Puzzled, I asked 
why he had booked five hours to the project. I was concerned that if he 
hadn’t started yet but had used up half his allocation, he might not finish the 
work. The project manager looked at me in all seriousness, and said, “Oh, 
that’s probably just the weekly meeting. You can ignore that.” 
As you can imagine, this didn’t work for me. Because the project manager 
was treating a contributor like a team member, we had burned through half 
the available hours, and the contributor hadn’t produced anything. When I 
asked the project manager what he was thinking, the answer was, unfortu-
nately, reasonable: “Well, I thought he’d want context on what the project 
was doing and why we needed his help.” This was a great example of an an-
swer that is hard for me to explain. 
Yes, it’s helpful and maybe good for the team if your network IT guy under-
stands the project. If he internalizes the project’s goals and objectives, per-
haps he can complete the work he needs to do in nine hours instead of ten 
and make suggestions that might help you in the future. But that comes at a 
cost. For your team members, you’re willing to pay that cost—in fact, you 
want to pay that cost. On the other hand, if people are only contributors, 
you’ve explicitly decided ahead of time that you can’t use them this way. 
Understanding the difference is vital to proper execution. 

Chapter 13 | Know the Roles 
 
194  
When you organize the team in an easy-to-understand and appropriate way,  
you have people in all three roles. Some are leaders, some are team mem-
bers committed to the project, and some are expert contributors who are 
accountable to their own function but willing to do whatever work you re-
quire. Good collaboration requires that everyone associated with the pro-
ject knows which of these they are and can conform to meet the expecta-
tion of these roles. It’s your job as project manager to explain to the pro-
ject’s members what their roles are and to manage them accordingly. 
The Importance of Role Definition 
Defining the roles within your project is the first step toward making your 
group of people into an actual team. And it’s this teamwork that you want 
to foster. People who identify as being on the same team are predisposed 
to like each other and work with each other, and they start from the de-
fault position of everyone wanting the same thing. Beginning from that 
stance makes a lot of problems disappear; and problems that exist are eas-
ier to solve better because people are working together to help reach the 
same objectives. 
Building your team to be effective and high performing is one of the more 
important tasks of a project manager early in the project. Structuring the 
team for success greatly influences the way that the team operates and 
works together. Creating a team whose members collaborate well, share 
their skills and knowledge, and support each other in pursuit of the project 
goals goes a long way toward a successful project. This requires correct and 
appropriate use of members at all levels, and clarity among the team mem-
bers about their roles on the project. Creating that structure and that clar-
ity is the job of the project manager. 
 Note  Structuring your team properly is key to creating a successful team. 
A high-performing team doesn’t just get a lot of work done. It’s also impor-
tant that the team provide a wide array of perspectives and ideas, potential 
solutions, and implementation strategies. These include everything from ad-
vocating for the users to basic technical best practices, as well as paying at-
tention to things like performance, efficiency, and ongoing support costs. 
Unless people know where they are in the project, you may create a col-
laboration challenge without realizing it. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
195  
In a high-performing team, people in every role, at every level of engage-
ment, know where they exist in the project organizational chart. This may 
not be a literal chart that you tack up on the wall, but it should be in peo-
ple’s heads. If people are uncertain about their role or not completely sure 
whether they’re on the team, then you have a problem to solve. You’re 
much better off being up front about your expectations and the needs of 
the team roles than trying to correct behavior after the fact. 
Project Team Member Roles 
Within a project team, members play different but equally important roles: 
functional manager, analyst, developer, tester/reviewer, and client interface. 
If your project is very small, team members may be asked to play more than 
one role at the same time. If your project is large enough, several people 
may play each position, just with a different focus. No matter what size 
team you wind up with, each project manager must decide who is playing 
the following roles and how they interact with the project itself. 
The list of roles isn’t balanced. It’s not unusual to have 1 person playing 1 
role, and 40 playing another. Nor is it unusual to have a team of three 
where each member is filling two or more roles at the same time. The key 
is to make sure all roles are covered and available to the project. Without 
them, your project is missing a key component that you must figure out 
how to get elsewhere. 
Functional Manager 
It’s rare for a true functional manager (the manager of a reasonable-sized 
team) to be a full member of your project team. If they’re dedicated to your 
project, then who is managing their team? However, there are cases where 
entire teams are assigned to projects, so you get the manager as a part of 
the bargain. When that occurs, you should treat the manager as a reviewer, 
which I get into in a minute. 
I’m talking about the functional manager who is most closely affiliated with 
your project. If you’re installing a new accounting package, it could mean the 
accounting manager; if you’re installing a new HRIS package, it could be the IT 
manager for the HR department. This kind of member straddles the line be-
tween stakeholder and team member. They’re issuing requirements and con-
straints, but they need to engage with the project more than just at that level. 
They should be (or at least feel) involved with the decision-making process. 

Chapter 13 | Know the Roles 
 
196  
They are team members because of their level of commitment to the suc-
cess of the project. If they’re truly working on behalf of the project and are 
interested in seeing it deliver what it’s supposed to deliver and execute well, 
then having this kind of person on your side is a wonderful boon to your 
project. If, for other reasons, they don’t want the project to go well, then 
you still need to treat them as member of the team. 
I once watched a project that was intended to rewrite the way my company 
did sales reporting. As you can imagine, sales reporting is a very critical, 
pressure-laden application. The company’s financial status and employee 
compensation were tied to it, so speed and accuracy were important for 
the system. The current system was pretty bad. It was down about 10% of 
the time, and although everyone agreed it was reasonably accurate, no one 
thought it was exactly right. Thus the project had the advantage of trying to 
replace a flawed system. 
As it happened, I knew Dave, the guy who was the manager of the sales-
reporting team. I didn’t ask him about the project specifically, but I knew 
he’d be interested. So when I bumped into the project manager, I said, “Hey, 
how’s it going with Dave? He’s a pretty good guy to work with.” The project 
manager looked at me a little blankly and then realized who I was talking 
about. She replied, “Uh, we haven’t looped him in yet.” This project never 
launched. 
If the functional manager is on the team, then you’re safe in treating them as 
a team member and probably using them as a reviewer. But if they aren’t, 
you still need to respect their interests and treat them as you would another 
team member. This includes invites to meetings, regular communications, 
and making them feel like part of the decision-making process. If you fail to 
do this, you create a barrier to the project that you must overcome—a bar-
rier that didn’t need to exist in the first place. 
Analyst 
I don’t believe I’ve ever uttered the following words: “This project has too 
many analysts assigned.” Well, maybe I have, but I probably didn’t believe it. 
A good analyst has a role on a project that is irreplaceable. A bad analyst 
can steer a project in a bad direction.  
An analyst has two separate but related duties. They must gather and collate 
data in a way that can be used to make decisions, and they must formulate a 
point of view or a recommendation from the data collected.  

No-Drama Project Management 
 
197  
The complication I’ve seen is that many people, on the project or not, feel 
they should have input into project decisions and prioritization. A good ana-
lyst knows how to best build a case using data and facts, provide some 
analysis, and allow the decision-maker to have the final say. But many pro-
jects and organizations are filled with amateur analysts—people who know 
how to mine data but don’t know how to make an actionable recommenda-
tion from the information they collect. 
Someone who can collect information but is unable to synthesize it enough 
to help drive decision-making isn’t very helpful. Likewise, someone who 
feels free to make recommendations that aren’t supported by data isn’t per-
forming a useful service. This issue can take two shapes. The analyst may 
draw conclusions that are actually in opposition to the data they’ve col-
lected, or they may make recommendations in the absence of data, going off 
their personal knowledge and experience. 
This is a very fine line for a project manager to walk. Analysts (and those 
who aspire to be analysts) are vital to a project’s success. Without good 
data and good analysis, you may not have the information and support to 
make the decisions the project needs. That said, beware of the following 
two types of analyst: first, someone who is unable to accept that projects 
accept multiple inputs and that even though their conclusions and recom-
mendations are accurate, they’re missing a piece of information that they 
has no real way to include; and second, someone who wants to participate 
and make decisions based on something other than the output of their 
work. Both types can be dangerous to a project. 
 Note  Be wary of people who are willing to provide conclusions that aren’t based on data. 
Here’s my favorite example of the first kind of problem. I consulted for a 
company that was experiencing fraud: customers were ordering items, re-
ceiving them in the mail, and then scheming different ways to not pay for 
them. From a financial standpoint, this was a nontrivial issue. The company 
was losing six figures of sales every month, and the problem was accelerat-
ing as the fraudsters became bolder. 
After looking at millions of transactions with several different attributes and 
drilling into each characteristic of the orders, our analyst said very definitively, 
“Overnight shipping orders placed on Thursday are the most fraudulent. If we 
stopped offering that service, we would save over $100,000 a month.” To be 

Chapter 13 | Know the Roles 
 
198  
fair, the data did support this claim. The theory was that the warehouse peo-
ple were so incented by on-time delivery that they knew orders placed on 
Thursday needed to be shipped, lest they be pushed into the weekend, and so 
they rushed to fulfill without looking hard enough at the orders. 
Someone else in the room said, “Did you look at how many sales we’d lose if 
we stop offering overnight on Thursday?” The answer shined a very harsh 
spotlight on the analysis. The answer was, “Uh… not that much.” The unfor-
tunate thing was that the conclusion had merit—a lot of our fraudulent or-
ders were indeed coming as overnight orders on Thursdays. But the analyst 
was so firm in his convictions, without checking other data, that we eventually 
had to excuse him from the project. There was no way to move forward. 
The second problem is much thornier. As a project manager, you need to 
make sure your team is balanced and that the roles are balanced. For in-
stance, it’s okay to have a dreamer on the team, as long as there is the 
counterbalance of a Joe Friday—a “just the facts” kind of person—to bring 
balance. In most of my projects, I expect my analyst to play that role. If 
someone has a fanciful idea or wants to make a decision based on feelings, 
turn to the analyst to see if there is any way to substantiate the decision. If 
the analyst decides to put aside the rigor needed to make fact-based deci-
sions and dream along with the other person, then you’re in trouble. 
 Note  Balance in team construction is at least as important as the team’s actual makeup. 
Here you’re dealing with a human-nature problem. All intelligent people like 
to engage in problems, even (maybe especially) problems that they aren’t 
equipped to help solve. I personally have next to no design skill, so when it 
comes time to unveil the creative output for the project, I’m willing to ex-
press my opinion but no more. I don’t claim to know whether or why some-
thing will work. I’m an expert in the statement “Looks fine to me,” but if I 
try to go into any more detail, I wind up making a fool of myself.  
This doesn’t just occur for people who carry the title Business Analyst. 
People in every walk of life feel like they’re experts at something that seems 
obvious to the uninitiated, such as website design or product quality. Ana-
lysts are specifically trained not to allow their own personal biases to over-
rule the data they have collected or the conclusions the data can lead them 
to. Some people on your team will have the ability to do analysis—look at 
business problems and formulate a point of view and a recommendation—

No-Drama Project Management 
 
199  
but they aren’t trained in the same skills. Often, these folks hold very strong 
convictions but without the proper discipline to ensure that their convic-
tions are accurate, or at least based on the information collected. My expe-
rience has shown that these kinds of people stick to their ideas more 
strongly than those who have evidence to support them. 
If you have analysts on your project, either by title or role, be sure they 
know that being an analyst means collecting data and formulating an opinion. 
Also, make it clear to them that they’re only one input into decision-making. 
Analysis of facts can only take you so far; if you only followed what you 
know for certain, you’d never take the appropriate risks in the business. Fi-
nally, make sure they recognize and accept their role and don’t drift into 
other, less data-driven positions. If you’re counting on them to be the voice 
of reason, you must make sure they stay in that zone. 
Developer 
I’ll use the word developer as shorthand for “anyone who is producing stuff 
on your project.” If you’re running a project that involves writing software, 
then this may literally be a developer, but it doesn’t have to be. It can be 
anyone from a tax specialist to a writer. Anyone who can take a specifica-
tion and deliver to it is a developer for your purposes. 
Developers should make up the bulk of your project team. You need people 
who are able to take a specified task and go off and complete it. If these de-
velopers are team members, then they should also have a sense of why 
they’re performing the task and where it fits into the overall delivery plan. If 
they’re only contributors, then it may be helpful for them to know why they 
have been given the task, but they generally don’t have time (nor do you) to 
try to understand the bigger picture. 
Developers can also have opinions and thoughts about the wisdom or qual-
ity of a certain course of action, and they should be encouraged to express 
them. However, like analysts, they need to be made aware that they aren’t 
the ones making the decisions; it’s also fairly rare for them to have the full 
picture. 
This often poses a different problem than the one you face with analysts. An 
analyst who thinks the project team is making a wrong decision can employ 
many strategies for making their feelings known. But in the end, they aren’t 
responsible for carrying out the results of the decision. On the other hand, 
developers need to execute on decisions, and the decisions may very well be 
ones they disagree with. And truth be told, the developer may be correct. 

Chapter 13 | Know the Roles 
 
200  
But it’s important not to let this become a self-fulfilling prophesy, where the 
developer doesn’t believe in the task they’re assigned and therefore doesn’t 
carry it out to the best of their ability. 
The strategy to help with this is complicated. You, as project manager, don’t 
need the team to agree with every decision made throughout the entire 
project. But they must carry out the decisions made, even if they don’t com-
pletely agree. You must achieve this without a team member gaining the 
mindset of a contributor, although in essence that’s exactly what you 
want—but only for this task. The developer must continue to focus on the 
project and be ready to contribute to the next discussion, even though this 
one didn’t go their way. 
Tester/Reviewer 
I’m listing these two roles together, even though they’re often filled by sepa-
rate people. The job of a tester/reviewer is to make sure that whatever the 
developers produced was done correctly: that it both delivers the requested 
functionality or use cases and matches the standards for acceptable work in 
the organization. These needs may seem at odds with each other—the de-
veloper must get as much work done as possible while delivering all the 
needed features and working to the level of quality the reviewer requires. It’s 
another tightrope walk. 
A project manager who views these folks as the enemy or as obstacles that 
need to be overcome is missing the point. Unless they’re extremely outside 
of your project scope, such as compliance or audit, you need to make sure 
these team members fully understand the project’s goals and objectives. 
More important, they need to understand what is important and what isn’t. 
This greatly influences how they respond as the project goes along. 
The worst position to take, in virtually all cases, is that all requirements are 
the same. If everything is a must-have, including technical requirements, then 
you can’t prioritize and figure out tradeoffs. Similar to the way you talk with 
your clients, you should use the vocabulary of importance and priority with 
your testers and reviewers. Of course, everything must be tested; and, of 
course, you want all work to be reviewed. But some items need a little more 
scrutiny than others. It would be difficult to disagree with this principle. 
This is how you should talk with testers and reviewers. You need to find out 
what they think is important and stress that they should give those things the 
most attention. You should also have a list of items that aren’t quite as im-
portant and that should get less attention. This isn’t cheating—it’s the right 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
201  
way to prioritize, although the reviewers may not be used to it. Don’t be 
afraid to explain that they should spend the majority of their time on the 
things that matter to them most. That’s what you do with your team, too. 
 Note  Proper prioritization goes for review and test, as well. 
You must also consider the review of things that aren’t important. Some ele-
ments of your project may be tested or reviewed and found to be not per-
fectly developed to specification, and you won’t act on them further. This is 
the sad outcome of an environment with limited resources and limited focus. 
If you aren’t going to fix defects, either functional or technical, then why test 
in the first place? You must explain the answer to your testers and reviewers.  
Be sure to define the items that the project or business deems important, 
and be open to the list of things the reviewers think are vital. But that will 
leave elements that no one feels are critical or in need of testing and valida-
tion. Resist the urge to allow reviewers to vigorously test these items “just 
in case.” If they feel they must look at these low-priority items, be sure you 
set the right expectation. Even if defects are found, there may not be time 
or resources to make changes. If you don’t set this expectation up front, 
you’re probably in for an argument later. 
Client Interface 
If you watch tales of what business was like in the 1950s or 1960s (say, on 
Mad Men), you see that no one talked to the client without the account 
manager (known as an “accounts man”) present. Those sensibilities have 
long since passed, and you’re usually in a situation where anyone can have 
contact and free, open discussions with the client. However, there was a 
reason things used to be done that way, and it isn’t entirely outdated. 
Being able to work with a client is a skill like any other. Some people are 
blessed with it; others take years to learn it. And we’ve all run into people 
who don’t have it. That’s okay—there are plenty of skills that each of us 
doesn’t have or could be much, much better at. But although people are 
willing to hear something like, “Susie is better than you at database optimi-
zation” or “Ralphie is a better graphic designer than you,” virtually no one is 
comfortable hearing, “Pete is a better talker than you are.” 

Chapter 13 | Know the Roles 
 
202  
Clients, internal partners, sponsors, or executives want two things in their 
collaboration with the project team: a few voices speaking, and speaking a 
consistent message. You don’t want to outright prevent your team members 
from speaking with the client (in fact, you probably can’t), but you should 
make sure the content of the conversation stays aligned, no matter who is 
speaking. And yes, you may want to prevent certain very underskilled team 
members from updating people outside the project. 
The easiest and most effective way to do this is by being direct. Make it 
clear that anyone can talk with anyone else, but the content of those discus-
sions should contain the message you want to send. In team meetings or 
other team communications, say things like, “If anyone happens to talk with 
the client, be sure to explain that…” or “If anyone is contacted by the pro-
ject sponsor, feel free to send them my way for any updates or questions.” 
 Note  No one ever regretted getting a clear and direct explanation of what their role on a project 
was supposed to be. 
Some people on your team will be fine. Many of your senior folks will have 
experience dealing with these kinds of conversations, and you shouldn’t dis-
courage them from continuing. But again, the way to do this is to be direct. 
The first time Sally asks your permission to meet with the client, let her 
know, “Sally, I trust you to do this without me, but let me know if anything 
weird comes up or you want my help afterward.” Sally now has the green 
light to use her judgment, which you hope is good. 
The client-contact role isn’t for everyone, even though many team members 
probably feel they should have it. You can’t hope to keep each person on 
the project team completely apart from everyone on the client side. But you 
can explain the importance of staying aligned in the conversations, and allow 
skilled team members the freedom to represent you and the project. 
Policing Roles 
Your team includes a mix of leaders, members, and contributors. It’s critical 
that people know their roles so they know how to act and what is expected 
of them. It’s equally important that you guide people back into their roles 
when they stray out of them.  

No-Drama Project Management 
203  
I used to have a really sharp engineer on my team. He was universally ac-
cepted as one of the best in the company. Problem was, he was only 26 
years old, and he didn’t feel like a leader. But there was no doubt he was the
leader on his teams and a leader in the entire company. Every so often, he 
forgot that his role was to lead and that other team members were looking 
to him for cues on how to behave. When he subconsciously slipped into 
team-member mode, the project suffered greatly. It took gentle pressure to 
remind him what his role was and how he needed to play it. 
This kind of thing happens all the time. Team members act like reviewers, 
analysts decide to take their findings directly to the client, and leaders be-
have like contributors. This definitely adds to project drama and is some-
thing you need to avoid. It’s a double negative: not only is someone acting in 
the wrong role and causing confusion, but also no one, or the wrong per-
son, is performing some other role. Confusion and lack of role clarity are 
sure to cause your project stress. 
At the start of the project, or at the beginning of a team-member engage-
ment with the project, have a very clear discussion with them. Describe the 
role you expect them to play, and tell them that if you see them acting in 
the wrong role, you’ll say something. It’s important to set both of these ex-
pectations before the project begins. And you need to follow through: make 
certain everyone is doing what they’re supposed to. 
If, along the way, you discover you have leaders who can’t lead, or client-
facing members who shouldn’t be in that role, or a team member who has 
skills you didn’t know about, then you need to make a change. The worst 
thing you can do is have people playing out of position due to need or gaps 
in performance. Your project will go much more smoothly with people as-
signed to and performing the right roles. 
Summary 
In addition to carrying out the traditional project-management responsibili-
ties, a good project manager knows that they need to structure their team 
in a way that sets up the team for success and limits drama and stress. This 
means constructing a team that aligns with the needs and objectives of the 
project, that can execute on the tasks that need to be completed, and that 
can communicate how they’re doing in a way that the project manager and 
team can understand. Almost all the items you need to consider will help or 
hurt one of those three attributes. 

Chapter 13 | Know the Roles 
 
204  
In addition, consider the levels of the team members. Be sure you have 
enough people in leadership roles, a large body of team members, and the 
appropriate number of contributors to execute specific project tasks. Every 
project is different and needs different numbers of each type of person, but 
there is little doubt that your project will need people of each kind. 
Understanding the role that each member is supposed to play, from re-
viewer to developer to client engagement to team leadership, is also key for 
a stress-free project. Setting each member’s expectation about their role 
and how you plan to manage them in that role is key to staying sane. Keep-
ing your eye on this is important for a smooth-running project. If you can’t 
provide clarity to the project about who is doing what, you wind up with 
confusion and drama. And that’s what you’re trying to avoid. 
  
 

C H A P T E R 
14 
Handling the 
Truly Unexpected 
“Uh oh…” 
Project managers are often viewed as professionals who create a plan and 
then execute to that plan while tracking status and providing updates. Some 
would say that the role of the project manager is to navigate the plan and 
the schedule while doing their best to avoid changes or difficulties. You 
probably know this is never the case. If you could simply create a plan and 
then execute it without any changes, adjustments, or problems, then your 
job could be done via an Excel macro. And I suspect you know that most of 
what you do every day could never be done with a few keystrokes. 
 Note  Project management is a lot more than color-by-numbers. 
To be fair, there is a role under the project-management umbrella for peo-
ple who do exactly what I just described. The act of taking a project plan 
and giving an accurate summary of where you are is a nontrivial task. But 
this task of merely managing the plan and schedule can be done without 
knowing the goals or objectives of the project, and without once communi-
cating with the client or the team. Depending on the size of the project, this 
role is vital to a smooth operation. It’s not what I’m talking about here. 

Chapter 14 | Handling the Truly Unexpected 
 
206  
When I talk about project managers, I mean people who manage the pro-
ject. It seems silly to say that, but there is no better way to describe the job 
without going back to the definition. Management requires active guidance 
and direction for all routine and non-routine tasks being done that further 
the aim’s objectives. It could be a project is very routine and doesn’t need a 
project manager, and an Excel macro will suffice. But real project managers 
never seem to get those projects, nor would we want them. 
Project management is about the ability to handle non-routine problems and 
keep your project on track and creating the value it’s supposed to create. 
As you’ve seen in past chapters, some of these non-routine problems really 
are routine. Challenges in communication or in client alignment plague more 
projects than not. Difficulty in managing scope or creating success criteria 
isn’t uncommon either. But sometimes new and unique problems occur 
within a project, and it’s up to you to figure out what to do about them. 
This is when you earn your living. 
There is also a class of problem that you can’t foresee but, with hindsight, 
should at least have been somewhat prepared to handle. This is a difficult 
balance. On the one hand, you couldn’t have known the problem would oc-
cur, either due to lack of experience or because you’re attempting some-
thing truly new in the marketplace. On the other, with the knowledge you 
now have, you realize the problem was a direct outcome of something you 
did or failed to do. This is a great thing to have happen to you, as the only 
way to learn the unknown is through experience 
One of the reasons you manage projects is the ability and opportunity to do 
and learn new things. You can move from industry to industry, from one 
problem domain to another, and carry your skills with you. This allows you 
to gain more domain expertise while sharpening your core abilities to get 
good work done. One way in which you grow as a manager is by facing and 
overcoming problems you’ve never had to deal with before. And you can 
only do that if you’re open to the idea that problems will occur and that it’s 
your responsibility to figure out the resolution. 
Not only do you gain experience and knowledge that enable you to over-
come these problems, but you’re also prepared for them in the future. You 
can help train your peers and team members about how to recognize and 
be ready for these kinds of interesting problems, making you more valuable 
in your project-management community. Having interesting problems makes 
for a good story; having routine ones doesn’t. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
207  
No-Drama Preparation 
The continuing themes of no-drama project management include communi-
cation, intentional decision making, and determining success criteria before 
attempting to create a solution. Another theme has been to expect prob-
lems that should have been expected. In this case, it means preparing for the 
problems you think may happen, before they actually do happen. It’s surpris-
ing how much value you gain by preparing for issues to arise, even in ways 
that may not be apparent. 
A friend of mine ran a project that involved getting a huge amount of raw 
materials—literally tons of the stuff—for a manufacturing facility in Europe. 
The vendor-selection process had resulted in choosing a supplier in Hong 
Kong. The project manager, my friend, was certain this wasn’t going to 
work. Although the vendor was fairly well established and seemed to be 
saying all the right things, he doubted they could actually supply all the ma-
terial he needed. He even told them that straight out. They told him not 
worry. 
But being a good project manager, he did worry. He crafted a few scenarios 
around the vendor’s inability to deliver, such as a partial delivery, no deliv-
ery, or a very late delivery. He also suggested that the vendor might ask for 
more money from us, in order to express-ship or otherwise expedite the 
material to the plant, and he worked out what that would do from a cost of 
goods sold (COGS) perspective and how it would impact the business case. 
If the vendor was going to be late in producing, he was ready. 
As it turned out, the vendor was true to their word. Right on schedule, a 
huge container full of materials was ready to ship. It was travelling by tramp 
steamer (or something equally slow) to a European port, but it would arrive 
in plenty of time for the market launch. Assuming the ship wasn’t attacked 
by pirates,1 there was nothing to worry about. My friend crossed “vendor 
delay” off the list. 
A couple of weeks later, the container arrived at the port. This was way 
ahead of schedule, furthering the delight of the project manager. He wasn’t 
there personally, but he sent someone from the plant to get it. Later that 
day, the guy who went to the port let the project manager know that the 
container hadn’t cleared customs yet, and he’d have to go back later. No big 
deal; it happens all the time. 
                                                
1 A great example of an unexpected problem. 

Chapter 14 | Handling the Truly Unexpected 
 
208  
But weeks passed, and the container was still stuck in customs. No amount 
of calling or pleading changed things. There was almost certainly nothing 
wrong or unusual about the container, but it wasn’t cleared. Of all the 
things my friend was tracking, “failure to clear customs” wasn’t one of them. 
We had done this kind of shipment several times before, and we expected 
to do so once a month for the foreseeable future, based on our understand-
ing of demand and how often we would need to replenish the inventory. 
This could have been a disaster. The project manager could have thrown up 
his hands and said this wasn’t anything he could control, and that customs 
delays and other governmental-type slowdowns weren’t the project’s fault. 
Because everyone agreed that he had done everything correctly and the 
whims of a few border officials were causing the problem, he would have 
been mostly in the right had he done so. 
But that’s not what the project manager did. He recognized that the actual 
problem wasn’t a delay at the border: it was the fact that the plant didn’t 
receive the raw materials in time to begin production. Although he wasn’t 
prepared to deal with customs officials, he was prepared to deal with this 
kind of delay. In fact, he had expected it to occur—only he thought it would 
be the fault of the supplier in Hong Kong. This is an example of not being 
prepared in specific, but being prepared in general. 
 Note  Sometimes it’s worth it to be prepared for outcomes, not causes. 
By being ready for the situation, the project manager was able to pull out 
the “late to plant” planning he had crossed off months before, and move on 
it. Rather than cause an excess of anxiety, he was able to say, “We weren’t 
prepared for this, but we were ready for something just like it.” That imme-
diately diffused the situation and moved the project away from blame and 
stress and into executing on a solution plan that was ready to go. 
Was Your Problem Unexpected? 
This leads to the next question your program manager or client will ask 
you: “How unexpected was this problem?” Although it can be difficult to 
prepare for the myriad causes and oddball occurrences, you should be pre-
pared for the impacts on the project. In the case just described, the impact 
was the late arrival of the material, not the customs delay. I highly doubt a 
v

No-Drama Project Management 
 
209  
good project manager would get away with making the assumption that the 
supply chain would work flawlessly the very first time they tried it. 
This kind of thinking should permeate your planning. Chapter 4 discussed 
the problems you may face when determining project priorities. There are 
many reasons this could be the case—many more than I recounted in that 
chapter, and probably more than I could fit into this book. However, it 
should be no secret to any project or program manager that difficulty in 
prioritization should be expected—or at least shouldn’t be unexpected. You 
may not know the cause, but the cause isn’t nearly as relevant as you think. 
Of course, it’s possible to have problems that were either unexpected or 
completely unknowable when the project began. Such issues make the job in-
teresting and teach you new things. Sometimes they’re particular fine points 
that are linchpins holding everything up. Other times, they’re mammoth 
problems that no one was aware of until you got started. Or they may have 
next to nothing to do with your project. 
A colleague of mine was running what seemed to be a fairly benign, nearly 
paint-by-numbers project to add more stock art to our artists portfolio. We 
had done this many times before, and the process was neither hard nor fas-
cinating. He assigned himself this project because he knew it wouldn’t be dif-
ficult, and he could run it along with all the other duties he needed to man-
age. As it turned out, he was wrong about how much time it would take, 
but he was glad he had called his own number, because the problem was 
pretty thorny. 
 Note  Truly unexpected problems take senior management and firm guidance. 
It turned out we had a huge database of stock images that we had bought a 
very long time ago from a company that was at the time fairly new. We had 
signed a very aggressive, very favorable license that the supplier would never 
be willing to sign again. As part of adding the new library to the package, we 
would be slightly altering how we were using this supplier’s images; this 
would represent a change to our license. 
This company was always looking for a reason to change our license, but 
none of us knew this. It never occurred to us to put on the list of project as-
sumptions something like, “Vendor may refuse to sell to us even at full list 
price.” Even now, I don’t think we’d list that—it seems like the kind of thing 

Chapter 14 | Handling the Truly Unexpected 
 
210  
that’s fair to assume in the normal course of doing business. Well, in this case, 
the supplier was agitated enough that they wouldn’t sell to us at any price.  
This was causing a bit of a problem, because we had begun making commit-
ments to clients for products that were made with this art. The vendor 
probably didn’t know this, so they weren’t trying to stick it to us—they just 
wanted out of a very unfavorable contract. We had no backup plan. We 
were stuck. Once we realize this, we had little choice but to raise the issue 
with our client and sponsor. 
We didn’t own the relationship with the vendor, nor did we own the rela-
tionship with the end consumers who were buying the products made from 
this package. All we could do was seek guidance for how and whether we 
should proceed. It’s one of the few times in a software project when I had 
no advice to give. No amount of schedule or budget changes could solve 
this problem. If the vendor wouldn’t work with us, and the vendor manager 
on our side wouldn’t budge, then we should go do something else. 
Before I get into the strategies for what to do next, it’s important to note 
how much drama a truly unexpected problem can bring into a project. 
There is a sense of, “What are we doing to do?” in the team, because every 
single solution is either out of their ability to control or possibly out of their 
scope to influence. The right thing to do at this point is not to say, “I don’t 
know what we’re going to do.” The right thing is to explain that when a 
truly unexpected, material problem occurs in a project, there are strategies 
to follow, and you expect to follow one of them. Keep the team from wor-
rying, because no amount of worry will make things better. Let them know 
you’re aware of the problem and presenting strategies to the client shortly, 
and they should sit tight until that happens. Be sure to communicate with 
the team as often as possible; when no information is available, people tend 
to invent their own bad news. 
Strategies for the Unexpected 
Once you’ve determined that you do have a material, unexpected problem 
in your project, the right thing to do is to call it out to the sponsor, the cli-
ent, or whoever is empowered to make a go-forward decision. The material 
problem may be an unexpected obstacle of some kind, a change in market 
conditions, or a drastic change in the environment. Whatever it is, you can’t 
ignore it, and continuing down the path you’re currently on won’t lead you 
anywhere good.  

No-Drama Project Management 
 
211  
 Note  Material problems should cause material changes; if they don’t, you should be careful. 
When this happens, your project has three avenues of approach: restart, re-
vise, or rescope. Each is fraught with its own challenges, and each has its 
own strengths. There are many factors to consider when determining which 
is the right way to head. Let’s look at each one. 
Restart  
Restarting a project is the most drastic of actions and therefore the one I 
discuss first. This is usually caused by a shift in the business case for a pro-
ject. This may mean the project’s costs have increased or its expected prof-
itability has decreased. Either will greatly impact the project’s return on in-
vestment (ROI). It may also be that the environment or client priorities have 
changed, causing the project charter’s initial foundation to no longer be valid. 
Whatever is the reason, the original value of the project is no longer true. 
From a project-management perspective, you’re running a new project. 
Granted, the project deliverables may look the same, and the plans you were 
going to use are probably still close to accurate, but the project’s value defini-
tion is different, and the ROI calculation isn’t the same. This should set off 
warning bells in your head, and you should take care to revalidate that the 
project is worth continuing. If you decide to continue it, you should gain an 
understanding of where the project falls in the priority list. If it used to be the 
top project in the portfolio, it was probably resourced and supported in a 
specific way. If it’s now in the middle or toward the bottom, you can probably 
expect different treatment. You need to know before you’re surprised. 
A company I once worked for had a project to start construction of novelty 
products. We believed we could use our existing manufacturing lines to be-
gin making a new kind of product: one that would hit a different market 
than we traditionally sold into. This would be an interesting way to take ad-
vantage of existing capabilities. Without having to change anything, we could 
create products that would sell to a new customer base, thus ensuring that 
we weren’t cannibalizing our existing sales. 
It then turned out that our existing manufacturing lines couldn’t make the 
products we had hoped. Something about tolerances or clearance—I never 
quite understood. Anyway, new equipment would need to be sourced and 
purchased, floor space found, and operators trained and hired. The expected 

Chapter 14 | Handling the Truly Unexpected 
 
212  
revenue for the case remained the same, but the cost structure took a dras-
tic turn for the worse. 
From the business side, we probably did the right thing: we reforecast the 
COGS, lowered the profit expectations, and published this new information 
far and wide. We were open and honest—perhaps too much so. What we 
did not do, however, was change the attitude of the project team members, 
and this caused significant drama later in the project. 
When the original project began, people wanted to be assigned to it. It was a 
pretty big deal—a new product line, great profitability numbers, and a level 
of team (both in numbers and qualifications) that matched the importance of 
the project. The team wasn’t overly arrogant; but members knew they were 
a good team on a good project, and they acted as such. As we moved for-
ward with the new project, which had lower profitability and priority, the at-
titude of the team was in conflict with the project charter. 
As one of the lower-value projects in the portfolio, it was sacrificed con-
stantly to make more important projects better: one or two of the best peo-
ple were reassigned to other projects, requests to other groups were serv-
iced more slowly, and so on. This frustrated the team, which was still acting 
as if it were working on the first project instead of the second one. 
By “second one,” I mean we should have restarted the project, and perhaps 
given it a different name and a different team. Other than the final product, 
very little stayed the same from the initial project to the subsequent one. 
The reason we didn’t restart the project or completely recast it as some-
thing else was almost certainly a failure in client management. And that’s the 
key point. 
 Note  Restarting a project is more of a client-management challenge than a project-
management challenge. 
Restarting a project is difficult. Often, it’s more difficult than starting a new 
one. A new project has the advantage of nothing having gone wrong and no 
disappointments to report, no matter how small. Taking a project that was 
green-lit to run, and going all the way back to business-case creation and re-
approval, puts the entire project at risk. The client or sponsor is under-
standably reluctant to do this. Any time you bring a project back for ap-
proval, there’s a chance it won’t be approved in its new form. No client 
wants to hear that. But as a project manager, you must get someone to 
make this decision. 

No-Drama Project Management 
213  
If you don’t take the project back to be reapproved in its new state—or if 
you’re legitimately worried that it won’t be approved if the truth is known 
and examined—then you’re essentially running a project that was never ap-
proved. It’s hard to imagine something that can cause more confusion and 
chatter. If the project ROI calculation no longer works, you shouldn’t be 
running the project, period. Hiding this fact does no one any good, and it 
will probably cause harm down the road. 
On reflection, if you think the project needs material revision in value, 
scope, or cost, or is starting to feel like a different project to you, then you 
should work with the client to reshape it as a new project. You may lose 
this one in favor of something else. But if that’s the case, better now than in 
six or more months, when either you deliver something that doesn’t create 
the expected value or your team begins wondering why the project isn’t as 
important as it once was. Remember, you want the client and the team to 
work with you again. Make the correct call at this juncture, rather than de-
livering something that no one is excited about. 
Revise 
Not every project that hits a problem or big change needs to be halted or 
restarted. If that were the case, you’d probably never get a chance to launch 
anything, because we live in a dynamic and changing environment. Some-
times it’s possible to change a project in a way that doesn’t have a meaning-
ful impact on the project’s value positioning. In fact, this happens more often 
than not. 
This tends to happen with a project that needs to increase its scope by 5% 
to 10%, change the specific resources assigned, alter its schedule slightly, or 
suffer a one-time cost. Some of these things can also cause a restart: for ex-
ample, if the one-time cost means that instead of being profitable in year 
one, the project now has a payback period of four years, that’s a material 
change. Similarly, if you’re planning to launch a product for the Christmas 
season, but a delay will push the launch into February, you have a serious 
change on your hands.  
But in many cases, a simple revision is possible. Perhaps you need to delay 
the project by weeks, not months. Or the missing item you need to buy has 
a non-meaningful impact on the profitability of the end result. Except in the 
smallest of projects, revisions are more likely to occur than not. Most of 
what you’re doing has never (or rarely) been done before, so you’re con-
stantly learning new things along the way: things that invalidate plans you 

Chapter 14 | Handling the Truly Unexpected 
 
214  
made months or quarters ago. This isn’t a sign of failure or poor execution; 
it’s a fact of the project manager’s life. 
This issue is one of the reasons companies deploy professional project man-
agers for important efforts. In many organizations, project managers are 
well within their rights to shuffle the people on their project, change the 
project plan, or do whatever is necessary within the initial budget to deliver 
the project. This often takes a serious amount of creativity from the project 
manager and trust from the client and team. Usually, the amount of time 
spent analyzing a revision is a mere fraction of the time spent creating the 
initial plan, but you desire the client and team to have the same level of con-
fidence in the revised plan as the initial one. 
Nearly all projects go through some revision. Some project-management 
methodologies and organizations require that each change be removed from 
the original project and managed separately using a change order2 or some-
thing similar. Sometimes it’s possible to use the existing people in a different 
way in order to keep the project going.  
For instance, once, in the middle of a project, we collectively decided that 
we should do some focus-group usability testing. The cost of the testing was 
nominal (the room and facilitator were fairly cheap), but it required that we 
have a mostly working prototype of the product for the subjects to do their 
testing on. Not only did this prototype not exist, but it was never in the 
plan to make one. It was likely to require two or three weeks of work if we 
wanted to get any meaningful results from the test. 
The first step the project manager took was to understand the value of the 
request. Sometimes revisions seem very important and highly valuable be-
cause they’re the latest thoughts someone had. Before you proceed, make 
sure you aren’t running into the fallacy of “most recent wins.” In this case, it 
was clear early on that everyone was on board with doing this kind of testing. 
It was a new product in a new market, and all we had was our own experi-
ence and best guesses to see if we got it right. Some of the people on our 
team were pretty sure our guesses were correct, but no one was willing to 
say they knew for certain. So, usability testing was scoped into the project. 
 Note It’s important to confirm that revisions have the right level of value. It’s easy to fall in the 
trap of “most recent request wins,” even though that may not be the right thing to do. 
                                                
2 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Change_order. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
215  
The second step was to figure how to pay for it, or in this case, how to re-
source the building of the prototype. This would require weeks of work, 
and we knew it should be done by someone familiar with the project. If we 
brought in an outsider, the overall cost of the project would increase and 
we’d have to train the person and explaining the project’s goals and objec-
tives. Otherwise the prototype wouldn’t be useful. 
The client was unwilling to shoulder the cost of adding four to five weeks of 
an engineer to get this done, but they did want the prototype built. So, the 
project manager proceeded to the third step: determining how to use the 
existing team and budget to do the work. As it turned out, the project plan 
included some important but not urgent items, as well as a couple of not-
important, not-urgent items. For people who know Steven Covey’s prioriti-
zation categories,3 these are Quadrant II and Quadrant IV activities. 
Eliminating a few of these tasks from the bottom freed up one of our web 
engineers and a database programmer. They weren’t the ideal team to build 
the prototype, but they were pretty good, and they had the right qualities. 
They built a very useful prototype. The usability testing confirmed that our 
initial guesses were mostly correct, and now we knew for sure. 
But this created a change in the original project. Some of the items we 
planned to deliver were off the project and might never be delivered. The 
project manager needed to ensure that the client knew this and wouldn’t be 
surprised or upset when the project closed. If you have a very good, ongo-
ing relationship with a client, you may get away with telling them something 
like, “Remember, because of the prototype, you’re not getting that auto-
mated testing thing you originally requested.” But even that rarely works, 
because one or both of you eventually forget. 
This is where the revision process comes in, and it’s a judgment call. You 
need to answer this question: “Is this a material change to the project?” This 
doesn’t mean a normal change or alteration that comes through require-
ments refinement or deep-level analysis that wasn’t available originally. 
Changing a user interface (UI) element from a link to button doesn’t apply. 
It’s also possible that removing bits of originally requested functionality 
doesn’t apply, if it’s decided that the functionality either isn’t needed or isn’t 
that important. Material changes are things that, if not delivered, will cause 
the client to ask for a refund. 
                                                
3 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First_Things_First_(book). 

Chapter 14 | Handling the Truly Unexpected 
 
216  
 Note  Beware of being casual about important things. 
If you think you’re facing a true change in the project, you need a revision 
process. I don’t necessarily mean a legal document that requires sign-off, or 
something that gets encased under glass for all the world to see—although, 
in some cases, this isn’t a bad idea. You need to signal to the client that this 
change is different from others, and you want everyone to remember it later 
in the project—including yourself. A project revision is different than a small 
change, and it deserves a different kind of treatment. 
Rescope  
Rescoping a project falls between restarting and revising. With a restart, 
you’re saying, “This is an entirely new project.” With a revision, you’re send-
ing the message that the project is essentially the same, but with some impor-
tant differences from the baseline. With a rescope, you’re adding to a project, 
but without touching the original project. This is how most consulting com-
panies stay in business: they sign you up for one project and then continue to 
add to it until the size of the additions is bigger than the original engagement.  
That’s not necessarily a bad thing, but it’s rarely correct for it to be the de-
fault solution. Adding to a project almost certainly increases cost, and it’s un-
likely to add commensurate value. The additions may add value, but they usu-
ally don’t do so at the same rate the project was originally intended to do. 
But that is sometimes okay. Even though a change may lower the ROI of a 
project, the ROI may still be good enough. One of the questions I tend to 
ask my project managers when they want to rescope a project is, “If we had 
known this before we started, would we have approved the project?” The 
answer is in the affirmative a surprising amount of the time, which is proba-
bly a sign that many projects are intended to have a good enough return 
that they can withstand some added cost. My project managers know not to 
start their answer with, “No, but…” because whatever follows isn’t rele-
vant. Sure, we may decide to add scope to a project for important reasons 
other than ROI, but that’s not what I’m asking about. 
Similar to revising, rescoping should be done intentionally and transpar-
ently. Some project managers call whatever is in the newly scoped project 
“Phase 2.” I often encourage them to name it specifically after the addi-
tional functionality. If you were planning to sell square widgets, and you’ve 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
217  
decided to add the ability to make and sell round ones, then don’t call the 
entire project Widgets. The additional work is either Widgets Phase 2 or, 
even better, Round Widgets. That makes the extension’s purpose clear to 
everyone involved. 
This is an important because sometimes the client or sponsor changes their 
mind about Phase 2. Cooler heads prevail, or they get a better idea, or mar-
ket conditions change, and they no longer want round widgets (although 
they still wants square ones). Oh, and they’re sorry for putting you through 
the trouble.  
This is a good reason to keep the extension separate. If you decide to add a 
material amount of new scope into a running project, you’ll wind up conflating 
the two. Interleave their planning, execution, and release, and soon enough, 
you won’t have a project and a rescope: you’ll have one project. Extracting 
the parts that formed Phase 2 will be more work than you anticipate.  
 Note  Once two plans are merged, they’re hard to unmerge. 
Additionally, you want to know how much time has already been spent on 
the rescoped part of the project—not so you can measure the sunk costs, 
but because you and the client deserve the visibility into what that decision 
and change cost. Even if you decide to run the two things together, you 
should keep your documentation, planning, and other artifacts separate, so 
you can tell one from the other. 
Managing Fallout 
As the project manager, you’re likely to be asked something like, “How did 
this happen?” There is no way to avoid this question, nor should you want 
to. And there are as many answers as there are projects. In your mind, 
separate these two topics: “How did we get here?” and “What are we going 
to do now?” How you manage the former impacts your relationship with 
the sponsor or client, whereas how you manage the latter strongly affects 
your relationship with your team and management. It’s possible to maintain 
your relationship with both these groups—and even improve it. 
You must realize that these two questions have very different areas of fo-
cus. You may have been involved in the process that caused a big miss in the 

Chapter 14 | Handling the Truly Unexpected 
 
218  
requirements or solution design. Or perhaps an initial assumption turned 
out to be so wrong that it invalidated the entire foundation of the project. 
Of course, it’s also possible that the error happened before you were in-
volved in the project, or maybe the miss wasn’t a mistake at all—it was un-
knowable until the project began. The key thing is that it doesn’t matter. All 
mistakes are learning opportunities, and whether it was you who made the 
mistake is immaterial. How you got where you are is probably factually de-
terminable.  
For instance, I once consulted for a company that was in the process of buy-
ing another, much smaller, company in a different country. Originally, this 
was supposed to be a “buy and hold” acquisition. The purchasing company 
was going to buy the smaller company, merge the financials and balance 
sheets, and let the acquired company run as an arms-length subsidiary for 
the foreseeable future. This was probably a good idea at the time. 
However, it became known in the industry that the subsidiary was owned 
by the parent (the company-issued press release didn’t help keep this se-
cret) and that the subsidiary had a much different level of quality than the 
parent. Mid-project, the sponsor decided that allowing the subsidiary to 
produce substandard products would do too much damage to the parent’s 
brand. Therefore, the project was rescoped to include increasing product 
quality. This acquisition-quality project turned out to be bigger than the ini-
tial project. 
It became relatively well accepted that this project was the right thing to do. 
It was also widely wondered how we ever thought we could not do it. But 
truthfully, at the time, this was a reasonable decision. The decision was 
made before anyone knew how public the announcement would be or how 
substandard the subsidiary’s products were. It was an understandable error, 
but it was an error nonetheless. 
Neither you nor the client should try to hide from the cause of a problem, 
but you also shouldn’t let it affect what you do in response. This gets into 
the second issue: what to do next. Even if the problem was a complete miss 
and was specifically and solely caused by you, that doesn’t mean you 
shouldn’t create the plan; you’re still the project manager, after all. Don’t 
wait for permission or seek approval to create the plan for what to do next. 
It’s your responsibility until you’re told otherwise. 
Being able to segregate the cause and the solution is a vital skill not just for 
this occurrence but also for many things in your projects. Often the cause 
isn’t known, but you’re still on the hook for crafting a solution. Likewise, the 
cause can be so far removed from the actual impact that casual analysis 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
219  
doesn’t yield anything useful or actionable. Be clear about not getting hung 
up on who or what caused the problem, and instead focus on how to work 
your way out of it. 
Managing the Team 
How you react to problems that are truly unexpected is an important factor 
in the success or failure of a project. If you let the decision take too long, or  
if you continue to plow ahead as if nothing is amiss, you’ll begin to lose your 
team. They will very shortly know that something is wrong, and pretending 
not to notice won’t calm them down. In fact, it’s likely to cause them to think 
you don’t know what’s going on, which will bring drama to your project. 
Once you recognize that the project you’re running can’t be successful in its 
current state, you need to do something else—and you need to do it in a 
constructive, open way. Continuing on a doomed path will win you no fa-
vors with your client or your team. And attempting to “fix” it in secret is 
also unlikely to curry favor with anyone. Of course, you don’t want to shout 
“My project is failing!” over the corporate intercom, but your team and cli-
ent know that changes are coming, and you should be up front about them. 
This is even more important between the time that the need for change is 
obvious, and the change is actually made. It’s not uncommon for this span of 
time to last for weeks, and those are precious weeks for the project. If you 
create a situation where your team is dispirited or doubts the project will 
continue, or if you let them think there is no reason to continue working, 
then you’ve harmed your project in an unforgiveable way. 
I acknowledge that this is a tightrope walk. But it emphasizes why you need 
to be open and honest, as well as clear and decisive. You still have a plan, 
and most of that plan probably remains valid. If you can keep your team 
working on the things you know will continue and add value, then you 
should do so. If you can’t, then maybe the team shouldn’t be working on the 
project. A few days of busy-work and writing project documentation won’t 
hurt anyone, and the breather may be welcome. But if days stretch into 
weeks, or weeks into months, then you’ve harmed your ability to get the 
team moving in the proper direction again. 
 Note  Remember the needs of the team while decisions are being made. 

Chapter 14 | Handling the Truly Unexpected 
 
220  
For this reason, rescoped or restarted projects often lead to a go-forward 
team. It may not be a good idea to try to pick up and continue with the ex-
act same team with the exact same makeup. The team may be missing a 
needed skill, or the new schedule may require different availability. But it’s 
also a wise idea to bring in one or more people who don’t know the project 
hit a bump in the road and is now on its second chance. You still have team 
members who are more motivated than ever to make the project a success, 
mixed with new blood who are energized by the project.  
Summary 
Despite the theme of this book—that many of the problems projects face 
were predictable and probably avoidable—many issues fall into neither cate-
gory. If all problems were predictable and avoidable, the project manager’s 
job would be pretty boring and unimportant. How you recognize and deal 
with these kinds of issues is what separates a project manager from a pro-
ject administrator or secretary. 
You can help in these situations by being prepared. Although it sounds like 
I’m saying you need to be prepared for all unexpected possibilities, that’s 
not quite the truth. In many cases, you can’t predict the cause of a problem, 
but you can predict the impact of the problem ahead of time. Consider the 
example in which my friend knew it would be a problem if materials arrived 
late to the manufacturing plant. Even though the reason the materials were 
late was totally unexpected, the notion that it might happen led the project 
manager to be prepared with a plan for what to do in that eventuality. Hav-
ing that plan saved a lot of stress and drama from creeping into the project. 
Before you add excitement and worry to your project team or client, make 
sure the problem you’re facing was truly unexpected, and not just a flavor of 
a problem you’re prepared to handle. If you decide to treat this issue as 
something no one could be ready to deal with, then you either needlessly 
raise your team’s anxiety level or look foolish in front of the team when you 
discover that the solution was thought of before the project began. 
If you face a problem that you can’t solve with a predetermined strategy, 
and it’s material enough that it changes the shape of the project, you can 
pursue three different avenues: you can restart the project, you can revise 
the project, or you can rescope it. Each strategy has its place in the project 
manager’s arsenal. 
If the new information about the project causes such a change that it’s really 
a different project, then restarting it may make sense. And if going back to 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
221  
the beginning means the project doesn’t get approved, it’s better to deter-
mine that now rather than after you deliver it.  
If the problem to be overcome is solvable within the current project budget, 
as long as a few things are removed, then consider revising the project. This 
works best when the problem to be solved is of undisputable high priority 
and the project already includes some lower-priority items.  
If neither of these strategies will work, then you’re probably facing adding 
time and effort to your project by rescoping it. Rescoping isn’t always a bad 
thing, but it’s a sign of something big enough to need its own name.  
At some point in the process, the project manager must deal with the fall-
out, even if they weren’t involved when the mistaken decision was made. 
Mistakes are chances to learn and improve and shouldn’t be used as ways to 
blame and point fingers. Each mistake makes you smarter for the next time, 
so a thoughtful discussion about what decisions were made and how mis-
takes could happen can only help you and your team in the future. 
This analysis of the problem shouldn’t impede your determination of the so-
lution. They’re separate exercises. Conflating the two will more than likely 
yield a disappointing result and cause more problems down the road. 
Creating solutions for your team structure and the problem itself are both 
important to a healthy project going forward. You should call out the prob-
lem in the first place to help steer the project back on the path to success—
an act that can be disruptive. Using this intentional disruption to set things 
right is a good use of time and energy. Doing it intentionally and openly 
helps keep your team engaged and avoids drama during the process. 
  

C H A P T E R 
15 
The End of Drama 
“Let’s do it all again!” 
Chapter 1 talked about why you’re a project manager. One of the most 
compelling reasons is that your job requires you to do new things, learn 
new topics, and, often, launch new products. It’s a job where the principles 
remain the same, but the problem domain, industry, and challenges are ever 
changing. Being able to take your old skills and apply them toward new and 
different frontiers is something very few other positions can claim. 
But that comes with a cost: you must always be improving your skills as a 
project manager and your general and industry expertise. Along the way, 
you’re allowed—indeed, expected—to make lots of mistakes. However, 
you’re also required to not continually make the same mistakes and, ideally, 
to never make the same mistakes twice. If you work in a program or a multi–
project manager environment, this can be even more challenging—you’re ex-
pected to not make any of the mistakes any other PM has made, either. 
 Note  Project managers are expected to make mistakes. But only once. 
To make this work, you need an environment in which you’re learning from 
each other and viewing each other as members of the same team. While 
you’re all dealing with different clients and working on different and existing 
projects, you’re tied together by the thin thread of being accountable to 
each other. Don’t discount the value of having someone to talk with who 
has been in a similar situation. Sometimes you’re doing the talking, and 

Chapter 15 | The End of Drama 
224  
sometimes you’re doing the asking. But either way, the more you can make 
your team into a team of project managers, the better off you’ll all be. 
All project managers aspire to have projects run with less stress. This 
doesn’t mean every project is a rousing success or a shining example of a 
perfectly executed plan. Rather, it means you faced problems, just like any 
other project; you handled them in a way that didn’t cause more anxiety 
than necessary; and you didn’t get in the way when trying to navigate a diffi-
cult situation. In short, you’re looking to run projects without the drama 
that sometimes comes along for the ride. 
No-Drama Project Management 
Throughout this book, I’ve talked about the many ways a project manager 
can contribute to the drama of a project. What I didn’t discuss specifically is 
how to avoid drama entirely. There is no recipe to follow or checklist to 
keep in hand that can help you avoid the kind of unproductive anxiety that 
can arise when things are going wrong. But I hope you picked up on the key 
themes that will limit the drama among your clients and team members. 
They include preparation, being open and honest, and treating communica-
tion as a project deliverable that needs to be managed like any other feature. 
Preparation  
One of the quickest ways to create drama in a project is insufficient prepa-
ration. As Chapters 10 and 11 discussed, this covers both traditional project 
planning and what I call no-drama preparation. The former includes normal 
project-management artifacts such as dependency plans, work-breakdown 
structures, Gantt charts, and other elements that are basic to project man-
agement. The latter is a bit more nuanced. 
Being prepared doesn’t mean you have every possibility covered, or ready-
made plans for any eventuality. There is no way to predict every single thing 
that can go awry in a project; if you try, you’ll never have time to manage 
the project. However, it’s significantly less challenging to prepare for the 
outcomes you want to avoid.  
For instance, if you have a key person on your project, you may be con-
cerned about what would happen if they weren’t around. This could happen 
in a variety of different ways. The person could quit in a huff, win the lottery, 
or be injured in the corporate softball league. They could be reassigned to a 
more important project or be called on to rescue something else. Maybe a 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
225  
high-ranking executive wants to recruit the person onto their team. The 
number of possibilities is too high to count—and this is only one risk.  
So, don’t worry about what can go wrong. You’ll drive yourself crazy if you 
try. Worry about how a problem will impact the project, and what you can 
do about it when it happens. The good news is, this is a lot easier to manage 
and provides the greatest flexibility. The bad news is, it means your prepara-
tions require some creativity to execute. Because your plans will be close to 
the problem at hand, instead of the exact problem at hand, it will be up to 
you to make the mitigation strategies fit. But that’s why project managers 
are assigned to projects in the first place. 
Being Open and Honest 
These are two separate things, because you can be one without being the 
other. Being open is about being transparent with your team, your client, 
and your organization. If things are going the way you hoped, or maybe they 
aren’t, your team should know about it. One of the worst feelings as a team 
member is the sense that things are happening and everyone knows about it 
but you. Even if it isn’t true (perhaps especially if it isn’t true), it creates a 
sense of paranoia in your team member that is never positive. 
There is value in letting team members see you manage. Sometimes your in-
stinct is to “take something offline,” but you should instead do the manage-
ment where the team can see it. This can also mean letting them sit in on 
planning sessions, or sharing with them what’s on your mind. There’s a limit, 
of course, but you should bring your team into the process a lot more than 
you probably are currently. The more open your team feels you are with 
them, the more open they will be in return. 
Being honest is a totally different challenge. My experience tells me that 
everyone appreciates the truth, even when the truth is bad news. Few peo-
ple like being tricked or deceived; it doesn’t matter if your intentions were 
good, such as to protect a team member or delay an unpopular decision un-
til more information can be gathered. Truth that is negative isn’t any less 
true, and your team understands this. 
 Note  People mind criticism a lot less when it’s true. 
The project managers in my program send out status updates. Some do it 
weekly, some do it monthly, but they all do it. One of them added a stop 

Chapter 15 | The End of Drama 
 
226  
light (literally clip art of a stop light) to show whether a project is red, 
green, or yellow. I didn’t ask for this, because I felt I could read the update 
and decide for myself whether the project was in good shape. One week 
the project manager sent out an update with a bright green light at the top, 
but the details in the message led me to believe the project wasn’t green. I 
didn’t stress over it—I had the details I needed—but I had to ask, “What is 
keeping you from calling this project yellow?” 
The answer was incredibly interesting to me. The project was indeed in a 
little trouble (it was temporary—the project was back on track within three 
weeks), and almost everyone knew it. The team had a meeting to talk about 
the risks they were facing, and they came up with a pretty solid plan for 
dealing with the problem. They were acting on the plan, but they were a bit 
less than half done when it was time to send out a new update. 
The project manager told me he didn’t want to dispirit the team by sending 
out anything other than green. Sure, the project was a bit rocky, but they 
had come up with a great plan, and the team was working hard on it. Why 
broadcast to the greater community that the project wasn’t going well, when 
everything either was under control or shortly would be under control? 
I understood and appreciated this sentiment, but I thought it was wrong and 
that his client and team would see through it. The client was involved in the 
planning process along with the entire team, and they all knew something 
was going on. Deciding to call the project green anyway was disingenuous 
and not entirely truthful. One of the team members told me, “Maybe he’s 
grading on a curve.” 
The funny thing is that doing this, although well-intentioned, caused the pro-
ject manager to miss out on several opportunities. The first was the chance 
to spark the team when the project slipped from a legitimate green to a solid 
yellow. There is power in telling your team you’re in a mess and asking that 
they pull together to get out of it. If you tell the world everything is fine, you 
lose the ability to play this card. Even more depressing was the opportunity 
lost when the team pulled out of it, which I knew that they would. Once they 
set things back on course by working hard and tracking to their plan, no one 
knew it. The team missed a chance to be congratulated, because no one out-
side the team knew they had performed an impressive project rescue. 
 Note  Your team will support you if you say you need support. Otherwise, they will assume noth-
ing is wrong. 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
227  
The good thing about the truth is that you can show it’s true, and no one 
can get on your case for telling it. Better to be up front and truthful about 
project status, team mistakes, or anything else that is going on. You can al-
ways provide context along with it, but it’s very difficult to explain a state-
ment that turns out not to be true.  
Treating Communication Like a Deliverable 
This last point is both the easiest and hardest to grasp. As discussed in pre-
vious chapters, for most of the project, communication is all the client re-
ceives from you. This is the way your client, sponsor, and team judge how 
well you’re managing the project and how on top of everything you are. 
Therefore, treat your communications like any other project deliverable. 
This means gathering requirements ahead of time, understanding what is 
important, and following up after the fact to measure value. If you’re sending 
out a communication to more than one person, the chances are incredibly 
high that your audiences have different needs. So, you’re unlikely to meet all 
their needs with a one-size-fits-all strategy. If your audience measures in the 
dozens of people, you may need to say the same thing multiple times in dif-
ferent ways and venues. This is a good thing. 
Communication in the project sense involves making someone else under-
stand what’s going on, what the key decisions are, and where the project 
currently stands. Because everyone has a different need and a different area 
of focus, you should take the time to understand how each person wants to 
be communicated with, how often, and by whom. Along the way, continue 
to ask if your messages are being understood and reaching the correct peo-
ple. If you leave your communications to chance, it will only be luck if you 
happen to get it right. 
Fortunately, you know how to create deliverables. You can figure out what 
you need to do, specify it, deliver it, and then measure it after the fact. This 
is what you do most of the day. Once you acknowledge that project com-
munications are vital to the project and deserve to be treated as a first-
order requirement, you can shift your thinking about them. Rather than be-
ing a task you need to do that takes up your time, they become something 
you get to deliver and on which you’re judged and measured. The shift is 
palpable, and it creates a much different quality of project. It’s a change well 
worth making.  
The no-drama project manager spends extra time on being prepared, being 
open and honest, and treating project communications seriously and with 

Chapter 15 | The End of Drama 
 
228  
the respect that they deserve. These are great ways to insulate your pro-
jects from being full of drama. There is no magic bullet to prevent drama 
ahead of time, but doing these things can help from the start.  
Making Intentional Decisions 
Another theme of the no-drama approach is the notion that decisions made 
intentionally are usually the correct ones. Conversely, although decisions 
that are allowed to happen or are made passively may be correct, that hap-
pens only by accident or coincidence. Often, decisions that are left to linger 
wind up with a limited set of solutions when decision time is at hand. 
Don’t let things happen by accident or allow entropy and inertia to take 
control and decide for you. This allows decisions to go on so long that the 
outcome is finally forced on the project, or the developer makes a choice 
without thinking about it, or only one possibility remains. Letting decisions 
make themselves is a pretty sure way to reach the wrong ends. 
But more than that, making decisions intentionally aligns with the top-down 
approach to prioritization and implementation. Determining what is impor-
tant and spending the majority of your time on those things most often 
leads to a good result. It also allows for the proper amount of time and dili-
gence when making these calls—something you won’t have if you wait until 
the last minute to decide. 
Deciding things early and on purpose offers three important benefits. First, 
all options are available. Second, you have time to communicate and validate 
the impact of the decisions you’re making. And finally, you can hold yourself 
and others accountable for the decisions, rather than hiding behind the fa-
çade of not having enough time or being in a rush. 
One of the saddest discussions I have with project managers is when they 
know what the right decision would have been, but it’s too late to go for-
ward with it. A problem that had several good solutions now has only one 
remaining, due to time constraints or budget—or, worse, because a differ-
ent but less important decision was made that now prevents it. The old 
phrase “keeping your options open” only works if you’re actively keeping 
them open. If you’re delaying decisions merely to delay them, then you’ll 
probably be disappointed in the end. 
As I’ve said in many places in this book, communicating what you’re doing 
clearly and correctly is vital to no-drama project management. However, it’s 
also key to communicate in a way that invites feedback and provides time to 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
229  
alter course if necessary. If the position of your communication is “the deci-
sion has been made; there is no time to change,” then you aren’t communi-
cating, you’re dictating. You’re preventing people who should be allowed to 
provide input into decisions from being able to do so. This isn’t a way to 
positively influence your organization or find optimal solutions. 
 Note  Communicating and telling are entirely different acts. 
Finally, as a program manager, I dislike the excuse of lack of time to make a 
higher-quality choice. I am forced to concede that by the time the project 
manager got around to making a decision, the options were limited and the 
time available to make the decision was small. But that doesn’t excuse the 
weeks and months leading up to that point, where the project manager 
could have been working on alternatives, communicating with stakeholders 
and team members to find an optimal solution, and preparing for the conse-
quences of whatever decision they finally made. Yes, they put themselves in 
a spot where they had few options. But that was likely their own doing. 
Doing things intentionally is a key to no-drama project management. Not 
only are decisions usually better if they’re made ahead of time and on pur-
pose, but they also provide time for good communication and analysis, to 
ensure that you’re on the right track and doing the right thing. If you leave 
decisions to chance or wait until the last minute, you may find that your op-
tions are limited and your ability to find and discuss the best solutions have 
passed you by. 
Expecting the Expected 
This is another recurring theme in a no-drama management style: expecting 
the problems that you should have seen coming. With hundreds of thousands 
of project-management types managing over a million projects a year, certain 
patterns emerge that are fairly recognizable and predictable. Virtually all pro-
ject managers have had to deal with team members who were shared with 
other projects or reassigned with little to no notice (and no replacement). 
You have to deal with client and stakeholder communities who can’t agree on 
the goals of the project, or who have extreme difficulty in determining priori-
ties. You may face project drift caused by clients changing their mind or the 
market changing it for them. All of these occurrences are unfortunate, but 

Chapter 15 | The End of Drama 
 
230  
none of them are completely unforeseeable shocks that could never be pre-
dicted. Chapter 11 talked about the two things that make it possible to ex-
pect the unexpected: knowledge and strategy.  
Although many of the problems you may face are predictable and can be 
expected, you need to know about them in order to prepare for them. If 
you can only rely on your own personal experience, then you’re limited to 
the things you have had to handle yourself. This isn’t just about learning best 
practices and studying project management. You need to talk candidly with 
your peers and with colleagues in the industry to gain an understanding of 
the problems you’re likely to face and what the signs are, so you can best 
recognize them. It’s very easy to become so wrapped up in your project or 
organization that you forget how many others like you are striving to do 
better and improve the discipline as a whole. 
 Note  The greater project-management community is there to help. 
But familiarity with consistent problems is only part of the task. You must 
learn how to recognize these problems as they’re happening, and you must 
prepare to deal with them before they happen. If you don’t recognize them 
and aren’t ready for their occurrence, knowing about them doesn’t do you 
much good. Some challenges are universal to all projects, like communica-
tion. Others are specific to your industry: problems that are common in 
software may not be prevalent in drug research. And finally, certain prob-
lems happen more frequently in your organization than anywhere else. As a 
good no-drama project manager, you need to be well-versed in the prob-
lems that may occur and the ways they’re often solved. 
The key is to not be surprised by problems that you could have predicted 
and avoided. Not all causes, and not all problems, can be foreseen, but you 
should be prepared for the problems and impacts that could have been. 
With this in hand, you can bring a measure of comfort to your team and cli-
ent that will help keep the level of stress to a minimum. 
Problems in Team Management 
This book discussed five areas of team management that, if handled improp-
erly, can lead to drama in your project. One aspect that makes team man-
agement slightly different than client management is the amount of influence 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
231  
that you, the project manager, have in the outcome. Clients can change 
their minds on a whim and often believe they can write a check (either liter-
ally or figuratively) to cover the damage they do. Sometimes they’re even 
correct. That won’t work with your team. 
A project manager needs to become highly skilled at these five main facets 
of team management: communication, planning, preparing, establishing met-
rics, and project roles. Even if you aren’t a hands-on manager, but rather a 
manager of managers, these skills continue to be important. It makes little 
difference if it’s a 1-person project or a 100-person project—as soon as the 
number of people on the project exceeds 1, these tenets become vital to 
the project’s overall health.  
Communication 
One of the primary tasks of a project manager is managing communications 
with the entire project community, including the team, the client, the 
stakeholders, the service providers, and your own management chain. 
Through good communication, you can keep your team aligned and make 
sure they understand the ultimate goals of the project. And through align-
ment, you can produce significantly more value than you could if team mem-
bers were pulling in opposite directions or otherwise weren’t in sync with 
each other. 
In addition to keeping your team aligned, you need to keep your clients 
aligned with each other as well as aligned with the team and the project. Of-
ten it’s easier to do the latter than the former. The clients are often aware 
of what is being delivered, but they can’t agree about the project goals. Al-
though your primary responsibility may be to delivery, you should also 
spend time trying to get your clients on the same page. Otherwise you’ll 
struggle to have a satisfied customer. 
Your communications and team management will catch the eye of your pro-
gram manager and probably the top levels of your client organization. Often, 
your communications are all they have to judge how well the project is be-
ing run. You need to consider this when you’re structuring your communi-
cation plan. A certain group of people will only see your communications 
and never your delivery. With that in mind, what would you do differently? 
It would be hard to overestimate the importance and value of project com-
munications. It’s important to keep your team headed in the same direction, 
and it’s the only way to keep the client and team together. This is why I 
sometimes call communicating the primary job of the project manager.  

Chapter 15 | The End of Drama 
 
232  
Planning 
Back in Chapter 10, I covered the importance of planning. To many experi-
enced project managers, this seems obvious. How could you possibly have a 
project without also having a project plan?  
It can be more of a challenge than you’d think. Planning takes time and can 
cause tension with clients and team members who want to get moving be-
cause they already know what they need to do. Figuring out where you 
want to go is important before you start going, lest you wind up some place 
you don’t want to be. 
Conversely, it’s important for the project manager to remember that 
they’re managing a project, not a project plan. If the plan is no longer useful 
or isn’t driving the value you hoped to create, then continuing to follow the 
plan makes little sense. No project manager will win thanks and praise for 
following a plan perfectly but winding up with a deliverable that doesn’t 
meet the business need. 
 Note  It’s important to know your destination as well as the alternate routes you can take to get 
there. 
Therefore, planning is the intersection of knowing where you’re going and 
flexibility in how you’ll get there. Trying to move forward without a plan is 
likely to end up in a bad place, but so is sticking with a plan that isn’t work-
ing. This is why it’s called project management rather than project plan 
management. 
Preparing 
Chapter 11 discussed the concept of preparing and how it’s different than 
planning. For the most part, you plan for things you know about. You know 
what needs to get done, roughly when it must be complete, and approxi-
mately what resources you need to apply in the process. You may build in 
contingencies based on things you know or experience with past projects. 
But either way, you’re going off things you know or think you know. 
Being prepared is the opposite. It means being ready for things that you don’t 
know about but that you know will have an impact on the project. I talked 
about how there is no way to predict all things that can cause problems—the 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
233  
list is too long. However, you can determine the impacts that would mess up 
the plan or the project, and begin preparing for them. It should be your goal 
to be prepared in case of emergencies, even if there is no way to guess cor-
rectly what will cause that emergency. 
Being prepared, even in general terms, is a great way to avoid drama in your 
project. Two different mindsets go into preparation. The first involves ad-
justing your mindset from thinking about what will go right to thinking about 
what could go wrong. When you acknowledge that things may not go as 
planned, you’ll be much less surprised when that turns out to be the case. 
Second, you wind up thinking about contingencies and alternate paths that 
you can break out when the need arises, or that give you practice for com-
ing up with them when a real problem hits. 
Establishing Metrics 
I often position the topic of metrics to my teams and project managers as 
follows: “How will we know when we’re winning?” This gets them thinking 
about the problem in the right way, rather than thinking more strictly about 
being measured. But however you think about it, if you don’t know how to 
tell whether you’re doing well, you probably shouldn’t start. 
Chapter 12 explored two kinds of metrics: metrics about what the project 
is delivering, and metrics about the project itself. When you’re crafting met-
rics about what the project is supposed to produce, it’s important to make 
sure that what you’re measuring is aligned with the goals of the project and 
the organization. Additionally, it’s vital that what you’re measuring is actually 
measurable, or it will be ignored by the team and the client. 
When it comes time to measure the project itself, you can use several stan-
dard techniques. The two I highlighted are project efficiency as measured by 
resource utilization, and project effectiveness as measured by an earned-
value chart. Both of these standard measurements are very useful in deter-
mining the current health of the project and whether the project is trending 
in a good direction. No single view can tell program managers everything 
they need to know, but these two views indicate quite a bit. 
Finally, I discussed the two measurements that matter in the long term. A 
few months or a few years after a project, not many people will remember 
if you improved a KPI by 2.7% or 2.9%. But they will remember whether 
they want to work with you again and whether they trust you to run an-
other of their projects. Although this isn’t a metric that measures the pro-
ject or delivery, in the long run it may be the only evaluation that matters. 

Chapter 15 | The End of Drama 
234  
Project Roles 
A no-drama project manager should consider three things when crafting a 
project team. The first is creating a team structure that is suitable for run-
ning the project successfully. You need a team that can both understand and 
deliver on the needs of the client. You also need team members capable of 
communicating with you and the other team members about their status 
and participating in the project to the level you need. 
Second, you want to create a balanced team. This means having the right 
number of people in positions of leadership, and enough people who are be-
ing led. Depending on the size of the project, you may have technical lead-
ers, quality leaders, user-experience leaders, or several of each. You should 
also consider the balance of skills, both technical and nontechnical. Make 
sure you have the expertise required to accomplish the project goals and 
also that you have a balance of styles and interests on the project. A good 
team is one in which the members complement each other, aren’t identi-
cally skilled, and don’t all have very similar outlooks and viewpoints. 
 Note  A well-constructed team is balanced. 
The last important thing to consider is setting clear expectations for your 
team members about their roles. Leaders need to know that you expect 
them to lead, and team members need to be aware of who is leading them. 
Similarly, skilled people must be aware of which skills they will use for the 
project and which they won’t. A good source of project drama is having the 
wrong person doing a specific task and not doing it as well as someone else 
could. When team members are clear about the expectations of their roles, 
it’s up to you to keep them performing by using everything from gentle re-
minders to direct conversation. You may be in an environment where any-
one can do most anything, but that’s not a particularly good way to run a 
project team.  
Problems in Client Management 
It’s possible for a project’s biggest failing to be the tactical management of 
day-to-day activities, but it’s more likely that the problem arose earlier than 
that. A successful sports coach may leave the play calling to someone else 
but keep the leadership and motivational tasks for himself. Similarly, being 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
235  
able to manage the client relationship with the project is critical not only to 
project success but also in the effort to limit the overall drama created by 
the project. 
The client-management topics a project manager must excel at include un-
derstanding client needs and ensuring that clients are aligned with the pro-
ject, with each other (if there is more than one), and with the decision-
making process both before the project starts and while its running. Finally, 
the project manager must have a keen eye for stakeholder identification, be-
cause not everyone important to the project will be immediately apparent. 
Requirements 
At the base of every project is the list of items the client or sponsor wants 
done. However, many projects begin with that list, which can lead down the 
wrong path. A project isn’t just a collection of client desires, with the ulti-
mate hope that they will synthesize into something great. The project needs 
to start with a goal in mind, and the requirements collection and definition 
should flow from that. Your project almost certainly doesn’t have an unlim-
ited budget, so determining the key requirements helps decide how that 
budget should be spent. 
Once you have a good idea what the project’s critical requirements are, you 
should seek two kinds of approval. The first is the formal kind, where you 
attempt to get sign-off on what the project will deliver. This approval often 
feels more contractual than it does like an agreement between partners 
who want the same thing. In many ways, this is how it should feel, because 
formal sign-off is the mechanism used by vendors and third parties who 
want to understand what they need to deliver in order to fulfill their obliga-
tion. To get to this spot usually takes weeks or months, and often the result 
is a document full of compromises that everyone has agreed with at one 
point or another. This helps avoid contractual drama: when it comes time 
to settle the bill, it will be clear whether the project delivered as promised. 
Contractual drama is easily remedied and isn’t always meaningful to a com-
pany looking to form a long-term relationship. Sometimes you want to focus 
not on delivering features and functionality but on helping to drive long-term 
value. And this is where the second kind of sign-off comes into play: the “Do 
we still want to do this?” agreement. Once everyone has a good grasp of 
what the project includes and what it doesn’t, do they still want to move 
forward? This is a question you should absolutely ask yourself, your team, 
and your client at regular intervals during the project. This implicit statement 
that the client likes the direction and wants to continue is valuable to all the 

Chapter 15 | The End of Drama 
 
236  
stakeholders involved. It’s like checking the map when you’re half way to 
your destination, to make sure you’re headed to the right place. Nothing bad 
ever comes from double-checking. 
Prioritization 
If you gave your client a list of a dozen things that came up during require-
ments gathering, and asked which items they really wanted, the answer 
would be “All of them.” This isn’t because clients act like petulant children, 
it’s because that’s the wrong question. The client does want all 12 of those 
requirements. Otherwise they wouldn’t have asked for them in the first 
place. The trick is to put the requirements in some kind of order.  
Chapter 4 looked at two different ways to do this. First, you can group re-
quirements into As, Bs, and Cs. Cs are things the project almost certainly 
won’t do, and As are things that are most likely to get done. The list of Bs is 
where project management comes in. You commit to some of them, but 
not all; and you don’t commit to any of them individually. It’s a tricky bal-
ance, but one that I’ve seen work repeatedly. None of the Bs are more im-
portant than any of the As, and therefore, each of the Bs can be sacrificed 
for more important work. But you can say with a level of confidence that 
some of them will get done.  
The second strategy is pure ranking of requirements: literally numbering 
them from one to whatever. Although this exercise becomes difficult and 
tedious the further down the list you go, the results toward the top are al-
most always incredibly interesting. By determining the top three or top ten 
requirements out of hundreds or thousands, you can do a much better job 
of focusing your efforts and your team’s efforts on the right tasks. Without 
attempting this exercise, you’d never know. 
 Note  Sometimes you learn a lot from the prioritization exercise itself. 
Finally, you can also learn a great deal by determining what can be depriori-
tized. An awful lot of good ideas wind up on this list, which can be surprising. 
But just because something is a good idea, doesn’t mean you should work on 
it ahead of other things, or work on it at all right now. Finding out this kind 
of information before you begin improves your planning and delivery.  

No-Drama Project Management 
 
237  
Alignment 
Your project won’t be successful if the people and stakeholders on the pro-
ject are all pulling in separate directions toward separate goals. This seems 
obvious, and it probably is obvious when people make completely opposite 
requests. But misalignment is a lot harder to spot. People talk in generalities, 
or they mostly agree, or the areas of disagreement don’t seem material. 
You know everyone isn’t perfectly aligned, but you think you have enough 
agreement to move forward. This happens all the time. 
Chapter 6 talked about checking project alignment by using project princi-
ples. By distilling the hundreds of hours and thousands of pages of work al-
ready done into a dozen or fewer assertions about the project, you can do 
more to get agreement or foster dissent than you can by letting everyone 
read your huge pile of documentation. If your principles are clear enough, 
and you state firmly what you’re attempting with the project, the result is 
discussion and constructive arguments. In the end, this is what you want. 
Getting everything out in the open is good, especially before it’s too late to 
change course. 
Alignment over project goals is paramount to running a good project. How-
ever, alignment over features, requirements, or tasks isn’t. You should expect 
constant discussion over those, while your overall goals remain the same. If 
you have the opposite situation—alignment about tasks but not goals—then 
you appear to have agreement when in reality you have almost none. 
Assumptions 
Projects can’t be run without assumptions. In fact, nothing would run if we 
were unable to make assumptions, most of which turn out to be true. Be-
cause projects are often approved and started with incomplete, imperfect 
information, you’re forced to use assumptions to make up the difference. 
This is not only normal, it’s the only way to move forward. 
Assumptions can sometimes be tricky to spot, because they generally seem 
to be true to all involved; you would never attempt to assume something 
that is obviously false. Watch for the use of the vocabulary of assumptions. 
People talk about being “pretty sure” or being mostly confident. This is es-
pecially true when what they’re talking about isn’t in their area of expertise. 
The more someone talks definitively about something outside of their ex-
pertise, the more likely they are to be making an assumption. 

Chapter 15 | The End of Drama 
 
238  
Again, making assumptions is not only okay, it’s expected for a project. 
However, once you identify the assumptions, you need to track them and 
decide if they actually are assumptions, or if they are risks, or something 
that you can manage. By the time the project is coming to a close, it’s no 
longer okay to be working from assumptions; one of your tasks is to figure 
out whether those assumptions were true. Some of them will become risks; 
many others will be retired. You can only know if you manage them actively. 
Stakeholder Identification 
Making sure you know who your stakeholders are goes a long way toward 
reducing drama in your project. Some of them are easy to spot, such as the 
direct client, or the person paying the bill. These people have a direct im-
pact on the project and are the ones from whom you’re correct to take di-
rection. They also include people who have a lot of interest in the project 
for various reasons. 
 Note  Your project probably has more stakeholders than you realize. 
Often, there is another class of stakeholder that is much harder to uncover. 
These are people who have heavy influence on the outcome, even though 
you can’t find them on a project org chart or identify them ahead of time. 
Some of them want the project to succeed; some of them don’t. But none 
of them can be safely ignored. You need to know who they are and what 
their hopes for the project are, positive and negative. Only then can you 
hope to manage them as stakeholders. 
Managing the Unexpected 
The last thing I talked about in Chapter 14 was the idea that despite all your 
planning, preparation, and careful thinking, things may happen that you didn’t 
expect. Not only didn’t you expect them, no one could have. If all the prob-
lems you face were foreseeable, no one would need you to manage pro-
jects, so you should probably be thankful. It’s one of the things that make 
the job interesting, too. 
I talked about how preparation factors in. Although it’s impossible to be pre-
pared for the unexpected, probably by definition, sometimes you can prepare 

No-Drama Project Management 
 
239  
for the impacts of unforeseen events. Few of the causes are predictable, but 
their effects may be. It’s possible that you don’t need to add drama to your 
project because you’ve already thought of this problem, or a problem just 
like it, and have a solution in mind. If so, this is a great outcome. 
On the other hand, if you’re facing a problem that you couldn’t anticipate 
and for which you have no ready solution, then you generally have three op-
tions. You can restart the project, you can revise the project, or you can 
rescope it. Each has its use, depending on the situation, and each has a cer-
tain tax that must be paid. But there is no sense moving forward with a pro-
ject that has hit an unforeseen problem that you can’t overcome. In the long 
run, that’s wasted effort and a way to speed along the road to drama. 
Your goal is to end the drama in your projects. Over the course of your ca-
reer, you’ll be responsible for running many projects with varied success. 
Sometimes project managers have spectacular failures. Other times, they 
have successes that are written about in newspapers and magazines. But 
above all, you should focus on delivering value to your clients while reducing 
the anxiety and stress of the job. That’s what a No-Drama Project Manager 
finds most satisfying. 
  

  
I 
Index 
A 
above the line (A-priority) 
prioritization, 46 
active deprioritization, 54 
aggregation projects. See bottom-up 
requirements gathering 
aggressiveness, amount of, 86–87 
agreement, lack of high-level, 160–162 
alignment 
around corporate or 
organizational strategy, 22 
around goals of project, 5, 22 
with client, 75–88 
aligning with team, 80–82 
amount of aggressiveness, 
86–87 
communicating alignment, 
82–84 
differences of opinion, 84–86 
importance of, 76–77 
remaining aligned, 87 
expected problems in client 
management, 22 
problems in client management, 237 
analyst role, 196–199 
analysts, types to be wary of, 198–199 
Analytic Hierarchy Process (pairwise 
prioritization), 52–54 
approval of projects, 235–236 
assertions, 92 
assumption lifecycle, 94 
assumptions, 89–104 
avoiding standard or implicit, 
98–99 
definition of, 90–92 
expected problems in client 
management, 23 
identifying, 94–98 
assumptions made by project 
team, 96 
level of confidence, 97–98 
pre-project assumptions, 
94–96 
importance of, 92–94 
problems in client management, 
237–238 
vs. risk, 99–101 
testing and tracking, along with 
risks, 101–102 
wrong, 102–103 
audiences, communication for, 
126–132 
challenges of, 133–134 
clients, 130–132 
executives, 130–132 
extended team, 128–129 
internal team, 126–127 
other departments, 129–130 

Index 
 
242 
B 
balanced teams, creating, 234 
below the line (C-priority) 
prioritization, 46, 54–55 
benefits, of communication, 139–140 
bills, identifying decision makers by 
payment of, 107–109 
bottom-up requirements gathering, 33 
bottom-up thinking, top-down 
thinking vs., 33–35 
broadcast communications, 136 
burndown charts, 181 
business owners (product managers), 
project sponsors or clients 
versus, 12 
C 
C-priority (below the line) 
prioritization, 46, 54–55 
cause of problems, segregating from 
solution, 218 
challenges, of communication, 133–134 
change management, 59–74 
communication and, 25 
expected problems in client 
management, 21–22 
importance of, 61–62 
keeping focused, 73 
people involved, 71–72 
project implications, 72 
reasons for, 62–69 
failure in execution, 69 
new legislation, 67–68 
new sales channels, 66–67 
organization has changed, 
63–64 
priorities have changed, 65–66 
project affected by others, 68 
project becomes obsolete, 
64–65 
situation caused by, 69–71 
change order, 214 
channels, for communication, 136–138 
broadcast communications, 136 
closed-circuit communication, 
137–138 
individual communications, 137 
Churchill, Winston, 59 
churn, subscription-based project, 56 
clarity around tasks and subtasks, 5 
client interface role, 201–202 
client management 
expected problems in, 19–24 
alignment, 22 
assumptions, 23 
change, 21–22 
identifying stakeholders, 23–24 
prioritization, 21 
requirements, 20 
problems in, 234–238 
alignment, 237 
assumptions, 237–238 
prioritization, 236 
requirements, 235–236 
stakeholder identification, 238 
client satisfaction, metrics, 183–184 
clients 
alignment with, 75–88 
amount of aggressiveness, 
86–87 
communicating, 82–84 
differences of opinion, 84–86 
importance of, 76–77 
remaining aligned, 87 
and team, 80–82 
communication, 130–132, 231 
role of, 12–13 
closed-circuit communication, 137–138 
code words, 83 
coincidental action, intentional action 
versus, 145 
communication, 123–141 
alignment, 82–84 
benefits of, 139–140 

Index 
 
243 
of changes, 62, 70 
channels for, 136–138 
broadcast communications, 136 
closed-circuit communication, 
137–138 
individual communications, 137 
for different audiences, 126–132 
challenges of, 133–134 
clients, 130–132 
executives, 130–132 
extended team, 128–129 
internal team, 126–127 
other departments, 129–130 
effectiveness of, 138–139 
expected problems in team 
management, 24–25 
importance of, 125–126 
out-of-channel escalations, 18–19 
problems in team management, 231 
as project, 134–136 
role of project manager, 6 
strategy for, 38–40 
with team about unexpected 
events, 210 
treating like deliverable, 227–228 
communication plan, 152 
completed project, 49 
complexity, underestimating, 165–167 
comunication, medium versus 
message, 125 
confidence 
handling wrong assumptions, 
102–103 
level of, 97–98 
constraints 
based on out-of-date 
assumptions, 96 
requirements versus, 36 
consultant, assumptions and, 91 
contractual drama, 235 
core team, 192 
creativity, of project manager, 214 
critical assumptions, 92 
critical path, 49–50 
critical requirements, 47 
customers 
alignment with, 77 
communication with, 231 
identifying, 31–33, 112–114 
requirements gathering from, 
32–33 
types of, 31 
D 
data, basing KPIs on valid, 176–178 
decision makers, identifying, 105–121 
customers, 112–114 
influencers, 116–117 
managing stakeholders, 118–121 
by payment of bills, 107–109 
by presence of human resources, 
109–112 
signature authority, 114–116 
decisions, intentional, 228–229 
delivering solutions, 113–114 
departments, communication for, 
129–130 
dependency chain, critical path for 
project, 49 
deprioritizing 
proper procedure for, 55–56 
value of, 54–55 
developer role, 199–200 
drama, 223–239 
avoiding, 224–228 
being open and honest, 
225–227 
preparation, 224–225 
with preparation, 233 
treating communication like 
deliverable, 227–228 
contractual, 235 
due to unexpected problems, 210 
making intentional decisions, 
228–229 

Index 
 
244 
drama (continued) 
problems 
in client management, 234–238 
expecting foreseeable, 229–230 
managing unexpected, 238–239 
in team management, 230–234 
E 
earned value, metrics, 181–182 
effectiveness, of communication, 
138–139 
effort time versus actual time, 190 
elevator pitch, 39 
errors 
avoiding repitition of, 223 
learning from, 217–218 
executives, communicating with, 
133–134 
expectations, 131 
status, risk, and progress 
updates, 131 
what they can do to help, 131 
executives, communication for, 
130–132 
expectations of roles in teams, 234 
expecting and preparing for problems, 
207–208 
experience, learning to deal with 
unexpected events, 206 
extended team, communicating 
with, 133 
project status, 129 
requirements, deadlines, and 
deliverables, 129 
value of the work, 128 
extended team, communication for, 
128–129 
F 
failure, 15–16 
in execution, 69 
identifying those hoping for, 
117–118 
at obvious, 17–18 
false information, in plans, 147–148 
feedback, inviting, 228 
final approval, importance of 
determining who has, 116 
finance tool, decision makers 
regarding, 107 
focus 
keeping through changes, 73 
value of, 37–38 
formal sign-offs, 40–41 
functional manager role, 195–196 
G 
gap assignments, 3 
go-forward team, 220 
goals 
aligning KPIs with organization, 
173–174 
driving right behavior 
through, 175 
Golden Rule, decision making, 109 
Gray, John, 34 
group project managers. See program 
managers 
Groupon, 67–68 
guesses, versus assumptions, 91 
H 
handling wrong assumptions, 102–103 
honesty, avoiding drama through, 
225–227 
HRIS (Human Resources Information 
System), decision makers 
regarding, 107 
human resources, identifying decision 
makers by presence of, 109–112 

Index 
245 
Human Resources Information System 
(HRIS), decision makers 
regarding, 107 
I, J 
identifying, decision makers, 105–121 
customers, 112–114 
influencers, 116–117 
managing stakeholders, 118–121 
by payment of bills, 107–109 
by presence of human resources, 
109–112 
signature authority, 114–116 
implicit assumptions, avoiding, 98–99 
importance 
of change management, 61–62 
of communication, 125–126 
individual communications, 137 
inflexible plans, 148–149 
influence/interest matrix, 119–121 
influencers 
decision making, 116–117 
identifying, 116–117 
informal sign-offs, 40–42 
information sharing, comunication 
versus, 124 
intentional decisions, 145–146, 153, 
228–229 
interdepartmental differences, 84 
internal (project) team, 
communicating with, 126–127, 
133–136, 139–140 
decisions and changes, 127 
project updates, 127 
roles, responsibilities, and goals 
of, 127 
task coordination, 127 
internal tool, decision makers 
regarding, 107 
interview questions 
aligning with client, 78–79 
aligning with team members, 
81–82 
intradepartmental differences, 85 
K 
KPIs (Key Performance Indicators), 
173–178 
aligning with organization goals, 
173–174 
basing on valid data, 176–178 
driving correct behavior with, 
175–176 
establishing, 26–27 
L 
laundry list projects. See bottom-up 
requirements gathering 
leaders, 191–192 
legislation, changes caused by, 67–68 
level of confidence, 97–98 
levels, of team members, 191–194 
leaders, 191–192 
team contributors, 192–194 
team members, 192 
M 
management 
change management, 59–74 
communication and, 25 
expected problems in client 
management, 21–22 
importance of, 61–62 
keeping focused, 73 
people involved, 71–72 
project implications, 72 
reasons for, 62–69 
situation caused by, 69–71 
client management 
expected problems in, 19–24 
problems in, 234–238 
project-management principles, 
86–87 
risk-management matrix, 151 

Index 
 
246 
management (continued) 
risk-management plans, 150–152 
team management 
alignment, 80–82 
expected problems in, 24–28 
identifying assumptions, 96 
problems in, 230–234 
market research, assumptions and, 91 
market risk, 72 
material change, 63–64 
material changes to projects, 215 
McCain, Brad, 139 
metrics, 171–186 
client satisfaction, 183–184 
earned value, 181–182 
establishing 
expected problems in team 
management, 26–27 
problems in team 
management, 233 
KPIs, 173–178 
aligning with organization 
goals, 173–174 
basing on valid data, 176–178 
driving correct behavior with, 
175–176 
resources, 179–180 
team satisfaction, 184–185 
top-level, 172–173 
visions versus, 177 
micromanaging, assumptions, 99 
mistakes 
avoiding repetition of, 228 
avoiding repitition of, 223 
learning from, 217–218 
mitigatable assumptions, 100 
mitigatable risk, 100 
morale, team, alignment and, 76 
N 
no-drama preparation, 224 
nonfunctional requirements, 36 
O 
observer effect, 117 
opinions, differences of, 84–86 
organization 
aligning KPIs with goals of, 173–174 
changes, 63–64 
organizational change, 63 
out-of-channel escalations, 18–19 
outside-in requirements gathering, 
35–37 
overplanning, 146–147 
P, Q 
pairwise prioritization, 51–54 
people, involved in changes, 71–72 
performance, team, 76 
personal ROI, 175 
Phase 2, naming rescoped projects, 216 
plan development, proceeding 
without, 143–145 
planning, 143–154 
acting intentionally, 145–146 
communication plan, 152 
expected problems in team 
management, 25 
false information in, 147–148 
inflexible, 148–149 
overplanning, 146–147 
preparing versus, 25 
problems in team management, 
232 
risk-management plans, 150–152 
staffing plans, 149–150 
sticking with, 153–154 
PMBOK (Project Management Body 
of Knowledge), documenting 
assumptions, 89 
PMI (Project Management Institute), 
number certified through, 1 

Index 
 
247 
PMO (Project Management Office), 
10–11 
policing, roles, 202–203 
portfolio managers. See program 
managers 
pre-project assumptions, identifying, 
94–96 
preparation 
avoiding drama through, 224–225 
for impacts of unexpected 
events, 238 
preparing 
expected problems in team 
management, 25–26 
problems in team management, 
232–233 
prioritization, 45–57 
changes in, 65–66 
critical path, 49–50 
deprioritizing 
proper procedure for, 55–56 
value of, 54–55 
expected problems in client 
management, 21 
importance of, 47–49 
pairwise, 51–54 
playing games with, 50–51 
problems in client management, 236 
of projects, effect of restarting 
projects on, 211 
problem statement, assumptions 
and, 93 
problems, 155–169 
breaking process, 163–165 
in client management, 234–238 
alignment, 237 
assumptions, 237–238 
prioritization, 236 
requirements, 235–236 
stakeholder identification, 238 
expected 
in client management, 19–24 
in team management, 24–28 
expecting foreseeable, 229–230 
lack of high-level agreement, 
160–162 
schedule “make up”, 167–168 
skill gaps, 162–163 
slow turnaround, 158–160 
in team management, 230–234 
communication, 231 
establishing metrics, 233 
planning, 232 
preparing, 232–233 
project roles, 234 
unclear project ownership, 
157–158 
underestimating complexity, 
165–167 
unexpected, 28, 205–221, 238–239 
fallout from, 217–219 
managing team, 219–220 
preparation for, 207–208 
strategies for, 210–213, 
216–217 
process, breaking, 163–165 
product managers (business owners), 
project sponsors or clients 
versus, 12 
profitability, 172 
program managers 
expected problems, 156 
failure and, 15–16 
role of, 8–10 
slow turnaround, 159 
unclear project ownership, 158 
program sponsors or clients 
awareness of effects of change on, 
71 
client-contact role, 201–202 
communication with, 25, 131, 
133–134, 139–140 
lack of alignment with, 17 
measuring satisfaction of, 184–185 
sign-off follow-up, 42 
slow turnaround, 159–160 
unclear project ownership, 
157–158 

Index 
 
248 
project change, 60. See also change 
management 
Project Management Body of 
Knowledge (PMBOK), 
documenting assumptions, 89 
Project Management Institute (PMI), 
number certified through, 1 
Project Management Office (PMO), 
10–11 
project-management principles, 86–87 
project managers 
motivations for, 2–3 
program managers versus, 9 
Project Management Office and, 11 
project sponsors or clients and, 
12–13 
role of, 5–6 
weaknesses of 
false information, 147–148 
inflexibility, 148–149 
overplanning, 146–147 
project principles, 83–84 
project roles, problems in team 
management, 234 
project sponsors, role of, 12–13 
project team, prioritization exercise, 21 
project teams 
alignment with, 80–82 
identifying assumptions made by, 96 
role of, 7–8 
projects 
affected by other projects, 68 
approval of, 235–236 
becomes obsolete, 64–65 
benefits of managing, 2–3 
communication as, 134–136 
honesty with status of, 225–227 
implications on when there are 
changes, 72 
metrics, 233 
strategy pyramid, 77–78 
unclear ownership of, 157–158 
R 
ranking of project requirements, 236 
reasons, for change, 62–69 
failure in execution, 69 
new legislation, 67–68 
new sales channels, 66–67 
organization has changed, 63–64 
priorities have changed, 65–66 
project affected by others, 68 
project becomes obsolete, 64–65 
requirements 
expected problems in client 
management, 20 
gathering 
client management and, 20 
communication and, 25 
focus on system and tactical 
requirements, 30 
incompleteness of, 29 
identifying, 29–44 
communication strategy, 
38–40 
customers, 31–33 
outside-in requirements 
gathering, 35–37 
sign-off, 40–43 
top-down thinking vs. 
bottom-up thinking, 33–35 
value of focus, 37–38 
problems in client management, 
235–236 
project, pairwise prioritization 
and, 54 
resource owner, decision inputs, 
110–112 
resource risk, 72 
resources, metrics, 179–180 
return on investment. See ROI 
reversal of decisions, 158 
risk analysis, change management 
and, 72 
risk-management matrix, 151 
risk-management plans, 150–152 

Index 
 
249 
risk minimizers, 115–116 
risk, turning assumptions into, 94 
risks, and assumptions 
risks vs., 99–101 
testing and tracking, 101–102 
ROI (return on investment) 
comunication and, 124–125 
effect of rescoping projects 
on, 216 
effect of restarting projects 
on, 211 
KPIs and, 174 
program managers and, 9–10 
roles 
analyst, 196–199 
client interface, 201–202 
defining, 194–195 
developer, 199–200 
expectations of in teams, 234 
functional manager, 195–196 
necessity of, 3–4 
of PMO, 10–11 
policing, 202–203 
program manager, 5–6, 8–10 
project 
expected problems in team 
management, 27–28 
problems in team 
management, 234 
project sponsor and/or client, 
12–13 
project team, 7–8 
tester/reviewer, 200–201 
Rumsfeld, Don, 16 
S 
sales channels, changes caused by, 
66–67 
schedule, “making up” when behind, 
167–168 
schedule risk, 72 
scope, 181 
sign-offs, 40–43 
following up on, 42–43 
formal, 40–41 
informal, 41–42 
signature authorities, identifying, 
114–116 
sine qua non concept, 50 
situation, caused by changes, 69–71 
skill gaps, 162–163 
skills, team management, 232 
solution of problems, segregating 
from cause, 218 
sponsors, role of, 12–13 
staffing plans, 149–150 
stakeholder identification, problems in 
client management, 238 
stakeholders. See also decision makers 
alignment, 22 
communicating with, 135, 152 
as decision makers, 105–107 
identifying, expected problems in 
client management, 23–24 
managing, 118–121 
standard assumptions, avoiding, 98–99 
status updates on projects, 225–227 
strategic direction, strategy pyramid, 
77–78 
strategy pyramid, 77–78 
stress, causing for project manager, 
18–19 
subject-matter expert, assumptions 
and, 91 
subscription churn, 177–178 
success, 15–28 
being headache, 18–19 
criteria, managing 
intradepartmental 
differences, 86 
expected problems 
in client management, 19–24 
in team management, 24–28 

Index 
 
250 
success (continued) 
failing at obvious, 17–18 
unexpected problems, 28 
support of team, 226 
T 
tasks, strategy pyramid, 78 
tax laws, 67–68 
team management 
alignment, 80–82 
expected problems in, 24–28 
communication, 24–25 
establishing metrics, 26–27 
planning, 25 
preparing, 25–26 
project roles, 27–28 
identifying assumptions, 96 
problems in, 230–234 
communication, 231, 234 
teams, 187–204 
benefits of being honest with, 
225–227 
benefits of being open with, 225 
effect of restarting projects on, 212 
effect of revising projects on, 
214–215 
and group leaders 
making good use of, 7 
underestimating 
complexity, 166 
understanding leadership role 
of, 28 
and group members 
alignment and, 76 
awareness of effects of change 
on, 71–74 
expressing status, 190 
measuring satisfaction of, 
183–184 
proper execution, 189–190 
roles of, 8 
skill gap, 162–163 
team contributors versus, 
193–194 
understanding needs and 
objectives of project, 189 
importance of communication 
with, 231 
keeping from worrying about 
unexpected events, 210 
managing, when facing unexpected 
problems, 219–220 
member levels, 191–194 
leaders, 191–192 
team contributors, 192–194 
team members, 192 
necessary abilities for 
executing on tasks, 189–190 
expressing status, 190 
understanding project, 189 
roles in 
analyst, 196–199 
client interface, 201–202 
defining, 194–195 
developer, 199–200 
functional manager, 195–196 
policing, 202–203 
tester/reviewer, 200–201 
satisfaction, metrics, 184–185 
technological change, 64–65 
tester/reviewer role, 200–201 
those hoping for failure, 117–118 
top-down thinking, vs. bottom-up 
thinking, 33–35 
top-level metrics, 172–173 
training peers, to deal with 
unexpected problems, 206 
transparency in decision-making, 61, 73 
troubleshooting, 155–169 
breaking process, 163–165 
in client management, 234–238 
alignment, 237 
assumptions, 237–238 
prioritization, 236 
requirements, 235–236 
stakeholder identification, 238 
expected problems 
in client management, 19–24 
in team management, 24–28 

Index 
 
251 
expecting foreseeable problems, 
229–230 
lack of high-level agreement, 
160–162 
schedule “make up”, 167–168 
skill gaps, 162–163 
slow turnaround, 158–160 
in team management, 230–234 
communication, 231 
establishing metrics, 233 
planning, 232 
preparing, 232–233 
project roles, 234 
unclear project ownership, 
157–158 
underestimating complexity, 
165–167 
unexpected problems, 28, 205–221, 
238–239 
fallout from, 217–219 
managing team, 219–220 
preparation for, 207–208 
strategies for, 210–213, 
216–217 
truth, importance of, 225–227 
turnaround, slow, 158–160 
Two-level prioritization, 46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U 
underestimating complexity, 
165–167 
unexpected problems, 238–239. See 
also problems 
unknown, managing, 94 
unmitigatable assumptions, 100 
unmitigatable risk, 100 
usability testing, 214–215 
V 
value of project revisions, 
understanding, 214 
W, X 
wrong assumptions, handling, 
102–103 
Y, Z 
Y2K problem, 36–37 

 
No-Drama Project  
Management 
Avoiding Predictable Problems for Project Success 
 
 
Bart Gerardi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
No-Drama Project Managment: Avoiding Predictable Problems for Project Success 
Copyright © 2011 by Bart Gerardi 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, record-
ing, or by any information storage or retrieval system, without the prior written 
permission of the copyright owner and the publisher. 
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4302-3990-1 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4302-3991-8 
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a 
trademark symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we 
use the names, logos, and images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of 
the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. 
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar 
terms, even if they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of 
opinion as to whether or not they are subject to proprietary rights. 
President and Publisher: Paul Manning 
Lead Editor: Jeff Olson 
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Ewan Buckingham, Gary Cornell, 
Morgan Ertel, Jonathan Gennick, Jonathan Hassell, Robert Hutchinson, Mi-
chelle Lowman, James Markham, Matthew Moodie, Jeff Olson, Jeffrey Pep-
per, Douglas Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke, Dominic Shakeshaft, Gwenan 
Spearing, Matt Wade, Tom Welsh 
Coordinating Editor: Jennifer L. Blackwell 
Copy Editor: Tiffany Taylor 
Compositor: Mary Sudul 
Indexer: BIM Indexing & Proofreading Services 
Cover Designer: Anna Ishchenko 
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media, LLC., 
233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 
348-4505, e-mail orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com.  
For information on translations, please e-mail rights@apress.com, or visit 
www.apress.com.  
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, 
or promotional use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. 
For more information, reference our Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page 
at www.apress.com/bulk-sales. 
The information in this book is distributed on an “as is” basis, without warranty. Al-
though every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither the 
author(s) nor Apress shall have any liability to any person or entity with respect to 
any loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the in-
formation contained in this work. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
To my loving wife Judy,  
who supports me in all my crazy projects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vii
About the Author 
Bart Gerardi is a program manager for an e-commerce company in the E-
Commerce 50. He has been a consultant, manager, and leader for 15 years. 
Bart’s love of bringing projects to market has spanned several companies, 
positions, and waves of Internet fads. Always on the lookout for new pro-
jects to run, he also manages the delivery of several teams bringing the next 
generation of e-commerce to the industry. Bart lives in the Boston area. 
You can find more of Bart’s writings at www.NoDramaPM.com. 

 
ix 
Acknowledgments 
There are a lot of people who knowingly or unknowingly made this book 
possible. These include people who have taught me, people I have learned 
from, people who worked with me or for me, as well as the people who par-
ticipated in the creation of the book itself. Without any one of these people, 
this book would never have existed, and for that I am eternally grateful. 
The first group of people are those I’ve worked for, either in the past or the 
present. They include Brad Palmer, Adrian Griego, Neil Wheaton, Josh 
Koppelman, and Tim Martin. These are the folks who felt it was their job to 
teach me, sometimes accidentally, the practice of running projects. Without 
them, I wouldn’t have had projects to run or experiences to share through-
out this book. 
The focus of this book is on how a program manager manages project man-
agers. I have to thank my fabulous team for allowing me to manage them for 
the past several years and practice some of these concepts on them. My 
team has included Adam Garland, Caleb Munson, Charlene Bunting, Erin 
DeCesare, Kelli Connors, Matt Gittlitz, and Nicholas Smith, among others 
throughout the years. In particular, Adam was the one who made me write 
this book in the first place. 
Part of the crux of No-Drama Project Management is working well with 
your clients. In order for this to work, you need clients who are willing to 
play along and willing to experiment with you. I’ve been fortunate to have 
great clients in Marion Thomas, James Connolly, Matt Guinen, Julia Voor-
hees, Alison French, Christine Midwood, and my client and thinking partner, 
Jennifer Hood, plus several score more. 
The process of writing a book is a long one, and there are more people in-
volved that you can imagine. This book wouldn’t have seen print if not for 
my great editors, Jennifer Blackwell and Jeff Olson, and outstanding copy-
editor Tiffany Taylor, and probably many more who I don’t know about. 
What you hold in your hands is as much due to them as to me. 
Finally, the people who gave the most to let me write this book are my fam-
ily. My wonderful wife Judy, and my three kids, Emily, Brett, and Ben, didn’t 

 
x
mind when I was writing during family vacations, and encouraged me by get-
ting excited when the cover was complete (and sharing with their friends). 
They were key stakeholders in this entire project, a concept I discuss later 
in the book. 
If any one of the people I’ve worked with, I’ve worked for, I’ve helped sup-
port, or who supported me had acted a little bit differently than they did, 
this book wouldn’t exist. It’s hard to put into words my thanks, other than 
to say, thanks for everything.  
 
 
 

 
xi 
Preface 
If you picked up this book, you are probably a project manager, program 
manager, or some other project professional. I can tell you, without know-
ing you personally, that some of your projects have failed. In fact, one might 
be in the process of failing right now. What you may not know is that not all 
failures are created equal. Some failures are actually good for your career, 
whereas some successes may not be. Why is this? 
Drama. 
Your team, clients, sponsors, and managers want you to be successful. They 
want every project to create a lot of value and be fondly remembered after 
it’s finished. But this isn’t always the case, and it’s not always a bad thing. 
What they don’t want is for your project to be full of anxiety and stress. And 
there is no better way to create stress than by failing in a way that other 
projects have failed. These include things like lack of preparation, lack of 
communication, or lack of understanding or alignment on what the project is 
supposed to deliver. The cause and result of any of these failures is the same: 
Drama.  
Drama is sand in the gears of any project. 
This book explores the predictable ways that projects fail, and how you can 
work to avoid them. Nobody wants to be on a project that fails for an obvi-
ous reason or due to the actions or inactions of the project manager. Pro-
jects are inherently risky, and some of those risks are beyond your control. 
Having one of those risks sink your project isn’t necessarily a big deal, nor 
does it have to a career buster. But to have an issue that looks to others 
(and yourself) like a failure of basic project-management skills ruin your de-
livery may also ruin your prospects of advancement. Fortunately, avoiding 
that fate is well within your control. 
In the chapters that follow, I discuss the problems that doom projects over 
and over again, and how you can recognize and prevent them. The hope  
is that if your project is destined to fail, at least it will be for a reason you 
can be proud of—something you can tell fascinating stories about for years 
to come.  

