
Handbook of Analysis and 
Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins provides a comprehensive 
guide to learning about the properties of anthocyanins, which have gained increasing 
importance in recent years and have attracted widespread attention from industry, aca­
demia, and government, as well as the precise, applicable, and modern methods of their 
analysis developed to date. The first part of the book introduces the structure, biochemical 
properties, health effects, and high antioxidant capacity of anthocyanins based on scientific 
developments in recent years. The second part of the book is aimed at the technological 
use of anthocyanins in industry, focusing on the effects of food processing methods on 
anthocyanins, encapsulation, the possibilities of using them as colorants in industry, and 
their importance as a functional ingredient, as well as a healthy ingredient. The third part 
of the book presents in detail the extraction and purification methods of anthocyanins in 
different food products as well as sensitive, quantitative, applicable, and newly developed 
NMR, HPLC, UHPLC, GC/MS, UHPLC/MS, and LC/MS methods.
Key Features:
•	 Minimal Prerequisites: No prior functional food experience is needed, making the 
content accessible to a wide audience.
•	 New and Real-World Data: Learn with real-scientific information on anthocya­
nins, including all biological properties of anthocyanins, antioxidant activities, 
and new datasets on health protection, functional food development, encapsula­
tion, and uses of anthocyanins as food colorant.
•	 Expanded Theoretical and Practical Data on Methods of Analysis of Anthocyanins: 
Includes deeper coverage of theory-based approaches of modern methods of analy­
sis of anthocyanins, their connection with GC/MS, LC/MS etc.-based approaches, 
and a presentation of newly developed and formal aspects of these methods of 
anthocyanins.
Ideal for those interested in or looking to deepen their knowledge of functional foods and 
nutraceuticals, this edition provides a clear introduction to the antioxidant structure and 
health-protective properties of anthocyanins and current modern analysis methods.

This CRC series Food Analysis and Properties is designed to provide a state-of-art coverage 
on topics to the understanding of physical, chemical and functional properties of foods: 
including (1) recent analysis techniques of a choice of food components; (2) developments 
and evolutions in analysis techniques related to food; (3) recent trends in analysis techniques 
of specific food components and/or a group of related food components.
Sequencing Technologies in Microbial Food Safety and Quality
Edited by Devarajan Thangadurai, Leo M.L. Nollet, Saher Islam, and Jeyabalan 
Sangeetha
Nanoemulsions in Food Technology: Development, Characterization, and Applications Edited by 
Javed Ahmad and Leo M.L. Nollet
Mass Spectrometry in Food Analysis
Edited by Leo M.L. Nollet and Robert Winkler
Bioactive Peptides from Food: Sources, Analysis, and Functions Edited by Leo M.L. Nollet and 
Semih Ötleş
Nutriomics: Well-being through Nutrition Edited by Devarajan Thangadurai, Saher Islam, 
Leo M.L. Nollet,  and Juliana Bunmi Adetunji
Analysis of Naturally Occurring Food Toxins of Plant Origin Edited by Leo M. L. Nollet and 
Javed Ahmad
Analysis of Food Spices: Identification and Authentication Edited by Leo M. L. Nollet, Javed 
Ahmad, and Javed Ahamad
Flavoromics: An Integrated Approach to Flavor and Sensory Assessment Edited by Leo M. L. 
Nollet and Matteo Bordiga
Bioactive Compounds from Food: Benefits and Analysis Edited by Leo M. L. Nollet and Javed 
Ahmad
Bioactive Compounds: Identification and Characterization of their Food and  Pharmacological 
Potential
Edited by Mozaniel Santana de Oliveira and Leo M.L. Nollet
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins Edited by Leo M.L. Nollett 
and Semih Ötleş
Food Analysis & Properties
Series Editor
Leo M. L. Nollet
University College Ghent, Belgium

Handbook of Analysis and 
Extraction Methods  
of Anthocyanins
Edited by
Leo M.L. Nollet and Semih Ötleş

Designed cover image: Shutterstock
First edition published 2025
by CRC Press
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431
and by CRC Press
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
© 2025 selection and editorial matter, Leo M.L. Nollett and Semih Ötleş; individual chapters, the contributors
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher can-
not assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and 
publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and 
apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright 
material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, 
or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, includ-
ing photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without writ-
ten permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or con-
tact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For 
works that are not available on CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for 
identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
ISBN: 978-1-032-58468-3 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-59161-2 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-45326-0 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/9781003453260
Typeset in Palatino
by KnowledgeWorks Global Ltd.

v
Contents
Series Preface................................................................................................................................. vii
Preface...............................................................................................................................................ix
Biographies.......................................................................................................................................xi
Section I  General Introduction, Sources, and Chemistry
	 1	 State of the Art of Anthocyanins: Antioxidant Activity, Sources, 
Bioavailability, and Therapeutic Effect in Human Health.............................................3
	 2	 Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing.......................................................34
	 3	 Encapsulation of Anthocyanins – Insights on Technological Strategies 
to Increase Its Stability during Food Processing and Digestion.................................65
	 4	 Anthocyanins as Food Colorants.......................................................................................81
	 5	 Antioxidant Properties of Anthocyanins.........................................................................98
	 6	 Health Effects of Anthocyanins.......................................................................................114
	 7	 Anthocyanins as Functional Foods..................................................................................135
Section II  Extraction Methods and Analysis of Anthocyanins
	 8	 Extraction and Purification of Anthocyanins: A Review............................................147
	 9	 Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins.............................................................................163
	10	 HPLC and UHPLC Analysis of Anthocyanins..............................................................179
	11	 LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins...................................................................................196
	12	 UHPLC/MS Analysis of Anthocyanins..........................................................................244
	13	 NMR Analysis of Anthocyanins......................................................................................262
	14	 Spectroscopic Methods in Analysis of Anthocyanins.................................................271
	15	 GC/MS Analysis of Anthocyanins..................................................................................285
Index..............................................................................................................................................291

vii
Series Preface
There will always be a need to analyze food compounds and their properties. Current 
trends in analyzing methods include automation, increasing the speed of analyses, and 
miniaturization. Over the years, the unit of detection has evolved from micrograms to 
pictograms.
A classical pathway of analysis is sampling, sample preparation, cleanup, derivatization, 
separation, and detection. At every step, researchers are working and developing new 
methodologies. A large number of papers are published every year on all facets of analy­
sis. So, there is a need for books that gather information on one kind of analysis technique 
or on the analysis methods for a specific group of food components.
The scope of the CRC Series on Food Analysis and Properties aims to present a range of 
books edited by distinguished scientists and researchers who have significant experience 
in scientific pursuits and critical analysis. This series is designed to provide state-of-the-art 
coverage on topics such as the following:
1.	Recent analysis techniques on a range of food components.
2.	Developments and evolution in analysis techniques related to food.
3.	Recent trends in analysis techniques for specific food components and/or a group 
of related food components.
4.	The understanding of physical, chemical, and functional properties of foods.
The book Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins is volume number 
26 of this series.
I am happy to be a series editor of such books for the following reasons:
•	 I am able to pass on my experience in editing high-quality books related to food.
•	 I get to know colleagues from all over the world more personally.
•	 I continue to learn about interesting developments in food analysis.
Much work is involved in the preparation of a book. I have been assisted and supported 
by a number of people, all of whom I would like to thank. I would especially like to thank 
the team at CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, with a special word of thanks to Steve Zollo, 
senior editor.
Many, many thanks to all the editors and authors of this volume and future volumes. I 
very much appreciate all their effort, time, and willingness to do a great job.
I dedicate this series to:
•	 My wife, for her patience with me (and all the time I spend on my computer).
•	 All patients suffering from prostate cancer; knowing what this means, I am hop­
ing they will have some relief.
Dr. Leo M. L. Nollet (Retired)
University College Ghent
Ghent, Belgium

ix
Preface
As the market share of functional foods increases in the world, interest in components 
with protective and therapeutic properties, especially antioxidant ones, has been increas­
ing rapidly in both the scientific world and the nutraceutical industry in recent years. 
When examined from this perspective, anthocyanins stand out as a class of flavonoids 
with an important antioxidant character among the secondary metabolites of plants. 
Anthocyanins are pigments that give various fruits and vegetables their blue, red, purple, 
and black colors. In this book, the importance of anthocyanins is an important functional 
component. The studies conducted in recent years on their extraction technologies and 
analysis are discussed and a roadmap that can be considered for the future for both aca­
demia and industry is tried to be drawn.
The book is divided into two sections:
Section 1: General Introduction, Sources, and Chemistry, and Section 2: Extraction 
Methods and Analysis of Anthocyanins.
The book considers fundamental concepts, chemical properties, biosynthesis, bioavail­
ability, stability in food products during food processing, encapsulation, antioxidant prop­
erties, health effects, uses as functional food, isolation and extraction methods, analysis 
(HPLC, UHPLC, LC/MS, NMR, GC/MS, and spectroscopy) of anthocyanins.
The book addresses food scientists, technologists, chemists, nutrition researchers, pro­
ducers, and processors working in the whole food science and technology field as well as 
those who are interested in the development of innovative functional products.
We would like to acknowledge and thank all chapter authors for their fruitful collabo­
ration in bringing together different topics of anthocyanins in one integral and valuable 
reference.
We would especially like to thank the team at CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, with a spe­
cial word of thanks to Steve Zollo, senior editor.
When the going gets tough, the tough get going.
Leo M.L. Nollet
Semih Ötleş

xi
Biographies
Leo M. L. Nollet earned an M.S. (1973) and Ph.D. (1978) in biology from the Katholieke 
Universiteit Leuven, Belgium. He is an editor and associate editor of numerous books. He 
edited for M. Dekker, New York—now CRC Press of Taylor & Francis Publishing Group—
the first, second, and third editions of Food Analysis by HPLC and Handbook of Food Analysis. 
The last edition is a two-volume book. Dr. Nollet also edited the Handbook of Water Analysis 
(first, second, and third editions) and Chromatographic Analysis of the Environment, third 
and fourth editions (CRC Press). With F. Toldrá, he coedited two books published in 2006, 
2007, and 2017: Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing (CRC Press) and Advances in Food 
Diagnostics with another publisher. With M. Poschl, he coedited the book Radionuclide 
Concentrations in Foods and the Environment, also published in 2006 (CRC Press). Dr. Nollet 
has also coedited with Y. H. Hui and other colleagues on several books: Handbook of Food 
Product Manufacturing; Handbook of Food Science, Technology, and Engineering (CRC Press, 
2005); Food Biochemistry and Food Processing (first and second editions; and the Handbook of 
Fruit and Vegetable Flavors. In addition, he edited the Handbook of Meat, Poultry and Seafood 
Quality, first and second editions.
From 2008 to 2011, he published five volumes on animal product-related books with F. 
Toldrá: Handbook of Muscle Foods Analysis, Handbook of Processed Meats and Poultry Analysis, 
Handbook of Seafood and Seafood Products Analysis, Handbook of Dairy Foods Analysis (2nd edi­
tion in 2021), and Handbook of Analysis of Edible Animal By-Products. Also, in 2011, with F. 
Toldrá, he coedited two volumes for CRC Press: Safety Analysis of Foods of Animal Origin and 
Sensory Analysis of Foods of Animal Origin. In 2012, they published the Handbook of Analysis 
of Active Compounds in Functional Foods. In a co-edition with Hamir Rathore, Handbook of 
Pesticides: Methods of Pesticides Residues Analysis was marketed in 2009; Pesticides: Evaluation 
of Environmental Pollution in 2012; Biopesticides Handbook in 2015; and Green Pesticides 
Handbook: Essential Oils for Pest Control in 2017. Other finished book projects include Food 
Allergens: Analysis Instrumentation and Methods (with A. van Hengel; CRC Press, 2011) and 
Analysis of Endocrine Compounds in Food. Dr. Nollet’s recent projects include Proteomics in 
Foods with F. Toldrá and Transformation Products of Emerging Contaminants in the Environment: 
Analysis, Processes, Occurrence, Effects, and Risks with D. Lambropoulou.
In the series Food Analysis and Properties, he edited (with C. Ruiz-Capillas) Flow Injection 
Analysis of Food Additives (CRC Press, 2015) and Marine Microorganisms: Extraction and 
Analysis of Bioactive Compounds (CRC Press, 2016). With A.S. Franca, he coedited Spectroscopic 
Methods in Food Analysis (CRC Press, 2017), and with Horacio Heinzen and Amadeo R. 
Fernandez-Alba, he coedited Multiresidue Methods for the Analysis of Pesticide Residues in Food 
(CRC Press, 2017). Further volumes in the series Food Analysis and Properties are Phenolic 
Compounds in Food: Characterization and Analysis (with Janet Alejandra Gutierrez-Uribe, 
2018), Testing and Analysis of GMO-containing Foods and Feed (with Salah E. O. Mahgoub, 
2018), Fingerprinting Techniques in Food Authentication and Traceability (with K. S. Siddiqi, 
2018), Hyperspectral Imaging Analysis and Applications for Food Quality (with N.C. Basantia, 
Leo M.L. Nollet, Mohammed Kamruzzaman, 2018), Ambient Mass Spectroscopy Techniques 
in Food and the Environment (with Basil K. Munjanja, 2019), Food Aroma Evolution: During 
Food Processing, Cooking, and Aging (with M. Bordiga, 2019), Mass Spectrometry Imaging 
in Food Analysis (2020), Proteomics for Food Authentication (with S. Ötleş, 2020), Analysis of 

xii
Biographies
Nanoplastics and Microplastics in Food (with K.S. Siddiqi, 2020), Chiral Organic Pollutants: 
Monitoring and Characterization in Food and the Environment (with Edmond Sanganyado 
and Basil K. Munjanja, 2020), Sequencing Technologies in Microbial Food Safety and Quality 
(with Devarajan Thangadurai, Saher Islam, Jeyabalan Sangeetha, 2021), Nanoemulsions in 
Food Technology: Development, Characterization, and Applications (with Javed Ahmad, 2021), 
Mass Spectrometry in Food Analysis (with Robert Winkler, 2022), Bioactive Peptides from Food: 
Sources, Analysis, and Functions (with Semih Ötleş, 2022), and Nutriomics: Well-being through 
Nutrition (with Devarajan Thangadurai, Saher IslamJuliana Bunmi Adetunji, 2022). In 2023 
he published with Javed Ahmad Analysis of Naturally Occurring Food Toxins of Plant Origin.
The last published books are as follows: Biopesticides Handbook 2nd Ed. (with S. Mir), 
Handbook of Seafood and Seafood Products Analysis (with F. Toldrá), Flavoromics: An Integrated 
Approach to Flavor and Sensory Assessment (with M. Bordiga), Analysis of Food Spices (with J. 
Ahmad and J. Ahamad), Global Regulations of Medicinal, Pharmaceutical, and Food Products 
(with F. Ali), and Bioactive Compounds from Food Benefits and Analysis (with J. Ahmad).
Semih Ötleş A native of Izmir, Türkiye, Professor Ötleş obtained his B.Sc. degree from 
the Department of Food Engineering (Ege University) in 1980. During his assistantship at 
Ege University, in 1985, he received an M.S. in Food Chemistry, and in 1989, after complet­
ing his thesis research on the instrumental analysis and chemistry of vitamins in foods, 
he received a Ph.D. in Food Chemistry from Ege University. In 1991–1992, he completed 
postdoctoral training on meat proteins, including OECD—Postdoctoral Fellowship, in the 
Research Center Melle at Gent University, Belgium. Afterward, he joined the Department 
of Food Engineering at Ege University as a scientist of Food Chemistry, being promoted 
to Associate Professor in 1993 and to Professor in 2000. He was Vice Dean at Engineering 
Faculty (2003–2009), Head of the Department of Nutrition and Dietetics (2008–2011), and 
Vice Rector in Ege University (2012–2016). The research activities of Professor Ötleş have 
been focused on instrumental methods of food analysis. Ötleş began a series of projects on 
the separation and instrumental analysis techniques, first for analysis of vitamins in foods, 
then protein chemistry, carbohydrates, carotenoids, proteomics, and most recently bioac­
tive peptides. Other activities span the fields of instrumental food analysis like UPLC, GC, 
GC/MS, LC/MS/MS analysis, hyphenated techniques, soy chemistry, aromatics, medical 
and functional foods, and nutraceutical chemistry. Included are multiresidue analysis of 
various foods, n-3 fatty acids in fish oils, and medical and functional foods.

Section I
General Introduction, 
Sources, and Chemistry


3
1
State of the Art of Anthocyanins: Antioxidant 
Activity, Sources, Bioavailability, and 
Therapeutic Effect in Human Health
Noelia Tena, Julia Martín, and Agustín G. Asuero
1.1  Introduction
In recent years, the interest in plants and food containing antioxidant properties has 
increased. The chemical compounds present in vegetables and fruits with these capaci­
ties are: vitamins C and E, carotenoids, and flavonoids. The anthocyanins, which are the 
most important group of flavonoids in plants, are pigments with a flavylium cation (AH+) 
structure that act as acids. This structure is directly related to its antioxidant activity. Most 
of the functional properties and the sensory quality of the anthocyanins can be explained 
by their chemical reactivity. The structures and properties of anthocyanins are dependent 
on different factors such as pH, temperature, and solvents which should be controlled to 
carry out antioxidant activity studies of these compounds [1–9].
Free radicals, reactive oxygen species (ROS), and/or reactive nitrogen species (RNS) are 
required for the proper performance of the human body and its organs. These radicals are 
on balance by a redox homeostasis in our body. However, the body may be occasionally 
affected by oxidative stress resulting from an off-balance state. This stress is important 
in the development of chronic degenerative diseases including coronary heart disease, 
cancer, and aging [2]. Anthocyanins have been described as compounds that prevent or 
inhibit, oxidation by scavenging free radicals and reducing oxidative stress. On a regular 
basis, anthocyanins act as H-atom donator or as single-electron transfer (SET). Different 
methods of analysis based on both mechanisms have been proposed to determine the anti­
oxidant activity of anthocyanins. The antioxidant activity of these compounds depends on 
their total concentration, structure, and environment. A literature compilation about the 
concentrations of the most common anthocyanins in different foods is presented in this 
review in order to have an overview of the different sources of anthocyanins.
The beneficial properties attributed to the dietary ingestion of anthocyanin-rich foods 
(eye health, cardiovascular diseases, antiobesity, antidiabetic, antimicrobial, anticancer, or 
neuroprotective effect) have been deeply documented in studies carried out with experi­
mental models. These health benefits contrast with the apparent small portion (<1–2%) of 
these compounds absorbed by our organism [3–5]. During the digestion process, antho­
cyanins undergo an intense variation in pH that together with the enzymatic and bacte­
rial action can cause the hydrolysis and transformation of anthocyanins into metabolites, 
conjugated products, or simpler phenolic compounds [7, 10–12]. The question is: How 

4
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
can anthocyanins be so influential in health? Are anthocyanins the only responsible for 
their beneficial effects? The last scientific developments highlight the potential synergy 
effect between parent compounds, metabolites (phases I and II), conjugated products, and 
microbe-generated metabolites to explain those biological events [4, 11–13].
Due to their particular physicochemical features, the bioavailability of anthocyanins is 
very difficult to assess. The first studies were performed analyzing blood and urine to deter­
mine the anthocyanin concentration levels after the ingestion of foods rich in anthocyanins 
[14–16]. However, the low absorption percentage obtained led to in vitro assays (mostly using 
cell culture systems) in order to facilitate the knowledge of their biochemical and chemical 
changes as well as the influence of the digestion steps. The last studies have emphasized the 
key role of the microbiota in the transformation of anthocyanins, which is not considered in 
in vitro assays but is still poorly considered in in vivo and ex vivo studies [14].
This review aims to highlight some aspects regarding the antioxidant activity of anthocy­
anins and their bioavailability after intake. The first part includes an exposition of the most 
common antioxidant bioassays used to determine in vitro the antioxidant activity of antho­
cyanins, being the advantages and disadvantages of each bioassay identified. Afterwards, 
the effect of the chemical structure and the environment on the ability of the anthocyanins 
to prevent oxidation is discussed and presented together with information about different 
sources and the range of concentrations of these compounds in food. The second part of the 
manuscript exposes the bioavailability and metabolism of anthocyanins as well as a sum­
mary including the main therapeutic effects of anthocyanins on different diseases.
1.2  Antioxidant Bioassays for Anthocyanins
Numerous antioxidant assays have been proposed to measure the ability of anthocyanins 
to prevent the oxidation process that naturally occurs. Depending on the source of the 
anthocyanins and their nature, in most of the cases, an extraction step before carrying out 
the antioxidant bioassay is needed. The extraction process is a critical step in the determi­
nation of the antioxidant activity bioassay, presenting a challenge due to the low stability 
of anthocyanins after extraction and their tendency to remain bound to the matrix of the 
sample. Multiple alternatives have been proposed in the literature for this procedure [17]. 
Results show that temperature, pH, solvent system, solvent-to-solid ratio, and number of 
extractions are factors that play an important role in the extraction efficiency and that 
should be optimized for each sample [18, 19]. Once the anthocyanins are in a liquid solu­
tion, the antioxidant activity could be determined by different bioassays. In general, two 
different mechanisms can be used to explain the antioxidant activity of anthocyanins: 
hydrogen atom donator (HAT) and SET. In HAT mechanism, the free radical R• removes 
a hydrogen atom from the antioxidant (AH+) converting the free radical to a more stable 
product. In the SET mechanism, the antioxidant (AH+) donates an electron to the free radi­
cal reducing the oxidized intermediates into the stable form [20]. However, the difficulty 
in distinguishing between HAT and SET reactions is high. In most situations, these two 
reactions take place simultaneously, and the mechanism of the reaction is determined 
by the antioxidant structure, solubility, the partition coefficient, and solvent polarity [21]. 
Different antioxidant bioassays have been commonly used in the literature to determine 
the antioxidant activity of anthocyanins. A summary of the most common antioxidant 
bioassays used for anthocyanins is shown in Table 1.1.

5
State of the Art of Anthocyanins
Each one of these methods provides information about the antioxidant activity of the 
anthocyanins under specific conditions. In order to have more information about the reac­
tion mechanism, a more comprehensive description of the procedure followed in each one 
of these bioassays are presented together with their main advantages and disadvantages.
1.2.1  DPPH (Diphenyl-1-Picrylhydrazyl) Assay
DPPH assay is a spectrophotometric method that can be applied for both solid and liq­
uid samples, not being specific for any particular antioxidant. Thus, it can be applied to 
determine the total antioxidant capacity of the sample. This assay is based on the ability 
of the free radical (DPPH•) to react with hydrogen donor (AH+). The free radical presents 
an intense abortion in the UV-vis spectral region at 515 nm, the absorbance at 515 nm 
decreases when the free radical is reduced.
The antioxidant activity of anthocyanins for DPPH has been assessed by several authors 
[22–26]. Reliable results can be obtained with this method in a fast and simple manner. 
Currently, a colorimetric alternative has been proposed to extend the application of this assay 
where a spectrophotometer is not available [27]. Furthermore, as the free radical is stable its 
production is not necessary every time that an analysis is carried out. The main disadvan­
tages could be the complexity of the analysis, as it turns more complex when other com­
pounds present in the sample absorb at 515 nm and many antioxidants are inert to DPPH.
TABLE 1.1
Commonly Used Methods for Measurement in Vitro of Antioxidant Activity
Bioassay
Reagents Involved 
in the Reaction
Detection
Method
DPPH (diphenyl-1-
picrylhydrazyl) assay
Free radical (DPPH•+)
Decrease of Abs. at 515 nm
Spectrophotometric 
or colorimetric
ORAC Assay (oxygen 
radical absorbance 
capacity)
2,2´-Azobis(2-amidino-
propane) dihydrochloride 
(AAPH) to produce free 
radical β-phycoerythrin or 
fluorescein or pyrogallol red
Decrease of fluorescence
Fluorescence 
spectroscopy
TRAP assay (total peroxyl 
radical trapping 
antioxidant parameter)
2,2´-Azobis(2-amidopropane) 
hydrochloride (ABAP) to 
produce free radical luminol
Decrease of luminescence
Chemiluminescence
FCT (ferric thiocyanate) 
assay
Ferrous chloride, formation 
of red ferric thiocyanate
Increase of Abs. at 500 nm
Spectrophotometric
FRAP (ferric reducing 
antioxidant power) assay
FeCl3·6H2O, formation of 
blue ferrous complexes
Increase of Abs. at 593 nm
Colorimetric
CUPRAC, cupric ion 
reducing antioxidant 
capacity
Cupric neocuproine, 
formation of 
Cu(I)-neocuproine
Increase of Abs. at 550 nm
Spectrophotometric
ABTS [2,2´-azino-bis 
(3-ehtylbenzothiazoline-6-
sulfonic acid) diamonium 
salt] assay
Free radical (ABTS•+)
Decrease of Abs. at 415 nm
Colorimetric
Methods of inhibited 
autoxidation
Lipid molecules, azoinitiator
O2 consumption/
hydroperoxide formation
Oxygen electrode, 
pressure gauge, 
detection of 
conjugated dienes
Note: Abs, absorbance.

6
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
1.2.2  ORAC Assay (Oxygen Radical Absorbance Capacity)
ORAC assay is a fluorescence method that combines the sample (AH+) with a fluorescent 
compound, protein phycoerythrin (β-PE), and with a generator of free radicals, 2,2ʹ-azobis(2-
amidino-propane) dihydrochloride (AAPH). This assay is based on the loss of the fluores­
cent compound when it is oxidized by the generated free radicals. When antioxidants (AH+) 
are involved in the reaction, the fluorescent compound is protected from oxidative degrada­
tion. Hence, the fluorescence signal remains. The fluorescence signal is monitored for 1 h 
at λem = 565 nm and λex = 540 nm, respectively. The antioxidant activity of anthocyanins 
has been assessed by ORAC assay by several authors [26, 28–30]. This is considered a good 
method to determine the antioxidant capacity of hydrophilic and hydrophobic samples, as 
it is easily adaptive to different samples changing the generator of free radicals. One disad­
vantage is the non-specificity of the fluorescence compounds that can react with the sample 
losing fluorescence even without the addition of a free radical generator.
1.2.3  TRAP Assay (Total Peroxyl Radical Trapping Antioxidant Parameter)
TRAP assay is a chemiluminescence method that consists of the following components:
i.	thermolabile azo-radical initiator (e.g., 2,2ʹ-azobis(2-amidopropane) hydrochloride 
(ABAP)), which produces radicals (R•) that react rapidly with O2 to give a peroxyl 
radicals (ROO•);
ii.	oxidizable compounds with chemiluminescence properties to monitor the reac­
tion progress (e.g., luminol); and
iii.	the sample with the antioxidant properties (AH+).
The antioxidant activity of anthocyanins has been assessed by TRAP assay by several 
authors [31–34]. This assay is sensitive to all known chain-breaking antioxidants. However, 
an important disadvantage to highlight is the difficulty comparing the results between 
laboratories due to the number of different endpoints that can be used. It is a relatively 
complex method, time-consuming, and requires a high degree of experience. Furthermore, 
such as in the ORAC assay, the oxidizable compounds are non-specific and other non-
radical chain reactions could occur.
1.2.4  FCT (Ferric Thiocyanate) Assay
The FCT assay is a spectrophotometric method that consists of the oxidation of ferrous 
chloride to ferric ions by reacting with peroxide. The peroxides are formed during the 
reaction that takes place when the sample is mixed with ethanol, water, phosphate buffer 
solution (pH = 7), and linoleic acid. Then, ferrous chloride in hydrochloric acid is added to 
the reaction, and the ferric ion formed is combined with ammonium thiocyanate produc­
ing ferric thiocyanate, which is red. The absorbance of the sample is measured at 500 nm 
until the maximum value is reached.
This assay is used to measure the amount of peroxide produced during the initial stages 
of oxidation. In the case of anthocyanins, this method has been applied to determine the 
antioxidant activity avoiding the peroxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acid [35]. This 
assay is simple and reproducible. Nevertheless, results are not reliable in the case that 
compounds within the sample absorb around 500 nm. This drawback is common not only 
in this method but in other spectrophotometric assays.

7
State of the Art of Anthocyanins
1.2.5  FRAP (Ferric Reducing Antioxidant Power) Assay
FRAP assay is a colorimetric method that can be employed for the determination of the 
total antioxidant activity of anthocyanins. It is based on the reduction of complexes of 
2,4,6-tripyridyl-s-triazine (TPTZ) with ferric chloride hexahydrate (FeCl3·6H2O) under 
acidic conditions. The solution turns slightly brownish, forming blue ferrous complexes 
once the reduction is completed. The absorbance is measured at 593 nm against the blank.
This method has been extensively applied to determine the antioxidant activity of 
anthocyanins in different matrices: in elderberry [36]; in Roselle extract [37]; in raspberries, 
blackberries, red currants, gooseberries, and Cornelian cherries [38]; or in carrots, cabbage, 
cauliflower, potatoes, onions, asparagus, and eggplant [39]. However, the results of this 
method are in most of the cases compared to the results of other antioxidant assays [40]. 
Rapid and reproducible results are obtained with this method. However, some limitations 
related to FRAP assay should be considered. On the one hand, the samples must be aque­
ous and the pH value is critical. On the other hand, some compounds without antioxidant 
properties can reduce Fe3+ to Fe2+ inducing an overestimation of the antioxidant activity of 
the sample.
1.2.6  CUPRAC (Cupric Ion Reducing Antioxidant Capacity) Assay
CUPRAC assay is a spectrophotometric method similar to FRAP. In this method, the 
anthocyanins react with the CUPRAC reagent (cupric neocuproine) producing the Cu(I)-
neocuproine which is a chromophore that absorbs at 450 nm. This method has been suc­
cessfully applied to various food extracts [7].
The main advantages of this method are related to the positive characteristics of the 
CUPRAC reagent: availability and easy accessibility, rapidity, stability, low cost, sensitivity 
toward thiol-type antioxidants unlike FRAP, and responsiveness to both hydrophilic and 
lipophilic antioxidants. Nevertheless, the detection is based on the absorption at 450 nm 
which is non-specific enough and the presence of other compounds present in the sample 
could be interfered with the results.
1.2.7  ABTS (2,2ʹ-Azino-bis (3-ehtylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic Acid) 
Diamonium Salt) Assay
The most recent ABTS assay method is based on decolorization techniques. It consists of 
the production of a stable radical, blue/green ABTS chromophore, by the reaction of ABTS 
with potassium persulfate. This stable radical has a maximum absorbance of 415 nm. A 
drop in absorbance of this compound occurs when the radical reacts with the antioxidant. 
This method can determine the antioxidant activity of mixtures of substances, helping to 
distinguish between additive and synergistic effects. The antioxidant activity is calculated 
relative to the reactivity of the Trolox standard under similar conditions.
This assay is frequently combined with the DPPH assay for the determination of the 
antioxidant activity of anthocyanins [41–43]. This method is simple and not a large sample 
volume and time of analysis are necessary. Nevertheless, a standard solution is required 
in order to obtain accurate results.
This assay is also described in the literature as TEAC [6-hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethylchro­
man-2-carboxylic acid (Trolox)] equivalent antioxidant capacity. The same free radical is 
used in both TEAC and ABTS assays. However, different reagents have been proposed for 
the generation of the green-blue ABTS•+, resulting in different TEAC assays. This radical is 

8
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
produced by the oxidation of 2,2ʹ-azinobis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid; ABTS). 
The oxidation can be reached in different ways: (i) in TEAC assay I, metmyoglobin reacted 
with H2O2 generating the ferrylmyoglobin radical, which then reacted with ABTS. (ii) In 
TEAC assay II, the ABTS•+ is formed by the reaction with manganese dioxide. (iii) In TEAC 
assay III, an enzymatic reaction using horseradish peroxidase is applied. Other propos­
als consist of applying electrochemical oxidation or using 2,2ʹ-azobis-2-amidinopropane, 
dihydrochloride (AAPH), or potassium persulfate (K2S2O8) as oxidants.
These alternatives are interchangeable when the appropriate solvent is selected. However, 
differences in assay conditions can be found, such as the reaction time or the wavelength 
used for the detection, for instance, sometimes in order to avoid interferences 734 nm is 
preferable to 415 nm.
These assays have been used to determine the antioxidant capacity of the anthocyanins, 
as a consequence some results have been reported in wine [44]; in corn [45]; in pomegran­
ate juice [46]; or in blueberries [47].
The advantages of TEAC assay I are the simplicity, reproducibility, and flexibility to 
determine the antioxidant capacity in hydrophilic and lipophilic foods. However, the pre-
addiction of the sample before the radical generation could result in an overestimation of 
the antioxidant capacity. Other possible disadvantages of this assay may be the fact that 
ABTS is not found naturally and that any compound with a redox potential lower than 
ABTS•+ may reacts with the radical.
Other alternatives applied to determine the antioxidant activity of anthocyanins involve 
the use of enzymes [48] or the use of chromatographic techniques. The latter alternative 
can not only extract the anthocyanins to determine their antioxidant activity [49] but also 
determine the total anthocyanins concentration (TAC), and the identification and quantifi­
cation of the presence of each anthocyanin present in the sample [50, 51].
The in vitro assays exposed in this manuscript provide information about the antioxi­
dant activity of the anthocyanins determined by their capacity to neutralize the initiators 
of the oxidation process (absorbing photons, neutralizing ROS, or chelating metals ion) 
stopping the initiation steps of the autoxidation process. Thus, these assays are based on 
the reaction of the anthocyanins with: (i) some colored persistent radicals such as the free 
radicals used in the DPPH test and TEAC test; or (ii) other oxidizing agents like Fe3+ ions 
used in the FRAP test or Cu2+ ions used in CUPRAC test. This neutralization capacity is 
measured under specific conditions of temperature, light, or a combination of both. Other 
assays to measure the antioxidant capacity of anthocyanins are based on a competitive 
probe reaction where the competitive reaction of radicals with the anthocyanins or with a 
probe is monitored by fluorimetric techniques in the case of the ORAC assay, among oth­
ers. All of these methods offer information on the actual antioxidant activity. They trap 
free radicals and should be considered as chain-breaking antioxidants. This property can 
be measured properly only with methods based on inhibited autoxidation, while others 
(such as DPPH and ABTS) provide only a rough estimation. However, different specific 
studies have been carried out to determine the preventive antioxidant capacity [52]. Other 
specific assays to gather information about the inhibition of lipid substrate oxidation, 
where different factors and mechanisms of oxidation are studied simultaneously, can be 
found in the literature [53].
As it has been explained above, the assays presented in this manuscript follow different 
mechanisms of reaction to measure the antioxidant capacity. Therefore, the information 
provided by them and the interpretation of their results should be carefully considered. 
For example, that is the case of the results provided by FRAP and CUPRAC assays ver­
sus ORAC assay which consists of a radical-trapping reaction and directly measures the 
capacity to neutralize initiators.

9
State of the Art of Anthocyanins
Despite the fact that the methods mentioned above are the most commonly used to deter­
mine the antioxidant capacity of anthocyanins, there is currently a claim for the development 
of different alternatives in order to provide direct information about the capacity to prevent 
autoxidation in the biological system. Diverse alternatives have been proposed to measure 
the inhibition of autoxidation. That is the case exposed by Matera et al. [54], where the anti­
oxidant activity is measured by studying the inhibited autoxidation in aqueous micelles. 
For that purpose, linoleic acid and Triton-X100 were mixed under controlled pH together 
with an initiator and the extracted anthocyanins. The reaction was tracked by monitoring 
the oxygen consumption with a Clark-type electrode. Another alternative to measuring the 
capacity of anthocyanins to inhibit autoxidation was proposed by Tisuda et al. [55], where 
the antioxidative activity was measured by using linoleic acid autoxidation in different sys­
tems; liposome, rabbit erythrocyte membrane, and rat liver microsomal. This type of study 
provides direct information about the relationship between the results of antioxidant assays 
and their biological activity in the prevention of autoxidation. Currently, the European Food 
Safety Authority (EFSA) has published guidance for the scientific requirements for health 
claims related to antioxidants, oxidative damage, and cardiovascular health. In this guid­
ance, the European Health Claims Regulation has given recommendations to determine 
the biological effect of food supplements with purported antioxidant activity. According 
to this document, the antioxidant properties of foods are based on scavenging free radicals 
that are in vitro studied in model systems, and it is not established that this capability has a 
beneficial physiological effect in humans. Thus, the in vivo human studies in plasma using 
methods—such as TRAP, TEAC, FRAP, and ORAC—carried out to establish the antioxidant 
capacity of the plasma do not demonstrate that it has a beneficial physiological effect in 
humans. Consequently, the protection of cells from premature aging to promote healthy 
aging in relation to the antioxidant properties of food is not sufficiently defined because it 
is established by non-specific criteria. In order to provide information about the prevention 
of the autoxidation under specific criteria, the EFSA guidance recommends some assays for 
specific biological molecules. For example, it proposes: (i) the monitoring of F2-isoprostanes 
to determine the capacity for the protection of the lipids from oxidative damage; (ii) the anal­
yses of 8-hydroxy-2-deoxy-guanosine in blood, tissue, and urine to assess oxidative damage 
to DNA; and (iii) the monitoring of protein carbonyls by ELISA, which can be applied to 
determine the protection of protein from oxidation damage [56].
All the assays explained in detail in this manuscript provide results that generally express 
the antioxidant activity as mmol Trolox equivalent per kg of fresh weight. However, these 
results do not report exactly the antioxidative activity of foods. For this purpose, informa­
tion about the size portion of each food in the diet is also important to evaluate its antioxi­
dant activity [57]. Due to the relevance of this type of results with regard to the antioxidant 
activity of anthocyanins, the USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference 
has published a database where the total concentration of anthocyanins of different fruits 
and vegetables has been determined together with the service size that should be ingested 
from each fruit or vegetable [58].
1.3  Classification and Natural Sources of Anthocyanins
Health and therapeutic effects of anthocyanins are related to their chemical and biochemical 
reactivity, which are partially explained by their antioxidative activities [59, 60]. However, 
the antioxidative activity of anthocyanins does not necessarily transfer to biological 

10
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
activity because any actions on the body depend both on bioavailability and cellular 
molecular targets [61]. Furthermore, not all the blue, red, and purple fruits, vegetables, and 
flowers have the same composition and concentration of anthocyanins and in consequence 
the same antioxidative activity. The fruits with the highest concentration of anthocyanins 
are berries, currants, grapes, and some tropical fruits. In the group of edible vegetables, 
leafy vegetables, grains, roots, and tubers show the highest concentration of anthocyanins 
as well [62]. Furthermore, the presence of anthocyanins can be detected in different parts 
of the plant such as the stem, leaves, and storage organs.
In nature, these pigments are commonly present as anthocyanin, which is in the form of 
glycoside, and as anthocyanidin also known as aglycone (one or more saccharides bonded 
with the aglycone). The base structure of anthocyanins is shown in Figure 1.1. Nowadays the 
number of anthocyanins identified in nature is higher than 600 [6]. Among these anthocya­
nins, glycoside forms of delphinidin, cyanidin, petunidin, peonidin, malvidin, and pelargo­
nidin are the most abundant [54, 55, 62–65]. Table 1.2 shows the most common anthocyanins 
that have been identified in different fruits, vegetables, and edible flowers and the numerical 
code that has been assigned to each anthocyanin to refer them in the manuscript.
In supplementary information, Tables S1–S6 show the most common anthocyanins 
identified in different fruits, vegetables, and flowers, grouped according to their chemical 
structure: delphinidin and its derivatives (Table S1), cyanidin and its derivatives (Table 
S2), petunidin (Table S3), peonidin (Table S4), malvidin (Table S5), and pelargonidin and 
its derivatives (Table S6). Each table also indicates the natural source of the anthocyanins, 
the type of extraction that was applied, the chromatographic method used to identify and 
quantify them, and the antioxidant assays applied to determine the antioxidant capacity.
The main conclusion from Table S1 is that delphinidin 3-glucoside (code 4) is the most 
common and abundant delphinidin in fruits and edible flowers. However, this group of 
anthocyanins is not so frequent in vegetables, being delphinine the most common. The 
results showed in Table S2 pointed out that the most common cyanindin in fruit and edi­
ble flower is cyanidin 3-glucoside (code 11), being also abundant cyanidin 3-galactoside 
(code 10) in fruits. In vegetables, cyanidin (code 8) is the most common and abundant but 
cyanidin 3-glucoside (code 11) is abundant in some grains as well. Table S3 shows that 
the following anthocyanins can be identified in fruits: petunidin 3-arabinoside, petunidin 
3-galactoside, and petunidin 3-glucoside (code 30, 31, 32) in almost all the studied fruits,
FIGURE 1.1
Structure of anthocyanins R3 = sugar, and anthocyanidins R3 = H.

11
State of the Art of Anthocyanins
with petunidin 3-glucoside (code 32) being the most abundant and the only petunidin 
identified in the flowers. Petunidin (code 29) is the only anthocyanin of this group identi­
fied in the studied vegetables. Table S4 reveals that no peonidin was identified in flow­
ers. In fruits, peonidin 3-glucoside (code 37) was the most abundant but also peonidin 
3-galactoside (code 36) was identified in most of them. In vegetables, the most common 
anthocyanin of this group was peonidin (code 35). From the group of malvidin (Table S5), 
TABLE 1.2
Anthocyanins Identified in Different Fruits, Vegetables, and Edible Flowers and Their Codes
Code
Anthocyanin
Code
Anthocyanin
1
Delphinidin
30
Petunidin 3-arabinoside
2
Delphinidin 3-arabinoside
31
Petunidin 3-galactoside
3
Delphinidin 3-galactoside
32
Petunidin 3-glucoside
4
Delphinidin 3-glucoside
33
Petunidin 3-halactoside
5
Delphinidin 3,5-diglucoside
34
Petunidin 3-rutinoside
6
Delphinidin 3-rutinoside
35
Peonidin
7
Delphinidin 3-O-(6ʺ-p-coumaroyl-glucoside)
36
Peonidin 3-galactoside
8
Cyanidin
37
Peonidin 3-glucoside
9
Cyanidin 3-arabidoside
38
Peonidin 3-rutinoside
10
Cyanidin 3-galactoside
39
Peonidin 3-(6ʹ-malonylglucoside)
11
Cyanidin 3-glucoside
40
Peonidin 3-(3ʺ,6ʺ-dimalonylglucoside)
12
Cyanidin 3,5-diglucoside
41
Peonidin 3-glucoside/malvidin 3-
galactoside
13
Cyanidin 3-rutinoside
42
Peonidin 3-arabinoside/malvidin 3-
glucoside
14
Cyanidin 3-(6ʹ-malonylglucoside)
43
Peonidin 3-O-sophoroside-5-O-glucoside
15
Cyanidin 3-(3ʺ,6ʺ-dimalonylglucoside)
44
Peonidin 3-p-hydroxybenzoylsophoroside-
5-glucoside
16
Cyanidin 3-xyloside
45
Peonidin 3-caffeoylsophoroside-5-
glucoside
17
Cyanidin 3-xylosylrutinoside
46
Peonidin 3-dicaffeoylsophoroside-5-
glucoside
18
Cyanidin 3-dioxaloylglucoside
47
Peonidin 3-caffeoyl-p-
hydroxybenzoylsophoroside-5-glucoside
19
Cyanidin 3-halavtoside
48
Peonidin 3-caffeoy-feruloylsophoroside-
5-glucoside
20
Cyanidin 3-O-sophoroside
49
Malvidin
21
Cyanidin 3-sophoroside-5-rhamnoside
50
Malvidin 3-arabinoside
22
Cyanidin 3-sambubioside
51
Malvidin 3-galactoside
23
Cyanidin 3-sambubioside-5-rhamnoside
52
Malvidin 3-glucoside
24
Cyanidin-3-p-hydroxybenzoylsophoroside-
5-glucoside
53
Malvidin 3,5-diglucoside
25
Cyanidin-3-caffeoylsophoroside-5-glucoside
54
Pelargonidin
26
Cyanidin-3-caffeoyl-p-
hydroxybenzoylsophoroside-5-glucoside
55
Pelargonidin 3-glucoside
27
Cyanidin 3-(p-coumaroyl)-diglucoside-5-
glucoside
56
Pelargonidin 3-rutinoside
28
Cyanidin 3-(p-coumaroyl)-diglucoside-5-
glucoside
57
Pelargonidin 3,5-diglucoside
29
Petunidin

12
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
it can be concluded that the most abundant in fruits is malvidin 3-galactoside (code 51) 
followed by malvidin 3-glucoside (code 52). The last stage was also the most abundant in 
flowers followed by malvidin 3,5-diglucoside (code 53). In vegetables, the malvidin was the 
only anthocyanin quantified of this group. Table S6 shows that pelargonidin 3-glucoside 
(code 55) was the most abundant in fruits followed by pelargonidin 3-rutinoside (code 56). 
The pelargonidin 3,5-diglucoside (code 57) was the most abundant in flowers, and the 
pelargonidin (code 54) was the only anthocyanin of this group identified in the studied 
vegetables.
The protection of these pigments against the oxidation process depends on their struc­
tures. Not all of them possess the same activities to scavenge diverse reactive oxygen or 
nitrogen species. The antioxidant ability of anthocyanins depends on the ring orientation 
since it will determine the willingness to donate a proton and the capacity to transfer and 
electron. The number of free hydroxyls around the pyrone ring and their positions also 
play a key role in the antioxidant activity [2]. The presence of other types of radicals in the 
main structure has an important role in the antioxidant activity as well. Hence, anthocya­
nins, chalcones, and quinoidal bases with a double bond conjugated to the keto group are 
efficient antioxidants at scavenging free radicals. Also, the glycosylated B-ring structure of 
anthocyanins contributes to the high antioxidant activity, where orthohydroxylation and 
methoxylation substantially increase the antioxidant activity. Furthermore, anthocyanidins 
have higher antioxidant activity in comparison with anthocyanins, which has been reported 
in the literature. The reason may be the lower stability of the anthocyanidin compared to the 
anthocyanin due to its structure, which consequently makes anthocyanidin highly reactive 
[66]. Acylation of anthocyanin with one or more phenolic acids has a significant increase in 
antioxidant activity [54, 67], but glycosylation leads to a reduction in the activity [66, 68].
The efficacy of scavenging diverse free radicals differs from one anthocyanin to the 
other. Pelargonidin-3-glucoside, cyanidin-3-glucoside, and delphinidin-3-glucoside and 
their standard aglycones have strong antioxidative activity in a liposomal system and 
reduced formation of malondialdehyde by UVB irradiation [55, 69]. Furthermore, the 
results pointed out the highest inhibitory effect on lipid peroxidation and O2
• scavenging 
activity of delphinidin and delphinidin-3-glucoside followed by cyanidin and pelargoni­
din [2]. On the contrary, pelargonidin had the highest inhibitory effect on hydroxyl radical 
scavenging activity [66]. Moreover, a study demonstrates the highest inhibitory effect on 
copper (II)-induced low-density lipoprotein (LDL) oxidation of cyanidin and cyanidin-
3-glucoside compared with other phenolic acids, anthocyanins, and anthocyanin agly­
cones, whereas delphinidin has intermediate efficacy [70]. Another study analyzed the 
antioxidant activity of malvidin-3-glucoside and the result showed that the quinoidal-base 
and pseudo-base of malvidin-3-glucoside significantly inhibited peroxidation of linoleate 
compared with catechin, malvidin, and resveratrol [71]. However, the oxidation activity 
assigned to these anthocyanins is dependent on the type of reactive species and in con­
sequence on the type of antioxidant assay carried out for the determination of the anti­
oxidant activity. Thus, FRAP and TEAC assays have reported a significant reduction of 
the antioxidant activity by the metoxilation in the position 5 or 3 and 5 in petunidin and 
malvidin monoglucoside, respectively [72]. Another factor implicated in the reactivity of 
the anthocyanins and also in their antioxidative activity is the pH. In the literature dif­
ferent studies have demonstrated the effect of the pH on the antioxidant capacity of the 
anthocyanins from different sources; Roselle [26], wine [71, 72], black rice complexed with 
cycloamylose [73, 74], palm juice [75], and Hibiscus acetosella [76]. The pH is an important 
factor that should be controlled in order to determine the reactivity of the anthocyanins. 
The acid nature of the anthocyanin structure is shown in Figure 1.2. This acid nature 

13
State of the Art of Anthocyanins
is due to the conjugation of the double bonds in the rings of the main structure and the 
hydroxyl groups at C4ʹ, C5, and C7, respectively. The hydroxyl group at C7 is the strongest 
acid. The deprotonation can be produced at acid pH~4 yielding a neutral quinonoid base 
stabilized by tautomerization with the hydroxyl group at C5. The hydroxyl group at C4 is 
also susceptible to being deprotonated at higher pH~7 yielding the anionic base. If the pH 
level is still rising to the basic pH, higher than 8, the deprotonation is produced in the C5 
yielding the dianionic base which can lead to the chalcone anion [1]. Hence, the pH of the 
solution controls the proportions of protonated and deprotonated hydrated and isomeric 
forms of anthocyanin, affecting its reactivity. Therefore, the pH should be controlled dur­
ing the extraction process of anthocyanins and also during the antioxidative bioassays 
because their results are pH-dependent [2, 26].
Once the identification of the most common anthocyanins in different foods has been 
carried out and the influence of the structure and the environment in the capacity of 
anthocyanins to prevent the oxidation has been discussed, the next step was to determine 
the bioavailability of these anthocyanins and their implication, enhancing human health.
1.4  Bioavailability of Anthocyanins
The daily intake of anthocyanins can be estimated via food databases and can range from 
a few to hundreds of milligrams per person due to the methodological differences in the 
assessment, together with the influence of nutritional, cultural, and social differences of 
FIGURE 1.2
Effect of pH on the structure and color of anthocyanins.

14
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
the investigated populations [8]. The pattern followed by anthocyanins after oral dispen­
sation is unique and different from other flavonoids [77]. Anthocyanins have a markedly 
low bioavailability, only 1–2% of the ingested anthocyanins maintain their parent C6–C3–
C6 structure in the organism. Food digestion is a pH-dependent process and, therefore, 
anthocyanins are subjected to transformations in addition to hydrolyzation by several 
enzymes in the small intestine [12, 78]. A portion of the ingested anthocyanins reaches the 
large intestine, where they are metabolized into low-molecular-weight catabolites, which 
can be excreted in the feces within 2–4 h (up to 8 h) or absorbed again. Active transporters 
through either gastric or intestinal cell barrier play an important role in their transfer and 
absorption within the liver, kidney, brain, or other organs and tissues, besides the stomach 
[13, 79]. In a recent review on tissue bioavailability in animals, Sandoval-Ramírez et al. [80] 
concluded that the TAC absorbed was 2.17 × 105 pmol/g in mice kidney, 1.73 × 105 pmol/g 
in liver, 3.6 × 103 pmol/g in heart, and 1.16 × 105 pmol/g in lung; and 6.08 × 103 pmol/g in pig 
brain. In the wall of the intestine and then in the liver, anthocyanins and their catabolites 
undergo phase 2 enzymatic metabolism being also transformed into their glucuronidated, 
sulfated, and methylated forms [10, 12–14, 78, 81–83]. The presence of microbial catabolites 
at many sites of the body, at higher concentrations than the native form, has suggested that 
part of the biological activities attributed to anthocyanins is related to the synergetic effect 
of their colonic catabolites [13, 84]. Anthocyanin metabolites and transformation products 
have been characterized and quantified by several authors [85–89]. Ferrars et al. [88] identi­
fied a wide variety of anthocyanin phenolic metabolites, including 11 novel metabolites, 
in post-menopausal women after 12 weeks of elderberry intake, at concentration levels 
higher than their anthocyanin native forms. There are many critical factors affecting the 
fate of anthocyanins and their metabolites in our organism: the ability to cross membranes, 
pH, digestive enzymes, microbiota, biliary acids, or food matrix. The use of radiolabeled 
(14C) or stable-isotope-labeled (13C) tracer studies provides useful information about to 
which extent anthocyanins are metabolized to phenolic acid derivatives. In this sense, 
Czank et al. [90] investigated the fate of anthocyanins in eight male participants after 
the ingestion of 13C-cyanidin-3-O-glucoside (500 mg). The relative mean bioavailability 
was 12.38% (5.37% excreted in urine and 6.91% in breath). The authors found a maximum 
serum concentration 42-fold higher for 13C-labeled metabolites than their respective native 
compound 13C-cyanidin-3-glucoside. Up to 49 metabolites were detected including among 
others: phase II conjugates of cyanidin-3-glucoside and cyanidin (cyanidin-glucuronide, 
methyl cyanidin-glucuronide, and methyl cyanidin-3-glucoside-glucuronide); degrada­
tion products (protocatechuic acid, phloroglucinaldehyde, and phloroglucinaldehyde); 
phase II conjugates of protocatechuic acid, phenylacetic acids, phenylpropenoic acids, and 
hippuric acid.
The mechanisms through which anthocyanins may exert their bioactivity are not fully 
understood as it is not clear whether their activity is linked to native forms, their deriva­
tives, or both. The distinction of their different biological roles is a very challenging task. 
Some comparative studies have been conducted on the antioxidant activity of anthocy­
anin metabolites [91]. Recently, Kim et al. [92] provided basic information on the chemical 
changes of cyanidin glycosides during in vitro gastrointestinal digestion. Cyanidin-3-
O-galactoside was degraded into caffeoylquinic acid, which was not found after in vitro 
digestion of cyanidin-3-O-glucoside. The bioactivity (DPPH) of the anthocyanin metabo­
lites decreased in the intestinal fraction. However, the bioactivity increased after simulated 
colonic digestion, possibly because of the newly formed colonic metabolites. Furthermore, 
anthocyanin metabolites from the chokeberry extract exhibited higher DPPH radical 
activities than those from the mulberry extract. In another study, α-glucosidase inhibitory 

15
State of the Art of Anthocyanins
activity and ROS scavenging activities of conjugated-pelargonidin-3-O-glucoside samples 
were potentially increased after gastrointestinal digestion [93].
A scheme of the physicochemical reactions observed during the three main stages of the 
human digestion process can be observed in Figure 1.3 [11]. Biotransformation reactions 
start in the oral cavity through salivary amylase (pH 5.6–7.9). Once in the stomach at pH 
1.5–3.5, anthocyanins exist in multiple ionic forms being mainly present as red flavylium 
cations and quinoidal blue species. Finally, in the intestinal step (pH 6.7–7.4), anthocyanins 
are present as colorless carbinol (with limited absorption) and occur the biotransforma­
tion into low-molecular-weight molecules such as phenolic acids or catechol (gallic acid, 
vanillic acid, protocatechuic acid, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, and syringic acid have been 
identified as the main degradation products of delphinidin-3-O-glucoside, peonidin-3-O-
glucoside, cyanidin-3-O-glucoside, pelargonidin-3-O-glucoside, and malvidin-3-O-gluco­
side, respectively) [13].
For a better understanding of the anthocyanin bioavailability, different in vivo and in 
vitro models simulating digestion have been proposed [11]. Gowd et al. [94] assessed the 
phenolic profile of blackberry anthocyanin extract followed by human gut microbiota 
fermentation at different time intervals (0–48 h). Authors revealed the formation of gut 
metabolites enhances the high glucose plus palmitic-acid-induced ROS, mitochondrial 
membrane collapse, and glutathione depletion in HepG2 cells. Several studies have also 
reported that after anthocyanin colonic fermentation occurs an increase of beneficial 
bacteria (Bifidobacterium spp., Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Lactobacillus/Enterococcus spp., 
Akkermansia) [95–100]. Intestinal microbiota possesses β-glucosidase activity, allowing the 
release of glucose from the aglycone and providing energy to support bacterial growth. A 
study recently carried out by Zhou et al. [95] suggests that the consumption of blueberry 
and its extracts could exert prebiotic activity and a modulatory effect on the composi­
tion and abundance of human intestinal microbiota. Anthocyanins could enhance human 
FIGURE 1.3
Schematic representation of the anthocyanins chemical structures influenced by the digestion process steps (r2 
and r3 = h or methyl) (Taken from Braga et al. [14], with permission of Elsevier).

16
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
health by modulating gut microorganisms, which are often related to different diseases 
[95, 101]. Nevertheless, it is important to note that anthocyanin derivatives can also reduce 
some harmful bacteria such as C. histolyticum after colonic fermentation [101, 102]. A sum­
mary of anthocyanins colonic metabolism metabolites and colon microbiota alteration is 
shown in Figure 1.4 [11].
In any case, there are still many doubts about the mechanisms involved and which factors 
have a crucial impact on bioavailability [7]. Anthocyanins with an efficient effect for one 
individual may not have the same effect for another [12], and there is still a high variability 
in the results obtained. Based on the literature and recent reviews [11, 14], this variability is 
due to the lack of homogeneity introduced at three levels: (i) food matrix and food process­
ing; (ii) enzymatic levels (affected by genetic factors and diet, age, and sex); and (iii) micro­
biota functionality. Reported data considering inter- or intra-individual variability is very 
scarce and bioavailability methods are not standardized making it very difficult to reach 
firm conclusions. On the one hand, in vitro methods (cell-based assays) fail to consider the 
role of the individual microbiota present in the human body; while, on the other hand, in 
in vivo trials (human trials and animal studies) each subject has their own microbiota [14].
FIGURE 1.4
Scheme of anthocyanins metabolites from colonic metabolism and colon microbiota alteration.

17
State of the Art of Anthocyanins
It is also important to note that the incorporation of anthocyanins into food and medical 
products is a challenging task due to their high instability and susceptibility to degradation. 
In this sense, the use of nano/microencapsulation with natural polymers is one of the best 
strategies to improve the stability of sensitive substances in in vitro simulated gastrointestinal 
digestion and colonic fermentation [103, 104]. According to a recent review on this topic [104] 
different techniques have been tested to encapsulate anthocyanins including spray-drying > 
freeze-drying > gelation > lipid-based particles > electrohydrodynamic processes. The first 
one is the most economical, simplest, and the most applied method (80–90%) [105, 106]. The 
use of other techniques still remains poorly explored probably due to the hydrophilic nature 
of anthocyanins, being therefore a promising area of future research [104, 107–109].
Blackberry anthocyanins encapsulated with β-cyclodextrin [101, 110] or gum arabic 
[111] helped to delay the release of anthocyanins during in vitro simulated gastrointes­
tinal digestion. The stability of anthocyanins can be also influenced by the type of wall 
material. Recently, Wu et al. [103] evaluated the effect of four different wall materials dur­
ing in vitro simulated digestion and colonic fermentation. The encapsulation technique 
enhanced significantly the colonic accessibility and delayed the release of anthocyanins, 
especially for soy protein. Degradation products of anthocyanins such as syringic acid 
produced during colonic fermentation by the action of gut microbiota were indicative of 
their benefits for host health.
1.5  Therapeutic Effects of Anthocyanins
Available scientific studies prove the beneficial effects of the presence of anthocyanins in 
fruits and vegetables in the prevention of diseases [60, 66, 81, 112]. Even after the ingestion 
of high doses of anthocyanin and derivatives, no negative effects have been observed [113]. 
This section covers the main health benefits of anthocyanins in different types of patholo­
gies including eye health, cardiovascular disease, antiobesity, antidiabetic, antimicrobial 
effects, anticancer activities, and neurodegenerative disorders. A summary of the positive 
effects of anthocyanins is shown in Table 1.3 [114–160], and their mechanisms of action in 
disease prevention are discussed below.
Eye health: Since the first report in 1966 about the positive effects of anthocyanins on 
vision in humans, anthocyanin-rich extracts have been worldwide utilized as a popular 
supplement for ocular health [161, 162]. Oral dispensation of blackcurrant anthocyanins 
may be a promising supplement for patients with open-angle glaucoma, being also effec­
tive for antiglaucoma medication, while anthocyanin-rich bilberry extract has a protective 
effect on vision during retinal inflammation [115]. It has also been confirmed that cyanidin 
helps the regeneration of rhodopsin and smooth muscle relaxation in rats [116]. Results 
have also shown that bilberry extracts were able to suppress the photooxidation of pyri­
dinium disretinoid A2E, an auto-fluorescence pigment that accumulates in retinal epithe­
lial cells with age and can cause light-induced damage to the cell. In a comparative study, 
a significant improvement in nocturnal visual function and an improved contrast sensitiv­
ity levels in subjects with myopia versus placebo group was observed [114]. Anthocyanins 
act also in inhibiting transient myopia, reducing eye fatigue or enhancing retinal blood 
flow with glaucoma [118, 121, 161, 163].
Cardiovascular diseases: It is especially important the role of anthocyanins in prevent­
ing myocardial infarction and cardiovascular disease related to mortality. Extracts of 

18
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
TABLE 1.3
Health Benefits of Anthocyanins
Eye Health
Administration
References
Improvement of vision in patients with open-angle glaucoma
Oral capsule
[114]
Protective effect during retinal inflammation
IV in rats
[115]
Regeneration of rhodopsin and smooth muscle relaxation
IV in mouse model
[116]
Improvement of dark adaptation
Oral capsule
[117]
Prevention of cataractogenesis of diabetic cataract
Incubation of Enucleated rat 
lenses
[118]
Antiapoptotic effects against oxidative damage of lens 
epithelial cell
Cell studies
[119]
Prevention of retinal degeneration induced by 
N-methyl-N-nitrosourea
Oral solution
[120]
Increase of ocular blood flows
Oral capsule
[121]
Cardiovascular diseases
Inhibition of platelet aggregation (in vitro antithrombotic 
properties)
Cell studies
[122]
Increase of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels and 
decrease of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels
Oral capsule
[123]
Lower risk of nonfatal myocardial infarction
Oral intake
[124]
Vasorelaxation properties in isolated coronary artery rings in pigs
Cell studies
[125]
Decrease of susceptibility to ischemia-reperfusion injury and 
infarct size
Rodent food
[126]
Improvement of lipid profile and platelet function
Oral capsule
[127]
Antiobesity effects
Improvement of weight gain and lipid profile on obese rats
Fat-diet-induced mouse 
model
[128]
Suppression of body weight gain and improve blood lipid profile 
in rats
Fat-diet-induced mouse 
model
[129]
Reduction of sugar concentration in urine and plasma in rats
Intraperitoneal and 
intragastric administration
[130]
Ameliorated obesity in high-fat-fed mice
Cell studies
[131]
Upregulation of adipocytokine secretion and gene expression 
in rat adipocytes
Cell studies
[132]
Suppression of fat tissue gain, weight gain, and other metabolic 
disorders
Fat-diet-induced mouse 
model
[133]
Antidiabetic effects
Amelioration of hyperglycemia and insulin sensitivity in diabetic 
mice
Fat-diet-induced mouse 
model
[134]
Improvement of dyslipidemia, enhancement of antioxidant 
capacity, and prevention of insulin resistance in human with 
type 2 diabetes
Oral capsule
[135]
Alleviation of glomerular angiogenesis of diabetic kidneys 
in mice
Cell studies
[136]
Inhibition of DPP IV activity (a protease that regulates blood 
glucose levels via degradation of incretins)
Computational studies
[137]
Amelioration of renal apoptosis in diabetic nephropathy mice
Oral solution
[138]
Activation of adipose tissue-derived adiponectin to defend 
against diabetes-related endothelial dysfunction in mice
Diet-induced mouse model
[139]
(Continued)

19
State of the Art of Anthocyanins
Antimicrobial effects
Induction of cell damage by destroying the cell wall, membrane, 
and intercellular matrix
Cell studies
[140]
Highest sensitivity to Aeromonas hydrophila and Listeria innocua
Microbial strains
[141]
Antibacterial effects toward Enterococcus faecium resistant to 
vancomycin, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, and 
Escherichia coli
Microbial strains
[142]
Inhibition of Gram-negative bacteria
Microbial strains
[143]
Anticancer effects
Suppression of cell proliferation, inflammation, and angiogenesis 
and induction of apoptosis in esophageal tissue of rats
Diet-induced rat model
[144]
Anti-invasive potential in breast cancer cell lines
Cell studies
[145]
Anticancer effect on BALB/c nude mice bearing MDA-MB-
453 cell xenografts and breast cancer cell lines
Cell studies
[146]
Inhibition of cell migration and invasion, suppression of activation 
of rapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma, mitogen-activated protein 
kinase and c-Jun N-terminal kinase, and downregulation of 
secretion of matrix metalloproteinase 2
Cell studies
[147]
Inhibition of growth of human HT-29 colon cancer cells, increase 
of expression of tumor suppression genes, and decrease of 
cyclooxygenase-2 gene expression
Cell studies
[148]
Reduction of colonic aberrant crypt foci, colonic cellular 
proliferation, and COX-2 mRNA expression in rats
Diet-induced rat model
[149]
Suppression of formation of aberrant crypt foci in colons 
of CF-1 mice
Cell studies and diet-
induced rat model
[150]
Promotion of apoptosis in benign prostatic hyperplasia rats
Oral doses in rat model
[151]
Anti-invasive effect on human hepatoma Hep3B cells and 
inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase MMP-2 and MMP-9 
gene expression
Cell studies
[152]
Inhibition of Akt-mTOR signaling thereby inducing 
maturation of acute myeloid leukemia cells, besides 
inducing apoptotic players such as TRAIL in cancer systems
Cell studies
[153]
Neurodegenerative diseases
Neuroprotective activity by suppression of dopaminergic cell 
death in Parkinson’s disease
Cell studies
[154]
Improvement of learning and memory ability in mice. Higher 
antioxidant enzyme activity and less lipid oxidation in both 
brain and liver
Diet-induced mouse model
[155]
Regulation of cholinergic neurotransmission to restore Na+, 
K+-ATPase, and Ca2+-ATPase activities and to prevent memory 
deficits in rats
Oral and injected rat models
[156]
Neuroprotective effect: memory and synaptic dysfunction
Oral rat models
[157]
Improvement of its free radical scavenging capabilities via 
p38/JNK pathway against Abeta1-42-induced oxidative stress
Cell studies
[158]
Enhancement of neuroprotection against Abeta1-42-induced 
neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration
Oral mouse model and cell 
studies
[159]
Enhancement of the neuroprotection in an Abeta1-42 mouse 
model of Alzheimer’s disease
Oral mouse model and cell 
studies
[160]
TABLE 1.3  (Continued)
Health Benefits of Anthocyanins
Eye Health
Administration
References

20
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
anthocyanins have been used to inhibit platelet aggregation being preventive in the ini­
tial stage of thrombi; in the treatment of problems with poor micro-circulation resulting 
from capillary fragility; and also to prevent the LDL oxidation [122, 164–166]. In a placebo-
controlled trial in dyslipidemia patients (40–65 years), the intake of berry-derived antho­
cyanins improved lipoprotein profile through cholesteryl ester transfer protein inhibition 
[123]. Authors observed a greater increase in high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol 
levels and in the cellular cholesterol efflux to serum as well as a decrease in LDL choles­
terol levels in the anthocyanin group in contrast to the placebo group. Similar results were 
reported by Álvarez Suárez et al. [127] in an in vivo study using healthy volunteers supple­
mented with strawberries (500 g). Daily consumption improved the lipid profile reducing 
total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and triglyceride levels, while HDL cholesterol remained 
unchanged. This increased antihemolytic defenses and platelet function in the subjects. In 
another attempt, higher intakes of fruit-based anthocyanins were associated with a lower 
risk of nonfatal myocardial infarction (14%) and ischemic stroke in a prospective cohort 
study of men over 24 years [124]. A meta-analysis of 45 randomized controlled trials stated 
that the consumption of berries and purified anthocyanins (2.2−1230-mg anthocyanins/
day) increases significantly HDL-cholesterol and reduces LDL-cholesterol, triglycerides, 
systolic blood pressure, and diastolic blood pressure as well as the inflammatory markers 
CRP and TNFα [167]. The analysis also suggested that some individuals are more suscep­
tible to the protective effects of anthocyanin consumption: (i) those overweight; (ii) those 
over 50 years; and (iii) those with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease. Another 
meta-analysis of 99 randomized controlled trials showed that the consumption of 
anthocyanin-rich products decreased significantly both systolic and diastolic blood 
pressure regardless of the health status of the participants [168].
In in vitro assays, anthocyanins have also shown inhibition of the porcine pancreatic 
elastase [169], an enzyme that plays a significant function in pathologies such as arterio­
sclerosis, emphysema, or rheumatoid arthritis by attacking fibers and collagen. Moreover, 
acceleration in the cicatrization process due to anthocyanin-rich extract has been demon­
strated, showing preventive and curative activity against gastroduodenal ulcers induced 
in rats [7]. Their influence on the biosynthesis of mucopolysaccharides provably improves 
the efficacy of the gastric mucous layer and increases the base substance of the connective 
tissue and of the capillaries [170].
Antiobesity and antidiabetic effects: Anthocyanins have shown antiobesity effects through 
multiple mechanisms such as inhibiting lipid absorption, regulating lipid metabolism, 
increasing energy expenditure, suppressing food intake, and regulating gut microbiota, 
which suggests anthocyanins are promising candidates in antiobesity therapies [171]. 
Kwon et al. [128] observed that an anthocyanins-added diet from black soybean in rats 
decreases body weight gains, being significantly lowered in the rats fed with a high-fat 
diet plus black soybean anthocyanins compared with the rats fed with a high-fat diet 
without black soybean. Anthocyanins also improved the lipid profile and suppressed the 
high-fat-diet-induced weight gain in the liver intermediately and decreased the weights of 
epididymal and perirenal fat pads.
In addition, type 2 diabetes is closely related to obesity [66]. Anthocyanins can alleviate 
complications in type 2 diabetes by inhibiting intestinal glucose absorption, inducing pan­
creatic insulin secretion, upregulating glucose transporter type 4, and suppressing hepatic 
gluconeogenesis [172]. After the supplementation of a high-fat diet for 13 weeks with dif­
ferent berries in mice, Heyman et al. [173] observed that those supplemented mice gained 
lesser body weight and presented lower fasting insulin levels than the control group as 
well as mediated positive effects on glucose homeostasis. Jankowski et al. [130] described 

21
State of the Art of Anthocyanins
a substantial decrease in the sugar concentration in urine and blood serum after strep­
tozotocin injection in fed rats with grapes. The mechanisms of anthocyanins suggested 
by the authors were the reduction of the biosynthesis of collagen, lipoproteins, and gly­
coproteins, as well as the reduction of the activity of elastase and adenosine deaminase 
(both high in diabetic patients). Treatment with cherries in rats resulted in a significant 
reduction of blood glucose and urinary microalbumin and an increase of the creatinine 
secretion level in urea [174]. The pulp, seed, and skin from “red chilto” (a red fruit from 
Argentina) had a hypoglycemic effect and acted increasing glucose absorption, decreasing 
glucose diffusion rate, and promoting glucose transport across the cell membrane [175] in 
an in vitro simulated gastroduodenal digestion. Consumption of blueberries and apples/
pears in humans was also associated with a lower risk of type 2 diabetes [176].
Antimicrobial effects: The antimicrobial activity of anthocyanins against a wide range 
of microorganisms is also well documented. Possible mechanisms induced cell damage 
by destroying the cell wall, membrane, and intercellular matrix [66, 140, 177]. Blackberry 
extracts have antibacterial activity with the highest sensitivity to Aeromonas hydrophilia and 
Listeria innocua [141]. Cranberry extracts have antibacterial activity toward Enterococcus fae­
cium resistant to vancomycin, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, and Escherichia 
coli [142]. Different types of berry extracts inhibit Gram-negative bacteria but not Gram-
positive bacteria [143] probably because Gram-negative bacteria act as a preventive barrier 
against hydrophobic compounds but not against hydrophilic compounds [178].
Anticancer activity: Possible mechanisms of the anticancer activity of anthocyanins 
have been described by many authors: antimutagenic activity; inhibition of oxidative DNA 
damage and carcinogen activation; induction of phase II enzymes for detoxification; cell 
cycle arrest; inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 enzymes; as well as induction of apoptosis and 
antiangiogenesis [179–184].
In breast cancer, anthocyanins cause the inhibition of key modulators that promote its 
progression and development by acting directly in the DNA fragmentation and promoting 
the death of MCF-7 cancer cells [185, 186]. In addition, the studies indicate that anthocya­
nins exert extensive in vitro anti-invasive and in vivo antimetastatic activities. For exam­
ple, delphinidin can act as a potential antimetastatic agent that suppresses PMA-induced 
cancer cell invasion through the specific inhibition of NF-κB-dependent MMP-9 gene 
expression [187, 188]. In lung cancer, the treatment of cyanidin-3-glucoside and cyanidin 
3-rutinoside, isolated from mulberry, inhibits the migration and invasion of A549 cells and 
also decreases MMP-2 and uPA and enhances TIMP-2 and PAI. Anthocyanins also inhibit 
the growth of carcinogenic cells that provoke colon cancer, induce the apoptosis effect, 
and are even able to act as modulators of the macrophages in the immune response [180]. 
Forester et al. [189] also reported the positive effect of anthocyanin metabolites decreasing 
cell viability and causing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in colon cancer. In oral and cervi­
cal cancer, the invasion of SCC-4 cells and HeLa cells was diminished by the treatment of 
peonidin 3-glucoside and cyanidin-3-glucoside [190].
It is also important to note that the structures of anthocyanins have a considerable influ­
ence on their biological activities [191–193]. In this sense, the type of aglycones, sugars, and 
acylated acids, and the position and degree of glycosylation and acylation seem to be the 
main factors influencing the anticancer property [191]. Jing et al. [192] compared the anti­
cancer properties of anthocyanin-rich extracts using human colon cancer HT29 cell line. 
Authors reported the following growth inhibitory activity rates: purple corn > chokeberry 
and bilberry > purple carrot and grape > radish and elderberry. Those non-acylated mono­
glycosylated anthocyanins had greater anticancer properties than those with pelargoni­
din, triglycoside, and/or acylation with cinnamic acid.

22
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Neurodegenerative diseases: Anthocyanins are also uniquely suited for the treatment 
of neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, or amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis. Their main mechanisms include antioxidant pathways, calcium homeostasis, 
inflammation, protein homeostasis, and the balance of pro-survival and pro-apoptotic sig­
naling [194, 195].
In a primary cell model of Parkinson’s disease, dopaminergic cell death elicited by rote­
none was suppressed by extracts prepared from blueberries, grape seed, hibiscus, black­
currant, and mulberry [154]. Moreover, Strathearn et al. [154] observed that those extracts 
rich in anthocyanins and proanthocyanidins exhibited greater neuroprotective activity 
than extracts rich in other polyphenols.
The oral dispensation of anthocyanins (200 mg/kg) in rats was able to regulate choliner­
gic neurotransmission, to restore Na+, K+-ATPase, and Ca2+-ATPase activities, and prevent 
memory deficits caused by scopolamine dispensation [156]. Rehman et al. [157] showed the 
neuroprotective effect of anthocyanins based on an artificial aging model using D-galactose 
to induce oxidative stress and inflammatory response. The potential mechanisms of their 
action included: decreased expression of the receptor for advanced glycation end product, 
reduced level of ROS, and lipid peroxidation. Shih et al. [155] observed that mice fed with 
anthocyanin-rich mulberry extracts demonstrated significantly less amyloid β protein and 
showed improvement in learning and memory ability in avoidance response tests. The fed 
mice also showed a higher antioxidant enzyme activity and less lipid oxidation in both the 
brain and liver, as compared to the control mice. Besides, the treatment with anthocyanin-
rich mulberry extract has been proven to decrease the levels of serum aspartate aminotrans­
ferase, alanine aminotransferase, triglyceride, and total cholesterol that increase with aging.
Furthermore, the therapeutic profile of anthocyanins can be improved by encapsulation 
[158–160]. For instance, in Alzheimer’s disease Amin et al. [158] showed that encapsulated 
nanoparticles loaded with anthocyanins are rapidly taken up by cells enhancing their 
neuroprotective profile against amyloid beta toxicity above that of anthocyanins alone. 
Similar activity was also observed in in vivo studies in mice [158, 160].
1.6  Conclusions
In order to establish the antioxidant activity of anthocyanins and how their intake affects 
human health, many factors should be taken into account. Firstly, an evaluation of the 
antioxidant activity from a multiparametric perspective is required as the total concen­
tration, the structure, the nature of the sample, the pH, and the mechanism of the reac­
tion play an important role in their effect. On a regular basis, more than one antioxidant 
assay—one for each mechanism—should be carried out. Besides identification and quan­
tification of the anthocyanins is also highly recommended to establish an accurate value 
for the antioxidant activity of a sample. Secondly, it is required to know the bioavailability 
of these compounds after their intake. Many studies have demonstrated the benefits 
of anthocyanin-rich extracts in the prevention of diseases. Nonetheless, it is important 
to note that their efficacy depends on their bioavailability. Along the digestion process, 
anthocyanins are metabolized into various conjugates, which then ultimately metabolize 
into phenolic acid degradation products as well. The accumulated evidence suggests the 
synergy effect between all possible forms to explain their attributed health-promoting 
properties. An inter- and intra-individual variability in anthocyanins absorption, metabo­
lism, distribution, and excretion is also evident. Among the main factors that probably 

23
State of the Art of Anthocyanins
affect this variability are: food matrix and processing, enzymatic levels, and microbiota 
functionality. Attention should be paid in different lines: (i) to perform well-designed stan­
dardized methods when evaluating bioavailability; (ii) to consider inter or intra-individual 
variability in anthocyanin metabolism; (iii) to assess the antioxidant activity of anthocyanin 
metabolites during gastrointestinal digestion; and, since anthocyanin might exert differ­
ent biological activities, (iv) to draw a more accurate characterization profile.
Supplementary Materials
The following are available online at http://www.mdpi.com/2076-3921/9/5/451/s1, Table S1: 
Natural source, type of extraction, chromatographic method, and antioxidant assay applied 
to identify and quantify delphinidin and its derivatives identified with codes, Table S2: 
Natural source, type of extraction, chromatographic method, and antioxidant assay applied 
to identify and quantify cyanidin and its derivatives identified with codes, Table S3: Natural 
source, type of extraction, chromatographic method, and antioxidant assay applied to iden­
tify and quantify petunidin and its derivatives identified with codes, Table S4: Natural 
source, type of extraction, chromatographic method, and antioxidant assay applied to iden­
tify and quantify peonidin and its derivatives identified with codes, Table S5: Natural source, 
type of extraction, chromatographic method, and antioxidant assay applied to identify and 
quantify malvidin and its derivatives identified with codes, Table S6: Natural source, type of 
extraction, chromatographic method, and antioxidant assay applied to identify and quantify 
pelargonidin and its derivatives identified with codes.
Author Contributions
Investigation, N.T., J.M., and A.G.A.; Project administration, A.G.A.; Supervision, A.G.A.; 
Writing—original draft, N.T. and J.M.; Writing—review and editing, N.T. and J.M. All 
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding
This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the Vicerrectorado de Investigación de la Universidad de 
Sevilla for its support. We would also like to thank the reviewers for their helpful com­
ments that have greatly contributed to the improvement of the document. We are also 
grateful for the very helpful revision by Irene García Sáez.

24
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
	
1.	 Dangles, O.; Fenger, J.A. The chemical reactivity of anthocyanins and its consequences in food 
science and nutrition. Molecules. 2018, 23, 1970.
	
2.	 Miguel, M.G. Anthocyanins: Antioxidant and/or anti-inflammatory activities. J. Appl. Pharm. 
Sci. 2011, 1, 7–15.
	
3.	 Kay, C.D.; Pereira-Caro, G.; Ludwig, I.A.; Clifford, M.N.; Crozier, A. Anthocyanins and flava­
nones are more bioavailable than previously perceived: A review of recent evidence. Annu. 
Rev. Food Sci. Technol. 2017, 8, 155–180.
	
4.	 Lila, M.A.; Burton-Freeman, B.; Grace, M.; Kalt, W. Unraveling anthocyanin bioavailability for 
human health. Annu. Rev. Food Technol. 2016, 7, 375–393.
	
5.	 Fang, J. Bioavailability of anthocyanins. Drug Metab. Rev. 2014, 46, 508–520.
	
6.	 Lingua, M.S.; Fabani, M.P.; Wunderlin, D.A.; Baroni, M.V. From grape to wine: Changes in phe­
nolic composition and its influence on antioxidant activity. Food Chem. 2016, 208, 228–238.
	
7.	 Martín, J.; Kuskoski, E.M.; Navas, M.J.; Asuero, A.G.. Antioxidant Capacity of Anthocyanin 
Pigments. In Flavonoids—From Biosynthesis to Human Health; Justino, J., Ed.; Science, Technology 
and Medicine Open Access Publisher: Rijeka, Croatia, 2017; Chapter 11; pp. 205–255.
	
8.	 Martín Bueno, J.; Sáez-Plaza, P.; Ramos-Escudero, F.; Jímenez, A.M.; Fett, R.; Asuero, A.G. 
Analysis and antioxidant capacity of anthocyanin pigments. Part II: Chemical structure, color, 
and intake of anthocyanins. Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem. 2012, 42, 126–151.
	
9.	 Navas, M.J.; Jiménez-Moreno, A.M.; Martín Bueno, J.; Sáez-Plaza, P.; Asuero, A.G. Analysis and 
antioxidant capacity of anthocyanin pigments. Part IV: Extraction of anthocyanins. Crit. Rev. 
Anal. Chem. 2012, 42, 313–342.
	 10.	 Gamel, T.H.; Wright, A.J.; Tucker, A.J.; Pickard, M.; Rabalski, I.; Podgorski, M.; Di Ilio, N.; O’Brien, 
C.; Abdel-Aal, E.M. Absorption and metabolites of anthocyanins and phenolic acids after con­
sumption of purple wheat crackers and bars by healthy adults. J. Cereal Sci. 2019, 86, 60–68.
	 11.	 Cavalcante Braga, A.R.; Murador, D.C.; Mendes de Souza Mesquita, L.; Vera de Rosso, V. 
Bioavailability of anthocyanins: Gaps in knowledge, challenges and future research. J. Food 
Compos. Anal. 2018, 68, 31–40.
	 12.	 Fernandes, I.; Faria, A.; Calhau, C.; de Freitas, V.; Mateus, N. Bioavailability of anthocyanins 
and derivatives. J. Funct. Foods. 2014, 7, 54–66.
	 13.	 Fernandes, I.; Faria, A.; de Freitas, V.; Calhau, C.; Mateus, N. Multiple-approach studies to 
assess anthocyanin bioavailability. Phytochem. Rev. 2015, 14, 899–919.
	 14.	 Eker, M.E.; Aaby, K.; Budic-Leto, I.; Rimac Brncˇic, S.; El, S.N.; Karakaya, S.; Simsek, S.; Manach, 
C.; Wiczkowski, W.; de Pascual-Teresa, S. A review of factors affecting anthocyanin bioavail­
ability: Possible implications for the inter-individual variability. Foods. 2020, 9, 2.
	 15.	 Mülleder, U.; Murkovic, M.; Pfannhauser, W. Urinary excretion of cyanidin glycosides. J. 
Biochem. Biophys. Methods. 2002, 53, 61–66.
	 16.	 Bub, A.; Watzl, B.; Heeb, D.; Rechkemmer, G.; Briviba, K. Malvidin-3-glucoside bioavailability 
in humans after ingestion of red wine, dealcoholized red wine and red grape juice. Eur. J. Nutr. 
2001, 40, 113–120.
	 17.	 Hong, H.T.; Netzel, M.E.; O’Hare, T.J. Optimization of extraction procedure and development 
of LC–DAD–MS methodology for anthocyanin analysis in anthocyanin-pigmented corn ker­
nels. Food Chem. 2020, 319, 126515.

25
State of the Art of Anthocyanins
	 18.	 Castañeda-Ovando, A.; Pacheco-Hernandez, M.L.; Paez-Hernandez, M.E.; Rodriguez, 
J.A.; Galan-Vidal, C.A. Chemical studies of anthocyanins: A review. Food Chem. 2009, 113, 
859–871.
	 19.	 Fernandez-Aulis, F.; Hernandez-Vazquez, L.; Aguilar-Osorio, G.; Arrieta-Baez, D.; Navarro-
Ocan, A. Extraction and identification of anthocyanins in corn cob and corn husk from caca­
huacintle maize. J. Food Sci. 2019, 84, 954–962.
	 20.	 Siti Azima, A.M.; Noriham, A.; Manshoor, N. Anthocyanin content in relation to the antioxi­
dant activity and colour properties of Garcinia mangostana peel, Syzigium cumini and Clitoria 
ternatea extracts. Int. Food Res. J. 2014, 21, 2369–2375.
	 21.	 Liang, N.; Kitts, D.D. Antioxidant property of coffee components: Assessment of methods that 
define mechanisms of action. Molecules. 2014, 19, 19180–19208.
	 22.	 Shalaby, E.A.; Shanab, S.M.M. Antioxidant compounds, assays of determination and mode of 
action. Afr. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 2013, 7, 528–539.
	 23.	 Goupy, P.; Bautista-Ortin, A.-B.; Fulcrand, H.; Dangles, O. Antioxidant activity of wine pig­
ments derived from anthocyanins: Hydrogen transfer reactions to the DPPH radical and inhi­
bition of the heme-induced peroxidation of linoleic acid. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2009, 57, 5762–5770.
	 24.	 Molyneux, P. The use of the stable free radical diphenylpicrylhydrazyl (DPPH) for estimating 
antioxidant activity. Songklanakarin. J. Sci. Technol. 2004, 26, 211–219.
	 25.	 Sudheeran, P.K.; Feygenberg, O.; Maurer, D.; Alkan, N. Improved cold tolerance of Mango fruit 
with enhanced anthocyanin and flavonoid contents. Molecules. 2018, 23, 1832.
	 26.	 Wu, H.Y.; Yang, K.M.; Chiang, P.Y. Roselle anthocyanins: Antioxidant properties and stability 
to heat and pH. Molecules. 2018, 23, 1357.
	 27.	 Akar, Z.; Kucuk, M.; Dogan, H. A new colorimetric DPPH scavenging activity method with 
no need for a spectrophotometer applied on synthetic and natural antioxidants and medicinal 
herbs. J. Enzym. Inhib. Med. Chem. 2017, 32, 640–647.
	 28.	 Ehlenfeldt, M.K.; Prior, R.L. Oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC) and phenolic and 
anthocyanin concentrations in fruit and leaf tissues of highbush blueberry. J. Agric. Food Chem. 
2001, 49, 2222–2227.
	 29.	 Bellido, G.G.; Beta, T. Anthocyanin composition and oxygen radical scavenging capacity 
(ORAC) of milled and pearled purple, black, and common barley. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2009, 57, 
1022–1028.
	 30.	 Zheng, Y.; Wang, S.Y.; Wang, C.Y.; Zheng, W. Changes in strawberry phenolics, anthocyanins, 
and antioxidant capacity in response to high oxygen treatments. LWT. 2007, 40, 49–57.
	 31.	 Denev, P.; Ciz, M.; Ambrozova, G.; Lojek, A.; Yanakieva, I.; Kratchanova, M. Solid-phase extrac­
tion of berries’ anthocyanins and evaluation of their antioxidative properties. Food Chem. 2010, 
123, 1055–1061.
	 32.	 Rossetto, M.; Vanzani, P.; Lunelli, M.; Scarpa, M.; Mattivi, F.; Rigo, A. Peroxyl radical trapping 
activity of anthocyanins and generation of free radical intermediates. Free Radic. Res. 2007, 41, 
854–859.
	 33.	 Dresch, R.R.; Kreinecker-Dresch, M.T.; Biegelmeyer, R.; Fretes-Argenta, D.; Fagundes da 
Rocha, R.; Ferreira-Teixeira, H.; Fonseca-Moreira, J.C.; Henriques, A.T. Potential use of second­
ary products of the agri-food industry for topical formulations and comparative analysis of 
antioxidant activity of grape leaf polyphenols. Nat. Prod. Res. 2018, 32, 486–492.
	 34.	 Philpott, M.; Lim, C.C.; Ferguson, L.R. Dietary protection against free radicals: A case for mul­
tiple testing to establish structure-activity relationships for antioxidant potential of anthocy­
anic plant species. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2009, 10, 1081–1103.
	 35.	 Su, M.S.; Chien, P.J. Antioxidant activity, anthocyanins, and phenolics of rabbiteye blueberry 
(Vaccinium ashei) fluid products as affected by fermentation. Food Chem. 2007, 104, 182–187.
	 36.	 Özgen, M.; Scheerens, J.C.; Neil Reese, R.; Miller, R.A. Total phenolic, anthocyanin contents 
and antioxidant capacity of selected elderberry (Sambucus canadensis L.) accessions. Pharm. 
Mag. 2010, 6, 198–203.
	 37.	 Tsai, P.J.; Intosh, J.M.; Pearce, P.; Camden, B.; Jordan, B.R. Anthocyanin and antioxidant capac­
ity in roselle (Hibiscus sabdariffa L.) extract. Food Res. Int. 2002, 35, 351–356.

26
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
	 38.	 Pantelidis, G.E.; Vasilakakis, M.; Manganaris, G.A.; Diamantidis, G. Antioxidant capacity, phe­
nol, anthocyanin and ascorbic acid contents in raspberries, blackberries, red currants, goose­
berries and Cornelian cherries. Food Chem. 2007, 102, 777–783.
	 39.	 Li, H.; Deng, Z.; Zhu, H.; Hu, C.; Liu, R.; Young, J.C.; Tsao, R. Highly pigmented vegetables: 
Anthocyanin compositions and their role in antioxidant activities. Food Res. Int. 2012, 46, 
250–259.
	 40.	 Moon, J.K.; Shibamoto, T. Antioxidant assays for plant and food components. J. Agric. Food 
Chem. 2009, 57, 1655–1666.
	 41.	 Ge, Q.; Ma, X. Composition and antioxidant activity of anthocyanins isolated from Yunnan 
edible rose (An ning). Food Sci. Hum. Wellness. 2013, 2, 68–74.
	 42.	 Frond, A.D.; Iuhas, C.I.; Stirbu, I.; Leopold, L.; Socaci, S.; Andreea, S.; Ayvaz, H.; Andreea, S.; 
Mihai, S.; Diaconeasa, Z.; et al. Phytochemical characterization of five edible purple-reddish 
vegetables: Anthocyanins, flavonoids, and phenolic acid derivatives. Molecules 2019, 24, 1536.
	 43.	 Pasko, P.; Barton, H.; Zagrodzki, P.; Gorinstein, S.; Fołta, M.; Zachwieja, Z. Anthocyanins, total 
polyphenols and antioxidant activity in amaranth andquinoa seeds and sprouts during their 
growth. Food Chem. 2009, 115, 994–998.
	 44.	 Villaño, D.; Fernández-Pachón, M.S.; Troncoso, A.M.; García-Parrilla, M.C. The antioxidant 
activity of wines determined by the ABTS (+) method: Influence of sample dilution and time. 
Talanta. 2004, 64, 501–509.
	 45.	 Hu, Q.P.; Xu, J.G. Profiles of carotenoids, anthocyanins, phenolics, and antioxidant activity of 
selected color waxy corn grains during maturation. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2011, 59, 2026–2033.
	 46.	 Pala, C.U.; Toklucu, A.K. Effect of UV-c light on anthocyanin content and other quality param­
eters of pomegranate juice. J. Food Compos. Anal. 2011, 24, 790–795.
	 47.	 Bunea, A.; Rugina, D.O.; Pintea, A.M.; Conta, Z.; Bunea, C.I.; Socaciu, C. Comparative polyphe­
nolic content and antioxidant activities of some wild and cultivated blueberries from Romania. 
Not. Bot. Horti Agrobo. 2011, 39, 70–76.
	 48.	 Moniruzzaman, M.; Khalil, M.I.; Sulaiman, S.A.; Gan, S.H. Advances in the analytical meth­
ods for determining the antioxidant properties of honey: A review. Afr. J. Tradit. Complement. 
Altern. Med. 2012, 9, 36–42.
	 49.	 Degenhardt, A.; Knapp, H.; Winterhalter, P. Separation and purification of anthocyanins by 
high-speed countercurrent chromatography and screening for antioxidant activity. J. Agric. 
Food Chem. 2000, 48, 338–343.
	 50.	 Rubinskiene, M.; Jasutiene, I.; Venskutonis, P.R.; Viskelis, P. HPLC determination of the compo­
sition and stability of blackcurrant anthocyanins. J. Chromatogr. Sci. 2005, 43, 478–482.
	 51.	 Welch, C.R.; Wub, Q.; Simon, J.E. Recent advances in anthocyanin analysis and characteriza­
tion. Curr. Anal. Chem. 2008, 4, 75–101.
	 52.	 Amorati, R.; Valgimigli, L. Methods to measure the antioxidant activity of phytochemicals and 
plant extracts. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2018, 66, 3324–3329.
	 53.	 Félix, R.; Valentão, P.; Andrade, P.B.; Félix, C.; Novais, S.C.; Lemos, M.F.L. Evaluating the in vitro 
potential of natural extracts to protect lipids from oxidative damage. Antioxidants. 2020, 9, 231.
	 54.	 Matera, R.; Gabbanini, S.; Berretti, S.; Amorati, R.; De Nicola, G.R.; Iori, R.; Valgimigli, L. 
Acylated anthocyanins from sprouts of Raphanus sativus cv. Sango: Isolation, structure eluci­
dation and antioxidant activity. Food Chem. 2015, 166, 397–406.
	 55.	 Tsuda, T.; Watanabe, M.; Ohshima, K.; Norinobu, S.; Choi, S.W.; Kawakishi, S.; Osawa, T. 
Antioxidative activity of the anthocyanin pigments cyanidin 3-o-β-D-glucoside and cyanidin. 
J. Agri. Food Chem. 1994, 42, 2407–2410.
	 56.	 EFSA Guidance for the scientific requirements for health claims related to antioxidants, oxida­
tive damage and cardiovascular health (revision 1). EFSA J. 2018, 16, 5136.
	 57.	 Prior, R.L.; Go, L.; Wu, X.; Jacob, R.A.; Sotoudeh, G.; Kader, A.A.; Cook, R.A. Plasma antioxidant 
capacity changes following a meal as a measure of the ability of a food to alter in vivo antioxi­
dant status. J. Am. Coll. Nutr. 2007, 26, 170–181.
	 58.	 Comert, E.D.; Mogol, B.A.; Gokmen, V. Relationship between color and antioxidant capacity of 
fruits and vegetables. Curr. Res. Food Sci. 2020, 2, 1–10.

27
State of the Art of Anthocyanins
	 59.	 Bakuradze, T.; Tausend, A.; Galan, J.; Groh, I.A.M.; Berry, D.; Tur, J.A.; Marko, D.; Richling, E. 
Antioxidative activity and health benefits of anthocyanin-rich fruit juice in healthy volunteers. 
Free Radic. Res. 2019, 53, 1045–1055.
	 60.	 Khoo, H.E.; Lim, S.M.; Azlan, A. Evidence-based therapeutic effects of anthocyanins from 
foods. Pak. J. Nutr.. 2019, 18, 1–11.
	 61.	 Williamson, G. The role of polyphenols in modern nutrition. Nutr. Bull. 2017, 42, 226–235.
	 62.	 Chaiyasut, C.; Sivamaruthi, B.S.; Pengkumsri, N.; Sirilun, S.; Peerajan, S.; Chaiyasut, K.; Kesika, 
P. Anthocyanin profile and its antioxidant activity of widely used fruits, vegetables, and flow­
ers in Thailand Asian. J. Pharm. Clin. Res. 2016, 9, 218–224.
	 63.	 Ogawa, K.; Sakakibara, H.; Iwata, R.; Ishii, T.; Sato, T.; Goda, T.; Shimoi, K.; Kumazawa, S. 
Anthocyanin composition and antioxidant activity of the crowberry (Empetrum nigrum) and 
other berries. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2008, 56, 4457–4462.
	 64.	 Zykin, P.A.; Andreeva, E.A.; Lykholay, A.N.; Tsvetkova, N.V.; Voylokov, A.V. Anthocyanin com­
position and content in rye plants with different grain color. Molecules. 2018, 23, 948.
	 65.	 De Morais, J.S.; Sant’Ana, A.S.; Dantas, A.M.; Silva, B.S.; Lima, M.S.; Borges, G.C.; Magnani, M. 
Antioxidant activity and bioaccessibility of phenolic compounds in white, red, blue, purple, 
yellow and orange edible flowers through a simulated intestinal barrier. Food Res. Int. 2020, 131, 
109046.
	 66.	 Khoo, H.E.; Azlan, A.; Tang, S.T.; Lim, S.M. Anthocyanidins and anthocyanins: Colored pig­
ments as food, pharmaceutical ingredients, and the potential health benefits. Food Nutr. Res. 
2017, 61, 1361779.
	 67.	 Tamura, H.; Yamagami, A. Antioxidative activity of monoacylated anthocyanins isolated from 
Muscat Bailey A grape. J. Agric. Food Chem. 1994, 42, 1612–1615.
	 68.	 Stintzing, F.C.; Stintzing, A.S.; Carle, R.; Frei, B.; Wrolstad, R.E. Color and antioxidant proper­
ties of cyanidin-based anthocyanin pigments. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2002, 50, 6172–6181.
	 69.	 Tsuda, T.; Shiga, K.; Ohshima, K.; Kawakishi, S.; Osawa, T. Inhibition of lipid peroxidation and 
the active oxygen radical scavenging effect of anthocyanin pigments isolated from Phaseolus 
vulgaris L. Biochem. Pharmacol. 1996, 52, 1033–1110.
	 70.	 Brown, J.E.; Kelly, M.F. Inhibition of lipid peroxidation by anthocyanins, anthocyanidins and 
their phenolic degradation products. Eur. J. Lipid Sci. Technol. 2007, 109, 66–71.
	 71.	 Lapidot, T.; Harel, S.; Akiri, B.; Granit, R.; Kanner, J. pH-dependent forms of red wine antho­
cyanins as antioxidants. J. Agric. Food Chem. 1999, 47, 67–70.
	 72.	 Muselík, J.; García-Alonso, M.; Martín-López, M.P.; Žemlicˇka, M.; Rivas-Gonzalo, J.C. 
Measurement of antioxidant activity of wine catechins, procyanidins, anthocyanins and 
pyranoanthocyanins. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2007, 8, 797–809.
	 73.	 Jung, Y.K.; Joo, K.S.; Rho, S.J.; Kim, Y.R. pH-dependent antioxidant stability of black rice antho­
cyanin complexed with cycloamylose. LWT Food Sci. Technol. 2020, 129, 109474.
	 74.	 Sui, X.; Dong, X.; Zhou, W. Combined effect of pH and high temperature on the stability and 
antioxidant capacity of two anthocyanins in aqueous solution. Food Chem. 2014, 163, 163–170.
	 75.	 Ghosh, S.; Chakraborty, R.; Raychaudhuri, U. Determination of pH-dependent antioxidant 
activity of palm (Borassus flabellifer) polyphenol compounds by photoluminol and DPPH meth­
ods: A comparison of redox reaction sensitivity. 3 Biotech. 2015, 5, 633–640.
	 76.	 Março, P.H.; Poppi, R.J.; Scarminio, I.S.; Tauler, R. Investigation of the pH effect and UV radia­
tion on kinetic degradation of anthocyanin mixtures extracted from Hibiscus acetosella. Food 
Chem. 2011, 125, 1020–1102.
	 77.	 Manach, C.; Williamson, G.; Morand, C.; Scalbert, A.; Remesy, C. Bioavailability and bioeffi­
cacy of polyphenols in humans. I. Review of 97 bioavailability studies. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2005, 
81, 230–242.
	 78.	 Felgines, C.; Talavéra, S.; Texier, O.; Gil-Izquierdo, A.; Lamaison, J.-L.; Remesy, C. Blackberry 
anthocyanins are mainly recovered from urine as methylated and glucuronidated conjugates 
in humans. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2005, 53, 7721–7727.
	 79.	 Passamonti, S.; Vanzo, A.; Vrhovsek, U.; Terdoslavich, M.; Cocolo, A.; Decorti, G.; Mattivi, F. Hepatic 
uptake of grape anthocyanins and the role of bilitranslocase. Food Res. Int. 2005, 38, 953–960.

28
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
	 80.	 Sandoval-Ramírez, B.A.; Catalanń, U.; Fernanńdez-Castillejo, S.; Rubió, L.; Maciá, A.; Sola, R. 
Anthocyanin tissue bioavailability in animals: Possible implications for human health. A sys­
tematic review. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2018, 66, 11531–11543.
	 81.	 Lucioli, S. Anthocyanins: Mechanism of action and therapeutic efficacy. In Medicinal Plants as 
Antioxidant Agents: Understanding Their Mechanism of Action and Therapeutic Efficacy; Capasso, 
A., Ed.; Research Signpost: Kerala, India, 2012; pp. 27–57.
	 82.	 Jin, Y.A.D.; George, T.G.M.; Lovegrove, J.A.A. Randomised trial to investigate the effects of 
acute consumption of a blackcurrant juice drink on markers of vascular reactivity and bio­
availability of anthocyanins in human subjects. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2011, 65, 849–857.
	 83.	 Wu, X.; Cao, G.; Prior, R.L. Absorption and metabolism of anthocyanins in elderly women after 
consumption of elderberry or blueberry. J. Nutr. 2002, 132, 1865–1871.
	 84.	 Williamson, G.; Clifford, M.N.. Colonic metabolites of berry polyphenols: The missing link to 
biological activity? Br. J. Nutr. 2010, 104 (Suppl. S3), S48–S66.
	 85.	 Kaiser, M.; Müller-Ehl, L.; Passon, M.; Schieber, A. Development and validation of methods 
for the determination of anthocyanins in physiological fluids via UHPLC-MSn. Molecules. 
2020, 25, 518.
	 86.	 Ludwig, I.A.; Mena, P.; Calani, L.; Borges, G.; Pereira-Caro, G.; Bresciani, L.; Del Rio, D.; Lean, 
M.E.J.; Crozier, A. New insights into the bioavailability of red raspberry anthocyanins and 
ellagitannins. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2015, 89, 758–769.
	 87.	 Ferrars, R.M.; Cassidy, A.; Curtis, P.; Kay, C.D. Phenolic metabolites of anthocyanins follow­
ing a dietary intervention study in post-menopausal women. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2014, 58, 
490–502.
	 88.	 Ferrars, R.M.; Czank, C.; Saha, S.; Needs, P.W.; Zhang, Q.; Raheem, K.S.; Botting, N.P.; Kroon, 
P.A.; Kay, C.D. Methods for isolating, identifying, and quantifying anthocyanin metabolites in 
clinical samples. Anal. Chem. 2014, 86, 10052–10058.
	 89.	 Nurmi, T.; Mursu, J.; Heinonen, M.; Nurmi, A.; Hiltunen, R.; Voutilainen, S. Metabolism of 
berry anthocyanins to phenolic acids in humans. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2009, 57, 2274–2281.
	 90.	 Czank, C.; Cassidy, A.; Zhang, Q.; Morrison, D.J.; Preston, T.; Kroon, P.A.; Botting, N.P.; Kay, C.D. 
Human metabolism and elimination of the anthocyanin, cyanidin-3-glucoside: A 13C-tracer 
study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2013, 97, 995–1003.
	 91.	 Novotny, J.A.. Anthocyanin Bioavailability: Past Progress and Current Challenges. In Emerging 
Trends in Dietary Components for Preventing and Combating Disease; ACS Symposium Series; 
American Chemical Society: Washington, DC, USA, 2012; Chapter 32; pp. 559–568.
	 92.	 Kim, I.; Moon, J.K.; Hur, S.J.; Lee, J. Structural changes in mulberry (Morus microphylla Buckl) 
and chokeberry (Aronia melanocarpa) anthocyanins during simulated in vitro human diges­
tion. Food Chem. 2020, 318, 126449.
	 93.	 Gowd, V.; Karim, N.; Xie, L.; Shishir, M.R.I.; Xu, Y.; Chen, W. In vitro study of bioaccessibility, 
antioxidant, and α-glucosidase inhibitory effect of pelargonidin-3-O-glucoside after interact­
ing with beta-lactoglobulin and chitosan/pectin. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2020, 154, 380–389.
	 94.	 Gowd, V.; Bao, T.; Chen, W. Antioxidant potential and phenolic profile of blackberry antho­
cyanin extract followed by human gut microbiota fermentation. Food Res. Int. 2019, 120, 
523–533.
	 95.	 Zhou, L.; Xiec, M.; Yanga, F.; Liu, J. Antioxidant activity of high purity blueberry anthocyanins 
and the effects on human intestinal microbiota. Food Sci. Technol. 2020, 117, 628101.
	 96.	 Zhu, Y.; Sun, H.; He, S.; Lou, Q.; Yu, M.; Tang, M.; Tu, L. Metabolism and prebiotics activity of 
anthocyanins from black rice (Oryza sativa L.) in vitro. PLoS ONE. 2018, 13, 0195754.
	 97.	 Hidalgo, M.; Oruna-Concha, M.J.; Kolida, S.; Walton, G.E.; Kallithraka, S.; Spencer, J.P.E.; 
Gibson, G.R.; de Pascual-Teresa, S. Metabolism of anthocyanins by human gut microflora and 
their influence on gut bacterial growth. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2012, 60, 3882–3890.
	 98.	 Boto-Ordóñez, M.; Urpi-Sarda, M.; Queipo-Ortuño, M.I.; Tulipani, S.; Tinahones, F.J.; Andres-
Lacueva, C. High levels of bifidobacteria are associated with increased levels of anthocyanin 
microbial metabolites: A randomized clinical trial. Food Funct. 2014, 5, 1932–1938.

29
State of the Art of Anthocyanins
	 99.	 Garcia-Mazcorro, J.F.; Lage, N.N.; Mertens-Talcott, S.; Talcott, S.; Chew, B.; Dowd, S.E.; Kawas, 
J.R.; Noratto, G.D. Effect of dark sweet cherry powder consumption on the gut microbiota, 
short-chain fatty acids, and biomarkers of gut health in obese db/db mice. Peer J. 2018, 2018, 
1–31.
	100.	 Lacombe, A.; Li, R.W.; Klimis-Zacas, D.; Kristo, A.S.; Tadepalli, S.; Krauss, E.; Young, R.; Wu, 
V.C.H. Lowbush wild blueberries have the potential to modify gut microbiota and xenobiotic 
metabolism in the rat colon. PLoS ONE. 2013, 8, 67497.
	101.	 Flores, G.; Ruiz del Castillo, M.L.; Costabile, A.; Klee, A.; Bigetti Guergoletto, K.; Gibson, G.R. 
In vitro fermentation of anthocyanins encapsulated with cyclodextrins: Release, metabolism 
and influence on gut microbiota growth. J. Funct. Foods. 2015, 16, 50–57.
	102.	 Guergoletto, K.B.; Costabile, A.; Flores, G.; Garcia, S.; Gibson, G.R. In vitro fermentation of 
juçara pulp (Euterpe edulis) by human colonic microbiota. Food Chem. 2016, 196, 251–258.
	103.	 Wu, Y.; Han, Y.; Tao, Y.; Li, D.; Xie, G.; Show, P.L.; Lee, S.Y. In vitro gastrointestinal digestion 
and fecal fermentation reveal the effect of different encapsulation materials on the release, 
degradation and modulation of gut microbiota of blueberry anthocyanin extract. Food Res. Int. 
2020, 132, 109098.
	104.	 Sharif, N.; Khoshnoudi-Nia, S.; Jafari, S.M. Nano/microencapsulation of anthocyanins; A sys­
tematic review and meta-analysis. Food Res. Int. 2020, 132, 109077.
	105.	 Yousuf, B.; Gul, K.; Wani, A.A.; Singh, P. Health benefits of anthocyanins and their encapsula­
tion for potential use in food systems: A review. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2016, 56, 2223–2230.
	106.	 Mahdavi, S.A.; Jafari, S.M.; Ghorbani, M.; Assadpoor, E. Spray-drying microencapsulation of 
anthocyanins by natural biopolymers: A review. Dry Technol. 2014, 32, 509–518.
	107.	 Robert, P.; Fredes, C. The encapsulation of anthocyanins from berry-type fruits. Trends in 
foods. Molecules. 2015, 20, 5875–5888.
	108.	 Cavalcanti, R.N.; Santos, D.T.; Meireles, M.A.A. Non-thermal stabilization mechanisms of 
anthocyanins in model and food systems—An overview. Food Res. Int. 2011, 44, 499–509.
	109.	 Fang, Z.; Bhandari, B. Encapsulation of polyphenols—A review. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2010, 
21, 510–523.
	110.	 Fernandes, A.; Rocha, M.; Santos, L.; Brás, J.; Oliveira, J.; Mateus, N.; de Freitas, V. Blackberry 
anthocyanins: β-cyclodextrin fortification for thermal and gastro- intestinal stabilization. Food 
Chem. 2018, 245, 426–431.
	111.	 Huang, Y.; Zhou, W.B. Microencapsulation of anthocyanins through two-step emulsification 
and release characteristics during in vitro digestion. Food Chem. 2019, 278, 357–363.
	112.	 De Pascual-Teresa, S.; Sanchez-Ballesta, M.T. Anthocyanins: From plant to health. Phytochem. 
Rev. 2008, 7, 281–299.
	113.	 Clifford, M.N. Anthocyanins—Nature, occurrence and dietary sources. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2000, 
80, 1063–1072.
	114.	 Shim, S.H.; Kim, J.M.; Choi, C.Y.; Kim, C.Y.; Park, K.H. Ginkgo biloba extract and bilberry 
anthocyanins improve visual function in patients with normal tension glaucoma. J. Med. Food. 
2012, 15, 818–823.
	115.	 Ahmad, A.; Kaleem, M.; Ahmed, Z.; Shafiq, H. Therapeutic potential of flavonoids and their 
mechanism of action against microbial and viral infections—A review. Food Res. Int. 2015, 77, 
221–235.
	116.	 Miyake, S.; Takahashi, N.; Sasaki, M.; Takahashi, N.; Ozawa, Y. Vision preservation during reti­
nal inflammation by anthocyanin – Rich bilberry extract: Cellular and molecular mechanism. 
Lab. Investig. 2012, 92, 102–109.
	117.	 Lee, J.; Lee, H.K.; Kim, C.Y.; Hong, Y.J.; Choe, C.M.; You, T.W.; Seong, G.J. Purified high-dose 
anthocyanoside oligomer administration improves nocturnal vision and clinical symptoms in 
myopia subjects. Br. J. Nutr. 2005, 93, 895–899.
	118.	 Thiraphatthanavong, P.; Wattanathorn, J.; Muchimapura, S.; Wipawee, T.M.; Wannanon, P.; 
Terdthai, T.U.; Suriharn, B.; Lertrat, K. Preventive effect of Zea mays L. (purple waxy corn) on 
experimental diabetic cataract. BioMed Res. Int. 2014, 2014, 507435.

30
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
	119.	 Mok, J.W.; Chang, D.J.; Joo, C.K. Antiapoptotic effects of anthocyanin from the seed coat of 
black soybean against oxidative damage of human lens epithelial cell induced by H2O2. Curr. 
Eye Res. 2014, 39, 1090–1098.
	120.	 Paik, S.S.; Jeong, E.; Jung, S.W.; Ha, T.J.; Kang, S.; Sim, S.; Jeon, J.H.; Chun, M.H.; Kim, I.B. 
Anthocyanins from the seed coat of black soybean reduce retinal degeneration induced by 
N-methyl-N-nitrosourea. Exp. Eye Res. 2012, 97, 55–62.
	121.	 Ohguro, H.; Ohguro, I.; Katai, M.; Tanaka, S. Two-year randomized, placebo-controlled study 
of black currant anthocyanins on visual field in glaucoma. Ophthalmologica. 2012, 228, 26–35.
	122.	 Yang, Y.; Shi, Z.; Reheman, A.; Jin, W.; Li, C.; Zhu, G.; Wang, Y.; Freedman, J.J.; Ling, W.; Ni, H. 
Anthocyanins inhibit platelet activation and attenuate thrombus growth in both human and 
murine thrombosis models. Blood. 2010, 116, 3197.
	123.	 Qin, Y.; Xia, M.; Ma, J.; Hao, Y.; Liu, J.; Mou, H.; Cao, L.; Ling, W. Anthocyanin supplementation 
improves serum LDL-and HDL-cholesterol concentrations associated with the inhibition of 
cholesteryl ester transfer protein in dyslipidemic subjects. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2009, 90, 485–492.
	124.	 Cassidy, A.; Bertoia, M.; Chiuve, S.; Flint, A.; Forman, J.; Rimm, E.B. Habitual intake of antho­
cyanins and flavanones and risk of cardiovascular disease in men. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2016, 104, 
587–594.
	125.	 Bell, D.R.; Gochenaur, K. Direct vasoactive and vasoprotective properties of anthocyanin-rich 
extracts. J. Appl. Physiol. 2006, 100, 1164–1170.
	126.	 Toufektsian, M.C.; De Lorgeril, M.; Nagy, N.; Salen, P.; Donati, M.B.; Giordano, L.; Mock, H.-P.; 
Peterek, S.; Matros, A.; Petroni, K.; et al. Chronic dietary intake of plant-derived anthocyanins 
protects the rat heart against ischemia-reperfusion injury. J. Nutr. 2008, 138, 747–752.
	127.	 Alvarez-Suarez, J.M.; Giampieri, F.; Tulipani, S.; Casoli, T.; di Stefano, G. One month strawberry-
rich anthocyanin supplementation ameliorates cardiovascular risk, oxidative stress markers 
and platelet activation in humans. J. Nutr. Biochem. 2014, 25, 289–294.
	128.	 Kwon, S.H.; Ahn, I.S.; Kim, S.O.; Kong, C.S.; Chung, H.Y.; Do, M.S.; Park, K.Y. Anti-obesity and 
hypolipidemic effects of black soybean anthocyanins. J. Med. Food. 2007, 10, 552–556.
	129.	 Wu, T.; Yu, Z.; Tang, Q.; Song, H.; Gao, Z.; Chen, W.; Zheng, X. Honeysuckle anthocyanin sup­
plementation prevents diet-induced obesity in C57BL/6 mice. Food Funct. 2013, 4, 1654–1661.
	130.	 Jankowski, A.; Jankowska, B.; Niedworok, J. The effects of anthocyanin dye from grapes on 
experimental diabetes. Folia Med. Cracov. 2000, 41, 5–15.
	131.	 Jayaprakasam, B.; Vareed, S.K.; Olson, L.K.; Nair, M.G. Insulin secretion by bioactive anthocya­
nins and anthocyanidins present in fruits. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2005, 53, 28–31.
	132.	 Tsuda, T.; Ueno, Y.; Aoki, H.; Koda, T.; Horio, F.; Takahashi, N.; Kawada, T.; Osawa, T. 
Anthocyanin enhances adipocytokine secretion and adipocyte-specific gene expression in 
isolated rat adipocytes. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2004, 316, 149–157.
	133.	 Tsuda, T.; Horio, F.; Uchida, K.; Aoki, H.; Osawa, T. Dietary cyanidin 3-O-β-D-glucoside-rich 
purple corn color prevents obesity and ameliorates hyperglycemia in mice. J. Nutr. 2003, 133, 
2125–2130.
	134.	 Takikawa, M.; Inoue, S.; Horio, F.; Tsuda, T. Dietary anthocyanin-rich bilberry extract amelio­
rates hyperglycemia and insulin sensitivity via activation of AMP-activated protein kinase in 
diabetic mice. J. Nutr. 2010, 140, 527–533.
	135.	 Li, D.; Zhang, Y.; Liu, Y.; Sun, R.; Xia, M. Purified anthocyanin supplementation reduces dys­
lipidemia, enhances antioxidant capacity, and prevents insulin resistance in diabetic patients. 
J. Nutr. 2015, 145, 742–748.
	136.	 Kang, M.K.; Lim, S.S.; Lee, J.Y.; Yeo, K.M.; Kang, Y.-H. Anthocyanin-rich purple corn extract 
inhibit diabetes-associated glomerular angiogenesis. PLoS ONE. 2013, 8, 79823.
	137.	 Fan, J.; Johnson, M.H.; Lila, M.A.; Yousef, G.; de Mejia, E.G. Berry and citrus phenolic com­
pounds inhibit dipeptidyl peptidase IV: Implications in diabetes management. Evid. Based 
Complement. Alternat. Med. 2013, 2013, 479505.
	138.	 Koh, E.S.; Lim, J.H.; Kim, M.Y.; Chung, S.; Shin, S.J.; Choi, B.S.; Kim, H.W.; Hwang, S.Y.; Kim, 
S.W.; Park, C.W..; et al. Anthocyanin-rich seoritae extract ameliorates renal lipotoxicity via acti­
vation of AMP-activated protein kinase in diabetic mice. J. Transl. Med. 2015, 13, 203.

31
State of the Art of Anthocyanins
	139.	 Liu, Y.; Li, D.; Zhang, Y.; Sun, R.; Xia, M. Anthocyanin increases adiponectin secretion and pro­
tects against diabetes-related endothelial dysfunction. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2014, 
306, E975–E988.
	140.	 Pojer, E.; Mattivi, F.; Johnson, D.; Stockley, C.S. The case for anthocyanin consumption to pro­
mote human health: A review. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 2013, 12, 483–508.
	141.	 Genskowsky, E.; Puente, L.A.; Perez-Alvarez, J.A.; Fernández-López, J.; Muñoz, L.A.; Viuda-
Martos, M. Determination of polyphenolic profile, antioxidant activity and antibacterial prop­
erties of maqui [Aristotelia chilensis (Molina) Stuntz] a Chilean blackberry. J. Sci. Food Agr. 2016, 
96, 4235–4242.
	142.	 Côté, J.; Caillet, S.; Doyon, G.; Ng, K. Antimicrobial effect of cranberry juice and extracts. Food 
Cont. 2011, 22, 1413–1418.
	143.	 Puupponen-Pimiä, R.; Nohynek, L.; Meier, C.; Kähkönen, M.; Heinonen, M.; Hopia, A.; 
Oksman-Caldentey, K.M. Antimicrobial properties of phenolic compounds from berries. J. 
Appl. Microbiol. 2001, 90, 494–507.
	144.	 Wang, L.S.; Hecht, S.S.; Carmella, S.G.; Yu, N.; Larue, B.; Henry, C.; McIntyre, C.; Rocha, C.; 
Lechner, J.F.; Stoner, G.D. Anthocyanins in black raspberries prevent esophageal tumors in 
rats. Cancer Prev. Res. 2009, 2, 84–93.
	145.	 Faria, A.; Pestana, D.; Teixeira, D.; de Freitas, V.; Mateus, N.; Calhau, C. Blueberry anthocyanins 
and pyruvic acid adducts: Anticancer properties in breast cancer cell lines. Phytother. Res. 2010, 
24, 1862–1869.
	146.	 Hui, C.; Bin, Y.; Xiaoping, Y.; Long, Y.; Chunye, C.; Mantian, M.; Wenhua, L. Anticancer activi­
ties of an anthocyanin-rich extract from black rice against breast cancer cells in vitro and in 
vivo. Nutr. Cancer. 2010, 62, 1128–1136.
	147.	 Chen, X.Y.; Zhou, J.; Luo, L.P.; Han, B.; Li, F.; Chen, J.Y.; Zhu, Y.F.; Chen, W.; Yu, X.P. Black rice 
anthocyanins suppress metastasis of breast cancer cells by targeting RAS/RAF/MAPK path­
way. BioMed Res. Int. 2015, 2015, 414250.
	148.	 Malik, M.; Zhao, C.; Schoene, N.; Guisti, M.M.; Moyer, M.P.; Magnuson, B.A. Anthocyanin-rich 
extract from Aronia meloncarpa E. induces a cell cycle block in colon cancer but not normal 
colonic cells. Nutr. Cancer. 2003, 46, 186–196.
	149.	 Lala, G.; Malik, M.; Zhao, C.; He, J.; Kwon, Y.; Giusti, M.M.; Magnuson, B.A. Anthocyanin-rich 
extracts inhibit multiple biomarkers of colon cancer in rats. Nutr. Cancer. 2006, 54, 84–93.
	150.	 Lim, S.; Xu, J.; Kim, J.; Chen, T.Y.; Su, X.; Standard, J.; Carey, E.; Griffin, J.; Herndon, B.; Katz, B.; 
et al. Role of anthocyanin-enriched purple-fleshed sweet potato p40 in colorectal cancer pre­
vention. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2013, 57, 1908–1917.
	151.	 Jang, H.; Ha, U.S.; Kim, S.J.; Yoon, B.I.; Han, D.S.; Yuk, S.M.; Kim, S.W. Anthocyanin 
extracted from black soybean reduces prostate weight and promotes apoptosis in the pros­
tatic hyperplasia-induced rat model. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2010, 58, 12686–12691.
	152.	 Shin, D.Y.; Lee, W.S.; Kim, S.H.; Kim, M.J.; Yun, J.W.; Lu, J.N.; Lee, S.J.; Tsoy, I.; Kim, H.J.; Ryu, 
C.H.; et al. Anti-invasive activity of anthocyanins isolated from Vitis coignetiae in human hepa­
tocarcinoma cells. J. Med. Food. 2009, 12, 967–972.
	153.	 Bontempo, P.; de Masi, L.; Carafa, V.; Rigano, D.; Scisciola, L.; Iside, C.; Grassi, R.; Molinari, 
A.M.; Aversano, R.; Nebbioso, A.; et al. Anticancer activities of anthocyanin extract from geno­
typed Solanum tuberosum L. “Vitelotte”. J. Funct. Foods 2015, 19, 584–593.
	154.	 Strathearn, K.E.; Yousef, G.G.; Grace, M.H.; Roy, S.L.; Tambe, M.A.; Ferruzzi, M.G.; Wu, 
Q.-L.; Simon, J.E.; Lila, M.A.; Rochet, J.-C. Neuroprotective effects of anthocyanin and pro­
anthocyanidin-rich extracts in cellular models of Parkinson’s disease. Brain Res. 2014, 1555, 
60–77.
	155.	 Shih, P.-H.; Chan, Y.-C.; Liao, J.-W.; Wang, M.-F.; Yen, G.-C. Antioxidant and cognitive promo­
tion effects of anthocyanin-rich mulberry (Morus atropurpurea L.) on senescence-accelerated 
mice and prevention of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Nutr. Biochem. 2010, 21, 598–605.
	156.	 Gutierres, J.M.; Carvalho, F.B.; Schetinger, M.R.C.; Agostinho, P.; Marisco, P.C. Neuroprotective 
effect of anthocyanins on acetylcholinesterase activity and attenuation of scopolamine-
induced amnesia in rats. Int. J. Dev. Neurosci. 2014, 33, 88–97.

32
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
	157.	 Rehman, S.U.; Shah, S.A.; Ali, T.; Chung, J.I.; Kim, M.O. Anthocyanins reversed D-galactose-
induced oxidative stress and neuroinflammation mediated cognitive impairment in adult rats. 
Mol. Neurobiol. 2017, 54, 255–271.
	158.	 Amin, F.U.; Shah, S.A.; Badshah, H.; Khan, M.; Kim, M.O. Anthocyanins encapsulated by 
PLGA@PEG nanoparticles potentially improved its free radical scavenging capabilities via 
p38/JNK pathway against Abeta1-42-induced oxidative stress. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2017, 15, 12.
	159.	 Kim, M.J.; Rehman, S.U.; Amin, F.U.; Kim, M.O. Enhanced neuroprotection of anthocyanin-
loaded PEG-gold nanoparticles against Abeta1-42-induced neuroinflammation and neu­
rodegeneration via the NF-KB/JNK/GSK3beta signaling pathway. Nanomedicine. 2017, 13, 
2533–2544.
	160.	 Ali, T.; Kim, M.J.; Rehman, S.U.; Ahmad, A.; Kim, M.O. Anthocyanin-loaded PEG-gold 
nanoparticles enhanced the neuroprotection of anthocyanins in an Abeta1-42 mouse model of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurobiol. 2017, 54, 6490–6506.
	161.	 Nomi, Y.; Iwasaki-Kurashige, K.; Matsumoto, H. Therapeutic effects of anthocyanins for vision 
and eye health. Molecules. 2019, 24, 3311.
	162.	 Ghosh, D.; Konishi, T. Anthocyanins and anthocyanin-rich extracts: Role in diabetes and eye 
function. Asian Pac. J. Clin. Nutr. 2007, 16, 200–208.
	163.	 Tsuda, T. Anthocyanins as functional food factors: Chemistry, nutrition and health promotion. 
Food Sci. Technol. Res. 2012, 18, 315–324.
	164.	 Smeriglio, A.; Monteleone, D.; Trombetta, D. Health effects of Vaccinium myrtillus L.: Evaluation 
of efficacy and technological strategies for preservation of active ingredients. Mini Rev. Med. 
Chem. 2014, 14, 567–584.
	165.	 Liu, L.K.; Lee, H.J.; Shih, Y.W.; Chyau, C.C.; Wang, C.J. Mulberry anthocyanins extracts inhibit 
LDL oxidation and macrophage-derived foam cell formation induced by oxidative LDL. J. Food 
Sci. 2008, 73, 4113–4121.
	166.	 Rechner, A.R.; Kroner, C. Anthocyanins and colonic metabolites of dietary polyphenols inhibit 
platelet function. Thromb. Res. 2005, 116, 327–334.
	167.	 Luís, Â; Domingues, F.; Pereira, L. Association between berries intake and cardiovascular dis­
eases risk factors: A systematic review with meta-analysis and trial sequential analysis of ran­
domized controlled trials. Food Funct. 2018, 9, 740–757.
	168.	 García-Conesa, M.T.; Chambers, K.; Combet, E.; Pinto, P.; Garcia-Aloy, M.; Andresń-Lacueva, 
C.; dePascual-Teresa, S.; Mena, P.; Konic Ristic, A.; Hollands, W.J.; et al. Meta-analysis of the 
effects of foods and derived products containing ellagitannins and anthocyanins on cardio­
metabolic biomarkers: Analysis of factors influencing variability of the individual responses. 
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 694.
	169.	 Ksonzékova, P.; Mariychuk, R.; Eliasova, A.; Mudronova, D.; Csank, T.; Kiraly, J.; Marcincakova, 
D.; Pistl, J.; Tkacikova, L. In vitro studies of biological activities of anthocyanin-rich berry 
extracts on porcine intestinal epithelial cells. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2016, 96, 1093–1100.
	170.	 Bone, K.; Mills, S.. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy: Modern Herbal Medicine; Churchill 
Livingstone: Edinburg, TX, USA, 2013.
	171.	 Xie, L.; Su, H.; Sun, C.; Zheng, X.; Chen, W. Recent advances in understanding the anti-obesity 
activity of anthocyanins and their biosynthesis in microorganisms. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 
2018, 72, 13–24.
	172.	 Rupasinghe, H.P.V.; Arumuggam, N. Health benefits of anthocyanins. Food Chem. Func. Anal. 
2019, 2019, 123–158.
	173.	 Heyman, L.; Axling, U.; Blanco, N.; Sterner, O.; Holm, C.; Berger, K. Evaluation of beneficial 
metabolic effects of berries in high-fat fed C57BL/6J mice. J. Nutr. Metab. 2014, 2014, 403041.
	174.	 Lachin, T.; Reza, H. Anti diabetic effect of cherries in alloxan induced diabetic rats. Recent Pat. 
Endocr. Metab. Immune Drug Discov. 2012, 6, 67–72.
	175.	 Orqueda, M.E.; Torres, S.; Zampini, I.C.; Cattaneo, F.; Fernandez Di Pardo, A.; Valle, E.M.; 
Jimenez-Aspee, F.; Schmeda-Hirschmann, G.; Isla, M.I. Integral use of Argentinean solanum 
betaceum red fruits as functional food ingredient to prevent metabolic syndrome: Effect of in 
vitro simulated gastroduodenal digestión. Heliyon. 2020, 6, 03387.

33
State of the Art of Anthocyanins
	176.	 Wedick, N.M.; Pan, A.; Cassidy, A.; Rimm, E.B.; Sampson, L.; Rosner, B.; Willett, W.; Hu, F.B.; 
Sun, Q.; van Dam, R.M. Dietary flavonoid intakes and risk of type 2 diabetes in US men and 
women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2012, 95, 925–933.
	177.	 Cisowska, A.; Wojnicz, D.; Hendrich, A.B. Anthocyanins as antimicrobial agents of natural 
plant origin. Nat. Prod. Commun. 2011, 6, 149–156.
	178.	 Helander, I.M.; Alakomi, H.L.; Latva-Kala, K.; Mattila-Sandholm, T.; Pol, I.; Smid, E.J.; Gorris, 
L.G.M.; von Wright, A. Characterization of the action of selected essential oil components on 
Gram-negative bacteria. J. Agric. Food Chem. 1998, 46, 3590–3595.
	179.	 Riaz, M.; Zia-Ul-Haq, M.; Saad, B. Anthocyanins and Human Health: Biomolecular and Therapeutical 
Aspects; Springer: New York, 2016.
	180.	 Wallace, T.C.; Giusti, M.M.. Anthocyanins in Health and Disease; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, 2014.
	181.	 Fraga, C.G. (Ed.) Plant Phenolics and Human Health: Biochemistry, Nutrition and Pharmacology; 
Wiley: New York, 2010.
	182.	 He, J.; Giusti, M.M. Anthocyanins: Natural colorants with health-promoting properties. Annu. 
Rev. Food Sci. Technol. 2010, 1, 163–187.
	183.	 Galvano, F.; Salamone, F.; Nicolosi, A.; Vitaglione, P. Anthocyanins-based drugs for colon can­
cer treatment: The nutriotionist’s point of view. Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 2009, 64, 431–432.
	184.	 Webb, M.R.; Min, K.; Ebeler, S.E. Anthocyanins interactions with DNA: Intercalation, topoi­
somerase i inhibition and oxidative reactions. J. Food Biochem. 2008, 32, 176–196.
	185.	 Fernandes, I.; Faria, A.; Azevedo, J.; Soares, S.; Calhau, C.; De Freitas, V.; Mateus, N. Influence of 
anthocyanins, derivative pigments and other catechol and pyrogallol-type phenolics on breast 
cancer cell proliferation. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2010, 58, 3785–3792.
	186.	 Sun, J.; Hai Liu, R. Cranberry phytochemical extracts induce cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in 
human MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Cancer Lett. 2006, 241, 124–134.
	187.	 Hoshyar, R.; Mahboob, Z.; Zarban, A. The antioxidant and chemical properties of Berberis 
vulgaris and its cytotoxic effect on human breast carcinoma cells. Cytotechnology. 2015, 68, 
1207–1213.
	188.	 Im, N.K.; Jang, W.J.; Jeong, C.H.; Jeong, G.S. Delphinidin suppresses PMA-induced MMP-9 
expression by blocking the NF-kappaB activation through MAPK signaling pathways in 
MCF-7 human breast carcinoma cells. J. Med. Food. 2014, 17, 855–861.
	189.	 Forester, S.C.; Choy, Y.Y.; Waterhouse, A.L.; Oteiza, P.I. The anthocyanin metabolites gallic acid, 
3-o-methylgallic acid, and 2,4,6- trihydroxybenzaldehyde decrease human colon cancer cell 
viability by regulating pro-oncogenic signals. Mol. Carcinog. 2014, 53, 432–439.
	190.	 Chen, P.N.; Kuo, W.H.; Chiang, C.L.; Chiou, H.L.; Hsieh, Y.S.; Chu, S.C. Black rice anthocyanins 
inhibit cancer cells invasion via repressions of MMPs and u-PA expression. Chem. Biol. Interact. 
2006, 163, 218–229.
	191.	 Li, D.; Wang, P.; Luo, Y.; Zhao, M.; Chen, F. Health benefits of anthocyanins and molecular 
mechanisms: Update from recent decade. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2017, 57, 1729–1741.
	192.	 Jing, P.; Bomser, J.A.; Schwartz, S.J.; He, J.; Magnuson, B.A.; Giusti, M.M. Structure–function 
relationships of anthocyanins from various anthocyanin-rich extracts on the inhibition of 
colon cancer cell growth. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2008, 56, 9391–9398.
	193.	 Zhao, C.; Giusti, M.M.; Malik, M.; Moyer, M.P.; Magnuson, B.A. Effects of commercial antho­
cyanin-rich extracts on colonic cancer and nontumorigenic colonic cell growth. J. Agric. Food 
Chem. 2004, 52, 6122–6128.
	194.	 Winter, A.N.; Bickford, P.C. Anthocyanins and their metabolites as therapeutic agents for neu­
rodegenerative disease. Antioxidants. 2019, 8, 333.
	195.	 Klinkenberg, I.; Blokland, A. The validity of scopolamine as a pharmacological model for cog­
nitive impairment: A review of animal behavioral studies. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2010, 34, 
1307–1350. 

34
2
Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing
Maria Josiane Macedo, Juliana Dara Rabêlo Silva, and Mário Roberto 
Maróstica Júnior
2.1  Introduction
Anthocyanins are a predominant and extensively used category of water-soluble natural 
colorants. They have emerged as a viable alternative to traditional synthetic colorants in 
response to the growing demand for additives of natural origin and increased awareness 
of the potential health and environmental risks associated with the use of chemicals in the 
production of synthetic pigments (Yao et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022). These factors underline 
the potential of anthocyanins as value-added ingredients or promising additives for appli­
cations in the food industry.
The intense coloration of anthocyanins, which ranges from red to purple, blue and 
in-between, is attributed to their chemical structure. Specifically, the presence of con­
jugated double bonds allows anthocyanins to absorb light at an approximate wave­
length of 500 nm (Echegaray et al. 2022). However, anthocyanins are highly unstable 
pigments and susceptible to degradation. A variety of intrinsic and extrinsic factors 
can influence the stability of anthocyanins, including relative humidity, light, pH, 
temperature, sugars (acylated and non-acylated), vitamin C, oxygen, sulfur dioxide or 
sulfites, enzymes, co-pigments, and metal ions (Enaru et al. 2021; Yao et al. 2021; Chen 
et al. 2022; Cunha et al. 2023). It is therefore essential to improve the physicochemical 
stability of anthocyanins in order to develop processing strategies that preserve their 
integrity.
Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is to compile scientific information on the main 
factors that influence the stability of anthocyanins and to discuss fundamental methods 
and strategies for preserving their characteristics during food processing.
2.2  Factors Affecting the Stability of Anthocyanins
Anthocyanins, natural pigments found in many fruits and vegetables, are renowned for 
their antioxidant properties and health benefits. However, their stability during food pro­
cessing and storage poses a significant concern in the food industry. Several factors can 
influence the degradation of anthocyanins. Thus, this chapter reports the role of these fac­
tors in the stability of these compounds.

35
Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing
2.2.1  pH
The stability of anthocyanin pigments is directly linked to changes in their structure in 
response to pH variations. The predominant forms of anthocyanins are determined by the 
equilibrium constant (K) and are dependent on the pH of the medium, which also influences 
their color (Trouillas et al. 2016). This phenomenon is associated with the values of equilib­
rium constants, specifically deprotonation (Ka) and hydration (Kh). If Kh is greater than Ka, the 
equilibrium shifts to hemiacetal or pseudobase forms, and conversely, the equilibrium shifts 
to quinoidal bases, which have a blue color (Mercadante 2018; Oancea 2021; Gull et al. 2022).
As shown in Figure 3.1, in acidic conditions (pH 1–2), the prevalence is of the flavylium 
cation, which is in the protonated form, making them stable and red in color. As the pH 
increases, approaching neutrality, deprotonation and hydration reactions of the flavylium 
cation may occur (Trouillas et al. 2016).
The flavylium cation, when hydrated, results in the creation of a carbinol pseudobase, 
which appears colorless at pH conditions between 4 and 5, or undergoes deprotonation 
between pH 6 and 7, giving rise to the quinoidal base form with a blue color. Under highly 
alkaline conditions (pH > 9), tautomerization occurs through ring opening, resulting in a 
chalcone with a pale-yellow color, and subsequently, anthocyanins may undergo degrada­
tion (Albuquerque et al. 2020).
It has been well-elucidated that anthocyanins and their coloration are more stable in 
acidic pH (pH < 3.0); therefore, due to their instability at different pH levels, their applica­
tion in foods becomes quite limited (Oancea 2021). Liu et al. (2019) investigated the effect 
of pH on anthocyanin emulsions, noting a color shift from violet at pH 7.0 to salmon pink 
at pH 3.0. Hou et al. (2013) found that pH strongly influenced the degradation of anthocya­
nins in black rice, where increasing the pH from 1.0 to 6.0 accelerated the degradation of 
anthocyanins. They were more stable in acidic conditions (pH 1.0–3.0), whereas a signifi­
cant reduction in stability of anthocyanins was observed at pH > 3.0.
Anthocyanins from purple sweet potatoes were applied as colorants in ice pops, and the 
best conditions were found by Rodríguez-Mena et al. (2023), who observed that the pH of 
the extraction solvent influenced the obtaining of anthocyanins, with pH 2.5 showing the 
best color properties.
The pH control is an essential parameter for minimizing the loss of anthocyanins dur­
ing food processing. Furthermore, the color change can directly affect the appearance and 
acceptance of food by consumers, especially when the color reflects the product’s quality, 
therefore representing a major challenge in the food industry due to the high instability of 
these pigments at different pH.
2.2.2  Temperature
The thermal degradation of anthocyanins can be influenced by the pH of the medium, with 
varying degrees of degradation observed during heating. Brouillard and Delaporte (1977) 
initially proposed mechanisms for this degradation, which have been recently reviewed 
and updated by Oancea (2021). Under high temperature and different pH conditions, may 
occur irreversible oxidative reactions leading to the degradation of anthocyanins into alde­
hyde and benzoic acid derivatives (Figure 2.1) (Oancea 2021).
At pH 1.0, multiple hydrolyses of glycosidic bonds occur, resulting in the formation of 
anthocyanidin, followed by the cleavage of rings A and B, yielding final derivatives such 
as phenolic aldehyde and benzoic acid. Similarly, at pH 3.5, hydrolytic opening of the 

36
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
FIGURE 2.1
Interconversion and thermal degradation of anthocyanins.

37
Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing
pyrrolic ring precedes the formation of a chalcone, which then undergoes further degra­
dation of rings A and B, producing similar final derivatives. Cleavage of C3–C4 leads to 
the formation of phloroglucinaldehyde, while cleavage of C2–C3 bonds generates phenolic 
acids. This process likely involves a combination of hydrolytic and autooxidative reactions 
(Mercadante 2018; Oancea 2021).
The degradation of anthocyanins during isothermal heating follows a first-order kinetic 
model, where a lower kinetic rate constant (k) indicates better stability of anthocyanins, as 
demonstrated in previous studies (Patras et al. 2010; Hou et al. 2013; De Marchi et al. 2024).
In a study conducted by Loypimai et al. (2016), the authors found that increasing the 
temperature from 60°C to 100°C significantly increased the values of k for anthocyanins 
and led to the darkening of pigments. Moreover, under the influence of a higher pH (pH 
5.0), they observed a greater sensitivity to temperature changes, resulting in a deteriora­
tion of anthocyanin stability. Similar results were previously reported by Hou et al. (2013), 
who found that elevated pH (pH 5.0–6.0) combined with high temperature (90°C–100°C) 
resulted in high degradation of anthocyanin pigments.
Various thermal processing methods like blanching, pasteurization, and baking are com­
monly employed in food processing to ensure safety and prolong shelf life, often involving 
high temperatures (>60°C) (Oancea 2021). However, it’s crucial to consider that exposure 
time and heating techniques directly influence the stability of compounds, potentially 
causing pigment discoloration (Kara & Erçelebi 2013).
When analyzing the processing of blueberry puree, which involved the use of high tem­
perature (95°C blanching) combined with pasteurization, Brownmiller et al. (2008) found 
a significant reduction of 43% in the total anthocyanin content compared to fresh fruits. In 
a comprehensive review, thermal processing effects on the stability of pigments obtained 
from fruits and their by-products were well elucidated (Rawson et al. 2011).
Žilić et al. (2016), while investigating the impact of temperature on the production of 
cookies using anthocyanin-rich corn flours, observed a significant reduction, between 3.5 
and 5 times, in anthocyanin levels after baking at 200°C. In the same study, by adjust­
ing the pH of the cookie dough with citric acid (from pH 7.86–8.05 to pH 4.59–3.72) and 
reducing the temperature to 150°C, the authors noted a positive influence on anthocyanin 
stability and coloration, with values of anthocyanins 2.5–3.4 times higher, highlighting 
the influence of pH and temperature on anthocyanin stability during cookie processing.
These findings highlight the critical role of temperature in food production with antho­
cyanins, as it can impact the content, color, and flavor, affecting sensory characteristics 
and consumer acceptance (Sendri et al. 2023). Furthermore, the extent of anthocyanin deg­
radation during thermal food processing also depends on both the specific composition 
of anthocyanins and the characteristics of the food matrix. For example, the presence of 
sucrose, reducing sugars, and Maillard reaction products, as well as ascorbic acid and phe­
nolic compounds, can alter the degradation kinetics of these compounds (Žilić et al. 2016).
2.2.3  Light
The light is responsible for favoring the biosynthesis process in the plant; however, after the 
extraction of anthocyanins and their incorporation into foods, the pigments tend to undergo 
constant degradation during processing, storage, and transportation (Giusti et al. 2023).
The degradation rates of anthocyanins from Roselle (Hibiscus L.) were investigated by 
Askar et al. (2015). The authors observed that degradation occurred more rapidly when 
exposed to sunlight compared to those kept in the dark. Additionally, they found that 
degradation was directly related to pH, with higher rates in basic medium than in acidic 

38
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
medium. According to the authors, the rate of photodiscoloration increased with increas­
ing pH, possibly due to the formation of more hydroxyl radicals, which are induced by the 
exposure of solutions to sunlight.
In the study conducted by Aramwit et al. (2010), it was observed that after 10 hours 
of exposure to fluorescent light at room temperature, there was a significant reduction 
in both the total content of anthocyanins obtained from mulberries (Morus alba) and in 
antioxidant activity. It was found that the anthocyanin content and antioxidant activity 
decreased proportionally with the increase in exposure time of the extract to light.
Rigolon et al. (2024) investigated the stability of sports drinks made from jabuticaba peel 
and blueberry pulp over 91 days under varying storage conditions. They observed that 
exposure to light led to gradual color degradation and a reduction in anthocyanin content 
in both beverages, regardless of the beverage matrix.
Therefore, exposure to light impacts the stability of anthocyanins in food products. 
Although essential for their formation in plants, light accelerates their degradation in pro­
cessed foods, especially under sunlight and basic pH conditions. Therefore, careful han­
dling and packaging are crucial to preserve the anthocyanins in food products.
2.2.4  Oxygen
Anthocyanins are easily oxidized by oxygen, making them susceptible to oxidative deg­
radation during various stages of food processing and storage. This can be attributed to 
the reaction of anthocyanins to hinder radical activity in high concentrations of oxygen, 
resulting in the depletion of antioxidant pigments and the formation of colorless or brown 
compounds (Markakis 1982).
Kim et al. (2021) found in their study that the thermal processing of blueberry puree 
in the absence of oxygen prevented anthocyanin oxidation. All anthocyanins in samples 
heated in the absence of oxygen showed higher levels of anthocyanins and achieved 
greater color retention compared to those processed in the presence of oxygen.
The degradation of anthocyanins can be accelerated by the presence of oxygen, mediated 
by oxidizing enzymes such as polyphenol oxidase (PPO), which catalyzes the oxidation 
of chlorogenic acid (CG) to the corresponding o-quinone (chlorogenoquinone, CGQ). The 
interaction of this quinone with anthocyanins results in the formation of brown-colored 
condensation products (Patras et al. 2010). Thus, the presence of oxygen not only amplifies 
the effects of other anthocyanin degradation processes but also facilitates and accelerates 
their enzymatic oxidation.
2.3  Interaction with Other Food Components
2.3.1  Enzymes
During the processing of raw materials, activated enzymes are largely responsible for the 
degradation of anthocyanins, due to their high specificity and efficiency. β-glucosidase 
is thought to initiate the degradation of anthocyanins by catalyzing the cleavage of the 
covalent bond between the glycosyl residue and the aglycone of the anthocyanin pigment. 
Consequently, the highly labile anthocyanidin undergoes degradation, diminishing its 
solubility and transforming it into colorless compounds, thereby diminishing the vibrancy 
of the pigments’ coloration (Cavalcanti et al. 2011; Cai et al. 2022).

39
Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing
Peroxidases and phenolases, which encompass phenol oxidases and PPOs, are preva­
lent enzymes that contribute to the breakdown of anthocyanins. These enzymes, naturally 
occurring in fruits and berries, interact directly with anthocyanins, leading to their degra­
dation via a co-oxidation reagent of enzymatically produced o-quinones and/or subsequent 
quinone oxidation derivatives (Cavalcanti et al. 2011; Enaru et al. 2021; Cai et al. 2022).
Nonetheless, research carried out by Fang et al. (2007) elucidated that the rate of cyani­
din 3-glucoside decolorization remained nearly constant, irrespective of the presence or 
absence of gallic acid (GA), and even when the enzyme extract was deactivated in the pres­
ence of GA. This suggests that bayberry PPO was unable to interact directly with cyanidin 
3-glucoside.
2.3.2  Ascorbic Acid
Ascorbic acid, an essential component in food processing, is a reliable indicator of food 
quality, as any fluctuation in its level signals a deterioration in food quality after process­
ing and during storage. This compound, present in a variety of fruits and vegetables, is 
often incorporated as an antioxidant in many foods with the aim of increasing their nutri­
tional value (Enaru et al. 2021).
In an environment containing anthocyanins, the presence of ascorbic acid accelerates 
the degradation of these pigments and the subsequent loss of color. The mechanisms pro­
posed for this phenomenon include the direct condensation of ascorbic acid with antho­
cyanins and the formation of hydrogen peroxide, which leads to the oxidative cleavage 
of the pyrithione ring (Cavalcanti et al. 2011; Enaru et al. 2021; Cai et al. 2022). Direct con­
densation occurs at carbon four of the anthocyanin molecule, resulting in the loss of both 
compounds. Conversely, the second mechanism involves the loss of anthocyanin pigments 
through oxidative cleavage of the pyrithione ring, which operates through a free radical 
mechanism. In this process, ascorbic acid serves as a catalyst for molecular oxygen, gener­
ating free radicals (Cavalcanti et al. 2011; Enaru et al. 2021; Cai et al. 2022).
This occurrence poses a substantial hurdle to the utilization of colorants derived from 
anthocyanin in the food sector, particularly in beverages and juices frequently fortified 
with vitamin C (Farr & Giusti 2018). This was corroborated by Pacheco-Palencia et al. 
(2007), where the enrichment with ascorbic acid expedited the degradation of anthocyanin 
in clarified juices at all storage temperatures.
The influence of ascorbic acid on anthocyanins is multifaceted and depends on a num­
ber of factors, including the food matrix (He & Schwartz 2008). To illustrate, in a context 
where hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is present, it was observed that ascorbic acid concentra­
tions between 60 and 80 mg/L contributed to the stabilization of the anthocyanins present 
in pomegranate juice. In contrast, in cherry juice, an identical concentration of 80 mg/L 
accelerated the degradation of anthocyanins (Mehmet & Zkan 2002). Thus, it is important 
to note that in situations where oxygen and ascorbic acid levels are high, the degrading 
effect becomes more prominent.
2.3.3  Sugar
Sugars, abundantly found in various food products like juices, wines, and preserves, play 
a pivotal role in anthocyanin coloration. An elevated sugar concentration leads to dimin­
ished water activity, thereby decelerating the pseudobases formation and subsequently 
safeguarding the color of anthocyanins. Conversely, lower sugar concentrations, along 
with their degradation by-products, can compromise the stability of anthocyanins. Various 
sugars, such as sucrose, fructose, glucose, and xylose, may lead to the unanticipated 

40
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
breakdown of anthocyanins. Furfural, a common by-product of sugar degradation, has 
been proven to hasten the degradation of anthocyanins more than methylfurfural, culmi­
nating in the creation of brown pigment polymers (Cavalcanti et al. 2011; Cai et al. 2022).
Tsai et al. (2005) illustrated the influence of sucrose on the anthocyanin and antioxi­
dant potential of blackberry extract under heat. Their observations included an escalation 
in polymeric and co-pigmented anthocyanins, coupled with a reduction in monomeric 
anthocyanins. Sucrose was found to exert a hyperchromic effect on anthocyanins before 
heating, and the browning by-products could amplify the discoloration of anthocyanins 
during the initial heating phase. Similarly, Nikkhah et al. (2007) reported that moderate 
sugar concentrations, such as 20%, had a protective effect on anthocyanin content and 
color quality in different extracts of chilled berries. However, this protective effect dimin­
ished with higher sugar concentrations.
2.3.4  Sulfites
Sulfur-containing compounds, specifically sulfites and sulfates, find widespread use in pre­
serving fruit-derived foods. However, these compounds can lead to the fading of anthocy­
anin pigments, resulting in discoloration. This effect arises from the formation of colorless 
structures derived from sulfur when these compounds are introduced at positions 2 or 4 of 
the anthocyanins. The process is reversible: heating the anthocyanins releases sulfur diox­
ide, allowing the color to regenerate. Similarly, acidification to a low pH also liberates sulfur 
dioxide and restores the anthocyanins. However, high concentrations of sulfites, greater than 
10 g/kg, cause permanent anthocyanin degradation (Cavalcanti et al. 2011; Enaru et al. 2021).
Sulfur dioxide (SO2), for example, is widely used in the fruit and vegetable preservation 
industry as an inhibitor of microbial growth and enzymatic and nonenzymatic browning. 
Additionally, SO2 has demonstrated its efficacy as an excellent choice for low-pH foods, 
such as wine, owing to its antiseptic properties against yeasts and bacteria, as well as its 
antioxidant effects. This makes it one of the most versatile and effective additives, capable 
of whitening pigments, eliminating unpleasant odors from oxidation and enabling the 
extraction of solid grape components such as stalks, seeds, and skins (Enaru et al. 2021). 
This additive is also used in three other stages of winemaking: (1) During the fermentation 
process, in the grapes or must, with the main aim of preventing oxidation; (2) Following 
the completion of fermentation and before the aging or storage stages, it limits microbial 
growth that could impact the wines; (3) Finally, just before bottling, the wines are stabi­
lized with SO2 to prevent any alterations or accidents in the bottles.
Nevertheless, stringent regulation governs the utilization of this compound due to its poten­
tial to induce sensory alterations in the end product. High concentrations of SO2 can lead to 
undesirable flavors, affecting sulfur gas and reducing compounds, including hydrosulfates 
and mercaptans (Enaru et al. 2021). It is therefore crucial to continue research to optimize the 
use of these additives, guaranteeing the quality of the final product and consumer safety.
2.4  Processing Factors
2.4.1  Extraction
Anthocyanins are located within the vacuoles of plant cells and necessitate effective tissue 
rupture for extraction, a process facilitated by solvent penetration followed by solubilization. 

41
Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing
The careful selection of solvents, taking into account polarity, is paramount. Solid-liquid 
extraction, utilizing solvents such as methanol, ethanol, ethyl acetate, or acetone, represents 
a widely adopted conventional method (Silva et al. 2017; Muhlack et al. 2018; Romero-Díez 
et al. 2019). This approach is often complemented by pH adjustment through the addition of 
acids in low concentrations to reduce pH, thereby enhancing stability and facilitating diffu­
sion into the solvent (Gull et al. 2022).
Wang et al. (2016) observed that specific extraction conditions, involving different sol­
vents, favor distinct groups of anthocyanins. The authors found that blueberry extracts 
showed better extraction with methanol, resulting in a significant increase in monomeric 
anthocyanins compared to other solvents such as ethanol and acetone. In contrast, cherries 
obtained better results using ethanol.
The authors noted significant effects of solvent type and extraction method on anthocy­
anin composition. Methanol yielded higher extraction efficiency for delphinidin-3-arabi­
noside, petunidin-3-glucoside, malvidin-3-galactoside (Mv-3-gal), peonidin-3-arabinoside 
(Pn-3-ara), and malvidin-3-glucoside (Mv-3-glu) in blueberries, while acetone was more 
effective for cyanidin-3-galactoside (Cy-3-gal), Mv-3-gal, and Mv-3-glu. In cherries, metha­
nol favored cyanidin-3-rutinoside, and ethanol yielded higher cyanidin-3-galactoside lev­
els in red pear peel.
Such results reinforce the relationship between the different polarity of each antho­
cyanin compound concerning the solvent. In this regard, the authors demonstrate that 
extraction conditions can selectively alter the compositions of anthocyanins in the extract, 
necessitating a rigorous selection of ideal conditions based on the compounds of interest 
to be investigated.
Currently, a novel group of solvents, Deep Eutectic Solvents (DES), known for their eco-
friendliness, is gaining traction in industries. DES, forming a supramolecular structure, 
extract phytochemical compounds due to enhanced solubility. Recent research, including a 
review by Foroutani et al. (2024), shows DES-based extracts are more stable than traditional 
solvents. By combining hydrogen bond acceptors (HBAs) with donors (HBDs), DES create 
mixtures with lower melting points, yielding natural deep eutectic solvents (NADES), safer 
and eco-friendly (Benvenutti, Zielinski & Ferreira 2022; Foroutani et al. 2024).
Zannou et al. (2020) investigated the recovery of anthocyanins from Roselle (Hibiscus sab­
dariffa L.) using DES, employing sodium acetate as a HBA and formic acid acting as a HBD 
in a molar ratio of 1:2. They observed higher polyphenol extraction efficiency compared to 
conventional solvents such as distilled water, 70% ethanol, and 80% methanol. The study’s 
results indicated that the use of DES proved to be an ideal medium for extracting polyphe­
nols from Roselle, providing high mass transfer and remarkable anthocyanin solubility.
In addition to the importance of solvent selection, the extraction process significantly 
impacts anthocyanin stability. Ensuring physical and chemical stabilization during extrac­
tion is crucial to enhance stability, prolong shelf life, and improve solubility these pig­
ments, thus enhancing technological properties and preserving sensory and nutritional 
characteristics (Esteve-Turrillas, Garrigues & De la Guardia 2024).
2.4.2  Processing Methods
Currently, unconventional extraction techniques such as ultrasound-assisted extraction 
(UAE), microwave-assisted extraction, supercritical fluid extraction (SFE), and pulsed elec­
tric field (PEF) extraction are preferred over conventional methods like Soxhlet extrac­
tion, hot water extraction, and magnetic stirring. This preference originates from the fact 
that conventional techniques may involve high temperatures and larger solvent quantities, 

42
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
leading to increased compound degradation. Moreover, conventional methods often lack 
control over granulometry and morphology, exhibit low precipitation rates, and offer low 
trapping and loading efficiency (Zielinski et al. 2021; Gull et al. 2022).
Unconventional techniques emerge with the advantage not only of preserving the ‘fresh’ 
characteristics of foods, prioritizing sensory quality, but also of enhancing the integrity 
of phytochemical compounds. In addition to saving time and energy, thus favoring envi­
ronmental sustainability through the use of techniques considered more ecological and 
sustainable (Esteve-Turrillas, Garrigues & De la Guardia 2024).
Given their relevance in improving anthocyanin extraction and stability, this chapter 
will focus on key methodologies non-conventional.
2.4.2.1  Ultrasound-Assisted Extraction
One of the green methodologies employed in the extraction of anthocyanins is UAE 
(Esteve-Turrillas, Garrigues & De la Guardia 2024). The application of high-power ultra­
sound can be carried out through two types of devices: the ultrasonic bath or the ultra­
sound equipment using a probe. Both systems consist of a transducer as the source of 
ultrasound power (Chemat et al. 2017).
Ultrasound is capable of generating cavitation through high-frequency sound waves, 
characterized by the collapse of cells resulting in the formation of bubbles, whose vibra­
tion promotes an increase in temperature, thus facilitating the softening of the matrix and 
ensuring efficient diffusion of anthocyanins. However, strict temperature control during 
this process becomes necessary, especially the use of a probe, as it can reach very high 
temperatures and consequently compromise its stability (D’Alessandro et al. 2014; Silva 
et al. 2017; Romero-Díez et al. 2019). The UAE, being a rapid extraction method, has the 
advantage of reduced processing time, as well as higher yield and lower energy consump­
tion and, easy applicability.
The type of ultrasound device used for extractions is a variable to be considered since it 
can influence the process of obtaining compounds. Probes have higher power due to the 
delivery of ultrasonic intensity through a smaller surface, limited to the tip of the probe. 
This more focused delivery allows the system to provide intensity in a more restricted 
area, giving it greater robustness (Chemat et al. 2017). Thus, high-power ultrasonic probes 
have been shown to be more efficient and are generally preferred for extraction applica­
tions. Additionally, the operating conditions of the equipment also need to be studied and 
considered as they can influence the process of obtaining anthocyanins during extraction.
2.4.2.2  Pressurized Liquid Extraction
Pressurized liquid extraction (PLE) utilizes high pressure and temperature, making it a 
rapid extraction technique that is easily automated. In this process, when the temperature 
exceeds the boiling point of the solvent, the pressure must be sufficient to keep it in the 
liquid state (above the boiling point, but below the critical point, called the subcritical state) 
(Zielinski et al. 2021).
In this method, the diffusion and solubility of the solvent are facilitated due to the solva­
tion that occurs during the process, allowing for enhanced penetration of the solvent into 
the matrix and more efficient mass transfer, resulting in higher extraction yields in a shorter 
period of time, as well as requiring a reduced amount of solvent (Zielinski et al. 2021).
In PLE, it is possible to operate at high temperatures, where the solubility of the target 
compounds and the desorption kinetics of the matrix are increased. However, although 

43
Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing
one of the advantages of this technique is to adjust process parameters aiming at the selec­
tivity to a specific group of compounds, the use of high temperatures can lead to the degra­
dation of anthocyanins during the extraction process, requiring finding a balance between 
degradation kinetics and extraction efficiency (Silva et al. 2017).
Benvenutti et al. (2022) compared PLE methods using water, ethanol, and DES for extract­
ing anthocyanins from jabuticaba peel. DES formulations, particularly choline chloride 
and propylene glycol (ChCl:Pro) and choline chloride and malic acid (ChCl:Ma), yielded 
significantly higher anthocyanin content under optimal conditions: 47% solvent concen­
tration, 90°C temperature, and 5.3 mL/min flow rate, with cyanidin concentrations up to 
three times higher than conventional solvents.
This combination underscores the potential of PLE with aqueous DES solutions to opti­
mize anthocyanin extraction from plant sources, offering improved efficiency and higher 
anthocyanin concentrations compared to traditional methods.
2.4.2.3  Supercritical Fluids Extraction
SFE is preferable for thermally unstable and easily oxidizable compounds that may be lost 
due to thermal degradation, such as example anthocyanins. In this process, supercritical 
fluids (at the critical point between liquid and vapor) are employed to extract the desired 
components from a matrix, whether solid or liquid (Silva et al. 2017).
Supercritical carbon dioxide (CO2) is a nonpolar solvent and therefore can be used to remove 
nonpolar components, reducing interference from unwanted substances; however, its low 
polarity makes it unsuitable for extracting polar compounds like anthocyanins, necessitat­
ing the use of polar modifiers. Ethanol and methanol are the most commonly used modifiers 
for extracting bioactive compounds (Chemat et al. 2019). These modifiers are added in small 
quantities, and it becomes necessary to understand the thermodynamics and kinetics of the 
extraction process to ensure better selectivity and reduce the possibility of co-extraction of 
non-target compounds, such as waxes (Essien, Young & Baroutian 2020).
In this sense, the choice of solvent is crucial during the extraction of anthocyanins by this 
method; typically, a mixture of CO2, ethanol, and water is used. It is essential to adjust the 
ratio between ethanol and water to ensure the best solubility of anthocyanins in supercriti­
cal CO2, taking into account specific pressure and temperature conditions (Silva et al. 2017).
Among other advantages, extraction with supercritical fluids contributes to the inhi­
bition of natural enzymes that degrade anthocyanins; and the extracts obtained by this 
method are recognized for complying with environmental regulations and are considered 
safe for human consumption (GRAS) (Silva et al. 2017).
2.4.2.4  Pulsed Electric Field
PEF technology is a non-thermal technique investigated in food processing, which 
involves the application of high-voltage electricity pulses to foods positioned between 
two electrodes for a short period of time. Higher intensity fields are more effective in 
microbial inactivation, while low to medium-intensity fields, with short treatment times, 
have been employed to enhance mass transfer in solid foods (Zhang et al. 2019; Zielinski 
et al. 2021), which is advantageous for extracting compounds located within cells such as 
anthocyanins.
Due to the electropermeabilization mechanism, PEF has proven to be a sustainable and 
green extraction technology, providing positive environmental impacts in food processing. 
One of the main advantages of this technology, besides avoiding temperature increase, is 

44
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
the reduction in solvent usage during extraction and shorter processing time, enabling a 
decrease in the consumption of natural resources and solvents (Bocker & Silva 2022).
2.4.2.5  High-Voltage Electrical Discharge
High-voltage electrical discharge (HVED) emerges as an alternative non-thermal tech­
nique, proving to be effective, ecological, and with great potential to enhance the extrac­
tion of bioactive compounds from food by-products. This technique operates based on 
generating discharges through a high local electric field. By applying high voltage through 
an aqueous solution contained in a treatment chamber between two submerged electrodes, 
the propagation of various electrons occurs. The result is the formation of high-pressure 
shock waves and cavitation phenomena leading to cell rupture and disintegration, conse­
quently increasing mass transfer (El Kantar et al. 2023).
Díaz-Álvarez et al. (2022) showed that HVED treatment enhances mass transfer rates 
in conventional extraction processes. They observed modifications in blueberry cell walls 
treated with HVED, resulting in increased anthocyanin content by 64.66% compared to 
untreated samples. Additionally, HVED reduced exposure times and energy consumption 
while achieving positive cell permeabilization rates at high operational frequencies, high­
lighting its effectiveness in improving anthocyanin extraction.
A comparative analysis of various anthocyanin extraction techniques from different 
plant sources reveals distinct performance characteristics (Table 2.1).
In Summary, the UAE showed superior anthocyanin recovery in H. sabdariffa calyx 
(Pinela et al. 2019), while Homogenization-Assisted Extraction (HAE) was more effective 
for jabuticaba peel (Albuquerque et al. 2020). The PLE offered shorter extraction times and 
reduced solvent usage, despite fewer anthocyanins of blackberry were obtained in some 
cases compared to conventional methods (Machado et al. 2015). The SFE demonstrated 
higher selectivity and effectiveness, particularly for juçara residues Garcia-Mendoza et al. 
(2017). And, the PEF technology and HVED showed promise in enhancing anthocyanin 
extraction efficiency while minimizing environmental impact (Medina-Meza & Barbosa-
Cánovas 2015).
These findings underscore the importance of selecting solvents and appropriate extrac­
tion techniques tailored to specific plant sources and desired outcomes.
2.5  Strategies to Improve the Stability of Anthocyanins
Exploring methods to make anthocyanins more stable is important for in-depth research 
into the functional properties of anthocyanins and their industrial application in food. 
Effective strategies that can reduce the degradation of anthocyanins include, for example, 
acylation, co-pigmentation, metal complexation, and self-association (Table 2.2).
2.5.1  Acylation
Acylation emerges as an efficient method for preserving the stability and color inten­
Anthocyanins modified through acylation display intricate patterns of glycosylation and 
sity of anthocyanins. The introduction of acyl groups shields anthocyanins against 
hydrophilic elements and external factors, and contributes to heightened stability. 

45
Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing
TABLE 2.1
Comparison of Anthocyanin Extraction Techniques from Different Plant Sources
Resource
Processing Method
Extract Type
Temperature
Time
Main Findings
Reference
Hibiscus sabdariffa calyx
UAE and HAE
Hydroethanolic
∼30°C
26–30 min
The UAE method significantly 
outperformed HAE in anthocyanin 
recovery, yielded 51.76 mg/g of dry 
residue, whereas HAE yielded only 
20.86 mg/g of dry residue.
Pinela et al. 
(2019)
Jabuticaba (Myrciaria 
jaboticaba (Vell.) O. 
Berg.) peel
UAE and HAE
Hydroethanolic
∼47°C
21–24 min
Anthocyanin recovery from jabuticaba 
peel was higher in HAE, yielded 
76 ± 1 mg TAC/g while UAE yielded 
32 ± 1 mg TAC/g. HAE proved more 
effective and selective than UAE.
Albuquerque 
et al. (2020)
Blackberry (Rubus 
fruticosus L.) residues
PLE, Soxhlet, and 
maceration.
Hydroethanolic 
and methanolic
at room temperature 
– 100°C
30 min–24 h
PLE yielded fewer anthocyanins 
(1.02 mg/g) than Soxhlet (1.68 mg/g) 
and maceration (1.21 mg/g). 
However, it's preferred for its shorter 
extraction time (30 min vs. 5 and 24 h) 
and lower solvent use (from 40 g/g 
and 20 g/g to 18 g/g)
Machado et al. 
(2015)
Juçara (Euterpe edulis 
Mart.) residues
PLE, SFE, UAE, 
Soxhlet, and ABE
Ethanolic, 
Hydroethanolic, 
aqueous,
40–80°C
45 min–6 h
In pressurized liquid extraction, 
acidified water (pH 2.0) at 40°C 
yielded the most anthocyanins, with 
SFE (6.2 mg/g dr) outperforming PLE 
(1.76 mg/g dr). Both methods showed 
potential for juçara residue 
anthocyanin extraction over low-
pressure methods.
Garcia-
Mendoza et al. 
(2017)
Grapes (Vitis vinifera L.) 
peel and plums 
(Prunus domestica var. 
Casselman) peel
PFE, UAE, and 
water extraction.
Aqueous
3–70°C
58 µs–1 h
PEF with larger chamber diameter was 
effective for grape skin anthocyanin 
extraction, while 50°C ultrasound 
yielded higher plum skin anthocyanin 
yields, both surpassing conventional 
water extraction at 70°C.
Medina-Meza 
and Barbosa-
Cánovas 
(2015).
Note:	 UAE: ultrasound-assisted extraction; HAE: heat-assisted extraction; PLE: pressurized liquid extraction; SFE: supercritical fluids extraction; ABE: agitated bed 
extraction; PFE: pulsed electric field.

46
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
acylation, which can be achieved via both chemical and enzymatic acylation. These acyl­
ated derivatives exhibit superior stability and solubility in organic solvents compared to 
their non-acylated counterparts. Acylation serves as a principal avenue for augmenting 
the polarity and molecular size of anthocyanins while altering their spatial configuration. 
Factors such as the active site of acylation and the types and quantities of acyl groups exert 
influence over the acylation process (Cai et al. 2022; Luo et al. 2022).
Notably, anthocyanins bearing multiple acyl groups demonstrate enhanced stabilization 
compared to those with a singular acyl group. Polyacylated derivatives, associated with 
peonidin and cyanidin from purple-fleshed sweet potatoes, showcase superior bioavail­
ability and resistance to pH fluctuations, highlighting their efficacy in maintaining color 
the red and blue in varied pH environments. (Oliveira et al. 2019). Furthermore, hydro­
gen bonding and electrostatic interactions bolster the stability of anthocyanin interactions 
with pectin in acidic conditions, facilitating stability during gastrointestinal simulation 
(Koh, Xu & Wicker 2020).
The acylated anthocyanins, particularly those featuring diacylated groups and disac­
charides of paeoniflorin derivatives, exhibit prolonged stability during storage, underscor­
ing their more favorable against environmental stressors such as high temperatures, pH 
variations, light exposure, and oxygen presence (Quan et al. 2019).
2.5.1.1  Chemical Acylation
Chemical acylation represents a viable strategy for enhancing anthocyanin stability 
(Table 2.2). The selection of suitable acylating agents, catalysts, and reaction conditions 
significantly affects the success of chemical acylation processes. Aliphatic carbonyl acids, 
including acetic acid, oxalic acid, heptane acid, and lauric acid, are commonly employed as 
acylating agents under optimized conditions (Xu et al. 2017).
The primary mechanism in acylation is the stacking interaction (π) between the acyl 
group and the chromophore under acidic conditions. The cis-trans configuration plays a 
pivotal role in acylation, with cis-isomers offering substantial protection against hydration 
(Moloney et al. 2018; Sigurdson, Tang & Mónica Giusti 2018). Anthocyanin modification, 
particularly through increasing the carbon chain length of aliphatic carbonyls, has dem­
onstrated enhanced resistance against high temperatures and intense light. This process 
contributes to color enhancement, thus expanding the applicability of anthocyanins in 
various industries (Xu et al. 2017).
Despite its efficacy, chemical acylation presents certain limitations such as low selectiv­
ity, environmental concerns, and uncertainty regarding the acylated structure. Challenges 
include the precise acylation of specific hydroxyl group positions and the potential suppres­
sion of antioxidant capacity due to indiscriminate binding to phenolic hydroxyl groups. 
Compared to enzymatic acylation, chemical acylation struggles more with producing spe­
cific acylation products (Cai et al. 2022). Therefore, enzymatic acylation is considered a 
more efficient method than chemical acylation for increasing anthocyanin stabilization in 
application.
2.5.1.2  Enzymatic Acylation
Enzymatic acylation represents a vital biochemical avenue dependent on activated acyl 
donors such as fatty acids and aromatic acids. Efficient enzymatic acylation necessitates 
suitable conditions including the presence of acyl-COA, acyl glucose, optimized pH, con­
trolled temperature, and ample energy. Acylase serves as a catalyst directing the acylation 

47
Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing
(Continued)
TABLE 2.2
Examples of Anthocyanin Association from Diverse Sources
Source
Acylation Type
Acylate
Acyl Donor
Catalyst
Outcome
Reference
Purple-fleshed 
sweet potato
Chemical acylation
Peonidin-3-(6′-hydroxybenzoyl)-
sophoroside-5-glucoside; peonidin-3-
(6′-hydroxybenzoyl-6″-caffeoyl) 
-sophoroside-5-glucoside
p-hydroxybenzoic 
acid, caffeic acid
None
Higher capacity in retaining 
the red and blue colors at 
acidic and basic pH values
Oliveira et al. 
(2019)
Blueberry
Chemical acylation
Malvidin-3-glucoside; cyanidin-3-
glucoside; and delphinidin-3-
glucoside
Blueberry pectin
None
Increased stability at pH 4.0, 
and stability of anthocyanins 
after simulated 
gastrointestinal digestion
Koh, Xu and 
Wicker (2020)
Purple-fleshed 
sweet potato
Chemical acylation
Peonidin 3-p-hydroxybenzoyl 
sophoroside-5-glucoside, peonidin 
3-feruloyl sophoroside-5-glucoside, 
peonidin 3-caffeoyl sophoroside-
5-glucoside, peonidin dicaffeoyl 
sophoroside-5-glucoside, peonidin 
3-caffeoyl-p-hydroxybenzoyl 
sophoroside5-glucoside and peonidin 
caffeoyl-feruloyl sophoroside-5-
glucoside.
p-hydroxybenzoic 
acid, ferulic acid or 
caffeic acid or 
glucosylated with 
glucose, or 
sophorose
None
The PFSPAs were more stable 
during storage
Quan et al. 
(2019)
Blueberry
Chemical acylation
Blueberry anthocyanin
acetic acid, oxalic 
acid, heptane acid, 
and lauric acid
None
Increased stability of acylated 
blueberry anthocyanin on 
temperature and light
Xu et al. (2017)
Red cabbage
Chemical acylation
Cyaniding (3,3′,4′,5,7-
pentahydroxyflavylium)
hydroxycinnamic 
acids
None
Improved color stabilizing, 
and an improved resistance 
against the long-term color 
loss in mildly alkaline 
conditions
Moloney et al. 
(2018)
Asian eggplant 
and Black goji
Chemical acylation
cis and trans p-coumaroylated isomers 
of delphinidin-3-rutinoside-5-
glucoside (Dp-3-rut-5-glu) (Pt-3-rut-5-
glu) and trans p-coumaroylated 
derivatives of petunidin-3-rutinoside-
5-glucoside (Pt-3-rut-5-glu)
Alkaline 
saponification
None
Cis acylation reduced 
hydration across pH, 
increasing color intensity, 
while trans acylation 
generally improved color 
retention over time
Sigurdson, Tang 
and Mónica 
Giusti (2018)

48
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
(Continued)
Blackcurrant
Enzymatic 
acylation
Monoacylated derivatives of 
anthocyanins
Lauric acid
Novozym 
435 lipase
The half-life extended
Yang et al. 
(2019)
Black Rice
Enzymatic 
acylation
cyanidin-3-(6′′-benzoyl)- glucoside, 
cyanidin 3-(6′′- salicyloyl)-glucoside, 
and cyanidin-3-(6′′-cinnamoyl)- 
glucoside
Benzoic acid 
methyl ester
Salicylic acid 
methyl ester
Cinnamic acid 
methyl ester
Novozym 
435 lipase
Improved half-life to resist 
thermal and light
Yan et al. 
(2016)
Alpine 
bearberry
Enzymatic 
acylation
Cyanidin-3-O-(6′′-dodecanoyl) 
galactoside
Lauric acid
Novozym 
435 lipase
Increased thermal stability, 
lipophilicity, color 
enhancement, inhibition of 
lipid peroxidation, and light 
resistivity of anthocyanin
Yang et al. 
(2018)
CO-PIGMENTATION
Source
Association 
Mechanism
Types of Anthocyanins
Co-Pigments
Outcome
Reference
Blueberry juice
Intermolecular 
co-pigmentation
Peonidin-3-glucoside
Gallic acid
Color saturation and anthocyanins stability
Zhang et al. 
(2020)
Purple corn
Intermolecular 
co-pigmentation
C-glycosyl flavones
citric acid
Better stability and significantly longer 
half-lives (up to 50% longer)
Chatham, 
Howard and 
Juvik (2020)
Black 
chokeberry
Intermolecular 
co-pigmentation
Cyanidin-3-O-galactoside and cyanidin-
3-O-arabinoside
rosmarinic acid, 
syringic acid, and 
catechin
Hyperchromic effect most significant, 
magnification of color intensity and 
decrease of color hue, both related to a 
more pleasant color
Klisurova 
et al. (2019)
Açai fruit
Intermolecular 
co-pigmentation
cyanidin-3-rutinoside and cyanidin-
3-glucoside
flavone-C-
glycosides
Increased anthocyanin color and stability
Pacheco-
Palencia 
(2010)
Cabernet 
Sauvignon 
grape
Intermolecular 
co-pigmentation
malvidin- 3-glucoside
caffeic acid
Increased stability to anthocyanin solutions 
under the storage conditions evaluated
Gris et al. 
(2007)
TABLE 2.2  (Continued)
Examples of Anthocyanin Association from Diverse Sources
Source
Acylation Type
Acylate
Acyl Donor
Catalyst
Outcome
Reference

49
Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing
Grape juice
Intermolecular 
co-pigmentation
delphinidin 3,5-diglucoside, cyanidin 
3,5-diglucoside, Petunidin 
3,5-diglucoside, Peonidin 
3,5-diglucoside, Malvidin 
3,5-diglucoside
ascorbic acid
Increased anthocyanin retention, decreased 
ascorbic degradation and antioxidant 
capacity when compared to control juices
Pozo-Insfran 
et al. (2007)
Strawberry 
purees
Intermolecular 
co-pigmentation
pelargonidin-3-glucoside, 
pelargonidin-3-rutinoside and 
cyanidin-3-glucoside
sinapic acid
Improved the stability and the resistance 
of anthocyanins in HPP samples during 
storage to degradation
Terefe, Netzel 
and Netzel 
(2019)
Grape
Intramolecular 
co-pigmentation
delphinidin-3-O-glucoside, Cyanidin-
3-O-glucoside, Petunidin-3-O-
glucoside, Peonidin-3-O-glucoside, 
Malvidin-3-O-glucoside
ferulic acid, D-
gluconic acid, 
caffeic acid, and 
vanillic acid
Increased the light and heat stability of 
anthocyanins and exhibit satisfactory 
antioxidant activity
He et al. (2018)
Purple carrot 
extracts
Intermolecular 
co-pigmentation
cyanidin-3-xylosyl(glucosyl) 
galactoside
L-phenylalanine; 
Ltyrosine; 
L-tryptophan; and 
ε-poly-L-lysine
The half-life: increased more than double
Cheng et al. 
(2017)
Muscadine 
grape (juice 
and wine)
Intermolecular 
co-pigmentation
3,5-diglucosides
formononetin, 
biochanin A, and 
prunetin
Color improvement and anthocyanin 
stability was observed in the wines 
during storage
Talcott, Peele 
and Brenes 
(2005)
Sorghum
Intermolecular 
co-pigmentation
3-deoxyanthocyandins, luteolinidin 
and apigeninidin and their 
methoxylated derivatives
tannic, ferulic, and 
O-coumaric acids 
and rutin
Enhanced color stability of pigments
Awika (2008)
Hydrangea 
sepals
Metal 
complexation
delphinidin
Al3+
Promoted the formation of blue and 
stabilized
Schreiber, 
Swink and 
Godsey (2010)
Not related
Metal 
complexation
cyanin, deoxyanthocyanidin, and 
luteolinidin
Al3+
Stabilized the blue ionized quinoidal base 
avoiding its degradation by reaction with 
oxygen
Moncada et al. 
(2003)
TABLE 2.2  (Continued)
Examples of Anthocyanin Association from Diverse Sources
CO-PIGMENTATION
Source
Association 
Mechanism
Types of Anthocyanins
Co-Pigments
Outcome
Reference
(Continued)

50
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Red pears 
(D′Anjou)
Metal 
complexation
Not related
Stannous (Sn) ion,
Resulted in stable red pigments
Ngo and Zhao 
(2009)
Grape skin
Metal complexation Not related
Montmorillonite, 
a synthetic 
nonswelling mica 
and silica
Enhanced stability against visible light 
irradiation
Kohno et al. 
(2009)
lderberry, black 
currant, red 
cabbage, and 
purple carrot
Metal complexation Not related
ferric ions
Improvement thermal and storage stability
Buchweitz 
et al. (2013)
Grape
Metal complexation Not related
Fe2+ and Fe3+
Were shown to synergistically affect the 
color spectra (effect on bathochromic and 
hyperchromic) of grape anthocyanins at 
varying pHs
Celli et al. 
(2018)
Standard 
substance
Metal complexation delphinidin-3-O-glucoside, cyanidin-
3-O-glucoside, pelargonidin-3-O-
glucoside
Fe3+
Enhanced thermal stability
Tachibana, 
Kimura and 
Ohno (2014)
Purple potato
Metal complexation cyanidin and peonidin
K+, Ca2+, Mg2+, 
Zn2+, Cu2+, Fe2+, 
and Al3+
Hyperchromic effect and bathochromic
Li et al. (2016)
Red wine (Vitis 
vinifera L.)
Self-association
malvidin-3-O-glucoside (mv3glc) and 
malvidin-3-O-(6- coumaroylglucoside)
Coumaric acid 
residue
Improvement anthocyanin color 
stabilization
Fernandes 
et al. (2015)
Wine
Self-association
3-glucosides, malvidin, delphinidin,` 
and peonidin
Not related
Influence on the apparent hydration 
constant of the anthocyanins with 
subsequent modification in the color
González-
Manzano 
et al. (2008)
Note:	 PFSPAs: purple-fleshed sweet potato anthocyanins; HPP: high-pressure processing.
TABLE 2.2  (Continued)
Examples of Anthocyanin Association from Diverse Sources
CO-PIGMENTATION
Source
Association 
Mechanism
Types of Anthocyanins
Co-Pigments
Outcome
Reference

51
Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing
reaction toward specific molecular targets, thereby enhancing catalytic efficiency under 
mild conditions (Cai et al. 2022).
Recent studies affirm the benefits of enzymatic acylation, highlighting improvements 
in thermal stability, lipophilicity, color enhancement, and inhibition of lipid peroxidation. 
Aromatic acids and their derivatives significantly enhance the thermal stability and light 
resistance of anthocyanins, particularly when employed with biocatalysts like Novozym 
435 (Yan et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2018).
Investigations into enzymatic acylation of blackcurrant and black rice anthocyanins 
demonstrate superior thermal stability and resistance to light and heat in acylated deriva­
tives compared to with the original anthocyanins, also known as parental anthocyanins 
(Yan et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2019). These findings underscore the potential of enzymatic 
acylation to bolster the stability and resistance of anthocyanins, thereby expanding their 
utility across various applications.
2.5.2  Copigmentation Effect
Copigmentation stands out as a pivotal and efficient approach aimed at fortifying antho­
cyanins against adverse conditions, including high temperatures, intense light exposure, 
and oxygen presence, thereby stabilizing these compounds (Table 2.2). This process entails 
the formation of molecular associations or complexes between anthocyanins and other 
colorless organic compounds or metal ions, resulting in color change or intensification, 
aimed at anthocyanin structural stability (Cavalcanti et al. 2011; Enaru et al. 2021; Cai et al. 
2022; Chen et al. 2022).
For a molecule to function as a co-pigment, it must fulfill two essential criteria: (1) It must 
possess sufficiently extensive π-conjugated systems conducive to π-π stacking interaction. 
(2) It must feature hydrogen bridge donor/acceptor groups such as OH and C=O groups. 
Consequently, a solution containing anthocyanins in the presence of a co-pigment typi­
cally exhibits significantly more intense coloration than theoretically anticipated for the 
medium’s pH value. It’s worth noting that the phenomenon of co-pigmentation is contin­
gent upon pH levels, with increased pH potentially leading to anthocyanin degradation 
and subsequent reduction in color intensity (Enaru et al. 2021).
The stability of co-pigmented complexes is susceptible to thermal degradation, wherein 
high temperatures may either have negligible effects on the co-pigmentation mechanism 
or yield counterproductive outcomes. For instance, co-pigmentation with compounds like 
ferulic acid or sinapic acid, or exposure to heat treatments at specific temperatures and 
durations, can accelerate anthocyanin degradation (Enaru et al. 2021).
The interaction between anthocyanins and co-pigments varies based on the nature 
and concentration of these compounds, resulting in diverse shades and intensities 
of color. While co-pigments may be colorless in isolation, their combination with 
anthocyanins induces a hyperchromic effect and batochromic shift in the absorption 
spectrum, leading to increased light absorption. The constituents of these pigments 
encompass a wide array of compounds, including alkaloids, amino acids, nucleotides, 
organic acids, flavonoids, metals, and even other anthocyanins (Castañeda-Ovando 
et al. 2009; Escribano-Bailón & Santos-Buelga 2012; Molaeafard et al. 2021; Oliveira 
et al. 2021).
The efficacy of co-pigmentation is profoundly influenced by the steric arrangement 
and size of the co-pigmented substance, with a planar structure being more conducive to 
stabilizing the flavylium ion, thereby facilitating a more efficient co-pigmentation effect 
(Escribano-Bailón & Santos-Buelga 2012).

52
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
An exemplary study involving model beverages demonstrated that the introduction of a 
flavone-rich extract into samples containing cyanidin- and pelargonidin-based anthocya­
nins resulted in an increase of up to 50% in the half-life of these anthocyanins, indicating 
significantly improved stability (Chatham, Howard & Juvik 2020). In addition, Klisurova 
et al. (2019) observed improvements in color and stability after analyzing various co-
pigments for black chokeberry anthocyanins. It was found that the addition of herbal 
extracts induced a significant hyperchromic effect, even at much lower dosages compared 
to the pure co-pigments.
The interaction of anthocyanins present in wines, juices, and fruit-based products with 
phenolic cofactors has been associated with color enhancement and the stability of these 
pigments. Pacheco-Palencia and Talcott (2010) investigated the influence of the addition of 
polyphenolic cofactors on the phytochemical and color stability of anthocyanins in açaí fruit. 
The results indicated that flavone-C-glucoside acts as a color enhancer and stabilizing agent.
In this sense, Zhang et al. (2020) evaluated the influence of adding the co-pigment GA on 
the stability of anthocyanin and the color of blueberry juice. The findings revealed that the 
incorporation of GA resulted in a more pronounced crimson hue, enhanced color satura­
tion, and improved stability of anthocyanins in the blueberry juice. Therefore, the addition 
of GA could serve as processing technique to produce juices with superior color quality 
and stable anthocyanin content.
Gris et al. (2007) conducted a study on co-pigmentation in Cabernet Sauvignon grape 
extracts. The spectrophotometric results revealed an interaction between the crude 
anthocyanin extract and caffeic acid, suggesting a co-pigmentation phenomenon. It was 
observed that the addition of caffeic acid significantly increased the stability of the antho­
cyanins. Furthermore, the introduction of partially purified co-pigments intensified the 
color of muscadine grape juice, improved antioxidant activity, and minimized phytochem­
ical losses during processing and storage under high hydrostatic pressure (HHP) (Pozo-
Insfran et al. 2007).
In summary, co-pigmentation has emerged as a promising strategy to enhance the 
stability and color of anthocyanins, with significant implications for the food and bever­
age industry. Anthocyanins can interact with co-pigments through diverse mechanisms, 
which vary based on the nature of the co-pigment involved. An association between antho­
cyanins and colorless co-pigments is called intermolecular co-pigmentation. Additionally, 
intramolecular associations occur when there is interaction between the chromophore and 
non-chromophore regions within the same molecule. Another mode of interaction involves 
anthocyanidin nuclei or their interaction with aromatic acyl groups, which is known as 
self-association. Consequently, both intramolecular and intermolecular co-pigmentation, 
metal complexation, and self-association serve as effective strategies for bolstering antho­
cyanin stability (Cavalcanti et al. 2011; Cao et al. 2021; Enaru et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022).
2.5.2.1  Intramolecular and Intermolecular Co-Pigmentation
Intramolecular co-pigmentation is a process where the anthocyanidin’s chemical structure 
interacts with a co-pigment that is inherently part of the anthocyanin. This interaction is 
facilitated by the alignment of the aromatic acyl fragments of the acylated anthocyanins 
with the anthocyanidins’ core structure. The structural attributes of the anthocyanins play 
a crucial role in determining the effectiveness of this interaction. Moreover, the sugar pres­
ent in the anthocyanin structure serves as a bridge between the anthocyanin framework 
and the acyl segment. This arrangement allows the molecule to adjust its position so that 
the aromatic acyl group can interact with the π system of the planar pyrrole ring, thereby 

53
Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing
shielding it from a nucleophilic attack by water. The creation of sandwich-like structures, 
where the anthocyanin core is nestled between two acyl segments, leads to the effective 
stabilization of anthocyanin pigments. This phenomenon is pronounced in anthocyanins 
possessing two or more aromatic acyl segments necessary for forming such complexes 
(Enaru et al. 2021; Cai et al. 2022).
In contrast, intermolecular co-pigmentation frequently manifests in red wines. This 
phenomenon arises from van der Waals interactions, hydrophobic effects, and hydro­
gen bonding, facilitating a non-covalent interplay between anthocyanin molecules and 
co-pigments. These interactions contribute to the wine’s purple hues and deeper color 
through two mechanisms: the hyperchromic and batochromic effects. The alteration in 
color is attributed to conformational changes in the anthocyanin chromatophore, which 
prevents hydration reactions, ultimately increasing the ratio between the flavylium cation 
(red color) and the quinonoid base (purple color). This interaction is pivotal in safeguard­
ing against bleaching during light and heat treatments, essential for specific product pro­
duction (Malien-Aubert, Dangles & Amiot 2001).
Terefe et al. (2019) found that the co-pigmentation of anthocyanins in strawberry puree 
with sinapic acid led to a notable improvement in degradation resistance and antioxidant 
capacity under conditions of high pressure and thermal processing. Moreover, intramo­
lecular co-pigmentation showed a beneficial effect on the stability and hyperchromicity of 
anthocyanins from Vitis amurensis Rupr (He et al. 2018). The inclusion of flavonoids, poly­
phenols, amino acids, peptides, and proteins to co-pigmentation can enhance the storage 
stability and prolong the shelf life of foods containing anthocyanins (Cheng et al. 2017).
In a distinct investigation, Talcott et al. (2005) demonstrated that isoflavonoids sourced 
from red clover (Trifolium pratense) bolster the overall color and stability of anthocyanin 
3,5-diglycosides present in muscadine grape juice and wine (Vitis rotundifolia) via intermo­
lecular co-pigmentation reactions. Awika (2008) delved into the impact of common phe­
nolic co-pigments, including tannic, ferulic, and o-coumaric acids, as well as rutin, on the 
stability and behavior of six 3-deoxyanthocyanins. The findings unveiled that phenolic 
compounds offer heightened color stability, with substitutions at C-5 emerging as piv­
otal determinants for the general characteristics of 3-deoxyanthocyanidins. These find­
ings underscore the importance of these compounds in maintaining color and stability in 
products such as grape juices and wines. Understanding these mechanisms can contribute 
to improving the quality and stability of food products.
2.5.2.2  Metal Complexation
Metal complexation is a widely utilized technique in the food industry to enhance the 
stability of anthocyanins, thereby preserving the vibrant color of food products. Through 
the coordination of metal cations, such as iron ions, with anthocyanins, the distribution 
of non-localized electrons in the pyrylium ring is modulated, resulting in profound color 
effects. The most intense color effects are observed when co-pigmentation occurs, with 
two positively charged metal ion protons or +2 or +3 valence metals being simultaneously 
captured by anthocyanins that have catechol or pyrogallol in the B ring. Examples of these 
anthocyanins include cyanidin, petunidin, delphinidin, and their derivatives. The metal 
ions commonly involved in this process are sodium (Na+), iron (Fe 2+/3+), aluminum (Al3+), 
magnesium (Mg2+), and zinc (Zn2+). This complexation process not only stabilizes anthocy­
anins but also improves their thermal and storage stability, thus contributing to prolonged 
shelf life and enhanced product quality (Table 2.2) (Cavalcanti et al. 2011; Enaru et al. 2021; 
Cai et al. 2022).

54
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
In addition, studies suggest that the blue color observed in some plants is the result of 
the interaction between anthocyanins and metals. For instance, it is proposed that the 
interaction between anthocyanins and molybdenum contributes to the stabilization of the 
blue coloration in Hindu cabbage tissue (Muhammad & Saad 2016). Studies indicate that 
the combination of o-dihydroxy anthocyanins and Fe3+ or Mg2+ ions in a solution with 
pH = 5 leads to the development of the blue hue in plants. This occurs under specific con­
ditions, particularly when the stoichiometric ratio between anthocyanin and Fe3+ is 1:6 
(Castañeda-Ovando et al. 2009; Cortez et al. 2017).
In a separate study, Schreiber et al. (2010) explored the chemical mechanism of Al3+ com­
plexation with delphinidin. They proposed a two-step process: initially, the production 
of the blue quinoidal base anion from delphinidin occurs, which complexes with Al3+. 
Subsequently, this complex is stabilized by the π-π stacking of a second delphinidin, act­
ing as a flavilium cation on top of the blue complex. This process results in a bathochromic 
change in the spectral signature of the cation and intensifies the blue color. These findings 
are in line with the data of Moncada et al. (2003), who demonstrated that complexation with 
Al3+ stabilizes the ionized blue quinoidal base, preventing its degradation by reaction with 
oxygen. Ngo and Zhao (2009) reported that the use of an aqueous formula composed of stan­
nous, formaldehyde, hydrochloric acid, and tannic acid, followed by steam heating at a tem­
perature of 73°C, resulted in the anchoring and stabilization of red pigments in pear peels.
Additionally, Kohno et al. (2009) reported that incorporating natural anthocyanins into 
montmorillonite significantly enhanced their stability in an alkaline environment and 
under visible light exposure. This improved stability was ascribed to both electrostatic 
interactions between the intercalated dye and the montmorillonite surface and the safe­
guarding effect against atmospheric oxygen. Consequently, the intercalated and stabilized 
anthocyanin emerges as a promising candidate for eco-friendly dye applications.
In particular, iron ions (Fe3+ and Fe2+) have been found to exert a significant stabiliz­
ing effect on anthocyanins present in various foods and beverages. Their interaction with 
anthocyanins leads to the formation of stable complexes, characterized by hyperchromic 
properties, which enhance color retention and overall product quality (Buchweitz et al. 
2013; Celli and Su Ling Brooks 2017). Tachibana et al. (2014) showed that the addition of 
chondroitin sulfate, alginate, and low-methoxylated pectin to the anthocyanin Fe3+ com­
plex can effectively contribute to the synergistic effect on the hyperchromic displacement 
of cyanidin-3-O-glucoside and delphinidin-3-O-glucoside. Additionally, favorable hyper­
chromic effects have been observed in metal complexation systems involving other cations 
such as K+, Ca2+, Mg2+, Zn2+, Cu2+, Fe2+ and Al3 in conjunction with anthocyanin-rich sources 
like purple sweet potato (Li et al. 2016).
Therefore, metal chelation represents a significant strategy for stabilizing anthocyanins 
present in fruit-derived products such as juices and wines. Enrichment with metals can 
result in an increase in added value, as well as providing a chemical stabilization mecha­
nism, guaranteeing nutritional and sensory quality to the products obtained.
2.5.3  Self-Association
Self-association is an effective strategy for increasing the stability of anthocyanins, 
allowing them to form bonds with two or more other anthocyanin molecules (Table 2.2). 
Anthocyanin molecules have been observed to form bonds with each other, particularly 
when their concentration exceeds 0.1 mM. These self-association complexes, stabilized by 
hydrophobic interactions within their aromatic cores, exhibit a chiral structure reminis­
cent of left-handed screws (Cavalcanti et al. 2011; Enaru et al. 2021; Cai et al. 2022).

55
Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing
Various factors, including anthocyanin concentration, types, and positions within the B 
ring, as well as the presence of glucose at the C3 or C5 position, influence the formation 
and stability of these complexes. The weaker associations observed at the C3’ position and 
stronger interactions at the C5’ position. Furthermore, methoxyl substitutions at both the 
C3’ and C5’ positions significantly augment self-association and color intensity (Cai et al. 
2022). Notably, acylated anthocyanins demonstrate a heightened propensity for self-
association, leading to increased interaction and the formation of hydrophobic π-π com­
plexes (Fernandes et al. 2015).
In the context of red and blackberry wine models, the chromogenic mechanism primar­
ily involves self-association, positively impacting coloration and stabilization processes. 
Leveraging self-association in extract concentration and purification procedures can con­
tribute to natural stabilization, particularly when combined with pH adjustment tech­
niques (González-Manzano et al. 2008).
Self-association can therefore be used as an effective strategy in extract concentration 
and/or purification procedures. In this context, it is possible that an interaction occurs 
between the anthocyanins themselves. When associated with other factors, such as pH 
adjustment, this interaction can contribute significantly to the natural stabilization process.
2.6  Industrial Applications
Anthocyanins, renowned for their natural pigment attributes, are increasingly being incor­
porated into diverse food formulations. Beyond augmenting polyphenol intake, the inte­
gration of anthocyanins aims to enhance product acceptability, extend shelf life, and avert 
spoilage risks. This strategic utilization can elevate products to functional foods, thereby 
amplifying their health-promoting properties and addressing apprehensions surrounding 
the safety of synthetic food colors (Martins et al. 2016; Xiong et al. 2019; Echegaray et al. 2022).
In a study by Papillo et al. (2018), the addition of anthocyanin-rich extracts of Italian black 
rice (Oryza sativa L., var. Artemide) to baked cookies was examined. Employing hydroal­
coholic extracts enriched with anthocyanins and stabilized through either spray-drying or 
freeze-drying methods, notable enhancements in both anthocyanin (between 194 and 230 µg/g 
cookie) content and antioxidant (482–595 vs 283 µg TE/g cookie) capacities were observed 
in fortified cookies compared to control samples. Similar outcomes were documented by 
Maner et al. (2017) following the incorporation of wine grape pomace powder into cookie 
formulations, resulting in enriched color (2.03–3.51 mg/g in the samples with extract vs 
0.16 mg/g in the control sample), heightened antioxidant activity, and improved organoleptic 
attributes. In a similar vein, López et al. (2019) noted that the inclusion of an anthocyanin-
rich extract of Arbutus unedo L. concurrently enhanced antioxidant activity and provided a 
more appealing color in baked wafers. These studies collectively underscore the potential of 
anthocyanin-rich extracts to enhance the nutritional and sensory attributes of bakery items.
Pasqualone et al. (2013) investigated the efficacy of grape pomace extract in enhanc­
ing the anthocyanin content and color intensity of cookies. Their findings revealed that 
incorporating a freeze-dried extract not only increased the anthocyanin content but also 
intensified the reddish hue of the cookies compared to the control samples. Additionally, 
Albuquerque et al. (2020) conducted a study focusing on enriching macarons with extracts 
derived from jaboticaba epicarp (Myrciaria jaboticaba (Vell.) Berg). Their results demon­
strated that this enrichment led to a more stable color over a six-day period, surpassing 

56
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
the performance of the commercial colorant E136. Similarly, Sui (2017) demonstrated the 
enhanced resistance to lipid oxidation in cookies enriched with anthocyanins from black 
rice extract powder (at concentrations of 2% and 4%) compared to those containing the 
synthetic additive butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA).
Moreover, a study on gluten-free tortillas and cookies revealed that the integration of 
black bean seed husk extracts into nixtamalized corn flour enhanced the color of the end 
products. The results showed significant improvements in color without notable effects on 
texture. The authors noted that the inclusion of 3 g of extract per kg of dough maintained 
the dough’s rheological and functional properties. However, an addition of 7 g of extract/
kg of dough, some rheological changes were observed. Notably, both scenarios retained 
approximately 60% of the bioactive compounds (Chávez-Santoscoy et al. 2016).
Wallace and Giusti (2008) noted that incorporation of 20 mg of Cy-3-glu from blueberry 
powder (Berberis boliviana L.) per 100 g of yogurt resulted in products exhibiting a color remi­
niscent of commercial blueberry yogurt. Remarkably, the color remained stable over the ini­
tial two-month period, and the products maintained high phenolic stability, irrespective of 
the fat matrix. In a subsequent study, Karaaslan et al. (2011) enhanced yogurts with extracts 
from various grape types (Cabernet Sauvignon, Chardonnay, Shyrah, and Merlot) and grape 
tissue callus, both of which are rich in phenolic compounds and anthocyanins (1 mL of acidi­
fied extract for every 100 mL of yogurt). The yogurts produced had superior anthocyanin 
content and antioxidant capacity compared to the control yogurts. Notably, yogurts fortified 
with white grape extracts had a reduced phenolic compound content.
In relation to a dairy product like kefir, Montibeller et al. (2018) discovered that fortify­
ing with anthocyanins from grape skins served as a natural colorant. The enhanced kefir 
preserved over 50% of the total anthocyanins for the first 27 days and approximately 67% 
on the 16th day. However, it is crucial to acknowledge that the content of each anthocyanin 
gradually decreased during storage to varying extents. Particularly, peonidin-3-glucoside 
exhibited the highest stability, retaining 87% of its anthocyanins by day 16, while delphin­
idin-3-bglucoside decreased to 50% by day 12. Interestingly, kefir made with these natural 
colorant exhibited properties akin to kefir without additives.
Choi et al. (2017) engineered a smart film that acts as a pH indicator, where they affixed 
the anthocyanin extract derived from purple sweet potato to a starch agar base. This film 
was utilized to track the pH alterations in pork samples, with the hues fluctuating at dis­
tinct pH levels, signifying spoilage. The film’s color, which transitions from red to green, 
can signal the spoilage of pork as the pH shifts.
Consequently, enhancing the control of factors that influence the stability of anthocyanins, 
coupled with a high level of selectivity and reduced production expenses, is of utmost sig­
nificance. This presents a promising avenue for future investigations aimed at bolstering the 
stability of anthocyanins, given their association with numerous health advantages.
2.7  Conclusion
The stability of anthocyanins during food processing is a crucial issue for the food industry, 
as these bioactive compounds play a significant role in promoting health. The data discussed 
here has provided a deeper understanding of the factors that affect the stability of these 
pigments during the various stages of processing. Indicating that the proper selection of 
processing methods, temperature control, pH, and the presence of other food components 

57
Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing
can play a crucial role in preserving the beneficial properties of anthocyanins. Therefore, the 
identification of effective strategies to minimize the degradation of these compounds during 
processing opens the door to the development of healthier and more nutritious foods.
We therefore conclude that this chapter contributes to the advancement of scientific 
knowledge at the intersection of food processing technology and bioactive compounds, 
which have the potential not only to improve the quality of processed foods but also to offer 
additional health benefits to consumers, paving the way for the development of healthier 
and more sustainable food products that meet the growing demands for functional foods.
References
Albuquerque, Bianca R., José Pinela, Lillian Barros, M. Beatriz P.P. Oliveira, and Isabel C.F.R. Ferreira. 
2020. “Anthocyanin-Rich Extract of Jabuticaba Epicarp as a Natural Colorant: Optimization 
of Heat- and Ultrasound-Assisted Extractions and Application in a Bakery Product.” Food 
Chemistry 316 (June). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2020.126364
Aramwit, Pornanong, Nipaporn Bang, and Teerapol  Srichana. 2010. “The Properties and Stability 
of Anthocyanins in Mulberry Fruits.” Food Research International 43 (4): 1093–97. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodres.2010.01.022
Askar, Kahtan A., Zabarjad H. Alsawad, and Moayad N. Khalaf. 2015. “Evaluation of the pH and 
Thermal Stabilities of Rosella Anthocyanin Extracts under Solar Light.” Beni-Suef University 
Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences 4 (3): 262–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bjbas.2015.06.001
Awika, Joseph M. 2008. “Behavior of 3-Deoxyanthocyanidins in the Presence of Phenolic 
Copigments.” Food Research International 41 (5): 532–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.
2008.03.002
Benvenutti, Laís, Acácio Antonio Ferreira Zielinski, and Sandra Regina Salvador Ferreira. 2022. 
“Pressurized Aqueous Solutions of Deep Eutectic Solvent (DES): A Green Emergent Extraction 
of Anthocyanins from a Brazilian Berry Processing By-Product.” Food Chemistry: X 13. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fochx.2022.100236
Bocker, Ramon, and Eric Keven Silva. 2022. “Pulsed Electric Field Assisted Extraction of Natural Food 
Pigments and Colorings from Plant Matrices.” Food Chemistry: X 15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fochx.2022.100398
Brouillard, Raymond, and Bernard Delaporte. 1977. “Chemistry of Anthocyanin Pigments. 2. 
Kinetic and Thermodynamic Study of Proton Transfer, Hydration, and Tautomeric Reactions 
of Malvidin 3-Glucoside.” Journal of the American Chemical Society 26: 8461–68. https://doi.
org/10.1021/ja00468a015 
Brownmiller, C., L.R. Howard, and R.L. Prior. 2008. “Processing and Storage Effects on Monomeric 
Anthocyanins, Percent Polymeric Color, and Antioxidant Capacity of Processed Blueberry 
Products.” Journal of Food Science 73: H72–79. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-3841.2008.00761.x
Buchweitz, M., J. Brauch, R. Carle, and D. R. Kammerer. 2013. “Colour and Stability Assessment of 
Blue Ferric Anthocyanin Chelates in Liquid Pectin-Stabilised Model Systems.” Food Chemistry 
138 (2–3): 2026–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2012.10.090
Cai, Dongbao, Xusheng Li, Jiali Chen, Xinwei Jiang, Xiaoqiang Ma, Jianxia Sun, Lingmin Tian, et al. 
2022. “A Comprehensive Review on Innovative and Advanced Stabilization Approaches of 
Anthocyanin by Modifying Structure and Controlling Environmental Factors.” Food Chemistry 
366 (January). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2021.130611
Cao, Qiqi, Jianwen Teng, Baoyao Wei, Li Huang, and Ning Xia. 2021. “Phenolic Compounds, 
Bioactivity, and Bioaccessibility of Ethanol Extracts from Passion Fruit Peel Based on Simulated 
Gastrointestinal Digestion.” Food Chemistry 356 (May 2020): 129682. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodchem.2021.129682

58
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Castañeda-Ovando, Araceli, Ma de Lourdes Pacheco-Hernández, Ma Elena Páez-Hernández, José 
A. Rodríguez, and Carlos Andrés Galán-Vidal. 2009. “Chemical Studies of Anthocyanins: A 
Review.” Food Chemistry. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2008.09.001
Cavalcanti, Rodrigo N., Diego T. Santos, and Maria Angela A. Meireles. 2011. “Non-Thermal 
Stabilization Mechanisms of Anthocyanins in Model and Food Systems—An Overview.” Food 
Research International 44 (2): 499–509. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2010.12.007
Celli, Giovana B., Michael J. Selig, Chen Tan, and Alireza Abbaspourrad. 2018. “Synergistic 
Bathochromic and Hyperchromic Shifts of Anthocyanin Spectra Observed Following 
Complexation with Iron Salts and Chondroitin Sulfate.” Food and Bioprocess Technology 11 (5): 
991–1001. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11947-018-2055-z
Celli, Giovana Bonat, and Marianne Su Ling Brooks. 2017. “Impact of Extraction and Processing 
Conditions on Betalains and Comparison of Properties with Anthocyanins — A Current 
Review.” Food Research International 100 (October): 501–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.
2016.08.034
Chatham, Laura A., Jay E. Howard, and John A. Juvik. 2020. “A Natural Colorant System from 
Corn: Flavone-Anthocyanin Copigmentation for Altered Hues and Improved Shelf Life.” Food 
Chemistry 310 (April). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2019.125734
Chávez-Santoscoy, Rocio A., Janet A. Gutiérrez-Uribe, Sergio O. Serna-Saldivar, and Esther Perez-
Carrillo. 2016. “Production of Maize Tortillas and Cookies from Nixtamalized Flour Enriched 
with Anthocyanins, Flavonoids and Saponins Extracted from Black Bean (Phaseolus Vulgaris) 
Seed Coats.” Food Chemistry 192 (July): 90–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2015.06.113
Chemat, Farid, Maryline Abert-Vian, Anne Sylvie Fabiano-Tixier, Jochen Strube, Lukas Uhlenbrock, 
Veronika Gunjevic, and Giancarlo  Cravotto. 2019. “Green Extraction of Natural Products. 
Origins, Current Status, and Future Challenges.” TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry 118. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.trac.2019.05.037
Chemat, Farid, Natacha Rombaut, Anne-Gaëlle Sicaire, Alice Meullemiestre, Anne-Sylvie Fabiano-
Tixier, and Maryline Abert-Vian. 2017. “Ultrasound Assisted Extraction of Food and Natural 
Products. Mechanisms, Techniques, Combinations, Protocols and Applications. A Review.” 
Ultrasonics Sonochemistry 34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ultsonch.2016.06.035
Chen, Yanpei, Tarun Belwal, Yanqun Xu, Quan Ma, Dong Li, Li, Hang Xiao, and Zisheng Luo. 2022. 
“Updated Insights into Anthocyanin Stability Behavior from Bases to Cases: Why and Why 
Not Anthocyanins Lose during Food Processing.” Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition. 
Taylor and Francis Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2022.2063250
Cheng, Jing, Jian Hua Liu, Govindarajan Prasanna, and Pu Jing. 2017. “Spectrofluorimetric and 
Molecular Docking Studies on the Interaction of Cyanidin-3-O-Glucoside with Whey Protein, 
β-Lactoglobulin.” International Journal of Biological Macromolecules 105 (December): 965–72. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.07.119
Choi, Inyoung, Jun Young Lee, Monique Lacroix, and Jaejoon Han. 2017. “Intelligent PH Indicator 
Film Composed of Agar/Potato Starch and Anthocyanin Extracts from Purple Sweet Potato.” 
Food Chemistry 218 (March): 122–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2016.09.050
Cortez, Regina, Diego A. Luna-Vital, Daniel Margulis, and Elvira Gonzalez de Mejia. 2017. 
“Natural Pigments: Stabilization Methods of Anthocyanins for Food Applications.” 
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety 16 (1): 180–98. https://doi.org/
10.1111/1541-4337.12244
Cunha, Robson, Pollyana Trigueiro, María del Mar Orta Cuevas, Santiago Medina-Carrasco, Thiago 
M. Duarte, Luzia M.de C. Honório, Dihêgo H.L. Damacena, Maria Gardennia Fonseca, 
Edson C. da Silva-Filho, and Josy A. Osajima. 2023. “The Stability of Anthocyanins and Their 
Derivatives through Clay Minerals: Revising the Current Literature.” Minerals. MDPI. https://
doi.org/10.3390/min13020268
D’Alessandro, Leandro Galván, Krasimir Dimitrov, Peggy Vauchel, and Iordan Nikov. 2014. 
“Kinetics of Ultrasound Assisted Extraction of Anthocyanins from Aronia melanocarpa (Black 
Chokeberry) Wastes.” Chemical Engineering Research and Design 92 (10): 1818–26. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cherd.2013.11.020

59
Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing
De Marchi, Laura, Laura Salemi, Maria Bellumori, Roberto Chignola, Federica Mainente, Diana 
Vanessa Santisteban Soto, Ilaria Fierri, Marco Ciulu, and Gianni Zoccatelli. 2024. “Thermal 
Degradation of Red Cabbage (Brassica oleracea L. var. Capitata f. rubra) Anthocyanins in a 
Water Model Extract under Accelerated Shelf-Life Testing.” Food Chemistry 440. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2023.138272
Echegaray, Noemí, Paulo E.S. Munekata, Patricia Gullón, Christian K.O. Dzuvor, Beatriz Gullón, 
Francis Kubi, and José M. Lorenzo. 2022. “Recent Advances in Food Products Fortification with 
Anthocyanins.” Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition. Taylor and Francis Ltd. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2020.1844141
Enaru, Bianca, Georgiana Drețcanu, Teodora Daria Pop, Andreea Stǎnilǎ, and Zorița Diaconeasa. 
2021. “Anthocyanins: Factors Affecting Their Stability and Degradation.” Antioxidants. MDPI. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox10121967
Escribano-Bailón M. T., and Celestino Santos-Buelga. 2012. “Anthocyanin Copigmentation-
Evaluation, Mechanisms and Implications for the Colour of Red Wines.” Current Organic 
Chemistry 16 (6): 715–23.
Essien, Sinemobong O., Brent Young, and Saeid Baroutian. 2020. “Recent Advances in Subcritical Water 
and Supercritical Carbon Dioxide Extraction of Bioactive Compounds from Plant Materials.” 
Trends in Food Science and Technology 97: 156–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2020.01.014
Esteve-Turrillas, Francesc A., Salvador Garrigues, and Miguel de la Guardia 2024. “Green Extraction 
Techniques in Green Analytical Chemistry: A 2019–2023 Up-Date.” TrAC Trends in Analytical 
Chemistry 170. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trac.2023.117464
Fang, Zhongxiang, Min Zhang, Yunfei Sun, and Jingcai Sun. 2007. “Polyphenol Oxidase from Bayberry 
(Myrica Rubra Sieb. et Zucc.) and Its Role in Anthocyanin Degradation.” Food Chemistry 103 (2): 
268–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2006.07.044
Farr, Jacob E., and M. Monica Giusti. 2018. “Investigating the Interaction of Ascorbic Acid with 
Anthocyanins and Pyranoanthocyanins.” Molecules 23 (4). https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules
23040744
Fernandes, Ana, Natércia F. Brás, Nuno Mateus, and Victor De Freitas. 2015. “A Study of Anthocyanin 
Self-Association by NMR Spectroscopy.” New Journal of Chemistry 39 (4): 2602–11. https://doi.
org/10.1039/c4nj02339k
Foroutani, Zahra, Mohammad Reza Afshar Mogaddam, Zahra Ghasempour, and Nazila 
Ghareaghajlou. 2024. “Application of Deep Eutectic Solvents in the Extraction of Anthocyanins: 
Stability, Bioavailability, and Antioxidant Property.” Trends in Food Science & Technology 104324. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2023.104324
Garcia-Mendoza, Maria del Pilar, Faber Ariel Espinosa-Pardo, Andressa Mara Baseggio, Gerardo 
Fernández Barbero, Mário Roberto Maróstica Junior, Mauricio Ariel Rostagno, and Julian 
Martínez. 2017. “Extraction of Phenolic Compounds and Anthocyanins from Juçara (Euterpe 
edulis Mart.) Residues Using Pressurized Liquids and Supercritical Fluids.” The Journal of 
Supercritical Fluids 119: 9–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2016.08.014
Giusti, M. Monica, Gonzalo Miyagusuku-Cruzado, and Taylor C. Wallace. 2023. “Flavonoids as 
Natural Pigments.” In: C. Stevens, T. Bechtold, A. Manian & T. Pham. Handbook of Natural 
Colorants. Wiley Online Library. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119811749.ch17
González-Manzano, Susana, Celestino Santos-Buelga, Montserrat Dueñas, Julián C. Rivas-Gonzalo, 
and Teresa Escribano-Bailón. 2008. “Colour Implications of Self-Association Processes of Wine 
Anthocyanins.” European Food Research and Technology 226 (3): 483–90. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00217-007-0560-9
Gris, E. F., E. A. Ferreira, L. D. Falcão, and M. T. Bordignon-Luiz. 2007. “Caffeic Acid Copigmentation 
of Anthocyanins from Cabernet Sauvignon Grape Extracts in Model Systems.” Food Chemistry 
100 (3): 1289–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2005.10.014
Gull, Amir, Mohd Aaqib Sheikh, Jasmeet Kour, Beenish Zehra, Imtyaz Ahmad Zargar, Altaf Ahmad 
Wani, Surekha Bhatia, and Mushtaq Ahmad Lone. 2022. “Chapter 18 – Anthocyanins.” In: 
Kour, J. & Nayik, G.A. Nutraceuticals and Health Care. Academic Press, 317–29. https://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-323-89779-2.00018-1

60
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
He, Jian, and Steven J Schwartz. 2008. “Isolation of Anthocyanin Mixtures from Fruits and Vegetables 
and Evaluation of Their Stability, Availability and Biotransformation in The Gastrointestinal 
Tract.” http://rave.ohiolink.edu/etdc/view?acc_num=osu1222108733
He, Yang, Liankui Wen, Hansong Yu, Fei Zheng, Zhitong Wang, Xuanwei Xu, Hao Zhang, et al. 
2018. “Effects of High Hydrostatic Pressure-Assisted Organic Acids on the Copigmentation 
of Vitis amurensis Rupr Anthocyanins.” Food Chemistry 268 (December): 15–26. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.06.052
Hou, Zhaohua, Peiyou Qin, Yan Zhang, Songhuan Cui, and Guixing Ren. 2013. “Identification of 
Anthocyanins Isolated from Black Rice (Oryza sativa L.) and Their Degradation Kinetics.” Food 
Research International: 691–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2011.07.037
Karaaslan, Mehmet, Mustafa Ozden, Hasan Vardin, and Huseyin Turkoglu. 2011. “Phenolic 
Fortification of Yogurt Using Grape and Callus Extracts.” LWT 44 (4): 1065–72. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.lwt.2010.12.009
Kara, Şelale, and Emine Alben Erçelebi. 2013. “Thermal Degradation Kinetics of Anthocyanins and 
Visual Colour of Urmu Mulberry (Morus nigra L.).” Journal of Food Engineering 116 (2): 541–47. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2012.12.030
Kim, Ah-Na, Kyo-Yeon Lee, Bo Gyeong Kim, Si Won Cha, Eun Ji Jeong, William L. Kerr, and Sung-Gil 
Choi. 2021. “Thermal Processing under Oxygen–Free Condition of Blueberry Puree: Effect on 
Anthocyanin, Ascorbic Acid, Antioxidant Activity, and Enzyme Activities.” Food Chemistry 342. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2020.128345
Klisurova, Daniela, Ivalina Petrova, Manol Ognyanov, Yordan Georgiev, Maria Kratchanova, and 
Petko Denev. 2019. “Co-Pigmentation of Black Chokeberry (Aronia Melanocarpa) Anthocyanins 
with Phenolic Co-Pigments and Herbal Extracts.” Food Chemistry 279 (May): 162–70. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.11.125
Koh, Jeewon, Zhimin Xu, and Louise Wicker. 2020. “Blueberry Pectin and Increased Anthocyanins 
Stability under in Vitro Digestion.” Food Chemistry 302 (January). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodchem.2019.125343
Kohno, Yoshiumi, Reina Kinoshita, Shuji Ikoma, Keiko Yoda, Masashi Shibata, Ryoka Matsushima, 
Yasumasa Tomita, Yasuhisa Maeda, and Kenkichiro Kobayashi. 2009. “Stabilization of Natural 
Anthocyanin by Intercalation into Montmorillonite.” Applied Clay Science 42 (3–4): 519–23. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clay.2008.06.012
Li, Xiao Ding, Jie Li, Meng Wang, and Hong Jiang. 2016. “Copigmentation Effects and Thermal 
Degradation Kinetics of Purple Sweet Potato Anthocyanins with Metal Ions and Sugars.” 
Applied Biological Chemistry 59 (1): 15–24. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13765-015-0140-9
Liu, Jinning, Yunbing Tan, Hualu Zhou, Jorge L. Muriel Mundo, and David Julian McClements. 
2019. “Protection of Anthocyanin-Rich Extract from pH-Induced Color Changes Using Water-
in-Oil-in-Water Emulsions.” Journal of Food Engineering 254: 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jfoodeng.2019.02.021
López, Cecilia Jiménez, Cristina Caleja, M. A. Prieto, Marina Sokovic, Ricardo C. Calhelha, Lillian 
Barros, and Isabel C.F.R. Ferreira. 2019. “Stability of a Cyanidin-3-O-Glucoside Extract Obtained 
from Arbutus unedo L. and Incorporation into Wafers for Colouring Purposes.” Food Chemistry 
275 (March): 426–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.09.099
Loypimai, Patiwit, Anuchita Moongngarm, and Pheeraya Chottanom. 2016. “Thermal and pH 
Degradation Kinetics of Anthocyanins in Natural Food Colorant Prepared from Black Rice 
Bran.” Journal Food Science Technology 53: 461–70. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13197-015-2002-1
Luo, Xiu’er, Ruoyong Wang, Jinhua Wang, Ying Li, Huainan Luo, Shi Chen, Xin’an Zeng, and 
Zhong Han. 2022. “Acylation of Anthocyanins and Their Applications in the Food Industry: 
Mechanisms and Recent Research Advances.” Foods. MDPI. https://doi.org/10.3390/foods
11142166
Machado, Ana Paula Da Fonseca, José Luis Pasquel-Reátegui, Gerardo Fernández Barbero, and 
Julian Martínez. 2015. “Pressurized Liquid Extraction of Bioactive Compounds from Blackberry 
(Rubus fruticosus L.) Residues: A Comparison with Conventional Methods.” Food Research 
International 77: 675–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2014.12.042

61
Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing
Malien-Aubert, C., O. Dangles, and M. J. Amiot. 2001. “Color Stability of Commercial Anthocyanin-
Based Extracts in Relation to the Phenolic Composition. Protective Effects by Intra- and 
Intermolecular Copigmentation.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 49 (1): 170–76. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/jf000791o
Maner, Salama, Ajay Kumar Sharma, and K. Banerjee. 2017. “Wheat Flour Replacement by Wine 
Grape Pomace Powder Positively Affects Physical, Functional and Sensory Properties of 
Cookies.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences India Section B - Biological Sciences 87 (1): 
109–13. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40011-015-0570-5
Markakis, Pericles 1982. “Chapter 6 – Stability of Anthocyanins in Foods.” In: Markakis, P. 
Anthocyanins as Food Colors. Academic Press, 163–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
472550-8.50010-X
Martins, Natália, Custódio Lobo Roriz, Patricia Morales, Lillian Barros, and Isabel C.F.R. Ferreira. 
2016. “Food Colorants: Challenges, Opportunities and Current Desires of Agro-Industries to 
Ensure Consumer Expectations and Regulatory Practices.” Trends in Food Science and Technology. 
Elsevier Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2016.03.009
Mehmet, Özkan. 2002. “Degradation of Anthocyanins in Sour Cherry and Pomegranate Juices by 
Hydrogen Peroxide in the Presence of Added Ascorbic Acid.” Food Chemistry, 78(4), 499-504. 
www.elsevier.com/locate/foodchem.
Mercadante, Adriana Zerlotti 2018. “Capítulo 7 – Pigmentos Naturais.” In: Lajolo, F. M. and 
Mercadante, A. Z. Química e Bioquímica dos Alimentos. Rio de Janeiro: Ed. Atheneu, Vol. 2, 251–59.
Medina-Meza, Ilce Gabriela, and Gustavo V. Barbosa-Cánovas. 2015. “Assisted Extraction of Bioactive 
Compounds from Plum and Grape Peels by Ultrasonics and Pulsed Electric Fields.” Journal of 
Food Engineering: 268–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2015.06.012
Molaeafard, Shahrbanu, Rashid Jamei, and Ahmad Poursattar Marjani. 2021. “Co-Pigmentation of 
Anthocyanins Extracted from Sour Cherry (Prunus cerasus L.) with Some Organic Acids: Color 
Intensity, Thermal Stability, and Thermodynamic Parameters.” Food Chemistry 339 (March). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2020.128070
Moloney, Micheal, Rebecca J. Robbins, Tom M. Collins, Tadao Kondo, Kumi Yoshida, and Olivier 
Dangles. 2018. “Red Cabbage Anthocyanins: The Influence of D-Glucose Acylation by 
Hydroxycinnamic Acids on Their Structural Transformations in Acidic to Mildly Alkaline 
Conditions and on the Resulting Color.” Dyes and Pigments 158 (November): 342–52. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.dyepig.2018.05.057
Moncada, Margarida C., Sara Moura, M. João Melo, Ana Roque, Carlos Lodeiro, and Fernando Pina. 
2003. “Complexation of Aluminum(III) by Anthocyanins and Synthetic Flavylium Salts: A 
Source for Blue and Purple Color.” Inorganica Chimica Acta 356 (December): 51–61. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0020-1693(03)00394-3
Montibeller, Maria Jara, Patric de Lima Monteiro, Diego Santiago Tupuna-Yerovi, Alessandro de 
Oliveira Rios, and Vitor Manfroi. 2018. “Stability Assessment of Anthocyanins Obtained from 
Skin Grape Applied in Kefir and Carbonated Water as a Natural Colorant.” Journal of Food 
Processing and Preservation 42 (8). https://doi.org/10.1111/jfpp.13698
Muhammad, Muhammad Riaz, and Zia-Ul-Haq Bashar Saad. 2016. “Anthocyanins and Human 
Health: Biomolecular and Therapeutic Aspects.” http://www.springer.com/series/10203
Muhlack, Richard A., Ravichandra Potumarthi, and David W. Jeffery. 2018. “Sustainable Wineries 
through Waste Valorisation: A Review of Grape Marc Utilisation for Value-Added Products.” 
Waste Management 72: 99–118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2017.11.011
Ngo, Thao, and Yanyun Zhao. 2009. “Stabilization of Anthocyanins on Thermally Processed Red 
D’Anjou Pears through Complexation and Polymerization.” LWT 42 (6): 1144–52. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.lwt.2009.02.013
Nikkhah, E, M Khayamy, R Heidari, and R Jamee. 2007. “Effect of Sugar Treatment on Stability of 
Anthocyanin Pigments in Berries.” Journal of Biological Sciences 8: 1412–17.
Oancea, Simona. 2021. “A Review of the Current Knowledge of Thermal Stability of Anthocyanins and 
Approaches to Their Stabilization to Heat.” Antioxidants 10 (9): 1337. https://doi.org/10.3390/
antiox10091337

62
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Oliveira, Hélder, Nuno Basílio, Fernando Pina, Iva Fernandes, Victor de Freitas, and Nuno Mateus. 
2019. “Purple-Fleshed Sweet Potato Acylated Anthocyanins: Equilibrium Network and 
Photophysical Properties.” Food Chemistry 288 (August): 386–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodchem.2019.02.132
Oliveira, Joana, Joana Azevedo, Natércia Teixeira, Paula Araújo, Victor De Freitas, Nuno Basílio, and 
Fernando Pina. 2021. “On the Limits of Anthocyanins Co-Pigmentation Models and Respective 
Equations.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 69 (4): 1359–67. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.jafc.0c05954
Pacheco-Palencia, Lisbeth A., Palo Hawken, and Stephen T. Talcott. 2007. “Phytochemical, 
Antioxidant and Pigment Stability of Açai (Euterpe Oleracea Mart.) as Affected by Clarification, 
Ascorbic Acid Fortification and Storage.” Food Research International 40 (5): 620–28. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodres.2006.11.006
Pacheco-Palencia, Lisbeth A., and Stephen T. Talcott. 2010. “Chemical Stability of Açai Fruit 
(Euterpe Oleracea Mart.) Anthocyanins as Influenced by Naturally Occurring and Externally 
Added Polyphenolic Cofactors in Model Systems.” Food Chemistry 118 (1): 17–25. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2009.02.032
Papillo, Valentina Azzurra, Monica Locatelli, Fabiano Travaglia, Matteo Bordiga, Cristiano Garino, 
Marco Arlorio, and Jean Daniel Coïsson. 2018. “Spray-Dried Polyphenolic Extract from Italian 
Black Rice (Oryza sativa L., Var. Artemide) as New Ingredient for Bakery Products.” Food 
Chemistry 269 (December): 603–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.07.059
Pasqualone, Antonella, Anna Maria Bianco, and Vito Michele Paradiso. 2013. “Production Trials to 
Improve the Nutritional Quality of Biscuits and to Enrich Them with Natural Anthocyanins.” 
CYTA - Journal of Food 11 (4): 301–8. https://doi.org/10.1080/19476337.2012.753113
Patras, A., N.P. Brunton, C. O’Donnell, and B.K. Tiwari. 2010. “Effect of Thermal Processing on 
Anthocyanin Stability in Foods; Mechanisms and Kinetics of Degradation.” Trends in Food 
Science & Technology 21 (1): 3–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2009.07.004
Pinela, J., M.A. Prieto, Eliana Pereira, Inès Jabeur, Maria Filomena Barreiro, Lillian Barros, and 
Isabel C.F.R Ferreira. 2019. “Optimization of Heat- and Ultrasound-Assisted Extraction of 
Anthocyanins from Hibiscus sabdariffa Calyces for Natural Food Colorants.” Food Chemistry 275: 
309–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.09.118
Pozo-Insfran, D. Del, A. Del Follo-Martinez, S. T. Talcott, and C. H. Brenes. 2007. “Stability of 
Copigmented Anthocyanins and Ascorbic Acid in Muscadine Grape Juice Processed by High 
Hydrostatic Pressure.” Journal of Food Science 72 (4). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-3841.2007.
00316.x
Quan, Wei, Wei He, Mei Lu, Bo Yuan, Maomao Zeng, Daming Gao, Fang Qin, Jie Chen, and Zhiyong 
He. 2019. “Anthocyanin Composition and Storage Degradation Kinetics of Anthocyanins-
Based Natural Food Colourant from Purple-Fleshed Sweet Potato.” International Journal of Food 
Science and Technology 54 (8): 2529–39. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijfs.14163
Rawson, A., A. Patras, B.K. Tiwari, F. Noci, T. Koutchma, and N. Brunton. 2011. “Effect of Thermal 
and Non Thermal Processing Technologies on the Bioactive Content of Exotic Fruits and Their 
Products: Review of Recent Advances.” Food Research International 44 (7): 1875–87. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodres.2011.02.053
Rigolon, Thaís Caroline Buttow, Larissa Lorrane Rodrigues Borges, Amanda Lais Alves Almeida 
Nascimento, Janaina Gonçalves Fernandes, João Carlos Bouzas Marins, Evandro Martins, 
Pedro Henrique Campelo, and Paulo César Stringheta. 2024. “Study of the Stability of 
Hydroelectrolytic Sports Beverages Enriched With Phenolic Extract from Jaboticaba Peel 
or Blueberry Pulp.” Food and Humanity 2. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foohum.2023.100214
Rodríguez-Mena, Azucena, Luz Araceli Ochoa-Martínez, Silvia Marina González-Herrera, Olga 
Miriam Rutiaga-Quiñones, Rubén Francisco González-Laredo, Begoña Olmedilla-Alonso, and 
Sandra Vega-Maturino. 2023. “Coloring Potential of Anthocyanins from Purple Sweet Potato 
Paste: Ultrasound-Assisted Extraction, Enzymatic Activity, Color and Its Application in Ice 
Pops.” Food Chemistry Advances 3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.focha.2023.100358

63
Stability of Anthocyanins during Food Processing
Romero-Díez, R., M. Matos, L. Rodrigues, M.R. Bronze, S. Rodríguez-Rojo, M.J. Cocero, and 
A.A. Matias. 2019. “Microwave and Ultrasound Pre-Treatments to Enhance Anthocyanins 
Extraction from Different Wine Lees.” Food Chemistry 272: 258–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodchem.2018.08.016
Schreiber, Henry D., Amy M. Swink, and Taylor D. Godsey. 2010. “The Chemical Mechanism for 
Al3+ Complexing with Delphinidin: A Model for the Bluing of Hydrangea Sepals.” Journal of 
Inorganic Biochemistry 104 (7): 732–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2010.03.006
Sendri, Nitisha, Sarvpreet Singh, Shriya Bhat, Mahesh Gupta, and Pamita Bhandari. 2023. “Insight 
into the Influence of Oxygen, Sunlight and Temperature on the Stability and Color Attributes of 
Red Cabbage Anthocyanins and in Vitro Gastrointestinal Behaviour.” Food Chemistry Advances 
3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.focha.2023.100359
Silva, S., E.M. Costa, C. Calhau, R.M. Morais, and M.E. Pintado. 2017. “Anthocyanin Extraction from 
Plant Tissues: A Review.” Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 57 (14): 3072–83. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2015.1087963
Sigurdson, Gregory T., Peipei Tang, and M. Mónica Giusti. 2018. “Cis-Trans Configuration of 
Coumaric Acid Acylation Affects the Spectral and Colorimetric Properties of Anthocyanins.” 
Molecules 23 (3). https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules23030598
Sui, Xiaonan. 2017. Impact of Food Processing on Anthocyanins. Springer Theses. Singapore: Springer 
Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-2612-6
Tachibana, Noriko, Yukihiro Kimura, and Takashi Ohno. 2014. “Examination of Molecular 
Mechanism for the Enhanced Thermal Stability of Anthocyanins by Metal Cations and 
Polysaccharides.” Food Chemistry 143: 452–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2013.
08.017
Talcott, Stephen T., Janelle E. Peele, and Carmen H. Brenes. 2005. “Red Clover Isoflavonoids as 
Anthocyanin Color Enhancing Agents in Muscadine Wine and Juice.” Food Research International 
38 (10): 1205–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2005.05.004
Terefe, Netsanet Shiferaw, Gabriele A. Netzel, and Michael E. Netzel. 2019. “Copigmentation with 
Sinapic Acid Improves the Stability of Anthocyanins in High-Pressure-Processed Strawberry 
Purees.” Journal of Chemistry 2019. https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/3138608
Trouillas, Patrick, Juan C. Sancho-García, Victor De Freitas, Johannes Gierschner, Michal Otyepka, 
and Olivier Dangles. 2016. “Stabilizing and Modulating Color by Copigmentation: Insights 
from Theory and Experiment.” Chemical Reviews 116 (9): 4937–82. ttps://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
chemrev.5b00507.
Tsai, P. J., L. Delva, T. Y. Yu, Y. T. Huang, and L. Dufossé. 2005. “Effect of Sucrose on the Anthocyanin 
and Antioxidant Capacity of Mulberry Extract during High Temperature Heating.” Food 
Research International 38: 1059–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2005.03.017
Wallace, T. C., and M. M. Giusti. 2008. “Determination of Color, Pigment, and Phenolic Stability 
in Yogurt Systems Colored with Nonacylated Anthocyanins from Berberis boliviana L. as 
Compared to Other Natural/Synthetic Colorants.” Journal of Food Science 73 (4). https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1750-3841.2008.00706.x
Wang, Wenjie, Jooyeoun Jung, Elizabeth Tomasino, and Yanyun Zhao. 2016. “Optimization of 
Solvent and Ultrasound-Assisted Extraction for Different Anthocyanin Rich Fruit and Their 
Effects on Anthocyanin Compositions.” LWT – Food Science and Technology 72: 229–38. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2016.04.041
Xiong, Yun, Pangzhen Zhang, Robyn Dorothy Warner, and Zhongxiang Fang. 2019. 
“3-Deoxyanthocyanidin Colorant: Nature, Health, Synthesis, and Food Applications.” 
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety. Blackwell Publishing Inc. https://doi.
org/10.1111/1541-4337.12476
Xu, Qing, Yuanjing Zhou, Liping Luo, Zhu Huang, Fei Nie, and Guilong Gao. 2017. “Acylation of 
Blueberry Anthocyanins with Aliphatic Carbonyl Acids and Their Stability Analysis.” In 2017 
6th International Conference on Energy and Environmental Protection (ICEEP 2017) (pp. 904–907). 
Atlantis Press.

64
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Yan, Zheng, Chunyang Li, Lixia Zhang, Qin Liu, Shiyi Ou, and Xiaoxiong Zeng. 2016. “Enzymatic 
Acylation of Anthocyanin Isolated from Black Rice with Methyl Aromatic Acid Ester as Donor: 
Stability of the Acylated Derivatives.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 64 (5): 1137–43. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.5b05031
Yang, Wei, Maaria Kortesniemi, Xueying Ma, Jie Zheng, and Baoru Yang. 2019. “Enzymatic 
Acylation of Blackcurrant (Ribes nigrum) Anthocyanins and Evaluation of Lipophilic Properties 
and Antioxidant Capacity of Derivatives.” Food Chemistry 281 (May): 189–96. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.12.111
Yang, Wei, Maaria Kortesniemi, Baoru Yang, and Jie Zheng. 2018. “Enzymatic Acylation of 
Anthocyanins Isolated from Alpine Bearberry (Arctostaphylos alpina) and Lipophilic Properties, 
Thermostability, and Antioxidant Capacity of the Derivatives.” Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry 66 (11): 2909–16. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.7b05924
Yao, Liang, Jiang Xu, Liwei Zhang, Tao Zheng, Lei Liu, and Lei Zhang. 2021. “Physicochemical 
Stability-Increasing Effects of Anthocyanin via a Co-Assembly Approach with an Amphiphilic 
Peptide.” Food Chemistry 362 (November). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2021.130101
Zannou, Oscar, Ilkay Koca, Turki M.S. Aldawoud, and Charis M. Galanakis. 2020. “Recovery and 
Stabilization of Anthocyanins and Phenolic Antioxidants of Roselle (Hibiscus sabdariffa L.) 
with Hydrophilic Deep Eutectic Solvents.” Molecules 25 (16): 3715. https://doi.org/10.3390/
molecules25163715
Zhang, Zhi-Hong, Lang-Hong Wang, Xin-An Zeng, Zhong Han, and Charles S. Brennan. 2019. “Non-
Thermal Technologies and Its Current and Future Application in the Food Industry: A Review.” 
International Journal off Food Science and Technology 54: 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijfs.13903
Zhang, Lingli, Wenbo Wang, Xueyang Yue, Guang Sheng Wu, Pengxiang Yue, and Xueling Gao. 
2020. “Gallic Acid as a Copigment Enhance Anthocyanin Stabilities and Color Characteristics in 
Blueberry Juice.” Journal of Food Science and Technology 57 (4): 1405–14. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13197-019-04175-w
Zielinski, Acácio Antonio Ferreira, Andrea del Pilar Sanchez-Camargo, Laís Benvenutti, Diego 
Márlon Ferro, Jônatas Lopes Dias, Sandra Regina Salvador Ferreira. 2021. “High-Pressure 
Fluid Technologies: Recent Approaches to the Production of Natural Pigments for Food and 
Pharmaceutical Applications.” Trends in Food Science & Technology 118: 850–69. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tifs.2021.11.008
Žilić, Slađana, Tolgahan Kocadağlı, Jelena Vančetović, and Vural Gökmen. 2016. “Effects of Baking 
Conditions and Dough Formulations on Phenolic Compound Stability, Antioxidant Capacity 
and Color of Cookies Made from Anthocyanin-Rich Corn Flour.” LWT – Food Science and 
Technology 65: 597–603. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2015.08.057

65
3
Encapsulation of Anthocyanins – Insights on 
Technological Strategies to Increase Its Stability 
during Food Processing and Digestion
Carolina Marques Mandaji, Matheus Ismael Gomes Rodrigues, 
and Renan Campos Chisté
3.1  Introduction
Anthocyanins constitute one of the groups of natural pigments responsible for the blue, 
purple, and red colors in the plant kingdom. They play an important role in attracting ani­
mals, promoting seed dispersal, pollination, and helping to protect plants from damages 
induced by ionizing radiation, such as ultraviolet (Smeriglio et al., 2016). Moreover, this 
group of pigments has functional properties and potential benefits to human health. The 
regular intake of anthocyanins, as part of healthy food habits, is associated with a reduced 
risk of developing chronic non-communicable diseases (Rosales et al., 2023).
Generally, the absorption of anthocyanins in vivo mainly depends on their stability and 
bioavailability in different cells and organs. Under the acidic pH gastric environment, 
anthocyanins are in a stable flavylium cation form, while they are rapidly converted to 
the unstable hemiketal, chalcone, or quinoidal base forms under neutral or alkaline pH 
conditions in the small intestine and colon. The gut microbiota is involved in anthocy­
anin metabolism and produces phenolic acids from the unstable forms of anthocyanidins. 
Thus, the bioavailability of anthocyanins is partially limited due to their susceptibility to 
chemical alterations and affinity for different cells (Shen et al., 2022).
Despite the remarkable functional properties, the incorporation of anthocyanins into 
food or pharmaceutical formulations by industrial sectors are challenging, as their color 
and stability are highly affected by the processing conditions, such as pH changes, temper­
ature increase, light exposure, presence of copigments, self-association, presence of metal­
lic ions, enzymatic reactions, and presence of oxygen and ascorbic acid (Cavalcanti, Santos 
& Meireles, 2011). Therefore, to overcome such limitations, encapsulation rises as a reliable 
strategy to increase the stability of anthocyanins throughout technological processing for 
further application by the interested industries.
Encapsulation is a technique that consists of entrapping active ingredients (solid, liq­
uid, or gas) in polymeric coatings (encapsulating agents), allowing these ingredients to be 
protected from adverse environmental conditions, controlling their release or incorporat­
ing functional properties into food products. Depending on the encapsulation method 
and coating materials, the capsules can assume different sizes: macrocapsules (>5000 μm), 
microcapsules (0.2–5000 μm), and nanocapsules (<0.2 μm) (Mandaji, Pena & Chisté, 2022). 

66
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Different encapsulation methods are known and widely used by the food, cosmetics, 
and pharmaceutical industries, such as spray drying, freeze-drying, and ionic gelation 
(Timilsena, Haque & Adhikari, 2020), being the encapsulation of natural pigments for 
incorporation into food products one of the most commonly practical applications.
In addition to the molecular stability, another advantage of encapsulation is the modula­
tion of the bioaccessibility and bioavailability of anthocyanins through their controlled 
release in the human body, attributed to different wall materials used to form capsules 
(Rosales & Fabi, 2022). Several applications for microencapsulated anthocyanins in foods 
are known, such as food coloring, an ingredient in formulations to confer potential func­
tional properties to foods due to their antioxidant and antimicrobial activities and their 
application in “intelligent” films to inform food freshness (Shipp & Abdel-Aal, 2010; Leong 
et al., 2021; Santos, da Silva & Leite Neta, 2022).
Therefore, in this chapter, the most common encapsulation methods and coating mate­
rials used for the microencapsulation of anthocyanins will be approached. Additional 
information regarding the bioaccessibility and bioavailability of anthocyanins will also be 
presented as influenced by the different coating materials, followed by some technological 
trends for the application of microencapsulated anthocyanins.
3.2  A Quick Look on Microencapsulation Techniques and the 
Most Used Coating Materials to Encapsulate Anthocyanins
For contextualization purposes, a quick literature search was carried out in Science 
Direct database (Elsevier), with articles published in a one-year period (January/2023 to 
January/2024), accounting for 110 studies, only to illustrate the trends of the most studied 
methods and coating materials used for anthocyanins’ microencapsulation (Figure 3.1). 
These trends showed that the method used for encapsulation might be a determinant fac­
tor when choosing the proper coating material.
Currently, the development of films incorporated with anthocyanins is a hot topic among 
the encapsulation methods, accounting for 29% of the selected studies (Figure 3.1). Many 
of these studies aimed to develop “intelligent” films, so they can be used as indicators of 
food quality since anthocyanins’ molecules undergo structural modifications according to 
pH alteration, which results in visual color change (Figure 3.2). The main choices of coat­
ing materials to produce films with anthocyanins are not only polysaccharides, such as 
starch, chitosan, and sodium alginate, but also protein materials, such as gelatins and soy 
protein isolates are usually reported (Figure 3.1b). Films produced with anthocyanins as 
part of the formulation have proven to be useful in identifying the freshness of foods such 
as fish, pork, and milk (Francisco et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024).
Spray drying is one of the most popular methods used to microencapsulate anthocy­
anin in the literature (Figure 3.1a), due to its ease of use on industrial scales. This method 
offers simplicity during execution and compatibility with a wide range of coating materi­
als, which allows the production of encapsulated bioactive compounds with high stability 
during storage under different conditions, in addition to preserving their biological prop­
erties (Mandaji et al., 2022). Maltodextrin is the most common coating material used for 
encapsulating anthocyanins by spray drying, followed by gum arabic and proteins.
Freeze-drying is another widely used method, which is mainly used to encapsulate heat-
sensitive molecules, such as anthocyanins. During freeze-drying, the aqueous mixture 

67
Encapsulation of Anthocyanins
FIGURE 3.1
The main methods (a) and coating materials (b) used to encapsulate anthocyanins as published in a one-year 
period (Science Direct, jan/2023-jan/2024).
FIGURE 3.2
Structural and color changes of anthocyanins according to pH alteration.

68
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
containing the coating material, and the interested active ingredient, is kept frozen at tem­
peratures below −40°C, followed by drying by sublimation, under low pressure, which 
minimizes thermal degradation during the production of microcapsules/microparticles 
(Mandaji et al., 2021). For comparison purposes, microcapsules/microparticles produced by 
freeze-drying (−50°C) allowed total monomeric anthocyanins retention of 85%, while 71% 
was observed for spray drying at 150°C (Yavuz-Düzgün et al., 2023). Regarding the coat­
ing materials, arabic and xanthan gums, maltodextrin, starch, and proteins are the main 
materials used to produce anthocyanin’s microcapsules/microparticles by freeze-drying.
Other encapsulation methods are also frequently investigated (Figure 3.1a) to produce 
anthocyanins’ microcapsules, namely hydrogel formation, electrospinning, and emulsion. 
Hydrogels have unique technological properties, such as high water content, high per­
meability, and responsiveness to the surrounding environment, which make them ideal 
carriers of bioactive compounds (Moriyama et al., 2023). Hydrogels are formed by sta­
bilization processes, in which an ionic or covalent bond binds polymer chains, limiting 
its mobility until the liquid state is converted into a solid or gel state (Nezamdoost-Sani 
et al., 2024). Sodium alginate is the most widely used material to prepare hydrogels for 
the encapsulation of anthocyanins due to its advantageous properties, such as sensitivity 
to pH alteration, high solubility in water (hydrophilicity), non-toxicity, biodegradability, 
biocompatibility, and high economic efficiency (Hao et al., 2024). Other materials, such as 
chitosan, starch, and pectin are also used to a lesser extent.
Electrospinning involves an electrohydrodynamic process, in which a drop of liquid is 
electrified to generate a conically shaped structure known as a Taylor cone, which goes 
through stretching processes leading to the formation of fibers from a polymer solution 
(Mercante et al., 2024a). In recent decades, electrospinning has been considered an easy 
and efficient approach for manufacturing micro/nanofibers from polymeric solutions, 
which can have diameters of less than 1 μm (Mercante et al., 2024b). These ultra-thin mate­
rials have unique characteristics, such as high surface area to volume, high porosity, and 
high flexibility (Freitas et al., 2024). Most of the studies involving the encapsulation of 
anthocyanins using electrospinning technique involve the development of nanofiber blan­
kets to monitor the freshness based on the same principle shown in Figure 3.2 (Heydarian 
& Shavisi, 2023; Pereira et al., 2023; Karambasti & Shavisi, 2024; Khaledian, Moshtaghi & 
Shahbazi, 2024; Lv et al., 2024).
Finally, an emulsion consists of two immiscible liquids, usually oil and water, with one 
of the liquids being dispersed as small spherical droplets into the other. Emulsions can 
be classified according to the relative spatial distribution of the oil and aqueous phase, 
as follows: oil in water (O/W), water in oil (W/O), water/oil/water (W/O/W), and oil/
water/oil (O/W/O) (Lu, Kelly & Miao, 2016). Part of the studies that used the emulsion 
method to encapsulate anthocyanins aimed to direct the emulsion to another encapsula­
tion technique, such as the formation of hydrogels, films, coacervation, and spray chill­
ing. In general, the development of emulsions increased the encapsulation efficiency of 
anthocyanins, which may produce highly responsive films to pH changes, in addition to 
increase the bioaccessibility of these molecules (Devi, Das & Badwaik, 2023; Figueiredo 
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Ozcan et al., 2023).
Importantly to note, nanoencapsulation rises as an increasing trend in encapsulation 
studies to comprise the possible uses of active ingredients encapsulated in nanometric-
sized capsules (Singh et al., 2023). Nanoencapsulation covers a wide range of encapsulation 
methods, and studies on nanoencapsulation of anthocyanins have included the employ­
ment of emulsions, colloidal particles, liposomes, and electrospinning, which accounted 
about 15% of the selected studies published in the last year in the Science Direct database 

69
Encapsulation of Anthocyanins
(Figure 3.1a). The nanometric size of capsules has some advantages compared to microcap­
sules, such as increased intracellular and intestinal absorption of the active encapsulated 
compounds (Freixo, 2013). Further information regarding the nanoencapsulation of antho­
cyanins was nicely reviewed elsewhere (Rosales & Fabi, 2022).
3.3  The Effect of Encapsulation on Bioaccessibility 
and Bioavailability of Anthocyanins
Bioaccessibility refers to the amount of a given compound that is available for absorption 
in the human gastrointestinal tract, while bioavailability refers to the fraction of these 
compounds that reaches systemic circulation (Nascimento et al., 2023). The term “bioavail­
ability of compounds” includes gastrointestinal digestion (release), absorption, tissue dis­
tribution, metabolism, and excretion. In turn, bioaccessibility is generally determined by 
a digestion procedure that includes several steps: release from the food matrix, conversion 
during digestion conditions, and absorption by intestinal epithelial cells (Karaś et al., 2016).
The digestive process of anthocyanins begins with chewing, where the action of micro­
organisms and enzymes in saliva, together with mechanical breakdown, contributes to 
the release and initial fragmentation of anthocyanins. In the stomach, low pH softens the 
food matrix and favors the release of anthocyanins, which can be absorbed in the gastric 
wall (Nascimento et al., 2023). Subsequently, in the small intestine, the highest absorption 
rates of anthocyanins occur through two mechanisms: (1) through direct absorption of 
the glycosidic form (intact anthocyanin) mediated by sugar transporters, and (2) through 
the action of enzymes, such as β-glucosidase, that promotes its conversion into aglycones 
(anthocyanidins), which are more easily absorbed by passive diffusion through colono­
cytes than anthocyanins, due its higher hydrophobicity (Rosales & Fabi, 2022; Nascimento 
et al., 2023). In the large intestine, the gut microbiota plays a crucial role in the breakdown 
of anthocyanins into metabolites that can be further absorbed or excreted (Nascimento 
et al., 2023). The absorption scheme for anthocyanins is summarized in Figure 3.3.
Both the bioaccessibility and bioavailability of anthocyanins in foods can be carried out 
through in vitro and in vivo tests. Bioaccessibility is generally assessed by in vitro digestion 
procedures, often simulating gastric and small intestinal digestion, sometimes followed 
by cellular uptake determination using Caco-2 cells as a model of the intestinal epithelial 
barrier. In terms of bioavailability, when a claim is made, it must be demonstrated that 
the target component was digested and absorbed efficiently, being the in vivo determina­
tion preferable (Carbonell-Capella et al., 2013; Karaś et al., 2016,). However, a number of 
researchers have used in vitro approaches, as they facilitate reproduction, standardization, 
and methodological repeatability (Nascimento et al., 2023).
As anthocyanins undergo structural modifications according to pH alteration (Figure 
3.2), their stability limitations over the digestion steps are relevant to predict both bioacces­
sibility and bioavailability. As an example, the contents of anthocyanins of jussara extracts 
(Euterpe edulis Mart.) were reported to decrease significantly during the in vitro bioaccessi­
bility assay by 81% after the oral phase, 48% after gastric, and 31% after the intestinal phases 
(Vannuchi et al., 2024). In another study, anthocyanins were isolated from blackberries, red 
apple skins, strawberries, red grape skins, and wine, and the stability of the anthocyanins 
in the gastric phase was high (100%), but low after the intestinal phase (1.6–82%), and only 
a small percentage of anthocyanins were intact at the end of the in vitro bioaccessibility 

70
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
assay (0.07–3.51%) (Victoria-Campos et al., 2022). Another study reported similar behavior, 
in which the anthocyanins extracted from blackberries presented high stability during the 
gastric phase, but after the intestinal phase, only 13% of the initial amount was identified 
(Rosales et al., 2023). These investigations corroborate the fact that anthocyanins are stable 
in the stomach due to the low pH values (1.5–2.0) that favor the flavylium cation forms. 
However, in the intestine (pH ~8.0), anthocyanin molecules are subjected to high alkaline 
conditions of the medium that favor the formation of less stable structures, and also the 
binding of anthocyanins to proteins and bile salts, followed by subsequent precipitation 
that decreases bioaccessibility (Victoria-Campos et al., 2022; Rosales et al., 2023).
Concerning absorption, an in vivo study demonstrated that the bioavailability of antho­
cyanins of blueberry extract in humans is very low (0.02% plasma/0.03% urine) (Mueller 
et al., 2017). However, these same authors showed that plasma levels of anthocyanins’ 
metabolites (gallic acid, protocatechuic acid, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, 4-hydroxybenzalde­
hyde, 3-O-methylgallic acid, phloroglucinol aldehyde, syringic acid, and vanillic acid) were 
up to 20 times higher in plasma and 38 times higher in urine than in the initial extract. In 
another in vivo study, the red radish extract was administered to mice and pelargonidin 
3-glucoside (~28.9 pmol/mL) was the most bioavailable anthocyanin present in the plasma 
(Li et al., 2023). Additionally, these same authors also found high levels of anthocyanins’ 
metabolites in the plasma: gallic acid (~0.07 µmol/mL), protocatechuic acid (~0.10 µmol/
mL), p-hydroxybenzoic acid (~0.03 µmol/mL), and caffeic acid (~0.13 µmol/mL). Contrastly, 
in an in vivo study regarding the administration of red cabbage to humans, almost 14% 
of the total anthocyanins found in the plasma were present in the form of native com­
pounds, and less than 4% in the form of metabolites (Wiczkowski et al., 2016). Therefore, 
although the estimated total bioavailability of anthocyanins increases when their metabo­
lized products are accounted, this value remains low, with less than 2% being effectively 
absorbed by the gastrointestinal tract (Rosales & Fabi, 2022).
FIGURE 3.3
Scheme of anthocyanin’s absorption.

71
Encapsulation of Anthocyanins
To overcome the stability issues of anthocyanins during digestion, which might directly 
affect their biological properties, encapsulation rises as a technological strategy to increase 
the bioaccessibility of anthocyanins. As an example, microencapsulation of jamelão extract 
(Syzygium cumini L.) with maltodextrin provided high stability for the anthocyanins (26%) 
after simulated in vitro digestion, when compared to the free extract (0.8%) (Paes et al., 
2024). Similar results were observed for anthocyanins microencapsulated from elderberry 
juice (Sambucus nigra subsp. canadensis), with isolated soy protein, which presented ~26% 
of bioaccessibility, being about twice higher than for the anthocyanins from the non-
encapsulated juice (12%) (Ravichandran et al., 2023).
Although systematic and deep investigations are still needed to fully understand the 
fate of anthocyanins during digestion and absorption, the increase in the in vitro bioac­
cessibility of anthocyanins, as influenced by the protection provided by encapsulation, 
might result in the increase of bioavailability. Blueberry anthocyanins were microencap­
sulated with α-casein, and the in vivo bioavailability was assessed using mice models 
(Lang et al., 2021). These authors observed a decrease in the excreted contents of the main 
anthocyanins, namely malvidin 3-O-galactoside, cyanidin 3-O-glucoside, and delphini­
din 3-O-glucoside, followed by increase in the metabolite contents in urine (syringic acid, 
ferulic acid, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, and vanillic acid), and decreased contents in feces 
(syringic acid, ferulic acid, and gallic acid) (Lang et al., 2021). In another study, micro­
encapsulation of anthocyanins from blueberry extract, with pectin as coating material, 
increased the intestinal accessibility of these molecules during passage through the small 
intestine and modulated the formation of aldehyde phloroglucinol (metabolite) in human 
plasma (Mueller et al., 2018). In general, increasing the bioavailability of anthocyanins 
through encapsulation promotes a number of beneficial health effects that are linked to 
these molecules. Another bioavailability research carried out with anthocyanins extracted 
from black soybean hulls, which were microencapsulated with fructooligosaccharides 
(FOS) and whey protein, reported that groups of mice fed with encapsulated anthocyanins 
showed higher concentrations of anthocyanins in the blood stream 4 h after microcapsule 
intake (Zhang et al., 2020). Moreover, the results of the mentioned research also suggest 
that microencapsulated anthocyanins produced with dietary fibers as coating material 
might affect blood glucose index after postprandial meal (mice model).
3.4  Controlled Release of Encapsulated Anthocyanins
Predicting the release rates of encapsulated bioactive compounds in different media, 
through mathematical models, can be seen as a useful research strategy to design potential 
functional foods with high bioaccessibility and bioavailability. Kinetic data for the release 
of encapsulated active ingredients can be predicted using theoretical, empirical, or semi-
empirical methods (Flores and Kong, 2017). Among the mathematical models reported in 
studies about the release kinetics of encapsulated compounds, four are generally used and 
conveniently compared: zero-order, first-order, and Higuchi and Korsmeyer-Peppas equa­
tions (Flores and Kong, 2017).
Despite the importance of predicting the release behavior of encapsulated compounds 
in both food and physiological systems, the literature regarding the release kinetics of 
microencapsulated anthocyanins is limited. However, two studies demonstrated that the 
Korsmeyer-Peppas (Korsmeyer et al., 1983) and Higuchi (Higuchi, 1962) models (Table 3.1) 
provided the best fit to predict the release of active ingredients during storage.

72
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Mt is the amount of active ingredient released as a function of time t; M∞ is the total 
amount of the active ingredient, Mt/M∞ is the fraction of active ingredient released in 
time t, k is the release constant, and n is the indicative release exponent of the transport 
mechanism. For spherical structures, the transport mechanisms are classified as follows: 
quasi-Fickian diffusion (n < 0.43), Fickian diffusion (n = 0.43), anomalous diffusion (non-
Fickian) (0.43 < n < 0.85), case 2 – zero-order release (n = 0.85), and super case 2 – relaxation 
(n > 0.85). All data in Table 3.1 were based on information described by Pires (2011), Tavares 
(2015), and Mendes (2019).
Choosing the appropriate coating material to accomplish the purpose of the addition of 
microencapsulated anthocyanins may affect the release rate of these compounds during 
digestion, which will influence the bioaccessibility. Peanparkdee, Borompichaichartkul, 
and Iwamoto (2021) developed a study with different coating materials to microencapsu­
late anthocyanins from black rice extracts. These authors reported that two coating mate­
rials presented the most interesting results: the first one was gelatin, which, on the one 
hand, presented the highest release rate of anthocyanin during simulated intestinal diges­
tion (83%). The other coating material was a combination of gelatin/gum arabic which, 
on the other hand, showed a low release rate of anthocyanins (9.8%), suggesting that the 
highest anthocyanin proportion of anthocyanins remained inside the microcapsules after 
digestion. In another study regarding the microencapsulation of anthocyanins extracted 
from red cabbage, using a combination of maltodextrin/pectin as coating material, it was 
seen that the free extract released ~71% of anthocyanins in the gastric digestive phase, 
while the encapsulated extract released 49% (Sendri et al., 2023). These studies demon­
strate that encapsulation controlled the level of anthocyanins released during the gastric 
phase, allowing a higher amount of anthocyanins to reach the intestine, which might be 
available for further absorption. All these results are useful for the food and pharmaceuti­
cal industries, depending on the approach and purpose.
The anthocyanins from grape pomace extracts were microencapsulated with different 
coating materials, by spray drying, and subjected to the release study in simulated gastric 
and intestinal media (Moreno, Cocero & Rodríguez-Rojo, 2018). These authors reported 
that microcapsules produced with pea protein isolate showed the highest anthocyanins’ 
release rates, being 50% released in the gastric phase and 45% in the intestinal phase, 
within 120 min after digestion. Among the empirical models selected to fit the release data, 
the Higuchi model provided the best fit to the experimental data, followed closely by the 
Korsmeyer-Peppas model. In all the cases, the diffusion exponent n for the Korsmeyer-
Peppas model was less than 0.43, which suggested quasi-Fickian diffusion, which agrees 
with Higuchi’s interpretation (Moreno, Cocero & Rodríguez-Rojo, 2018).
In another study, the release kinetics of anthocyanins encapsulated in alginate hydro­
gel spheres was investigated, being the encapsulated jamelão pulp extracts (S. cumini) 
TABLE 3.1
Mathematical Models Used to Predict Anthocyanins’ Release Kinetics
Model
Equation
Description
Korsmeyer-Peppas
∞=
Mt
M
ktn
Model that exponentially relates the release rate of the active ingredient 
to the elapsed time. Used in systems in which the release mechanisms 
are unknown, and analyzes when more than one type of release occurs.
Higuchi
=
Mt
k t
Model that predicts the active ingredient release based on Fick’s Law. If 
the correlation coefficient (R²) is higher than other kinetic models, it can 
be inferred that the main release mechanism is controlled by diffusion.

73
Encapsulation of Anthocyanins
produced through drip extrusion (Sharma, Dash & Badwaik, 2022). After carrying out the 
simulated gastrointestinal experiment, the Korsmeyer-Peppas model was chosen as the 
most appropriate to predict the release of anthocyanins. The diffusion exponent n revealed 
that the jamelão extracts encapsulated inside alginate hydrogel spheres combined with 
guar gum (n = 0.358) showed release behavior described by quasi-Fickian diffusion, while 
the encapsulation with alginate hydrogel spheres combined with xanthan gum (n = 0.670), 
pectin (n = 0.578), and gum arabic (n = 0.452) exhibited release behavior by Non-Fickian 
diffusion. All the microcapsules showed high anthocyanin release rates (75–87%) in the 
gastric phase, within 120 min after digestion (Sharma, Dash & Badwaik, 2022). The algi­
nate hydrogel is porous and these high-diffusion coefficients indicated that its combina­
tion with the selected coating materials was not sufficient to reduce the porosity (Carvalho 
et al., 2019).
3.5  Microencapsulated Anthocyanins for Food Application
The use of anthocyanins in microcapsules as food additives can be a promising strategy 
to prevent degradation, loss of color, and overall reduced stability of these compounds 
under food processing and storage conditions. The conversion of aqueous anthocyanins’ 
extracts into dried extracts through microencapsulation results in technological products 
with higher physicochemical and microbiological stability than non-encapsulated extracts, 
enabling industrial application of the encapsulation technique for the development of food 
colorants, and potential functional ingredients in foods (Oliveira & Petrovick, 2010; Tarone, 
Cazarin & Junior, 2020; Machado et al., 2022).
The replacement of red synthetic dyes used by food industries, such as Allura Red AC 
(INS 129), Amaranth (INS 123), and Azorubin (E122), by natural pigments, such as antho­
cyanins, is challenging and represents a growing trend, which is justified by the search 
for healthier eating habits and concerns on the environment impacts caused by synthetic 
dyes production (Maronpot, Hayashi & Bastaki, 2020; Santos, da Silva & Leite Neta, 2022). 
Although the encapsulation of natural pigments is a promising alternative to the synthetic 
ones, it is noted that the ingredients and storage conditions of foods may affect the total 
contents or bioaccessibility/bioavailability of these compounds. Thus, the addition of 
microencapsulated anthocyanins in processed foods makes it possible to impart interest­
ing colors to new food products or recover color loss due to food processing.
Shamshad et al. (2023) investigated the stability of microcapsules of anthocyanins 
extracted from black carrots in ice cream for 60 days, being the microcapsules pre­
pared using maltodextrin and gum arabic by freeze-drying. Three formulations were 
produced containing 3% (T1), 6% (T2), and 9% (T3) of microencapsulated anthocyanins 
powder-enriched ice cream. As expected, the ice cream with 9% presented the highest 
contents of total monomeric anthocyanins (143 mg/100 g), and for all the formulations, 
only a slight decrease in the anthocyanin contents was observed from the 45th day until 
the end of the experiment (~2–3%). The authors’ conclusion showed that the addition of 
microencapsulated anthocyanins powder in ice cream proved to stabilize black carrot 
anthocyanins and contributed positively to the sensory characteristics of ice cream.
In addition to contributing to the sensorial aspects of foods, anthocyanins can act as 
functional food ingredients due to their antioxidant properties as scavengers of free 
radicals, which delay lipid oxidation, both in the human body and in food systems 

74
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
(Bordignon Jr et al., 2009; Shipp & Abdel-Aal, 2010). Acidic foods, such as soft drinks, 
ice creams, and yogurts, are preferably used in the application of anthocyanins as the 
mean favors the predominance of flavylium cation, as shown in Figure 3.2.
In this sense, anthocyanins of blackberry were microencapsulated with maltodex­
trin by spray drier and freeze-drying and with sodium alginate by ionic gelation, fol­
lowed by application in natural yogurt aiming to determine the in vitro bioaccessibility 
(Santos et al., 2022). The incorporation of anthocyanin microcapsules, which were pre­
pared by spray drier and freeze-drying, was successful, while the capsules obtained 
by ionic gelation partially dissolved in the yogurt and compromised the desired tex­
ture and final appearance of the product. The natural yogurt incorporated with freeze-
dried microcapsules showed higher bioaccessibility of cyanidin 3-glucoside (29.9%), 
the major anthocyanin, than ionic gelation (21%), and spray drying (4.9%). According 
to Gowd et al. (2020), milk proteins and phenolic compounds are capable of forming 
stable complexes, which makes it possible to increase the stability of these substances 
during the digestive process.
Another study evaluated the antioxidant capacity, anthocyanin contents, and digestive 
stability of microencapsulated anthocyanins (coating materials: maltodextrin and inulin), 
which were extracted from red cabbage (Brassica oleracea L. var. capitata L. f. rubra, var. 
Garance), cornelian cherry (Cornus mas L.), and chokeberry (Aronia melanocarpa), and added 
to wheat bread formulation (Czubaszek et al., 2023). The breads made using microencapsu­
lated anthocyanins showed higher contents of anthocyanins and antioxidant capacity than 
simple wheat bread, being red cabbage microcapsules the one with the highest antioxi­
dant capacity against ABTS radical (75–76-μmol Trolox equivalents/g), which was 30 times 
higher than breads without microcapsules’ addition. Regarding digestive stability, acylated 
anthocyanins in breads with red cabbage microcapsules were detected in all the digestive 
phases (oral, gastric, and intestinal), while breads added with microcapsules with antho­
cyanins of cornelian cherry and chokeberry were identified only up to the gastric phase.
Another technological feature of anthocyanin microcapsules is related to their appli­
cability in active films for food packing. These packages incorporate active substances 
that improve their performance by optimizing the shelf life of products by delaying the 
maturation or development of microorganisms in foods, for example (Robertson, 2005). 
Leong et al. (2021) developed an active gelatin film incorporated with microcapsules of 
anthocyanins extracted from butterfly peas (Clitoria ternatea) to evaluate its antimicro­
bial activity against three Gram-positive and six Gram-negative foodborne pathogenic 
bacteria. Six among the nine microorganisms tested were susceptible to the anthocya­
nins film, including those that cause foodborne illnesses, such as Staphylococcus aureus, 
Escherichia coli, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The application of the active film to pack 
tofu as a food model system indicated the high efficiency of active films to control 
microbiological growth, both at room temperature and under refrigeration, providing 
microbiological shelf life from five to six days.
3.6  Final Considerations
Anthocyanins have widely known biological potentials that give these natural pigments 
a series of health-promoting effects as well as open wide avenues for technological appli­
cations. However, considering the high susceptibility of anthocyanins to degrading or 

75
Encapsulation of Anthocyanins
altering their chemical structures during food processing or in physiological conditions, 
the main methods and coating materials, which were discussed in this chapter, showed 
that encapsulation technology rises as an excellent way to make anthocyanins more avail­
able for technological use aiming to increase bioaccessibility/bioavailability by the human 
body.
The technological application of encapsulated anthocyanins by the food industries 
is mainly focused on the replacement of synthetic food colorants, but each day more of 
the functional properties of anthocyanins, such as antioxidant and antimicrobial activi­
ties, have caught the attention. A number of food products prepared with the addition of 
microencapsulated anthocyanins have been reported in the literature, mainly the acidic 
ones, such as ice creams, yogurts, and soft drinks, since the low pH and temperature favor 
the preservation of these pigments. Another important trend focused on food science and 
technology is the incorporation of anthocyanins (microencapsulated or not) in biodegrad­
able films that can be used as active packaging and as indicators of food freshness (“intel­
ligent” films).
Importantly, regarding the encapsulation procedure, some care must be taken, especially 
concerning the selection of the coating materials. Depending on the material selected, 
anthocyanins may or may not be released efficiently throughout the gastrointestinal 
tract. On this matter, available literature approaching the release kinetics of encapsulated 
anthocyanins during digestion is still limited and represents a relevant gap to be filled to 
understand the mechanisms and effects of different wall materials on the bioavailability 
of anthocyanins.
References
Bordignon, Celso Luiz Jr; Francescatto, Vanessa; Nienow, Alexandre Augusto; Calvete, Eunice; 
Reginatto, Flávio Henrique Influence of the extraction solution pH on the content of antho­
cyanins in strawberry fruits. Food Science and Technology, 29(1), 183–188, 2009. https://doi.
org/10.1590/S0101-20612009000100028
Carbonell-Capella, Juana M.; Buniowska, Magdalena; Barba, Francisco J.; Esteve, María J.; Frígola, 
Ana. Analytical methods for determining bioavailability and bioaccessibility of bioactive com­
pounds from fruits and vegetables: A review. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and 
Food Safety, 13, 155–171, 2013. https://doi.org/10.1111/1541-4337.12049
Carvalho, Ana Gabriela da Silva; Machado, Mariana Teixeira da Costa; Barros, Helena Dias de Freitas 
Queiroz; Cazarin, Cinthia Baú Betim; Maróstica Junior, Mário Roberto; Hubinger, Miriam 
Dupas. Anthocyanins from jussara (Euterpe edulis Martius) extract carried by calcium alginate 
beads pre-prepared using ionic gelation. Powder Technology, 345, 283–291, 2019. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2019.01.016.
Cavalcanti, R.N.; Santos, D.T.; Meireles, M.A.A. Non-thermal stabilization mechanisms of anthocya­
nins in model and food systems – an overview. Food Research International, 44, 2, 499–509, 
2011. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2010.12.007
Czubaszek, Anna; Czaja, Anna; Sokół-Łętowska, Anna; Kolniak-Ostek, Joanna; Kucharska, Alicja 
Z. Quality of bread enriched with microencapsulated anthocyanin extracts during in vitro 
simulated digestion. Journal of Cereal Science, 113, 103724, 2023. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcs.2023.103724
Devi, Lourembam Monika; Das, Amit Baran; Badwaik, Laxmikant S. Effect of gelatin and acacia 
gum on anthocyanin coacervated microcapsules using double emulsion and its characteriza­
tion. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 235, 123896, 2023. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.123896

76
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Figueiredo, ayne de Abreu; Norcino, Laís Bruno; Carmo, Eloá Lourenço do; Campelo, Pedro Henrique; 
Botrel, Diego Alvarenga; Borges, Soraia Vilela; Souza, Sérgio Michielon de; Oliveira, Cassiano 
Rodrigues de. Microstructured lipid microparticles containing anthocyanins: Production, char­
acterization, storage, and resistance to the gastrointestinal tract. Food Research International, 
166, 112611, 2023. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2023.112611
Flores, Floirendo P.; Kong, Fanbin. In vitro release kinetics of microencapsulated materials and the 
effect of the food matrix. Annual Review of Food Science and Technology, 8, 1, 237–259, 2017. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-food-030216-025720
Francisco, Ana Paula; Sganzerla, William Gustavo; Castro, Luiz Eduardo Nochi; Barroso, Tiago 
Linhares Cruz Tabosa; Silva, Aline Priscilla Gomes da; Rosa, Cleonice Gonçalves da; Nunes, 
Michael Ramos; Forster-Carneiro, Tânia; Rostagno, Mauricio A. Pressurized liquid extraction 
of bioactive compounds from grape peel and application in pH-sensing carboxymethyl cel­
lulose films: A promising material to monitor the freshness of pork and milk. Food Research 
International, 179, 114017, 2024. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2024.114017
Freitas, Camila Fabiano de; Santos, Maria Luiza Borges; Cândido, Gabriela Braga Gomes; Colombari 
Neto, Jean; Oliveira, Antônia Carla de Jesus; Medeiros, Gabriela Brunosi; Pereira, Antonio 
Guilherme Basso; Dragunski, Douglas Cardoso; Caetano, Josiane; Corradini, Elisângela; Muniz, 
Edvani Curti. HIDROGÉIS CONTENDO FIBRAS ELETROFIADAS PARA LIBERAÇÃO 
SUSTENTADA DE SOLUTOS. In: Mercante, Luiza Amim; Corrêa, Daniel Souza. Chapter 6 - 
Eletrofiação e nanofibras: Fundamentos e aplicações. Ponta Grossa: Atena Editora, p. 138–167, 
2024.
Freixo, Luís Carlos Araújo. Micro e Nanoencapsulação como Estratégias de Estabilização de 
Entidades Bioativas: Proteínas, Enzimas e Bacteriófagos. 2013. 76 f. Dissertação (Mestrado) - 
Curso de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Fernando Pessoa, Porto, 2013.
Gowd, Vemana; Karim, Naymul; Xie, Lianghua; Shishir, Mohammad Rezaul Islam; Xu, Yang; 
Chen, Wei. In vitro study of bioaccessibility, antioxidant, and α-glucosidase inhibitory effect 
of pelargonidin-3-oglucoside after interacting with beta-lactoglobulin and chitosan/pec­
tin. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 154, 380–389, 2020. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.03.126
Hao, Hongdan; Duan, Bingchao; Zhang, Lidan; Wang, Lan; Zhang, Lingli; Wang, Yufei; Li, Yuanyuan; 
Zhao, Chunmei; Jia, Guochao; Li, Yuling; Liu, Congjun; Lu, Kui. Fabrication and character­
ization of polyvinyl alcohol/sodium alginate loaded carvacrol/silica hollow microspheres 
composite hydrogel as a colourimetric freshness indicator. Food Bioscience, 57, 103474, 2024. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fbio.2023.103474
Heydarian, Ali; Shavisi, Nassim. Multifunctional food packaging materials: Electrospun mats based 
on gelatin-xanthan gum containing chitin nanofibers and black barberry anthocyanins for fresh­
ness monitoring and enhancing the shelf-life quality of pacific white shrimps. Food Packaging 
and Shelf Life, 40, 101219, 2023. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fpsl.2023.101219
Higuchi, W.I. Analysis of data on the medicament release from ointments. Journal of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, 51, 8, 802–804, 1962. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jps.2600510825
Karambasti, Parya Rashidi; Shavisi, Nassim. Development of guar gum-pectin nanofiber mats con­
taining Papaver rhoeas petal anthocyanins and cellulose nanocrystals for real-time visual detec­
tion of lamb meat freshness. LWT – Food Science and Technology, 194, 115786, 2024. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2024.115786
Karaś, Monika; Jakubczyk, Anna; Szymanowska, Urszula; Złotek, Urszula; Zielińska, Ewelina. 
Digestion and bioavailability of bioactive phytochemicals. International Journal of Food 
Science & Technology, 52, 2, 291–305, 2016. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ijfs.13323
Khaledian, Yousef; Moshtaghi, Hamdollah; Shahbazi, Yasser. Development and characterization 
of smart double-layer nanofiber mats based on potato starch-turnip peel anthocyanins and 
guar gum-cinnamaldehyde. Food Chemistry, 434, 137462, 2024. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodchem.2023.137462
Korsmeyer, Richard W.; Gurny, Robert; Doelker, Eric; Buri, Pierre; Peppas, Nikolaos A. Mechanisms 
of solute release from porous hydrophilic polymers. International Journal of Pharmaceutics, 
15, 1, 25–35, 1983. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0378-5173(83)90064-9

77
Encapsulation of Anthocyanins
Lang, Yuxi; Li, Bin; Gong, Ersheng; Shu, Chi; Si, Xu; Gao, Ningxuan; Zhang, Weijia; Cui, Huijun; 
Meng, Xianjun. Effects of α-casein and β-casein on the stability, antioxidant activity and bioac­
cessibility of blueberry anthocyanins with an in vitro simulated digestion. Food Chemistry, 
334, 127526, 2021. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2020.127526
Leong, Chean Ring; Daud, Nurul Shahida; Tong, Woei Yenn; Cheng, See Yuan; Tan, Wen Nee; Hamin, 
Nurhanis Syafiqah; Pa’ee, Khairul Faizal. Gelatine film incorporated with Clitoria ternatea-derived 
anthocyanin microcapsules, a food packaging material effective against foodborne pathogens. 
Food Technology & Biotechnology, 59(4), 422, 2021. https://doi.org/10.17113/ftb.59.04.21.7069
Li, Jian; Guo, Chaofan; Cai, Shengbao; Yi, Junjie; Zhou, Linyan. Fabrication of anthocyanin–rich 
W1/O/W2 emulsion gels based on pectin–GDL complexes: 3d printing performance. Food 
Research International, 168, 112782, 2023. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2023.112782
Lu, Wei; Kelly, Alan L.; Miao, Song. Emulsion-based encapsulation and delivery systems for poly­
phenols. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 47, 1–9, 2016. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
tifs.2015.10.015.
Lv, Haowei; Wang, Chenxi; He, Deyun; Zhao, Haibo; Zhao, Meng; Xu, Enbo; Jin, Zhengyu; 
Yuan, Chao; Guo, Li; Wu, Zhengzong; Liu, Pengfei; Cui, Boi. Intelligent food tag: A starch-
anthocyanin-based ph-sensitive electrospun nanofiber mat for real-time food freshness moni­
toring. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 256, 128384, 2024. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.128384
Machado, Michelle Heck; Da Rosa Almeida, Aline; Maciel, Matheus Vinicius de Oliveira Brisola; 
Vitorino, Vinicius Bittencourt; Bazzo, Giovana Carolina; Da Rosa, Cleonice Gonçalves; William 
Gustavo  Sganzerla;  Cassiana  Mendes;  Pedro Luiz Manique  Barreto. Microencapsulation by 
spray drying of red cabbage anthocyanin-rich extract for the production of a natural food colo­
rant. Biocatalysis and Agricultural Biotechnology, 39, 102287, 2022. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bcab.2022.102287
Mandaji, Carolina Marques; Pena, Rosinelson da Silva; Chisté, Renan Campos. Encapsulation of bio­
active compounds extracted from plants of genus Hibiscus: A review of selected techniques 
and applications. Food Research International, 151, 110820, 2022. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodres.2021.110820
Maronpot, Robert R.; Hayashi, Shim-mo; Bastaki, Maria. Synthetic and natural food colorants. Foods 
& Foods Ingredients Journal of Japan, 225, 2, 100–110, 2020.
Mendes, Ana Paula Pais. Cinética de liberação de clorexidina em nanocompósito de magnetita e 
quitosana. 2019. 78 f. Dissertação (Mestrado) - Curso de Mestrado em Química, Universidade 
Federal de São Carlos, São Carlos, 2019.
Mercante, Luiza A.; Schneider, Rodrigo; Facure, Murilo H.M.; Andre, Rafaela S.; Teodoro, Kelcilene; 
Martins, Danilo; Migliorini, Fernanda L.; Correa, Daniel S. Chapter 2 – Eletrofiação: parâmetro 
e configurações de sistema, tipos de fibras e métodos de modificação. In: Mercante, Luiza 
Amim; Corrêa, Daniel Souza. Eletrofiação e nanofibras: Fundamentos e aplicações. Ponta 
Grossa: Atena Editora, p. 13–51, 2024a.
Mercante, Luiza Amim; Correa, Daniel Souza. Chapter 1 - Eletrofiação: histórico e fundamentos. In: 
Mercante, Luiza Amim; Correa, Daniel Souza. Eletrofiação e nanofibras: Fundamentos e apli­
cações. Ponta Grossa: Atena Editora, Cap. 1. p. 1–12, 2024b.
Moreno, T.; Cocero, M.J.; Rodríguez-Rojo, S. Storage stability and simulated gastrointestinal release 
of spray dried grape marc phenolics. Food and Bioproducts Processing, 112, 96–107, 2018. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fbp.2018.08.011
Moriyama, Kousuke; Inomoto, Noe; Moriuchi, Hidetoshi; Nihei, Masanobu; Sato, Miku; Miyagi; 
Yoshiki; Tajiri, Ayaka; Sato, Takeshi; Tanaka, Yasuhiko; Johno, Yuuki; Goto, Masahiro; Kamiya, 
Noriho. Characterization of enzyme-crosslinked albumin hydrogel for cell encapsulation. 
Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering, 136, 6, 471–476, 2023. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbiosc.2023.09.007
Mueller, Dolores; Jung, Kathrin; Winter, Manuel; Rogoll, Dorothee; Melcher, Ralph; Kulozik, Ulrich; 
Schwarz, Karin; Richling, Elke. Encapsulation of anthocyanins from bilberries – Effects on bio­
availability and intestinal accessibility in humans. Food Chemistry, 248, 217–224, 2018. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2017.12.058

78
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Mueller, Dolores; Jung, Kathrin; Winter, Manuel; Rogoll, Dorothee; Melcher, Ralph; Richling, Elke. 
Human intervention study to investigate the intestinal accessibility and bioavailability of antho­
cyanins from bilberries. Food Chemistry, 231, 275–286, 2017. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodchem.2017.03.130
Nascimento, Amanda Lais Alves Almeida; Borges, Larissa Lorrane Rodrigues; Fernandes, Janaina 
Gonçalves; Freitas, Valdeir Viana; Martins, Evandro; Campelo, Pedro Henrique; Stringheta, 
Paulo Cesar. Exploring strategies to enhance anthocyanin bioavailability and bioaccessibility 
in food: A literature review. Food Bioscience, 56, 103388, 2023. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
fbio.2023.103388
Nezamdoost-Sani, Narmin; Khaledabad, Mohammad Alizadeh; Amiri, Saber; Phimolsiripol, 
Yuthana; Khaneghah, Amin Mousavi. A comprehensive review on the utilization of biopolymer 
hydrogels to encapsulate and protect probiotics in foods. International Journal of Biological 
Macromolecules, 254, 127907, 2024. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.127907
Oliveira, Olivia Werner; Petrovick, Pedro Ros Spray drying of plant extracts: Basic remarks and appli­
cation. Revista Brasileira De Farmacognosia, 20(4), 641–650, 2010. https://doi.org/10.1590/
S0102-695X2010000400026
Ozcan, Basak Ebru; Saroglu, Oznur; Karakas, Canan Yagmur; Karadag, Ayse. Encapsulation of purple 
basil leaf extract by electrospraying in double emulsion (W/O/W) filled alginate-carrageenan 
beads to improve the bioaccessibility of anthocyanins. International Journal of Biological 
Macromolecules, 250, 126207, 2023. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.126207
Paes, Francisco Elvino Rodrigues; Sabino, Luiz Bruno de Sousa; Silva, Larissa Morais Ribeiro da; 
Silva, Ivanildo José da; Ricardo, Nágila Maria Pontes Silva; Brito, Débora; Hellen Almeida de; 
Menezes, Fernando Lima de; Figueiredo, Raimundo Wilane de. Anthocyanins extracted from 
Jamelon fruits (Syzygium cumini L.): Effect of microencapsulation on the properties and bioac­
cessibility. South African Journal of Botany, 166, 423–431, 2024. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
sajb.2024.01.051
Peanparkdee, Methavee; Borompichaichartkul, Chaleeda; Iwamoto, Satoshi. Bioaccessibility and 
antioxidant activity of phenolic acids, flavonoids, and anthocyanins of encapsulated Thai rice 
bran extracts during in vitro gastrointestinal digestion. Food Chemistry, 361, 130161, 2021. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2021.130161
Pereira, Pamela F.M.; Picciani, Paulo H. de Sousa; Calado, Veronica; Tonon, Renata V. Gelatin-based 
films and mats as electro-sensoactive layers for monitoring volatile compounds related to 
meat spoilage. Food Packaging and Shelf Life, 36, 101049, 2023. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
fpsl.2023.101049
Pires, Rafaeli Oleques. Modelagem matemática de perfis de liberação de fármacos a partir de nano­
carreadores. 2011. 98 f. Dissertação (Mestrado) - Curso de Curso de Mestrado em Nanociências, 
Centro Universitário Franciscano de Santa Maria, Santa Maria, 2011.
Andrew L.; Hoskin, R.T.; Krishnaswamy, K. Spray drying to produce novel phytochemical-rich 
ingredients from juice and pomace of American elderberry. Food Bioscience, 55, 102981, 2023. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fbio.2023.102981
Robertson, G. L. Food Packaging: Principles and Practice. CRC Press, 2005.
Rosales, Thiécla Katiane Osvaldt; Fabi, João Paulo. Nanoencapsulated anthocyanin as a functional 
ingredient: Technological application and future perspectives. Colloids and Surfaces B: 
Biointerfaces, 218, 112707, 2022. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2022.112707
Rosales, Thiécla Katiane Osvaldt; Pedrosa, Lucas de Freitas; Nascimento, Karen Rebouças; Fioroto, 
Alexandre Minami; Toniazzo, Taíse; Tadini, Carmen Cecília; Purgatto, Eduardo; Hassimotto, 
Neuza Mariko Aymoto; Fabi, João Paulo. Nanoencapsulated anthocyanins: A new technologi­
cal approach to increase physical-chemical stability and bioaccessibility. Food Hydrocolloids, 
139, 108516, 2023. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodhyd.2023.108516
Santos, Suelen Siqueira dos; Paraíso, Carolina Moser; Romanini, Edilson Bruno; Correa, Vanessa 
Gesser; Peralta, Rosane Marina; Costa, Silvio Cláudio da; Santos Junior, Oscar de Oliveira; 
Visentainer, Jesuí Vergílio; Reis, Miria Hespanhol Miranda; Madrona, Grasiele Scaramal. 
Ravichandran, K.S.; Silva, E.S.; Moncada, M.; Perkins-Veazie, P.; Lila, M.A.; Greenlief, C.M.; Thomas, 

79
Encapsulation of Anthocyanins
Bioavailability of blackberry pomace microcapsules by using different techniques: An approach 
for yogurt application. Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies, 81, 103111, 2022. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifset.2022.103111
Santos, N.S.; da Silva, F. L. A. T.; Leite Neta, M. T. S. Corantes naturais: importância e fontes de 
obtenção. RECIMA21 - Revista Científica Multidisciplinar, 3(3), e331165, 2022. https://doi.
org/10.47820/recima21.v3i3.1165
Sendri, Nitisha; Singh, Sarvpreet; Bhatt, Shriya; Gupta, Mahesh; Bhandari, Pamita. Insight into 
the influence of oxygen, sunlight and temperature on the stability and color attributes of red 
cabbage anthocyanins and in vitro gastrointestinal behaviour. Food Chemistry Advances, 3, 
100359, 2023. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.focha.2023.100359
Shamshad, Aneela; Iahtisham-Ul-Haq; Butt, Massod Sadiq; Nayik, Gulzar Ahmad; Al Obaid, Sami; 
Ansari, Mohammad Javed; Karabagias, Ioannis Konstantinos; Sarwar, Nazmul; Ramniwas, 
Seema. Effect of storage on physicochemical attributes of ice cream enriched with microencap­
sulated anthocyanins from black carrot. Food Science and Nutrition, 11(7), 3976, 2023. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/fsn3.3384
Sharma, Maanas; Dash, Kshirod K.; Badwaik, Laxmikant S. Physicochemical and release behaviour of 
phytochemical compounds based on black jamun pulp extracts-filled alginate hydrogel beads 
through vibration dripping extrusion. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 
194, 715–725, 2022. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.11.116
Shen, Yixiao; Zhang, Ning; Tian, Jinlong; Xin, Guang; Liu, Ling; Sun, Xiyun; Li, Bin. Advanced 
approaches for improving bioavailability and controlled release of anthocyanins. Journal of 
Controlled Release, 341, 285–299, 2022. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2021.11.031
Shipp, Jaclyn; Abdel-Aal, El-Sayed M. Food applications and physiological effects of anthocyanins 
as functional food ingredients. The Open Food Science Journal, 4, 1, 2010. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2174/1874256401004010007
Singh, Akhilesh Kumar; Pal, Priti; Pandey, Brijesh; Goksen, Gulden; Sahoo, Uttam Kumar; Lorenzo, 
Jose M.; Sarangi, Prakash Kumar. Development of “Smart Foods” for health by nanoencapsula­
tion: Novel technologies and challenges. Food Chemistry: X, 20, 100910, 2023. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.fochx.2023.100910
Smeriglio, Antonella; Barreca, Davide; Bellocco, Ersilia; Trombetta, Domenico Chemistry, pharmacol­
ogy and health benefits of anthocyanins. Phytotherapy Research, 30, 1265–1286, 2016. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ptr.5642
Tarone, Adriana Gadioli; Cazarin, Cinthia Baú Betim; Junior, Mario Roberto Marostica. Anthocyanins: 
New techniques and challenges in microencapsulation. Food Research International, 133, 
109092, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2020.109092
Tavares, Jucelio Kilinski Modelagem da liberação controlada de princípios ativos (betacaroteno 
e lidocaína) de microcápsulas. 2015. 212 f. Tese (Doutorado) - Curso de Pós-graduação em 
Engenharia Química, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, 2015.
Timilsena, Yakindra Prasad; Haque, Md Amdadul; Adhikari, Benu. Encapsulation in the food indus­
try: A brief historical overview to recent developments. Food and Nutrition Sciences, 11, 6, 
481–508, 2020. https://doi.org/10.4236/fns.2020.116035
Vannuchi, Nicholas; Ramos, Sergiana dos Passos; Mazzo, Tatiana Martelli; Longo, Elson; Bonsanto, 
Fabiana Perrechil; Braga, Anna Rafaela Cavalcante; Rosso, Veridiana Vera de. Natural deep eutec­
tic solvents (NADES)-extracted anthocyanins: Bioaccessibility in electrospun peo microfibers. 
Food Research International, 177, 113898, 2024. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2023.113898
Victoria-Campos, Claudia Inés; Ornelas-Paz, José de Jesús; Rocha-Guzmán, Nuria Elizabeth; 
Gallegos-Infante, José Alberto; Failla, Mark L.; Pérez-Martínez, Jaime David; Rios-Velasco, 
Claudio; Ibarra-Junquera, Vrani. Gastrointestinal metabolism and bioaccessibility of selected 
anthocyanins isolated from commonly consumed fruits. Food Chemistry, 383, 132451, 2022. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2022.132451
Wiczkowski, Wieslaw; Szawara-Nowak, Dorota; Romaszko, Jerzy. The impact of red cabbage fer­
mentation on bioavailability of anthocyanins and antioxidant capacity of human plasma. Food 
Chemistry, 190, 730–740, 2016. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2015.06.021

80
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Wu, Xiuli; Yan, Xiangxuan; Zhang, Jianwen; Wu, Xuexu; Luan, Mingran; Zhang, Qing. Preparation 
and characterization of pH-sensitive intelligent packaging films based on cassava starch/poly­
vinyl alcohol matrices containing Aronia melanocarpa anthocyanins. LWT-Food Science and 
Technology, 194, 115818, 2024. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2024.115818
Yang, Shuo; Ding, Qijun; Li, You; Han, Wenjia. Bacterial cellulose/gelatin-based pH-responsive func­
tional film for food freshness monitoring. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 
259, 129203, 2024. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2024.129203
Yavuz-Düzgün, Merve; Kareth, Sabine; Özçelik, Beraat; Weidner, Eckhard. Black carrot extract 
loaded-potato protein particles by PGSS-drying: Physico-chemical properties and in vitro bioac­
cessability. The Journal of Supercritical Fluids, 203, 106065, 2023. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.supflu.2023.106065
Zhang, Rui; Zhou, Lan; Li, Jia; Oliveira, Hélder; Yang, Ning; Jin, Weiping; Zhu, Zhenzhou; Li; Shuyi; 
He, Jingren. Microencapsulation of anthocyanins extracted from grape skin by emulsifica­
tion/internal gelation followed by spray/freeze-drying techniques: Characterization, stabil­
ity and bioaccessibility. LWT-Food Science and Technology, 123, 109097, 2020. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.lwt.2020.109097

81
4
Anthocyanins as Food Colorants
Elivaldo Nunes Modesto Junior, Rosane Patrícia Ferreira Chaves, 
and Renan Campos Chisté
4.1  Introduction
Natural food colorants comprise a class of food additives widely applied by food industries, 
the technological functionalities of which are associated with the aggregation to develop 
new colored products, restoration of color loss during processing, or color enhancement 
of food products (Damodaran, Parkin, & Fennema, 2010). The increased global demand 
for natural and healthier food products makes natural pigments extracted from plants, or 
produced by biotechnological means, promising food colorants to attend these types of 
growing markets (Bocker & Silva, 2022). Thus, food manufacturers have been pressed to 
reformulate their products to adopt natural pigments as replacements for synthetic dyes 
(Chung, Rojanasasithara, Mutilangi, & McClements, 2017).
Following this trend, the expected growth of the natural dyes market is 11%, from 2018 
to 2024 (Wood, 2019), and the global natural food colors market is predicted to grow at 
an annual growth rate of 6% until 2032 (Gamage & Choo, 2023). In this regard, modern 
consumers from different countries have intensified the search for natural and sustainable 
products that positively impact human health and support greater longevity and quality 
of life (Martins, Roriz, Morales, Barros, & Ferreira, 2016). Natural food colorants follow this 
trend because natural pigments are linked to beneficial health effects, such as the preven­
tion of non-communicable chronic diseases (NCDs), which are diseases not transmissible 
directly from one person to another (Bocker & Silva, 2022). NCDs, such as heart diseases, 
diabetes, autoimmune diseases, chronic kidney disease, osteoporosis, Alzheimer’s dis­
ease, Parkinson’s disease, and cancer, are responsible for almost 70% of all deaths world­
wide (Ribeiro & Veloso, 2021). Thus, it is of paramount importance the exploitation of novel 
and promising sources of natural pigments to accomplish the increasing global demand. 
Amongst the prevailing natural pigments, anthocyanins are remarkable compounds 
widely investigated worldwide to be used as food coloring (Gamage & Choo, 2023).
Anthocyanins are available in plant vacuoles, and depending on the pH, and chemical 
interactions with other compounds, they express various attractive colors in the range 
of red, orange, purple, and blue (Khoo, Azlan, Tang, & Lim, 2017). Despite the attractive 
colors and health benefits attributed to anthocyanin intake, their incorporation in food 
products is challenging due to their limited stability as influenced by many factors, such 
as the type of chemical structures, exposure to high temperature, light and oxygen, pH 
changes, high relative humidity conditions, presence of sulfur dioxide, sulfites, ascorbic 
acid, enzymes, co-pigments, and metal ions (Sharma, Gupta, Singh, Bansal, & Singh, 2016; 
Vidana Gamage, Lim, & Choo, 2021). Therefore, in this chapter, we will discuss promising 

82
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
sources of anthocyanins to be used as food colorants, focusing on selected berries, along 
with approaches related to the limitations for the incorporation of anthocyanins by the 
food industries and potential technological applications.
4.2  Sources of Anthocyanins with Potential to Be Used as Food Colorants
Color is one of the most important sensory aspects to be considered in the development of 
food products since visual appearance is a primary influencer on consumers’ perception 
of overall food quality (Martinez, Rando, Agante, & Abreu, 2021; Sun, Xin, & Alper, 2021). 
The color influence is clearly justified by the ability of colors to refer to pre-developed 
concepts by consumers that trigger positive or negative perceptions depending on the 
expected appearance, differences in tonality, brightness, and color intensity of food prod­
ucts (Spence, 2018; Luo, Yu, Westland, & Mahon, 2019).
Anthocyanins, one of the most frequent and widely distributed flavonoids, are water-
soluble pigments in flowers, seeds, fruits, and leaves of a great number of plant species. The 
chemical structures of anthocyanins (C6-C3-C6) are formed from a 2-phenyl benzopyran 
basic structure, which is composed of two benzoyl rings connected by a heterocyclic ring, 
and glycosides are commonly attached to hydroxyl groups (OH) on positions C3 (most 
frequent), C5, and C7 (Sun, Xin, & Alper, 2021). Generally, aglycone forms of anthocyanins 
(anthocyanidins) are less stable and rarely frequent in plant species under natural condi­
tions; so, they are mostly found formed by glycosidic bonds with sugars such as glucose, 
galactose, rhamnose, xylose, and rutinose (Zhao, Wang, Huang, & Hu, 2021). Currently, 702 
different anthocyanins and 27 anthocyanidins have been identified in nature, and among 
the anthocyanins, cyanidin 3-O-glucoside is the major anthocyanin found in most plant 
species (Khoo, Azlan, Tang, & Lim, 2017). The different types of anthocyanins are mainly 
due to differences in the position of glycosidic bonds, the type and number of sugars, the 
number of OH groups, and the type and number of attached organic and phenolic acids 
(Yue et al., 2021). Anthocyanins contain unsaturated double bonds and have easily oxi­
dized groups, which lead to their highly unstable properties. Figure 4.1 shows the six most 
common forms of anthocyanins found in foods, namely, cyanidin, petunidin, petonidin, 
pelargonidin, delphinidin, and malvidin.
There are abundant anthocyanins resources in fruits and by-products, and the high-
value addition to fruit wastes is a hot topic in the food science and technology area (Tan et 
al., 2022). Therefore, adding value to fruit wastes targeting bioactive compounds, such as 
anthocyanins for food coloring purposes, not only improves the understanding of rational 
use of fruit residues but also stimulates the concept of circular economy during the indus­
trial waste management strategies, which increases environmental protection by imple­
menting sustainable approaches that result in high-value co-products with economic and 
social benefits.
The estimation for the anthocyanin market size is USD 355.67 million in 2024 and is 
expected to reach USD 457.19 million by 2029, growing at a compound annual growth rate 
(CAGR) of 5.15% during 2024–2029 (Mordor Intelligence, 2024). Currently, the main sources 
of anthocyanins, which are investigated for food coloring purposes, are fruits (mostly 
berries), vegetables, colored grains, and by-products of fruit and vegetable processing 
(Ockermann, Headley, Lizio, & Hansmann, 2021). China is the leading producer of fresh 
fruit worldwide with an annual output of 242 million metric tons, followed by India (105 

83
Anthocyanins as Food Colorants
million metric tons) and Brazil (39 million metric tons) (FAOSTAT, 2024), and high produc­
tion of fruit wastes is expected around the globe. About 60–70% of the flavonoids of small 
berries are found in their peel and seeds, which are usual by-products, being cyanidin 
3-O-glucoside, cyanidin 3-O-rutinoside, and delphinidin 3-O-glucoside the major reported 
anthocyanins (Paredes-López, Cervantes-Ceja, Vigna-Pérez, & Hernández-Pérez, 2010).
Most berries are known by the different attractive colors seen in their fruit peels and 
pulps, which are due to the differences in the anthocyanins’ composition that open great 
avenues to systematic investigations in different countries on the potential of anthocya­
nins as food colorants. Furthermore, numerous studies confirmed that anthocyanins 
from berries present numerous biological properties (Figure 4.2), mainly antioxidant and 
anti-inflammatory activities, and the frequent intake of anthocyanins has been associated 
with a decrease in the development of chronicle degenerative diseases, such as cardio­
vascular and neurodegenerative diseases, diabetes (type-2), and cancer (Kong, Chia, Goh, 
Chia, & Brouillard, 2003; Badescu, Badulescu, Badescu, & Ciocoiu, 2015; Koss-Mikołajczyk, 
Kusznierewicz, & Bartoszek, 2019; Aboonabi, Singh, & Rose’Meyer, 2020).
4.2.1  Blueberry (Vaccinium spp.)
Blueberry belongs to the family Ericaceae, subfamily Vacciniaceae, genus Vaccinium and 
subgenus Cyanococcus, being native to North America, characterized as a perennial decid­
uous or evergreen shrub (Yang et al., 2022), and very popular around the world for its 
appreciable taste (Herrera-Balandrano, Chai, Beta, Feng, & Huang, 2021). Currently, blue­
berry is mostly cultivated in North America (Canada and USA), China, Japan, and Europe, 
but also in other countries of the Southern Hemisphere, such as Chile, Argentina, New 
Zealand, and Australia (Routray & Orsat, 2011).
These nutritionally relevant small berries are rich in not only a variety of nutrients, 
such as dietary fibers, minerals, and vitamins, but also important bioactive compounds, 
such as hydroxycinnamic acid and resveratrol (Kalt et al., 2020; Silva et al., 2020; Wu et al., 
2022; Yang et al., 2022), and highlighted by their high contents of anthocyanins (Borges, 
Degeneve, Mullen, & Crozier, 2010), ranging from 19 to 677-mg cyanidin 3-glucoside/100 
FIGURE 4.1
Chemical structures of anthocyanins, and the six most common forms found in foods. R1 and R2 can be 
replaced by H, OH, or OCH3, and R3 can be substituted by sugar moieties (anthocyanins) or OH (aglycone 
forms, anthocyanidins).

84
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
g fresh weight, 456–1406-mg cyanidin 3,5-glucoside/100 g fresh weight, and 101–195-mg 
malvidin 3-glucoside/100 g fresh weigh (Koh, Xu, & Wicker, 2020).
The contents of anthocyanins in blueberry fruits are key indicators that may impact the 
potential functional value of blueberries. The synthesis of anthocyanins is greatly influ­
enced by environmental factors, as well as genotypes (Wang et al., 2022); thus, expres­
sive differences in anthocyanin levels are expected in fruits from different cultivars and 
origins (Wang et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022). Wang et al. (2022) used ultra-performance 
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS) to determine the anthocyanins’ 
composition of 62 blueberry cultivars in China. Among them, “Rubel” showed the high­
est anthocyanin contents (534 mg/100 g fresh weight), whereas “Puru” contained the low­
est contents (71 mg/100 g fresh weight). These same authors reported that among all the 
monomers of anthocyanins identified in the 62 cultivars, malvidin-galactoside presented 
the highest average content (~48 mg/100 g fresh weight).
A large number of overlapping anthocyanin components can be found among blueberry 
cultivars, indicating that close genetic relationships still exist among breeding cultivars 
(Yang et al., 2022). A recent study reported the anthocyanins’ composition of 17 blueberry 
cultivars found in China, being delphinidin, malvidin, and petunidin glycosides as the 
main identified anthocyanins, accounting for more than 90% of the total anthocyanin con­
tent (Wu et al., 2023).
FIGURE 4.2
Biological properties associated with anthocyanins from berries.

85
Anthocyanins as Food Colorants
Anthocyanins from blueberry are diverse in composition and contents, and remark­
able biological effects were reported, such as antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities, 
improvement in vision quality, lowering blood pressure, and role in the prevention of car­
diovascular and neurodegenerative diseases, and other effects (Routray & Orsat, 2011; Wu, 
Gao, Guo, Zhang, & Gong, 2018; Kalt et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2022).
4.2.2  Black Goji Berry (Lycium ruthenicum)
Lycium ruthenicum fruits belong to the family Solanaceae and genus Lycium, which is 
mainly distributed in China, Mongolia, Central Asia, and North Africa, and the deciduous 
shrub grows under the environment of special geography (high altitude) and arid climate 
(low temperature, less rain, and strong sunlight) (Wang et al., 2018; Liu, Liu, Wen, Tao, & 
Shao, 2020).
The total contents of anthocyanins of black goji berries are very high in the fresh fruits, 
reaching 24 mg/g, which was reported to be higher than other pigmented plants, such 
as blue honeysuckle (1–14 mg/g), some varieties of blueberries (4–6 mg/g), and mulber­
ries (0.1–3 mg/g) (Luo, Yu, Westland, & Mahon, 2019). Among the 39 identified black goji 
anthocyanins, most are 3,5-diglycoside derivatives of petunidin (>95%), being petunidin 
3-O-rutinoside (trans-p-coumaroyl)5-O-glucoside accounting for 80% of the total antho­
cyanins (Yan et al., 2022). In addition, many Z-E isomeric forms of anthocyanins in black 
goji were reported in nature, and the acyl groups in acylated anthocyanins were typically 
E-configured, with only a few Z-isomers (Ichiyanagi et al., 2005; Yan et al., 2022). The co-
existence and abundance of both Z- and E-anthocyanin isomers in the same source can be 
considered another detachable feature of black goji berry fruits.
Black goji berries are popular in the food industry for preparing potential functional 
foods, such as black goji juices and drinks, not only due to their related biological proper­
ties but also due to the attractive black-bluish color (Zhang et al., 2019), which increased 
the fruit consumption and stimulated the development of functional black goji products 
(Wang et al., 2018; Liu, Liu, Wen, Tao, & Shao, 2020). The biological properties associated 
with black goji berries are derived not only from its bioactive compounds, mainly antho­
cyanins, but also from essential oils, organic acids, minerals, and polysaccharides (Zheng 
et al., 2011; Peng, Liu, Shi, & Li, 2014; Peng, Liu, Lei, & Wang, 2016; Qi et al., 2019).
4.2.3  Blackcurrant (Ribes nigrum L.)
Ribes nigrum L. (genus Ribes, family Grossulariaceae), generally called blackcurrant, is a 
flowering shrub that contains deep purple, bittersweet, and seed-bearing berries that can 
attain a diameter of about 1 cm (Gopalan et al., 2012). These edible berries can be used to 
prepare syrup, jelly, candy, and liqueur, among others, and are commonly used to produce 
dark violet pigments due to their high contents of anthocyanins (Ejaz et al., 2023). For com­
parison purposes, the reported total anthocyanin contents for blackcurrant (freeze-dried 
powder extracts) were 1741 mg/100 g (dry weight), which were higher than for blueberry 
(1562 mg/100 g) and blackberry (949 mg/100 g) (Lee et al., 2015).
Blackcurrants have been considered “super fruits” since they are supposed to contrib­
ute to numerous therapeutic benefits, such as the capacity to treat chronic illnesses asso­
ciated with oxidative stress (Lister, Wilson, Sutton, & Morrison, 2002; Ejaz et al., 2023). 
Furthermore, blackcurrants are widely recognized for containing high levels of polyphe­
nols, specifically anthocyanins and proanthocyanins, when compared with other berries 
(Lee et al., 2015).

86
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Anthocyanins are the main investigated bioactive compounds in blackcurrants since 
they are present not only in the berries but also in its seeds and leaves (Zheng et al., 
2012; Teleszko & Wojdyło, 2015; Cao, Park, Lee, & Kim, 2021). Moreover, the contents of 
anthocyanins were observed to show wide variation among some blackcurrant cultivars, 
such as “Record,” “Blackdown,” and “Ronix” (80–476 mg/100 mg of fresh weight) (Nour, 
Stampar, Veberic, & Jakopic, 2013). Concerning the anthocyanins’ composition, about 97% 
of the anthocyanins in blackcurrants are derived from the four basic components delph­
inidin 3-O-glucoside, delphinidin 3-O-rutinoside, cyanidin 3-O-glucoside, and cyanidin 
3-O-rutinoside (Anttonen & Karjalainen, 2006; Cao, Park, Lee, & Kim, 2021).
4.2.4  Grumixama (Eugenia brasiliensis)
Grumixama fruits (genus Eugenia, family Myrtaceae) are very similar to cherries, with 
2.0-cm diameters, one to many seeds, and a thick peel that can be purple/red or yellow/
white depending on the species/varieties, being purplish/reddish color the most common 
fruits (Da Silva, Rodrigues, Mercadante, & De Rosso, 2014; Teixeira, Bertoldi, Lajolo, & 
Hassimotto, 2015). The Myrtaceae family is generally considered an important family of 
edible fruits which comprises around 121 genera and 3800–5800 species of woody shrubs 
or trees, mostly evergreen and distributed mainly in the tropics and subtropics (Stefanello, 
Pascoal, & Salvador, 2011). The fruits from this family have significant economic potential 
due to their nutritional values, especially as promising sources of bioactive compounds 
with antioxidant properties of wide interest to the food, cosmetics, and pharmaceutical 
industries (Sardi et al., 2017).
Grumixama fruits have purple/red peel due to the presence of anthocyanins, especially 
cyanidin 3-O-glucoside and delfinidin 3-O-glucoside (Fischer et al., 2005; Flores et al., 2012; 
Da Silva, Rodrigues, Mercadante, & De Rosso, 2014), and the first accounts for ~94% of 
the total monomeric anthocyanins (Da Silva, Rodrigues, Mercadante, & De Rosso, 2014). 
The total contents of anthocyanins were reported in the range of 239–643 mg/100 g (fresh 
weight) (Araújo, Neri-Numa, de Paulo Farias, da Cunha, & Pastore, 2019; Modesto Junior, 
Martins, Pereira, Chisté, & Pena, 2023a).
The grumixama fruits are commonly used to prepare homemade foods, such as frozen 
fruits, frozen pulps, and jellies. The anthocyanins recovered from the edible part of purple 
grumixama were reported to have great potential to be used as a natural colorant in the 
food industry (Modesto Junior, Martins, Pereira, Chisté, & Pena, 2023a). Modesto Junior et 
al. (2023b) prepared grumixama juice to stimulate the development of healthy options of 
food products with high contents of antioxidant compounds, especially anthocyanins, and 
reported delphinidin 3-glucoside (10.68 mg/L) and cyanidin 3-glucoside (13.67 mg/L) as 
the predominant compounds.
Furthermore, systematic investigations concerning the biological effects of grumixama 
fruits are needed to understand its full technological potential, since only a few reports 
are available (Araújo, Neri-Numa, de Paulo Farias, da Cunha, & Pastore, 2019), such the 
anti-inflammatory capacity of fruit pulp extracts to reduce NF-κB activation and release of 
TNF-α (Lazarini et al., 2018), and the antiproliferative activity against human breast cancer 
cells reported for grumixama juice (Teixeira et al., 2017).
4.2.5  Mulberry (Morus spp.)
Mulberry from the genus Morus is a perennial woody plant in the Moraceae family 
(Erden, 2021), which is a fast-growing deciduous plant found in a wide range of climatic, 

87
Anthocyanins as Food Colorants
topographical, and soil conditions, and it is widely distributed, from temperate to sub­
tropical regions of the Northern hemisphere to the tropics of the Southern hemisphere 
(Wen et al., 2019).
Since ancient times, the Chinese Materia Medica (CMM) describes many medicinal 
benefits associated with mulberry, and these beneficial effects along with the promising 
chemical composition have attracted increasing research interest throughout the world 
(China, Japan, Korea, and some European countries), mainly regarding the bioactive com­
pounds, such as flavonoids (including anthocyanins), other non-flavonoids, alkaloids, and 
polysaccharides (Hunyadi, Martins, Hsieh, Seres, & Zupkó, 2012; Wen et al., 2019). In most 
mulberry-growing countries, the fruits are eaten fresh, dried, or processed into wines, 
fruit juices, and jams, because of their highly appreciated taste, low-calorie contents, and 
appealing color due to the presence of high contents of anthocyanins (Huang, Zhou, Meng, 
Wu, & He, 2017; Aybastier, 2021).
As anthocyanin contents and profiles may vary with cultivars, environmental condi­
tions, agricultural practices, processing, and storage, Kim and Lee (2020) investigated the 
composition of 12 cultivars of mulberry from Korea, by LC-MS, and 16 anthocyanins were 
identified. These authors reported that cyanidin 3-O-glucoside was the major anthocyanin 
in mulberries (33–1951 mg/100 g, dry weight), accounting for ~67% of the total contents, 
followed by cyanidin 3-O-rutinoside (18–865 mg/100 g, dry weight) and pelargonidin 
3-glucoside (0–51 mg/100 g). In this same study, several anthocyanins were identified for 
the first time in mulberry fruits and included malvidin hexoside, cyanidin malonyl hexose 
hexoside, cyanidin pentoside, cyanidin malonyl hexoside, petunidin deoxyhexose hexo­
side, and cyanidin deoxyhexoside (Kim & Lee, 2020).
In addition to imparting attractive colors, anthocyanins from mulberry have known 
pharmacological activities and health-enhancing potential, such as antioxidant, and anti-
inflammatory, and are associated with the decrease in the development of chronic degen­
erative diseases (Wen et al., 2019).
4.3  Limitations for the Application of Anthocyanins by the 
Food Industries
The chemical instability of anthocyanins probably results in their low bioavailability (0.26–
1.8%) (Cladis, Debelo, Lachcik, Ferruzzi, & Weaver, 2020) and seriously limits their applica­
tion in food, cosmetic, and pharmaceutical industries. These compounds are hydrophilic 
and highly susceptible to degradation and significantly lose color due to several environ­
mental factors, mainly pH variation, high temperature, and light and oxygen exposure 
(Herrera-Balandrano, Chai, Beta, Feng, & Huang, 2021; Oancea, 2021; Rashwan et al., 2021). 
Thus, the application of anthocyanins or its natural extracts in food products that are 
subjected to food processing is challenging, especially on an industrial scale. Therefore, 
understanding the main factors that limit the stability of anthocyanins and allow explor­
ing technological alternatives to increase the stabilization of anthocyanins, in both food 
and physiological systems, have high industrial relevance worldwide.
Anthocyanin molecules undergo reversible chemical alterations in their structures as 
influenced by pH changes, which will be one of the most important decision factors to 
take into consideration before using anthocyanins as food colorant (Enaru, Drețcanu, Pop, 
Stǎnilǎ, & Diaconeasa, 2021).

88
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
In general, in an acidic environment, at pH values from about 1 to 3, anthocyanins are 
found as flavylium cation (red color), and this structural form is responsible for the pro­
duction of intense reddish and/or purplish colors (Khoo, Azlan, Tang, & Lim, 2017). When 
the pH increases between around 4 and 6, colorless carbinol pseudobases may take place 
(Kang, Ko, & Chung, 2021). Finally, at a pH higher than 7–8, quinoidal blueish structures 
are formed, followed by yellowish chalcones formation (pH > 8), due to C-ring opening. 
Different hues and color intensities may be observed as dependent on the anthocyanin’s 
composition in the medium.
Therefore, considering the high susceptibility of anthocyanins to pH variation, the addi­
tion of anthocyanins in food formulations is more appropriate for food products with 
acidic characteristics. Another very interesting application of anthocyanins as a food colo­
rant is about its incorporation in the formulation of “intelligent” films, which have proven 
to be reliable in indicating the freshness of foods such as fish, pork, and milk, based on 
their pH alterations due to the loss of quality during storage (Francisco et al., 2024; Wu 
et al., 2024; Yang, Ding, Qijun, Li, & Han, 2024). Figure 4.3 illustrates the reversible color 
changes of anthocyanins as influenced by pH alteration.
Another important limiting factor to be considered before the application of anthocya­
nins as food colorant is their susceptibility to loss of color and degradation during food 
processing when high temperatures are used. Thermal degradation of anthocyanins, in 
particular at pH above 4.0 (colorless carbinol pseudobase), follows the pathway of inter­
mediate chalcone and final derivatives of aldehyde and phenolic acids, structurally dif­
ferentiated based on the corresponding anthocyanin (Sinela et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019), 
FIGURE 4.3
Structural modifications of anthocyanins molecules and associated color changes as induced by pH alteration.

89
Anthocyanins as Food Colorants
as illustrated in Figure 4.4. Combined hydrolytic and auto-oxidative reactions are probably 
involved (Dangles & Fenger, 2018).
Obviously, thermal degradation of anthocyanins occurs to different extents, depend­
ing on the raw material, pH, structural characteristics, and presence of co-pigments. 
Importantly, the stability of anthocyanins increases as methylation increases or acyla­
tion is found in the structure and decreases with an increasing number of OH groups 
in the B-ring (Fei et al., 2020). Thus, extracts composed of highly acylated anthocyanins 
tend to be more stable than the non-acylated alternatives, and this fact calls our attention 
to the importance of investigations concerning the elucidation of anthocyanin’s compo­
sition in food matrices. Furthermore, deglycosylation is the main thermal degradation 
pathway in glycosylated anthocyanins, as in the case of cyanidin 3-glucoside, where the 
sugar moiety attached to C3 is removed, inducing the cleavage of B- or A-ring that gen­
erates phloroglucinolaldehyde or 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (Patras, Brunton, O’Donnell, & 
Tiwari, 2010).
In addition to pH changes and temperature increases, the light exposure and molecular 
oxygen presence are also important frequent conditions that limit the industrial use of 
anthocyanins as food colorants. In nature, plants are exposed to light, which stimulates 
anthocyanin synthesis and accumulation; hence, light is another important parameter 
in the stability of these compounds (Sikorski, 2018). However, anthocyanins are affected 
by light exposure in two ways: light is required for anthocyanins production, but it also 
FIGURE 4.4
Possible mechanisms of thermal degradation of anthocyanins. R1 and R2 can be OH, H, and/or OCH3 to indicate 
the other structures of anthocyanins. (Adapted from Damodaran, Parkin, & Fennema, 2010.)

90
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
speeds up their breakdown (Cavalcanti, Santos, & Meireles, 2011). In addition, the amount 
of molecular oxygen in the medium increases the rate of light-induced breakdown; thus, it 
should be mentioned that intense color fade is expected when anthocyanins absorb light 
after a period of sensitization (Remini et al., 2018). Studies carried out to understand the 
impact of light on the stability of anthocyanin extracts from various biological sources can 
be found in the literature. As an example, Modesto Junior et al. (2023b) exposed extracts of 
anthocyanins of E. brasiliensis to different light sources, namely, fluorescent, incandescent, 
and ultraviolet. These authors observed that UV light, which has higher energy than vis­
ible light, induced lower half-life time (t1/2 = 0.18 h) to anthocyanins than incandescent 
(t1/2 = 59.63 h) and fluorescent (t1/2 = 45.61) lights.
4.4  Considerations on the Application of Anthocyanins in 
Food Formulations
The demand for foods and natural extracts with high contents of anthocyanins has 
increased the attention of the scientific community due to the claimed health benefits they 
may offer (Giusti & Wrolstad, 2003). Consumers and food manufacturers are searching 
for natural food colorants over synthetic dyes (Oplatowska-Stachowiak & Elliott, 2017). 
According to a 2007 trial conducted on children aged three and between eight and nine 
years, mixtures of artificial colorants such as Tartrazine (E102), Sunset Yellow (E110), 
Carmoisine (E122), Ponceau 4R (E124), Allura Red AC (E129), and Quinoline Yellow (E104), 
when combined with sodium benzoate (E211), statistically seem to be associated with con­
siderable rise of hyperactivity in children (McCann et al., 2007).
Anthocyanins impart distinct color hues in the range of red, orange, purple, and blue, 
as demonstrated in this chapter, and they have been used as natural, water-soluble, Codex 
Alimentarius-approved food colorant (E163) for the application in a range of food and 
beverage products (Gençdağ, Özdemir, Demirci, Görgüç, & Yılmaz, 2022; Silva, Reboredo, 
& Lidon, 2022). As an example, anthocyanins hold great importance in wine industries as 
they play a major role in affecting wine properties, such as wine color, mouthfeel, aging, 
stability, and overall quality (Ruta & Farcasanu, 2019). Moreover, adding extracts rich in 
anthocyanins to baked goods such as cookies, biscuits, and macarons can attribute attrac­
tive visual colors to characterize new products, in addition to potentially increase its anti­
oxidant properties (Papillo et al., 2018; Albuquerque, Pinela, Barros, Oliveira, & Ferreira, 
2020), increasing the market appeal and overall food’s acceptability. Furthermore, antho­
cyanins have proved to exhibit high stability during storage in acidic fermented products, 
such as kefir, yogurt, and various beverages, and these products might be thought of as 
ideal foods for anthocyanin addition as a food coloring (Wallace & Giusti, 2008; Karaaslan, 
Ozden, Vardin, & Turkoglu, 2011). Due to the higher stability of acylated anthocyanins 
during food processing conditions, researchers around the world are frequently investi­
gating the technological potential of promising sources of acylated structures, such as red 
cabbage, radish, and black carrots, which are known to contain high amounts of these type 
of anthocyanins (B’kowska-Barczak, 2005).
Therefore, anthocyanins have high technological potential for the application in the 
food development sectors to stimulate the design of a number of functional foods and 
beverages, which may contribute to beneficial effects to human health.

91
Anthocyanins as Food Colorants
4.5  Final Considerations
Over the years, anthocyanins (isolated or extracts with high contents) have been investi­
gated as natural colorants in a number of food applications mainly due to their attractive 
colors, in addition to the known biological properties that can add value in the develop­
ment of potential functional foods. The high instability of anthocyanins over a number of 
food processing and storage conditions, mainly pH change, temperature increase, light, 
and oxygen exposure, which result in intense color fade, is the main limiting factor to 
consolidating these natural pigments in the food industry as the first choice to impart 
reddish-purplish colors to food products.
Therefore, systematic studies to optimize different strategies to protect anthocyanins 
during food processing are still needed, such as encapsulation techniques, as well as 
further scientific investigations to undercover new plant sources with high contents of 
selected and more stable anthocyanins to make them feasible to be exploited by sustain­
able approaches.
References
Aboonabi, A., Singh, I., & Rose’Meyer, R. (2020). Cytoprotective effects of berry anthocyanins against 
induced oxidative stress and inflammation in primary human diabetic aortic endothelial cells. 
Chemico-Biological Interactions, 317, 108940. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbi.2020.108940
Albuquerque, B. R., Pinela, J., Barros, L., Oliveira, M. B. P. P., & Ferreira, I. C. F. R. (2020). Anthocyanin-
rich extract of jabuticaba epicarp as a natural colorant: Optimization of heat-and ultrasound-
assisted extractions and application in a bakery product. Food Chemistry, 316, 126364. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2020.126364
Anttonen, M. J., & Karjalainen, R. O. (2006). High-performance liquid chromatography analysis 
of black currant (Ribes nigrum L.) fruit phenolics grown either conventionally or organically. 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 54, 20, 7530–7538. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf0615350
Araújo, F. F., Neri-Numa, I. A., de Paulo Farias, D., da Cunha, G. R. M. C., & Pastore, G. M. (2019). 
Wild Brazilian species of Eugenia genera (Myrtaceae) as an innovation hotspot for food and 
pharmacological purposes. Food Research International, 121, 57–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodres.2019.03.018
Aybastier, Ö. (2021). Isolation and determination of antioxidant compounds from black mulberry 
(Morus nigra L.) by chromatographic methods. Food, 46, 1, 32–41. https://doi.org/10.15237/
gida.GD20114
Badescu, M., Badulescu, O., Badescu, L., & Ciocoiu, M. (2015). Effects of Sambucus nigra and Aronia 
melanocarpa extracts on immune system disorders within diabetes mellitus. Pharmaceutical 
Biology, 53, 4, 533–539. https://doi.org/10.3109/13880209.2014.931441
Polish Journal of Food and Nutrition Sciences, 14, 55.
Bocker, R., & Silva, E. K. (2022). Pulsed electric field assisted extraction of natural food pigments 
and colorings from plant matrices. Food Chemistry: X, 15, 30, 100398. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fochx.2022.100398
Borges, G., Degeneve, A., Mullen, W., & Crozier, A. (2010). Identification of flavonoid and phenolic 
antioxidants in black currants, blueberries, raspberries, red currants, and cranberries. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 58, 7, 3901–3909. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf902263n
Bqkowska-Barczak, A. (2005). Acylated anthocyanins as stable, natural food colorants – A review. 

92
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Cao, L., Park, Y., Lee, S., & Kim, D.-O. (2021). Extraction, identification, and health benefits of antho­
cyanins in blackcurrants (Ribes nigrum L.). Applied Sciences, 11, 1863. https://doi.org/10.3390/
app11041863
Cavalcanti, R. N., Santos, D. T., & Meireles, M. A. A. (2011). Non-thermal stabilization mechanisms 
of anthocyanins in model and food systems—An overview. Food research international, 44(2), 
499–509.
Cavalcanti, R. N., Santos, D. T., & Meireles, M. A. A. (2021). Non-thermal stabilization mechanisms 
of anthocyanins in model and food systems—An overview. Food Research International, 44, 2 
499–509. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2010.12.007
Chung, C., Rojanasasithara, T., Mutilangi, W., & McClements, D. J. (2017). Stability improvement of 
natural food colors: Impact of amino acid and peptide addition on anthocyanin stability in model 
beverages. Food Chemistry, 218, 277–284. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2016.09.087
Cladis, D. P., Debelo, H., Lachcik, P. J., Ferruzzi, M. G., & Weaver, C. M. (2020). Increasing doses of 
blueberry polyphenols alters colonic metabolism and calcium absorption in ovariectomized rats. 
Molecular Nutrition in Food Research, 64, 12, 2000031. https://doi.org/10.1002/mnfr.202000031
Da Silva, N. A., Rodrigues, E., Mercadante, A. Z., & De Rosso, V. V. (2014). Phenolic compounds and 
carotenoids from four fruits native from the Brazilian Atlantic forest. Journal of Agricultural and 
Food Chemistry, 62, 22, 5072–5084. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf501211p
Damodaran, S., Parkin, K. I., & Fennema, O. R. (2010). Fennema’s Food Chemistry, 4th Ed., 900 pp. 
Portuguese version authorized from English language edition published by CRC Press, part of 
Taylor & Francis Group LLC, Porto Alegre.
Dangles, O., & Fenger, J. A. (2018). The chemical reactivity of anthocyanins and its consequences in 
food science and nutrition. Molecules, 23, 8, 1970. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules23081970
Ejaz, A., Waliat, S., Afzaal, M., Saeed, F., Ahmad, A., Din, A., Ateeq, H., Asghar, A., Shah, Y. A., Rafi, 
A., & Khan, M. R. (2023). Biological activities, therapeutic potential, and pharmacological 
aspects of blackcurrants (Ribes nigrum L): A comprehensive review. Food Science & Nutrition, 11, 
10, 5799–5817. https://doi.org/10.1002/fsn3.3592
Enaru, B., Drețcanu, G., Pop, T. D., Stǎnilǎ, A., & Diaconeasa, Z. (2021). Anthocyanins: Factors affecting 
their stability and degradation. Antioxidants, 10, 12. https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox10121967
Erden, Y. (2021). Sour black mulberry (Morus nigra L.) causes cell death by decreasing mutant 
p53 expression in HT-29 human colon cancer cells. Food Bioscience, 42, 101113. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fbio.2021.101113
FAOSTAT (2024). Food and Agriculture Data. Food and Agriculture Organization Corporate Statistical 
Database. Available online: https://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#home. Accessed on: 04/27/2024.
Fei, P., Zeng, F., Zheng, S., Chen, Q., Hu, Y., & Cai, J. (2020). Acylation of blueberry anthocyanins 
with maleic acid: Improvement of the stability and its application potential in intelligent 
color indicator packing materials. Dyes and Pigments, 184, 108852. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
dyepig.2020.108852
Fischer, D. C., Limberger, R. P., Henriques, A. T., & Moreno, P. R. (2005). Essential oils from leaves of 
two Eugenia brasiliensis specimens from southeastern Brazil. Journal of Essential Oil Research, 17, 
499–500. https://doi.org/10.1080/10412905.2005.9698977
Francisco, A. P., Sganzerla, W. G., Castro, L. E. N., Barroso, T. L. C. T., Silva, A. P. G., Rosa, C. G., 
Nunes, M. R., Forster-Carneiro, T., & Rostagno, M. A. (2024). Pressurized liquid extraction 
of bioactive compounds from grape peel and application in pH-sensing carboxymethyl cel­
lulose films: A promising material to monitor the freshness of pork and milk. Food Research 
International, 179, 114017. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2024.114017
Flores, G., Dastmalchi, K., Paulino, S., Whalen, K., Dabo, A. J., Reynertson, K. A., Foronjy, R. F., 
as potential therapeutics for COPD treatment. Food Chemistry, 134, 3, 1256–1262. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2012.01.086
Gamage, G. V., & Choo, W. S. (2023). Effect of hot water, ultrasound, microwave, and pectinase-
assisted extraction of anthocyanins from black goji berry for food application. Heliyon, 9, 
e14426. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e14426
D’Armiento, J. M., & Kennelly, E. J. (2012). Anthocyanins from Eugenia brasiliensis edible fruits 

93
Anthocyanins as Food Colorants
Gençdağ, E., Özdemir, E. E., Demirci, K., Görgüç, A., & Yılmaz, F. M. (2022). Copigmentation and 
stabilization of anthocyanins using organic molecules and encapsulation techniques. Current 
Plant Biology, 29, 100238. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpb.2022.100238
Giusti, M. M., & Wrolstad, R. E. (2003). Acylated anthocyanins from edible sources and their applica­
tions in food systems. Biochemical Engineering Journal, 14, 3, 217–225. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1369-703X(02)00221-8
Gopalan, A., Reuben, S. C., Ahmed, S., Darvesh, A. S., Hohmann, J., & Bishayee, A. (2012). The health 
benefits of blackcurrants. Food & Function, 3, 8, 795–809. https://doi.org/10.1039/C2fo30058c
Herrera-Balandrano, D. D., Chai, Z., Beta, T., Feng, J., & Huang, W. (2021). Blueberry anthocyanins: 
Na updated review on approaches to enhancing their bioavailability. Trends in Food Science & 
Technology, 118, Part B, 808–821. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2021.11.006
Huang, L., Zhou, Y., Meng, L., Wu, D., & He, Y. (2017). Comparison of different CCD detectors and 
chemometrics for predicting total anthocyanin content and antioxidant activity of mulberry 
fruit using visible and near infrared hyperspectral imaging technique. Food Chemistry, 224, 
1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2016.12.037
Hunyadi, A., Martins, A., Hsieh, T. J., Seres, A., & Zupkó, I. (2012). Chlorogenic acid and rutin play a 
major role in the in vivo anti-diabetic activity of Morus alba leaf extract on type II diabetic rats. 
PLoS One, 7, 11, e50619. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0050619
Ichiyanagi, T., Kashiwada, Y., Shida, Y., Ikeshiro, Y., Kaneyuki, T., & Konishi, T. (2005). Nasunin from 
eggplant consists of cis-trans isomers of delphinidin 3-[4-(ρ-coumaroyl)-l-rhamnosul (1→6) 
glucopyranoside]-5-glucopyranoside. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 53, 24, 
9472–9477. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf051841y
Kalt, W., Cassidy, A., Howard, L., Krikorian, R., Stull, A., Tremblay, F., & Zamora-Ros, R. (2020). 
Recent research on the health benefits of blueberries and their anthocyanins. Advances in 
Nutrition, 11, 2, 224–236. https://doi.org/10.1093/advances/nmz065
Kang, H.-J., Ko, M.-J., & Chung, M.-S. (2021). Anthocyanin structure and pH dependent extraction 
characteristics from blueberries (Vaccinium corymbosum) and chokeberries (Aronia melanocarpa) 
in subcritical water state. Foods, 10, 3, 527. https://doi.org/10.3390/foods10030527
Karaaslan, M., Ozden, M., Vardin, H., & Turkoglu, H. (2011). Phenolic fortification of yogurt using 
grape and callus extracts. LWT – Food Science and Technology, 44, 4, 1065–1072. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.lwt.2010.12.009
Khoo, H. E., Azlan, A., Tang, S. T., & Lim, S. M. (2017). Anthocyanidins and anthocyanins: Colored 
pigments as food, pharmaceutical ingredients, and the potential health benefits. Food & 
Nutrition Research, 61, 1, 1361779. https://doi.org/10.1080/16546628.2017.1361779
Kim, I., & Lee, J. (2020). Variations in anthocyanin profiles and antioxidant activity of 12 genotypes of 
mulberry (Morus spp.) fruits and their changes during processing. Antioxidants, 9, 242. https://
doi.org/doi:10.3390/antiox9030242
Koh, J., Xu, Z., & Wicker, L. (2020). Blueberry pectin and increased anthocyanins stability under in vitro 
digestion. Food Chemistry, 302, 125343–125350. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2019.125343
Koss-Mikołajczyk, I., Kusznierewicz, B., & Bartoszek, A. (2019). The relationship between phyto­
chemical composition and biological activities of differently pigmented varieties of berry fruits; 
comparison between embedded in food matrix and isolated anthocyanins. Foods, 8, 12, 646. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods8120646
Kong, J. M., Chia, L. S., Goh, N. K., Chia, T. F., & Brouillard, R. (2003). Analysis and biological activities 
of anthocyanins. Phytochemistry, 64, 5, 923–933. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0031-9422(03)00438-2
Lazarini, J. G., Sardi, J. D. C. O., Franchin, M., Nani, B. D., Freires, I. A., Infante, J., ... & Rosalen, P. 
L. (2018). Bioprospection of Eugenia brasiliensis, a Brazilian native fruit, as a source of anti-
inflammatory and antibiofilm compounds. Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy, 102, 132–139.
Lee, S. G., Vance, T. M., Nam, T. G., Kim, D. O., Koo, S. I., & Chun, O. K. (2015). Contribution of antho­
cyanin composition to total antioxidant capacity of berries. Plant Foods for Human Nutrition, 70, 
4, 427–432. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11130-015-0514-5
Lister, C. E., Wilson, P. E., Sutton, K. H., & Morrison, S. C. (2002). Understanding the health benefits 
of blackcurrants. Acta Horticulturae, 585, 443–449.

94
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Liu, Z., Liu, B., Wen, H., Tao, Y., & Shao, Y. (2020). Phytochemical profiles, nutritional constituents 
and antioxidant activity of black wolfberry (Lycium ruthenicum Murr.). Industrial Crops and 
Products, 154, 112692. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2020.112692
Luo, D., Yu, L., Westland, S., & Mahon, N. (2019). The influence of colour and image on consumer 
purchase intentions of convenience food. Journal of the International Colour Association, 24, 11–23. 
http://www.aic-colour.org/journal.htm
Martinez, L. M., Rando, B., Agante, L., & Abreu, A. M. (2021). True colors: Consumers’ packaging 
choices depend on the color of retail environment. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 59, 
102372. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretconser.2020.102372
Martins, N., Roriz, C. L., Morales, P., Barros, L., & Ferreira, I. C. F. R. (2016). Food colorants: Challenges, 
opportunities and current desires of agro-industries to ensure consumer expectations and 
regulatory practices. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 52, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tifs.2016.03.009
McCann, D., Barrett, A., Cooper, A., Crumpler, D., Dalen, L., Grimshaw, K., Kitchin, E., Lok, K., 
Porteous, L., Prince, E., Sonuga-Barke, E., Warner, J. O., & Stevenson, J. (2007). Food additives 
and hyperactive behaviour in 3-year-old and 8/9-year-old children in the community: A ran­
domised, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial. The Lancet, 370, 9598, 1560–1567. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61306-3
Modesto Junior, E. N., Martins, M. G., Pereira, G. A., Chisté, R. C., & Pena, R. D. S. (2023a). Stability 
kinetics of anthocyanins of grumixama berries (Eugenia brasiliensis Lam.) during thermal and 
light treatments. Foods, 12, 3, 565. https://doi.org/10.3390/foods12030565
Modesto Junior, E. N., Chaves, R. P. F., Martins, M. G., Pereira, G. A., Chisté, R. C., & Pena, R. D. S. 
(2023b). Phenolic compounds stability of grumixama (Eugenia brasiliensis) juice during process­
ing and storage. Beverages, 9, 4, 91. https://doi.org/10.3390/beverages9040091
Mordor Intelligence. Anthocyanin Market Size & Share Analysis – Growth Trends & Forecasts (2024–
2029). Available online: https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/anthocyanin-
market. Accessed on 04/27/2024.
Nour, V., Stampar, F., Veberic, R., & Jakopic, J. (2013). Anthocyanins pro-file, total phenolics and anti­
oxidant activity of black currant ethan-olic extracts as influenced by genotype and ethanol con­
centration. Food Chemistry, 141, 2, 961–966. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2013.03.105
Oancea, S. (2021). A review of the current knowledge of thermal stability of anthocyanins and 
approaches to their stabilization to heat. Antioxidants, 10, 9, 1337. https://doi.org/10.3390/
antiox10091337
Ockermann, P., Headley, L., Lizio, R., & Hansmann, J. (2021). A review of the properties of anthocya­
nins and their influence on factors affecting cardiometabolic and congnitive health. Nutrients, 
13, 8, 2831. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13082831
Oplatowska-Stachowiak, M., & Elliott, C. T. (2017). Food colors: Existing and emerging food safety 
concerns. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 57, 3, 524–548. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10408398.2014.889652
Papillo, V. A., Locatelli, M., Travaglia, F., Bordiga, M., Garino, C., Arlorio, M., & Coïsson, J. D. (2018). 
Spray-dried polyphenolic extract from Italian black rice (Oryza sativa L., var. Artemide) as 
new ingredient for bakery products. Food Chemistry, 269, 603–609. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodchem.2018.07.059
Paredes-López, O., Cervantes-Ceja, M. L., Vigna-Pérez, M., & Hernández-Pérez, T. (2010). Berries: 
Improving human healthy aging, and promoting quality life – A review. Plant Foods for Human 
Nutrition, 65, 299–308. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11130-010-0177-1
Patras, A., Brunton, N. P., O’Donnell, C., & Tiwari, B. K. (2010). Effect of thermal processing on antho­
cyanin stability in foods; mechanisms and kinetics of degradation. Trends in Food Science and 
Technology, 21, 1, 3–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2009.07.004
Peng, Q., Liu, H., Shi, S., & Li, M. (2014). Lycium ruthenicum polysaccharide attenuates inflamma­
tion through inhibiting TLR4/NF-κB signaling pathway. International Journal of Biological 
Macromolecules, 67, 330–335. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2014.03.023

95
Anthocyanins as Food Colorants
Peng, Q., Liu, H., Lei, H., & Wang, X. (2016). Relationship between structure and immunological 
activity of an arabinogalactan from Lycium ruthenicum. Food Chemistry, 194, 595–600. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2015.08.087
Qi, Y., Zhu, C., Chen, J., Liu, G., Yang, Z., & Chen, W. (2019). Comparative analysis of the quality 
and health-promoting compounds of two-shaped fruits of wild Lycium ruthenicum Murr. from 
the Qinghai–Tibet Plateau. Acta Physiologiae Plantarum, 41, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11738-019-2888-8
Rashwan, A. K., Karim, N., Xu, Y., Xie, J., Cui, H., Mozafari, M. R., & Chen, W. (2021). Potential 
micro-/nano-encapsulation systems for improving stability and bioavailability of antho­
cyanins: An updated review. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 63, 19, 3362–3385. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2021.1987858
Remini, H., Dahmoune, F., Sahraoui, Y., Madani, K., Kapranov, V., & Kiselev, E. (2018). Recent 
advances on stability of anthocyanins. RUND Journal of Agronomy and Animal Industries, 13, 4, 
257–286. https://doi.org/10.22363/2312-797X-2018-13-4-257-286
Ribeiro, J. S., & Veloso, C. M. (2021). Microencapsulation of natural dyes with biopolymers for 
application in food: A review. Food Hydrocolloids, 112, 106374. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodhyd.2020.106374
Routray, W., & Orsat, W. (2011). Blueberries and their anthocyanins: Factors affecting biosynthesis 
and properties. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 10, 303–320. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1541-4337.2011.00164.x
Ruta, L. L., & Farcasanu, I. C. (2019). Anthocyanins and anthocyanin-derived products in yeast-
fermented beverages. Antioxidants, 8, 6, 182. https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox8060182
Sardi, J. d. C. O., Freires, I. A., Lazarini, J. G., Infante, J., de Alencar, S. M., & Rosalen, P. L. (2017). 
Unexplored endemic fruit species from Brazil: Antibiofilm properties, insights into mode of 
action, and systemic toxicity of four Eugenia spp. Microbial Pathogenesis, 105, 280–287. https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.MICPATH.2017.02.044
Sharma, R. J., Gupta, R. C., Singh, S., Bansal, A. K., & Singh, I. P. (2016). Stability of anrhocyanins-and 
anthocyanidins-enriched extracts, and formulations of fruit pulp of Eugenia jambolana (‘jamun’). 
Food Chemistry, 190, 808–817. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2015.06.029
Sikorski, Z. E. (2018). Fennema’s food chemistry (fifth edition). Edited by Srinivasan Damodaran 
and Kirk L. Parkin. Journal of Food Biochemistry, 42, 2, e12483. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jfbc.12483
Silva, S., Costa, E. M., Veiga, M., Morais, R. M., Calhau, C., & Pintado, M. (2020). Health promoting 
properties of blueberries: A review. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 60, 181–200. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2018.1518895
Silva, M. M., Reboredo, F. H., & Lidon, F. C. (2022). Food colour additives: A synoptical overview 
on their chemical properties, applications in food products, and health side effects. Foods, 11, 3, 
379. https://doi.org/10.3390/foods11030379
Sinela, A., Rawat, N., Mertz, C., Achir, N., Fulcrand, H., & Dornier, M. (2017). Anthocyanins degrada­
tion during storage of Hibiscus sabdariffa extract and evolution of its degradation products. Food 
Chemistry, 214, 234–241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2016.07.071
Spence, C. (2018). Background colour & its impact on food perception & behaviour. Food Quality and 
Preference, 68, 156–166. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodqual.2018.02.012
Stefanello, M. E. A., Pascoal, A. C. R. F., & Salvador, M. J. (2011). Essential oils from neotropical 
Myrtaceae: Chemical diversity and biological properties. Chemistry & Biodiversity, 8, 1, 73–94. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/cbdv.201000098
Sun, L., Xin, F., & Alper, H. S. (2021). Bio-synthesis of food additives and colorants – A grow­
ing trend in future food. Biotechnology Advances, 47, 107694. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biotechadv.2020.107694
Tan, J., Han, Y., Han, B., Qi, X., Cai, X., Ge, S., & Xue, H. (2022). Extraction and purification of antho­
cyanins: A review. Journal of Agriculture and Food Research, 8, 100306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jafr.2022.100306

96
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Teixeira, L. d. L., Bertoldi, F. C., Lajolo, F. M., & Hassimotto, N. M. A. (2015). Identification of ellagitan­
nins and flavonoids from Eugenia brasiliensIs Lam. (Grumixama) by HPLC-ESI-MS/MS. Journal 
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 63, 22, 5417–5427. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.5b01195
Teixeira, L. L., Costa, G. R., Dörr, F. A., Ong, T. P., Pinto, E., Lajolo, F. M., & Hassimotto, N. M. 
A. (2017). Potential antiproliferative activity of polyphenol metabolites against human breast 
cancer cells and their urine excretion pattern in healthy subjects following acute intake of a 
polyphenol-rich juice of grumixama (Eugenia brasiliensis Lam.). Food & Function, 8, 6, 2266–2274. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C7FO00076F
Teleszko, M., & Wojdyło, A. (2015). Comparison of phenolic compounds and antioxidant potential 
between selected edible fruits and their leaves. Journal of Functional Foods, 14, 736–746. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jff.2015.02.041
Vidana Gamage, G. C., Lim, Y. Y., & Choo, W. S. (2021). Sources and relative stabilities of acylated 
and nonacylated anthocyanins in beverage systems. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 59, 3, 
831–845. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13197-021-05054-z
Wallace, T. C., & Giusti, M. M. (2008). Determination of color, pigment, and phenolic stability in 
yogurt systems colored with nonacylated anthocyanins from Berberis boliviana L. as compared 
to other natural/synthetic colorants. Journal of Food Science, 73, 4, C241–C248. https://doi.
org/10.1111/J.1750-3841.2008.00706.x
Lycium ruthenicum studies: Molecular biology, phytochemistry and pharmacology. Food 
Chemistry, 240, 759–766. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2017.08.026
Wang, F., Li, H., Qin, Y., Mao, Y., Zhang, B., & Deng, Z. (2019). Effects of heat, ultrasound, and micro­
wave processing on the stability and antioxidant activity of delphinidin and petunidin. Journal 
of Food Biochemistry, 43, 5, e12818. https://doi.org/10.1111/jfbc.12818
Wang, S., Wang, B., Dong, K., Li, J., Li, Y., & Sun, H. (2022). Identification and quantification of antho­
cyanins of 62 blueberry cultivars via UPLC-MS. Biotechnology & Biotechnological Equipment, 36, 
587–597. https://doi.org/10.1080/13102818.2022.2090857
Wen, P., Hu, T. G., Linhardt, R. J., Liao, S. T., Wu, H., & Zou, Y. X. (2019). Mulberry: A review of bioac­
tive compounds and advanced processing technology. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 83, 
138–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2018.11.017
Wood, L. (2019). $5 Billion Natural Dyes Market – Global Outlook and Forecasts 2019–2024. Retrieved 
from: https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/5-billion-natural-dyes-market—global-
outlook-and-forecasts-2019-2024-300797306.html Accessed 10/02/2023.
Wu, T., Gao, Y., Guo, X., Zhang, M., & Gong, L. (2018). Blackberry and blueberry anthocyanin supple­
mentation counteract high-fat-diet-induced obesity by alleviating oxidative stress and inflam­
mation and accelerating energy expenditure. Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity, 4051232. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/4051232
Wu, Y., Yang, H., Yang, H., Zhang, C., Lyu, L., Li, W., & Wu, W. (2022). A physiological and metabo­
lomic analysis reveals the effect of shading intensity on blueberry fruit quality. Food Chemistry: 
X, 15, 100367. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fochx.2022.100367
Wu, Y., Han, T., Yang, H., Lyu, L., Li, W., & Wu, W. (2023). Known and potential health benefits 
and mechanisms of blueberry anthocyanins: A review. Food Bioscience, 55, 103050. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fbio.2023.103050
Wu, X., Yan, X., Zhang, J., Wu, X., Luan, M., & Zhang, Q. (2024). Preparation and characterization of 
pH-sensitive intelligent packaging films based on cassava starch/polyvinyl alcohol matrices 
containing Aronia melanocarpa anthocyanins. LWT – Food Science and Technology, 194, 115818. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2024.115818
Yan, Y., Nisar, T., Fang, Z., Wang, L., Wang, Z., Gu, H., Wang, H., & Wang, W. (2022). Current developments 
on chemical compositions, biosynthesis, color properties and health benefits of black goji antho­
cyanins: An updated review. Horticulturae, 8, 1033. https://doi.org/10.3390/horticulturae8111033
Yang, S., Ding, Q., Li, Y., & Han, W. (2024). Bacterial cellulose/gelatin-based pH-responsive func­
tional film for food freshness monitoring. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 259, 
129203. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2024.129203
Wang, H., Li, J., Tao, W., Zhang, X., Gao, X., Yong, J., Zhao, J., Zhang, L., Li, Y., & Duan, J. A. (2018). 

97
Anthocyanins as Food Colorants
Yang, W., Guo, Y., Liu, M., Chen, X., Xiao, X., Wang, S., Gong, P., Ma, Y., & Chen, F. (2022). Structure 
and function of blueberry anthocyanins: A review of recent advances. Journal of Functional 
Foods, 88, 104864. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jff.2021.104864
Yue, E., Yu, Y., Wang, X., Liu, B., Bai, Y., & Yang, B. (2021). Anthocyanin protects cardiac function and 
cardiac fibroblasts from high-glucose induced inflammation and myocardial fibrosis by inhibit­
ing IL-17. Frontiers in Pharmacology, 11, 593633. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2020.593633
Zhang, J., Sun, L., Dong, Y., Fang, Z., Nisar, T., Zhao, T., & Guo, Y. (2019). Chemical compositions and 
α-glucosidase inhibitory effects of anthocyanidins from blueberry, blackcurrant and blue hon­
eysuckle fruits. Food Chemistry, 299, 125102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2019.125102
Zhao, Y. W., Wang, C. K., Huang, X. Y., & Hu, D. G. (2021). Anthocyanin stability and degradation 
in plants. Plant Signaling & Behavior, 16, 12, 1987767. https://doi.org/10.1080/15592324.2021.
1987767
Zheng, J., Ding, C., Wang, L., Li, G., Shi, J., Li, H., & Suo, Y. (2011). Anthocyanins composition and anti­
oxidant activity of wild Lycium ruthenicum Murr. from Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. Food Chemistry, 
126, 3, 859–865. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2010.11.052
Zheng, J., Yang, B., Ruusunen, V., Laaksonen, O., Tahvonen, R., Hellsten, J., & Kallio, H. (2012). 
Compositional differences of phenolic compounds between black currant (Ribes nigrum L.) cul­
tivars and their response to latitude and weather conditions. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 60, 26, 6581–6593. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf3012739

98
5
Antioxidant Properties of Anthocyanins
Shiva Serwan Hasso and Javed Ahamad
5.1  Introduction
Anthocyanins (ACNs) are part of the flavonoid family which is a subclass of polyphenols 
and are found widely in plants (Byamukama et al., 2006). Till now more than 700 ACNs 
have been reported, and these different ACNs are found in 27 families and 72 genera 
of plants (Zhang et al., 2019). ACNs give attractive colors ranging from red to magenta, 
purple, and blue in flowers, fruits, and vegetables (de Pascual-Teresa and Sanchez-Ballesta, 
2008; Wallace and Giusti, 2015). ACNs have been widely studied for their potential health 
benefits, including antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer activity as well as other 
health benefits (de Pascual-Teresa and Sanchez-Ballesta, 2008). The most common ACNs 
found in fruits and vegetables are pelargonidin, peonidin, petunidin, cyanidin, delphini­
din, and malvidin (Castañeda-Ovando et al., 2009).
ACNs are common in red and blue fruits such as berries, pomegranates, apples, and 
grapes as well as vegetables (red onion, red cabbage, and red lettuce) but their content 
varies between the various types of species, according to cultivar or diversity, growing 
area, climate, farming technics, harvest time, maturity, seasonal variability, processing 
and storing, temperature, and light exposure.
Berries such as strawberries, blueberries, blackberries, blackcurrants, and raspber­
ries contain large numbers of ACNs, ranging from about 100–700 mg/100g of the fresh 
product, but the largest amount of ACN is found in elderberries and chokeberries 
which contain about 1.4–1.8g/100g of product (de Pascual-Teresa and Sanchez-Ballesta, 
2008; Wallace and Giusti, 2015). The most common plants that contain ACNs include 
blackberry (Rubus fruticosus), blueberry (Vaccinium oxycoccos), bilberry (Vaccinium 
myrtillus), elderberries (Sambucus canadensis), blackcurrant (Ribes nigrum), strawberry 
(Fragaria ananassa), pomegranate (Punica granatum), red cabbage (Brassica oleracea), red 
grape (Vitis vinifera), chokeberries (Aronia melanocarpa), pistachio (Pistacia vera), red 
onion (Allium cepa), apple (Malus domestica), red oak leaf (Quercus rubra), red lollo lat­
tuce (Lactuca sativa), and raspberries (Rubus idaeus) (Ogawa et al., 2008; Pojer et al., 2013; 
Ramos et al., 2014).
ACNs have been reported as powerful antioxidants in many in-vitro and in-vivo studies 
(Kähkönen and Heinonen, 2003; Einbond et al., 2004; Zafra-Stone et al., 2007). Due to their 
antioxidant potential, ACNs are used for the prevention and treatment of several human 
illnesses like diabetes, cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), cancer, liver disorders, neurode­
generative diseases, etc. (Wang and Stoner, 2008; Wallace, 2011; Gowd et al., 2017; Mehmood 
et al., 2021). The present book chapter comprises the recent studies on ACNs and discusses 
important progress made in ACNs’ role as antioxidants and further understanding its role 

99
Antioxidant Properties of Anthocyanins
in the prevention and treatment of various diseases like cancer, metabolic syndrome, liver, 
and neurodegenerative disorders.
5.2  Chemistry, Biogenesis, and Sar of Anthocyanin
5.2.1  Chemistry of Anthocyanins
ACNs belong to a large class of polyphenolic compounds known as flavonoids. Flavonoids 
are categorized into various subclasses, such as flavanols, flavonols, anthocyanidins, fla­
vanones, flavones, and isoflavones. They possess a similar 15-carbon atom-based skeleton 
known as the 2-phenyl-1-benzopyrylium or flavylium cation backbone, which is composed 
of a C-6 (A ring) – C-3 (C ring) – C-6 (B ring) structure (Harborne, 1998). The variations 
between the subclasses are due to the presence of double bonds and carbonyl groups in 
the C ring. Chemically, ACNs are the glycosylated forms of anthocyanidins (aglycones). 
Anthocyanidins are formed by a flavylium cation backbone hydroxylated in different 
positions, typically on carbons C3, C5, C6, C7, and C3ʹ, C4ʹ, C5ʹ, resulting in various antho­
cyanidins (Castañeda-Ovando et al., 2009). Currently, approximately 700 different ACNs 
and 25 distinct anthocyanidins (aglycone forms of ACNs) have been identified in nature. 
However, only six anthocyanidins are commonly found such as cyanidin (Cy), delphinidin 
(Dp), malvidin (Mv), pelargonidin (Pg), peonidin (Pn), and petunidin (Pt), accounting for 
more than 90% of all identified ACNs (Feng et al., 2023). The variations in ACN structure 
arise from differences in the quantity and placements of OH-groups and the extent of their 
methylation, the type, number, and position of sugars attached to the aglycone, as well as 
the type and number of aliphatic and aromatic acids bonded to these sugars (Feng et al., 
2023; Liu et al., 2023). The OH-groups on the aglycone can be attached to sugar molecules 
in which ACN is formed, which can further connect with other sugars through glycosidic 
bonds. However, the most common attached sugars are glucose (glu) and rhamnose (rha), 
but galactose (gal), xylose (xyl), arabinose (ara), rutinose (rut), and other sugars are also fre­
quently observed. Although, the glycosyl moieties of ACNs can also be acylated with aro­
matic or aliphatic acids (such as cinnamic, malonic, and acetic acids) through ester bonds. 
Both glycosylation and acylation impact the physical and chemical properties of ACNs 
by altering the size and polarity of the molecule. Glycosylation increases water solubility 
while acylation decreases it. Since the aglycone form of ACNs is rarely found in nature due 
to its instability, glycosylation enhances stability by creating an intramolecular hydrogen 
bonding network within the molecule. Therefore, the presence of different sugar moieties 
and various acyl groups (including aliphatic and cinnamic acids) contributes to the diverse 
chemical structures of ACNs found in nature (He and Giusti, 2010). The chemical struc­
tures of the most important ACNs are presented in Figures 5.1 and 5.2.
Anthocyanidin
R1
R2
R3
Pelargonidin (Pg)
–H
–OH
–H
Cyanidin (Cy)
–OH
–OH
–H
Peonidin (Pn)
–OCH3
–OH
–H
Delphinidin (Dp)
–OH
–OH
–OH
Petunidin (Pt)
–OH
–OH
–OCH3
Malvidin (Mv)
–OCH3
–OH
–OCH3

100
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
5.2.2  Biogenesis of Anthocyanins
ACNs are derived from phenylalanine or tyrosine which is derived from the shikimate 
pathway, and further, it is transformed into 4-coumaroyl-CoA through the phenylpro­
panoid pathway or the combined action of TAL and 4CL enzymes. From that point on, 
the ACNs are synthesized via the general flavonoid pathway, whereby one molecule of 
4-coumaroyl-CoA combines with three molecules of malonyl-CoA to produce naringenin 
chalcone, which is then converted to naringenin by CHI enzyme. Naringenin serves as a 
major intermediate compound and undergoes various hydroxylation reactions to form dif­
ferent anthocyanidins. These anthocyanidins are further modified through glycosylation 
and other processes to produce ACNs (Figure 5.3) (Zha and Koffas, 2017).
5.2.3  Structure-Activity Relationships (SAR) of Anthocyanins
The antioxidant properties of ACNs depend on their specific chemical structure. Whereby, 
factors such as the positions, numbers, and types of chemical groups (such as hydroxyl, 
methyl, acyl, and glycosyl) attached to the aromatic rings of ACNs are important for their 
structure-activity relationship (Apak et al., 2007; Gulcin, 2020). For flavonoids, three struc­
tural requirements: the catechol group in the B-ring, the conjugated double bond with the 
4-oxo group in the C-ring, and hydroxyl groups in positions 3 and 5 contribute to their 
strong antioxidant activity. However, for ACNs, which lack of double bond at positions 
C2–C3 and a 4-oxo group, the substituents in the B-ring greatly influence their antioxidant 
capacity. The presence of OH-groups is more effective than –OCH3 groups or hydrogen 
(H) alone. Although, the configuration of a B-ring with 3′,4′-dihydroxyl groups is par­
ticularly important for determining antioxidant activity in ACNs (Rossetto et al., 2007). 
The arrangement, substitution, and total number of hydroxyl groups have a significant 
impact on the antioxidant activity of ACNs. Specifically, the presence of OH-groups in 
positions C3′ and C4′ of ring B is crucial for the free radical scavenging abilities of ACNs 
(Kongpichitchoke et al., 2015). Although, previous studies have shown that delphinidin 
(Dp) exhibits stronger radical scavenging activity than cyanidin (Cy) (Noda et al., 2002; 
Kähkönen and Heinonen, 2003; Azevedo et al., 2010), due to the presence of three hydroxyl 
on the B-ring of delphinidin (Dp). However, the last findings have been reported by Wang 
FIGURE 5.1
Chemical structures of the basic skeleton of anthocyanin.

101
Antioxidant Properties of Anthocyanins
et al., where purified delphinidin (Dp) with three hydroxyl groups on the B-ring had lower 
oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC) activity compared to cyanidin (Cy), pelargoni­
din (Pg), malvidin (Mv), and peonidin (Pn) compounds having one or two hydroxyl groups 
(Wang et al., 1997). These studies suggest that while hydroxylation at positions 3′ and 4′ 
in the B-ring is important for radical scavenging potential in ACNs, additional hydrox­
ylation at position 5′ may decrease ORAC activity when combined with 3′ and 4′-OH. 
Compared to Cy and Dp, Pg, Mv, and Pn compounds which have only one hydroxyl group 
in the B-ring, exhibit lower activities in terms of ORAC, ABTS, and DPPH assays (Wang 
et al., 1997; Kähkönen and Heinonen, 2003; Chen et al., 2019). These findings highlight the 
FIGURE 5.2
Chemical structures of major anthocyanins.

102
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
FIGURE 5.3
Biosynthetic pathway of major anthocyanins.
Abbreviations:  TAL, tyrosine ammonia lyase; PAL, phenylalanine ammonia-lyase; C4H, cinnamate 4-
hydroxylase; CPR, cytochrome P450 reductase; 4CL, 4-coumaroyl-CoA ligase; CHI, chalcone isomerase; CHS, 
chalcone synthase; F3H, flavanone 3-hydroxylase; F30 H, flavonoid 30-hydroxylase; F30 50 H, flavonoid 30, 
50 -hydroxylase; DFR, dihydroflavonol reductase; ANS, anthocyanidin synthase; FGT, flavonoid glucosyltrans­
ferase; ACT, ACN acyltransferase, OMT, O-methyltransferase.

103
Antioxidant Properties of Anthocyanins
importance of the 3′–4′ catechol (dihydroxy benzene) structure in determining scavenger 
activity (Atmani et al., 2009). In addition to the hydroxyl groups, different arrangements of 
sugars can also impact the antioxidant effects of ACNs (Kähkönen and Heinonen, 2003). 
The position, degree, as well as sugar groups of glycosylation and anthocyanidins, play 
a significant role. Usually, ACNs tend to reduce the antioxidant power compared to their 
aglycone parts (Wang and Stoner, 2008). However, the impact differs depending on a few 
factors. For instance, glucosylation can either decrease (Mv3G < Mv), increase (Cy3G > Cy), 
or not significantly affect (Pg = Pg3G) the ORAC activity of aglycones. In some cases, the 
presence and quantity of sugar groups affect antioxidant activity. Glucose and rhamnose-
glucose can increase ORAC activity for Cy while decreasing it when galactose is present 
(Wang et al., 1997). Additionally, ACNs with single sugars like glucose and galactose tend 
to show higher antioxidant capabilities compared to those with double sugars (Kähkönen 
and Heinonen, 2003; Reis et al., 2016). Other changes in the structure, like adding methyl 
or acyl groups to the hydroxyl groups of ACNs, significantly influence their antioxidant 
effects. Generally, when methyl groups are present at C3ʹ, C4ʹ, and C3 positions, they tend to 
lessen the antioxidant effects of ACNs (Reis et al., 2016). For instance, Mv and Mv3G, which 
contain two –OCH3 (methoxy) substituents, showed lower antiradical and reducing capa­
bilities compared to Cy and Dp, Cy3G, and Dp3G, which lack –OCH3 groups (Azevedo et 
al., 2010). However, some studies found that Pn, with a methoxy group in the 3′-position 
exhibited more activity than Pg with a lack of methoxy group (Kähkönen and Heinonen, 
2003). Moreover, a study by Sintzing et al. demonstrated that 5-glycosylation reduced ORAC 
value, while acylation increased the antioxidant potency (Stintzing et al., 2002).
5.3  Antioxidant Mechanism of Anthocyanins
In a typical and healthy state of the human body, there is an equilibrium between free rad­
icals and the internal defense mechanisms of antioxidants. Certain free radicals, includ­
ing superoxide radical anion, nitric oxide (NO), and associated reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) and/or reactive nitrogen species (RNS), play vital roles in maintaining cellular sig­
naling pathways, the immune system, and various other physiological processes (Dröge, 
2002; Jing, 2006). However, an overproduction of free radicals disrupts the body’s oxidative 
equilibrium, leading to oxidative stress, that can harm essential cellular components such 
as proteins, DNA, and membrane lipids (Figure 5.4) (Tandon et al., 2005). Acute inflam­
mation serves as the primary response to injury and pathogens, typically followed by 
FIGURE 5.4
Pathophysiology and oxidative equilibrium in the human body.

104
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
inflammation resolution (Salehi et al., 2019b). Persistent inflammation due to the resolution 
failure results in the progression of numerous chronic diseases, including CVDs, diabetes 
mellitus, neurodegenerative disorders, and cancers (Arulselvan et al., 2016; Salehi et al., 
2018g).
ACNs are the most safe, potent, and naturally occurring water-soluble scavengers of 
free radicals discovered to date. Their effectiveness as antioxidants is primarily related to 
their molecular structures (Fernandes et al., 2014). ACNs can show their antioxidant effects 
through both direct and indirect mechanisms. Directly, ACNs exhibit free radical scav­
enging capabilities due to their ability to donate hydrogen (electrons), or they may bolster 
the body’s intrinsic antioxidant defenses, either by increasing or restoring the activities of 
key antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase (SOD) and glutathione peroxidase 
(GPx), as reported by Toufektsian et al. (2008), or by directly acting on the genes respon­
sible for encoding these enzymes (Shih et al., 2010). Moreover, these compounds exert their 
antioxidant effects indirectly by reducing the formation of oxidative DNA chemical altera­
tions and endogenous reactive oxygen species (ROS) by inhibiting enzymes like xanthine 
oxidase, and NADPH oxidase or by modulating arachidonic metabolism and mitochon­
drial respiration, as observed by Pojer et al. (2013). The mechanism of action of ACNs is 
presented in Figure 5.5.
5.4  Antioxidant Activity of Anthocyanins
5.4.1  Cardiovascular Protection
Cardiovascular dysfunction arises due to the production of free radicals from various 
sources such as the mitochondrial electron transport chain, inducible NO synthase, the 
Angiotensin II (ANG-II) mediated NADPH oxidase system, and xanthine oxidase (Munzel 
et al., 2017). Free radicals and ROS which are the leading cause of oxidation can result in 
cardiomyocyte loss and endothelial cell destruction in the blood vessel leading to cellu­
lar signaling for hypertrophic responses (Alam et al., 2021). The oxidation of low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL) initiates the accumulation of macrophage white blood cells in the artery 
wall, contributes to plaque formation, and eventually causes atherosclerosis and CVDs 
(Aviram, 2000; Aviram et al., 2005).
FIGURE 5.5
Antioxidant mechanism of anthocyanins.

105
Antioxidant Properties of Anthocyanins
Previous studies show that antioxidant therapy may alleviate oxidative stress and car­
diac remodeling (Ulla et al., 2017; Alam, 2019). Endothelium-derived NO deficiency cor­
relates closely with hypertension (Jousilahti et al., 1999). To date, various antioxidants 
and scavengers of oxygen free radicals have been demonstrated to activate NO synthase 
(NOS), thereby reducing blood pressure (Kojšová et al., 2006). Although, redox imbalance 
is a significant risk factor for stroke that contributes to endothelial dysfunction. ACNs 
possess the potential to prevent harmful factors affecting endothelial cells (Manolescu et 
al., 2019). ACNs derived from purple sweet potatoes have been studied to prevent isch­
emic stroke by decreasing levels of apoptosis-inducing factors, enhancing brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor signaling crucial for stroke recovery, and activating other antioxi­
dant mechanisms (Alvarez-Suarez et al., 2014; Adnyana et al., 2019). Therefore, ACNs and 
their vascular endothelium-related metabolites play a role in preventing CVDs, including 
stroke. Furthermore, oxidative stress can induce cardiomyocyte apoptosis and impair cel­
lular function. Lingonberry ACNs protect cardiac cells from apoptotic cell death caused 
by oxidative stress (Isaak et al., 2017). The cardioprotective mechanisms of ACNs on 
mitochondria involve preventing apoptosis by reducing cytosolic cytochrome-C expres­
sion and promoting oxidative phosphorylation in ischemia-damaged mitochondria, 
thereby maintaining electron transfer between cytochrome-C and NADH dehydroge­
nase (Liobikas et al., 2016). Dietary antioxidants, including ACNs, have been observed 
to enhance total antioxidant capacity, antioxidant defense enzymes, and high-density 
lipoprotein (HDL) antioxidant properties, as well as protection against LDL oxidation 
and CVDs.
5.4.2  Neuroprotective Effects of Anthocyanins
ACNs have demonstrated an extraordinary antioxidant capacity that could be effective in 
several models of neurodegenerative diseases (Traustadottir et al., 2009; Shih et al., 2011; 
Miller et al., 2018). Their high oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC) value accounts 
for a large part of this neuroprotective role (Zafra-Stone et al., 2007; Zhu et al., 2010). 
Additionally, their activities correlate with the antioxidant features as ACNs are effec­
tive free radical trappers, which prevent the formation of ROS in the affected cells. For 
instance, the generation of ROS is inhibited by ACNs in in-vitro models of α-β-peptide-
induced toxicity (Shih et al., 2011) as well as in hydrogen peroxide injury (Hwang et al., 
2012). The previous studies in animals showed the neuroprotection effects of black soy­
bean (Glycine max) ACNs against ethanol- and glutamate-induced oxidative stress via inhi­
bition of neuronal apoptosis, glutamate-related neurotransmission as well as protection 
against ROS production, glutamate-induced AMPK induction, neuroinflammation, and 
neurodegeneration (Shah et al., 2015; Shah et al., 2016). Moreover, the oral administration of 
ACN-rich extract of V. myrtillus (100 mg/kg) has been shown to suppress the psychological 
stress-induced cerebral oxidative stress in distressed mice (Rahman et al., 2008). The mem­
ory impairment reduction was also observed in rats that received 80 mg/kg ACN-rich 
extract of Lycium ruthenicum in comparison to other rat models with Alzheimer’s disease. 
Chen et al. (2019) also confirmed that L. ruthenicum ACNs can show neuroprotective effects 
in D-galactose treated rats by reducing the level of receptors for glycation end products, 
suppressing oxidative stress, and reducing levels of inflammation markers. Sustained anti­
oxidant enzyme levels, a decreased expression of aging-associated monoamine oxidase-B, 
and a decreased concentration of the lipid peroxidation product malondialdehyde (a bio­
marker for oxidized lipids) were also demonstrated in D-galactose treated mice after the 
administration 30 and 60 mg/kg of black rice ACNs (Lu et al., 2014). ACNs from black 

106
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
chokeberry (A. melanocarpa) with 30 mg/kg retained the total SOD and GPx levels in the 
brain tissue of D-gal-treated mice (Wei et al., 2017). Furthermore, a study recently used 
a model of streptozotocin-induced dementia of sporadic Alzheimer disease and showed 
that pretreatment with an ACN extract from grape skins by 200 mg/kg for 25 days can 
prevent behavioral alterations and protect against the alterations in levels of ROS and anti­
oxidant enzyme (SOD, catalase, and GPx) (Pacheco et al., 2018).
5.4.3  Hepatoprotective Effects of Anthocyanins
The liver plays an important role in metabolizing drugs and harmful substances that 
can impair its function and cause damage. Arjinajarn et al. (2017) observed that rice bran 
extract, with high amounts of cyanidin-3-glucoside (Cy3glc) and peonidin-3-glucoside 
(Pn3glc) effectively protected the liver from damage induced by gentamicin. The extract 
significantly increased the activity of the antioxidant enzyme SOD, reduced hepatic levels 
of malondialdehyde, and prevented the elevation of liver injury. These protective effects 
play a role in the suppression of oxidative and inflammatory pathways. Furthermore, 
Hou et al. (2013) discovered that black rice bran extracts abundant in ACNs like Cy3glc 
and Pn3glc protected mice livers from carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) toxicity (Ziberna et al., 
2010). Mice treated with 200–800 mg/kg of black rice exhibited increased activities of GPx 
and SOD along with elevated levels of reduced glutathione compared to the model group 
with CCl4-intoxication (Hou et al., 2013). The same results about the protective effects of 
blueberry ACN extract were shown by (Chen et al., 2012) on CCl4-induced liver injury in 
vivo. However, it was detected that blueberry ACNs reduce ROS generation and tissue 
oxidative damage, decrease inflammation, and suppress the activity of hepatic stellate 
cells (Sun et al., 2018). Blackberry fruit extract was also shown to reduce lipid peroxida­
tion and to recover the antioxidant enzyme activity in rats treated with CCl4 (Cho et al., 
2011).
5.4.4  Nephroprotective Effects of Anthocyanins
ACNs in food are believed to play a significant role in preventing kidney diseases. For 
instance, recently a study explored the effect of a bilberry extract rich in ACNs (200 mg/kg 
daily) on animals with CCl4-induced toxicity. The extract pretreatment notably decreased 
levels of pro-oxidative markers (such as H2O2, xanthine oxidase, and oxidized glutathi­
one) and pro-inflammatory markers (including myeloperoxidase, TNF-α, and NO), while 
elevating levels of antioxidant enzymes (including SOD, catalase, S-transferase, and GPx). 
The ACNs were found to reduce damage to both proximal and distal tubules in the kidney 
cortex (Popović et al., 2019). Similar effects were observed in another study, which showed 
that Malva sylvestris extract rich in ACNs alleviates renal toxicity induced by gentamicin, 
resulting in improved kidney function, reduced oxidative stress, pro-inflammatory mark­
ers, and diminished tissue injuries (Yarijani et al., 2019). Furthermore, a study using a rat 
model of gentamicin-induced nephrotoxicity revealed the beneficial effects of a bilberry’s 
daily diet (100 mg/kg), showing the correlation between the diet’s high ACN levels, anti­
oxidant activity, and improvements in serum catalase, malondialdehyde, and advanced 
oxidation protein products (Veljković et al., 2017). Additionally, studies by Qi et al. (2017) 
and Lee and Bae (2019) on ACN-rich fruits of Panax ginseng have shown promise in reduc­
ing renal tissue injury, plasma nitrite and nitrate production, and malondialdehyde levels, 
while restoring total glutathione content and antioxidant enzyme activity in kidney tis­
sues of mice.

107
Antioxidant Properties of Anthocyanins
5.4.5  Antidiabetic Activity of Anthocyanins
The biggest challenge in treating diabetes, regardless of its type, is in preserving and 
restoring functional pancreatic β-cells. Free radicals and oxidative stress play significant 
roles in the autoimmune destruction of β-cells in type 1 diabetes (T1D) and the malfunc­
tion and damage of β-cells due to insulin resistance and glucotoxicity in type 2 diabetes 
(T2D) (Dinić et al., 2022). Current diabetes treatments include hypoglycemic drugs, insulin, 
and dietary adjustments. These treatments aim to stimulate insulin secretion, reduce liver 
gluconeogenesis, and increase peripheral glucose absorption, and delay intestinal glucose 
absorption (Đorđević et al., 2022). However, less than half of diabetic patients achieve gly­
cemic control with the mentioned therapies, and the outcomes are far from expectations 
(Edelman and Polonsky, 2017). Patients often develop resistance to treatments and encoun­
ter side effects or toxicity from drugs, especially, life-threatening hypoglycemia due to 
insulin therapy (American Diabetes Association, 2019). For that reason, various strate­
gies have emerged, including islet transplantation, stimulating β-cells proliferation, and 
transplantation of in vitro-generated β-cells. However, these strategies mostly stay ineffec­
tive or inaccessible. While, other crucial strategies, such as reducing the ROS or inducing 
antioxidant enzymes to alleviate oxidative stress in isolated islets before transplantation 
have been developed (Burke et al., 2015; Remedi and Emfinger, 2016). Additionally, the use 
of antioxidants, such as ACNs, shows positive results in protecting β-cells from glucose-
induced oxidative stress. Studies have demonstrated that ACNs from boysenberries can 
prevent oxidative stress in diabetic rats induced by streptozotocin and prevent the devel­
opment of diabetes-related oxidation (Bottino et al., 2004; Padmasekar et al., 2013).
5.4.6  Anticancer Activity of Anthocyanins
Oxidative stress is primarily responsible for inducing mutations in DNA of normal cells 
that lead to cellular proliferation and the formation of tumors. Additionally, the generation 
of free radicals can change cellular signaling cascades that contribute to cellular differ­
entiation and inflammation within the tumor environment (Aggarwal et al., 2019). ACNs 
and related natural compounds may prevent cancer and tumor development by several 
mechanisms, including scavenging ROS directly, stimulating the expression of Phase II 
detoxification enzymes, enhancing the cells’ oxygen-radical absorbing capacity as well 
as, reducing the formation of oxidative DNA adducts. ACNs also inhibit cellular differ­
entiation, proliferation, and angiogenesis (Wang and Stoner, 2008; Lin et al., 2017). They 
have been studied to induce Phase II antioxidant and detoxifying enzymes in cultured 
cells, contributing to their anti-carcinogenic properties (Shih et al., 2005). Both in-vitro 
and in-vivo trials have shown that ACNs significantly reduce cancer cell proliferation 
and inhibit the formation of tumors (Kang et al., 2003; Medic et al., 2019). Blueberries, 
known for their antioxidant capacity, are thought to show protective effects against DNA 
oxidation (Pepe et al., 2013). The duration of blueberry consumption appears to play an 
important role in preventing mutagenesis. Del Bo’ et al. (2015) observed a reduction in 
H2O2-induced DNA damage in mice not after four weeks but after eight weeks of blue­
berry consumption, for that reason, continuous ingestion of blueberries is necessary for 
DNA damage prevention. In breast cancer, ACNs inhibit key modulators promoting pro­
gression and development by directly affecting DNA fragmentation and inducing death in 
MCF-7 cancer cells (Hui et al., 2010). In lung cancer, cyanidin-3-glucoside (Cy-3-glu) and 
cyanidin 3-rutinoside (Cy-3-rut), isolated from mulberries, inhibit the migration and inva­
sion of A549 cells (adenocarcinomic human alveolar basal epithelial cells) and decrease 

108
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
MMP-2 and uPA while enhancing PAI and TIMP-2 (Wang et al., 2012). ACNs also pre­
vent the growth of carcinogenic cells causing colon cancer, modulate macrophages in the 
immune response, and induce apoptosis (Mauray et al., 2010). In oral and cervical cancer, 
treatment with peonidin-3-glucoside and cyanidin-3-glucoside diminishes the invasion 
of HeLa cells and SCC-4 cells (Sankhari et al., 2012). The structural properties of ACNs 
significantly affect their biological activities, including the type of sugars, aglycones, acyl­
ated acids, and the position and degree of acylation and glycosylation, which seems to be 
the most important factors affecting their anticancer properties. The anticancer properties 
of various ACN-rich extracts were compared on the human colon cancer HT29 cell line, 
reporting various degrees of growth inhibitory activity rates among different sources of 
ACNs. The highest rate was observed in purple corn and the lowest rate in both radish and 
elderberry (Jiang et al., 2017).
5.5  Conclusion
ACNs are important colored secondary plant metabolites found in fruits, berries, and veg­
etables. The most common sources of ACNs include strawberries, blueberries, blackber­
ries, blackcurrants, raspberries, pomegranates, apples, grapes, red onion, red cabbage, and 
red lettuce. In recent decades, due to a surge in metabolic disorders, and cancers, natural 
antioxidants such as ACNs play an important role in the prevention and treatment of such 
illness conditions. The present review compiles data from various in-vitro, preclinical, and 
animal studies showing the beneficial activities of ACNs through antioxidant mechanisms 
in the prevention and treatment of various types of cancers, diabetes, CVDs, neurodegen­
erative disorders, kidney, and liver diseases.
References
Adnyana IMO, Sudewi R, Samatra P, Suprapta S. Balinese cultivar of purple sweet potato improved 
neurological score and BDNF and reduced caspase-independent apoptosis among Wistar rats 
with ischemic stroke. Open Access Macedonian Journal of Medical Sciences 2019;7:38–44.
Aggarwal V, Tuli HS, Varol A, Thakral F, Yerer MB, Sak K, Varol M, Jain A, Khan MA, Sethi G. Role 
of reactive oxygen species in cancer progression: Molecular mechanisms and recent advance­
ments. Biomolecules. 2019;9:735.
Alam MA. Anti-hypertensive effect of cereal antioxidant ferulic acid and its mechanism of action. 
Frontiers in Nutrition. 2019;6:121.
Alam MA, Islam P, Subhan N, Rahman MM, Khan F, Burrows GE, Nahar L, Sarker SD. Potential 
health benefits of anthocyanins in oxidative stress related disorders. Phytochemistry Reviews. 
2021;20(4):705–749.
Alvarez-Suarez JM, Giampieri F, Tulipani S, Casoli T, Di Stefano G, González-Paramás AM, Santos-
Buelga C, Busco F, Quiles JL, Cordero MD; et al. One-month strawberry-rich anthocyanin sup­
plementation ameliorates cardiovascular risk, oxidative stress markers and platelet activation 
in humans. Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry. 2014, 25, 289–294.
American Diabetes Association. Pharmacologic approaches to glycemic treatment: Standards of 
medical care in diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2019;42(Suppl. 1):S90–S102.

109
Antioxidant Properties of Anthocyanins
Apak R, Güçlü K, Demirata B, Ozyürek M, Ozyurt D. Comparative evaluation of various total anti­
oxidant capacity assays applied to phenolic compounds with the CUPRAC assay. Molecules. 
2007;12(7):1496–1547.
Arjinajarn P, Chueakula N, Pongchaidecha A, Jaikumkao K, Chatsudthipong V, Mahatheeranont 
S, Norkaew O, Chattipakorn N, Lungkaphin A. Anthocyanin-rich Riceberry bran extract 
attenuates gentamicin-induced hepatotoxicity by reducing oxidative stress, inflammation 
and apoptosis in rats. Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy. 2017;92:412–420.
Arulselvan P, Fard MT, Tan WS, Gothai S, Fakurazi S, Norhaizan ME, Kumar SS. Role of anti­
oxidants and natural products in inflammation. Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity. 
2016 Oct 10;2016.
Atmani D, Chaher N, Atmani D, Berboucha M, Debbache N, Boudaoud H. Flavonoids in human 
health: From structure to biological activity. Current Nutrition & Food Science. 2009;5(4):225–237.
Aviram M. Review of human studies on oxidative damage and antioxidant protection related to 
cardiovascular diseases. Free Radical Research. 2000;33:S85–S97.
Aviram M, Kaplan M, Rosenblat M, Fuhrman B. Dietary antioxidants and paraoxonases against LDL 
oxidation and atherosclerosis development. Atherosclerosis: Diet and Drugs. 2005;263–300.
Azevedo J, Fernandes I, Faria A, Oliveira J, Fernandes A, Freitas VD, Mateus N. Antioxidant proper­
ties of anthocyanidins, anthocyanidin-3-glucosides and respective portisins. Food Chemistry. 
2010;119(2):518–523.
Bottino R, Balamurugan AN, Tse H, Thirunavukkarasu C, Ge X, Profozich J, et al. Response of human 
islets to isolation stress and the effect of antioxidant treatment. Diabetes. 2004;53:2559–2568.
Burke GW, Vendrame F, Virdi SK, Ciancio G, Chen L, Ruiz P, et al. Lessons from pancreas trans­
plantation in type 1 diabetes: Recurrence of islet autoimmunity. Current Diabetes Reports. 
2015;15:1–9.
Hippeastrum cultivars. Scientia Horticulturae. 2006;109(3):262–266.
Castañeda-Ovando A, de Lourdes Pacheco-Hernández M, Páez-Hernández ME, Rodríguez JA, Galán-
Vidal CA. Chemical studies of anthocyanins: A review. Food Chemistry. 2009;113(4):859–871.
Chen B, Ma Y, Li H, Chen X, Zhang C, Wang H, Deng Z. The antioxidant activity and active sites of 
delphinidin and petunidin measured by DFT, in vitro chemical-based and cell-based assays. 
Journal of Food Biochemistry. 2019;43(9):12968.
Chen J, Sun H, Sun A, Lin Q, Wang Y, Tao X. Studies of the protective effect and antioxidant mech­
anism of blueberry anthocyanins in a CC14-induced liver injury model in mice. Food and 
Agricultural Immunology. 2012;23:352–362.
Chen S, Zhou H, Zhang G, et al. Anthocyanins from Lycium ruthenicum Murr. Ameliorated d-
galactose-induced memory impairment, oxidative stress, and neuroinflammation in adult rats. 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2019;67:3140–3149.
Cho BO, Ryu HW, Jin CH, Choi DS, Kang SY, Kim DS, Byun M-W, Jeong IY. Blackberry extract atten­
uates oxidative stress through up-regulation of Nrf2-dependent antioxidant enzymes in carbon 
tetrachloride-treated rats. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2011;59:11442–11448.
de Pascual-Teresa S, Sanchez-Ballesta MT. Anthocyanins: From plant to health. Phytochemistry 
Reviews. 2008;7:281–299.
Del Bo’ C, Fracassetti D, Lanti C, Porrini M, Riso P. Comparison of DNA damage by the comet assay 
in fresh versus cryopreserved peripheral blood mononuclear cells obtained following dietary 
intervention. Mutagenesis. 2015;30(1):29–35.
Dinić S, Arambašić JJ, Uskoković A, Mihailović M, Grdović N, Tolić A, Rajić J, Đorđević M, Vidaković 
M.  Oxidative stress-mediated beta cell death and dysfunction as a target for diabetes manage­
ment. Frontiers in Endocrinology. 2022;13:1006376.
Đorđević MM, Tolić A, Rajić J, Mihailović M, Arambasic JJ, Uskokovic A, et al. Centaurium ery­
thraea methanol extract improves the functionality of diabetic liver and kidney by mitigating 
hyperglycemia-induced oxidative stress. Journal of Functional Foods. 2022;90:104975.
Dröge W. Free radicals in the physiological control of cell function. Physiological Reviews. 2002;
82:47–95.
Byamukama R, Jordheim M, Kiremire B, Namukobe J, Andersen Ø M. Anthocyanins from flowers of 

110
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Edelman SV, Polonsky WH. Type 2 diabetes in the real world: The elusive nature of glycemic control. 
Diabetes Care. 2017;40(11):1425.
Einbond LS, Reynertson KA, Luo XD, Basile MJ, Kennelly EJ. Anthocyanin antioxidants from edible 
fruits. Food Chemistry. 2004;84(1):23–28.
Feng Y, Tian X, Liang W, Nan X, Zhang A, Li W, Ma Z. Genome-wide identification of grape ANS 
gene family and expression analysis at different fruit coloration stages. BMC Plant Biology. 
2023;23(1):632.
Fernandes I, Faria A, Calhau C, de Freitas V, Mateus N. Bioavailability of anthocyanins and deriva­
tives. Journal of Functional Foods. 2014;7:54–66.
Gowd V, Jia Z, Chen W. Anthocyanins as promising molecules and dietary bioactive compo­
nents against diabetes–A review of recent advances. Trends in Food Science & Technology. 
2017;68:1–3.
Gulcin I. Antioxidants and antioxidant methods: An updated overview. Archives of Toxicology. 
2020;94(2):651–715.
Harborne AJ. Phytochemical Methods a Guide to Modern Techniques of Plant Analysis. Springer 
Science & Business Media; 1998.
He J, Giusti MM. Anthocyanins: Natural colorants with health-promoting properties. Annual Review 
of Food Science and Technology. 2010;1:163–87.
Hou F, Zhang R, Zhang M, Su D, Wei Z, Deng Y, Zhang Y, Chi J, Tang X. Hepatoprotective and anti­
oxidant activity of anthocyanins in black rice bran on carbon tetrachloride-induced liver injury 
in mice. Journal of Functional Foods. 2013;5:1705–1713.
Hui C, Bin Y, Xiaoping Y, Long Y, Chunye C, Mantian M, Wenhua L. Anticancer activities of an 
anthocyanin-rich extract from black rice against breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. 
Nutrition and Cancer. 2010;62(8):1128–1136.
Hwang J-W, Kim E-K, Lee S-J, et al. Antioxidant activity and protective effect of anthocyanin 
oligomers on H2O2-triggered G2/M arrest in retinal cells. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry. 2012;60:4282–4288.
Isaak CK, Petkau JC, Blewett H, Karmin, Siow YL. Lingonberry anthocyanins protect cardiac cells 
from oxidative stress-induced apoptosis. Canadian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology. 
2017;904–910.
Jiang Y, Dai M, Nie W-J, Yang X-R, Zeng X-C. Effects of the ethanol extract of black mulberry 
(Morus nigra L.) fruit on experimental atherosclerosis in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 
2017;200:228–235.
Jing P. Purple Corn Anthocyanins: Chemical Structure, Chemopreventive Activity and structure/
function Relationships [dissertation]. The Ohio State University; 2006. p: 5–90.
Jousilahti P, Vartiainen E, Tuomilehto J, Puska P. Sex, age, cardiovascular risk factors, and coro­
nary heart disease: A pro spective follow-up study of 14,786 middle-aged men and women in 
Finland. Circulation. 1999;99:1165–1172.
Kähkönen MP, Heinonen M. Antioxidant activity of anthocyanins and their aglycons. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2003;51(3):628–633.
Kang S-Y, Seeram NP, Nair MG, Bourquin LD. Tart cherry anthocyanins inhibit tumor develop­
ment in Apc (Min) mice and reduce proliferation of human colon cancer cells. Cancer Letters. 
2003;194:13–19.
Kojšová S, Jendeková L, Zicha J, Kuneš J, Andriantsitohaina R, Pecháňová O. The effect of different 
antioxidants on nitric oxide production in hypertensive rats. Physiological Research. 2006;55.
Kongpichitchoke T, Hsu JL, Huang TC. Number of hydroxyl groups on the B-ring of flavonoids 
affects their antioxidant activity and interaction with phorbol ester binding site of PKCδ 
C1B domain: In vitro and in silico studies. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 
2015;63(18):4580–4586.
Lee I-C, Bae J-S. Pelargonidin protects against renal injury in a mouse model of sepsis. Journal of 
Medicinal Food. 2019;22:57–61.
Li P, Feng D, Yang D, Li X, Sun J, Wang G, Tian L, Jiang X, Bai W. Protective effects of anthocyanins on 
neurodegenerative diseases. Trends in Food Science & Technology. 2021;117:205–17.

111
Antioxidant Properties of Anthocyanins
Lin B-W, Gong C-C, Song H-F, Cui Y-Y. Effects of anthocyanins on the prevention and treatment of 
cancer. British Journal of Pharmacology. 2017;174:1226–1243.
Liobikas J, Skemiene K, Trumbeckaite S, Borutaite V. Anthocyanins in cardioprotection: A path 
through mitochondria. Pharmacological Research. 2016;113:808–815.
Liu S, Lou Y, Li Y, Zhao Y, Feng X, Capozzi V, Laaksonen O, Yang B, Li P, Gu Q. Comparison of antho­
cyanin and volatile organic compounds in juices and fruit wines made from blood oranges 
(Citrus sinensis L. Osbeck) at different maturity stages. Food Bioscience. 2023;56:103194.
Lu X, Zhou Y, Wu T, Hao L. Ameliorative effect of black rice anthocyanin on senescent mice induced 
by D-galactose. Food & Function. 2014;5:2892–2897.
Manolescu BN, Oprea E, Mititelu M, Ruta LL, Farcasanu IC. Dietary anthocyanins and stroke: A 
review of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies. Nutrients. 2019;11:1479.
Mauray A, Felgines C, Morand C, Mazur A, Scalbert A, Milenkovic D. Nutrigenomic analysis of 
the protective effects of bilberry anthocyanin-rich extract in apo E-deficient mice. Genes & 
Nutrition. 2010;5:343–353.
Medic N, Tramer F, Passamonti S. Anthocyanins in colorectal cancer prevention. A Systematic Review 
of the Literature in Search of Molecular Oncotargets. Front Pharmacol. 2019;10:675.
Mehmood A, Zhao L, Wang Y, Pan F, Hao S, Zhang H, Iftikhar A, Usman M. Dietary anthocyanins 
as potential natural modulators for the prevention and treatment of non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease: A comprehensive review. Food Research International. 2021;142:110180.
Miller MG, Hamilton DA, Joseph JA, Shukitt-Hale B. Dietary blueberry improves cognition among 
older adults in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. European Journal of 
Nutrition. 2018;57:1169–1180.
Munzel T, Camici GG, Maack C, Bonetti NR, Fuster V, Kovacic JC. Impact of oxidative stress on the 
heart and vasculature: part 2 of a 3-part series. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 
2017;70:212–229.
Noda Y, Kaneyuki T, Mori A, Packer L. Antioxidant activities of pomegranate fruit extract and its 
anthocyanidins: Delphinidin, cyanidin, and pelargonidin. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry. 2002;50(1):166–171.
Ogawa K, Sakakibara H, Iwata R, Ishii T, Sato T, Goda T, Shimoi K, Kumazawa S. Anthocyanin com­
position and antioxidant activity of the crowberry (Empetrum nigrum) and other berries. Journal 
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2008;56(12):4457–4462.
Pacheco SM, Soares MSP, Gutierres JM, et al. Anthocyanins as a potential pharmacological agent 
to manage memory deficit, oxidative stress and alterations in ion pump activity induced by 
experimental sporadic dementia of Alzheimer’s type. Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry. 
2018;56:193–204.
Padmasekar M, Lingwal N, Samikannu B, Chen C, Sauer H, Linn T. Exendin-4 protects hypoxic 
islets from oxidative stress and improves islet transplantation outcome. Endocrinology. 
2013;154:1424–1433.
Pepe G, Grossi MR, Berni A, Filippi S, Shanmugakani RK, Papeschi C, Mosesso P, Natarajan AT, Palitti 
F. Effect of blueberries (BB) on micronuclei induced by N-methyl-N′-nitro-nitrosoguanidine 
(MNNG) and 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA) in mammalian cells, assessed in in 
vitro and in vivo assays. Mutation Research. 2013;758(1-2):6–11.
Pojer E, Mattivi F, Johnson D, Stockley CS. The case for anthocyanin consumption to promote human 
health: A review. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety. 2013;12:483–508.
Popović D, Kocić G, Katić V, Jović Z, Zarubica A, Janković Veličković L, Nikolić V, Jović A, Kundalić 
B, Rakić V, et al. Protective effects of anthocyanins from bilberry extract in rats exposed to 
nephrotoxic effects of carbon tetrachloride. Chemico-Biological Interactions. 2019;304:61–72.
Qi Z-L, Wang Z, Li W, Hou J-G, Liu Y, Li X-D, Li H-P, Wang Y-P. Nephroprotective effects of antho­
cyanin from the fruits of Panax ginseng (GFA) on cisplatin-induced acute kidney injury in mice. 
Phytotherapy Research. 2017;31:1400–1409.
Rahman MM, Ichiyanagi T, Komiyama T, Sato S, Konishi T. Effects of anthocyanins on psychological 
stress-induced oxidative stress and neurotransmitter status. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry. 2008;56:7545–7550.

112
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Ramos P, Herrera R, Moya-León MA. Anthocyanins: Food sources and benefits to consumer’s health. 
Handbook of Anthocyanins: Food Sources, Chemical Applications and Health Benefits. 2014: 
363–384.
Remedi MS, Emfinger C. Pancreatic beta-cell identity in diabetes. Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism. 
2016;18(Suppl 1):110–116.
Rossetto M, Vanzani P, Lunelli M, Scarpa M, Mattivi F, Rigo A. Peroxyl radical trapping activ­
ity of anthocyanins and generation of free radical intermediates. Free Radical Research. 
2007;41(8):854–859.
Salehi B, Lopez-Jornet P, Pons-Fuster López E, Calina D, Sharifi-Rad M, Ramírez-Alarcón K, et 
al. Plant-derived bioactives in oral mucosal lesions: A key emphasis to curcumin, lycopene, 
chamomile, aloe vera, green tea and coffee properties. Biomolecules. 2019; 9:106. doi: 10.3390/
biom9030106.
Salehi B, Martorell M, Arbiser JL, Sureda A, Martins N, Maurya PK, et al. Antioxidants: Positive or 
negative actors? Biomolecules. 2018; 8. doi: 10.3390/biom8040124.
Sankhari JM, Thounaojam MC, Jadeja RN, Devkar RV, Ramachandran AV. Anthocyanin-rich red cab­
bage (Brassica oleracea L.) extract attenuates cardiac and hepatic oxidative stress in rats fed an 
atherogenic diet. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture. 2012;92:1688–1693.
Shah SA, Amin FU, Khan M, et al. Anthocyanins abrogate glutamate-induced AMPK activation, 
oxidative stress, neuroinflammation, and neurodegeneration in postnatal rat brain. Journal of 
Neuroinflammation. 2016;13:286.
Shah SA, Yoon GH, Kim MO. Protection of the developing brain with anthocyanins against ethanol-
induced oxidative stress and neurodegeneration. Molecular Neurobiology. 2015;51:1278–1291.
Shih PH, Chan YC, Liao JW, Wang MF, Yen GC. Antioxidant and cognitive promotion effects of 
anthocyanin-rich mulberry (Morus atropurpurea l.) On senescence-accelerated mice and preven­
tion of Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry. 2010;21:598–605.
Shih P-H, Wu C-H, Yeh C-T, Yen G-C. Protective effects of anthocyanins against amyloid b-peptide-
induced damage in neuro-2A cells. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2011;59:
1683–1689.
Shih P-H, Yeh C-T, Yen G-C. Effects of anthocyanidin on the inhibition of proliferation and induc­
tion of apoptosis in human gastric adenocarcinoma cells. Food and Chemical Toxicology. 
2005;43:1557–1566.
Stintzing FC, Stintzing AS, Carle R, Frei B, Wrolstad RE. Color and antioxidant properties of cyanidin-
based anthocyanin pigments. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2002;50(21):6172–6181.
Sun J, Wu Y, Long C, He P, Gu J, Yang L, Liang Y, Wang Y. Anthocyanins isolated from blueberry 
ameliorates CCl4 induced liver fibrosis by modulation of oxidative stress, inflammation and 
stellate cell activation in mice. Food and Chemical Toxicology. 2018;120:491–499.
Tandon VR, Verma S, Singh J, Mahajan A. Antioxidants and cardiovascular health. Journal of Medical 
Education Research. 2005;7(2):115–118.
Toufektsian MC, De Lorgeril M, Nagy N, Salen P, Donati MB, Giordano L, et al. Chronic dietary 
intake of plant-derived anthocyanins protects the rat heart against ischemia-reperfusion injury. 
Journal of Nutritional. 2008; 138: 747–752.
Traustadottir T, Davies SS, Stock AA, Su Y, Heward CB, Roberts LJ 2nd, Harman SM. Tart cherry 
juice decreases oxidative stress in healthy older men and women. Journal of Nutritional. 
2009;139:1896–1900.
Ulla A, Mohamed MK, Sikder B, Rahman AT, Sumi FA, Hossain M, Reza HM, Rahman GMS, Alam 
MA. Coenzyme Q10 prevents oxidative stress and fibrosis in isoprenaline induced cardiac 
remodeling in aged rats. BMC Pharmacology & Toxicology. 2017;18:1–10.
Veljković M, Pavlović DR, Stojiljković N, Ilić S, Jovanović I, Poklar Ulrih N, Rakić V, Veličković L, 
Sokolović D. Bilberry: Chemical profiling, in vitro and in vivo antioxidant activity and nephro­
protective effect against gentamicin toxicity in rats. Phytotherapy Research. 2017;31:115–123.
Reis JF, Monteiro S, Gomes, R de S do Carmo MM, da Costa GV, Ribera PC, et al. Action mechanism 
and cardiovascular effect of anthocyanins: A systematic review of animal and human studies. 
Journal of Translational Medicine. 2016;14:315.

113
Antioxidant Properties of Anthocyanins
Wallace TC, Giusti MM. Anthocyanins. Advances in Nutrition. 2015;6(5):620–622.
Wallace TC. Anthocyanins in cardiovascular disease. Advances in Nutrition. 2011;2(1):1–7.
Wang D, Xia M, Gao S, Li D, Zhang Y, Jin T, Ling W. Cyanidin-3-O-β-glucoside upregulates hepatic 
cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase expression and reduces hypercholesterolemia in mice. Molecular 
Nutrition & Food Research. 2012;56:610–621.
Wang D, Xia M, Yan X, Li D, Wang L, Xu Y, Jin T, Ling W. Gut microbiota metabolism of anthocy­
anin promotes reverse cholesterol transport in mice via repressing miRNA-10b. Circulation 
Research. 2012;111:967–981.
Wang H, Cao G, Prior RL. Oxygen radical absorbing capacity of anthocyanins. Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Chemistry. 1997;45(2):304–309.
Wang L-S, Stoner GD. Anthocyanins and their role in cancer prevention. Cancer Letters. 
2008;269:281–290.
Wei J, Zhang G, Zhang X, et al. Anthocyanins from black chokeberry (Aronia melanocarpa Elliot) 
delayed aging-related degenerative changes of brain. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry. 2017;65:5973–5984.
Yarijani ZM, Najafi H, Shackebaei D, Madani SH, Modarresi M, Jassemi SV. Amelioration of renal 
and hepatic function, oxidative stress, inflammation and histopathologic damages by malva 
sylvestris extract in gentamicin induced renal toxicity. Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy. 
2019;112:108635.
Zafra-Stone S, Yasmin T, Bagchi M, Chatterjee A, Vinson JA, Bagchi D. Berry anthocyanins as novel 
antioxidants in human health and disease prevention. Molecular Nutrition & Food Research. 
2007;51:675–683.
Zha J, Koffas MA. Production of anthocyanins in metabolically engineered microorganisms: Current 
status and perspectives. Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology. 2017;2(4):259–266.
Zhang J, Celli GB, Brooks MS. Natural sources of anthocyanins. Anthocyanins from Natural Sources: 
Exploiting Targeted Delivery for Improved Health. 2019;1–33.
Zhu F, Cai Y-Z, Yang X, Ke J, Corke H. Anthocyanins, hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives, and anti­
oxidant activity in roots of different Chinese purple-fleshed sweetpotato genotypes. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2010;58:7588–7596.
Ziberna L, Lunder M, Moze S, et al. Acute cardioprotective and cardiotoxic effects of bilberry antho­
cyanins in ischemia-reperfusion injury: Beyond concentration dependent antioxidant activity. 
Cardiovascular Toxicology. 2010;10:283–294.

114
6
Health Effects of Anthocyanins
Semih Ötleş and Emine Nakilcioglu
6.1  Introduction
There are numerous plant species on Earth that are categorized on the basis of various 
structures such as primary and secondary metabolites. Primary metabolites encompass 
chemicals necessary for the growth and development of plants, while secondary metabo­
lites serve signaling functions in the defense and pollination processes of plants (de la 
Rosa et al., 2019).
Secondary metabolites are divided into different groups based on their structural 
characteristics. In plant tissues, phenolic compounds are commonly found as second­
ary metabolites. Phenolic compounds, which play a major role in determining the color, 
aroma, and taste of plants, are highly beneficial due to their various biological effects on 
human health, like antioxidative and anti-inflammatory properties. Foods obtained from 
plants are rich sources of phenolic compounds that can have a range of positive influences, 
including preventing heart diseases, reducing the risk of cancer and diabetes, and decreas­
ing mutagenesis rates in human cells (Khoddami et al., 2013). The protection provided by 
the consumption of plant products like legumes, vegetables, and fruits is often colleagued 
with the presence of phenolic compounds. Additionally, phenolic compounds also have an 
impact on the quality characteristics of foods. They can enhance the shelf life of vegetables 
and fruits by activating antioxidant defense mechanisms. As a result, the acceptability of 
fruits and vegetables by consumers is improved.
Phenolic compounds including at least one hydroxyl group and one aromatic ring in 
their structures are divided into two groups in plants depending upon the phenol unit 
numbers in the molecule like simple phenols and polyphenols. The most common simple 
phenols found in plants are flavonoids and phenolic acids (Khoddami et al., 2013; de la 
Rosa et al., 2019). Additionally, plants can contain lignin, lignan, and coumarin, as well as 
condensed and hydrolyzable tannins (Khoddami et al., 2013).
Thousands of flavonoids have been identified in different conditions, tissues, and spe­
cies, and these flavonoids serve various ecophysiological functions, such as attracting ani­
mals for seed dispersal or pollinators (Ray et al., 2017).
Flavonoids with high bioactivity are one of the main products of plant metabolism and 
are the most common phenolic compounds found in vegetables and fruits. Flavonoids 
contain a heterocyclic pyrrole ring and are classified into groups based on variations in 
this pyrrole ring. In plants, pigment compounds in the flavonoid structure are divided 
into two categories based on their fundamental properties: fat-soluble and water-soluble 
pigments (Li et al., 2022). Anthocyanins are the only ionic flavonoid polyphenols soluble 
in water (Wrolstad, 2004).

115
Health Effects of Anthocyanins
6.1.1  Anthocyanins
Anthocyanins are glycoside forms and play a major role in the coloration of many plants. 
Anthocyanins, as an important subgroup of flavonoids, are responsible for the different 
colors of several vegetables, fruits, and flowers depending on pH levels (Wrolstad, 2004). 
Acting as natural pH indicators, anthocyanins appear reddish pink at low pH levels, blue-
purple at neutral conditions, and greenish yellow at high pH levels (de la Rosa et al., 2019).
In the structure of anthocyanins, sugar moieties are located in the third position of the 
carbon ring or in the fifth to seventh position of the A ring can be linked to the position 
( ) (Prior and Wu, 2006). Glucose (glc), arabinose (arab), galactose (gal), xylose (xyl), and 
rhamnose (rham), in mono-, di-, or tri-sugar forms are the common sugars that bind to 
anthocyanins. While approximately 17 anthocyanins exist in nature, only six of them, 
pelargonidin (Pg), peonidin (Pn), petunidin (Pt), delphinidin (Dp), cyanidin (Cy), and 
malvidin (Mv), are commonly encountered. The chemical structures of these six antho­
cyanins differ from each other because of the radicals at three, four, and five of the B ring 
(Figure 6.1).
Cyanidin 3-O-galactoside (Cy3Gal) is the most common and dominant pigment respon­
sible for the red and pink coloration of fruits, along with pelargonidins. Cy3Gal is particu­
larly found in fruits with red skin or flesh, such as red-skinned apples, blueberries, and 
cranberries (Liang et al., 2021).
The chemical stability of Cy3Gal is influenced by such various factors as acidity, expo­
sure to light, temperature, humidity, metal ions presence, gas composition, and other 
external factors. The content of Cy3Gal changes depending on the plant species. Aronia, 
blueberries, and blackberries are considered ideal sources. Similar to numerous other 
anthocyanins, Cy3Gal also demonstrates a noteworthy antioxidative capability.
Other anthocyanins are less commonly found. Delphinidin, petunidin, and malvidin 
are responsible for the purple and blue hues in plants. Additionally, factors like pH levels 
and copigmentation can influence the perceived color tones. Copigmentation enhances the 
vibrancy of anthocyanin colors, increasing their hue, brightness, and resistance to color 
changes. It adds to the steadfastness of anthocyanins.
6.1.2  History of Anthocyanin
The presence of plant pigments was first noticed in the mid-19th century. By the mid-19th 
century, chemical analysis methods were developed to study these pigments in more detail. 
FIGURE 6.1
Chemical structures of six anthocyanins (Prior and Wu, 2006).

116
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
In the 20th century, anthocyanins were discovered by Mendel who examined flower colors 
in peas (Holton and Cornish, 1995). From this period onward, research on the genetic and 
biochemical nature of pigment production in plants gained momentum. Scientists used 
spectroscopic methods to determine the chemical composition and structures of antho­
cyanins. Through these studies, it became clear that anthocyanins are responsible for color 
production in plants and enable the formation of different colors in various plant species.
6.1.3  Chemical Properties and Color of Anthocyanins
Numerous factors hinder the practical application of anthocyanin colorants, includ­
ing their vulnerability to heat and light, as well as their proneness to degradation reac­
tions. Specifically, ascorbic acid can expedite the deterioration processes of anthocyanins. 
Anthocyanins predominantly exist as resilient flavylium cations only at approximately 
pH 2. This distinctive chemical configuration is among the fundamental elements affecting 
the metabolism, absorption, and biological reactions to anthocyanins. Most anthocyanin 
colorants exhibit an effective pH range constrained to acidic foods, so color alterations and 
instability arise above pH 4. Numerous commercially used anthocyanin colorants may 
exhibit low color stability and could potentially harbor undesirable flavors.
Anthocyanins undergo structural transformations that can be reversed by pH changes, 
which have a significant impact on color. Different anthocyanins can vary considerably in 
terms of stability and color properties. Differences in anthocyanin structures can influence 
the stability of pigments, while the composition of the food matrix and pigment concentra­
tion can also exert an impact on pigment stability. Anthocyanins exhibit increased stabil­
ity at low water activity, making them appropriate for use in intermediate moisture and 
dried foods (Wrolstad, 2004).
Nature has documented the existence of over 600 distinct anthocyanins, and their chem­
ical structures vary based on the factors below:
1.	The quantity and arrangement of hydroxyl and methoxy groups in the fundamen­
tal anthocyanidin structure.
2.	The specific type, quantity, and locations of sugars attached to the anthocyanidin 
structure.
3.	The nature of the acylating agent used and the extent of sugar acylation.
These factors contribute to the wide array of anthocyanin compounds discovered in 
different plant species and play an important role in determining their distinct properties 
and functions.
The chemical configurations of anthocyanins can exhibit notable differences contingent 
upon the extent of glycosylation (the bonding of sugars) and acylation (the bonding of acyl 
groups). These chemical modifications can impact the color, stability, and biological activ­
ity of anthocyanins.
In the case of most anthocyanins, their molecular weights usually fall within the range of 
400–1200. Unlike other flavonoid subgroups sharing the same C6-C3-C6 skeleton, antho­
cyanins bear a positive charge under acidic pH conditions. In a solution, anthocyanins are 
actually in equilibrium among four molecular forms: quinoidal base, the flavylium cation, 
chalcone, and hemiacetal base. The relative ratios of these four states fluctuate depending 
on both the pH level and the specific structure of the anthocyanin molecules.
Anthocyanins in nature are found in the glycosylated form of anthocyanidins (Liang 
et al., 2021). This is due to the inherent instability of anthocyanidins in nature, and their 

117
Health Effects of Anthocyanins
stability is significantly influenced by environmental factors like temperature and pH. The 
stability of anthocyanidins is enhanced through various mechanisms by the addition of 
glucose. This enables them to establish hydrogen bonds, elevate van der Waals interac­
tions, and enhance electron distribution, consequently improving stability. The stability of 
anthocyanins is intricately connected to various common physicochemical factors utilized 
in food processing, including pH and temperature. Factors such as fluctuations in pH, 
changes in temperature, the presence of ascorbic acid, co-pigments, enzymatic activity, 
and exposure to light, oxygen, metallic ions, and sugars, along with the resultant degrada­
tion products, can contribute to the degradation of anthocyanins and, as a result, impact 
the color of the food (Ekici et al., 2014).
6.1.4  Benefits of Anthocyanins
Anthocyanins have strong antioxidant properties and can offer an extensive array of health 
advantages via antioxidant or alternative mechanisms. However, to fully understand the 
role of anthocyanins in disease prevention, it is necessary to know the metabolism, extent, 
and rate of their absorption and tissue or cellular dispersion.
Flavonols and anthocyanins possess strong ultraviolet (UV) and visible light absorp­
tion capabilities, providing protection against the harmful effects of UV radiation when 
exposed to an excess of photons (Araguirang and Richter, 2022). Additionally, anthocya­
nins encompass other protective mechanisms that do not involve photophysical reactions 
(Gitelson et al., 2007). The detection of anthocyanins is crucial because it serves as an indi­
cator of the aging and stress response of many plant species, offering valuable insights into 
how plants respond to and adapt to environmental stressors.
Anthocyanins are important for various functions within plants (Holton and Cornish, 
1995). Apart from serving as color pigments, they play roles in pollination and seed distri­
bution in plants. Additionally, when synthesized, they assist in seed dispersal.
Anthocyanins are present in reproductive structures and vegetative parts of plants. In 
vegetative tissues, their presence aids in safeguarding the photosynthetic machinery by 
absorbing surplus light. Additionally, they enhance tolerance to environmental conditions 
such as cold, drought, nutrient deficiencies, and high salinity while providing defense 
against pathogens (LaFountain and Yuan, 2021).
6.1.5  Foods Containing Anthocyanins
Anthocyanins, which offer antiviral and antimicrobial activities, can be found in vari­
ous fruits like plums, grapes, peaches, and cherries as well as in vegetables such as black 
beans, red onions, and lettuce (Wrolstad et al., 2004). Red wine can also serve as a valuable 
source of anthocyanins. Anthocyanins found in raspberries and blackberries are signifi­
cant for their health-related benefits, associated with anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and 
chemopreventive properties. It has been shown that anthocyanins in black raspberries 
have biological activity against colon, esophageal, and oral cancers (Bowen-Forbes et al., 
2010). According to some studies by Bowen-Forbes et al. (2010), black raspberries have a 
significantly higher anthocyanin content, while red raspberries have lower levels com­
pared to others.
In addition to fruits and vegetables, a significant portion of anthocyanin intake can be 
obtained from fruit juices that are conducive to the digestion of health-promoting phyto­
chemicals. Certain research studies have indicated that consumption of antioxidant fruit 
juices containing white grape, blackcurrant, elderberry, cherry, and blackberry juice can 

118
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
enhance plasma antioxidant capacity, indicating the beneficial effects of the antioxidant 
components in fruit juice (Table 6.1). It has also been observed that anthocyanins reduce 
lipid oxidation in the plasma compartment.
Because of the importance of color quality in both processed and fresh vegetables and 
fruits, agricultural experts and food scientists have conducted extensive research on these 
pigments. Anthocyanin-based colorants serve as not only natural color additives but are 
also manufactured for food applications using agricultural products cultivated for a par­
ticular intention, as well as from processing byproducts. In recent times, there has been a 
substantial rise in interest in anthocyanin pigments because of their potential to mitigate 
the risk of cancer, coronary heart disease, and stroke. Hence, apart from their functional 
purposes as color enhancers, anthocyanin extracts are thought to augment the nutritional 
value of food and beverages.
6.1.6  Natural Colorants Based on Anthocyanins
The regulations concerning the utilization of colorants based on anthocyanins exhibit 
notable variations from one country to another. Four out of the 26 colorants that are exempt 
from certification and authorized for food use in the United States are derived from antho­
cyanins, namely, grape color extract, grape skin extract, vegetable juice, and fruit juice. 
Besides grapes, more common sources of fruits and vegetables include red cabbage, radish, 
blackberry, currant, black raspberry, and blackcurrant.
In the European Union, all anthocyanin derivative colorants fall under the E 163 classifi­
cation and are considered natural colorants. The regulations regarding anthocyanin use in 
specific food products vary between countries. Some countries, including Canada, Australia, 
Cyprus, Japan, Finland, Norway, Sweden, South Africa, New Zealand, Switzerland, and the 
United States, limit the use of anthocyanins in certain food products. On the other hand, 
countries like Chile, Malta, Iran, Israel, Saudi Arabia, Colombia, South Korea, Peru, and the 
United Arab Emirates have granted general approval for the use of anthocyanin colorants in 
food. It can be said that the United States has among the most stringent regulations regard­
ing the utilization of anthocyanin-based colorants (Wrolstad, 2004).
6.1.7  Bioactivity of Anthocyanin Pigments
Over the past few years, there has been an increasing interest in anthocyanin pigments 
owing to their potential health advantages. These benefits include reduced coronary heart 
TABLE 6.1
Concentrations of Total Anthocyanins (TA) (mg CGE/L)
Total Anthocyanins (mg/L)
Black currant
1543.89 ± 5.5
Red Raspberry
217.39 ± 5.2
Blackberry
739.93 ± 37.5
Sour cherry
369.36 ± 2.4
Sweet cherry
256.6 ± 2.5
Strawberry
205.98 ± 2.2
Chokeberry
3042.2 ± 196.3
Elderberry
4188.63 ± 257
Source: Bowen-Forbes et al. (2010).

119
Health Effects of Anthocyanins
disease risk, anticarcinogenic activity, decreased stroke risk, improved visual acuity, anti-
inflammatory effects, and enhanced cognitive behavior (Wrolstad, 2004).
Experiments have provided compelling evidence regarding the bioactivity of anthocy­
anin pigments. Hagiwara et al. (2002) showcased that anthocyanins extracted from purple 
sweet potatoes and red cabbage could inhibit tumor development in rats when incorpo­
rated into their diet. Joseph et al. (1999) showed that the supplementation of blueberry 
and strawberry extracts improved cognitive behavior and memory in elderly rats. Clinical 
investigations conducted in Italy revealed that diabetic patients, accounting for 79% of the 
participants, demonstrated an amelioration in diabetic retinopathy after consuming black­
berry extract throughout the trial period. McGhie et al. (2003) determined intact anthocy­
anin glycosides after consumption of berry extracts in the plasma and urine of humans. 
The retrieved anthocyanins accounted for less than 1% of the dietary intake, and these 
pigments were eliminated from the body within a span of 4 hours.
In this chapter, we describe the definitions and sources of anthocyanin and the health 
effects of anthocyanin intake by consuming anthocyanin-rich sources.
6.2  Health Effects of Anthocyanin
6.2.1  Effects of Anthocyanins on Antidiabetic and Antiobesity Diseases
Insulin suppresses glucose uptake or output from the liver and keeps blood sugar levels 
at normal levels by stimulating metabolism. Insulin resistance is a disease in which insu­
lin inadequately stimulates the transport of glucose in adipose tissue and skeletal muscle. 
Insufficient insulin level causes blood glucose to increase. Increased triglyceride levels also 
have a significant role in the deterioration of insulin resistance (Shipp and Abdel-Aal, 2010).
According to analyses conducted worldwide, obesity has increased approximately three 
times since 1975. Factors affecting obesity include diseases such as appetite disorders, genet­
ics, endocrine disorders, and diabetes (Gomes et al., 2019). Diabetes is a metabolic disease 
related to high sugar concentration in the blood. It is generally caused by resistance to the 
peripheral effects of insulin and impairment of insulin secretion (Oliveira et al., 2020).
It is suggested that a diet low in fat, contained in sufficient amounts of vegetables and 
fruits, and rich in polyphenols affects insulin resistance and obesity. It may also reduce the 
risk of diabetes. In the treatment of these diseases, hypoglycemic drugs or sulfonylurea-
based drugs that stimulate the release of insulin from beta cells secreted in the pancreas 
are used to bring blood sugar levels to normal levels (Shipp and Abdel-Aal, 2010).
Phytochemicals found in fruits, including anthocyanins, have various such pharma­
cological effects as anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects. It is stated that anthocya­
nins are effective in reducing fat tissue and weight loss. It is also thought to be effective 
against diabetes because they have an antioxidant effect and decrease the production 
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Azzini et al., 2017; Oliveira et al., 2020). Compared to 
medications taken for weight control or to control blood sugar levels, a diet rich in veg­
etables and fruits is more economical and reliable (Shipp and Abdel-Aal, 2010).
Recent studies have been carried out investigating the effects of anthocyanins on anti­
diabetic and antiobesity. Herrera-Balandrano et al. (2021) examined the hypolipidemic and 
hypoglycemic effects of malvidin, malvidin derivatives (malvidin-3-galactoside and mal­
vidin-3-glucoside), and blueberry anthocyanin extract. Their effects on both streptozotocin 

120
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
(STZ)-induced diabetic mice and the human hepatocarcinoma cell line (HepG2) were exam­
ined. As a result of the research, it was stated that anthocyanin extract and malvidin deriva­
tives reduced ROS and increased cell viability by 79–88%. They inhibited hyperlipidemia 
and hyperglycemia by strengthening enzymes that play a significant role in glycogenolysis 
and lipolysis in HepG2 cells. Additionally, diabetic mice were given anthocyanin extract in 
low concentration (100 mg/kg) and high concentration (400 mg/kg) for five weeks. It has been 
stated that anthocyanin has a significant effect on body weight, reduces the amount of total 
cholesterol and triglycerides, and is a functional agent for hypolipidemia and hypoglycemia.
Chen et al. (2018) researched the in vitro hypolipidemic and hypoglycemic effects 
of black soybean seed coat extract (BSSCE) in diabetic mice induced by STZ and a 
high-fat diet. It has been observed that BSSCE protects HepG2 cells damaged by oxida­
tive stress. It also inhibits lipid accumulation in HepG2 cells. It was stated that body 
weight, insulin level, and blood sugar were significantly reduced in BSSCE-fed mice 
compared to diabetic mice. Additionally, as a result of this study, enzyme activities 
were observed to be improved. It has also been shown to decrease total triglyceride, 
total cholesterol, and non-esterified fatty acid content, increase high-density lipopro­
tein (HDL) cholesterol content, and contribute to hypolipidemia and hypoglycemia.
Wu et al. (2013) examined the anti-obesity effects of sweet cherry anthocyanins in mice 
fed a high-fat diet. Cherry anthocyanins have been shown to obstruct obesity in high-fat-fed 
mice. In the in vivo experiment, it was stated that body weight decreased by 5.2% in mice 
fed with 40 mg/kg cherry anthocyanin and by 11.2% in mice fed with 200 mg/kg cherry 
anthocyanin. Additionally, it has been observed to reduce blood glucose, low-density lipo­
protein (LDL) cholesterol, total cholesterol, and triglycerides, and slow down obesity.
Yang et al. (2017) studied the cardiometabolic effects of purified anthocyanins from 
black currant and blueberry in adults (aged 40–75) with hyperglycemia. Purified antho­
cyanins were administered to 160 participants with early untreated diabetes or predia­
betes. As a result of the research, it was stated that anthocyanins reduce the amount of 
sugar in the blood and LDL cholesterol, and also the consumption of anthocyanins are 
effective in improving insulin resistance and glycemic control.
Wu et al. (2013) examined the effects of honeysuckle anthocyanins (HA) on obesity in 
mice induced by a high-fat diet. Mice were fed either a high-fat diet or a low-fat diet dur­
ing eight weeks. Different amounts of HA (50, 100, and 200 mg/kg) were given to mice 
fed a high-fat diet. As a result of the research, it was reported that 100 and 200 mg/kg HA 
prevented body weight gain, improved liver functions, reduced lipids in the blood and 
liver, and reduced serum insulin levels. Thus, it has been stated that HA may be effective 
against obesity by preventing lipid accumulation.
6.2.2  Effects of Anthocyanins on Eye Health
The innermost layer of the eye is the retina. It is one of the most metabolically active tissues 
in the body (Liu et al., 2011). High metabolic rate causes sensitivity to oxidative stress and 
high oxygen demand. There are some parameters that make the retina defenseless against 
oxidative stress. Examples of these parameters include light exposure on photoreceptor 
membranes, high amounts of PUFA, and phagocytosis leading to reactive intermediates 
in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). Damage caused by oxidative stress is seen in the 
macula and usually occurs with increasing age (Kalt et al., 2010). Free radical scavengers 
can conserve the retina from light-induced damage (Liu et al., 2011).
According to studies conducted in recent years, it has been stated that flavonoids may 
be effective in visual signal transmission and eye diseases such as macular degeneration 

121
Health Effects of Anthocyanins
caused by oxidative stress (Kalt et al., 2010). The first reported health effect of anthocyanins 
is their benefit on vision. The first effect of anthocyanins on eye health emerged during 
World War II, when British Royal Airmen used blueberries to improve night vision (Shipp 
and Abdel-Aal, 2010). It was stated that foods rich in anthocyanins protected against oxi­
dative stress damage and improved eye health (Wattanathorn et al., 2023).
Miyake et al. (2012) investigated the effect of blueberry extract containing anthocyanins 
on the retina of mice. In the study, an endotoxin-induced uveitis (EIU) model was created 
in addition to retinal inflammation by injecting lipopolysaccharide. The extract, rich in 
anthocyanins, was measured by electroretinogram and appeared to prevent the deteriora­
tion of photoreceptor cell function. It has also been stated that rhodopsin associated with 
EIU is reduced and the shortening of the outer segments of photoreceptor cells is sup­
pressed. Additionally, the extract obstructed STAT3 activation, which causes rhodopsin 
reduction, and the rise in interleukin-6 expression (which activates STAT3). As a result, 
blueberry extract has been shown to protect visual function against retinal inflammation.
Kang et al. (2019) studied the anthocyanin oligomers effects on dry eye disease in mice. 
In the study, 40 mice (80 eyes) were used as subjects. Dry eyes were created using 0.02% 
benzalkonium chloride (BAC). Anthocyanin oligomers were administered once a day at 
two different doses such as 10 and 50 mg/kg. Eye drops (0.1% cyclosporine A) were applied 
to the control group twice a day. The corneal erosion degree (National Eye Institute (NEI) 
grading system), phenol red test, and tear break-up time (TBUT) were observed under slit 
lamp microscopy. In the group administered 50 mg/kg anthocyanin oligomer, the wet 
length of the phenol red thread and TBUT indicated an important increase compared to 
the BAC group. The NEI score was lower compared to the BAC-treated group. Analysis of 
corneal tissue indicated that keratinization and thickening of the corneal epithelial layer 
were not more pronounced in the group applied with 50 mg/kg anthocyanin oligomer 
compared to the group applied with cyclosporine A eye drops. As a result, it was revealed 
that anthocyanin oligomers had a positive effect on the clinical index of dry eyes in mice.
Kosehira et al. (2020) examined the effects of blueberry extract intake during 12 weeks 
on the tonic spasm of the ciliary muscle induced by the visual display terminal (VDT). A 
total of 109 healthy adults between the ages of 20 and 60 were divided into two groups: pla­
cebo and blueberry-extract-consuming. While the capsule without blueberry extract was 
administered to the placebo groups, the capsule containing 240 mg of blueberry extract 
was administered to the other group. The subjects were tested before and after VDT at 
weeks 0, 4, 8, and 12. The high-frequency component (HCF) of the accommodative micro­
fluctuation was measured and found that the values of HCF were significantly improved 
in the group consuming blueberry extract compared with the placebo group at weeks 8–12 
(p<0.05). Oral consumption of the extract during 12 weeks relieves the tonic spasm of the 
ciliary muscle induced by near vision and VDT tasks.
Sekikawa et al. (2021) observed the effects of consuming a supplement including blue­
berry anthocyanin on eye health. Randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study 
was carried out on Japanese subjects (32 healthy adults) who used VDT and subsequently 
experienced eye fatigue. Subjects were separated into a placebo group or an active group 
containing blueberry anthocyanin (43.2 mg anthocyanin per capsule). One capsule was 
consumed (either anthocyanin-containing or placebo) daily for six weeks. Percentage of 
pupillary response, tear film breakup time, muscle stiffness, and Schirmer value were 
observed before and after using VDT. It was stated that the active group using antho­
cyanin indicated an important improvement in the percentage of pupillary response. 
Additionally, it prevented the reduction in accommodative function induced by oxidative 
stress with the use of VDT.

122
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Meiqi Fan et al. (2023) examined the effects of grape peel extract anthocyanin oligomers 
on dry eye disease. The 108 patients with dry eyes were equally divided into treatment 
and placebo groups. A total of 800 mg/day of anthocyanin oligomers was given to the 
treatment group, while 800 mg/day of maltodextrin was given to the placebo group. The 
occurrence of adverse reactions, clinical indexes, and clinical activities were compared 
between the two groups. In the result of this study, anthocyanin oligomers have been 
observed to be effective in dry eye disease, improving ocular surface disease, intraocular 
pressure, and tear breakup time.
6.2.3  Effects of Anthocyanins on Cardiovascular Diseases
Cardiovascular diseases influence the heart and blood vessels. Factors such as exces­
sive alcohol and cigarette consumption, metabolic syndrome, and diet have an impor­
tant role in the onset and progression of cardiovascular diseases. One of the origins of 
morbidity and mortality in the world is cardiovascular disease (Krga and Milenkovic, 
2019; Gonçalves et al., 2021). The genesis of cardiovascular diseases is related to the pro­
duction of free radicals from sources such as the angiotensin II-mediated nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase system, inducible nitric oxide syn­
thase, xanthine oxidase, and the mitochondrial electron transport chain. ROS and free 
radicals can damage endothelial cells in blood vessels and cause cardiomyocyte loss in 
the heart (Alam et al., 2021). Persistent inflammation in the walls of large and medium 
arteries causes the onset of atherosclerosis that is linked to peripheral artery disease, 
ischemic stroke, hypertension, and coronary artery disease (Mattioli et al., 2020; Samota 
et al., 2022).
According to clinical and epidemiological studies, it is thought that a diet rich in veg­
etables and fruits slows down the development of cardiovascular diseases (Krga and 
Milenkovic, 2019). The biggest reason for the biological effects of anthocyanins is their 
antioxidant properties. It has an antioxidant effect against ROS and can be effective in 
preventing cardiovascular diseases caused by mortality (Krga and Milenkovic, 2019; Alam 
et al., 2021). Cardiovascular diseases like hypertension and atherosclerosis are associated 
with reduced blood flow. Anthocyanins have a positive effect on cholesterol levels, regu­
lating blood pressure and preventing the development of hypertension and atheroscle­
rosis (Hair et al., 2021). In addition, it also shows improving arterial stiffness, inhibiting 
enzymes (COX-1 and COX-2), antiglycation, anti-inflammatory, and antithrombotic effects 
(Khoo et al., 2017; Mozos et al., 2021).
Miyazaki et al. (2008) investigated the in vitro protective effect of purple sweet potato 
anthocyanin (PSPA) against in vitro LDL oxidation. Additionally, the development of ath­
erosclerotic lesions was examined in mice with Apolipoprotein E deficiency and fed with 
a diet enriched in fat and cholesterol, without or with 1% PSPA for four weeks. PSPA pro­
tected LDL against oxidation more strongly than l-ascorbic acid and other anthocyanins in 
vitro. PSPA significantly reduced the plasma level of soluble vascular cell adhesion mole­
cule-1 (sVCAM-1), atherosclerotic plaque area, and liver level of thiobarbituric acid-reactive 
substances (p<0.05). It was determined that the effects on plasma lipid and cholesterol 
levels and body weight were insignificant (p<0.05). It has also been stated that it suppresses 
the development of atherosclerotic lesions.
The study examining the effects of a food supplement consisting of blueberry and black 
currant anthocyanins on cardiovascular risk factors, inflammation, and oxidative stress 
in prehypertensive men was conducted by Hassellund et al. (2013). Subjects were given 
640 mg of anthocyanin per day. Compared to the placebo group, blood sugar and HDL 

123
Health Effects of Anthocyanins
cholesterol were higher in the anthocyanin group. It has also been stated that various 
plasma polyphenols increased after anthocyanin intake (1–3 hours).
Johnson et al. (2015) examined the effects of blueberry consumption during eight weeks 
on arterial stiffness and blood pressure in postmenopausal and premenopausal women 
with hypertension (stage 1). As a result of the studies, it was observed that consuming 
blueberries for eight weeks significantly reduced brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity, dia­
stolic blood pressure, and systolic blood pressure. In addition, it was stated that nitric 
oxide amounts were higher in the group consuming blueberries compared with the initial 
value and the control group.
Tabart et al. (2018) observed the relationship between the induction of endothelium-
dependent relaxation of blackcurrant juices in isolated coronary arteries and the polyphe­
nol content, antioxidant capacity, and anthocyanin content in their study. Consumption of 
six different commercial blackcurrant juices has been shown to induce relaxation ranging 
from 21 to 100%. It was observed that this caused relaxation was not related to the amount 
of ascorbic acid, total phenolic content, antioxidant capacity, and total flavanol content. It 
has been stated that relaxation amplitude has a significant relationship with anthocyanin 
concentration and total anthocyanin content.
The anti-inflammatory activities of anthocyanin-rich extract (ArCC) obtained from red 
Chinese cabbage were determined by Joo et al. (2018). Anti-inflammatory effects were 
observed in hyperlipidemic apolipoprotein E-deficient mice and cultured endothelial 
cells. Administration of ArCC suppressed aortic inflammation in hyperlipidemic apolipo­
protein E-deficient mice. Compared to control mice, the aortas of mice undergoing ArCC 
had lower blood inflammatory cytokine concentrations, reduced plaque formation, and 
lower leukocyte infiltration. It has been determined that the consumption of red Chinese 
cabbage has a significant role in decreasing the risk of vascular inflammatory disease.
6.2.4  Effects of Anthocyanins on Cancer
Cancer is an uncontrolled cell cycle. The mechanism of cancer prevention can be grouped 
under three headings: inhibition of signaling pathways, regulation of protein expres­
sion, and other signaling pathways (Lin et al., 2017). The initial stage of the cancer cycle 
is closely related to the level of the disease. Therefore, diets with antioxidant and anti-
inflammatory properties are critical (Chen et al., 2022). Anthocyanin intake is highly 
effective in preventing cancer. There is no specific recommended intake of anthocyanins 
for optimal health benefits. Human health can be promoted by intake of anthocyanins 
from different foods (Diaconeasa et al., 2020). After the intake of anthocyanins into the 
body, it can prevent cancer through pathways such as electron donation and Nrf2 acti­
vation. It can also prevent cancer by inhibiting proinflammatory gut bacteria and cyto­
kines (Figure 6.2) (Chen et al., 2022).
Anthocyanins show anti-carcinogenic effects due to their high antioxidant activity. The 
damage caused by oxidative stress is prevented by scavenging free radicals. Anthocyanins 
also bind directly to proteins by metal chelating (Wang and Stoner, 2008). Jing et al. (2015) 
examined the antioxidant properties of eggplant. Eggplant contains delphinidin and 
nasunin anthocyanins. In this study on colon cancer, they observed that eggplant supple­
mentation reduced ROS and promoted glutathione reductase protein expression. Grimes 
et al. (2018) examined colon and breast cancer. The cyanidin and delphinidin anthocyanins 
of grapes enabled the hydroxylation of polyphenols at the B ring.
Inflammatory proteins (NF-κB and COX-2) and other cytokine cause abnormal cell 
growth in several types of cancer. Anthocyanins inhibit the expression levels of mRNA 

124
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
and proteins. Many studies reveal the anti-inflammatory effect of anthocyanins against 
colorectal cancer. In addition, berries such as blackberries and raspberries support apop­
tosis of hepatocellular carcinoma, prostate cancer, and cervical cancer in vitro and in vivo 
(Ma et al., 2021). In a study conducted in vivo, blueberry and blackcurrant fruits were used. 
It was revealed that it reduced inflammation and inhibited NF-κB transactivation at the 
end of one month in the subject group. It was also found to improve glucose and lipid 
metabolism. Thus, it was concluded that tumor formation could be prevented (Aboonabi 
and Aboonabi, 2020). Chen et al. (2018) examined the properties of black raspberry antho­
cyanins on colorectal and colon cancer cells. In the study, anthocyanins were found to 
prevent the growth of cancer cells by showing anti-inflammatory effects against IL-1B, 
IL-6, and COX-2 inhibitors.
Other recent studies on cancer using anthocyanin sources are given in Table 6.2.
6.2.5  Effects of Anthocyanins on Neurodegenerative Diseases
Neurodegenerative diseases are defined as the rapid death of neurons and rapid brain dam­
age. These diseases are caused by the loss of myelin, which causes dysfunction (Li et al., 
2021). Neurodegenerative diseases are divided into acute and chronic. Acute diseases quickly 
cause permanent damage. Diseases such as Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s, and Huntington’s are 
chronic and reduce people’s quality of life over time (dos Santos et al., 2019; Gardener et al., 
2021). Although the origin of many diseases varies, factors contributing to the neurodegen­
erative process include oxidative stress, endoplasmic reticulum stress, excitotoxicity, nitrosa­
tive stress, protein aggregation, and neuroinflammation (Winter and Bickford, 2019).
The neuroprotective functions of anthocyanins are explained by their high oxygen radi­
cal absorbance capacity. Anthocyanins act as antioxidants by preventing the formation of 
ROS in cells (Alam et al., 2021). Anthocyanins exert neuroprotective effects by suppress­
ing oxidative stress and neuroinflammation (Hair et al., 2021). Zhang et al. (2019) reported 
that anthocyanins demonstrated neuroprotective effects on the brain by suppression of 
N-terminal kinase activation, activation of neurotrophic factor signaling, and mainte­
nance of calcium and zinc homeostasis. The anti-inflammatory effect of anthocyanins may 
be explained by their inhibition of some inflammatory biomarkers (interleukin-8 (IL-8)). 
FIGURE 6.2
Main mechanism of the cancer prevention of anthocyanins (Chen et al., 2022).

125
Health Effects of Anthocyanins
TABLE 6.2
Studies on Cancer Using Anthocyanin Sources
Source of Anthocyanins
Disease
Health Effects
Reference
Black rise anthocyanins
Breast cancer
Black rice anthocyanins have been shown to 
suppress metastasis by targeting the tumor 
stimulatory pathway (RAS/RAF/MAPK) 
on breast cancer cells by increasing 
antimetastatic activity.
Chen et al. 
(2015)
Blueberry anthocyanins
Breast cancer
Blueberry anthocyanins behaved as chemo 
inhibitors by inhibiting proliferation in breast 
cancer cells. In the study, anthocyanins 
promoted apoptosis by increasing caspase-3 
activity.
Faria et al. 
(2010)
Black raspberries
Esophageal 
Tumors
In vitro study, black raspberry was found 
to prevent tumor cell proliferation by 
decreasing the expression of NF-κB and 
activator protein-1. It was revealed that 
apoptosis was induced in preneoplastic and 
papillomatous esophageal tissues.
Wang et al. 
(2009)
Amachi and Leona 
potatoes anthocyanins
Colonic cancer
Both potatoes showed cytotoxicity effect on 
tumor cells (Caco-2). Leona potato was 
reported to contain seven times more 
anthocyanins than Amachi potato. Therefore, 
Leona potato was found to have higher 
activity on cell viability protection.
Kubow et al. 
(2017)
Red Jasmine Rice 
(Oryza sativa L.) 
anthocyanins
Colonic cancer
Red jasmine rice with high antioxidant 
activity was found to induce DNA 
fragmentation through both extrinsic and 
intrinsic apoptosis in Caco-2 cells. The study 
demonstrated that anthocyanins in rice have 
high inhibition of free radicals.
Suantai et al. 
(2022)
Acai pulp 
(Euterpe oleracea)
Colonic cancer
Antitumor activity has been studied in vitro 
with a diet containing anthocyanins of the 
known acai fruit. In the study, anthocyanins 
appear to reduce the proliferation of tumor 
cells and the viability of tumors with high 
degrees of dysplasia.
Fragoso et al. 
(2018)
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Colorectal cancer
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside anthocyanin reduced 
cell motility against cells that acquired 
resistance at the epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition. It was concluded that it could 
improve oxaliplatin resistance by reversing 
the transition mechanism.
Kurter et al. 
(2023)
Hibiscus anthocyanins
Colorectal cancer
In the study, hibiscus anthocyanins promoted 
the activation of multiple signaling pathways 
by activating protein kinase. Anthocyanins 
were found to promote caspase-3 cleavage 
and apoptosis activation.
Tsai et al. 
(2023)
Pomegranate 
anthocyanins
Oral cancer
In the study, pomegranate anthocyanins have 
been shown to reduce metalloproteinase 
(MMP-9 and MMP-2) activity and expression. 
Additionally, pomegranate anthocyanins 
demonstrated antimetastatic treatment 
effects on oral cancer by reducing epithelial-
mesenchymal transition signals.
Peng et al. 
(2020)

126
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
For example, pomegranate anthocyanins inhibit inflammatory biomarkers in the brain by 
activating NF-κB and inhibit the expression of proinflammatory cytokines and other bio­
molecules (Alam et al., 2021). Additively, cherry and blackberry anthocyanins have been 
shown to support the synthesis of prostacyclins in the vascular endothelium (Rehman 
et al., 2017).
Apoptosis is one of the main causes of neurological disorders. Lipopolysaccharides 
and glutamate can cause neuronal responses through mitochondria-dependent apoptotic 
pathways (Huo et al., 2021). In some cases, abnormal protein aggregation can be observed 
with accumulation of proteins. Intracellular calcium influx increases. Calcium imbalance 
causes mitochondrial oxidative stress. In these cases, the combination of glutamate and 
lipopolysaccharides induces apoptosis (Zhong et al., 2023). When anthocyanins are taken 
into the body, they rapidly reach the brain by way of P-glycoprotein transporters. It directly 
inhibits apoptosis by reducing oxidative stress and microglia (macrophages in the central 
nervous system) viability (Winter and Bickford, 2019). Ullah et al. (2014) studied mouse 
hippocampal cell lines and rat neurons. They reported that anthocyanins decreased cal­
cium dysregulation, ROS accumulation, and apoptotic cells in the activation of adenosine 
monophosphate (AMP), which acts as a homeostasis regulator.
Li et al. (2020), studied 44 mice with Alzheimer’s disease. Blueberry anthocyanin extracts 
were used in the study. 20 mg of extract was given by gavage every day for three months. 
At the end of three months, it has been observed that it reduced the expression of inflam­
matory factors and chemokine receptors in mice. It is seen that anthocyanin intake reduces 
hippocampal neuroinflammatory responses. It stimulates phagocytosis of β-amyloid pro­
tein plaques by regulating the signaling pathways of microglia. It has been demonstrated 
to reverse deficiency in cognitive function.
An important part of neuroinflammation is perioperative neurocognitive impairment. It 
is a common complication due to the lack of effective prevention and treatment measures. 
Zhang et al. (2020) studied the anthocyanins of black goji (Lycium ruthenicum Murr.) plant. 
In this study on mice, it was observed that neuroinflammation and microglia activation 
were significantly reduced. It was revealed that learning and memory functions improved 
in mice after treatment.
Hyperphosphorylation of microtubule-associated tau protein may result from periph­
eral insulin resistance. These mechanisms are closely associated with the development of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Batista et al. (2017), examined anthocyanins (delphinidin-3-glucoside, 
cyanidin-3-glucoside, and petunidin-3-glucoside) in the peel of Jaboticaba fruit (Myrciaria 
jaboticaba Vell.). Mice with insulin sensitivity and Alzheimer’s disease were treated with 
24 mg/kg/day for 14 days. At the end of the study, mice showed lower phosphorylation in 
the hippocampus by reducing peripheral insulin resistance. Hippocampal inflammatory 
markers (such as pNF-κB, p-JNK, TNF-α, IL-1β) were reduced and neuronal viability was 
preserved. Oxidative stress and neuronal apoptosis decreased by increasing antioxidant 
activity in the brain. Connection between neurons (synaptic functions) increased.
Poulose et al. (2017) studied the neurochemical properties of anthocyanins (cyanidin-
3-rutinoside, delphinidin-3-glycoside, cyanidin-3-glycoside, peonidin-3-glycoside, and 
malvidin-3-glycoside) of freeze-dried açaí powder. The diets of aged Fischer rats were 
supplemented with 20 g/kg anthocyanin every day for 45 days. At the end of the study, an 
increase in antioxidant enzymes (glutathione transferases (GST) and superoxide dismutase 
(SOD)) was observed. Significant decreases in prooxidant NADPH-oxidoreductase-2 
and proinflammatory transcription factor (NF-κB) were observed in rats with treatment 
(p<0.05). In addition, regulation of neuroinflammation autophagy was achieved at the end 
of 45 days.

127
Health Effects of Anthocyanins
Oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and loss of dopaminergic neurons lead to 
Parkinson’s disease. A lot of studies are being conducted to prevent these processes. Qian 
et al. (2019) studied mice with Parkinson’s disease. Blueberry anthocyanins were used in 
the study. After three weeks of treatment, glutathione peroxidase and SOD enzyme activi­
ties decreased. Anthocyanin intake showed a high antioxidant effect in scavenging free 
radicals. It was reported that oxidative damage in neurons decreased, and a significant 
neuroprotective effect was observed in Parkinson’s disease processes (p<0.05).
6.2.6  Effects of Anthocyanins on Skin Health
The skin comprises three layers such as epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue. All 
layers undergo degenerative changes with aging (Shin et al., 2019). Skin aging is divided 
into two categories: intrinsic and extrinsic. Internal aging is associated with the epidermis. 
Extrinsic aging is usually related to sun exposure and decreased collagen (Kohl et al., 
2011). There are many molecular mechanisms of skin aging and skin damage. Many treat­
ments related to these mechanisms continue to be researched (Xia et al., 2015).
The health benefits expected from cosmetic products are increasing day by day. Researchers 
and producers are focused on both health benefits and sustainability (Câmara et al., 2022). 
Anthocyanins are the color sources of many fruits and vegetables. They draw attention with 
their pharmacological profiles, pharmacological mechanisms, and health-promoting prop­
erties (Correia et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2021) Anthocyanins are an indispensable source for 
skin health. Rose et al. (2018) have been conducted the anthocyanins of black currant skins 
obtained as waste from industry. A hair dye formulation was created by extracting it with 
water. The stability of the hair color was high and industrial waste was evaluated.
The protective mechanism of anthocyanin pigments in human skin can be explained by 
reducing solar UV radiation penetration, the availability of ROS, biofilm formation, and 
the activation of skin barrier degrading enzymes (Figure 6.3) (Correia et al., 2021).
Anthocyanins continue to be researched for their benefits to human skin with their 
strong antioxidant capacity. In some applications, undesirable situations may arise due to 
changes in pH, temperature, etc. (Silva et al., 2020).
Poomanee et al. (2021) investigated the extraction of purple glutinous rice (Oryza sativa L.) 
anthocyanins and their effect on aging. High antioxidant capacity and high amounts 
of phytochemical components were observed in the extracts obtained. It was obtained 
that purple glutinous rice, which is a good source of cyanidin-3-O-glucoside component, 
showed a high anti-aging effect with skin fibroblast proliferation without cellular toxicity.
Purple sweet potato (Dioscorea alata L.) is known to have high radical scavenging ability, 
total phenolic content, and strong reducing ability. Chan et al. (2010) investigated the abil­
ity of PSPAs to protect against UV radiation. A cosmetic cream containing anthocyanins 
was studied. It was determined that the cream contained 0.61 mg of anthocyanins per 
100 g of cream. As a result of the study, it was found that it showed high absorption ability 
against UV-A and UV-B radiation and was successful against 46% of UV radiation.
Abdellatif et al. (2021) have been conducted a study on skin protection of pomegranate 
(Punica granatum) fruit in cream form. A cream containing pomegranate anthocyanins was 
used by the fusion method. The study showed that the cream did not cause any toxicity 
on the skin. It was reported that the anthocyanin-containing cream improved skin barrier 
functions and showed improvements in many photodamage parameters.
Vaccinium uliginosum is a species of blueberry that grows in temperate regions of the 
northern hemisphere. Jo et al. (2020) extracted anthocyanins using this blueberry. It was 
given orally to hairless mice exposed to UV-B radiation. At the end of the study, the level 

128
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
of metalloproteinase tissue inhibitor increased with high antioxidant activity. The level of 
UVB-affected phosphorylation was significantly decreased (p<0.05). It was stated that V. 
uliginosum may have a photoprotective effect against skin damages.
Papaioanou et al. (2018) examined the effects of anthocyanins of two varieties of Rubus 
idaeus L. fruit, Ruvi, and Cayuga on skin health. They reported that Ruvi fruit cultivated 
under low light conditions had high antioxidant activity and high anthocyanin content. 
A cream was developed with anthocyanin extract obtained from these fruits. The cream 
showed a high inhibitory effect against skin regulatory enzymes, tyrosinase, and elastase 
enzymes. In the study, it was mentioned that agricultural applications should be devel­
oped to maximize the cosmeceutical effect.
FIGURE 6.3
The effect of anthocyanin on factors that cause skin aging (Correia et al., 2021).

129
Health Effects of Anthocyanins
6.3  Conclusion
Anthocyanins are a member of the flavonoids that provide the blue, purple, and red 
pigment in vegetables and fruits. The chemical structure of anthocyanins shows that 
they have important effects on the suppression of diseases. These compounds, naturally 
found in many food sources, are one of the health-protecting components of our daily 
diet. In addition to their food applications, they have also been the subject of remark­
able research for their therapeutic effects. It is stated that they have antioxidative effects, 
anti-inflammatory effects, prevention of oxidative stress, and protection against such 
diseases as cardiovascular diseases, neurodegenerative, obesity, and cancer. In addi­
tion, a diet containing anthocyanin-rich fruits and vegetables is more reliable and eco­
nomical instead of medications used to control blood sugar and weight. Anthocyanins 
should be consumed more as natural coloring agents, dietary supplements, and nutra­
ceuticals. Therefore, more research should be conducted on the antioxidant activities of 
anthocyanin-rich food sources, their effects on health, and the bioavailability of extracts. 
Additionally, more studies are needed to improve the stability of anthocyanins during 
digestion.
Acknowledgments
The authors are thankful to Eda Nurko, Selen Seyhan, and Gizem Tiryaki for their valu­
able contributions in the preparation of this chapter.
References
Abdellatif, A. A., Alawadh, S. H., Bouazzaoui, A., Alhowail, A. H., & Mohammed, H. A. (2021). 
Anthocyanins rich pomegranate cream as a topical formulation with anti-aging activity. Journal 
of Dermatological Treatment, 32(8), 983–990. https://doi.org/10.1080/09546634.2020.1721418
Aboonabi, A., & Aboonabi, A. (2020). Anthocyanins reduce inflammation and improve glucose and 
lipid metabolism associated with inhibiting nuclear factor-kappaB activation and increasing 
PPAR-γ gene expression in metabolic syndrome subjects. Free Radical Biology and Medicine, 150, 
30–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2020.02.004
Alam, M. A., Islam, P., Subhan, N., Rahman, M. M., Khan, F., Burrows, G. E., … & Sarker, S. D. (2021). 
Potential health benefits of anthocyanins in oxidative stress related disorders. Phytochemistry 
Reviews, 20(4), 705–749. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11101-021-09757-1
Araguirang, G. E., & Richter, A. S. (2022). Activation of anthocyanin biosynthesis in high light – What 
is the initial signal? New Phytologist, 236(6), 2037–2043. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.18488
Azzini, E., Giacometti, J., & Russo, G. L. (2017). Antiobesity effects of anthocyanins in preclinical and 
clinical studies. Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity. https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/2740364
Batista, Â. G., Soares, E. S., Mendonça, M. C., da Silva, J. K., Dionísio, A. P., Sartori, C. R., … & 
Marostica Junior, M. R. (2017). Jaboticaba berry peel intake prevents insulin-resistance-induced 
tau phosphorylation in mice. Molecular Nutrition & Food Research, 61(10), 1600952. https://doi.
org/10.1002/mnfr.201600952

130
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Bowen-Forbes, C. S., Zhang, Y., & Nair, M. G. (2010). Anthocyanin content, antioxidant, anti-
inflammatory and anticancer properties of blackberry and raspberry fruits. Journal of Food 
Composition and Analysis, 23, 554–560. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfca.2009.08.012
Câmara, J. S., Locatelli, M., Pereira, J. A., Oliveira, H., Arlorio, M., Fernandes, I., … & Bordiga, M. (2022). 
Behind the scenes of anthocyanins—From the health benefits to potential applications in food, 
pharmaceutical and cosmetic fields. Nutrients, 14(23), 5133. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu14235133
Chan, C. F., Lien, C. Y., Lai, Y. C., Huang, C. L., & Liao, W. C. (2010). Influence of purple sweet potato 
extracts on the UV absorption properties of a cosmetic cream. Journal of Cosmetic Science, 61(5), 
333–341.
Chen, J., Xu, B., Sun, J., Jiang, X., & Bai, W. (2022). Anthocyanin supplement as a dietary strategy in 
cancer prevention and management: A comprehensive review. Critical Reviews in Food Science 
and Nutrition, 62(26), 7242–7254. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2021.1913092
Chen, L., Jiang, B., Zhong, C., Guo, J., Zhang, L., Mu, T., … & Bi, X. (2018). Chemoprevention of colorec­
tal cancer by black raspberry anthocyanins involved the modulation of gut microbiota and SFRP2 
demethylation. Carcinogenesis, 39(3), 471–481. https://doi.org/10.1093/carcin/bgy009
Chen, X. Y., Zhou, J., Luo, L. P., Han, B., Li, F., Chen, J. Y., … & Yu, X. P. (2015). Black rice anthocya­
nins suppress metastasis of breast cancer cells by targeting RAS/RAF/MAPK pathway. BioMed 
Research International. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/414250
Chen, Z., Wang, C., Pan, Y., Gao, X., & Chen, H. (2018). Hypoglycemic and hypolipidemic effects of 
anthocyanins extract from black soybean seed coat in high fat diet and streptozotocin-induced 
diabetic mice. Food & Function, 9(1), 426–439. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7FO00983F
Correia, P., Araújo, P., Ribeiro, C., Oliveira, H., Pereira, A. R., Mateus, N., … & Fernandes, I. (2021). 
Anthocyanin-related pigments: Natural allies for skin health maintenance and protection. 
Antioxidants, 10(7), 1038. https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox10071038
de la Rosa, L. A., Moreno-Escamilla, J. O., Rodrigo-García, J., & Alvarez-Parrilla, E. (2019). Phenolic 
compounds. In Postharvest Physiology and Biochemistry of Fruits and Vegetables (pp. 253–271). 
Woodhead Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813278-4.00012-9
Diaconeasa, Z., Știrbu, I., Xiao, J., Leopold, N., Ayvaz, Z., Danciu, C., … & Socaciu, C. (2020).
Anthocyanins, vibrant color pigments, and their role in skin cancer prevention. Biomedicines, 
8(9), 336. https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines8090336
dos Santos, N. M., Batista, P. B., Batista, A. G., & Júnior, M. R. M. (2019). Current evidence on cog­
nitive improvement and neuroprotection promoted by anthocyanins. Current Opinion in Food 
Science, 26, 71–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cofs.2019.03.008
Ekici, L., Simsek, Z., Ozturk, I., Sagdic, O., & Yetim, H. (2014). Effects of temperature, time, and pH 
on the stability of anthocyanin extracts: Prediction of total anthocyanin content using nonlinear 
models. Food Anal Methods, 7, 1328–1336. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12161-013-9753-y
Fan, M., Kim, S. A., Choi, Y. J., Tang, Y., Yang, H. P., & Kim, E. K. (2023). Anthocyanin oligomer (grape skin 
extract) administration improves dry eye disease: A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
study. Clinical & Experimental Ophthalmology, 51(2), 122–130. https://doi.org/10.1111/ceo.14207
Fragoso, M. F., Romualdo, G. R., Vanderveer, L. A., Franco-Barraza, J., Cukierman, E., Clapper, M. L., … 
& Barbisan, L. F. (2018). Lyophilized açaí pulp (Euterpe oleracea Mart) attenuates colitis-associated 
colon carcinogenesis while its main anthocyanin has the potential to affect the motility of colon 
cancer cells. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 121, 237–245. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2018.08.078
Gardener, S. L., Rainey-Smith, S. R., Weinborn, M., Bondonno, C. P., & Martins, R. N. (2021). Intake of 
products containing anthocyanins, flavanols, and flavanones, and cognitive function: A narrative 
review. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 13, 640381. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2021.640381
Gitelson, A. A., Merzlyak, M. N., & Chivkunova, O. B. (2007). Optical properties and nondestructive 
estimation of anthocyanin content in plant leaves. Photochem Photobiol, 74, 38–45. https://doi.
org/10.1562/0031-8655(2001)0740038opaneo2.0.co2
Gomes, J. V. P., Rigolon, T. C. B., da Silveira Souza, M. S., Alvarez-Leite, J. I., Della Lucia, C. M., 
Martino, H. S. D., & Rosa, C. D. O. B. (2019). Antiobesity effects of anthocyanins on mitochon­
drial biogenesis, inflammation, and oxidative stress: A systematic review. Nutrition, 66, 192–202. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nut.2019.05.005

131
Health Effects of Anthocyanins
Gonçalves, A. C., Nunes, A. R., Falcão, A., Alves, G., & Silva, L. R. (2021). Dietary effects of anthocyanins 
in human health: A comprehensive review. Pharmaceuticals, 14(7), 690. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ph14070690
Grimes, K. L., Stuart, C. M., McCarthy, J. J., Kaur, B., Cantu, E. J., & Forester, S. C. (2018). Enhancing 
the cancer cell growth inhibitory effects of table grape anthocyanins. Journal of Food Science, 
83(9), 2369–2374. https://doi.org/10.1111/1750-3841.14294
Hagiwara, A., Yoshino, H., Ichihara, T., Kawabe, M., Tamano, S., Aoki, H., … & Shirai, T. (2002). 
Prevention by natural food anthocyanins, purple sweet potato color and red cabbage color, 
of 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo [4, 5-B] pyridine (phip)-associated colorectal carcino­
genesis in rats. The Journal of Toxicological Sciences, 27(1), 57–68. https://doi.org/10.2131/jts.
27.57
Hair, R., Sakaki, J. R., & Chun, O. K. (2021). Anthocyanins, microbiome, and health benefits in aging. 
Molecules, 26(3), 537. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules26030537
Hassellund, S. S., Flaa, A., Kjeldsen, S. E., Seljeflot, I., Karlsen, A., Erlund, I., & Rostrup, M. (2013). 
Effects of anthocyanins on cardiovascular risk factors and inflammation in pre-hypertensive 
men: A double-blind randomized placebo-controlled crossover study. Journal of Human 
Hypertension, 27(2), 100–106. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/jhh.2012.4
Herrera-Balandrano, D. D., Chai, Z., Hutabarat, R. P., Beta, T., Feng, J., Ma, K., … & Huang, W. 
(2021). Hypoglycemic and hypolipidemic effects of blueberry anthocyanins by AMPK acti­
vation: In vitro and in vivo studies. Redox Biology, 46, 102100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
redox.2021.102100
Holton, T. A., & Cornish, E. C. (1995). Genetics and biochemistry of anthocyanin biosynthesis. The 
Plant Cell, 7(7), 1071. https://doi.org/10.2307/3870058
Huo, L., Du, X., Li, X., Liu, S., & Xu, Y. (2021). The emerging role of neural cell-derived exosomes in 
intercellular communication in health and neurodegenerative diseases. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 
15, 738442. https://doi.org/10.1105%2Ftpc.7.7.1071
Jing, P., Qian, B., Zhao, S., Qi, X., Ye, L., Giusti, M. M., & Wang, X. (2015). Effect of glycosylation patterns 
of Chinese eggplant anthocyanins and other derivatives on antioxidant effectiveness in human 
colon cell lines. Food Chemistry, 172, 183–189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2014.08.100
Jo, K., Bae, G. Y., Cho, K., Park, S. S., Suh, H. J., & Hong, K. B. (2020). An anthocyanin-enriched 
extract from Vaccinium uliginosum improves signs of skin aging in UVB-induced photodamage. 
Antioxidants, 9(9), 844. https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox9090844
Johnson, S. A., Figueroa, A., Navaei, N., Wong, A., Kalfon, R., Ormsbee, L. T., … & Arjmandi, B. H. 
(2015). Daily blueberry consumption improves blood pressure and arterial stiffness in post­
menopausal women with pre-and stage 1-hypertension: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled clinical trial. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, 115(3), 369–377. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jand.2014.11.001
Joo, H. K., Choi, S., Lee, Y. R., Lee, E. O., Park, M. S., Park, K. B., … & Jeon, B. H. (2018). Anthocyanin-
rich extract from red Chinese cabbage alleviates vascular inflammation in endothelial cells and 
Apo E−/− mice. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 19(3), 816. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijms19030816
Joseph, J. A., Shukitt-Hale, B., Denisova, N. A., Bielinski, D., Martin, A., McEwen, J. J., & Bickford, P. C. 
(1999). Reversals of age-related declines in neuronal signal transduction, cognitive, and motor 
behavioral deficits with blueberry, spinach, or strawberry dietary supplementation. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 19(18), 8114–8121. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-18-08114.1999
Kalt, W., Hanneken, A., Milbury, P., & Tremblay, F. (2010). Recent research on polyphenolics in 
vision and eye health. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 58(7), 4001–4007. https://doi.
org/10.1021/jf903038r
Kang, K., Jeung, J. G., Afzal, R., Yang, H., & Hwang, H. B. (2019). Effects of grape skin extract, antho­
cyanin oligomer, on a murine dry eye model. Journal of the Korean Society of Food Science and 
Nutrition, 48(4), 395–402. https://doi.org/10.3746/jkfn.2019.48.4.395
Khoddami, A., Wilkes, M. A., & Roberts, T. H. (2013). Techniques for analysis of plant phenolic com­
pounds. Molecules, 18(2), 2328–2375. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules18022328

132
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Khoo, H. E., Azlan, A., Tang, S. T., & Lim, S. M. (2017). Anthocyanidins and anthocyanins: Colored 
pigments as food, pharmaceutical ingredients, and the potential health benefits. Food & 
Nutrition Research, 61(1), 1361779. https://doi.org/10.1080/16546628.2017.1361779.
Kohl, E., Steinbauer, J., Landthaler, M., & Szeimies, R. M. (2011). Skin ageing. Journal of the 
European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology, 25(8), 873–884. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1468-3083.2010.03963.x.
Kosehira, M., Machida, N., & Kitaichi, N. (2020). A 12-week-long intake of bilberry extract (Vaccinium 
myrtillus L.) improved objective findings of ciliary muscle contraction of the eye: A random­
ized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group comparison trial. Nutrients, 12(3), 600. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/nu12030600
Krga, I., & Milenkovic, D. (2019). Anthocyanins: From sources and bioavailability to cardiovascular-
health benefits and molecular mechanisms of action. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 
67(7), 1771–1783. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.8b06737.
Kubow, S., Iskandar, M. M., Melgar-Bermudez, E., Sleno, L., Sabally, K., Azadi, B., ... & Zum Felde, 
T. (2017). Effects of simulated human gastrointestinal digestion of two purple-fleshed potato 
cultivars on anthocyanin composition and cytotoxicity in colonic cancer and non-tumorigenic 
cells. Nutrients, 9(9), 953.
Kurter, H., Basbinar, Y., Ellidokuz, H., & Calibasi-Kocal, G. (2023). The role of cyanidin-3-O-glucoside 
in modulating oxaliplatin resistance by reversing mesenchymal phenotype in colorectal cancer. 
Nutrients, 15(22), 4705. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15224705.
LaFountain, A. M., & Yuan, Y. W. (2021). Repressors of anthocyanin biosynthesis. New Phytologist, 
231(3), 933–949. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.17397
Li, B., Wang, L., Bai, W., Chen, W., Chen, F., & Shu, C. (2022). Anthocyanins: Chemistry, Processing and 
Bioactivity (pp. 1–15). Springer Nature. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-7055-8
Li, J., Zhao, R., Jiang, Y., Xu, Y., Zhao, H., Lyu, X., & Wu, T. (2020). Bilberry anthocyanins improve 
neuroinflammation and cognitive dysfunction in APP/PSEN1 mice via the CD33/TREM2/
TYROBP signaling pathway in microglia. Food & Function, 11(2), 1572–1584. https://doi.org/
10.1039/C9FO02103E
Li, P., Feng, D., Yang, D., Li, X., Sun, J., Wang, G., … & Bai, W. (2021). Protective effects of anthocya­
nins on neurodegenerative diseases. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 117, 205–217. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2021.05.005
Liang, Z., Liang, H., Guo, Y., & Yang, D. (2021). Cyanidin 3-O-galactoside: A natural compound with 
multiple health benefits. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 22(5), 2261. https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijms22052261
Lin, B. W., Gong, C. C., Song, H. F., & Cui, Y. Y. (2017). Effects of anthocyanins on the prevention and 
treatment of cancer. British Journal of Pharmacology, 174(11), 1226–1243. https://doi.org/10.1111/
bph.13627
Liu, Y., Song, X., Han, Y., Zhou, F., Zhang, D., Ji, B., … & Jia, X. (2011). Identification of anthocyanin 
components of wild Chinese blueberries and amelioration of light-induced retinal damage in 
pigmented rabbit using whole berries. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 59(1), 356–363. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/jf103852s
Ma, Z., Du, B., Li, J., Yang, Y., & Zhu, F. (2021). An insight into anti-inflammatory activities and inflam­
mation related diseases of anthocyanins: A review of both in vivo and in vitro investigations. 
International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 22(20), 11076. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms222011076
Mattioli, R., Francioso, A., Mosca, L., & Silva, P. (2020). Anthocyanins: A comprehensive review of 
their chemical properties and health effects on cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases. 
Molecules, 25(17), 3809. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules25173809
McGhie, T. K., Ainge, G. D., Barnett, L. E., Cooney, J. M., & Jensen, D. J. (2003). Anthocyanin glycosides 
from berry fruit are absorbed and excreted unmetabolized by both humans and rats. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 51(16), 4539–4548. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf026206w
Miyake, S., Takahashi, N., Sasaki, M., Kobayashi, S., Tsubota, K., & Ozawa, Y. (2012). Vision preserva­
tion during retinal inflammation by anthocyanin-rich bilberry extract: Cellular and molecular 
mechanism. Laboratory Investigation, 92(1), 102–109. https://doi.org/10.1038/labinvest.2011.132

133
Health Effects of Anthocyanins
Miyazaki, K., Makino, K., Iwadate, E., Deguchi, Y., & Ishikawa, F. (2008). Anthocyanins from purple 
sweet potato Ipomoea batatas cultivar Ayamurasaki suppress the development of atheroscle­
rotic lesions and both enhancements of oxidative stress and soluble vascular cell adhesion mol­
ecule-1 in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 56(23), 
11485–11492. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf801876n
Mozos, I., Flangea, C., Vlad, D. C., Gug, C., Mozos, C., Stoian, D., … & Atanasov, A. G. (2021). 
Effects of anthocyanins on vascular health. Biomolecules, 11(6), 811. https://doi.org/10.3390/
biom11060811
Oliveira, H., Fernandes, A., F. Brás, N., Mateus, N., de Freitas, V., & Fernandes, I. (2020). Anthocyanins 
as antidiabetic agents—In vitro and in silico approaches of preventive and therapeutic effects. 
Molecules, 25(17), 3813. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules25173813
Papaioanou, M., Chronopoulou, E. G., Ciobotari, G., Efrose, R. C., Sfichi-Duke, L., Chatzikonstantinou, 
M., … & Labrou, N. E. (2018). Cosmeceutical properties of two cultivars of red raspberry grown 
under different conditions. Cosmetics, 5(1), 20. https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics5010020
Peng, S. Y., Hsiao, C. C., Lan, T. H., Yen, C. Y., Farooqi, A. A., Cheng, C. M., … & Chang, H. W. (2020). 
Pomegranate extract inhibits migration and invasion of oral cancer cells by downregulating 
matrix metalloproteinase-2/9 and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Environmental Toxicology, 
35(6), 673–682. https://doi.org/10.1002/tox.22903
Poomanee, W., Wattananapakasem, I., Panjan, W., & Kiattisin, K. (2021). Optimizing anthocyanins 
extraction and the effect of cold plasma treatment on the anti-aging potential of purple glutinous 
rice (Oryza sativa L.) extract. Cereal Chemistry, 98(3), 571–582. https://doi.org/10.1002/cche.10399
Poulose, S. M., Bielinski, D. F., Carey, A., Schauss, A. G., & Shukitt-Hale, B. (2017). Modulation of 
oxidative stress, inflammation, autophagy, and expression of Nrf2 in hippocampus and frontal 
cortex of rats fed with açaí-enriched diets. Nutritional Neuroscience, 20(5), 305–315. https://doi.
org/10.1080/1028415X.2015.1125654
Prior, R. L., & Wu, X. (2006). Anthocyanins: Structural characteristics that result in unique meta­
bolic patterns and biological activities. Free Radical Research, 40(10), 1014–1028. https://doi.
org/10.1080/10715760600758522
Qian, F., Wang, M., Wang, J., & Lu, C. (2019). Anthocyanin-rich blueberry extract ameliorates the 
behavioral deficits of MPTP-induced mouse model of Parkinson’s disease via anti-oxidative 
mechanisms. Yangtze Medicine, 3(1), 72–78. https://doi.org/10.4236/ym.2019.31008
Ray, S., Barman, A. K., Roy, P. K., & Singh, B. K. (2017). Chicken eggshell powder as dietary calcium 
source in chocolate cakes. The Pharma Innovation Journal, 6(9), 01–04.
Rehman, S. U., Shah, S. A., Ali, T., Chung, J. I., & Kim, M. O. (2017). Anthocyanins reversed 
D-galactose-induced oxidative stress and neuroinflammation mediated cognitive impairment 
in adult rats. Molecular Neurobiology, 54, 255–271. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-015-9604-5
Rose, P. M., Cantrill, V., Benohoud, M., Tidder, A., Rayner, C. M., & Blackburn, R. S. (2018). 
Application of anthocyanins from blackcurrant (Ribes nigrum L.) fruit waste as renewable 
hair dyes. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 66(26), 6790–6798. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.jafc.8b01044
Samota, M. K., Sharma, M., Kaur, K., Yadav, D. K., Pandey, A. K., Tak, Y., … & Rani, H. (2022). Onion 
anthocyanins: Extraction, stability, bioavailability, dietary effect, and health implications. 
Frontiers in Nutrition, 9, 917617. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2022.917617
Sekikawa, T., Kizawa, Y., Takeoka, A., Sakiyama, T., Li, Y., & Yamada, T. (2021). The effect of consum­
ing an anthocyanin-containing supplement derived from Bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus) on eye 
function: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled parallel study. Functional Foods in 
Health and Disease, 11(3), 116–146. https://doi.org/10.31989/ffhd.v11i3.782
Shin, J. W., Kwon, S. H., Choi, J. Y., Na, J. I., Huh, C. H., Choi, H. R., & Park, K. C. (2019). Molecular 
mechanisms of dermal aging and antiaging approaches. International Journal of Molecular 
Sciences, 20(9), 2126. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20092126
Shipp, J., & Abdel-Aal, E. S. M. (2010). Food applications and physiological effects of antho­
cyanins as functional food ingredients. The Open Food Science Journal, 4(1). http://dx.doi.
org/10.2174/1874256401004010007

134
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Silva, G. T. M., Silva, K. M., Silva, C. P., Goncalves, J. M., & Quina, F. H. (2020). Hybrid pigments from 
anthocyanin analogues and synthetic clay minerals. ACS Omega, 5(41), 26592–26600. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.0c03354
Suantai, B., Jantakee, K., Kaewkod, T., Sangboonruang, S., Chitov, T., & Tragoolpua, Y. (2022). 
Anthocyanins in red jasmine rice (Oryza sativa L.) Extracts and efficacy on inhibition of herpes 
simplex virus, free radicals and cancer cell. Nutrients, 14(9), 1905. https://doi.org/10.3390/
nu14091905
Tabart, J., Auger, C., Kevers, C., Dommes, J., Pollet, B., Defraigne, J. O., … & Pincemail, J. (2018). The 
potency of commercial blackcurrant juices to induce relaxation in porcine coronary artery rings 
is not correlated to their antioxidant capacity but to their anthocyanin content. Nutrition, 51, 
53–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nut.2018.01.009
Tsai, M. C., Chen, C. C., Tseng, T. H., Chang, Y. C., Lin, Y. J., Tsai, I. N., … & Wang, C. J. (2023). 
Hibiscus anthocyanins extracts induce apoptosis by activating AMP-activated protein kinase 
in human colorectal cancer cells. Nutrients, 15(18), 3972. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15183972
Ullah, I., Park, H. Y., & Kim, M. O. (2014). Anthocyanins protect against kainic acid-induced exci­
totoxicity and apoptosis via ROS-activated AMPK pathway in hippocampal neurons. CNS 
Neuroscience & Therapeutics, 20(4), 327–338. https://doi.org/10.1111/cns.12218
Wang, L. S., Hecht, S. S., Carmella, S. G., Yu, N., Larue, B., Henry, C., … & Stoner, G. D. (2009). 
Anthocyanins in black raspberries prevent esophageal tumors in rats. Cancer Prevention 
Research, 2(1), 84–93. https://doi.org/10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-08-0155
Wang, L. S., & Stoner, G. D. (2008). Anthocyanins and their role in cancer prevention. Cancer Letters, 
269(2), 281–290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2008.05.020
Wattanathorn, J., Tong-Un, T., Thukham-Mee, W., Paholpak, P., & Rangseekhajee, P. (2023). A ran­
domized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of an anthocyanin-rich functional ingredient 
on cognitive function and eye dryness in late adulthood volunteers: Roles of epigenetic and gut 
microbiome modulations. Nutrients, 15(16), 3499. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15163499
Winter, A. N., & Bickford, P. C. (2019). Anthocyanins and their metabolites as therapeutic agents for 
neurodegenerative disease. Antioxidants, 8(9), 333. https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox8090333
Wrolstad, R. E. (2004). Symposium 12: Interaction of natural colors with other ingredient, anthocy­
anin pigments-bioactivity and coloring properties. Journal of Food Science, 69, 419–421.
Wu, T., Yu, Z., Tang, Q., Song, H., Gao, Z., Chen, W., & Zheng, X. (2013). Honeysuckle anthocyanin 
supplementation prevents diet-induced obesity in C57BL/6 mice. Food & Function, 4(11), 
1654–1661. https://doi.org/10.1039/C3FO60251F
Xia, W., Quan, T., Hammerberg, C., Voorhees, J. J., & Fisher, G. J. (2015). A mouse model of skin aging: 
Fragmentation of dermal collagen fibrils and reduced fibroblast spreading due to expression of 
human matrix metalloproteinase-1. Journal of Dermatological Science, 78(1), 79–82. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jdermsci.2015.01.009
Yang, L., Ling, W., Yang, Y., Chen, Y., Tian, Z., Du, Z., … & Yang, L. (2017). Role of purified anthocya­
nins in improving cardiometabolic risk factors in Chinese men and women with prediabetes 
or early untreated diabetes—A randomized controlled trial. Nutrients, 9(10), 1104. https://doi.
org/10.3390/nu9101104
Zhang, C., Wu, W., Zhou, L., Cheng, H., Ye, X., & He, Y. (2020). Developing deep learning based regres­
sion approaches for determination of chemical compositions in dry black goji berries (Lycium 
ruthenicum Murr.) using near-infrared hyperspectral imaging. Food chemistry, 319, 126536.
Zhang, J., Wu, J., Liu, F., Tong, L., Chen, Z., Chen, J., … & Huang, C. (2019). Neuroprotective effects 
of anthocyanins and its major component cyanidin-3-O-glucoside (C3G) in the central ner­
vous system: An outlined review. European Journal of Pharmacology, 858, 172500. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2019.172500
Zhao, J., Yu, J., Zhi, Q., Yuan, T., Lei, X., Zeng, K., & Ming, J. (2021). Anti-aging effects of the fer­
mented anthocyanin extracts of purple sweet potato on Caenorhabditis elegans. Food & Function, 
12(24), 12647–12658. https://doi.org/10.1039/D1FO02671B
Zhong, H., Xu, J., Yang, M., Hussain, M., Liu, X., Feng, F., & Guan, R. (2023). Protective effect of 
anthocyanins against neurodegenerative diseases through the microbial-intestinal-brain axis: 
A critical review. Nutrients, 15(3), 496. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15030496

135
7
Anthocyanins as Functional Foods
Semih Ötleş and Gozde Turkoz Bakirci
7.1  Introduction
Anthocyanins are water-soluble plant pigments with a particle molecular structure belong­
ing to the flavonoid class (Mattioli et al., 2020). Although the term anthocyanin was first used 
in 1835, it has been known that these substances are pH indicators since 1664 (Harborne 
and Williams, 2001). It is considered one of the most important pigment groups commonly 
found in plants (Kong et al., 2003). These compounds are water-soluble pigments derived 
from natural sources and are responsible for most of the red, blue and purple colors of fruits, 
vegetables, flowers and other plant tissues or products (Mazza et al., 2004).
In terminology (anthos = flower, kyanos = blue), it was originally used to describe the pig­
ment in the blue cornflower (Centaurea cyanus) (Pascual-Teresa et al., 2010; Tsuda, 2012). They 
usually have one or more hydroxyl or methoxy groups at different positions of two benzene 
rings linked by different sugar moieties (Kay et al., 2017). To date, more than 600 natural 
anthocyanins have been discovered, varying in the number and location of hydroxyl and 
methoxy groups, the number and type of sugar moieties, and the extent and type of sugar 
acylation (Shen et al., 2022).
The fact that antioxidant substances taken with plants create a protective shield against 
the effects of oxygen and other harmful substances entering the body, which causes cells to 
deform, increases the interest in such natural products (Etherton et al., 2002). Anthocyanins 
act as natural antioxidants and protect against free radicals and harmful substances. It 
prevents molecules such as proteins, DNA and lipids from oxidizing. It reduces the risks 
of chronic diseases and relieves inflammation. Anthocyanins are also used in industry 
and cosmetics. It has been found to repair DNA damage, induce apoptosis in tumor cells, 
normalize lipid profiles, improve vascular endothelial function, reduce platelet reactivity 
and contribute to the improvement of neurotoxicity. In addition to adding color appeal to 
foods, they also increase the oxidative stability of the foods to which they are added due 
to their activities against radical substances (Espin et al., 2000). In addition to the broad 
biological activity developed through preclinical and clinical studies, the low-temperature 
properties of anthocyanins make them very safe to consume (Salehi et al., 2020). In recent 
years, interest in anthocyanins has been increasing due to their positive effects on health.
7.2  Functional Foods
Functional products are defined as products and long-term functional foodstuffs that 
are offered in one or more forms or have been found to be effective in maintaining or 

136
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
improving the appearance and performance of human beings thanks to their characteris­
tics (Wildman, 2000).
People want to reach healthier and better quality of life depending on their knowledge 
and behavioral developments. They prefer to take preventive measures instead of treating 
their health problems in order to increase their life expectancy and quality. Nutritional 
style and preference are the most important of these preventive measures. While eating, 
functional foods that protect and improve well-being and reduce the risk of disease are 
preferred (Roberfroid, 2000).
Probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics, dietary fibers, essential fatty acids, carotenoids, phe­
nolic acids and flavonoids, phytoestrogens, phytosterols and phytostanols, vitamins and 
minerals are functional food components.
Probiotics are live microbial food additives that have beneficial effects on host health by 
regulating the microbial balance of the intestinal system. Today, the definition of probiotic 
covers all microbial preparations that support (strengthen) human and animal health and 
are added to food, feed or food additives. Lactic acid bacteria constitute the most impor­
tant group of probiotic microorganisms. Among these, Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus 
species are the most commonly used probiotic microorganisms. In addition, some bacte­
rial species, yeast and mold species are also used in the preparation of probiotic products 
(Lee and Salminen, 1995; Billoo et al., 2006; Kim et al., 2006).
Prebiotics are short-chain carbohydrates that cannot be digested by digestive enzymes 
in humans and are called resistant short-chain carbohydrates. Prebiotics resist digestion 
in the colon and reach the colon undigested (Li et al., 2008). They are generally nondigest­
ible oligosaccharides that can be dissolved in 80% ethanol. Prebiotics, which are inactive 
food ingredients, ferment in the colon. Its benefit to the host is due to its contribution to the 
bacterial flora (Al-Sherajia et al., 2013).
When content or foods contain both prebiotics and probiotics, they are called synbiotics 
(Gibson and Roberfroid, 1995). Dietary fiber is defined as carbohydrate polymers having 
ten or more monomeric units that are not hydrolyzed by endogenous enzymes in the small 
intestine of humans (Codex Alimentarius, 2010). Essential fatty acids are fatty acids that 
the body cannot produce and must be obtained through food (Harris et al., 2007).
Carotenoids, phenolic acids, flavonoids and phytosterols are phytochemicals that con­
tain disease-preventing and protective compounds. Fruits and vegetables are rich sources 
of nutrients and phytochemicals. Some agents in the phytochemical group, such as poly­
phenols (flavonoids, anthocyanins), isoprenoids, soluble compounds, soluble and insoluble 
fibers, are used in humans. It helps fight cancer and some cardiovascular chronic diseases. 
Research shows that fruits and vegetables for a healthy life protect from the mentioned 
diseases and positively promote a healthy life (Oke and Paliyath, 2012). Anthocyanins are 
used in functional foods due to their antioxidant properties.
7.3  Anthocyanins
Anthocyanins are members of the flavonoid group of phytochemicals. Cyanidin, pelar­
gonidin, petunidin are examples of anthocyanins (Skibola and Smith, 2000). The colorful 
anthocyanins are the members of the bioflavonoid phytochemicals and most recognized, 
or visible (Barros et al., 2016). Naturally occurring anthocyanins are in their glycosylated 
form and have sugar moieties such as glucose, arabinose, rhamnose, xylose or galactose 

137
Anthocyanins as Functional Foods
conjugated to the anthocyanidin backbone (Huang and Zhou, 2019). Anthocyanins are 
largely responsible for the attractive pale yellow, orange, red, magenta, violet and blue 
color of a wide variety of plant tissues, especially flowers, fruit, storage organs, stems and 
grains (Chemler et al., 2009; Martín et al., 2017).
It is estimated that there are more than 600 anthocyanins in nature (Clifford, 2000). 
Factors such as the number of hydroxyl and hydrogen groups in the anthocyanin mol­
ecule, the location of these groups, the type, number and bonding style of sugars bonded 
to the molecule, the structure and number of aliphatic and aromatic acids bonded to 
these sugars reveal the different properties among anthocyanins (Eiro and Heinonen, 
2002).
The concentration of the pigment is very important on determining the color expressed 
by anthocyanin. In lesser concentration, the color is blue. Meanwhile in higher concentra­
tion, the color is red. In medium concentration, the color is purple. The increase of the 
hydroxyl group tends to strengthen the color to be more bluish (Farahmandazad, 2015). Six 
anthocyanins found frequently in plants are pelargonidin, cyanidin, peonidin, delphini­
din, petunidin and malvidin (Gıustı and Wrolstad, 2003). Orange and pink colors are from 
pelargonidin individuals, red colors are from cyanidin individuals and purple and blue 
colors are from delphinidin individuals (Harborne and Williams, 2001).
Anthocyanins have higher antioxidant capacities (ACs) with free radical scavenging 
potential than other antioxidants. Anthocyanins have also been observed to reduce the 
risk of chronic disease by increasing antioxidant defenses and modulating antioxidant 
and inflammatory signaling pathways (Yang et al., 2011). Various studies have found that 
anthocyanin intake prevents the rise of blood sugar levels and increases insulin sensitivity 
in a Type 2 diabetes model (Prior et al., 2008).
Cardiovascular disorders, the largest cause of death in the world, are a class of diseases 
that affect the heart and blood vessels. Disease progression is closely related to platelet 
aggregation, hypertension, high LDL cholesterol concentration and vascular endothelial 
dysfunction. Dietary antioxidants, including anthocyanins, play a potential role in pre­
venting or partially reversing these pathological conditions. Many studies have been done 
in this field (Hassellund et al., 2013; Wallace et al., 2016).
The preventive effects of anthocyanins on body fat accumulation were first reported in 
2003 (Tsuda et al., 2003). To date, most studies evaluating the antiobesity role of anthocya­
nins have relied on anthocyanin-rich crude extracts from plant sources, and it has not been 
fully defined which molecular structures of anthocyanins are responsible for antiobesity 
(Tsuda, 2012).
Studies have shown that anthocyanins have effects on glucose modulation and insulin 
resistance associated with metabolic syndrome (Yamauchi et al., 2001; Russo et al., 2005; 
Shih et al., 2010).
The health benefits of anthocyanins on visual functions were one of the first health prop­
erties attributed to them (Ghosh and Konishi, 2007). Some in vitro and in vivo studies have 
been conducted focusing on food-derived anthocyanins regarding their effects on visual 
function (Smeriglio et al., 2016). Antioxidant effect is one of the physiological functions of 
anthocyanins that have been identified in studies. In studies, this antioxidant effect was 
observed in the retinal pigment epithelium (Milbury et al., 2007).
Inflammation is a complex biological response to tissue damage, associated with the 
onset, development and progression of cancer or tumors, provided there is a suitable micro­
environment. Flavonoids have been found to have immunomodulatory properties in vitro. 
Anthocyanins in particular have been reported to have a number of anti-inflammatory 
effects (Miller et al., 2013).

138
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
It has been observed that anthocyanin-rich foods may have beneficial effects against 
cognitive decline and age-related neurodegeneration and may modulate neuronal func­
tions (Nakaishi et al., 2000).
Anthocyanins have been found to support various cell cycle stages, affecting regulatory 
proteins and selectively inhibiting cancer cell growth (Smeriglio et al., 2016).
7.4  Anthocyanin-Rich Foods
Important sources of anthocyanins include black grapes, red cabbage, black carrots, cur­
rants, cherries, purple asparagus, strawberries, eggplant, purple cabbage, onions, red rad­
ishes and sweet potatoes, purple corn, elderberries and blueberries. The high anthocyanin 
content found in fruits shows that a daily intake can be achieved by regular consumption 
of fruits and fruit-derived drinks (Wu et al., 2006). To date, more than 90% of anthocyanins 
isolated in nature are based on six anthocyanidins: pelargodin, cyanidin, peonidin, delph­
inidin, petunidin and malvidin (Andersen and Jordheim, 2010).
Grapes have been consumed as dessert around the world for 2000 years and have a wide 
range of natural properties (Vouillamoz and Grando, 2006). As a taxonomic classifica­
tion, it can be expressed as species (Vinifera) belonging to the Vitaceae family and the Vitis 
genus, in the Rhamnales order, under the Thalamiflorae group. A lot of research has been 
done on its fruits since 1950 (Yadav et al., 2009). Grapes contain phenolic compounds with 
very different structures, such as phenolic acids and polymeric proanthocyanidins. Grape 
seeds are rich in procyanidins, known as polymers of catechins. Grape skin and juice con­
tain anthocyanin and phenolic acids, which are responsible for its color. These bioactive 
compounds vary depending on the grape variety, growing conditions and harvest time 
(Yu et al., 2005). Anthocyanin peonidin 3-glucoside, cyanidin 3-glucoside, malvidin 3-
glucoside, petunidin 3-glucoside and delphinidin 3-glucoside compounds have been 
detected in four red (Red Globe, Flame Seedless, Crimson Seedless and Napoleon) and three 
white (Superior Seedless, Dominga and Moscatel Italica) grape varieties (Cantos et al., 2002). 
Five anthocyanin-3-O-glucosides named malvidin-3-O-glucoside, peonidin-3-O-glucoside 
and cyanidin-3-O-glucoside were isolated by extraction of grapes (Chiou et al., 2014).
Onion and onion peel contain high amounts of flavonols with antioxidant properties 
(Albishi et al., 2013). There are two main flavonoids found in onions: anthocyanins/deriva­
tives, some of which give a red/purple color, and flavonols, which are quercetin/deriva­
tives which are found in all onions and give a yellow/brown color. Benítez et al. (2011) 
and Zhang et al. (2014) examined the anthocyanin content in red onion and determined 
that it predominantly contained delphinidin 3,5-diglucoside, cyanidin 3,5-diglycoside and 
cyanidin 3-glycoside. It has been stated that the amounts of delphinidin 3-glycosyl glyco­
side, cyanidin 3-(6″-malonyl glucoside) and cyanidin 3-(6″-malonyl-3″glycosylglycoside) in 
the peel of the red onion are much higher than in the inner part and contain more cyanidin 
derivatives (Gennaro et al., 2002).
Generally, 54 phenolic compounds have been identified in black elderberry species. 
The predominant polyphenols in black elderberry are anthocyanins. Anthocyanins are 
found in black elderberry fruits in the form of cyanidin glycosides. The main anthocya­
nins in black elderberry fruits are cyanidin-3-sambubioside, cyanidin-3,5 diglycoside, 
cyanidin-3-sambubioyl-5-glycoside, cyanidin-3-O-glycoside and cyanidin-3-(E)-pcoumaroyl-
sambubioside-5-glycoside (Mikulic-Petkovsek et al., 2015). Cyanidin-3-O-glycoside is a 

139
Anthocyanins as Functional Foods
compound with anticancer activity (Marczylo et al., 2009). In addition to cyanidin glyco­
sides, quercetin and caffeic acid derivatives have also been detected in black elderberry 
fruits. Although black elderberry extracts have an inhibitory effect on microbial activity, 
they also have antiradical activity with their anthocyanin content (Pliszka, 2017).
Pomegranate fruit is one of the foods with high AC. There are many components in 
pomegranate fruit that positively affect human health, such as phenolic substances, vita­
mins, minerals, organic acids and anthocyanins (Viuda-Martos et al., 2010; Shirode et 
al., 2014). With these features, pomegranate fruit is effective in protecting against many 
common diseases such as cancer, cardiovascular diseases and diabetes (Mphahlele et al., 
2016). It is also useful in the treatment of bacterial/fungal/parasitic infections, periodontal 
diseases, food poisoning, ulcers, diarrhea, dysentery and hemorrhoids (Lee et al., 2010). 
Some of the anthocyanins detected in pomegranate juice are cyanidin-3-O-glucoside, 
cyanidin-3,5-di-O-glucoside, delphinidin-3-O-glucoside, delphinidin-3,5-di-O-glucoside, 
pelargonidin-3-O-glucoside and pelargonidin-3,5-di-O-glucoside (Lansky and Newman, 
2007). It has been reported that consumption of pomegranate juice reduces LDL cholesterol 
in humans by preventing lipoprotein oxidation and prevents atherosclerosis by reducing 
platelet activation. It has been stated that these positive effects of pomegranate juice are 
due to its high AC and the polyphenolic compounds it contains (Aviram et al., 2000).
Anthocyanins are pigments naturally found in eggplant. Agronomic and genetic factors 
are concentrated within the fruit peel due to the intensity and type of light, temperature, 
processing and storage (Taher et al., 2020). Delphinidin glucosides (delphinidin anthocy­
anidin derivatives) are one of the major anthocyanins of eggplant peel and give a dark 
purple color. Some studies have shown that extracts from eggplant fruits have excellent 
therapeutic effects on warts, burns and many inflammatory diseases such as stomatitis, 
arthritis and gastritis. There are several studies proving that eggplant’s high fiber content 
helps the body get rid of waste materials and harmful toxins, thus reducing the risk of 
colon and stomach cancer (Rodriguez-Jimenez et al., 2018).
Flavonoids in sorghum include quercetin, luteolin, apigenin, catechin, taxifolin, glycit­
ein, naringenin, ononin and hispidulin. In addition, 3-deoxyanthocyanidin is an antho­
cyanin specific to sorghum and is found mostly in its colorful species (Irondi et al., 2019; 
Ofosu et al., 2020).
There are many studies showing the anti-inflammatory effects of Brassica vegetables 
due to their phytochemical properties. Anthocyanins, among the phytochemicals they 
contain, may have a wide range of biological activities, including antioxidant properties, 
anti-tumor activity, cardio- and hepato-protective effects, glucose control in diabetic indi­
viduals, reducing symptoms of gastrointestinal system diseases such as gastritis, ulcers, 
irritable bowel syndrome, immunomodulation and effects on aging, is stated (Kapusta-
Duch et al., 2012). Many studies have reported that Brassica anthocyanins have high AC 
and thus reduce oxidative stress and oxidative damage (Wiczkowski et al., 2013).
It is stated that red cabbage has many health benefits, especially with the anthocyanin 
it contains, such as lowering cholesterol, protecting against cardiovascular system dis­
eases, helping in weight loss, protecting against cancer and improving cognitive function 
(Zhang and Jing, 2020). Purple asparagus (Asparagus officinalis L.) contains more anthocya­
nins than green and white asparagus (Sonoda et al., 2005).
It is stated that the addition of anthocyanin improves the color of processed foods and 
provides an alternative to synthetic colorants. It has been determined that adding antho­
cyanin-rich extracts to bakery products, especially cookies, biscuits and macaroons, can 
protect the food from damage that may occur during cooking without affecting the accept­
ability of the food, and its AC may be greater than that of additives. In addition, products 

140
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
such as kefir and yogurt can be considered as foods suitable for anthocyanin supple­
mentation, as anthocyanins show high stability during storage. However, the produced 
functional foods have positive effects on health thanks to their rich anthocyanin content 
(Echegaray et al., 2020).
Biscuits are a good choice for functional combination as biscuit is one of the popular, 
frequently consumed foods with a long shelf life. Since purple pigments are found in the 
outer layers of the pericarp, biscuit making experiments have been made with whole wheat 
flour. Many functional biscuits are formulated with antioxidant and/or prebiotic proper­
ties (Pasqualone et al., 2015). From the point of view of anthocyanin, the addition of the 
extract obtained from Italian black rice, rich in biscuits and cookies, is highly technological 
and the strengthening of its phenolic fortified content has been observed. In addition, the 
addition of anthocyanin obtained from different sources has made the color of foods such 
as cookies, wafers and pasta more desirable. Products with high AC in red or purple color 
such as kefir, yoghurt, cream, grape skins, black carrots, blueberries and red cabbage have 
been obtained (Echegaray et al., 2020). An artistic, functional baking product made from 
traditional Chinese bread, which is obtained from more sweet potatoes, has been achieved 
as it is suitable for launch (Zhu and Sun, 2019).
Due to their antioxidant properties, anthocyanins not only color the food product they 
are added to but also help protect it against spoilage. Anthocyanins are used as dyestuffs 
to color various foods due to their high dyeing power. Since anthocyanins are water-soluble, 
they can be easily added to aqueous food systems. It has been determined that anthocya­
nins not only provide attractive color properties to foods but also protect them against 
spoilage by increasing the oxidative stability of the foods they are added to, due to their 
high AC (Katsube et al., 2006; Palonen and Weber, 2019).
Although anthocyanins are among the best natural food dyes, their use and prevalence 
are not increasing sufficiently because they are difficult to obtain and do not have a stable 
structure. Anthocyanins can be used to impart red color in ready-to-drink beverages. For 
this purpose, the use of anthocyanins in very low concentrations is sufficient. They can 
also be used as colorants in fruit yoghurts and candies. Since anthocyanins are natural 
coloring substances, they are seen as an important alternative to synthetic dyes in the col­
oring of many foods (Khoo et al., 2017).
References
Albishi T, John JA, Al-Khalifa AS, Shahidi F. Antioxidative phenolic constituents of skins of onion 
varieties and their activities. Journal of Functional Foods. 2013; 5: 1191–1203.
Codex Alimentarius. Guidelines on nutrition labelling CAC/GL 2-1985 as last amended 2010. Joint 
FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, Secretariat of the Codex Alimentarius Commission 
2010; FAO, Rome.
Al-Sherajia SH, Ismail A, Manap MY, Mustafa S, Yusof RM, Hassan FA. Prebiotics as functional 
foods: A review. Journal of Functional Foods. 2013; 5: 1542–1553.
Andersen MO, Jordheim M. Anthocyanins. 2010; Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Aviram M, Rosenblat M, Volkova N, Kaplan M, Coleman R, Hayek T, Presser D, Fuhrman B. 
Pomegranate juice consumption reduces oxidative stress, atherogenic modifications to LDL, 
and platelet aggregation: Studies in humans and in atherosclerotic apolipoprotein E-deficient 
mice. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2000; 71: 1062–1076.
Barros J, Serrani-Yarce JC, Chen F, Baxter D, Venables BJ, Dixon RA. Role of bifunctional ammonia-
lyase in grass cell wall biosynthesis. Nature Plants. 2016; 2(6): 16050.

141
Anthocyanins as Functional Foods
Benítez V, Mollá E, Martín-Cabrejas MA, Aguilera Y, López-Andréu FJ, Cools K, Terry LA, Esteban 
RM. Characterization of industrial onion wastes (Allium cepa L.): Dietary fibre and bioactive 
compounds. Plant Foods for Human Nutrition. 2011; 66(1):48–57. doi: 10.1007/s11130-011-
0212-x. PMID: 21318305.
Billoo AG, Memon MA, Khaskheli SA, Murtaza G, Iqbal K, Shekhani MS, Siddiqi AQ. Role of a pro­
biotic (Saccharomyces boulardii) in management and prevention of diarrhoea. World Journal of 
Gastroenterology. 2006; 12: 4557–4560.
Cantos E, Espin JC, Tomás-Barberán FA. Varietal differences among the polyphenol profiles of 
seven table grape cultivars studied by LC–DAD–MS–MS. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry. 2002; 50(20): 5691–5696.
Chemler JA, Leonard E, Koffas MAG Flavonoid Bio Transformations in Microorganisms. In 
Anthocyanins: Biosynthesis, Functions, and Applications. Edited by Gould K, Davies K, 
Winefield C, Springer. 2009; 191–238.
Chiou A, Panagopoulou EA, Gatzali F, De Marchi S, Karathanos VT. Anthocyanins content and anti­
oxidant capacity of Corinthian currants (Vitis vinifera L., var. Apyrena). Food Chemistry. 2014; 
146: 157–165.
Clifford MN. Review: Anthocyanins-nature, occurrence and dietary burden. Journal of the Science of 
Food and Agriculture. 2000; 80: 1063–1072.
Echegaray N, Munekata PES, Gullón P, Dzuvor CKO, Gullón B, Kubi F, Lorenzo JM. Recent advances 
in food products fortification with anthocyanins. Critical Reviews in Food Science and 
Nutrition. 2020;1–15. 10.1080/10408398.2020.1844141
Eiro MJ, Heinonen M. Anthocyanin color behavior and stability during storage: Effect of intermo­
lecular copigmentation. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2002; 50: 7461–7466.
Espin JC, Soler-Rivas C, Wichers H, Garcia-Viguera C. Anthocyanin based natural colorants: A new 
source of foodstuff. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2000; 48(5): 1588–1592.
Etherton PMK, Hecker KD, Bonanome A, Coval SM, Binkoski AE, Hilpert KF, Griel AE, Etherton 
TD. Bioactive compounds in foods: Their role in the prevention of cardiovascular disease and 
cancer. The American Journal of Medicine. 2002; 113: 71–85.
Farahmandazad H. Recovery and Purification of Anthocyanins from Purple-Blue Potato. [Thesis]. 
2015; Lappeenranta: Lappeenranta University of Technology.
Gennaro L, Leonardi C, Esposito F, Salucci M, Maıanı G, Quaglıa G, Fogliano V. Flavonoid and car­
bohydrate contents in tropea red onions:  Effects of homelike peeling and storage. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2002; 50(7): 1904–1910.
Ghosh D, Konishi T. Anthocyanins and anthocyanin-rich extracts: Role in diabetes and eye function. 
Asia Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2007; 16: 200–208.
Gibson GR, Roberfroid MB. Dietary modulation of the human colonic microbiota. Introducing the 
concept of prebiotics. Journal of Nutrition. 1995; 125: 1401–1412.
Harborne JB, Williams CA. Anthocyanins and other flavonoids. Natural Product Reports. 2001; 18: 
310–333.
Harris WS, Miller M, Tighe AP, Davidson MH, Schaefer EJ. Omega-3 fatty acids and coronary heart 
disease risk: Clinical and mechanistic perspectives. Atherosclerosis. 2007; 197: 12–24.
Hassellund SS, Flaa A, Kjeldsen SE, et al. Effects of anthocyanins on cardiovascular risk factors and 
inflammation in pre-hypertensive men: A double-blind randomized placebo-controlled cross­
over study. Journal of Human Hypertension. 2013; 27(2): 100–106.
Huang Y, Zhou W. Microencapsulation of anthocyanins through two-step emulsification and release 
characteristics during in vitro digestion. Food Chemistry. 2019; 278: 357–363.
Irondi EA, Adegoke BM, Effion ES, Oyewo SO, Alamu EO, Boligon AA. Enzymes inhibitory prop­
erty, antioxidant activity and phenolics profile of raw and roasted red sorghum grains in vitro. 
Food Science and Human Wellness. 2019; 8(2): 142–148.
Kapusta-Duch J, Kopec A, Piatkowska E, Borczak B, Leszczynska T. The beneficial effects of Brassica 
vegetables on human health. Roczniki Państwowego Zakladu Higieny. 2012; 63: 389–395.
Katsube T, Imawaka N, Kawano Y, Yamazaki Y. antioxidant flavonol glycosides in mulberry (Morus 
alba L.) leaves isolated based on LDL antioxidant activity. Food Chemistry. 2006; 97: 25–31.

142
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Kay CD, Pereira-Caro G, Ludwig IA, Clifford MN, Crozier A. Anthocyanins and flavanones are more 
bioavailable than previously perceived: A review of recent evidence. Annual Review of Food 
Science and Technology. 2017; 8: 155–180.
Khoo HE, Azlan A, Tang ST, Lim SM. Anthocyanidins and anthocyanins: Colored pigments as food, 
pharmaceutical ingredients, and the potential health benefits. Food & Nutrition Research. 2017; 
61: 1361779.
Kim HS, Park H, Cho IY, Paik HD, Park E. Dietary supplementation of probiotic Bacillus polyfermen­
ticus, Bispan strain, modulates natural killer cell and T cell subset populations and immuno­
globulin g levels in human subjects. Journal of Medicinal Food. 2006; 9: 321–327.
Kong JM, Chia LS, Goh NK, Chia TF, Brouillard R. Analysis and biological activities of anthocyanins. 
Phytochemistry. 2003; 64(5): 923–933.
Lansky EP, Newman RA. Punica granatum (pomegranate) and its potential for prevention and treat­
ment of inflammation and cancer. Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 2007; 109: 177–206.
Lee CJ, Chen LG, Liang WL, Wanga CC. Anti-inflammatory effects of Punica granatum Linne in vitro 
and in vivo. Food Chemistry. 2010; 118: 315–322.
Lee YK, Salminen S. The coming age of preobiotics. Trends in Food Science and Technology. 1995; 6(7): 
241–245.
Li D, Kim JM, Jin Z, Zhou J. Prebiotic effectiveness of inulin extracted from edible burdock. Anaerobe. 
2008; 14: 29–34.
Marczylo TH, Cooke D, Brown K, Steward WP, Gescher AJ. Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of the 
putative cancer chemopreventive agent cyanidin-3-glucoside in mice. Cancer Chemotherapy 
and Pharmacology. 2009; 64(6): 1261–1268.
Martín J, Navas MJ, Jiménez-Moreno AM, Asuero AG. Anthocyanin pigments: Importance, sam­
ple preparation and extraction. Phenolic Compounds-Natural Sources, Importance and 
Applications. 2017; 117–152.
Mattioli R, Francioso A, Mosca L, Silva P. Anthocyanins: A comprehensive review of their chemical 
properties and health effects on cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases. Molecules. 
2020; 25(17): 3809.
Mazza G, Cacace J, Kay C. Methods of analysis for anthocyanins in plants and biological fluids. 
Journal of AOAC International. 2004; 87(1): 129–145.
Mikulic-Petkovsek M, Ivancic A, Todorovic B, Veberic R, Stampar F. Fruit phenolic composition of 
different elderberry species and hybrids. Journal of Food Science. 2015; 80: 2180–2190.
Milbury PE, Graf B, Curran-Celentano JM, et al. Bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus) anthocyanins modulate 
heme oxygenase1 and glutathione S-transferase-pi expression in ARPE-19 cells. Investigative 
Ophthalmology & Visual Science. 2007; 48(5): 2343–2349.
Miller R, Putnam S, Edwards M. et al. Potential Health Benefits of Blackcurrants: Bioactives in Fruit, 
Health Benefits and Functional Foods, 1st ed. New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons; 2013: 215–250.
Mphahlele RR, Fawole OA, Mokwena LM, Opara UL. Effect of extraction method on chemical, vol­
atile composition and antioxidant properties of pomegranate juice. South African Journal of 
Botany. 2016; 103: 135–144.
Nakaishi H, Matsumoto H, Tominaga S, et al. Effects of blackcurrant anthocyanosides intake on 
dark adaptation and VDT work-induced transient refractive alternation in healthy humans. 
Alternative Medicine Review. 2000; 5: 553–562.
Ofosu FK, Elahi F, Daliri EBM, Tyagi A, Chen XQ, Chelliah R, … Oh DH. UHPLC-ESI-QTOF-MS/MS 
characterization, antioxidant and antidiabetic properties of sorghum grains. Food Chemistry. 
2020; 337: 127788.
Oke M, Paliyath G. Fertilizer Application and Nutraceutical Content in Health-Functional Foods. 
In Fertilizing Crops to Improve Human Health: a Scientific Review Vol:2, Functional Foods. 
Edited by T.W. Bruulsema, P. Heffer, R. M. Welch, İ., Çakmak, K., Moran, IPNI, Norcross, GA; 
IFA, Paris, France, July, 2012; 175p
Palonen P, Weber C. Fruit color stability, anthocyanin content, and shelf life were not correlated with 
ethylene production rate in five primocane raspberry genotypes. Scientia Horticulturae. 2019; 
247: 9–16.

143
Anthocyanins as Functional Foods
Pascual-Teresa D, Moreno DA, García-Viguera C. Flavanols and anthocyanins in cardiovascular 
health: A review of current evidence. International Journal of Molecular Sciences. 2010; 11(4): 
1679–1703.
Pasqualone A, Bianco A, Paradiso V, Summo C, Gambacorta G, Caponio F, Blanco A. Production and 
characterization of functional biscuits obtained from purple wheat. Food Chemistry. 2015; 180, 
64–70. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2015.02.025
Pliszka B. Polyphenolic content, antiradical activity, stability and microbiological quality of elder­
berry (Sambucus nigra L.) extracts. Acta Scientiarum Polonorum Technologia Alimentaria. 2017; 
16(4): 393–401.
Prior RL, Wu X, Gu L, et al. Whole berries versus berry anthocyanins: Interactions with dietary fat 
levels in the C57BL/6J mouse model of obesity. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 
2008; 56: 647–653.
Roberfroid MB. A European consensus of scientific concepts of functional foods. Nutrition. 2000; 16: 
689–691.
Rodriguez-Jimenez JR, Amaya-Guerra CA, Baez-Gonzalez JG, Aguilera-Gonzalez C, Urias-Orona V, 
Nino-Medina G. Physicochemical, functional, and nutraceutical properties of eggplant flours 
obtained by different drying methods. Molcules. 2018; 23(12): 3210.
Russo A, La Fauci L, Acquaviva R, et al. Ochratoxin A-induced DNA damage in human fibroblast: 
Protective effect of cyanidin 3-O-beta-d-glucoside. Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry. 2005; 
16(1): 31–37.
S.L. Lactic acid bacteria in health and disease. In: Lactic Acid Bacteria: Microbiology and Functional 
Aspects. Edited by Salminen S., von Wright, A. 2nd ed. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc. 1998; pp. 
211–254.
Salehi B, et al., The therapeutic potential of anthocyanins: Current approaches based on their molecu­
lar mechanism of action. Frontiers in Pharmacology. 2020; 11: 1300.
Shen Y, Zhang N, Tian J, Xin G, Liu L, Sun X, Li B. Advanced approaches for improving bioavailabil­
ity and controlled release of anthocyanins. Journal of Controlled Release. 2022; 341: 285–299.
Shih PH, Chan YC, Liao JW, et al. Antioxidant and cognitive promotion effects of anthocyanin-rich 
mulberry (Morus atropurpurea L.) on senescence-accelerated mice and prevention of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry. 2010; 21(7): 598–605
Shirode AB, Kovvuru P, Chittur SV, Henning SM, Heber D, Reliene R. Antiproliferative effects of 
pomegranate extract in MCF-7 breast cancer cells are associated with reduced DNA repair 
gene expression and induction of double strand breaks. Molecular Carcinogenesis. 2014 
Jun;53(6):458–70. doi: 10.1002/mc.21995. Epub 2013 Jan 28. PMID: 23359482.
Skibola C, Smith M. Potential health impacts of excessive flavonoid intake. Free Radical Biology and 
Medicine. 2000; 29(3-4): 375–383.
Smeriglio A, Barreca D, Bellocco E. Chemistry, pharmacology and health benefits of anthocyanins. 
Phytotherapy Research. 2016; 30(8): 1265–1286.
Sonoda T, Motoki S, Maekawa K, Suzuki T, Oosawa K, Maeda T, Kakuta H. Differences in antioxida­
tive polyphenols contents of asparagus related to cultivars and seasonal change under various 
cultural conditions of the mother-fern culture. In XI International Asparagus Symposium. 2005; 
776 (pp. 227–234).
Taher D, Solberg S, Prohns J, Chou YY, Rakha M, Wu T. World vegetable center eggplant collection: 
Origin, composition, seed dissemination and utilization in breeding. Frontiers in Plant Science. 
2020; 8: 1484.
Tsuda T, Horio F, Uchida K, et al. Dietary cyanidin 3-o-beta-dglucoside-rich purple corn color 
prevents obesity and ameliorates hyperglycemia in mice. Journal of Nutrition. 2003; 133(7): 
2125–2130.
Tsuda T. Dietary anthocyanin-rich plants: Biochemical basis and recent progress in health benefits 
studies. Molecular Nutrition & Food Research. 2012; 56: 159–170.
Viuda-Martos M, Fernandez-Lopez J, PerezAlvarez JA. Pomegranate and its many functional com­
ponents as related to human health: A review. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and 
Food Safety. 2010; 9: 635–654.

144
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Vouillamoz JF, Grando MS. Genealogy of wine grape cultivars: ‘Pinot’ is related to ‘Syrah. Heredity 
(Edinb). 2006; 97(2): 102.
Wallace TC, Slavin M, Frankenfeld CL. Systematic review of anthocyanins and markers of cardiovas­
cular disease. Nutrients. 2016; 8(1): 32–45.
Wiczkowski W, Szawara-Nowak D, Topolska J. Red cabbage anthocyanins: Profile, isolation, identi­
fication, and antioxidant activity. Food Research International. 2013; 51, 303–309. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2012.12.015
Wildman RE. C. Nutraceuticals: A Brief Review of Historical and Teleological Aspects. In: Handbook 
of Nutraceuticals and Functional Foods. Edited by Wildman REC. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 
2000.
Wu X, Beecher GR, Holden JM, et al. Concentrations of anthocyanins in common foods in the United 
States and estimation of normal consumption. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 
2006; 54(11): 4069–4075.
Yadav M, Jain S, Bhardwaj A, Nagpal R, Puniya M, Tomar R, Singh V, Parkash O, Prasad TR, Marotta 
F, Yadav H. Biological and medicinal properties of grapes and their bioactive constituents: An 
update. Journal of Medicinal Food. 2009; 12(3): 473–484.
Yamauchi T, Kamon J, Waki H, et al. The fat-derived hormone adiponectin reverses insulin resistance 
associated with both lipoatrophy and obesity. Nature Medicine. 2001; 7: 941–946.
Yang M, Koo SI, Song WO, et al. Food matrix affecting anthocyanin bioavailability. Current Medicinal 
Chemistry. 2011; 18(2): 291–300.
Yu J, Ahmedna M, Goktepe İ. Effects of processing methods and extraction solvents on concentration 
and antioxidant activity of peanut skin phenolics. Food Chemistry. 2005; 90: 199–206.
Zhang N, Jing P. Anthocyanins in Brassicaceae: Composition, stability, bioavailability, and potential 
health benefits. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition. 2022; 62(8): 2205–2220. doi: 
10.1080/10408398.2020.1852170. Epub 2020 Dec 1. PMID: 33256437.
Zhang X, Chen F, Wang M. Antioxidant and antiglycation activity of selected dietary polyphenols in 
a cookie model. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2014; 62(7): 1643–1648.
Zhu F, Sun J. Physicochemical and sensory properties of steamed bread fortified with purple sweet 
potato flour. Food Bioscience. 2019; 30, 100411. doi: 10.1016/j.fbio.2019.04.012

Section II
Extraction Methods and 
Analysis of Anthocyanins


147
8
Extraction and Purification of 
Anthocyanins: A Review
Jiaqi Tan, Yanmei Han, Bo Han, Xiangmei Qi, 
Xu Cai, Shaoqin Ge, and Hongkun Xue
8.1  Introduction
Anthocyanins are a kind of flavonoid natural water-soluble pigments widely existing 
in vacuoles of plant flowers, fruits, stems, and leaves [1]. Anthocyanins exhibit poten­
tial health benefits owing to their particular chemical structure and special fragrance. 
Extensive studies indicate that anthocyanins exhibited a variety of biological activities 
such as free radical scavenging [2], antibacterial [3], inhibition of cancer cell increment 
[4], and protection of eyesight [5]. Moreover, low toxicity and high safety of anthocyanins 
were also confirmed using in vitro and in vivo studies [6]. Consequently, anthocyanins are 
widely used in food, medicine, cosmetics, and other fields.
Presently, the extraction of anthocyanins mostly comes from fruits, vegetables, colored 
grains, by-products of fruit, and vegetable processing [7]. Fruit residues, such as grape, 
mulberry, and raspberry, are rich in anthocyanins. China is a large fruit-producing coun­
try with an annual output of 24 million tons and nearly 10 million tons of fruit residues [8]. 
There are abundant anthocyanins resources in fruit and residues. The high-value utiliza­
tion of fruit residue waste is a hot spot in food processing and development. Therefore, 
utilizing fruit residues to extract anthocyanins can not only improve the comprehensive 
utilization rate of fruit residues, solve the problem of industrial waste treatment, and 
reduce the pressure of environmental protection but also obtain high value-added prod­
ucts to improve their economic benefits.
According to existing literature, anthocyanins can be used as functional active ingredi­
ents and therapeutic agents for disease prevention and treatment [9, 10]. Efficient extrac­
tion and purification of anthocyanins are the premise of its application, and Figure 8.1 
summarizes different extraction and purification methods of anthocyanins. Therefore, 
the research progress of extraction and purification and future prospects of anthocya­
nins must be systematically reviewed to better understand anthocyanins from natural 
resources. Herein, the aim of this review was to present the research progress of antho­
cyanins extraction and purification and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each 
method. These findings provide an important scientific basis for the further development 
and utilization of anthocyanins.

148
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
FIGURE 8.1
The available methods extraction and purification methods of anthocyanins.

149
Extraction and Purification of Anthocyanins
8.2  Structure and Stability of Anthocyanins
Anthocyanins, as the most common and widely distributed flavonoids, are water-
soluble pigments in flowers, seeds, fruits, and leaves of many plants. Figure 8.2 shows the 
basic skeleton characteristics of anthocyanins C6-C3-C6, and 2-phenylbenzopyran is its 
basic structure [11]. Generally, the properties of anthocyanins are extremely unstable and 
rarely exist alone under natural conditions, and they are often formed by glycosidic bonds 
with sugars such as glucose, galactose, rutose, and rhamnose [12]. There are six common 
anthocyanins: cyanidin, petunidin, petonidin, pelargonidin, delphinidin, and malvi­
din (Figure 8.2). The different types of anthocyanins are mainly due to the differences 
in the position of glycosidic bond binding, the type and number of sugars, the number of 
hydroxyl groups, the type and number of aromatic acids, and so on [13]. Anthocyanins con­
tain unsaturated double bonds and easily oxidized groups, which lead to their extremely 
unstable properties. The external environment can easily affect their stability. The main 
external factors affecting the degradation of anthocyanins are pH, temperature, and O2 
concentration, and the secondary factors are enzymes, metal ions, ascorbic acid, and its 
degradation products [14, 15]. Moreover, the structure of anthocyanins, such as the num­
ber and position of hydroxyl groups, the degree of glycosylation, methylation, and acyla­
tion, affects the stability of anthocyanins [16]. Therefore, extraction factors (solid-to-liquid 
ratio, ultrasonic power, microwave power, extraction temperature, and extraction time) 
should be reasonably controlled to optimize the extraction rate of anthocyanins by using 
response surface analysis, orthogonal test, genetic algorithm, and genetic algorithm cou­
pled neural network.
FIGURE 8.2
Basic structure of anthocyanins.

150
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
8.3  Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
With the development of extraction technology, the nutritional and medical values of 
anthocyanins have increasingly attracted attention. All kinds of traditional and potential 
extraction methods have already been established and proposed. Table 8.1 summarizes 
the different raw materials, extraction methods, extraction process, and the corresponding 
anthocyanins yield.
8.3.1  Solvent Extraction Method (SEM)
The technical principle of the solvent extraction method (SEM) is close to the principle 
of similar solubility [17]. It is very important to reasonably select organic solvents. The 
most commonly used solvents for anthocyanins extraction are methanol, ethanol, acidi­
fied water, or acidified ethanol [18]. Based on a thorough review of previous literature, it 
was found that anthocyanins could be extracted by SEM under the following conditions: 
Extraction time of 5 min–4.2 h, extraction temperature of 34.7–52.03°C, solid-to-liquid ratio 
of 1:15–1:30 g/mL [19–23]. To sum up, SEM has certain advantages, such as convenient 
operation, simple equipment, and easy to implement, whereas it has significant disadvan­
tages, such as long time-consuming, low efficiency, large solvent consumption, and high 
temperature. Hence, the applications of SEM are limited.
To solve the limitations of traditional solvent extraction, some advanced and effective 
extraction methods were developed to improve the yield of anthocyanins. Especially, 
ultrasound-assisted extraction (UAE), microwave-assisted extraction (MAE), supercriti­
cal carbon dioxide extraction (SCDE), ultrasound-assisted enzymatic extraction (UAEE), 
ultrasound-assisted deep eutectic solvent extraction (UADESE), and ultrasonic-MAE 
(UMAE) methods have been widely used in the extraction of anthocyanins.
8.3.2  Ultrasound-Assisted Extraction (UAE)
UAE utilizes the cavitation effect and strong shear forces produced by ultrasound with 
frequencies between 20 kHz and 50 MHz to enhance the extraction ability and shorten 
the extraction time of anthocyanins [24]. Table 8.1 summarizes the process conditions of 
UAE anthocyanins from red rice bran, Auricularia auricula, purple corn bran, fresh purple 
eggplant parts, and blueberry [25–28]. By analyzing the literature of UAE anthocyanins 
at home and abroad, ultrasound has the effect of strengthening the extraction of natu­
ral anthocyanins to a certain extent when compared with traditional SEM. However, the 
cavitation and mechanical effects produced by ultrasound may destroy the structure of 
anthocyanins in the process of UAE. Therefore, the ultrasonic conditions (ultrasound 
power, extraction temperature, solid-to-liquid ratio, and extraction time) must be strictly 
controlled to give better play to the advantages of ultrasonic extraction.
8.3.3  Microwave-Assisted Extraction (MAE)
MAE has been used as a potential extraction method due to the higher recovery and 
efficiency in comparison to conventional SEM [30]. The main mechanisms of microwave 
extraction are inherent ion conduction and dipole relaxation in dielectric materials [31]. 
Microwave radiation rapidly elevates the temperature of the solvent, and the increasing 
temperature can obviously reduce the viscosity of the extract and promote the solubility 

151
Extraction and Purification of Anthocyanins
(Continued)
TABLE 8.1
Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Source
Extraction 
Solvent
Extraction 
Method
Extraction Process
Yield
References
Purple 
passion fruit 
peel
Potable 
water
SEM
pH 2.0, extraction 
temperature 52.03°C, 
solid-to-liquid ratio 
29.79 g/mL, and extraction 
time 180 min
577.59 
mg/100 g
[19]
Dried 
blackcurrant 
skins
Methanol/
water
SEM
Extraction time 2 h, 
extraction temperature 
50°C
1712.3 ± 
56.1 mg/
100 g
[20]
Blueberry 
bagasse
Acidulant 
(1% w/v) 
in water
SEM
Extraction temperature 
50°C, extraction time 
5 min
17.17 ± 
0.70 mg/
100 g
[21]
Black rice
Water
SEM
Extraction temperature 
34.7°C, extraction time 
80 min, and solid-to-liquid 
ratio 1:30 g/mL
16.58 mg/
100 g
[22]
Aronia 
melanocarpa
Ethanol
SEM
Extraction temperature 
46°C, extraction time 4.2 h, 
and solid-to-liquid ratio 
1:23.8 g/mL
6.12 mg/g
[23]
Red rice 
bran
78.37% 
ethanol
UAE
Solid-liquid ratio 1:17.46 
g/mL, ethanol 
concentration 78.37%, 
ultrasonication time 
55.23 min, and pH 2.31
5.80 mg/g
[25]
Auricularia 
auricula
80% ethanol
UAE
Ultrasonication time 5 min, 
extraction temperature 
90°C, and ethanol 
concentration 80%
382.4 μg/g
[26]
Purple corn 
bran
95% ethanol, 
0.1 mol/L 
citric acid, 
and distilled 
water
UAE
Extraction time 35 min, 
ultrasonic time 90 s, 
solid-liquid ratio 1:8 
g/mL, and ultrasonic 
power 400 W.
3.625 ± 0.105 
g/kg
[27]
Fresh purple 
eggplant 
parts
Acidified 
water
UAE
Extraction temperature 
75°C, pH 2.0, and extraction 
time 60 min
29.011 mg 
GAE/g DM
[28]
Blueberry
Ethanol
UAE
Ultrasonic power 512.7 W, 
extraction time 29.8 min, 
and liquid to solid ratio 
9.5:1 mL/g
2.903 mg/g
[29]
Purple sweet 
potato
30% ethanol
MAE
Solid-to-liquid ratio 
1:3 g/mL, ethanol 
concentration 30%, 
microwave irradiation 
power 320 W, extraction 
time 500 s
31.16 mg/
100g
[33]
Red 
cabbage
50% ethanol
MAE
Extraction time 5 min, 
solid-solvent ratio 
1:20 g/mL, and microwave 
power 200 W
241.20 mg/g
[34]

152
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
TABLE 8.1
Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Source
Extraction 
Solvent
Extraction 
Method
Extraction Process
Yield
References
Blackberry
52% ethanol
MAE
Microwave power of 469 W, 
solvent concentration of 
52%, liquid-solid ratio of 
25 g/mL, and microwave 
time of 4 min.
2.18 ± 
0.06 mg/g
[35]
Cranberry
52% ethanol
MAE
Extraction temperature of 
50°C, extraction time of 8 s, 
ethanol concentration of 52% 
and solid-to-liquid ratio of 
1:28 g/mL
3.06 ± 
0.05 mg/g
[36]
Lonicera 
edulis
85% ethanol
MAE
Microwave power 280 W, 
microwave time 90 s, 
material liquid ratio 1:25 g/
mL, and ethanol volume 
fraction 85%
292.16 ± 
1.25 mg/
100 g
[37]
Sour cherry 
(Prunus 
cerasus L.) 
peels
80% ethanol
MAE
Microwave power 500 W, 
irradiation time 90 s, and 
ethanol solvent 
concentration 80%
12.47 mg/g
[38]
Boletus 
edulis
CO2
SCDE
Extraction temperature of 
65°C, pressure 45 MPa, 
static time 15 min, 
dynamic time 20 min
52.7%
[39]
Blueberry 
pomace
CO2
SCDE
Extraction temperature 
40°C, pressure 34.7 MPa, 
CO2 velocity of flow 
4.5 L/min, and extraction 
time 1.86 h
1.48 mg/g
[40]
Blueberry
CO2
SCDE
Extraction temperature 40°C, 
pressure 28 MPa, solid-to-
liquid ratio 1:7 g/mL, and 
extraction time 60 min
1.58 mg/g
[41]
Blueberry
CO2
SCDE
Temperature, pressure, and 
solvent flow rate kept 
constant at 40°C, 20 MPa, 
and 10 mL/min
85 mg/100g
[42]
Grape 
skins
60% ethanol
UAEE
Extraction temperature of 
50°C, ultrasonic power of 
400 W, pectinase dosage 
of 0.16%, and extraction 
time of 28 min
3.01 ± 
0.04 mg/g
[43]
Raspberry 
wine 
residues
60% ethanol
UAEE
Extraction temperature of 
44°C, ultrasound power of 
290 W, pectinase dosage 
of 0.16%, and extraction 
time of 30 min
0.853 ± 
0.009 mg/g
[44]
Mulberry 
wine 
residues
Distilled 
water 
acidified to 
pH 3.5
UAEE
Extraction temperature of 
52°C, ultrasound power of 
315 W, enzyme of 0.22%, 
incubation time of 94 min 
incubation
5.98 mg/g
[45]
  (Continued)
(Continued)

153
Extraction and Purification of Anthocyanins
of the target components. In addition, microwave radiation destroys the microstructure 
of plant cells, which markedly decreases the mass transfer resistance of the target compo­
nents and promotes the anthocyanins diffusion from the inside to the outside [32]. Thus, 
the extraction efficiency of the target components is improved by microwave radiation. 
Currently, MAE is widely used in the extraction of bioactive compounds from natural 
plant resources, for example, purple sweet potato, red cabbage, blackberry, cranberry, 
Lonicera edulis, and sour cherry [33–38]. However, UAE and MAE methods may lead to 
the structural destruction of anthocyanins, which are mainly attributed to local excessive 
vibration and local high temperature of the extract, respectively. Moreover, the extraction 
parameters (microwave power, extraction time, and solid-to-liquid ratio) should be con­
trolled at a reasonable level to obtain high anthocyanin yield.
TABLE 8.1
Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Source
Extraction 
Solvent
Extraction 
Method
Extraction Process
Yield
References
Blueberry 
wine 
residues
Deep eutectic 
solvent
UADESE
Water content of 29%, 
ultrasonic power of 380 W, 
extraction temperature of 
55°C, and extraction time of 
40 min.
9.32 ± 
0.08 mg/g
[46]
Raspberry
Deep eutectic 
solvent
UADESE
Water content of 29%, 
ultrasonic power of 210 W, 
extraction temperature of 
51°C, and extraction time of 
32 min
1.378 ± 
0.009 mg/g
[47]
Black 
carrots
Deep eutectic 
solvent
UADESE
Ultrasound power of 78.4 W, 
extraction time of 19.8 min, 
solvent/solid ratio of 
24.5:1 mL/g, and cycle of 
0.195
16.84 mg/g
[48]
Lonicera 
caerulea 
residue
30% ethanol
UMAE
Microwave power 150 W, 
extraction time 2 min, solid/
solvent ratio of 3:90 g/mL, 
and ethanol solvent 
concentration 30%
9.37 mg/g
[49]
Mulberry
30% ethanol
UMAE
Microwave power 150 W, 
ultrasound power of 360 W, 
extraction time 2 min, solid/
solvent ratio of 1:70 g/mL, 
and ethanol solvent 
concentration 30%
13.57 ± 
1.30 mg/g
[50]
Purple 
yam
60% ethanol
UMAE
Ultrasonic power of 50 W, 
ultrasonic frequency of 40 
kHz, material-liquid ratio of 
1:48 g/mL, extraction time 
of 283 s and extraction 
temperature of 46°C
4.73 mg/g
[51]
Grape
67.4% 
ethanol
UMAE
Ethanol concentration 
67.4%, extract time 192 s, 
microwave power 478 W
3.920%
[52]
  (Continued)

154
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
8.3.4  Supercritical Carbon Dioxide Extraction (SCDE)
In recent years, a growing number of study has used supercritical carbon dioxide 
extraction (SCDE) to extract anthocyanins from natural sources, such as Boletus edu­
lis, blueberry pomace, and blueberry (Table 8.1) [39–42]. The nature of supercritical 
carbon dioxide is between gas and liquid. It has different physico-chemical proper­
ties from traditional solvents, strong solubility, large mass transfer coefficient, non-
toxic, high cost performance, and easy access [40]. Hence, SCDE, as a novel extrac­
tion technology, has many advantages, such as high efficiency, green, safety, and 
no pollution. Moreover, SCDE method has low treatment temperature and is espe­
cially suitable for the extraction of heat sensitive substances, such as anthocyanins 
[41]. However, this technology is still far from large-scale and industrialized applica­
tion in the food industry due to the high cost of equipment and large technical invest­
ment. In addition, extraction parameters (pressure and CO2 velocity) are difficult 
to control.
8.3.5  Combined Extraction Method
With the development of extraction technology, some combined extraction technolo­
gies, such as UAEE and UADESE methods, have been proposed for the extraction of 
active components from natural sources. The addition of enzymatic method, including 
cellulase and pectinase, has also increase the anthocyanins yield as has ultrasound 
processing for anthocyanins extraction from natural plant resources. Hence, UAEE 
method was widely used to extract anthocyanins from grape skins, raspberry wine 
residues, and mulberry wine residues [43–45]. At present, it is common to extract antho­
cyanins with organic solvents, whereas the toxicity of organic solvents and their harm 
to the environment bring hidden dangers to their use. In addition, the waste treatment 
in the production process also needs high-cost investment, which brings a burden to 
enterprises. Therefore, a green and efficient anthocyanins extraction method must be 
explored to improve the yield of anthocyanins. Recently, more and more researchers 
try to use deep eutectic solvents (DESs) instead of organic solvents. DESs, as a new 
generation of liquid salts, are usually based on mixtures of relatively cheap and easily 
available components. Since their emergence, DESs as potential green solvents have 
attracted extensive attention in various industrial fields, including the extraction of 
bioactive compounds from various natural plant sources. The combination of UAE and 
DESs extraction methods has the merits of both methods, thereby providing effective 
and environmentally friendly alternatives to the traditional anthocyanins extraction 
methods. The UADESE method is used to extract anthocyanins from blueberry wine 
residues, raspberry, black carrots, and black rice bran to achieve the maximum yield 
of anthocyanins [46–48]. Moreover, UMAE is also one of the important methods of 
anthocyanins extraction. This method can give full play to the advantages of micro­
wave and ultrasound. Therefore, UMAE is widely used in the extraction of anthocya­
nins in Lonicera caerulea residue, mulberry, purple yam, and grape [49–52]. However, 
although the combined extraction method can improve the yield of anthocyanins to 
a certain extent, the extraction process cannot be accurately controlled. Many prob­
lems should be solved to realize large-scale extraction of anthocyanins by using the 
combined extraction method in industry. How to develop a rapid, environmentally 
friendly, and efficient extraction method of anthocyanins from plant resources needs 
to be further studied.

155
Extraction and Purification of Anthocyanins
8.4  Purification Methods of Anthocyanins
In the extraction process, anthocyanins and a large number of impurities (soluble sugar, 
protein, and organic acid) are extracted at the same time. Excessive impurities will have 
a significant impact on the physiological activities, stability, and final product quality of 
anthocyanins. Therefore, the separation and purification of the crude extract is an essen­
tial link to obtain anthocyanins with high stability, strong physiological activity, and high 
quality. At present, the purification methods of anthocyanins mainly include column 
chromatography, membrane separation, high-speed counter-current chromatography 
(HSCCC), and high-efficiency preparative liquid chromatography.
8.4.1  Column Chromatography Method
Column chromatography is the most common purification method for the separation and 
purification of anthocyanins. The principle is that the distribution coefficients of anthocya­
nins in solid and mobile phases are different, which can better separate anthocyanins and 
impurities [53]. The packed column usually contains macroporous resins, sephadex-100, 
and polyamide resins. Macroporous resin, as an adsorbent of high polymer, has a porous 
skeleton and does not contain ion exchange groups. In addition, macroporous resin has 
the advantages of fast adsorption rate, large adsorption capacity, low production cost, and 
recycling [54]. Therefore, this method has become a very rapid purification method, which 
is widely used in the separation and purification of plant active components. Chen et al. 
[55] compared the adsorption and desorption properties of five macroporous resins on 
anthocyanins from mulberry. It was found that XDA-7HP macroporous resin had stronger 
adsorption and desorption capacities than the other four macroporous resins. The purity 
of anthocyanins obtained by elution with 40% ethanol solution was 8.5 times higher than 
that of the crude extract [55]. Wang et al. [56] used macroporous resin to separate and 
purify the crude extract of anthocyanins from blueberry. The results show that the purity 
of anthocyanins increased from 7.5% to 32.0% after purification by macroporous resin [56]. 
Xue et al. [57] first dynamically adsorbed the crude extract of anthocyanins in blueberry 
by microporous resin, then dynamically desorbed via pH = 3 and 60% ethanol aqueous 
solution, and collected the desorbed solution. The anthocyanins content was only 4.58%, 
then separated the anthocyanins in the analytical solution by Sephadex LH-20, and finally 
collected the anthocyanins content in the powder to reach 90.96% [57]. Column chroma­
tography is the most common method for the separation and purification of anthocyanins. 
However, this technology can not realize the large-scale purification of anthocyanins in 
industry due to the small amount of preparation.
8.4.2  Membrane Separation Method
Membrane separation technology is a method that uses artificial and natural synthetic 
membranes to separate and purify substances. The separation principle is based on dif­
ferent molecular weights to better separate impurities and target substances [58]. At 
present, the membranes used for separation and crude extraction mainly include micro-
filtration membrane (MF), ultra-filtration membrane (UF), and nanofiltration membrane 
(NF). The whole separation process of membrane separation technology belongs to 
physical process, which does not involve chemical reaction, and it has the advantages of 
mild action, no phase change during separation, acid and alkali resistance, low energy 

156
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
consumption, and so on. Therefore, this technology is widely used in the fields of biol­
ogy, medicine, food, and water treatment. Woo et al. (2008) used membrane separation 
technology to recover anthocyanins from cranberry pulp wastes. After ultrafiltration, 
infiltration, and concentration, the concentrated powder contained 0.11% anthocyanins 
[59]. He et al. extracted anthocyanins from black rice [60]. Firstly, the membrane with a 
relative molecular weight of 3 kDa was used to intercept and remove proteins and poly­
saccharides. The anthocyanins were adsorbed with DM 301 resin, eluted with an ethanol 
aqueous solution with a volume fraction of 85%, and finally intercepted with a 200 Da 
membrane to obtain purified anthocyanins with a purity of 95.93%. We can consider 
improving the pretreatment technology of raw materials when using membrane sepa­
ration. In purification, a variety of methods were used, such as membrane separation 
and resin adsorption, gel separation and membrane separation. A suitable and efficient 
method for the separation and preparation of anthocyanins was selected according to 
the feasibility of the experiment.
8.4.3  High-Speed Counter-Current Chromatography (HSCCC) Method
HSCCC, as a continuous liquid-liquid separation method, has been extensively used to 
prepare bioactive compounds from natural plant resources [61, 62]. HSCCC can avoid the 
irreversible adsorption of samples on solid phase support; thus, it can improve the sam­
ple loading capacity and facilitate the rapid and large-scale preparation of bioactive com­
pounds compared with traditional column chromatography [63]. Moreover, the impurities 
of the target fraction will be obviously reduced and the success rate of the separation of 
active compounds would be highly improved after separation by HSCCC. Our research 
group successfully isolated and purified two high-purity anthocyanins monomers 
(cyanidin-3-glucoside and delphinidin-3-glucoside) from blueberry and cranberry by 
HSCCC, and their purity was more than 94% [64, 65]. In addition, we isolated and puri­
fied seven major kinds of anthocyanins from raspberry wine residues by HSCCC [44]. 
Moreover, Xiao et al. [53] isolated anthocyanins from Perilla frutescens by HSCCC. It was 
found that the purities of malonylshisonin and shisonin were 96.7% and 97.5%, respec­
tively, indicating that HSCCC is a fast and efficient technique to prepare pure anthocya­
nins monomer from natural resources [53]. Liang et al. isolated cyanidin-3-glucoside from 
blue honeysuckle fruits by HSCCC. The results show that each injection of 100 mg crude 
extract yielded 22.8 mg of cyanidin-3-glucoside at 98.1% purity [66]. The selection of appro­
priate extraction solvent system is still an urgent problem to be solved in the technology of 
HSCCC. Therefore, the technology still needs further research.
8.4.4  High Performance Preparative Liquid Chromatography (HPPLC) Method
The principle of high performance preparative liquid chromatography (HPPLC) is based 
on the different physicochemical properties of each component in the crude extract of 
natural products, and the components are distributed in two immiscible phases to vary­
ing degrees and move relatively in the two phases at different speeds to be eluted from the 
column, which can achieve better separation effect [67]. When using HPPLC to separate 
and purify the crude extract, the main factors considered are the purity, yield, operating 
components, and production cycle of the target substance. HPPLC has the advantages of 
good separation and purification effect, high detection accuracy, wide application, and 
automatic continuous separation [68]. Therefore, it is widely used in the separation of high 
value-added products, such as organic acids, bioactive bases, and flavonoids. However, 

157
Extraction and Purification of Anthocyanins
this technology has a large amount of equipment investment and a small amount of prepa­
ration. Therefore, it is still unable to realize large-scale industrial application.
In conclusion, when enriching and purifying anthocyanins, the pretreatment of samples 
can help to improve the extraction rate and purity of anthocyanins, save time, reduce the 
use of organic solvents, and protect the environment. According to the production require­
ments, the selection of appropriate and feasible equipment, and the combined use of puri­
fication technology are conducive to the rapid separation and purification of anthocyanins 
with high purity.
8.5  Concluding Remarks and Prospects
The main factors affecting the extraction of anthocyanins from berries and fruit residue 
are the characteristics of sample matrix (such as water activity of sample and rigidity of 
plant cell wall) and extraction process parameters (such as pH, solvent, temperature, and 
time). At present, the extraction method has developed from traditional solvent method 
to emerging technologies such as DES extraction, ultrasonic-assisted extraction, MAE, 
and supercritical fluid extraction. Compared with traditional solvent extraction, the novel 
technologies have obvious advantages in extraction rate, energy consumption, extrac­
tion time, and environmental protection. However, the new technologies also have some 
shortcomings, such as high equipment requirements and process optimization standards. 
From the perspective of industrialization, microwave and ultrasonic-assisted extraction 
methods have been used in industry, whereas the industrialization of supercritical fluid 
extraction and high voltage pulsed electric field-assisted extraction methods are diffi­
cult due to the problem of equipment cost. Currently, the research on the extraction of 
anthocyanins is mainly to optimize the specific extraction process, or select the optimal 
extraction method by comparing different extraction processes and taking the extraction 
rate of total anthocyanins as the index. Laboratory extraction process should be closely 
related to industrial production, and laboratory extraction equipment should be used to 
provide more data support for simulating industrial production. Anthocyanins purifica­
tion needs to consider factors such as efficiency, production cost, and easy operation. The 
resin materials with high cost performance are used or combined with membrane separa­
tion and gel method. Chromatographic technology must be used to prepare high-purity 
anthocyanins.
Based on the development status at home and abroad, the research direction of antho­
cyanins from plant resources in China in the future can be considered from the follow­
ing aspects: (1) ameliorate the extraction equipment with high cost and potential safety 
hazards, and improve the safety performance of the extraction equipment while reducing 
the production cost; (2) according to the characteristics of extraction technology, different 
extraction technologies are investigated to diversify the extraction process and provide 
technical and theoretical support for screening the best process; (3) improve the laboratory 
extraction equipment to better match the industrial production; (4) increase the optimiza­
tion of sample pretreatment methods (such as fully grinding the sample, soaking and soft­
ening in advance, adding cellulase and pectinase to hydrolyze cellulose in raw materials, 
steam explosion, and pressurization), which will be conducive to the release of anthocya­
nins in raw materials; (5) different extraction and purification processes are formulated for 
anthocyanins products with different purities.

158
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Authors Contribution
Hongkun Xue: Writing-original draft, Writing-review & editing, Data curation, 
Visualization. Yanmei Han, Bo Han, Shaoqin Ge, and Xu Cai: Formal analysis and 
Software. Jiaqi Tan: Conceptualization, Resources, Writing-review & editing, Supervision.
Declaration of Competing Interest
All authors have declared no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgment
The authors gratefully thank the financial support provided by Hebei University High-
level Talent Scientific Research Start-up Project (521100221072) for this research project.
References
	
1	 [a]. J.M. Alvarez-Suarez, C. Cuadrado, I. Ballesteros, F. Giampieri, C.S. Buelga, Novel 
approaches in anthocyanin research-plant fortification and bioavailability issues, Trends Food 
Sci. Technol. 117 (2021) 92–105. [b] X. Zhao, Z. Yuan, Anthocyanins from pomegranate (Punica 
granatum L.) and their role in antioxidant capacities) and their role in antioxidant capacities, 
Chem. Biodivers. 18 (2021), e2100399.
	
2.	 X. Jiao, B. Li, Q. Zhang, N. Gao, X. Zhang, X. Meng, Effect of in vitro-simulated gastrointestinal 
digestion on the stability and antioxidant activity of blueberry polyphenols and their cellular 
antioxidant activity towards HepG2 cells, Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 53 (2018) 61–71.
	
3.	 P.B. Pertuzatti, M.T. Barcia, L.P.G. Rebello, S. Gόmez-Alonso, R.M.T. Duarte, M.C.T. Duarte, 
I. Hermosin-Gutierrez, Antimicrobial activity and differentiation of anthocyanin profiles of 
rabbiteye and highbush blueberries using HPLC-DAD-ESI-MSn and multivariate analysis, J. 
Funct. Foods 26 (2016) 506–516.
	
4.	 E. Eroglu Ozkan, M.F. Seyhan, O. Kurt Sirin, T. Yilmaz-Ozden, E. Ersoy, S.D. Hatipoglu 
Cakmar, A.C. Goren, H. Yilmaz Aydogan, O. Ozturk, Antiproliferative effects of Turkish pome­
granate (Punica granatum L.) extracts on MCF-7 human breast cancer cell lines with focus on 
antioxidant potential and bioactive compounds analyzed by LC-MS/MS, J. Food Biochem. 45 
(2021) e13904.
	
5.	 P. Zhang, Y. Li, T. Wang, Z. Cai, H. Cao, H. Zhang, Y. Cao, B. Chen, D. Yang, Statistics on 
the bioactive anthocyanin/proanthocyanin products in China online sales, Food. Sci. Nutr. 9 
(2021) 5428–5434.
	
6.	 M. Zielinska, A. Michalska, Microwave-assisted drying of blueberry (Vaccinium corymbosum 
L.) fruits: Drying kinetics, polyphenols, anthocyanins, antioxidant capacity, colour and tex­
ture, Food Chem. 212 (2016) 671–680.
	
7.	 P. Ockermann, L. Headley, R. Lizio, J. Hansmann, A review of the properties of anthocyanins 
and their influence on factors affecting cardiometabolic and cognitive health, Nutrients 13 
(2021) 2831.

159
Extraction and Purification of Anthocyanins
	
8.	 P. Zhou, Z. Wu, C. Huang, Y. Zhang, J. Zheng, Research progress of extraction and purification 
of anthocyanins, Fine Chem. 37 (2020) 1513–1523.
	
9.	 A. Kozlowska, T. Dzierzanowski, Targeting inflammation by anthocyanins as the novel thera­
peutic potential for chronic diseases: An update, Molecules 26 (2021) 4380.
	 10.	 H. Wen, H. Tian, C. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Peng, X. Yang, F. Chen, J. Li, Metformin and cyanidin 
3-O-galactoside from Aronia melanocarpa synergistically alleviate cognitive impairment in 
SAMP8 mice, Food Funct. 12 (2021) 10994–11008.
	 11.	 X. Su, J. Xu, D. Rhodes, Y. Shen, W. Song, B. Katz, W. Wang, Identification and quantification of 
anthocyanins in transgenic purple tomato, Food Chem. 202 (2016) 184–188.
	 12.	 Y.W. Zhao, C.K. Wang, X.Y. Huang, D.G. Hu, Anthocyanin stability and degradation in plants, 
Plant Signal. Behav. 16 (2021) 1987767.
	 13.	 X.F. Yue, S.S. Jing, X.F. Ni, K.K. Zhang, Y.L. Fang, Z.W. Zhang, Y.L. Ju, Anthocyanin and phe­
nolic acids contents influence the color stability and antioxidant capacity of wine treated with 
mannoprotein, Front. Nutr. 8 (2021) 691784.
	 14.	 B. Micό-Vicent, M. Ramos, V. Viqueira, F. Luzi, F. Dominici, A. Terenzi, E. Maron, M. Hamzaoui, 
from pomegranate waste: Colour, thermomechanical stability and environmental impact of 
polyester-based bionanocomposites, Polymers 13 (2021) 1966.
	 15.	 S. Oancea, A review of the current knowledge of thermal stability of anthocyanins and 
approaches to their stabilization to heat, Antioxidants 10 (2021) 1337.
	 16.	 M.E. West, L.J. Mauer, Color and chemical stability of a variety of anthocyanins and ascorbic 
acid in solution and powder forms, J. Agric. Food Chem. 61 (2013) 4169–4179.
	 17.	 J. Johnson, T. Collins, K. Walsh, M. Naiker, Solvent extractions and spectrophotometric proto­
cols for measuring the total anthocyanin, phenols and antioxidant content in plums, phenols 
and antioxidant content in plums, Chem. Pap. 9 (2020) 145.
	 18.	 R. Muangrat, P.T. Williams, P. Saengcharoenrat, Subcritical solvent extraction of total anthocy­
anins from dried purple waxy corn: Influence of process conditions, J. Food Process. Preserv. 
41 (2017) 46–50.
	 19.	 J. Herrera-Ramirez, N. Meneses-Marentes, M.P. Tarazona Diaz, Optimizing the extraction of 
anthocyanins from purple passion fruit peel using response surface methodology, J. Food 
Meas. Char. 14 (2020) 72–79.
	 20.	 E.M. Azman, D. Charalampopoulos, A. Chatzifragkou, Acetic acid buffer as extraction 
medium for free and bound phenolics from dried blackcurrant (Ribes nigrum L.) skins, J. Food 
Sci. 85 (2020) 3745–3755.
bagasse anthocyanins recovery: Optimization and comparisons with microwave-assisted 
extraction (MAE), LWT – Food Sci. Tech. 133 (2020) 11257.
	 22.	 A.C. Pedro, D. Granato, N.D. Rosso, Extraction of anthocyanins and polyphenols from black 
rice (Oryza sativa L.) by modeling and assessing their reversibility and stability, Food Chem. 
191 (2016) 12–20.
	 23.	 L. Tan, X. Xue, Y. Li, G. Shi, Extraction and purification techniques of anthocyanins from 
Aronia melanocarpa, North. Horti. 3 (2020) 111–119.
	 24.	 T. Belwal, H. Huang, L. Li, Z. Duan, X. Zhang, H. Aalim, Z. Luo, Optimization model for 
ultrasonic-assisted and scale-up extraction of anthocyanins from Pyrus communis ‘Starkrimson’ 
fruit peel, Food Chem. 297 (2019) 124993.
	 25.	 Y. Wang, L. Zhao, R. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Sun, L. Shi, P. Xue, Optimization of ultrasound-assisted 
extraction by response surface methodology, antioxidant capacity, and tyrosinase inhibitory 
activity of anthocyanins from red rice bran, Food Sci. Nutr. 8 (2020) 921–932.
	 26.	 C.J. Lopez, C. Caleja, M.A. Prieto, M.F. Barreiro, L. Barros, F.R. Ferreira, Optimization and 
comparison of heat and ultrasound assisted extraction techniques to obtain anthocyanin com­
pounds from Arbutus unedo L. fruits, Food Chem. 264 (2018) 81–91.
	 27.	 L. Chen, M. Yang, H. Mou, Q. Kong, Ultrasound-assisted extraction and characterization of 
anthocyanins from purple corn bran, J. Food Process. Preserv. 42 (2017) e13377.
 21. A. Lff, B. Nmm, B. Rfr, A. Rp, C. Er, A. Te, D. Vcb, Citric acid water-based solution for blueberry 
S. Kohnen, L. Torre, A. Jiménez, D. Puglia, M.C. Garrigόs, Anthocyanin hybrid nanopigments 

160
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
	 28.	 S. Ferarsa, W. Zhang, N. Moulai-Mostefa, L. Ding, M.Y. Jaffrin, N. Grimi, Recovery of anthocy­
anins and other phenolic compounds from purple eggplant peels and pulps using ultrasonic-
assisted extraction, Food Bioprod. Process. 7 (2018) 1836.
	 29.	 Y. Tian, Y. Yang, P. Gao, J.H. Wang, Y.Q. Xu, Z.Y. Yu, Optimization of ultrasonic-assisted 
extraction of flavonols and anthocyanins from blueberry using RSM, Adv. Mater. Res. 4 (2012) 
2423–2430.
	 30.	 Y. Sun, X. Liao, Z. Wang, X. Hu, F. Chen, Optimization of microwave-assisted extraction of 
anthocyanins in red raspberries and identification of anthocyanin of extracts using high-
performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, Eur. Food Res. Technol. 225 (2007) 
511–523.
	 31.	 Z. Yang, W. Zhai, Optimization of microwave-assisted extraction of anthocyanins from purple 
corn (Zea mays L.) cob and identification with HPLC-MS, Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. 11 (2010) 
470–476.
	 32.	 H. Xue, H. Xu, X. Wang, L. Shen, H. Liu, C. Liu, Q. Li, Effects of microwave power on extraction 
kinetic of anthocyanin from blueberry powder considering absorption of microwave energy, J. 
Food Qual. 1(2018) 9680184.
	 33.	 W. Liu, C. Yang, C. Zhou, Z. Wen, X. Dong, An improved microwave-assisted extraction of 
anthocyanins from purple sweet potato in favor of subsequent comprehensive utilization of 
pomace, Food Bioprod. Process. 5 (2019) 1–9.
	 34.	 N. Yiit, E.T. Yolaaner, A. Hamzalolu, V. Gkmen, Optimization of microwave-assisted extraction 
of anthocyanins in red cabbage by response surface methodology, J. Food Process. Preserv. 6 
(2021) 111–117.
	 35.	 Y. Wen, H. Chen, X. Zhou, Q. Deng, Y. Zhao, C. Zhao, X. Gong, Optimization of the micro­
wave-assisted extraction and antioxidant activities of anthocyanins from blackberry using a 
response surface methodology, RSC Adv. 5 (2015) 19686–19695.
	 36.	 H. Xue, J. Tan, L. Fan, Q. Li, X. Cai, Optimization microwave-assisted extraction of anthocya­
nins from cranberry using response surface methodology coupled with genetic algorithm and 
kinetics model analysis, J. Food Process. Eng. 44 (2021) e13688.
	 37.	 L.I. Feng, X.L. Zhang, X.C. Liu, X.T. Zhang, H.T. Zhao, Optimization of microwave-assisted 
extraction of anthocyanins from Lonicera edulis and its antioxidant activity by response surface 
methodology, Sci.Tech. Food Ind. 5 (2019) 116–170.
	 38.	 E.K. Ahin, M. Bilgin, S. Ahin, Recovery of anthocyanins from sour cherry (Prunus cerasus 
L.) peels via microwave assisted extraction: Monitoring the storage stability, Prep. Biochem. 
Biotechnol. 5 (2020) 1–11.
	 39.	 G.L. Jiao, A.K. Pour, Extraction of anthocyanins from Haskap berry pulp using supercritical 
carbon dioxide: Influence of co-solvent composition and pretreatment, LWT–Food Sci. Tech. 6 
(2018) 947.
cyanins from blueberry pomace by supercritical carbon dioxide, Appl. Chem. Ind. 48 (2019) 
109–112.
	 41.	 M.X. Tian, Y.D. Li, W.Z. Hu, Y.Y. Wang, A.L. Jiang, C.H. Liu, Optimization of supercritical CO2 
extraction of blueberry anthocyanins using response surface methodology, Sci. Tech. Food 
Ind. 37 (2016) 208–212.
	 42.	 J. Paes, R. Dotta, G.F. Barbero, J. Martínez, Extraction of phenolic compounds and anthocya­
nins from blueberry (Vaccinium myrtillus L.) residues using supercritical CO2 and pressurized 
liquids, J. Supercrit. Fluids 95 (2014) 8–16.
	 43.	 J. Tan, Q. Li, H. Xue, J. Tang, Ultrasound-assisted enzymatic extraction of anthocyanins 
from grape skins: Optimization, identification, and antitumor activity, J. Food Sci. 85 (2020) 
3731–3744.
	 44.	 H. Xue, J. Tan, Q. Li, J. Tang, X. Cai, Ultrasound-assisted enzymatic extraction of anthocyanins 
from raspberry wine residues: Process optimization, isolation, purification, and bioactivity 
determination, Food Anal. Methods 14 (2021) 1–18.
 40. G.W. Qin, H. Han, X.W. Ding, Y.L. Wang, Optimization of extracting technology of antho-

161
Extraction and Purification of Anthocyanins
	 45.	 L. Zhang, G. Fan, M.A. Khan, Z. Yan, T. Beta, Ultrasonic-assisted enzymatic extraction and 
identification of anthocyanin components from mulberry wine residues, Food Chem. 323 
(2020) 126714.
	 46.	 H. Xue, J. Tan, Q. Li, J. Tang, X. Cai, Ultrasound-assisted deep eutectic solvent extraction of 
anthocyanins from blueberry wine residues: Optimization, identification, and HepG2 antitu­
mor activity, Molecules 25 (2020) 5456.
	 47.	 H. Xue, J. Tan, Q. Li, J. Tang, X. Cai, Optimization ultrasound-assisted deep eutectic solvent 
extraction of anthocyanins from raspberry using response surface methodology coupled with 
genetic algorithm, Foods 9 (2020) 1409.
	 48.	 D.A. Türker, M. Doan, Ultrasound-assisted natural deep eutectic solvent extraction of antho­
cyanin from black carrots: Optimization, cytotoxicity, in vitro bioavailability and stability, 
Food Bioprod. Process. 132 (2022) 99–113.
	 49.	 X. Liu, L. Meng, X. Xin, Optimization of ultrasonic-microwave assisted extraction of anthocy­
anin from Lonicera caerulea residue, Food Res. Dev. 42 (2021) 50–54.
	 50.	 C. Dong, X. Yan, X. Li, S. Liu, C. Liu, Optimization of ultrasonic-microwave assisted extraction 
of anthocyanins from mulberry and theirs antioxidant activities, China Cond. 45 (2020) 172–178.
	 51.	 Z.S. Pei, H.D. Zhang, L.M. Yuan, X.C. Xin, L.Z. Sheng, Ultrasonic/microwave-assisted extrac­
tion (UMAE) of anthocyanins from Purple Yam, Food Sci. (N. Y.) 33 (2012) 78–83.
	 52.	 L. Chao, W. Wang, Z. Yi, R. Yang, D. Fan, Optimization of ultrasonic-microwave synergistic 
extraction of anthocyanins by response surface methodology, Food Ferment. Ind. 35 (2009) 
167–171.
	 53.	 H.U. Xiao, A.D. Sun, D.Q. Zhang, Separation of anthocyanins from Perilla frutescens by high 
speed counter-current chromatography, J. Chin. Med. Mater. 33 (2010) 1586.
	 54.	 X.X. Wang, C. Hansen, K. Allen, Identification of anthocyanins isolated from black bean can­
ning waste water by macroporous resin using optimized conditions, Food Nutr. Sci. 4 (2013) 
174–181.
	 55.	 Y. Chen, W. Zhang, T. Zhao, F. Li, M. Zhang, J. Li, L. Yang, Adsorption properties of macropo­
rous adsorbent resins for separation of anthocyanins from mulberry, Food Chem. 194 (2016) 
712–722.
	 56.	 E. Wang, Y. Yin, C. Xu, J. Liu, Isolation of high-purity anthocyanin mixtures and monomers 
from blueberries using combined chromatographic techniques, J. Chromatogr. A 1327 (2014) 
39–48.
	 57.	 H.K. Xue, L.Y. Shen, X.R. Wang, C. Liu, C. Liu, H. Liu, X. Zheng, Isolation and purification of 
anthocyanin from blueberry using macroporous resin combined Sephadex LH-20 Techniques, 
Food Sci. Technol. Res. 25 (2019) 29–38.
	 58.	 J. Martin, J. Enrique, M. Diaz, A.G. Asuero, Recovery of anthocyanins using membrane tech­
nologies: A review, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem. 48 (2017) 143–175.
	 59.	 A.H. Woo, J.H.V. Elbe, C.H. Amundson, Anthocyanin recovery from cranberry pulp wastes by 
membrane technology, J. Food Sci. 45 (1980) 875–879.
	 60.	 S. He, Q. Lou, J. Shi, H. Sun, M. Zhang, L. Qian, Water extraction of anthocyanins from black 
rice and purification using membrane separation and resin adsorption, J. Food Process. 
Preserv. 41 (2017) e13091.
	 61.	 F.X. Yang, P. Xu, J.G. Yang, J. Liang, M.H. Zong, W.Y. Lou, Efficient separation and purification 
of anthocyanins from Saskatoon berry by using low transition temperature mixtures, RSC 
Adv. 6 (2016) 104582–104590.
	 62.	 H. Zou, Y. Ma, Z. Xu, X. Liao, A. Chen, S. Yang, Isolation of strawberry anthocyanins using 
high-speed counter-current chromatography and the copigmentation with catechin or epicat­
echin by high pressure processing, Food Chem. 247 (2018) 81–88.
	 63.	 T. Chen, X. Yang, N. Wang, H. Li, J. Zhao, Y. Li, Separation of six compounds including two 
n-butyrophenone isomers and two stibene isomers from Rheum tanguticum Maxim by recy­
cling high speed counter-current chromatography and preparative high-performance liquid 
chromatography, IEEE J. Solid State Circ. 41 (2018) 3660–3668.

162
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
	 64.	 H.K. Xue, X.H. Zhu, J.Q. Tan, L.L. Fan, Q. Li, J.T. Tang, X. Cai, Counter-current fractionation-
assisted bioassay-guided separation of active compound from blueberry and the interaction 
between the active compound and α-glucosidase, Foods. 10 (2021) 509.
	 65.	 H.K. Xue, J.Q. Tan, Q. Li, J.T. Tang, X. Cai, Counter-current fractionation-assisted and bioassay-
guided separation of active compounds from cranberry and their interaction with α-glucosidase, 
LWT – Food Sci. Technol. (Lebensmittel-Wissenschaft-Technol.) 145 (2021) 111374.
	 66.	 C.A. Liang, A. Xx, L.A. Rong, B. Qy, A. Xw, L.A. Ye, Isolation of cyanidin-3-glucoside from blue 
honeysuckle fruits by high-speed counter-current chromatography, Food Chem. 152 (2014) 
386–390.
	 67.	 Y. Liu, M. Nobutoshi, L. Wang, S. Zhang, Preparative high-performance liquid chromatogra­
phy for the purification of natural acylated anthocyanins from red radish (Raphanus sativus L.), 
J. Chromatogr. Sci. 5 (2008) 743–746.
	 68.	 A. Skalska, A. Matysik, M. Gerkowicz, M. Wόjciak-Kosior, Preparative reversed-phase high-
performance thin-layer chromatography for analysis of anthocyanins, JPC-J. Planar. Chromat. 
19 (2006) 463–466.
	 69.	 Woo, A. H., Von Elbe, J. H., & Amundson, C. H. (1980). Anthocyanin recovery from cranberry 
pulp wastes by membrane technology. Journal of Food Science, 45(4), 875–879.

163
9
Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Kamran Javed Naquvi, Mohd. Javed Naim, and Javed Ahamad
9.1  Introduction
Anthocyanins are flavonoid glycosides with anthocyanidin as aglycone and these antho­
cyanins are abundantly distributed in plants (Byamukama et al., 2006; Jordheim et al., 2006). 
Over 500 various kinds of anthocyanins have been identified to date, and such antho­
cyanins are found in 72 genera and 27 distinct families of plants (de Pascual-Teresa and 
Sanchez-Ballesta, 2008). Anthocyanins are colored pigments mainly distributed in fruits, 
flowers, and vegetables. Anthocyanins have been the subject of extensive research due to 
their health benefits such as anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, antidiabetic, antimicrobial, 
analgesic, hepatoprotective, and anticancer (Kong et al., 2003; Wallace and Giusti, 2019). 
The most predominant examples of anthocyanin molecules include malvidin, pelargo­
nidin, peonidin, petunidin, cyanidin, and delphinidin (Castañeda-Ovando et al., 2009). 
Through anti-oxidation, anthocyanins can prevent genomic damage from oxidative stress 
and can manage cancer in its early stages of tumor development and metabolic disorders 
like diabetes, obesity, and cardiovascular diseases (Wang and Stoner, 2008; Naseri et al., 
2018; Jiang et al., 2019).
Due to the extensive use of anthocyanins as a colorant in foodstuffs, cosmetics, and 
pharmaceutical products as well as their potential health benefits, the interest in antho­
cyanins increased in recent years. Despite their potential application in pharmacological, 
pharmaceutical, food, and cosmetic industries, anthocyanin use is limited because of their 
relative instability, and low extraction yield (Castañeda-Ovando et al., 2009). Anthocyanins 
occur in plants either in a free state (anthocyanidin) or in combination with sugar (flavo­
noid glycoside). Extraction and purification of anthocyanins are difficult tasks due to their 
possible break at higher temperatures and low quantity in natural sources (Fan et al., 2008; 
Tan et al., 2022). The present book chapter discusses the different conventional and modern 
methods for the extraction of different anthocyanin molecules.
9.2  Sources and Chemistry of Anthocyanins
Anthocyanins are coloring pigments predominantly found in fruits, berries, vegetables, 
legumes, and cereals. The important sources of anthocyanins include blueberries, rasp­
berries, bilberries, elderberries, strawberries, chokeberries, pomegranates, apples, grapes, 
pistachios, red onions, and red cabbage (Jaiswal et al., 2019; Oladzadabbasabadi et al., 2022).

164
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Anthocyanins belong to the category of flavonoids, and the basic skeleton of anthocy­
anin consists of C6C3C6. The anthocyanins are derived from anthocyanidins which are 
aglycone parts of anthocyanins. Anthocyanins rarely occur in the free state in plants, gen­
erally, they are combined with sugar parts, the most common sugars present in anthocya­
nins include glucose, galactose, and rhamnose. Many anthocyanins occur in plants, the 
different types of anthocyanins mainly due to the differences in the position of glycosidic 
bond binding, the number and types of sugars, the number of hydroxyl groups, and the 
number of aromatic groups. The most important anthocyanins that occur in plants include 
malvidin, pelargonidin, peonidin, petunidin, cyanidin, and delphinidin (Figure 9.1) (Silva 
et al., 2016; Su et al., 2016).
Anthocyanins
R1
R2
Malvidin
OCH3
OCH3
Pelargonidin
H
H
Peonidin
OCH3
H
Petunidin
OCH3
OH
Cyanidin
OH
H
Delphinidin
OH
OH
9.3  Approaches of Anthocyanin Extraction
Anthocyanins occur in the glycosidic form and most of them are unsaturated and in low 
content in plants. These conditions of anthocyanins in plants make difficulty in the extrac­
tion and purification process. Their thermal instability and possible degradation are due 
FIGURE 9.1
The basic chemical skeleton of anthocyanin.

165
Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
to high temperature, pH, oxygen concentration, and some other factors like enzymes, 
metal ions, and their degradation products. Moreover, the complex chemical structure of 
anthocyanins, such as the number and position of hydroxyl groups, degree of glycosyl­
ation, methylation, and acylation, affects the stability of anthocyanins (Oancea, 2021; Zhao 
et al., 2021). To solve above-stated problems associated with anthocyanins, the extraction of 
anthocyanins is done at low temperatures using appropriate solvents (e.g., ethanol, ethyl 
acetate, water) using conventional methods (e.g., maceration, percolation, and Soxhlet 
extraction) and modern methods (microwave-assisted extraction (MAE), ultrasound-
assisted extraction, supercritical fluid extraction (SFE), enzyme-assisted extraction (EAE), 
etc.). The extraction time, solid-to-solvent ratio, extraction temperature, microwave power, 
and ultrasonic power all affect the extraction of anthocyanins (West and Mauer, 2013; Tan 
et al., 2022).
9.4  Methods of Anthocyanin Extraction
Anthocyanins are plant secondary metabolites from the flavonoid family, serving as 
water-soluble natural pigments (Constantin and Istrati, 2022). These compounds provide 
red, purple, and blue hues in many fruits and vegetables, including berries and eggplants. 
A significant drawback of anthocyanins is their low stability. Their stability is affected by 
several factors, including pH, light, temperature, co-pigmentation, sulfites, ascorbic acid, 
oxygen, and enzymes (Enaru et al., 2021). Extracting and separating anthocyanins from 
plants is crucial due to their instability. Optimizing the process is important as anthocya­
nins are prone to degradation by factors such as pH, temperature, oxygen, water activity, 
co-pigments, and enzymes (Chung et al., 2016; Weber et al., 2017). The most used method 
for extracting anthocyanins is solvent extraction, also known as conventional solid-liquid 
extraction, due to its effectiveness and simplicity. Conventional solid-liquid extraction is a 
process used to extract compounds from solid materials using a liquid solvent. The solid 
is mixed with the solvent, dissolving the desired compounds into the liquid. The mixture 
is then filtered or centrifuged to separate the liquid extract from the solid residue, enabling 
compound isolation (Wallace and Giusti, 2013). Some most common conventional methods 
for the extraction of anthocyanins are discussed below.
9.4.1  Conventional Methods
The extraction method for anthocyanins is determined by the need to maintain the sta­
bility and prolong the shelf life of these compounds, which directly impacts their benefi­
cial properties (Sharma et al., 2016; Enaru et al., 2021). Percolation, maceration, and Soxhlet 
extraction are three commonly used methods for extracting anthocyanins from plant 
materials. Percolation involves passing a solvent through a packed bed of the material, 
allowing the solvent to extract the anthocyanins as it percolates through. Maceration, on 
the other hand, relies on soaking the plant material in a solvent to allow the anthocya­
nins to diffuse into the liquid over time. Soxhlet extraction is a more intensive technique 
that involves continuously cycling a solvent between a heated flask containing the plant 
material and a condenser, effectively extracting the anthocyanins through repeated cycles 
of vaporization and condensation. Each of these methods has its advantages and limita­
tions in terms of efficiency, yield, and the quality of the extracted anthocyanins, making 
it important to choose the most suitable method based on the specific requirements of the 

166
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
extraction process. These techniques utilize various solvents and/or heat. Following the 
principle that ‘like dissolves like,’ the solvents commonly used to extract anthocyanins 
include methanol, ethanol, water, acetone, or their mixtures (Tena and Asuero, 2022).
9.4.1.1  Percolation
Percolation involves passing a solvent through a tightly packed column of plant material, 
allowing the solvent to flow slowly and uniformly through the material. As the solvent 
percolates downward, it interacts with the plant tissues, dissolving the anthocyanins and 
other soluble compounds. This method ensures that the solvent has maximum contact 
with the material, facilitating efficient extraction of the desired anthocyanins. The pro­
cess can be optimized by controlling the flow rate, solvent composition, and extraction 
time, ensuring a high yield and quality of the extracted anthocyanins (Ravanfar et al., 
2018; Wang et al., 2020). The authors extracted anthocyanins from red cabbage (Brassica 
oleracea L. var. capitata f. rubra) using both ultrasound-assisted extraction and conventional 
percolation methods. For the conventional method, they percolated red cabbage leaves in 
water to obtain the crude extract, using water as the solvent. The researchers optimized 
and compared the efficiency of percolation and ultrasound-assisted extraction methods 
for extracting anthocyanins, utilizing ultrasonic irradiation in the latter method. For 
ultrasound-assisted extraction, they determined that the optimal extraction efficiency 
was achieved at an ultrasonic output power of 100 W, with a pulse mode of 30 seconds on 
and 30 seconds off, conducted at a temperature of 15°C, over 90 minutes. This approach 
allowed for a more effective extraction process by enhancing the interaction between the 
solvent and the plant material through ultrasonic waves, resulting in a higher yield of 
anthocyanins compared to conventional percolation (Ravanfar et al., 2018). The extraction 
of anthocyanins from the bright red and dark red calyces of Hibiscus sabdariffa was carried 
out using the percolation method. This process was meticulously optimized to ensure 
the extracted anthocyanins are suitable for food applications. The optimization process 
focused on maximizing yield and preserving the stability and bioactivity of the anthocy­
anins, ensuring their efficacy and safety when incorporated into food products (Diessana 
et al., 2015). The phenolic fraction was extracted from Lonicera caerulea L. (blue honey­
suckle; Caprifoliaceae) berries using 0.1% H3PO4 for percolation and Sepabeads SP207 for 
solid-phase extraction (SPE). Cyanidin-3-glucoside was identified as the predominant 
anthocyanin in the extract. During the comparison of conventional and nonconventional 
phytochemical extraction methods from the heartwood of Pterocarpus marsupium Roxb. 
(also known as Malabar kino or Indian kino, family Fabaceae), it was found that the per­
colation method produced the highest yield compared to other conventional extraction 
methods (Devgun et al., 2012).
9.4.1.2  Maceration
Maceration involves submerging coarse or powdered plant materials in an airtight con­
tainer filled with a solvent (called menstruum). The mixture is kept at room temperature 
for at least three days and stirred regularly until the soluble matter dissolves (Manousi 
et al., 2019; Samira et al., 2024). The resulting mixture is then filtered to remove impurities, 
extracting flavors, colors, and active ingredients (Jovanović et al., 2017; Samira et al., 2024). 
Infusion and decoction use the same principle as maceration for extracting compounds 
from plant materials (Manousi et al., 2019). Infusion involves shorter soaking periods with 
hot water, ideal for delicate anthocyanins. Decoction uses boiling, suitable for tougher 

167
Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
materials but risks degrading anthocyanins. All methods aim to extract and preserve 
these pigments for their vibrant colors and antioxidant properties. Maceration advan­
tages include simplicity and effectiveness for delicate compounds; disadvantages are time 
consumption and potential degradation (Zhang et al., 2018). For anthocyanin extraction, 
maceration preserves these sensitive pigments, yielding vibrant colors and beneficial anti­
oxidants, but may require long durations for optimal results. Although new technologies 
like ultrasound and MAEs enhance yield and extract stability, they require sophisticated 
instrumentation, increasing the cost of anthocyanin production (Tena and Asuero, 2022; 
Taghavi et al., 2023).
Maceration is essential for extracting anthocyanins, which give highbush blueberries 
(Vaccinium corymbosum L.) their color and potential health benefits. It’s interesting how 
similar processes occur in both highbush blueberries and red wine, affecting compound 
extraction from the skin. The duration of fermentation and maceration in red wine also 
impacts compound extraction, like highbush blueberries during maceration. Identifying 
specific anthocyanidins like peonidin and malvidin, along with compounds like malvidin-
3-galactoside, offers valuable insights into highbush blueberry composition. The isolation 
and quantification of delphinidin, cyanidin, petunidin, peonidin, and malvidin demon­
strate the variety of anthocyanins in these berries, each potentially contributing distinct 
health benefits or flavors (Varo et al., 2022).
In a study comparing conventional and UAE extraction methods, anthocyanin content 
was measured in European red and green gooseberry (Ribes uva-crispa L.) extracts. A sig­
nificant difference in anthocyanin content, which is responsible for the red and blue colors 
in the fruits, was observed. Conventional extraction with ethanol (E-CE-20) yielded the 
highest anthocyanin content (3.63 mg/100 g) in red gooseberries, while the lowest content 
(1.14 mg/100 g) was found in green gooseberry extract (E-UAE-20). Maximum anthocy­
anin extraction yield was observed using the E-CE method in green and red gooseberries. 
Incorporating the Graciano variety during pre-fermentative maceration seems to boost the 
extraction and retention of pigments in Tempranillo wines. This improvement likely stems 
from the better co-pigmentation abilities of flavanols in Graciano grape skins compared 
to those in Tempranillo. This correlation underscores the importance of maceration tech­
niques in enhancing color and pigment characteristics in wine production (García-Marino 
et al., 2010). Anthocyanins have been extracted from dried chokeberry (Aronia melanocarpa) 
fruits using 50% ethanol as the solvent (Ćujić et al., 2016).
9.4.1.3  Soxhlation
Soxhlet extraction, an amalgamation of percolation and maceration, is pivotal in chemistry 
and biochemistry for extracting compounds from solids. Invented by Franz von Soxhlet 
in 1879, it employs a specialized apparatus with an extraction chamber, vapor duct, and 
siphon tube. The process begins with solid material in a thimble, soaked in a solvent. 
Heating vaporizes the solvent, which condenses and drips back, dissolving compounds 
from the material. The siphon tube maintains solvent levels, ensuring continuous extrac­
tion. This method’s efficiency and selectivity in extracting target compounds make it 
indispensable across scientific and industrial domains, delivering reliable results (Malik 
and Mandal, 2022). Anthocyanins were extracted from H. sabdariffa petals using solvent, 
Soxhlet, and microwave methods. Solvent extraction yielded the highest anthocyanin con­
tent. The effect of these anthocyanins as natural antioxidants on extra virgin olive oil was 
examined, suggesting that anthocyanins could be a suitable natural additive for commer­
cial olive oil production.

168
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
9.4.2  Modern Methods of Extraction
In recent years, interest in food quality has surged as consumers become more aware of the 
link between nutrition and health. Anthocyanins, known for their antioxidant properties, 
also serve as natural colorants and high-value compounds due to their role in enhancing 
sensory qualities, nutrition, and health benefits (Tena and Asuero, 2022). Various mod­
ern extraction techniques are employed to extract anthocyanins to harness these benefits 
efficiently. Anthocyanin extraction employs various advanced techniques for enhanced 
efficiency and sustainability. MAE employs microwave energy to heat solvents rapidly, 
increasing extraction rates and reducing solvent use. These methods collectively improve 
anthocyanin recovery, aligning with green chemistry principles (Marić et al., 2018; Shen 
et al., 2023). Ultrasound-assisted extraction (UAE) utilizes acoustic cavitation to improve 
solvent penetration and reduce extraction time. SFE utilizes supercritical CO2, providing 
a green, solvent-free method with high efficiency. Carbon dioxide (CO2) is the most fre­
quently used supercritical fluid, particularly effective and widely employed in the food 
industry for extracting analytes from vegetables. SFE offers a viable alternative to conven­
tional solvent extraction due to its nontoxic, cost-effective, relatively inert, recyclable, and 
nonflammable properties (Benchikh et al., 2023). SPE provides high purity by using selec­
tive adsorbents. EAE enhances yield and preserves bioactivity by breaking down plant cell 
walls with specific enzymes. EAE is an energy-efficient and environment-friendly tech­
nique for the selective extraction of targeted products, without compromising the func­
tional properties (Kumar and Tingirikari, 2023).
9.4.2.1  Microwave-Assisted Extraction
MAE is a significant technique in analytical chemistry, offering numerous advantages 
over traditional extraction methods. These benefits include improved extraction efficiency, 
shorter extraction times, reduced solvent consumption, and enhanced analyte recovery 
(Eskilsson and Björklund, 2000). By directly applying heat to the sample, microwaves 
enable the rapid and efficient extraction of target compounds by increasing their solu­
bility and diffusion, thereby requiring less solvent. Consequently, MAE is a more envi­
ronmentally friendly and cost-effective option, promoting greener and more sustainable 
analytical chemistry workflows (Ferrara et al., 2023). The extraction of anthocyanins from 
saffron (Crocus sativus) flower tepals using MAE has been investigated. Optimal process­
ing conditions were determined for cyanidin-3-glucoside, specifically focusing on extrac­
tion temperatures ranging from 35 to 75°C and extraction times between 5 and 15 minutes, 
with a maximum irradiation power of 360 W. Microstructural analysis revealed that MAE 
effectively disrupted cell walls under microwave irradiation, thereby demonstrating its 
rapid and efficient capability for extracting saffron anthocyanins (Jafari et al., 2019).
The optimization of anthocyanins, specifically cyanidin-3-glucoside and cyanidin-3-
rutinoside found in mulberry, was achieved using MAE. Subsequent identification of 
these anthocyanins in the extract was performed utilizing HPLC-ESI-MS (Zou et al., 2012). 
A study developed a method for extracting anthocyanins from mulberry using MAE with 
ethanol/ammonium sulfate as a biphasic extractant. This approach, termed microwave-
assisted aqueous two-phase system extraction, was applied to the extraction of functional 
natural products, specifically anthocyanins, from mulberry fruits (Wang et al., 2024). A 
study on the stability of 3-deoxyanthocyanin pigment from sorghum compared to antho­
cyanins from grains, maize, and cowpea under MAE revealed that the enhanced extrac­
tion of 3-deoxyanthocyanin was attributed to its structural stability. Additionally, the 

169
Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
improved diffusion from the cell matrix due to microwave-induced disruption of sorghum 
cell walls contributed to the efficiency of MAE (Herrman et al., 2020).
9.4.2.2  Ultrasound-Assisted Extraction
Ultrasound, an evolving technology in the food industry, plays a pivotal role in enhanc­
ing processes such as the extraction of compounds like anthocyanins (Nurkhasanah et al., 
2023). Applying ultrasound to solid or fluid products generates acoustic waves and cavita­
tion, triggering modifications in the sample matrix that lead to improved outcomes. This 
technique is particularly very effective in extracting valuable compounds such as natu­
ral pigments (Linares and Rojas, 2022), thereby boosting overall yield and sustainability. 
Furthermore, ultrasound alters the physical and chemical properties of plant materials, 
facilitating the release of extractable compounds by disrupting cell walls and enhancing 
mass transport, ultimately contributing to more efficient and sustainable food produc­
tion (Chemat et al., 2017; Linares and Rojas, 2022; Nurkhasanah et al., 2023). An analyti­
cal system was created to optimize ultrasound-assisted extraction (UAE) conditions for 
anthocyanin extraction, employing Box-Behnken design (BBD). The analysis identified six 
anthocyanins in the samples, particularly in various pigmented corn samples, highlight­
ing potential varieties that offer enhanced health benefits (Nurkhasanah et al., 2023).
The major anthocyanin content analysis in Erica australis flowers was optimized using 
a UAE method. This optimization involved the application of BBD along with response 
surface methodology, focusing on solvents, pH, extraction temperature, and sample-to-
solvent ratio as key variables (Carrera et al., 2021). In a study, both heat- and ultrasound-
assisted extraction methods were used to recover anthocyanin content. The research 
revealed higher levels of delphinidin-3-O-sambubioside and cyanidin-3-O-sambubioside 
anthocyanins in H. sabdariffa calyces compared to other extraction methods reported in 
the literature (Pinela et al., 2019). UAE was utilized to extract anthocyanins from Malus 
‘Royalty’ fruit, with optimized parameters such as temperature, solid-liquid ratio, solvents, 
extraction time, and ultrasonic power. The main anthocyanin identified was cyanidin-
3-galactoside. This study indicates that the concentrated anthocyanin fraction from 
Malus ‘Royalty’ fruits may possess promising antitumor and supportive therapeutic prop­
erties for gastric cancer treatment (Liu et al., 2022). A study optimized the extraction con­
ditions for ultrasound-assisted enzymatic extraction (UAEE) of anthocyanins from grape 
skins using response surface methodology combined with a genetic algorithm. The high­
est yield of anthocyanins (3.01 ± 0.04 mg/g) from grape skins via UAEE was achieved with 
the optimized extraction parameters. Delphinidin-3,5-O-diglucoside and cyanidin-3-O-
rutinoside were among the purified compounds. The results indicated that anthocyanin 
extracts obtained under the optimum extraction conditions (AEOEC) had a superior anti­
tumor effect on breast cancer MCF-7 cells compared to two purified anthocyanins (Tan 
et al., 2020).
9.4.2.3  Supercritical Fluid Extraction
SFE has gained attention as an innovative method for extracting bioactive compounds 
from plant materials due to its efficiency and environmental friendliness (Wen et al., 2019). 
SFE has been explored extensively for the extraction of anthocyanins, which are natu­
ral pigments with various health benefits. Anthocyanins responsible for the colors, red, 
purple, and blue, are in fruits and vegetables. Berries, currants, grapes, and some tropical 
fruits have high anthocyanin content (Khoo et al., 2017). This extraction technique utilizes 

170
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
supercritical fluids, such as carbon dioxide, at specific temperatures and pressures to extract 
anthocyanins effectively while minimizing solvent use and preserving the integrity of 
the extracted compounds (Machado et al., 2013; Tyśkiewicz et al., 2018; Nunes et al., 2022). 
Phenolic compounds and anthocyanins were extracted from blueberry (Vaccinium myrtil­
lus L.) residues using supercritical CO2 and pressurized liquids. This study employed both 
supercritical CO2 extraction and pressurized liquid extraction to recover bioactives from 
the blueberry residues. Interestingly, the concentrations of bioactive compounds in these 
extracts were found to be higher than those typically reported for fresh blueberries (Paes 
et al., 2014). Arrabidaea chica (Humb. and Bonpl.) Verlot leaves, abundant in anthocyanins, 
have long been utilized as a medicinal plant in the Amazon. A sequential extraction in a 
fixed bed was conducted at 40°C and 300 bar using supercritical carbon dioxide (scCO2) to 
obtain various extracts from this plant. The primary anthocyanin component, carajurin, 
was notably present in the highest concentration in the ethanolic extracts of A. chica (Paula 
et al., 2013).
scCO2 and water as a co-solvent were utilized to extract anthocyanin-rich compounds 
from Haskap berry (L. caerulea L.) pulp paste. The extraction parameters, including 
pressure, temperature, and water quantity, were further refined through the BBD. The 
optimal conditions resulted in the highest total anthocyanin yield of 52.7% achieved at 
45 MPa pressure, 65°C temperature, using 5.4 g of water per 3.2 g of berry pulp paste, with 
15 minutes of static time followed by 20 minutes of dynamic time (Jiao and Pour, 2018). 
Iridoids and anthocyanins were extracted from haskap (L. caerulea L.) berries using scCO2 
with ethanol as a modifier. Compared to conventional ethanolic extraction, the dynamic 
streamlined method resulted in a 97% yield of iridoids and approximately 7% more antho­
cyanins (Martinez et al., 2021). The extraction yield and anthocyanin content of H. sabdariffa 
L. (Roselle) were investigated using the scCO2 method. The results indicated that employ­
ing a low flow rate (4 ml/min), smaller particle size (200–355 µm), and a higher percentage 
ratio of modifier (10%) led to an increased anthocyanin content in the extract (Idham et al., 
2020). The study explored the supercritical carbon dioxide extraction (scCO2) of total antho­
cyanin and phenolic compounds from Syzygium cumini fruit pulp, examining the impact 
of three independent variables (pressure, temperature, and co-solvent flow rate) using a 
Box-Behnken response surface design with three factors at three levels. The optimized 
conditions were assessed to evaluate the effects of these three independent variables (pres­
sure, temperature, and co-solvent flow rate) on the extraction process (Maran et al., 2014).
9.4.2.4  Solid-Phase Extraction
SPE is a widely used and cost-effective technique for purifying samples, crucial for ana­
lyzing both major and minor food components, including squalene, tocopherols, and 
anthocyanins (Ferreiro-González et al., 2014; Grigoriadou et al., 2007). These natural pig­
ments, responsible for the red, purple, and blue hues in many fruits and vegetables, are 
often found in complex mixtures (He and Giusti, 2011; Ferreiro-González et al., 2014). SPE 
involves conditioning the solid phase, loading the sample to adsorb anthocyanins, wash­
ing away impurities, and eluting the purified anthocyanins. Typically, reverse-phase 
materials like C18 or polymeric resins are used for their high affinity due to hydropho­
bic interactions, making SPE an efficient method for isolating and studying these valu­
able compounds (Badawy et al., 2018; Badawy et al., 2022). SPE was employed to obtain 
anthocyanin-rich extracts from five berry species: chokeberry (A. melanocarpa), elderberry 
(Sambucus nigra), black currant (Ribes nigrum), blackberry (Rubus fruticosus), and blueberry 
(V. corymbosum L.). This process effectively separated nearly all sugars and acids from the 

171
Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
crude berry extracts. SPE achieved an anthocyanin recovery rate of 90–95.6% from these 
extracts (Denev et al., 2010).
A simple SPE method was developed to fractionate and isolate di-acylated anthocyanins 
from red cabbage extracts, which contain cyanidin derivatives capable of exhibiting vari­
ous colors from red to blue. These di-acylated anthocyanins are known for their greater 
stability and more desirable blue colorimetric properties. The SPE method achieved a high 
recovery rate of over 93% for the di-acylated pigments (Ahmadiani et al., 2019). A new SPE 
method was developed to determine anthocyanins in grapes. Various SPE cartridges were 
evaluated, including C-18 and vinylbenzene-based cartridges. This method is particularly 
valuable for assessing phenolic maturity, as it facilitates the analysis of anthocyanins pres­
ent in grapes (Ferreiro-González et al., 2014). Capitani et al. employed aqueous and organic 
extracts of blueberries for untargeted nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) metabolite pro­
filing. They also conducted targeted NMR characterization of anthocyanins using SPE. 
This led to the identification of five anthocyanins: malvidin-3-glucoside, malvidin-3-
galactoside, delphinidin-3-glucoside, delphinidin-3-galactoside, and petunidin-3-glucoside 
(Capitani et al., 2014).
Traditional extraction methods from plant materials are non-selective, resulting in pig­
ment solutions with many by-products like sugars, organic acids, and proteins, which can 
accelerate anthocyanin degradation and complicate processing steps like spray drying. To 
obtain a highly concentrated and purified anthocyanin pigment from black chokeberry 
(A. melanocarpa var. nero), juices and skin extracts were purified using SPE. SPE can purify 
anthocyanins in solution by removing impurities such as sugars, phenols, organic acids, 
proteins, salts, and flavonoids that co-extract during solid-liquid extraction. To optimize 
anthocyanin extraction from elderberry fruits (S. nigra), adsorbent C18 silica gel was used. 
After three extractions with 70% ethanol water and 1% citric acid for 30 minutes each, 
anthocyanins were obtained at approximately 0.98% of the fresh plant weight (Salamon 
et al., 2015). A novel SPE-HPLC method for analyzing the anthocyanin and organic acid 
composition of Finnish cranberry (Vaccinium oxycoccos L.) was studied. The most abundant 
individual anthocyanins were cyanidin-3-galactoside (19.2%), cyanidin-3-arabinoside 
(23.1%), peonidin-3-galactoside (21.5%), and peonidin-3-arabinoside (14.1%), as analyzed by 
RP-HPLC (Huopalahti et al., 2000).
9.4.2.5  Enzyme-Assisted Extraction
In EAE, the plant material undergoes pretreatment with enzymes like protease, pectin­
ase, pectinesterase, cellulase, hemicellulase, cellobiase, α-amylase, and fructosyltrans­
ferase. These enzymes hydrolyze the cell walls, releasing phytochemicals bound to lipid 
and carbohydrate chains within the cells (Shinwari, 2021). EAE is an energy-efficient and 
environmentally friendly method for selectively extracting targeted products without 
compromising their functional properties (Kumar and Tingirikari, 2023). Anthocyanins 
obtained through EAE not only exhibit higher content but also demonstrate increased sta­
bility compared to those extracted by traditional methods. This enhanced stability encom­
passes a broader range of anthocyanin compounds, making the process more effective for 
preserving the vibrant colors and beneficial properties of these phytochemicals.
An aqueous solution of Pectinex (containing cellulase, hemicellulase, and pectinase) at 
concentrations of 1–10% and a temperature of 40°C was used to extract anthocyanins from 
saffron tepals over reaction times of 20–180 minutes, and the results were compared with 
those obtained using an ethanol solvent under similar conditions. The anthocyanin con­
tent in the Pectinex solution reached approximately 6.7 mg/g of tepal powder, which is 

172
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
over 40% higher than that achieved with the ethanol method, at enzyme concentrations 
of 5% and extraction times of 60 minutes. Anthocyanins extracted with aqueous enzymes 
showed degradation rates three times slower and had 50% more vibrant chroma color 
compared to those recovered using ethanol after 3 hours of extraction. HPLC analysis 
indicated that anthocyanins extracted with mixed enzymes contained about 80% more 
cyanidin-3-glucosides and 20% less pelargonidin 3,5-glucosides compared to the ethanol 
method (Lotfi et al., 2015).
EAE is more efficient because enzymes effectively break down plant cell walls, leading 
to the release of intracellular proteins and other valuable compounds. This breakdown 
enhances the extraction process by allowing easier access to and release of phytochemicals 
and nutrients that are typically bound within the plant’s cellular structure (José Aliaño 
González et al., 2021). Consequently, this method increases yield and preserves the integ­
rity and activity of the extracted compounds. In a study, EAE was found to be superior 
to conventional extraction methods for extracting anthocyanins from eggplant (Solanum 
melongena L.) peel. EAE yielded the highest total yields and anthocyanin content compared 
to conventional solvent extraction. The extraction process was optimized using response 
surface methodology, with enzyme concentration, extraction temperature, and maceration 
time being the key variables optimized through a central-composite design. The results 
confirmed that EAE is more effective than traditional extraction methods (Amulya and Ul 
Islam, 2023).
Modern extraction techniques, like EAE, are more efficient, eco-friendly, and cost-
effective. They enhance the stability of extracted compounds, improve food quality and 
nutritional value, and maximize health benefits. This is especially true for anthocyanins, 
where these methods yield higher content and better preservation of beneficial properties. 
The examples of modern extraction methods used for anthocyanins are discussed in detail 
in Table 9.1.
9.5  Conclusion
In conclusion, this chapter has provided a comprehensive overview of the chemistry of 
anthocyanins and the various approaches for their extraction. Anthocyanins, natural 
pigments found in many fruits and vegetables, possess significant health benefits due to 
their antioxidant properties. Traditional extraction methods, such as maceration, perco­
lation, and Soxhlet extraction, have been widely used but often lack efficiency and can 
be environmentally unfriendly. Modern extraction methods have emerged to address 
these shortcomings, offering more efficient, cost-effective, and environmentally friendly 
alternatives. Techniques such as MAE and UAE enhance the disruption of plant tis­
sue, leading to higher yields of anthocyanins. SFE and SPE are also notable for their 
efficiency and ability to maintain the stability of the extracted compounds. EAE further 
improves yield and purity by breaking down cell walls more effectively than conven­
tional methods.
These advanced techniques not only improve the efficiency and effectiveness of anthocy­
anin extraction but also ensure the stability of these sensitive compounds. The use of modern 
extraction methods preserves the functional properties of anthocyanins, thereby maximizing 
their health benefits. As the demand for natural pigments and nutraceuticals grows, the con­
tinued development and optimization of these extraction methods will be crucial for meeting 
industry needs while promoting sustainability.

173
Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
TABLE 9.1
Extraction of Anthocyanins by Modern Extraction Techniques
Name of Plant
Modern Extraction 
Method
Optimized Parameters
Results
References
Rhodomyrtus 
tomentosa (Ait.) 
Hassk
MAE
Solvent concentration (30–70%), application 
ratio (10:1–1:1 ml/g), microwave power 
(100–500 W), and time (1–9 minutes).
The anthocyanin content reached its highest 
value of 137.54 mg/l when extracted using a 
50% ethanol solvent.
Pham et al. 
(2022)
Clitoria ternatea 
petals
UAE
Optimum extraction parameters are 
30 minutes extraction time, 50°C extraction 
temperature, and 10:1 solvent-to-solid ratio.
The glycerol-water system was identified as a 
green alternative for anthocyanin extraction, 
also serving effectively as a storage medium.
Shu et al. 
(2022)
Aronia 
melanocarpa
UMAE-NADES 
(ultrasonic-
microwave-assisted 
natural deep 
eutectic solvent)
Eight different natural eutectic solvents 
were screened initially, and choline 
chloride-glycerol was selected as the 
extraction solvent.
Six anthocyanins were isolated and UMAE-NADES 
demonstrated significant efficiency in extracting 
bioactive substances, showing potential utility 
in both the food and pharmaceutical industries.
Lin et al. 
(2022)
Sour cherry 
(Prunus cerasus 
L.), peels
MAE
The optimized parameters for the extraction 
process were 500 W of microwave power, 
90 seconds of irradiation time, and an 80% 
ethanol solvent concentration.
The maximum predicted yield of total 
anthocyanins was found to be 12.47 mg of 
cyanidin-3-glucoside per gram of fresh mass 
(mg-C3G/g-FM).
Kurtulbaş 
Şahin et al. 
(2021)
Raspberry (Rubus 
Coreanus Miq.)
MAE
Different solvents, including methanol, 
ethanol, and acetone, were used.
The canonical analysis estimated that the highest 
total anthocyanin content of raspberry was 
17.93 mg cyanidin-3-O-glucoside equivalents 
per gram dry weight.
Teng et al. 
(2013)
Pyrus communis 
‘Starkrimson’ 
fruit peel
UAE
Optimized UAE conditions: ultrasonic 
power, 162 W; temperature, 71°C; 
trifluoroacetic acid, 3%; ethanol, 57%; 
ultrasonication time, 11 minutes; and 
sample-to-solvent ratio = 1:30 g/ml).
Cyanidin-3-galactoside (Cy3-gal) yield was 
significantly higher (0.343 ± 0.005 mg/g) 
than from CE (0.266 ± 0.004 mg/g).
Belwal et al. 
(2019)
Raspberry (Rubus 
idaeus L. var. 
Heritage)
UAE
Optimized conditions: The ratio of solvents 
to materials was 4:1 (ml/g), extraction 
time was 200 seconds, and ultrasonic 
power was 400 W.
UAE was found to be more efficient and rapid for 
extracting anthocyanins from red raspberries, due to 
the strong disruption of fruit tissue structure caused 
by ultrasonic acoustic cavitation.
Chen et al. 
(2007)
Petals of 
Chaenomeles 
sinensis
SFE and HSCCC
SFE coupled with high-speed counter-
current chromatography (HSCCC) was 
successfully used for the extraction and 
on-line isolation of the anthocyanidins.
Six compounds including delphinidin-3-O-glucoside, 
cyanidin-3-O-glucoside, peonidin-3-O-glucoside, 
delphinidin, peonidin, and malvidin (Mv) were 
successfully separated within 300 minutes.
Li et al. 
(2013)

174
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
References
Abdel-Aal ESM, Akhtar H, Rabalski I, Bryan M. Accelerated, microwave-assisted, and conventional 
solvent extraction methods affect anthocyanin composition from colored grains. Journal of 
Food Science. 2014; 79(2): C138–46.
Ahmadiani N, Sigurdson GT, Robbins RJ, Collins TM, Giusti MM. Solid phase fractionation techniques 
for segregation of red cabbage anthocyanins with different colorimetric and stability properties. 
Food Research International. 2019; 120: 688–96.
Amulya PR, Ul Islam R. Optimization of enzyme-assisted extraction of anthocyanins from eggplant 
(Solanum melongena L.) peel. Food Chemistry: X. 2023; 18: 100643.
Badawy ME, El-Nouby MA, Kimani PK, Lim LW, Rabea EI. A review of the modern principles and 
applications of solid-phase extraction techniques in chromatographic analysis. Analytical 
Sciences. 2022; 38(12): 1457–87.
Badawy ME, El-Nouby MA, Marei AE. Development of a solid-phase extraction (SPE) cartridge 
based on chitosan-metal oxide nanoparticles (CH-MO NPs) for extraction of pesticides from 
water and determination by HPLC. International Journal of Analytical Chemistry. 2018; 2018(1): 
3640691.
Belwal T, Huang H, Li L, Duan Z, Zhang X, Aalim H, Luo Z. Optimization model for ultrasonic-
assisted and scale-up extraction of anthocyanins from Pyrus communis ‘Starkrimson’ fruit peel. 
Food Chemistry. 2019; 297: 124993.
Benchikh Y, Bachir-bey M, Chaalal M, Ydjedd S, Kati DE. Extraction of phenolic compounds, 
Editor(s): Dr. Inamuddin, Tariq Altalhi, Green sustainable process for chemical and environ­
mental engineering and science. Elsevier, 2023; 329–354. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-
323-95156-2.00008-8
Hippeastrum cultivars. Scientia Horticulturae. 2006; 109(3): 262–6.
Capitani D, Sobolev AP, Delfini M, Vista S, Antiochia R, Proietti N, Bubici S, Ferrante G, Carradori S, 
Salvador FR, Mannina L. NMR methodologies in the analysis of blueberries. Electrophoresis. 
2014; 35(11): 1615–26.
Carrera C, Aliaño-González MJ, Rodríguez-López J, Ferreiro-González M, Ojeda-Copete F, Barbero 
GF, Palma M. Optimization of an ultrasound-assisted extraction method for the analysis of 
major anthocyanin content in Erica australis flowers. Molecules. 2021; 26(10): 2884.
Castañeda-Ovando A, de Lourdes Pacheco-Hernández M, Páez-Hernández ME, Rodríguez JA, 
Galán-Vidal CA. Chemical studies of anthocyanins: A review. Food Chemistry. 2009; 113(4): 
859–71.
Chemat F, Rombaut N, Meullemiestre A, Turk M, Perino S, Fabiano-Tixier AS, Abert-Vian M. Review 
of green food processing techniques, preservation, transformation, and extraction. Innovative 
Food Science & Emerging Technologies. 2017; 41: 357–77.
Chen F, Sun Y, Zhao G, Liao X, Hu X, Wu J, Wang Z. Optimization of ultrasound-assisted extraction 
of anthocyanins in red raspberries and identification of anthocyanins in extract using high-
performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Ultrasonics Sonochemistry. 2007; 
14(6): 767–78.
Chung C, Rojanasasithara T, Mutilangi W, McClements DJ. Stabilization of natural colors and nutra­
ceuticals: Inhibition of anthocyanin degradation in model beverages using polyphenols. Food 
Chemistry. 2016; 212: 596–603.
Constantin OE, Istrati DI. Extraction, quantification and characterization techniques for anthocyanin 
compounds in various food matrices – A review. Horticulturae. 2022; 8(11): 1084.
de Pascual-Teresa S, Sanchez-Ballesta MT. Anthocyanins: From plant to health. Phytochemistry 
Reviews. 2008; 7: 281–99.
Denev P, Ciz M, Ambrozova G, Lojek A, Yanakieva I, Kratchanova M. Solid-phase extraction of 
berries’ anthocyanins and evaluation of their antioxidative properties. Food Chemistry. 2010; 
123(4): 1055–61.
Byamukama R, Jordheim M, Kiremire B, Namukobe J, Andersen Ø M. Anthocyanins from flowers of 

175
Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Devgun M, Nanda AR, Ansari SH. Comparison of conventional and non-conventional methods of 
extraction of heartwood of Pterocarpus marsupium Roxb. Acta Poloniae Pharmaceutica – Drug 
Research. 2012; 69(3): 475–85.
Diessana A, Parkouda C, Cissé M, Diawara B, Dicko M. Optimization of aqueous extraction of 
anthocyanins from Hibiscus sabdariffa L. calyces for food application. Food Science and Quality 
Management. 2015; 45: 23–32.
Enaru B, Drețcanu G, Pop TD, Stǎnilǎ A, Diaconeasa Z. Anthocyanins: Factors affecting their stability 
and degradation. Antioxidants (Basel). 2021; 10(12): 1967.
Eskilsson CS, Björklund E. Analytical-scale microwave-assisted extraction. Journal of Chromatography 
A. 2000; 902(1): 227–50.
Fan G, Han Y, Gu Z, Chen D. Optimizing conditions for anthocyanins extraction from purple sweet 
potato using response surface methodology (RSM). LWT – Food Science and Technology. 2008; 
41(1): 155–60.
Ferrara D, Beccaria M, Cordero CE, Purcaro G. Microwave-assisted extraction in closed vessel in 
food analysis. Journal of Separation Science. 2023; 46(20): e2300390.
Ferreiro-González M, Carrera C, Ruiz-Rodríguez A, Barbero GF, Ayuso J, Palma M, Barroso CG. A 
new solid phase extraction for the determination of anthocyanins in grapes. Molecules. 2014; 
19(12): 21398–410.
García-Marino M, Hernández-Hierro JM, Rivas-Gonzalo JC, Escribano-Bailón MT. Colour and pig­
ment composition of red wines obtained from co-maceration of Tempranillo and Graciano vari­
eties. Analytica Chimica Acta. 2010; 660(1–2): 134–42.
Grigoriadou D, Androulaki A, Psomiadou E, Tsimidou MZ. Solid phase extraction in the analysis of 
squalene and tocopherols in olive oil. Food Chemistry. 2007; 105(2): 675–80.
He J, Giusti MM. High-purity isolation of anthocyanins mixtures from fruits and vegetables – A 
novel solid-phase extraction method using mixed mode cation-exchange chromatography. 
Journal of Chromatography A. 2011; 1218(44): 7914–22.
Herrman DA, Brantsen JF, Ravisankar S, Lee KM, Awika JM. Stability of 3-deoxyanthocyanin pig­
ment structure relative to anthocyanins from grains under microwave-assisted extraction. Food 
Chemistry. 2020; 333: 127494.
Huopalahti R, Järvenpää EP, Katina K. A novel solid-phase extraction-HPLC method for the anal­
ysis of anthocyanin and organic acid composition of Finnish cranberry. Journal of Liquid 
Chromatography & Related Technologies. 2000; 23(17): 2695–2701.
Idham Z, Zaini AS, Putra NR, Rusli NM, Mahat NS, Yian LN, Yunus MA. Effect of flow rate, par­
ticle size and modifier ratio on the supercritical fluid extraction of anthocyanins from Hibiscus 
sabdariffa (L), IOP conference series: Materials science and engineering. IOP Publishing, 2020, 
932(1): 012031.
Jafari SM, Mahdavee Khazaei K, Assadpour E. Production of a natural color through microwave-
assisted extraction of saffron tepal’s anthocyanins. Food Science & Nutrition. 2019; 7(4): 1438–45.
Jaiswal YS, Guan Y, Moon KH, Williams LL. Anthocyanins: Natural sources and traditional thera­
peutic uses, Flavonoids – A coloring model for cheering up life. IntechOpen, 2019.
Jiang X, Li X, Zhu C, Sun J, Tian L, Chen W, Bai W. The target cells of anthocyanins in metabolic syn­
drome. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition. 2019; 59(6): 921–46.
Jiao G, Pour AK. Extraction of anthocyanins from haskap berry pulp using supercritical carbon diox­
ide: Influence of co-solvent composition and pretreatment. LWT. 2018; 98: 237–44.
Jordheim M, Fossen T, Andersen ØM. Characterization of hemiacetal forms of anthocyanidin 3-O-β-
glycopyranosides. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2006; 54(25): 9340–6.
José Aliaño González M, Carrera C, Barbero GF, Palma M. A comparison study between ultrasound-
assisted and enzyme-assisted extraction of anthocyanins from blackcurrant (Ribes nigrum L. 
Food Chemistry: X. 2021; 13: 100192.
Jovanović AA, Đorđević VB, Zdunić GM, Pljevljakušić DS, Šavikin KP, Gođevac DM, Bugarski BM. 
Optimization of the extraction process of polyphenols from Thymus serpyllum L. herb using 
maceration, heat-and ultrasound-assisted techniques. Separation and Purification Technology. 
2017; 179: 369–80.

176
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Khoo HE, Azlan A, Tang ST, Lim SM. Anthocyanidins and anthocyanins: Colored pigments as food, 
pharmaceutical ingredients, and the potential health benefits. Food & Nutrition Research. 2017; 
61(1): 1361779.
Kong JM, Chia LS, Goh NK, Chia TF, Brouillard R. Analysis and biological activities of anthocyanins. 
Phytochemistry. 2003; 64(5): 923–33.
Kumar V, Tingirikari JM. Degree of methylation: A key to the functional properties of low methylated 
pectin derived from pectin-rich agrowaste. Food Bioscience. 2023; 103386.
Linares G, Rojas ML. Ultrasound-assisted extraction of natural pigments from food processing by-
products: A review. Frontiers in Nutrition. 2022; 9: 891462.
Liu Y, Zhao Y, Zhuo Y, Li Y, Meng J, Wang Y, Li H. Ultrasound-assisted extraction of anthocyanins 
from Malus ‘royalty’ fruits: Optimization, separation, and antitumor activity. Molecules. 2022; 
27(13): 4299.
Lotfi L, Kalbasi-Ashtari A, Hamedi M, Ghorbani F. Effects of enzymatic extraction on anthocyanins 
yield of saffron tepals (Crocus sativus) along with its color properties and structural stability. 
Journal of Food and Drug Analysis. 2015; 23(2): 210–8.
Machado BAS, Pereira CG, Nunes SB, Padilha FF, Umsza-Guez MA. Supercritical fluid extraction 
using CO2: Main applications and future perspectives. Separation Science and Technology. 
2013; 48: 2741–60.
Malik J, Mandal SC. Extraction of herbal biomolecules, Editor(s): Subhash C. Mandal, 
Amit Kumar Nayak, Amal Kumar Dhara, Herbal biomolecules in healthcare applica­
tions. Academic Press, 2022; 21–46. ISBN 9780323858526. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-323-85852-6.00015-9
Manousi N, Sarakatsianos I, Samanidou V. 10 – Extraction techniques of phenolic compounds 
and other bioactive compounds from medicinal and aromatic plants, Editor(s): Grumezescu, 
A.M., Holban, A.M., Engineering tools in the beverage industry. Woodhead Publishing, 2019; 
283–314. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-815258-4.00010-X
Maran JP, Priya B, Manikandan S. Modeling and optimization of supercritical fluid extraction of 
anthocyanin and phenolic compounds from Syzygium cumini fruit pulp. Journal of Food Science 
and Technology. 2014; 51: 1938–46.
Marić M, Grassino AN, Zhu Z, Barba FJ, Brnčić M, Brnčić SR. An overview of the traditional and inno­
vative approaches for pectin extraction from plant food wastes and by-products: Ultrasound-, 
microwaves-, and enzyme-assisted extraction. Trends in Food Science & Technology. 2018; 76: 
28–37.
Martinez AS, Kornpointner C, Haselmair-Gosch C, Mikulic-Petkovsek M, Schröder K, Halbwirth H. 
Dynamic streamlined extraction of iridoids, anthocyanins and lipids from haskap berries. LWT. 
2021; 138: 110633.
Naseri R, Farzaei F, Haratipour P, Nabavi SF, Habtemariam S, Farzaei MH, Khodarahmi R, Tewari D, 
Momtaz S. Anthocyanins in the management of metabolic syndrome: A pharmacological and 
biopharmaceutical review. Frontiers in Pharmacology. 2018; 9: 1310.
Nunes AN, Borges A, Matias AA, Bronze MR, Oliveira J. Alternative extraction and downstream 
purification processes for anthocyanins. Molecules. 2022; 27(2): 368.
Nurkhasanah A, Fardad T, Carrera C, Setyaningsih W, Palma M. Ultrasound-assisted anthocyanins 
extraction from pigmented corn: Optimization using response surface methodology. Methods 
and Protocols. 2023; 6(4): 69.
Oancea S. A review of the current knowledge of thermal stability of anthocyanins and approaches to 
their stabilization to heat. Antioxidants. 2021; 10(9): 1337.
Oladzadabbasabadi N, Nafchi AM, Ghasemlou M, Ariffin F, Singh Z, Al-Hassan AA. Natural 
anthocyanins: Sources, extraction, characterization, and suitability for smart packaging. Food 
Packaging and Shelf Life. 2022; 33: 100872.
Paes J, Dotta R, Barbero GF, Martínez J. Extraction of phenolic compounds and anthocyanins from 
blueberry (Vaccinium myrtillus L.) residues using supercritical CO2 and pressurized liquids. The 
Journal of Supercritical Fluids. 2014; 95: 8–16.

177
Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Paula JT, Paviani LC, Foglio MA, Sousa IM, Cabral FA. Extraction of anthocyanins from Arrabidaea 
chica in fixed bed using CO2 and CO2/ethanol/water mixtures as solvents. The Journal of 
Supercritical Fluids. 2013; 81: 33–41.
Pham TN, Le XT, Pham VT, Le HT. Effects of process parameters in microwave-assisted extraction 
on the anthocyanin-enriched extract from Rhodomyrtus tomentosa (Ait.) Hassk and its stor­
age conditions on the kinetic degradation of anthocyanins in the extract. Heliyon. 2022; 8(6): 
e09518.
Pinela J, Prieto MA, Pereira E, Jabeur I, Barreiro MF, Barros L, Ferreira ICFR. Optimization of heat- 
and ultrasound-assisted extraction of anthocyanins from Hibiscus sabdariffa calyces for natural 
food colorants. Food Chemistry. 2019; 275: 309–21.
Ravanfar R, Moein M, Niakousari M, Tamaddon A. Extraction and fractionation of anthocyanins 
from red cabbage: Ultrasonic-assisted extraction and conventional percolation method. Journal 
of Food Measurement and Characterization. 2018; 12: 2271–7.
Salamon I, Mariychuk R, Grulova D. Optimal extraction of pure anthocyanins from fruits of Sambucus 
nigra. Acta Horticulturae. 2015; 1061: 73–8.
Samira O, Laila B, Moussa NA, Mohamed I, Devkota K, Abdelhakim B, Maggi F, Caprioli G, El 
Hassan S, Said G. Recent advances in the extraction of bioactive compounds from plant matri­
ces and their use as potential antioxidants for vegetable oils enrichment. Journal of Food 
Composition and Analysis. 2024; 105995.
Sharma RJ, Gupta RC, Singh S, Bansal AK, Singh IP. Stability of anthocyanins-and anthocyanidins-
enriched extracts, and formulations of fruit pulp of Eugenia jambolana (‘jamun’). Food Chemistry. 
2016; 190: 808–17.
Shen L, Pang S, Zhong M, Sun Y, Qayum A, Liu Y, Rashid A, Xu B, Liang Q, Ma H, Ren X. A com­
prehensive review of ultrasonic assisted extraction (UAE) for bioactive components: Principles, 
advantages, equipment, and combined technologies. Ultrasonics Sonochemistry. 2023; 106646.
Shinwari KJ. Chapter 4 – Emerging technologies for the recovery of bioactive compounds from saf­
fron species, Editor(s): Galanakis, Charis M., Saffron. Academic Press, 2021; 143–182.
Shu MH, Annamalai KK, Idris FN, Kamaruddin AH, Nadzir MM. Dataset of ultrasound-assisted 
extraction of anthocyanin from the petals of Clitoria ternatea using Taguchi method and effect of 
storage conditions on the anthocyanin stability. Data in Brief. 2022; 40: 107803.
Silva VO, Freitas AA, Maçanita AL, Quina FH. Chemistry and photochemistry of natural plant pig­
ments: The anthocyanins. Journal of Physical Organic Chemistry. 2016; 29(11): 594–9.
Su X, Xu J, Rhodes D, Shen Y, Song W, Katz B, Tomich J, Wang W. Identification and quantification of 
anthocyanins in transgenic purple tomato. Food Chemistry. 2016; 202: 184–8.
Taghavi T, Patel H, Rafie R. Extraction solvents affect anthocyanin yield, color, and profile of straw­
berries. Plants. 2023; 12(9): 1833.
Tan J, Han Y, Han B, Qi X, Cai X, Ge S, Xue H. Extraction and purification of anthocyanins: A review. 
Journal of Agriculture and Food Research. 2022; 8: 100306.
Tan J, Li Q, Xue H, Tang J. Ultrasound-assisted enzymatic extraction of anthocyanins from grape 
skins: Optimization, identification, and antitumor activity. Journal of Food Science. 2020; 
85(11): 3731–44.
Tena N, Asuero AG. Up-to-date analysis of the extraction methods for anthocyanins: Principles of the 
techniques, optimization, technical progress, and industrial application. Antioxidants. 2022; 
11(2): 286.
Tyśkiewicz K, Konkol M, Rój E. The application of supercritical fluid extraction in phenolic com­
pounds isolation from natural plant materials. Molecules. 2018; 23(10): 2625.
Varo MA, Serratosa MP, Martín-Gómez J, Moyano L, Mérida J. Influence of fermentation time on the 
phenolic compounds, vitamin c, color and antioxidant activity in the winemaking process of 
Blueberry (Vaccinium corymbosum) wine obtained by maceration. Molecules. 2022; 27(22): 7744.
Wallace TC, Giusti MM, editors. Anthocyanins in health and disease. CRC Press; 2013.
Wallace TC, Giusti MM. Anthocyanins-nature’s bold, beautiful, and health-promoting colors. Foods. 
2019; 8(11): 550.

178
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Wang DQ, Cui HP, Zong KL, Hu HC, Yang JT. Extraction of functional natural products employing 
microwave-assisted aqueous two-phase system: Application to anthocyanins extraction from 
mulberry fruits. Preparative Biochemistry & Biotechnology. 2024; 54(1): 115–25.
Wang LS, Stoner GD. Anthocyanins and their role in cancer prevention. Cancer Letters. 2008; 269(2): 
281–90.
Wang WY, Qu HB, Gong XC. Research progress on percolation extraction process of traditional 
Chinese medicines. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2020; 45(5): 1039–46.
Weber F, Boch K, Schieber A. Influence of copigmentation on the stability of spray dried anthocya­
nins from blackberry. LWT. 2017; 75: 72–7.
Wen P, Hu T-G, Linhardt RJ, Liao S-T, Wu H, Zou Y-X. Mulberry: A review of bioactive compounds 
and advanced processing technology. Trends in Food Science and Technology. 2019; 83: 138–58.
West ME, Mauer LJ. Color and chemical stability of a variety of anthocyanins and ascorbic acid in 
solution and powder forms. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2013; 61(17): 4169–79.
Zhang QW, Lin LG, Ye WC. Techniques for extraction and isolation of natural products: A compre­
hensive review. Chinese Medicine. 2018; 13:20.
Zhao YW, Wang CK, Huang XY, Hu DG. Anthocyanin stability and degradation in plants. Plant 
Signaling & Behavior. 2021; 16(12): 1987767.
Zou T, Wang D, Guo H, Zhu Y, Luo X, Liu F, Ling W. Optimization of microwave-assisted extrac­
tion of anthocyanins from mulberry and identification of anthocyanins in extract using HPLC-
ESI-MS. Journal of Food Science. 2012; 77(1): C46–50.

179
10
HPLC and UHPLC Analysis of Anthocyanins
Mohd. Javed Naim, Kamran Javed Naquvi, and Javed Ahamad
10.1  Introduction
Anthocyanins (ACNs) are glycosylated phenolic compounds/pigments that occur natu­
rally and are soluble in water, making them simple to incorporate into aqueous media. 
They exist as an extensive group of natural pigments that show various colors such as 
orange, red, violet, and blue (Riaz et al., 2016; Salehi et al., 2020). The term “anthocyanin” 
originates from the Greek words “anthos,” meaning flower, and “kyanos,” meaning blue. 
ACNs, or ACNs, are a specific kind of flavonoids that may be found in many sections of 
plants, with a particular abundance in flowers and fruits (Wallace and Giusti, 2013; Sui, 
2016). They are described by the presence of a C6-C3-C6 flavan or 2-phenyl benzodihy­
dorpyrane skeleton (Castañeda-Ovando et al., 2009). Nature has more than 700 known 
ACNs which serve several purposes such as attracting pests to flowers for pollination, 
attracting grazing animals to fruits for the dispersal of seeds, and protecting plant cells 
from damage by UV radiation (Warner, 2015). ACNs are often present in several plant 
families, such as Cruciferae, Caprifoliaceae, Ericaceae, Fabaceae, Rosaceae, Saxifragaceae, 
and Vitaceae (Mazza, 2018). The concentration of ACNs exhibits substantial variation 
across various dietary matrices, mostly because of the interplay between production and 
degradation. Notably, colored grains (purple maize and black rice), berries, and red wine 
are among the most abundant sources of ACNs (Figure 10.1). The inclusion of ACNs in 
these food products not only contributes to their visual attractiveness but also improves 
their nutritional composition (Cappellini et al., 2021; Custodio-Mendoza et al., 2024). The 
process of ACN production has been well investigated, although our understanding 
of its breakdown is still restricted (Passeri et al., 2016). ACN metabolism is regulated 
by genetic, developmental, and environmental variables. Many process-related factors, 
such as light, pH, oxygen, co-pigmentation, enzymes, ascorbic acid, sulfites, and tem­
perature, may cause ACNs to deteriorate, which is a major downside of employing ACNs 
(Enaru et al., 2021).
The most prevalent ACNs found in plants are derived from six widely distributed 
anthocyanidins: pelargonidin, cyanidin, delphinidin, peonidin, petunidin, and malvidin 
(Figure 10.2) (Kong et al., 2003; Liu et al., 2018). ACNs provide plants with defense mecha­
nisms against a range of living and non-living stressors (Pojer et al., 2013; Ahmed et al., 
2014). Currently, neither the USFDA nor EFSA has approved any health claims related to 
ACNs. Nevertheless, vendors persist in their efforts to communicate the perceived health 
advantages of ACN supplementation to consumers by interpreting the existing body of 
literature on the bioactivity of ACNs. They describe various effects on the eyes, blood 
vessels, lipid profile, liver, antioxidant status, and anti-inflammatory properties. While an 

180
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
official health claim has not been established, other research has investigated the impact of 
ACNs via laboratory experiments and live subjects (Ockermann et al., 2021).
In addition to their antioxidant, anticarcinogenic, anti-inflammatory, cardioprotective, 
and anti-neurodegenerative properties, ACNs have remarkable bioactive features and pro­
vide a host of other health advantages. Additionally, they improve eye health and have a 
FIGURE 10.1
Different natural sources of anthocyanins (De Pascual-Teresa and Sanchez-Ballesta, 2008; Escribano-Bailón 
et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2006; Koponen et al., 2007; Horbowicz et al., 2008; Veberic et al., 2009; Montilla et al., 2011; 
Müller et al., 2012; Fredes et al., 2014; Lao et al., 2017; Guine et al., 2018; Bar-Ya’akov et al., 2019).

181
HPLC and UHPLC Analysis of Anthocyanins
protective impact against diabetes and ocular disorders (Samtiya et al., 2021; Al-Khayri 
et al., 2022). Additionally, ACNs derived from various berries have shown the ability to 
safeguard the brain against oxidative damage that comes with aging and to improve cog­
nitive performance. Several food-related applications might benefit from these natural 
pigments (Speer et al., 2020). According to new research, these compounds may inhibit 
the replication of several viruses, such as herpes simplex, parainfluenza, syncytial, HIV, 
rotavirus, and adenovirus (Mohammadi Pour et al., 2019). They are very desirable for 
FIGURE 10.2
Chemical structure of important anthocyanins along with their general chemical structure (Salehi et al., 2020; 
Ockermann et al., 2021; Al-Khayri et al., 2022).

182
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
pharmacotherapeutic applications because of their low toxicity, a broad variety of phar­
macological actions, and supporting experimental and clinical evidence (Figure 10.3).
10.2  Chemistry of Anthocyanins
Anthocyanidins (C3′, C4′, C5′) and flavylium cation backbones (C3, C5, C6, and C7) are the 
typical sites of hydroxylation in these compounds (Mattioli et al., 2020). The structure of 
anthocyanidin glycosides (ACNS) typically consists of one glucoside unit; however, some 
ACNs have more than one glucoside unit attached to them (simple sugar or oligosaccha­
rides), and they have distinctive tricyclic (C6-C3-C6) skeleton pattern (Ockermann et al., 
2021). Glucose, arabinose, and galactose are the main monosaccharides, whereas rutinose 
is a disaccharide that contains 6-O-α-L-rhamnosyl-D-glucose. The most frequent ACN is 
cyanidin-3-glucoside, while the most prevalent anthocyanidin is cyanidin (Kong et al., 
2003; De Pascual-Teresa and Sanchez-Ballesta, 2008; Khoo et al., 2017).
ACNs, due to the presence of their polar hydroxyl group, establish hydrogen bonds with 
water molecules. According to research by Houghton et al. (2021) and Khoo et al. (2017), the 
amount of hydroxyl (OH) and methoxyl (O-CH3) groups in an ACN determines its color 
and its intensity. ACNs with more OH groups tend to be blue, while those with more OCH3 
groups tend to be reddish. There are ACNs in every part of higher plants. The six most 
common ACNs in nature are based on aglycones, and they are cyanidin (50%), pelargoni­
din (12%), petunidin (7%), delphinidin (12%), peonidin (12%), and malvidin (7%), with the 
only difference being the patterns of C-ring substitution (Tena et al., 2020). Anthocyanidins 
may be glycosylated on various hydroxyl groups of the molecule to generate ACNs, with 
3-OH being the most common glycosylation site in nature, resulting in 3-O-β-glucoside. 
ACNs exist as flavylium cations (oxonium-charged oxygen) at low pH levels, according to 
biochemical investigations, while uncharged quinones are generated at neutral pH. All 
ACNs are somewhat stable in basic circumstances (a property that grows in direct propor­
tion to pH), and they may degrade in various ways, losing their color in the process (Figure 
10.4) (Mattioli et al., 2020).
10.3  Analysis of Anthocyanins
Natural ACNs have been the focus of several publications in recent literature due to their 
promising role as healthful pigments. The following are a few examples of their uses: in 
food (Giusti and Wrolstad, 2003), in plants (Cooper-Driver, 2001), in biosynthesis (Springob 
et al., 2003), in quantitative analysis using chromatographic and electrophoretic tech­
niques (da Costa et al., 2000), and how they affect plants when stressed (Simmonds, 2003). 
Considering their bioavailability and steadiness in food is crucial for optimizing their 
effects and ensuring their safety for consumption. ACNs in various matrices have been 
identified and characterized using a broad range of analytical techniques. Raman spec­
troscopy, FT-IR, and near-IR spectroscopy are three crucial analytical tools for the quick 
and non-destructive assessment of food composition. As a result of their distinct chemical 
structures, FT-IR and Raman spectra, when coupled with NMR and MS, may help iden­
tify food components (ACNs) (Skogerson et al., 2011). On the other hand, if you only need 
a quick screening, you may utilize these methods alone; complete quantitative analysis 

183
HPLC and UHPLC Analysis of Anthocyanins
FIGURE 10.3
Important pharmacological activities exhibited by anthocyanins (He and Giusti, 2010; Salehi et al., 2020; Khan 
et al., 2022).

184
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
requires a lot of time and effort spent on sample preparation. As described by the training 
dataset, it identifies out-of-specification conditions by spectroscopic “fingerprint” devia­
tions. Although near-infrared and Raman spectroscopy provide fast analysis, they cannot 
directly measure ACN content; this subtlety is critical and proves the claim (Amanah et al., 
2020).
FIGURE 10.4
(A) Conversion of anthocyanidin to anthocyanin via enzymatic action of glucosyltransferase and (B) change in 
color in anthocyanins due to change in pH aqueous media (Mattioli et al., 2020; Ockermann et al., 2021).

185
HPLC and UHPLC Analysis of Anthocyanins
Liquid chromatography (high-performance or ultra-high-performance) using fluores­
cence, mass spectrometry (MS), or diode array detectors (DADs) is a typical component of 
such techniques. Although MS cannot differentiate between positional isomers on its own, 
it is often used in conjunction with high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) to 
achieve this goal (Garcia-Oliveira et al., 2021). Chromatographic techniques are vital for 
isolating complicated mixtures according to the physical and chemical characteristics of 
their constituents, which is essential for identifying specific ACNs in food matrices (Sun 
et al., 2022). Because of their great sensitivity, selectivity, and resolution, liquid chromato­
graphic (LC) techniques are ideal for analyzing complex mixtures (Lasoń-Rydel et al., 2021; 
Thuy et al., 2021). The basic idea behind LC is that analytes may be separated from liquid 
samples by interacting with stationary and mobile phases (Rusli et al., 2022). The mobile 
phase transports the sample from one step of the system to another; it might be a solvent 
alone or a mixture of organic and water-based solutions. Based on the separation needs, 
its composition might be acidified or salt-enriched. Stationary phases, which may be solid 
or liquid, are used to separate analytes of different compositions. These phases are then 
packed onto a column or coated onto a support. Analytes with a lower polarity are treated 
with the normal phase, whereas those with a higher polarity are treated with the reverse 
phase. Size exclusion is used for size-based separation, whereas ion exchange is employed 
for charged groups (Sivamaruthi et al., 2020; Leonarski et al., 2023).
While both HPLC and UHPLC use size, electrostatic interactions, and affinity to sep­
arate compounds, the two methods vary in the pressures used and the particle sizes 
that must be considered. With smaller stationary phase particles and elevated pressures 
(10,000–15,000 psi), UHPLC improves resolution and peak capacity, particularly for tightly 
eluting peaks (Fibigr et al., 2017; Yabré et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2022). Following similar chro­
matographic principles, thin-layer chromatography (TLC) uses a stationary phase con­
sisting of an adsorbent material (thin layer) on a plate. This approach is often used for 
qualitative scrutiny and initial compound separation; it is both quick and simple to use, 
making it ideal for educational purposes. While UHPLC and HPLC are known for their 
speed and accuracy, TLC isn’t always up to snuff when it comes to resolution and sensitiv­
ity (Tuzimski, 2002; Bele and Khale, 2011; Rodriguez-Saona and Allendorf, 2011). When 
it comes to isolating, detecting, and quantifying varied ACN profiles found in various 
foods, LC’s adaptability, sensitivity, and high resolution provide unmatched capabilities. 
Understanding nutritional content, disclosing health advantages, and guaranteeing food 
quality control all rely on the comprehensive study of individual ACNs (Thuy et al., 2021; 
Avula et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). Optimal gradients, operational systems, and detec­
tion techniques are constantly evolving to improve sensitivity, specificity, and structural 
information (Pereira et al., 2016; Badawy et al., 2022). Photodiode array (PDA) detectors and 
ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) are examples of topical techniques, whereas MS is an example 
of a quantitative approach. A combination of these advancements makes liquid chroma­
tography for ACN analysis more precise and time-saving (Drabińska et al., 2023).
10.3.1  Role of HPLC in Analysis of Anthocyanins
Using HPLC-DAD-MS analysis, Paun et al. (2022) determined the antioxidant potential, 
total phenolics, and ACNs in blackberry and black grape skins. Grape skins included 
seven ACN derivatives, five glycosylated ACN compounds in blackberries, and eight such 
compounds in grapes. Blackberries mostly contained cyanidin-3-glucoside, but grape 
skins primarily contained delphinidin-3-O-glucoside. Extracts from blackberries, as com­
pared to grape skins, were richer in polyphenols and ACNs, and they showed a significant 

186
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
improvement in polymeric color whether extracted with methanol or ethanol; however, the 
TAC (total antioxidant capacity) values were greater in the former case. To measure ACN 
in different formulations, such as spray-dried aqueous extract, oral powder, and compress­
ible lozenges, Khan et al. (2022) developed an easy, fast, and stability indicating HPLC-UV 
method using delphinidin-3-O-sambubioside (Dp3S) as a marker component. With higher 
values of correlation coefficient (0.9998), limit of detection (0.01 μg/mL), and limit of quanti­
fication (0.04 μg/mL), the technique was determined to be accurate, precise, and repeatable 
when validated according to ICH principles (International Council for Harmonisation) 
as well. Statistical analysis showed that the present procedure is accurate, exact, and 
repeatable (P < 0.05). When it comes to the detection wavelength and mobile phase pH, 
the approach holds up well (P < 0.05). Kalogiouri et al. (2022) developed an HPLC-DAD 
analytical technique to determine ACN levels in three different red Greek wine grape vari­
eties – Kotsifali, Limnio, and Vradiano. Throughout 2020, 16 samples were gathered from 
various locations around Greece, including the official ampelographic collections and 
the major areas of each type. Both the limits of detection (LODs – 0.06–0.12 mg/kg) and 
the limits of quantification (LOQs – 0.20–60 mg/kg) were within the specified ranges. 
Both the within-day and between-day tests demonstrated sufficient precision with RSD% 
values below 6.2% and 8.5%, respectively. The major ACNs in blueberries, including del­
phinidin-3-O-glucoside, cyanidin-3-O-glucoside, petunidin-3-O-glucoside, pelargoni­
din-3-O-glucoside, peonidin-3-O-glucoside, and malvidin-3-O-glucoside, were identified 
by Zhou et al. (2021) by optimizing HPLC chromatographic conditions. To begin, the ACN 
monomers were prepared using semi-preparative HPLC, and then analytical HPLC was 
used to optimize the separation parameters. Using acetonitrile-water as the mobile phase 
and gradient elution with a detection wavelength of 520 nm, the results showed that six 
major ACNs could be successfully separated. The mobile phase also included 0.3% phos­
phoric acid. The detection limits ranged from 0.010 to 0.035 lg/mL and the quantification 
limits from 0.03 to 0.117 lg/mL, indicating that the measurement was compatible with the 
identification of ACNs. There were very significant linear correlations (r > 0.9994) between 
the six components’ concentrations and peak areas as measured by the technique. Using 
HPLC-DAD-MS analysis, Li et al. (2016) isolated 13 ACNs from 17 samples of various blue­
berry types in China. Of the overall anthocyanidin content, malvidin, delphinidin, and 
petunidin made the most significant contributions.
Ştefănuţ et al. (2011) analyzed the antioxidant capacity, total phenolics, ACN composi­
tion, and ACN concentration in the extracts of native wild blackberries, mulberries, bil­
berries, and blackthorns by using HPLC. Chromatograms showed 4 ACN compounds in 
blackberries, 3 in mulberries, 18 in bilberries, and 5 in blackthorns. Blackberry, mulberry, 
and bilberry extracts had the highest concentration of cyanidin-3-glucoside, whereas 
blackthorn extract contained the highest concentration of cyanidin-3-rutinoside. The 
Folin-Ciocalteu technique was used to measure total phenolics, whereas the pH dif­
ferential method was used to quantify ACN concentration. To determine the impact of 
heat treatment on these polyphenolic compounds, Truong et al. (2010) isolated ACNs 
and anthocyanidins from PFSP (purple-fleshed sweet potatoes). Overall, 17 ACNs were 
identified by HPLC-DAD/ESI-MS/MS for Stokes Purple and NC 415 varieties with five 
major compounds: cyanidin-3-caffeoylsophoroside, peonidin-3-caffeoylsophoroside-
5-glucoside, cyanidin-3-caffeoyl-p-hydroxybenzoyl sophoroside-5-glucoside, peonidin-
3-caffeoyl-p-hyfroxybenzoylsophoroside-5-glucoside, and peonidin-caffeoyl-feruloyl 
sophoroside-5-glucoside.
Cyanidin-3-(6″,6′″dicaffeoyl sophoroside)-5-glucoside, cyanidin-3-(6″-caffeoyl-6′″- 
ferulylsophoroside)-5-glucoside, and a total of 12 pigments were detected in Okinawa 

187
HPLC and UHPLC Analysis of Anthocyanins
variety. The main anthocyanidins in the acid-hydrolyzed extract, cyanidin and peonidin, 
were successfully isolated and quantified using HPLC in conjunction with external stan­
dards and measured using HPLC.
In 2005, Rubinskiene et al. made use of blackcurrants from distinct Ribes nigrum breeds 
analyzed for ACN content and stability using HPLC equipped with UV and MS detectors. 
This process is carried out at different stages of ripeness. The berries of late blackcurrant 
varieties, such as Vakariai and Ben Alder, have a greater concentration of ACNs. When 
berries are reddish (at the beginning of ripening), delphinidin-3-rutinoside is the main 
component; when berries are black in color (ripe), cyanidin-3-rutinoside is a prominent pig­
ment. Aqueous solutions made from dry colorants are more stable than liquid water and 
ethanol extracts of coloring compounds, according to studies that examined the impact of 
light and temperature on the stability of blackcurrant pigments. The ACN with the highest 
heat stability is cyanidin-3-rutinoside. Of the 25 fruits studied by Wu and Prior (2005), 14 
had ACNs; the amounts ranged from 2 in nectarines and peaches to 31 in Concord grapes. 
They used HPLC-ESI-MS/MS in conjunction with diode array detection to comprehen­
sively identify and characterize the ACNs. Delphinidin, cyanidin, pelargonidin, petuni­
din, peonidin, and malvidin were detected in all the samples that were examined. An 
HPLC-UV-visible technique for quantifiable detection of ACN in blood orange juices (vari­
eties: “Moro,” “Tarocco,” “Sanguinello,” and “Sanguinello nocellare”) was developed by 
Mondello et al. (2000). They used a calibration curve for the reference compound cyanidin-
3-glucoside. The concentration range of cyanidin-3-glucoside that was achieved was 2–217 
parts per million (Table 10.1).
10.3.2  Role of UHPLC in Analysis of Anthocyanins
Jia et al. (2020) utilized the UPLC Quadrupole-Orbitrap MS system to quickly identify 
and quantify 12 ACNs from berries. Detection and quantification limits were set at 
3.86–11.61 mg/L, precision at 0.95–2.38%, repeatability at 0.96–2.08%, stability at 0.86–
2.31%, mean recovery at 95.8–103.1%, recovery range at 93.1–107.2%, and RSD at less than 
5.21% and the technique was found to be successfully validated. The six ACNs in acai 
berry and dried blueberry extracts were separated and quantitatively analyzed using a 
fast UHPLC-UV technique that was developed and validated by Fibigr et al. (2017). The 
method made use of a core-shell particle column with a pentafluorophenyl stationary 
phase. In about 5 minutes, the ACNs (peonidin-3-glucoside, delphinidin-3-glucoside, del­
phinidin-3-rutinoside, cyanidin-3-glucoside, and delphinidin-3-galactoside) were isolated 
and examined. At a temperature of 50°C, the chromatographic separation was carried out 
on a Kinetex PFP core-shell column measuring 150 × 2.1 mm and having a particle size of 
1.7 μm. Relative standard deviations for within-day and between-day repeatability were 
from 0.4 to 3.0% and 0.6 to 3.1%, respectively, and recoveries for all ACNs analyzed were 
97.8–102.6%. Within the range of 0.11–0.14 μg/mL, the LODs were found.
Shim et al. (2014) employed ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) in 
the quick detection of ACN glucosides and free delphinidin in grapes and confirmed its 
potential via tests of accuracy, precision, and linearity. A reversed phase C18 column with 
a PDA detector was used for the UHPLC separation. The column dimensions were 2 μm in 
particle size, 2 mm in injection diameter, and 100 mm in length. For delphinidin aglycone, 
the UHPLC studies had LODs and quantification ranging from 0.08 to 0.26 mg/kg, and for 
nine different kinds of ACN glucosides, they varied from 0.07 to 0.65 mg/kg. Delphinidin 
aglycone and individual ACN glucosides had a precision of less than 9.42% both intra- 
and inter-day.

188
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
(Continued)
TABLE 10.1
Role of HPLC in Analysis of Anthocyanins
S. No.
Anthocyanin
Source
Extraction 
Method
Procedure
Reference
1
Delphinidin-3-O-
sambubioside 
(3.65–96.99%)
Roselle (Hibiscus 
sabdariffa L.)
HPLC-UV
Mobile phase: Water acidified with 0.2% formic acid and 
acetonitrile (90:10 v/v).
Flow rate: 0.8 mL/min
Injection volume: 15 μL
Column: Reversed phase C18 analytical column 
(dimension 150 × 4.6 mm × 5 μm) at 45°C.
Khan et al. (2022)
2
Cyanidin-3-glucoside 
(86.49%)
Blackberries
HPLC-DAD-MS
Mobile phase: A (ultrapure water:formic acid – 99:1 v/v) 
and B (acetonitrile: A – 80:20 v/v)
Flow rate: 1 mL/min
Injection volume: 10 μL
Column: Reversed phase C18 analytical column 
(dimension 4.6 × 150 mm × 5 mm) at 40°C.
Paun et al. (2022)
Delphinidin-3-O-
glucoside (40.64%)
Black grape skin
3
Malvidin-3-O-glucoside 
(1.25–3.56 μg/mL)
Blueberry extracts of 
Gardenblue, 
Britewell, and 
Baldwin
HPLC-DAD
Mobile phase: A (acetonitrile 10–20%) and B (3% formic 
acid water)
Flow rate: 0.8–1.5 mL/min
Injection volume: 8, 10 and 15 μL
Column: Reversed phase C18 analytical column 
(dimension 250 × 4.6 mm × 5 μm) at 20–30°C.
Zhou et al. (2021)
4
Cyanidin (7.7–20.4%)
Red Greek wine grape
Cultivars (Vitis 
vinifera L.)
HPLC-DAD
Mobile phase: A (aqueous formic acid 5%) and B 
(methanol)
Flow rate: 1 mL/min
Injection volume: 5 μL
Column: Reversed phase C18 analytical column 
(dimension 250 × 4.6 mm × 5 μm) at 40°C.
Kalogiouri et al. 
(2022)
5
Malvidin (41%), 
delphinidin (33.1%), 
and petunidin 
(17.3%)
Blueberries
HPLC-DAD-MS
Mobile phase: A (water:formic acid:acetonitrile – 80:10:3 
v/v/v) and B (water:formic acid:acetonitrile – 10:10:50 
v/v/v)
Flow rate: 1 mL/min
Injection volume: 2 μL
Column: Reversed phase C18 analytical column 
(dimension 250 × 4.6 mm × 5 μm) at 25°C.
Li et al. (2016)

189
HPLC and UHPLC Analysis of Anthocyanins
TABLE 10.1
Role of HPLC in Analysis of Anthocyanins
S. No.
Anthocyanin
Source
Extraction 
Method
Procedure
Reference
6
Cyanidin-3-glucoside
Blackberries, 
mulberries, and 
bilberries
HPLC-DAD-MS
Mobile phase: A (20% methanol + 0.5% TFA) and B 
(methanol)
Flow rate: 1.5 mL/min
Injection volume: 20 μL
Column: Reversed phase C18 analytical column 
(dimension 125 × 4 mm × 5 μm) at 40°C.
Ştefănuţ et al. 
(2011)
Cyanidin-3-rutinoside
Blackthorn extract
7
Anthocyanins and 
anthocyanidin 
compounds
Purple-fleshed sweet 
potatoes
HPLC-DAD/
ESI-MS/MS
Mobile phase: A (formic acid in water 1% v/v) and B 
(acetonitrile containing 1% formic acid)
Flow rate: 0.23 mL/min
Injection volume: 10–20 μL
Column: Reversed phase C18 analytical column 
(dimension 250 × 2 mm × 4 μm) maintained at 35°C.
Truong et al. 
(2010)
8
Cyanidin-3-rutinoside
Blackcurrant (black 
color berries on 
ripening)
HPLC-UV-MS
Mobile phase: A (4% phosphoric acid + water) and B 
(acetonitrile)
Flow rate: 1 mL/min
Injection volume: 20 μL
Column: Reversed phase C18 analytical column 
(dimension 125 × 4 mm × 5 μm) at 40°C.
Rubinskiene et al. 
(2005)
Delphinidin-
3-rutinoside
Blackcurrant (reddish 
color berries on the 
onset of ripening)
9
Cyanidin-3-glucoside 
(2–217 ppm)
Blood orange juices
HPLC-UV-Vis
Mobile Phase: A (water:formic aid – 9:1) and B 
(water:formic acid:acetonitrile – 4:1:5)
Flow rate: 1 mL/min
Injection volume: 20 μL
Column: Restek Pinnacle ODS (dimension 250 × 4.6 mm × 
5 μm) at 40°C.
Mondello et al. 
(2000)
10
Anthocyanins
Fruits and berries
HPLC-ESI-MS/
MS
Mobile phase: A (5% aqueous formic acid) and B 
(methanol)
Flow rate: 1 mL/min
Column: Reversed phase C18 analytical column 
(dimension 250 × 4.6 mm × 5 μm).
Wu and Prior 
(2005)
  (Continued)

190
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Following rapid extraction processes and sample preparation, Dias et al. (2012) devel­
oped the first validated UHPLC-PDA approach for detecting major ACNs in Euterpe olera­
cea fruits. The separation took less than 17 minutes on a 1.8 m HSS C18 column using 
acetonitrile gradient elution and 5% formic acid. The validation technique relied on total 
error and accuracy metrics. Matrix calibration fared better than non-matrix calibration in 
terms of accuracy. The qualities of the primary ACNs, cyanidin-3-glucoside, and cyanidin-
3-rutinoside, were tested, including trueness (<6.76% relative bias), repeatability (<4.6% 
RSD), intermediate precision (~5.3% RSD), selectivity, response function, and linearity. The 
compounds were evaluated at concentrations of 1–48 μg/mL. Dias et al. (2011) developed a 
rapid UHPLC-DAD-ESI-MS method for the quantification of ACNs from E. oleracea fruits 
harvested at different times of the year in the floodplains of the eastern Amazonian region 
from Abaetetuba region (Brazil). There was a striking similarity in the ACN profiles of 
the various extracts. In every stage of maturity, cyanidin-3-glucoside and cyanidin-
3-rutinoside were the main components in almost the same amounts, except in the 
first stage, when the ACN content was too low to be quantified. Nevertheless, cyanidin-
3-rutinoside became more prevalent than cyanidin-3-glucoside at the final stage of devel­
opment. Cyanidin, on the other side, was shown to decrease as samples matured. Stage 4 
has the highest ACN concentration (Table 10.2).
(Continued)
TABLE 10.2
Role of UHPLC in the Analysis of Anthocyanins
S. No.
Anthocyanin
Source
Extraction 
Method
Procedure
Reference
1
Pelargonidin-3-
glucoside (2856.1 
± 21.23 μg/g) 
and cyanidin-3-
glucoside (2978 
± 25.67 μg/g)
Berries (Nitraria 
tangutorum B., 
Hippophae 
rhamnoides L., 
Lycium ruthenicum 
M., Lycii fructus, 
Rosa xanthina L., 
and Rubuscor 
chorifolius L.)
UHPLC-
Quadruple-
Orbitrap 
MS
Mobile phase: 0.9% v/v formic 
acid in water and methanol
Flow rate: 0.4 mL/min
Injection volume: 2 μL
Column: Accucore aQ C18 
column (dimension 
150 × 2.1 mm × 2.6 μm) 
at 30°C.
Jia et al. 
(2020)
2
Cyanidin-3-
rutinoside (374.7 
± 3.9 μg/100 g)
Acai berry and dry 
blueberry extracts
UHPLC-UV
Mobile phase: A (5% formic 
acid) and B (acetonitrile)
Flow rate: 0.55 mL/min
Injection volume: 2 μL
Column: Kinetex PFP core-
shell column (dimension 
150 × 2.1 mm × 1.7 μm) 
maintained at 50°C.
Fibigr et al. 
(2017)
3
Anthocyanin 
glucosides (9) 
and delphinidin
Grapes
UHPLC-PDA
Mobile phase: A 
(water:formic acid – 95:5 v/v) 
and B (acetonitrile:formic 
acid – 95:5 v/v)
Flow rate: 0.4 mL/min
Injection volume: 3 μL
Column: Reverse phase C18 
column (dimension 100 × 2 
mm × 2 μm) maintained at 
40°C.
Shim et al. 
(2014)

191
HPLC and UHPLC Analysis of Anthocyanins
10.4  Conclusion
In food science, there is a wide variety of analytical approaches to quantifying and char­
acterizing ACNs, including both established and new methods, each with its own set of 
pros and cons. For an in-depth investigation of ACNs, the gold standard is still HPLC 
using reverse phase columns made of silica, including C18 and phenyl. ACNs can now be 
precisely quantified and identified with the use of UHPLC and new packing technologies, 
such as core-shell columns, which greatly improve the speed, resolution, and efficiency of 
these analyses. The analysis’ goals will determine the detection methods used, which may 
range from UV detectors to MS and high-resolution MS. UV detectors, such as a PDA or a 
DAD, are useful tools for identifying different kinds of ACNs while doing profiling pro­
cesses. On the other hand, MS and HRMS are highly regarded for their exceptional accu­
racy in differentiating between ACN molecules that have structural similarities, allowing 
for thorough profiling. Improving current methods, investigating new detection technolo­
gies, and creating integrated systems to analyze ACNs comprehensively, accurately, and 
efficiently are all areas where future research should concentrate, to improve food indus­
try quality assurance procedures.
References
Ahmed NU, Park JI, Jung HJ, Yang TJ, Hur Y, Nou IS. Characterization of dihydroflavonol 
4-reductase (DFR) genes and their association with cold and freezing stress in Brassica rapa. 
Gene. 2014;550(1):46–55.
Al-Khayri JM, Asghar W, Akhtar A, Ayub H, Aslam I, Khalid N, Al-Mssallem MQ, Alessa FM, 
Ghazzawy HS, Attimarad M. Anthocyanin delivery systems: A critical review of recent research 
findings. Applied Sciences. 2022;12(23):12347.
TABLE 10.2  (Continued)
Role of UHPLC in the Analysis of Anthocyanins
S. No.
Anthocyanin
Source
Extraction 
Method
Procedure
Reference
4
Cyanidin-3-
glucoside and 
cyanidin-3-
rutinoside (1–48 
μg/mL)
Euterpe oleracea 
fruits
UHPLC-PDA-
ESI-MS/MS
Mobile phase: A 
(water:formic acid – 95:5) 
and B (acetonitrile)
Flow rate: 400 μL/min
Injection volume: 5 μL
Column: UPLC HSS C18 
column (dimension 
100 × 2.1 mm × 1.8 μm).
Dias et al. 
(2012)
5
Cyanidin-3-
glucoside 
(73 mg/g)
E. oleracea fruits
UHPLC-
DAD-
ESI-MS/MS
Mobile phase: A (5% formic 
acid in water) and B 
(acetonitrile)
Column: HSS C18 
column (dimension 
100 × 2.1 mm × 1.8 μm).
Dias et al. 
(2011)

192
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Amanah HZ, Joshi R, Masithoh RE, Choung MG, Kim KH, Kim G, Cho BK. Nondestructive measure­
ment of anthocyanin in intact soybean seed using Fourier transform near-infrared (FT-NIR) and 
Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy. Infrared Physics & Technology. 2020;111:103477.
Avula B, Katragunta K, Osman AG, Ali Z, John Adams S, Chittiboyina AG, Khan IA. Advances in 
the chemistry, analysis and adulteration of anthocyanin rich-berries and fruits: 2000–2022. 
Molecules. 2023;28(2):560.
Badawy ME, El-Nouby MA, Kimani PK, Lim LW, Rabea EI. A review of the modern principles and 
applications of solid-phase extraction techniques in chromatographic analysis. Analytical 
Sciences. 2022;38(12):1457–87.
Bar-Ya’akov I, Tian L, Amir R, Holland D. Primary metabolites, anthocyanins, and hydrolyzable tan­
nins in the pomegranate fruit. Frontiers in Plant Science. 2019;10:453016.
Bele AA, Khale A. An overview on thin layer chromatography. International Journal of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences and Research. 2011;2(2):256.
Cappellini F, Marinelli A, Toccaceli M, Tonelli C, Petroni K. Anthocyanins: From mechanisms of reg­
ulation in plants to health benefits in foods. Frontiers in Plant Science. 2021;12:748049.
Castañeda-Ovando A, de Lourdes Pacheco-Hernández M, Páez-Hernández ME, Rodríguez JA, Galán-
Vidal CA. Chemical studies of anthocyanins: A review. Food Chemistry. 2009;113(4):859–71.
Cooper-Driver GA. Contributions of Jeffrey Harborne and co-workers to the study of anthocyanins. 
Phytochemistry. 2001;56(3):229–36.
Custodio-Mendoza JA, Aktaş H, Zalewska M, Wyrwisz J, Kurek MA. A review of quantitative and 
topical analysis of anthocyanins in food. Molecules. 2024;29(8):1735.
da Costa CT, Horton D, Margolis SA. Analysis of anthocyanins in foods by liquid chromatogra­
phy, liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry and capillary electrophoresis. Journal of 
Chromatography A. 2000;881(1–2):403–10.
De Pascual-Teresa S, Sanchez-Ballesta MT. Anthocyanins: From plant to health. Phytochemistry 
Reviews. 2008;7:281–99.
Dias A, Chataigné G, Rozet E, Oliveira A, Silva A, Rogez H, Quetin-Leclercq JA rapid UHPLC-
DAD-ESI-MSn method for anthocyanins quantification from Euterpe oleracea fruits har­
vested at different times. In MS in Food and Feed 2011 Jun 9. https://orbi.uliege.be/handle/
2268/95197.
Dias AL, Rozet E, Chataigné G, Oliveira AC, Rabelo CA, Hubert P, Rogez H, Quetin-Leclercq J. A 
rapid validated UHPLC–PDA method for anthocyanins quantification from Euterpe oleracea 
fruits. Journal of Chromatography B. 2012;907:108–16.
Drabińska N, Marcinkowska MA, Wieczorek MN, Jeleń HH. Application of sorbent-based extraction 
techniques in food analysis. Molecules. 2023;28(24):7985.
Enaru B, Drețcanu G, Pop TD, Stǎnilǎ A, Diaconeasa Z. Anthocyanins: Factors affecting their stability 
and degradation. Antioxidants. 2021;10(12):1967.
Escribano-Bailón MT, Alcalde-Eon C, Muñoz O, Rivas-Gonzalo JC, Santos-Buelga C. Anthocyanins 
in berries of maqui [Aristotelia chilensis (mol.) Stuntz]. Phytochemical Analysis: An International 
Journal of Plant Chemical and Biochemical Techniques. 2006;17(1):8–14.
Fredes C, Yousef GG, Robert P, Grace MH, Lila MA, Gómez M, Gebauer M, Montenegro G. Anthocyanin 
profiling of wild maqui berries (Aristotelia chilensis [Mol.] Stuntz) from different geographical 
regions in Chile. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture. 2014;94(13):2639–48.
Garcia-Oliveira P, Pereira AG, Fraga-Corral M, Lourenço-Lopes C, Chamorro F, Silva A, Garcia-Perez 
P, Barroso F, Barros L, Ferreira IC, Simal-Gandara J. Identification, quantification, and method 
validation of anthocyanins. Chemistry Proceedings. 2021;5(1):43.
Giusti MM, Wrolstad RE. Acylated anthocyanins from edible sources and their applications in food 
systems. Biochemical Engineering Journal. 2003;14(3):217–25.
Guine RP, Goncalves F, Lerat C, El Idrissi T, Rodrigo E, Correia PM, Goncalves JC. Extraction of phe­
nolic compounds with antioxidant activity from beetroot (Beta vulgaris L.). Current Nutrition & 
Food Science. 2018;14(4):350–7.
He J, Giusti MM. Anthocyanins: Natural colorants with health-promoting properties. Annual Review 
of Food Science and Technology. 2010;1:163–87.

193
HPLC and UHPLC Analysis of Anthocyanins
Horbowicz M, Kosson R, Grzesiuk A, Dębski H. Anthocyanins of fruits and vegetables-their occur­
rence, analysis and role in human nutrition. Journal of Fruit and Ornamental Plant Research. 
2008;68(1):5–22.
Houghton A, Appelhagen I, Martin C. Natural blues: Structure meets function in anthocyanins. 
Plants. 2021;10(4):726.
Jia Q, Dong Q, Sang Q, Wang M, Zhang H, Zhou Y, Li Y, Xiao T, Hu P, Zhang S. Rapid qualita­
tive and quantitative analyses of anthocyanin composition in berries from the Tibetan Plateau 
with UPLC-quadruple-Orbitrap MS and their antioxidant activities. European Journal of Mass 
Spectrometry. 2020;26(4):301–8.
Kalogiouri NP, Karadimou C, Avgidou MS, Petsa E, Papadakis EN, Theocharis S, Mourtzinos I, 
Menkissoglu-Spiroudi U, Koundouras S. An optimized HPLC-DAD methodology for the 
determination of anthocyanins in grape skins of red Greek winegrape cultivars (Vitis vinifera 
L.). Molecules. 2022;27(20):7107.
Khan NH, Abdulbaqi IM, Darwis Y, Aminu N, Chan SY. A stability-indicating HPLC-UV method 
for the quantification of anthocyanin in Roselle (Hibiscus sabdariffa L.) spray-dried extract, oral 
powder, and lozenges. Heliyon. 2022;8(3).
Khoo HE, Azlan A, Tang ST, Lim SM. Anthocyanidins and anthocyanins: Colored pigments as food, 
pharmaceutical ingredients, and the potential health benefits. Food & Nutrition Research. 2017, 
61(1), doi: 10.1080/16546628.2017.1361779.
Kong JM, Chia LS, Goh NK, Chia TF, Brouillard R. Analysis and biological activities of anthocyanins. 
Phytochemistry. 2003;64(5):923–33.
Koponen JM, Happonen AM, Mattila PH, Törrönen AR. Contents of anthocyanins and ellagitan­
nins in selected foods consumed in Finland. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 
2007;55(4):1612–9.
Lao F, Sigurdson GT, Giusti MM. Health benefits of purple corn (Zea mays L.) phenolic compounds. 
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety. 2017;16(2):234–46.
Lasoń-Rydel M, Olejnik TP, Ławińska K, Niculescu MD. Methods of purification of raw polyphenol 
extract for chromatographic analysis. Technologia i Jakość Wyrobów. 2021;66.
Leonarski E, Cesca K, de Oliveira D, Zielinski AA. A review on enzymatic acylation as a promis­
ing opportunity to stabilizing anthocyanins. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition. 
2023;63(24):6777–96.
Li D, Meng X, Li B. Profiling of anthocyanins from blueberries produced in China using HPLC-
DAD-MS and exploratory analysis by principal component analysis. Journal of Food 
Composition and Analysis. 2016;47:1–7.
Liu Y, Tikunov Y, Schouten RE, Marcelis LF, Visser RG, Bovy A. Anthocyanin biosynthesis and deg­
radation mechanisms in Solanaceous vegetables: A review. Frontiers in Chemistry. 2018;6:52.
Mattioli R, Francioso A, Mosca L, Silva P. Anthocyanins: A comprehensive review of their chemical 
properties and health effects on cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases. Molecules. 
2020;25(17):3809.
Mazza G. Anthocyanins in Fruits, Vegetables, and Grains. CRC Press; 2018.
Mohammadi Pour P, Fakhri S, Asgary S, Farzaei MH, Echeverría J. The signaling pathways, and 
therapeutic targets of antiviral agents: Focusing on the antiviral approaches and clinical per­
spectives of anthocyanins in the management of viral diseases. Frontiers in Pharmacology. 
2019;10:485177.
Mondello L, Cotroneo A, Errante G, Dugo G, Dugo P. Determination of anthocyanins in blood 
orange juices by HPLC analysis. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis. 
2000;23(1):191–5.
Montilla EC, Arzaba MR, Hillebrand S, Winterhalter P. Anthocyanin composition of black carrot 
(Daucus carota ssp. sativus var. atrorubens Alef.) cultivars antonina, beta sweet, deep purple, 
and purple haze. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2011;59(7):3385–90.
Müller D, Schantz M, Richling E. High-performance liquid chromatography analysis of anthocya­
nins in bilberries (Vaccinium myrtillus L.), blueberries (Vaccinium corymbosum L.), and corre­
sponding juices. Journal of Food Science. 2012;77(4):C340–5.

194
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Ockermann P, Headley L, Lizio R, Hansmann J. A review of the properties of anthocyanins and their 
influence on factors affecting cardiometabolic and cognitive health. Nutrients. 2021;13(8):2831.
Passeri V, Koes R, Quattrocchio FM. New challenges for the design of high value plant products: 
Stabilization of anthocyanins in plant vacuoles. Frontiers in Plant Science. 2016;7:181384.
Paun N, Botoran OR, Niculescu VC. Total phenolic, anthocyanins HPLC-DAD-MS determination 
and antioxidant capacity in black grape skins and blackberries: A comparative study. Applied 
Sciences. 2022;12(2):936.
Pereira J, Zhou GH, Zhang WG. Effects of rice flour on emulsion stability, organoleptic character­
istics and thermal rheology of emulsified sausage. Journal of Food and Nutrition Research. 
2016;4(4):216–22.
Pojer E, Mattivi F, Johnson D, Stockley CS. The case for anthocyanin consumption to promote human 
health: A review. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety. 2013;12(5):483–508.
Riaz M, Zia-Ul-Haq M, Saad B. Anthocyanins and Human Health: Biomolecular and Therapeutic 
Aspects. Springer; 2016.
Rodriguez-Saona LE, Allendorf ME. Use of FTIR for rapid authentication and detection of adultera­
tion of food. Annual Review of Food Science and Technology. 2011;2:467–83.
Rubinskiene M, Jasutiene I, Venskutonis PR, Viskelis P. HPLC determination of the composi­
tion and stability of blackcurrant anthocyanins. Journal of Chromatographic Science. 
2005;43(9):478–82.
Rusli H, Putri RM, Alni A. Recent developments of liquid chromatography stationary phases for 
compound separation: From proteins to small organic compounds. Molecules. 2022;27(3):907.
Salehi B, Sharifi-Rad J, Cappellini F, Reiner Ž, Zorzan D, Imran M, Sener B, Kilic M, El-Shazly M, 
Fahmy NM, Al-Sayed E. The therapeutic potential of anthocyanins: Current approaches based 
on their molecular mechanism of action. Frontiers in Pharmacology. 2020;11:1300.
Samtiya M, Aluko RE, Dhewa T, Moreno-Rojas JM. Potential health benefits of plant food-derived 
bioactive components: An overview. Foods. 2021;10(4):839.
Shim YS, Kim S, Seo D, Park HJ, Ha J. Rapid method for determination of anthocyanin gluco­
sides and free delphinidin in grapes using UHPLC. Journal of Chromatographic Science. 
2014;52(7):629–35.
Simmonds MS. Flavonoid–insect interactions: Recent advances in our knowledge. Phytochemistry. 
2003;64(1):21–30.
Sivamaruthi BS, Kesika P, Chaiyasut C. The influence of supplementation of anthocyanins on obesity-
associated comorbidities: A concise review. Foods. 2020;9(6):687.
Skogerson K, Wohlgemuth G, Barupal DK, Fiehn O. The volatile compound BinBase mass spectral 
database. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011;12:1–5.
Speer H, D’Cunha NM, Alexopoulos NI, McKune AJ, Naumovski N. Anthocyanins and human 
health—A focus on oxidative stress, inflammation and disease. Antioxidants. 2020;9(5):366.
Springob K, Nakajima JI, Yamazaki M, Saito K. Recent advances in the biosynthesis and accumula­
tion of anthocyanins. Natural Product Reports. 2003;20(3):288–303.
Ştefănuţ MN, Căta A, Pop R, Moşoarcă C, Zamfir AD. Anthocyanins HPLC-DAD and MS character­
ization, total phenolics, and antioxidant activity of some berries extracts. Analytical Letters. 
2011;44(18):2843–55.
Sui X. Impact of Food Processing on Anthocyanins. Springer; 2016.
Sun MF, Jiang CL, Kong YS, Luo JL, Yin P, Guo GY. Recent advances in analytical methods for deter­
mination of polyphenols in tea: A comprehensive review. Foods. 2022;11(10):1425.
Tena N, Martín J, Asuero AG. State of the art of anthocyanins: Antioxidant activity, sources, bioavail­
ability, and therapeutic effect in human health. Antioxidants. 2020;9(5):451.
Thuy NM, Minh VQ, Ben TC, Thi Nguyen MT, Ha HT, Tai NV. Identification of anthocyanin com­
pounds in butterfly pea flowers (Clitoria ternatea L.) by ultra performance liquid chromatogra­
phy/ultraviolet coupled to mass spectrometry. Molecules. 2021;26(15):4539.
Truong VD, Deighton N, Thompson RT, McFeeters RF, Dean LO, Pecota KV, Yencho GC. 
Characterization of anthocyanins and anthocyanidins in purple-fleshed sweet potatoes by 
HPLC-DAD/ESI-MS/MS. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2010;58(1):404–10.

195
HPLC and UHPLC Analysis of Anthocyanins
Tuzimski T. Thin-layer chromatography (TLC) as pilot technique for HPLC. Utilization of retention 
database (RF) vs. eluent composition of pesticides. Chromatographia. 2002;56:379–81.
Veberic R, Jakopic J, Stampar F, Schmitzer V. European elderberry (Sambucus nigra L.) rich in sugars, 
organic acids, anthocyanins and selected polyphenols. Food Chemistry. 2009;114(2):511–5.
Wallace TC, Giusti MM, editors. Anthocyanins in Health and Disease. CRC Press; 2013.
Warner LM, editor. Handbook of Anthocyanins: Food Sources, Chemical Applications, and Health 
Benefits. Nova Publishers; 2015.
Wu X, Beecher GR, Holden JM, Haytowitz DB, Gebhardt SE, Prior RL. Concentrations of anthocya­
nins in common foods in the United States and estimation of normal consumption. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2006;54(11):4069–75.
Wu X, Prior RL. Systematic identification and characterization of anthocyanins by HPLC-ESI-MS/
MS in common foods in the United States: Fruits and berries. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry. 2005;53(7):2589–99.
Yabré M, Ferey L, Somé IT, Gaudin K. Greening reversed-phase liquid chromatography methods 
using alternative solvents for pharmaceutical analysis. Molecules. 2018;23(5):1065.
Zhang Z, Yang K, Yan C, Wu M, Wang Y. Revealing the differences in phenolics in different parts of 
Taraxacum mongolicum using UPLC-MS/MS. Phytochemistry Letters. 2023;56:13–8.
Zhou Y, Long S, Xu Q, Yan C, Yang J, Zhou Y. Optimization and application of HPLC for simultane­
ous separation of six well-known major anthocyanins in blueberry. Preparative Biochemistry & 
Biotechnology. 2021;51(10):961–70.

196
11
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
Kadriye Nur Kasapoglu, Eda Nur Ayar-Sumer, Gamze Hanbeyoglu-Akturk, 
Evren Demircan, and Beraat Ozcelik
11.1  Introduction
Anthocyanins are bioactive substances classified as colored flavonoids within the phenolic 
group. These water-soluble pigments naturally occur in a variety of plant-based foods, 
including fruits, vegetables, flowers, seaweeds, grains, and legumes, imparting colors 
ranging from red and purple to blue and occasionally black. As members of the flavonoid 
family, anthocyanins can be classified into various categories based on their specific molec­
ular composition (Constantin & Istrati, 2022). First, the common anthocyanidin deriva­
tives are the basic anthocyanidin compounds are delphinidin, cyanidin, pelargonidin, 
petunidin, peonidin, and malvidin. Additionally, these primary pigments found in 
plants can undergo glycosylation, where sugar moieties attach to them, forming delphin­
idin-3-glucoside, cyanidin-3-glucoside, pelargonidin-3-glucoside, petunidin-3-glucoside, 
peonidin-3-glucoside, and malvidin-3-glucoside. Furthermore, anthocyanins can undergo 
acylation, where organic acid groups like caffeic or malonic acid are attached, resulting in 
more stable compounds such as caffeoylated and malonylated anthocyanins. The acylated 
forms offer greater stability and color characteristics whereas glycosylated anthocyanins 
are the most common with higher stability and water solubility (Singh et al., 2020; Tena, 
Martín & Asuero, 2020).
Due to their antioxidant properties, anthocyanins can neutralize free radicals, thereby 
protecting cells from oxidative stress. This protective action is associated with mitigating 
the effects of aging, inflammation, and various diseases, including cancer, cardiovascu­
lar ailments, and neurodegenerative conditions (Tena, Martín & Asuero, 2020). However, 
despite their health-promoting qualities, anthocyanins exhibit low bioavailability. Only 
1–2% of consumed anthocyanins are absorbed in their original form, whereas the major­
ity are transformed into other bioactive compounds by enzymes and gut microbiota (Guo 
et al., 2024).
The extraction of anthocyanins from plant materials can be achieved through the utili­
zation of diverse techniques, which require optimizing the yield and preserving the stabil­
ity of the extracted compounds. Conventional solvent extraction involves the dissolution 
of anthocyanins in polar solvents such as water, ethanol, or methanol, which are usually 
acidified. The subsequent solvent evaporation then concentrates the pigments. Although 
conventional solvent extraction might be effectively used, it is a time-consuming process 
that requires careful solvent selection to maintain stability. On the other hand, ultrasound-
assisted extraction has gained popularity in recent years, mostly because of its efficiency 
and shorter extraction times. The ultrasound waves disrupt cell walls, thus improving 

197
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
solvent penetration and lowering the solvent needed (da Silva Oliveira et al., 2022). Similarly, 
microwave-assisted extraction employs microwave energy to rapidly heat the plant mate­
rial, thereby accelerating the extraction of anthocyanins (Nonglait & Gokhale, 2024). 
Pressurized-liquid extraction involves using high pressure and temperature to extract 
anthocyanins with high extraction yields and shorter extraction time. Supercritical liquid 
extraction is an environmentally friendly extraction option that uses supercritical CO2 as 
a solvent, frequently with ethanol (Hsieh-Lo, Castillo-Herrera & Mojica, 2020). Another 
method, enzyme-assisted extraction, uses enzymes like pectinases and cellulases to break 
down plant cell walls, aiming to release anthocyanins from the food matrix. Pulsed elec­
tric field extraction involves the application of short electric field bursts to disrupt cell 
walls, thus releasing anthocyanins (Singh et al., 2022).
After the extraction, a purification step might be necessary depending on the analysis 
method. The determination and further identification of anthocyanins is a critical step for 
them to be accurately studied for their biological and chemical properties (Lucci, Saurina 
& Núñez, 2017). Because of the complex structure of anthocyanin-rich plants, selective 
extraction of anthocyanin is a challenge. In order to obtain a purified anthocyanin extract, 
it is necessary to remove other components such as phenolics, carotenoids, and structural 
components, including proteins and sugars, from the extract. Column chromatography, 
membrane separation, high-speed counter-current chromatography, high-performance 
preparative liquid chromatography (LC), and solid-phase extraction are used for purifi­
cation, thereby refining the anthocyanin extract (Tan et al., 2022). The extraction method 
needs to be designed in detail based on the plant type, aimed compounds and their yield 
and aimed purity. Additionally, column chromatography, countercurrent chromatography, 
and high-speed counter-current chromatography are employed to eliminate impurities.
The most common methods for analyzing anthocyanins include LC coupled with 
various detectors. Among all the techniques available, the LC coupled with mass spec­
trometry (MS) methods is undoubtedly the most widely used analytical technique for 
anthocyanins. The invention of MS marked a significant breakthrough in analytical sci­
ence, facilitating enhanced speed and precision in quantitative and qualitative analysis. 
The introduction of anthocyanins to MS, where ionization of molecules occurs, allows 
for the measurement of mass-to-charge (m/z). This facilitates the identification process by 
providing information regarding the molecular weight and fragmentation patterns of the 
molecules (Singh et al., 2020). Furthermore, the HPLC-DAD-MS method has been widely 
used for anthocyanin analysis (Avula et al., 2023), while reversed-phase (RP) HPLC has 
also been used by retaining the anthocyanins on the stationary phase and eluting them. 
For example, Paun et al. (2022) identified several anthocyanins present in grape skins 
using RP-HPLC-DAD-MS, with delphinidin-3-O-glucoside identified as the most abun­
dant anthocyanin.
One of the most crucial stages in MS-based metabolite analysis is ionization. The char­
acterization of anthocyanins has been achieved through the utilization of electrospray 
ionization (ESI), matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI), and atmospheric 
pressure chemical ionization (APCI) in conjunction with mass analyzers. Besides, the 
employment of ESI with LC-MS is the most common for the analysis of anthocyanins 
in fruit samples (Oliveira et al., 2022). Tandem MS (MS/MS) comprises two MS phases. 
The initial MS phase is employed for the separation of anthocyanins based on their mass, 
and the second MS fragments ions thereby creating unique structural information (Ayar-
Sümer et al., 2024). For instance, the anthocyanin profile of red cabbage has been analyzed 
using HPLC-DAD/ESI-MS (Pereira et al., 2024), while the detailed anthocyanin profile of 
purple sweet potato has been examined using HPLC-DAD/ESI-MS2 (Jiang et al., 2020).

198
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Single quadrupole MS (Q-MS) analysis of anthocyanins is based on m/z, but it has 
limited structural analysis capabilities. However, Triple Quadruple MS (QqQ-MS) is a 
much more popular MS system for the quantification of anthocyanins, offering superior 
sensitivity and selectivity through the targeting of ions utilizing the multiple reaction 
monitoring (MRM) modes. LC-ESI-MS/MS with MRM ion mode has been employed 
for the analysis of apple anthocyanins, resulting in the identification and quantifi­
cation of several compounds (Illiano et al., 2022). Additionally, Quadrupole time-of-
flight (Q-TOF)-MS provides high-resolution MS with high sensitivity and accuracy. It 
is widely used for both qualitative and quantitative analysis of anthocyanins (Gonzales 
et al., 2015).
A comprehensive list of LC-MS methods has been employed for the identification and 
quantification of anthocyanins in a variety of fruits, vegetables, edible flowers, food 
matrices, and seaweeds discussed in this chapter. Some of the methods are less com­
monly employed than others, including ultra-performance LC (UHPLC)-Q-Orbitrap high-
resolution MS (HRMS), UPLC VION IMS QTOF MS/MS, UHPLC-TimsTOF Pro-MS, 
UPLC-APCI-MS/MS, and LC–LTQ-MS, UHPLC-HRMS. These methods are employed for 
the analysis of anthocyanin-rich fruits and vegetables and a topic that will be elaborated 
upon in subsequent titles (Bao et al., 2023; Hameed et al., 2023; Ingemann Berentzen et al., 
2024; Kodikara et al., 2024; Mirzazadeh et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2021). The anthocyanin 
composition of various flowers, including hibiscus, perilla leaves, and edible flowers, was 
investigated using a range of analytical instruments, including UHPLC-ESI+-Obitrap-MS, 
UHPLC-QQQ/MS, LC-ESI-ion trap (IT)-TOF-MS, rapid resolution LC (RRLC)-Q/TOF-MS, 
UPLC−triple-quadrupole (TQ)-MS/MS (Mejía et al., 2023; Shahtouri et al., 2024; Zheng 
et al., 2020). Each of the methods possesses distinctive advantages based on sensitivity, 
selectivity, and structural information, which has been discussed in further detail in the 
following titles. In addition to their presence in plants, anthocyanins are also found in 
various food matrices, where they are either naturally occurring or intentionally added for 
enrichment purposes. Consequently, this chapter also considers the utilization of LC-MS 
for the analysis of anthocyanins in a range of processed food matrices. LC-PDA-ESI-MS/
MS, HPLC-PDA-ESI-MS/MS, UHPLC-QE-MS, and LC-MSn have been developed for 
matrices analysis in addition to LC-MS and LC-MS/MS (Ai et al., 2021; Kostka et al., 2020; 
Tasinov et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a–e). Constantin and Istrati (2022) reviewed advanced 
techniques for extracting and quantifying anthocyanins. They found that combining LC 
with LC-MS with ESI or QTOF provides more accurate quantification of anthocyanins in 
complex food samples.
11.2  LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
11.2.1  Fruits
LC-MS analysis of anthocyanins in fruits is conducted by researchers for several key rea­
sons. One of the primary purposes is to identify the different anthocyanin compounds 
present. Anthocyanins, which come in various forms like cyanidin and delphinidin, are 
often bound to sugar molecules. LC-MS allows researchers to accurately distinguish and 
identify these compounds by analyzing their molecular weight and structure (Singh et al., 
2020). This technique has been thoroughly validated and has provided detailed anthocy­
anin profiles across many fruit types. For instance, Gamage and Choo (2023) examined 

199
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
the impact of diverse extraction techniques (hot water, ultrasound, microwave, and 
pectinase-assisted extraction) on anthocyanins derived from black goji berries. The indi­
vidual anthocyanins present in the extracts were identified by LC-MS, with an Agilent 
1290 Infinity LC system in conjunction with a Q-TOF mass spectrometer operating in 
positive ESI mode. A mass range of 600–1100 m/z was scanned, and compounds were 
separated using a C18 column under specific gradient elution conditions. Eight antho­
cyanins were identified in each extract, and a comparison of the amounts of these antho­
cyanins detected in the different extraction methods was also possible with LC-MS. This 
may facilitate an understanding of the reasons behind the final total anthocyanin content 
differences among the extracts. In a recent study, Kodikara et al. (2024) employed a novel 
UHPLC-HRMS metabolomic approach to rapidly and comprehensively analyze the phe­
nolic compounds present in a range of fruit species, including blueberry, raspberry, black­
berry, cranberry, and cherry. The HRMS conditions utilized a heated ESI source to create 
a charged solvent spray. A spray voltage of 3500 V for positive ions and 2200 V for nega­
tive ions was applied, while the ion transfer tube and vaporizer were maintained at 325 
and 350°C, respectively. Data acquisition included full scan mode (m/z 150–900) at 120,000 
resolution, followed by MS2 fragmentation at 30,000 resolution. The study introduced a 
novel UHPLC-HRMS system that markedly enhances the sensitivity, accuracy, and effi­
ciency of fruit phenolic compound analysis. A significant advancement is the system’s 
capacity to offer highly sensitive and selective detection, enabling the precise identifica­
tion of 66 phenolic compounds, including anthocyanins, even in complex fruit matrices. 
Furthermore, the system reduced the analysis time to 20 minutes, representing a substan­
tial advancement over older methods that required considerably longer. Incorporating a 
biphenyl column enhanced the separation and resolution of phenolic compounds, facili­
tating unambiguous differentiation of analyte peaks. The mass spectrometer’s capacity 
to fragment parent ions for distinctive identification guaranteed precise quantification of 
the compounds, establishing this system as a formidable instrument for comprehensive 
metabolomic analysis.
LC-MS is a highly sensitive method widely used to quantify anthocyanins in fruits. This 
quantification is crucial because the concentration of anthocyanins can vary significantly 
depending on factors like the variety and ripeness of the fruit. LC-MS provides precise and 
reliable data, helping researchers better understand anthocyanin levels under different 
conditions. This makes the technique essential for both scientific studies and commercial 
applications (Qu et al., 2021). Ma et al. (2022) quantified 32 distinct types of anthocyanins 
using UPLC-ESI-MS/MS with an ESI Turbo Ion-Spray interface operating in both positive 
and negative ion modes. The ESI source parameters included a turbo spray ion source, 
a source temperature of 550°C, and an ion spray voltage of 5500 V (in positive mode), 
with a 35-psi curtain gas and high-collision gas settings. The level of anthocyanins in the 
fruits of four distinct blueberries (Vaccinium sp.) cultivars (Gardenblue, Legacy, Misty, and 
Brightwell) varied at stages of development. The main findings were that different culti­
vars had different anthocyanin content. Delphinidins were identified as the primary con­
tributors to the dark blue color of the berries, whereas malvidins and petunidins played a 
secondary role in the development of color. The study also revealed a notable elevation in 
anthocyanin concentration as the fruits underwent maturation, manifesting across all four 
cultivars. In the initial, young fruit stage, the anthocyanin levels were relatively low. As 
the fruits entered the color-transition stage, at which point the berries changed from green 
to red or purple, the anthocyanin content increased. The highest levels were recorded in 
fully mature fruits, which contributed to the deepening of their color. These findings illus­
trate a clear correlation between fruit maturation and anthocyanin accumulation, with an 

200
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
increase in anthocyanin concentration occurring as the fruits ripened and their color inten­
sified. Additionally, Li et al. (2021) studied the development of fruit color in Rubus chingii. 
This involved investigating anthocyanins and carotenoids using LC-MS/MS, detecting fla­
vanol-anthocyanins, and revealing novel biosynthesis pathways. Anthocyanins were sep­
arated using UPLC with an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3 column and analyzed using an AB 
Triple TOF 5600plus MS system in negative ion mode (−4.5 kV, 550°C, ±5 ppm, DP: 100 V, 
CE: 10 V) and positive ion mode (+5.5 kV, 600°C, ±5 ppm, DP: 100 V, CE: 10 V), with MS/
MS acquisition mode (CE: 40 ± 20 V, IRD: 67, IRW: 25). Then, it is found that the fruit color 
dramatically changes as the fruit ripens in R. chingii. The observed color transformation 
can be attributed to the synthesis of anthocyanins and carotenoids and the crucial genes/
proteins involved in their production, which have been precisely measured using LC-MS/
MS. Consequently, it may elucidate the processes underlying fruit coloration and enhance 
fruit quality in raspberry breeding program. Kim et al. (2021) focused on optimizing a 
pectinase-assisted extraction method for mulberry to enhance the anthocyanins extrac­
tion yield. An LC-MS analysis was conducted utilizing a UPLC system C18 column and a 
flow rate of 0.35 mL/min. The mass range scanned was 50–1500 m/z, and MS/MS spectra 
were collected at collision energies of 10–40 eV. These conditions facilitated the identifica­
tion of metabolites in the mulberry extracts. Table 11.1 lists the MS methods (conditions 
and validation parameters) for the analysis of anthocyanins in fruits.
LC-MS is facilitating the comprehension of the biosynthesis and transport processes of 
anthocyanins in fruits. For instance, Qu et al. (2021) explored the browning of litchi peri­
carp during post-harvest storage, focusing on the balance between anthocyanin biosyn­
thesis and degradation. Researchers used transcriptomic, proteomic, and LC-MS analyses 
to conduct the investigation. The litchi extracts were subjected to analysis using an AB 
Sciex QTRAP® 6500 LC-MS/MS. The separation was conducted at 40°C with a flow rate 
of 0.35 mL/min on an ACQUITY BEHC18 column. Gradient elution was employed, utiliz­
ing a solution of 0.1% formic acid in water and methanol at a ratio of 95:5–5:95 (v/v), for 
14 minutes. The effluent was connected to an ESI QTRAP-MS in positive ion mode, with 
a Turbo Ion-Spray interface at 550°C, 5500 V, and 35-psi curtain gas. During storage at 
20°C, transcriptomic analysis revealed 4769 genes related to both anthocyanin biosynthe­
sis and degradation, and the proteomic analysis identified 84 proteins with significant 
roles in anthocyanin biosynthesis and degradation. Besides, LC-MS analysis detected 
29 anthocyanins and their derivatives in the litchi pericarp, with cyanidin 3-O-glucoside 
and cyanidin 3-O-rutinoside being the most dominant. After six days of storage, levels 
of five anthocyanins, including cyanidin 3-O-galactoside, showed a significant decline, 
whereas cyanidin 3-O-(6-O-malonyl-beta-D-glucoside) increased. The study concluded 
that although anthocyanin biosynthesis remained active during the browning process, 
degradation was the dominant force, leading to the rapid loss of the fruit’s red color. These 
findings offer valuable insights for developing strategies to prevent browning in post-
harvest litchi. In addition, Zhang et al. (2022a) investigated the accumulation of anthocya­
nins in red and white Prunus tomentosa cherries using metabolomic and transcriptomic 
analyses. To better understand the coloration mechanism of P. tomentosa, LC-MS/MS 
analysis was performed on the anthocyanin compounds in mature fruit. The analysis of 
cherry extracts was conducted using an LC-ESI-MS/MS with a Waters ACQUITY BEH C18 
column. The effluent was connected to an API 6500 Q TRAP UPLC/MS/MS, which was 
operated in both positive and negative ion modes. The key parameters were as follows: 
a source temperature of 550°C, an ion spray voltage of 5.5 kV, a curtain gas pressure of 
35 psi, and a high collision gas pressure. Thus, the study identified 15 anthocyanins in 
samples, the red cherries exhibited significantly elevated anthocyanin concentrations, with 

201
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
(Continued)
TABLE 11.1
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Fruits
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Ancient apple 
cultivars (Malus 
domestica)
Petunidin-3-O-glucoside
Peonidin-3-O-glucoside
Various concentrations 
among the samples
LC-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive/negative 
ionization
MRM ion mode
Ion spray voltage 4.5 kV
Source temperature: 380°C
Illiano et al. 
(2022)
Bilberries (urine and 
plasma samples) 
(Vaccinium 
myrtillus L.)
Malvidin-3-O-glucoside
Peonidin-3-O-glucoside
Petunidin-3-O-glucoside
16.6–34.8 ng/mL
17.5–44.8 ng/mL
17.5–43.0 ng/mL
UHPLC-MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
LOD: 1.2 to 2.3 ng/mL
LOQ 4.1 to 8.1 ng/mL
Kaiser et al. 
(2020)
Black goji berry 
(Lycium ruthenicum)
Petunidin-3-O-rutinoside(trans-p-coumaroyl)-5-O-glucoside
Delphinidin-3-O-rutinoside(coumaroyl)-5-O-glucoside
Petunidin-3-O-glucoside-5-O-glucoside 
Delphinidin-3-O-glucoside(coumaroyl)-5-O-glucoside
Delphinidin-3-O-rhamnoside-5-O-glucoside 
Petunidin-3-O-rutinoside(coumaroyl-(4-O-glucoside))-
5-O-glucoside
Petunidin derivative
Malvidin-3-O-rutinoside(coumaroyl)-5-O-glucoside
Petunidin-3-O-
rutinoside (trans-p-
coumaroyl)-5-O-
glucoside accounting 
for more than 80% of 
total anthocyanins
LC-MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Declustering potential 40 eV
Collision energy 5 eV
Collision cell entrance potential 10 eV
Desolvation gas temperature of 300°C
Mass Range: 600–1100 m/z,
Gamage and 
Choo (2023)
Blackberry skin 
(Rubus fruticosus)
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Delphinidin-3-xyloside
Cyanidin-3-O-arabinoside
Cyanidin-3-malonyl-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-rutinoside
Cyanidin-3-glucoside 
was the main 
component (86.49%)
LC-Q-TOF/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage 4200 v
Mass range: 100-1500 m/z
Paun et al. 
(2022)
Blackberry (R. 
fruticosus)
Cyanidin-3-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-arabinoside
Cyanidin-3-rutinoside
Delphinidin
Delphinidin-3-glucoside
Malvidin-3-glucoside
368.4 µg/g DW 
134.8 µg/g DW
110.4 µg/g DW 
26.74 µg/g DW 
18.02 µg/g DW 
90.63 µg/g DW
UHPLC-HRMS
ESI mode: positive ionization
3500 V for positive ions
2200 V for negative ions
Ion transfer tube: 325°C
Vaporizer: 350°C
Mass range: m/z 150–900
Kodikara 
et al. (2024)

202
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
(Continued)
TABLE 11.1  (Continued)
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Fruits
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Blueberry 
(Vaccinium sp.)
Cyanidin 3-O-(6-O-malonyl-beta-D-glucoside) Cyanidin 
3-O-arabinoside
Cyanidin 3-O-galactoside
Cyanidin 3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-O-rutinoside
Delphinidin 3,5-O-diglucoside (Delphin) Delphinidin
3-O-(6″-O-malonyl)-beta-D-glucoside Delphinidin
3-O-arabinoside
Delphinidin 3-O-galactoside
Delphinidin 3-O-glucoside
Malvidin 3-O-arabinoside
Malvidin 3-O-galactoside
Malvidin 3-O-glucoside
Malvidin 3-O-rutinoside
Pelargonidin 3-O-(6-O-malonyl-beta-D-glucoside)
Pelargonidin 3-O-arabinoside
Pelargonidin 3-O-galactoside
Pelargonidin 3-O-glucoside
Pelargonidin 3-O-rutinoside
Pelargonidin 3,5-O-diglucoside (Pelargonin) Peonidin
3,5-O-diglucoside
Peonidin 3-O-(6-O-malonyl-beta-D-glucoside) Peonidin
3-O-glucoside
Peonidin 3-O-arabinoside
Peonidin 3-O-galactoside
Peonidin 3-O-rutinoside
Petunidin 3,5-diglucoside
Petunidin 3-O-(6-O-malonyl-beta-D-glucoside) Petunidin
3-O-arabinoside
Petunidin 3-O-galactoside
Petunidin 3-O-glucoside
Petunidin 3-O-rutinoside
Not directly stated in 
mg/g, relative peak 
areas available for 
different stages
UPLC-ESI-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive/ negative 
ionization
Ion spray voltage: 5500 V
Source temperature: 550°C
Mass range: m/z 287–639
Ma et al. 
(2022)

203
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
(Continued)
TABLE 11.1  (Continued)
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Fruits
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Blueberry cultivars 
(Vaccinium sp.)
Malvidin 3-O-glucoside
Delphinidin 3-O-glucoside
Pelargonidin 3-O-(6-O-malonyl-beta-D-glucoside)
Petunidin 3-O-rutinoside
Petunidin 3-O-arabinoside
Petunidin 3-O-galactoside
Petunidin 3,5-diglucoside
Petunidin 3-O-(6-O-malonyl-beta-D-glucoside)
Petunidin 3-O-glucoside
Delphinidin 3,5-O-diglucoside, delphinidin 
3-O-(6”-O-malonyl)-beta-D-glucoside
Delphinidin 3-O-arabinoside
Delphinidin 3-O-galactoside
Delphinidin 3-O-glucoside
Malvidin 3-O-arabinoside
Malvidin 3-O-galactoside
Malvidin 3-O-glucoside
Malvidin 3-O-rutinoside
N/A
UPLC-ESI-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive/ negative 
ionization
Ion spray voltage 5500 V (positive ion)
Mass range: 100–1500 m/z
LOD: 0.02 µg/mL
Ma et al. 
(2022)
Blueberry 
(Vaccinium spp.)
Cyanidin-3-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-arabinoside
Delphinidin,
Delphinidin-3-glucoside
Malvidin-3-glucoside
Petunidin
Peonidin-3-glucoside
165.5 µg/g DW 
23.79 µg/g DW 
45.36 µg/g DW 
94.44 µg/g DW
252.5 µg/g DW 
14.04 µg/g DW
108.4 µg/g DW
UHPLC-HRMS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Voltage: 3500 V
Ion transfer tube: 325°C
Vaporizer: 350°C
Mass range: m/z 150–900
Kodikara 
et al. (2024)
Cherry (Prunus 
spp.)
Cyanidin-3-rutinoside
Cyanidin-3-glucoside
Pelargonidin
Peonidin
Peonidin-3-glucoside
315.6 µg/g DW 
66.06 µg/g DW 
42.46 µg/g DW 
644.2 µg/g DW 
225.8 µg/g DW
UHPLC-HRMS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Voltage: 3500 V
Ion transfer tube: 325°C
Vaporizer: 350°C
HESI, m/z 150–900
Kodikara 
et al. (2024)

204
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
(Continued)
TABLE 11.1  (Continued)
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Fruits
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Cherry sweet (red 
and yellow) 
(Prunus avium L.)
Cyanidin-3-O-rutinoside
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Pelargonidin-3-glucoside
3909.32 µg/g FW
13.54 µg/g FW
0.23 µg/g FW
LC-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Source voltage: 4 kV
Capillary temperature: 275°C
Mass range: m/z 100–1000
Wang et al. 
(2023a)
Cherry (red and 
white) (Prunus 
tomentosa Thunb.)
Pelargonidin 3-O-arabinoside
Pelargonidin 3-O-glucoside
Pelargonidin 3-O-(6-O-malonyl-beta-D-glucoside)
Pelargonidin 3-O-galactoside
Pelargonidin 3-O-rutinoside
Peonidin 3-O-galactoside
Peonidin 3-O-rutinoside
Peonidin 3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-O-rutinoside
Cyanidin 3-O-glucoside
Delphinidin 3-O-rutinoside
N/A
LC-ESI-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Ion spray voltage: 5.5 kV
Source temperature: 550°C
MRM transitions monitored for each 
anthocyanin
Zhang et al. 
(2022a)
Cocoa pod husk 
(Theobroma cacao)
3-Caffeoylpelargodinin 5-glucoside
Not directly stated in 
mg/g, relative colors 
available. The 
concentration 
differences were 
indicated by a change 
in color from blue 
to red.
HPLC- ESI-QTOF-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Collision energy: 40 eV
Source: Dual AJS ESI
Vcap: 3000 V
Fragmentation voltage: 175 V
Mass range: 100–1100 m/z
Gallegoet al. 
(2022)
Cranberry 
(Vaccinium 
macrocarpon)
Petunidin
Peonidin
Peonidin-3-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-glucoside
Delphinidin
Delphinidin-3-glucoside
829.7 µg/g DW 
1.068 µg/g DW
81.53 µg/g DW 
17.44 µg/g DW 
10.36 µg/g DW 
2.467 µg/g DW
UHPLC-HRMS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Voltage: 3500 V
Ion transfer tube: 325°C
Vaporizer: 350°C
Mass range: m/z 150–900
Kodikara 
et al. (2024)

205
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
(Continued)
TABLE 11.1  (Continued)
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Fruits
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Grape Skins (Vitis 
sp. Othello cultivar)
Malvidin-Delphinidin
Malvidin-Cyanidin
Delphinidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-galactoside
Delphinidin-3-O-glucoside
Delphinidin-3-(6-O-acetylglucoside)
Malvidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-glucoside-Ethyl-coumaroyl
Malvidin-3-glucoside-8- vinyl(epi)catechin Malvidin-3-
(6-O-acetylglucoside) pyruvate Malvidin-Petunidin
Delphinidin-3-O-
glucoside was the 
major (40.64%)
RP-HPLC-DAD-MS
ESI mode: Positive ionization
Capillary voltage 4200 V
Mass range: 100–1500 m/z
Paun et al. 
(2022)
Kadsura coccinea 
fruits
Cyanidin 3,5-O-diglucoside
Cyanidin 3-O-(6-O-malonyl-beta-D-glucoside)
Cyanidin 3-O-arabinoside
Cyanidin 3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-O-rutinoside
Delphinidin 3,5-O-diglucoside (Delphin)
Delphinidin 3-O-glucoside
Delphinidin 3-O-rutinoside
Malvidin 3-O-glucoside
Pelargonidin 3-O-glucoside
Pelargonidin 3-O-rutinoside
Peonidin 3,5-O-diglucoside
Peonidin 3-O-galactoside
Peonidin 3-O-glucoside
Peonidin 3-O-rutinoside
Petunidin 3-O-glucoside
Petunidin 3-O-rutinoside
0.47–0.55 μg/g
0.01 μg/g
0.02 μg/g
30.90–33.10 μg/g
55.90–59.00 μg/g
0.52–0.53 μg/g
11.30–11.40 μg/g
1.56–1.83 μg/g
0.07 μg/g
0.15–0.18 μg/g
1.47–1.61 μg/g
0.02 μg/g
0.02 μg/g
0.46–0.53 μg/g
3.79–4.41 μg/g
0.03 μg/g
0.07–0.08 μg/g
UPLC/MS/MS
ESI mode: Positive ionization
Ion spray voltage: 5500 V
Source temperature: 550°C
Huang 
(2021)
Lingonberry 
(Vaccinium 
vitis-idaea L.)
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-galactoside
Cyanidin-3-O-arabinoside
N/A
UHPLC-QqQ-MS/MS
ESI mode: Positive/negative 
ionization
Capillary voltage:
4 kV for positive ion mode
3.5 kV for negative ion mode
Xu et al. 
(2024a)

206
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
(Continued)
TABLE 11.1  (Continued)
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Fruits
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Litchi (Litchi 
chinensis Sonn.)
Cyanidin 3,5-O-diglucoside
Cyanidin 3-O-(6-O-malonyl-beta-D-glucoside) Cyanidin 
3-O-arabinoside
Cyanidin 3-O-galactoside
Cyanidin 3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-O-rutinoside
Cyanidin 3-O-sambubioside
Cyanidin 3-O-sophoroside
Cyanidin-3-O-xyloside
Cyanidin-3-rutinoside 5-glucoside
Delphinidin 3-O-glucoside
Delphinidin 3-O-rutinoside
Delphinidin-3-rutinoside 5-glucoside
Pelargonidin 3-O-(6-O-malonyl-beta-D-glucoside)
N/A
HPLC-ESI-MS/MS
ESI mode: Positive ionization
Ion spray voltage (IS): 5500 V
Source temperature: 550°C
Qu et al. 
(2021)
Litchi aril (flesh) 
and pericarp (L. 
chinensis)
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-rutinoside
Cyanidin-3-O-
rutinoside: 
21.95 μg/g DW in arils
UPLC-ESI-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Curtain gas: 35 psi
Ion spray voltage: 5500 V
Temperature: 550°C
Wang et al. 
(2023b)
Mulberry (Morus 
alba L.)
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Delphinidin hexoside
Pelargonidin 3-glucoside, Delphinidin 3-(6″-p-coumaroyl 
glucoside)
Cyanidin 3-rutinoside
The concentration 
differences were 
indicated by a change 
in color from blue 
to red
UPLC-Q-TOF MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage: 3.0 kV
Desolvation temperature 400°C
Mass range: 50–1200 m/z
Kim et al. 
(2021)
Passion fruit 
(Passiflora edulis 
Sims)
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-(6″-p-coumaroyl)-glucoside Delphinidin-3-O-
(6″-p-coumaroyl)-glucoside Delphinidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-(6″-p-coumaroyl)-glucoside (repeated in a 
different form)
Cyanidin-3-O-hexoside-rhamnoside
Delphinidin-di-C,C-hexosyl-O-rhamnoside
737.69 mg/100 g
789.90 mg/100 g
774.82 mg/100 g
85.72 mg/100 g
98.44 mg/100 g
500.43 mg/100 g
47.96 mg/100 g
LC-QTOF/ESI-MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage: 2500V
Cone voltage: 30V
Temperature: 300°C
Mass range: m/z 285–759
Siniawska 
and 
Wojdyło 
(2023)

207
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
(Continued)
TABLE 11.1  (Continued)
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Fruits
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Pistacia fruit 
(Pistacia 
lentiscus L.)
Delphinidin dihexoside 1
Delphinidin dihexoside 2
Delphinidin 3-O-galactoside
Delphinidin 3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-O-galactoside
Delphinidin pentoside 1
Cyanidin 3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin pentoside
Delphinidin pentoside 2
122 mg/100 g DW
248 mg/100 g DW
513 mg/100 g DW
646 mg/100 g DW
319 mg/100 g DW
71 mg/100 g DW
201 mg/100 g DW
103 mg/100 g DW
37 mg/100 g DW
UHPLC-QqQ-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Sheath gas: 60 a.u
Voltage: 1500 V
Vaporizer Temperature: 450°C
Capillary Temperature: 150°C
LOD: 0.08 mg/100 g
LOQ: 0.23 mg/100 g
Aissat et al. 
(2022)
Red pistachio 
drupes (Pistacia 
vera L.)
Cyanidin 3-O-β-d-galactopyranoside
Cyanidin pentoside
N/A
HPLC-DAD-ESI-MSn
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary: ±2287 V
CID: 1.2 V
Nebulizer temperature: 365°C
Mass range: m/z 100–2000
Ersan et al. 
(2016)
Cherry (P. tomentosa 
Thunb.)
Pelargonidin 3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-O-rutinoside
Pelargonidin 3-O-rutinoside
N/A
LC-ESI-MS/MS
Mass range: 100–1500 m/z
LOD: 0.02 µg/mL
Zhang et al. 
(2022a)
Raspberry (Rubus 
idaeus)
Cyanidin-3-rutinoside
Cyanidin-3-glucoside
Pelargonidin
Peonidin-3-glucoside
Delphinidin
Delphinidin-3-glucoside
310.3 µg/g DW
65.63 µg/g DW 
30.45 µg/g DW 
117.5 µg/g DW 
5.204 µg/g DW 
2.18 µg/g DW
UHPLC-HRMS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Voltage: 3500 V
Ion transfer tube: 325°C
Vaporizer: 350°C
Mass range: m/z 150–900
Kodikara 
et al. (2024)
Chinese raspberry 
(Rubus chingii)
Cyanidin-3-(6″-cinnamoyl)glucoside (Epi)Afzelechin(4α->8)
pelargonidin 3,5-O-diglucoside
(Epi)Catechin(4α->8)pelargonidin 3-O-glucopyranoside
(Epi)Afzelechin(4α->8)pelargonidin 3-O-sophoroside
(Epi)Afzelechin(4α->8)pelargonidin 3-O-glucopyranosid
Pelargonidin 3-O-glucoside
10–115 µg/g FW
UPLC-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Voltage: +5.5 kV
Temperature 600°C
Mass Range: 100–2000 m/z
Li et al. 
(2021)

208
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
TABLE 11.1  (Continued)
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Fruits
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Sumac fruits (Rhus 
coriaria L.)
Delphinidin-3,5-diglucoside
Delphinidin-3-galactoside
Cyanidin-3-glucoside
Petunidin-3-glucoside
Pelargonidin-3-glucoside
15.51–20,889.81 mg/kg 
DE
HPLC-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage: 4000 V
Ionization source temperature: 350°C 
The gas flow: 12 L/min
Nebulizer pressure: 55 psi
Mazzara 
et al. (2023)
Sumac fruits (R. 
coriaria L.)
Petunidin-3-O-galactoside
Petunidin
Cyanidin
N/A
HPLC-DAD-ESI-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Temperature: 325°C
Capillary voltage: 1.5 kV
Viola et al. 
(2024)
Staghorn sumac 
fruits (Rhus hirta 
L.)
7-O-methyl-cyanidin-3-O-(2″galloyl)-galactoside
7-O-methyl-cyanidin-3-O-galactoside)
7-O-methyl-delphinidin-3-O-(2″galloyl)-galactoside 
Cyanidin-3-O-(2″galloyl)-galactoside
Peonidin
N/A
UPLC–MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage: 4 kV
Cone voltage: 50–70 V
Source temperature: 150°C
Gas temperature: 400°C
MS scans: 400–1000 amu
Peng et al. 
(2016)
Staghorn sumac 
fruits (Rhus hirta 
L.)
Peonidin-3-O-galloyl-hexose
Cyanidin-3-glucoside
2 novel anthocyanidins:
(449 Da)-hexose-3-O-galloyl-hexose
(419 Da)-hexose-3-O-galloyl-hexose
270 ± 6.53 mg/g DW
LC-ESI-MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage: 32.5 kV
Needle voltage 5 kV
Temperature 350°C
Wu et al. 
(2013)

209
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
pelargonidin and cyanidin derivatives representing the most prevalent derivatives. The 
study concluded that the observed color difference is attributable to anthocyanin content 
and gene regulation, offering insights for breeding. In a further study, Wang et al. (2023b) 
investigated the deficiency of anthocyanin biosynthesis in litchi aril through the utiliza­
tion of UPLC-ESI-MS/MS and transcriptomic analysis. The synthesis of anthocyanins is a 
complex process that involves the action of multiple enzymes and is typically regulated by 
transcription factors. In litchi, while the pericarp (skin) accumulates anthocyanins such as 
cyanidin-3-O-glucoside and cyanidin-3-O-rutinoside, the aril (flesh) lacks visible antho­
cyanins despite having the early precursors for anthocyanin biosynthesis. LC-MS/MS was 
employed to profile the metabolites involved in the anthocyanin biosynthesis pathway in 
both arils and pericarps. The presence of intermediates such as phenylalanine and cyani­
din confirmed the functionality of the initial steps of anthocyanin biosynthesis in the aril. 
LC-MS/MS was instrumental in identifying the point of obstruction in the anthocyanin 
biosynthesis pathway, specifically at the glycosylation stage where cyanidin is converted 
to stable anthocyanins.
Another important use of LC-MS is in studying the bioavailability and health effects of 
anthocyanins. Known for their antioxidant properties and potential health benefits, antho­
cyanins are of great interest to researchers. LC-MS helps track how these compounds are 
metabolized in the body, giving valuable insights into their bioavailability and effective­
ness. This is especially useful in research focused on the nutritional and therapeutic ben­
efits of fruits rich in anthocyanins (Avula et al., 2023). In a recent study, Xu et al. (2024a) 
employed high-resolution UHPLC-QqQ-MS/MS to profile anthocyanins in lingonberry 
and to evaluate their potential biological activity. Kaiser et al. (2020) developed and vali­
dated a method for the analysis of anthocyanin metabolites in plasma using UHPLC-MS. 
The MS system was a Thermo Scientific LTQ XL Iontrap MSn with ESI in positive mode. 
The spray voltage was 4 kV, the capillary temperature 325°C, with capillary/tube lens volt­
ages of 9 V/40 V for anthocyanidins and 15 V/60 V for anthocyanins. The method dem­
onstrated acceptable sensitivity for the detection of metabolites, providing insights into 
anthocyanin bioavailability.
LC-MS also serves as a key tool for indicating fruit ripening and post-harvest changes. 
Anthocyanin levels can fluctuate during storage and ripening, and LC-MS helps to monitor 
these changes. This information is critical for optimizing storage conditions and improv­
ing the color and nutritional quality of fruit products, which is essential for maintaining 
fruit quality during transportation and storage (Qu et al., 2021). Gallego et al. (2022) ana­
lyzed the ripening process of cacao pod husks to avoid late-stage metabolic changes, assist­
ing in the determination of the optimal harvest time and the standardization of practices. 
The deployment of chemical markers and visual indicators may prove instrumental in the 
standardization of the process. Therefore, the biochemical disturbance was analyzed in 
cacao pod husks, resulting in the detection of five potential biochemical markers, one of 
which was 3-caffeoylpelargodinin 5-glucoside. The biochemicals, including anthocyanin, 
were identified through the use of an LC-MS coupled to a Q-TOF 6545 mass spectrometer, 
equipped with an ESI source. The analysis was conducted in positive ionization mode, 
with a mass scan range from 100 to 1100 m/z. Additionally, MS/MS analysis was conducted 
with a collision energy of 40 eV, to facilitate metabolite fragmentation and identification. 
The findings helped to avoid late-stage metabolic changes that harm bean quality, helping 
to determine the optimal harvest time and standardize practices. The study of Wang et al. 
(2023a) concentrated on the biosynthesis of anthocyanins and carotenoids in red and yel­
low sweet cherry cultivars at different stages of ripening and in the post-harvest period. 
The objective was to examine the discrepancies in pigment accumulation, particularly 

210
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
anthocyanins and carotenoids, and the associated gene regulation throughout the fruit 
ripening process. The study emphasized the pivotal role of anthocyanins in the formation 
of red cherry color and the regulatory genes that are responsible for pigment biosynthesis 
during ripening. The utilization of TripleTOF 5600 LC-MS/MS enabled the precise quan­
tification necessary to monitor these alterations, thereby providing insights into fruit rip­
ening, post-harvest management and potential applications in the agricultural and food 
industries for the improvement of fruit quality through the implementation of controlled 
ripening and color development. In another study, Chen et al. (2023a) examined the impact 
of non-thermal treatments, encompassing ultrasound, pulsed light, and magnetic energy, 
on fruit quality, anthocyanin accumulation, and gene expressions associated with antho­
cyanin biosynthesis in blood oranges during low-temperature storage. Furthermore, the 
researchers employed LC-MS with AB Triple TOF 5600plus to identify and quantify antho­
cyanins. Fourteen individual anthocyanins were identified and quantified through HPLC 
using LC-MS, which played a crucial role in ensuring precise identification and quantifica­
tion of the anthocyanins.
LC-MS metabolic profiling of different varieties of Pistacia vera L. nuts (family 
Anacardiaceae) from Spain revealed cyanidin-3-O-galactoside, cyanidin-3-O-glucoside, 
and peonidin-3-O-hexoside (Ojeda-Amador et al., 2019). On the other hand, Turkish red 
pistachio hulls were found to contain cyanidin 3-O-β-d-galactopyranoside and cyanidin 
pentoside. Aissat et al. (2022) examined the phenolic composition of Pistacia lentiscus L. 
fruits at varying stages of ripening, with a particular emphasis on anthocyanins, utiliz­
ing UHPLC-MS/MS (6430 QqQ MS, with MRM in either positive or negative mode) and 
LC-NMR methodologies. As the fruits ripened, there was a notable increase in anthocy­
anin content, which became the dominant phenolic class in the fully ripe black fruits, with 
concentrations reaching 1273–1373 mg/100 g DW. The most abundant anthocyanin in the 
ripe stages was delphinidin derivative, which constituted 88% of the total anthocyanin 
content. In contrast, the prevalence of flavonols and flavanols, which were more abundant 
in the initial unripe stages, diminished as the fruits matured. The UHPLC-MS/MS system 
enabled the precise identification and quantification of these anthocyanins, revealing the 
presence of nine different anthocyanins, including cyanidin and delphinidin derivatives, 
with high sensitivity and accuracy. The study emphasized the potential of P. lentiscus L. 
fruits as a rich source of anthocyanins, with applications in nutraceuticals and the food 
industry, particularly as natural colorants, while also underscoring the importance of rip­
ening in enhancing anthocyanin content.
Beyond its scientific use, LC-MS plays a crucial role in the food and agriculture indus­
tries, especially for quality control. By measuring the anthocyanin content in fruits, LC-MS 
helps in breeding programs designed to produce fruit varieties with higher anthocyanin 
levels. This is particularly valuable for boosting the nutritional value and market appeal of 
commercial fruit products (Singh et al., 2020). Kostka et al. (2020) generated pomegranate 
extracts from commercially available pomegranate juice, not from concentrate, and ana­
lyzed focusing on its anthocyanin and copigment fractions. An HPLC system coupled 
with an HCT Ultra Ion Trap mass, which featured an ESI source was used. Hence, the 
HPLC-PDA-ESI-MS/MS analysis identified and showed that the combination of antho­
cyanins, copigments, and other polymeric compounds results in a synergistic effect. 
Furthermore, the extract was found to notably decrease induced oxidative stress in human 
HepG2 cells. The research concludes that pomegranate extract (thus juice) shows promis­
ing potential for use in functional foods and nutraceuticals designed to alleviate oxidative 
stress. Besides, another study employed LC-QTOF/ESI-MS to analyze polyphenolic com­
pounds in purple passion fruit, identifying seven anthocyanins. The fruit’s antioxidant, 

211
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
anti-inflammatory, and anti-diabetic activities were evaluated, thereby providing insights 
into its potential as a functional food ingredient (Siniawska & Wojdyło, 2023). Aronia mela­
nocarpa L. is another fruit rich in polyphenolic compounds and anthocyanins. The juice 
samples of aronia were found to vary considerably depending on factors such as the har­
vesting period and the processing techniques employed. LC QTOF/ESI-MS was employed 
in both negative and positive ionization modes in full scan mode with voltage ramping 
from 0.3 to 2 V. Collision-induced fragmentation was conducted using argon as the col­
lision gas. The optimal LC-MS parameters were as follows: capillary voltage of 2500 V, 
cone voltage of 30 V, capillary temperature of 300°C, and source heater temperature of 
100°C. Tasinov et al. (2022) used LC-PDA-ESI-MS/MS to identify and quantify bioactive 
compounds in juices, ensuring they meet health claims. MS analysis was performed using 
an LTQ Orbitrap with an ESI source. Key parameters were a 4 kV source voltage, 20 units 
of sheath gas, 10 units of auxiliary gas, 2 units of sweep gas, and a capillary temperature 
of 275°C. Full scan mode was used at a 30,000 resolution (m/z 400), with MS/MS events 
at 15,000 resolution. The study found that factors like harvesting time, processing meth­
ods (e.g., cold pressing and pasteurization), and growing conditions (soil, climate, region) 
influence nutrient content. LC-MS played an important role in accurately identifying and 
quantifying bioactive compounds such as anthocyanins, thereby ensuring product consis­
tency. The study underscored the importance of utilizing LC-PDA-ESI-MS/MS for quality 
control, thereby ensuring that chokeberry juices retained their beneficial properties and 
complied with the standards set by the food and health industries.
11.2.2  Root Vegetables
Table 11.2 summarizes LC-MS analysis of anthocyanins from vegetal sources. Wan et al. 
(2024) compared the anthocyanin profiles of alcohol extracted white, orange, and purple 
sweet potato flesh using an LC-MS/MS system. Chromatographic analysis was conducted 
on a column (1.8 μm, 2.1 mm × 100 mm), and MS was performed with an ion spray volt­
age of +5.5/−4.5 kV, a temperature of 550°C, and ion source gases at 50 psi and 60 psi. The 
curtain gas was set to 35 psi, with de-clustering potentials of ±60 V, MS1 collision energy 
of ±10 V, MS2 collision energy of ±30 V, and a collision energy spread of 15 V. The MS1 
and MS2 TOF masses ranged from 50 to 1250 Da. A total of nine significantly different 
anthocyanins were identified, including three paeonidins. The purple variety exhibited 
74.78 times higher levels of peonidin-3-rhamnoside compared to the white variety and 
13.31 times higher than the orange variety, while the orange variety had 5.62 times more 
than white. Peonidin 3-O-beta-galactopyranoside levels in purple varieties were 16.98 times 
higher than in white and 5.76 times higher than in orange, though differences between 
white and orange were not significant. Additionally, peonidin 3-(6″-p-coumarylglucoside) 
was 2.51 times more abundant in orange than in white varieties. The most notable differ­
ence was observed in delphinidin 3,5-diglucoside, which was significantly higher in the 
purple variety than in the other ones.
Jiang et al. (2020) determined the free anthocyanin content in purple sweet potatoes 
using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) coupled with a 
Thermo Scientific LTQ XL mass spectrometer and a Phenomenex C18 column (250 mm × 
4.6 mm, 5 μm). The system employed gradient elution for separation, and the mass spec­
trometer, equipped with an ESI source, performed scans in positive ion mode (m/z 100–
2000) to identify molecular and fragment ions. The capillary voltage was set at 26 V, with 
nitrogen used as the drying and nebulizing gas at a flow rate of 20.0 L/min and a tempera­
ture of 270°C. Through HPLC-MS analysis, 13 distinct anthocyanins were identified, with 

212
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
TABLE 11.2
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Veggies, Grains and Legumes
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Black bean 
(Phaseolus 
vulgaris L.)
Delphinidin-3-O-glucoside
Petunidin-3-O-glucoside
Malvidin-3-O-glucoside
4.67 mg/g DW
3.23 mg/g DW
1.08 mg/g DW
LC-ESI-MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Interface voltage 4.5 kV
RF-beam voltage 60 V
Spray interface temperature 350°C
Heat block temperature 200°C
Kuasnei 
et al. (2022)
Chilean bean 
(P. vulgaris L.)
Delphinidin 3-O-hexoside
Petunidin 3-O-hexoside
Malvidin-3-O-glucoside
Delphinidin 3-(6″-malonylhexoside)
17.16 mg/100 g of 
dry seeds
HPLC-DAD-Q-TOF-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Ionization voltage + 4500 V
Nebulizer temperature 200°C
Full scan mode
Mass range: m/z 50–1500
Nina et al. 
(2023)
Mung bean (Vigna 
radiata L.)
Peonidin-3-O-arabinoside
Peonidin-3-O-galactoside
Delphinidin-3-O-(6-O-malonyl)-glucoside
Peonidin-3-O-glucoside
Petunidin-3-O-rutinoside
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Delphinidin-3-O-rutinoside
Petunidin-3-O-(6-O-malonyl)-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-galactoside
Petunidin-3-O-glucoside
Delphinidin-3-O-galactoside
Delphinidin-3,5-O-diglucoside
Delphinidin-3-O-arabinoside
Cyanidin-3-O-rutinoside
Cyanidin-3-O-(6-O-malonyl)-glucoside
Delphinidin-3-O-glucoside
Pelargonidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-arabinoside
Pelargonidin-3-O-rutinoside
N/A
LC-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Voltage 5500V
Multiple reaction monitoring mode
Ion source temperature 550°C
Ma et al. 
(2023)
(Continued)

213
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
TABLE 11.2
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Veggies, Grains and Legumes
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Black rice bran 
(Oryza sativa L.)
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
1.63 mg/g DW
HPLC-MS
ESI mode: positive
Leonarski 
et al. (2023)
Red rice bran 
(O. sativa L.)
Cyanidin-3-arabinoside
Petunidin-3-galactoside
Cyanidin-3-galactoside
Delphinidin-3-arabinoside
Delphinidin-3-xyloside
Cyanidin
Cyanidin-3-glucoside
Peonidin-3-galactoside
Peonidin-3-glucoside
Delphinidin
Delphinidin-3,5-diglucoside
Malvidin
Peonidin
Petunidin
Malvidin-3-galactoside
Malvidin-3-glucoside
Delphinidin-3-sambubioside
N/A
UPLC-ESI-QTOF-MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Source temperature 150°C
Desolvation temperature 350°C
Mass range m/z 50–1000
Chen et al. 
(2022)
Sweet potato 
(Ipomoea batatas L.)
Peonidin-3-rhamnoside
Peonidin 3-beta-galactopyranoside
Peonidin 3-(6″-p-coumarylglucoside)
Delphinidin 3,5-diglucoside
N/A
LC-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Spray voltage +5.5 KV
De-clustering potential ±60 V
MS1 collision energy ±10 V
MS2 collision energy ±30 V
Collision energy spread 15 V
Mass range 50–1250 Da
Wan et al. 
(2024)
(Continued)
  (Continued)
Temperature 550°C

214
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
TABLE 11.2
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Veggies, Grains and Legumes
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Purple sweet potato 
(I. batatas L.)
Cyanidin-3-sophoroside-5-glucoside
Peonidin-3-sophoroside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-p-hydroxybenzoyl sophoroside-5-glucoside
Peonidin-3-p-hydroxybenzoyl sophoroside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-(6″-feruloyl sophoroside)-5-glucoside
Peonidin-3-(6″-feruloyl sophoroside)-5-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-caffeoyl-phydroxybenzoyl 
sophoroside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-(6″-caffeoyl sophoroside)-5-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-(6″-caffeoyl-6″′-feruloyl sophoroside)-5-glucoside
Peonidin-3-caffeoyl-phydroxybenzoyl 
sophoroside-5-glucoside
Peonidin-3-caffeoyl sophoroside-5-glucoside
Peonidin-3-(6″-caffeoyl-6″′-feruloyl sophoroside)-5-glucoside
Peonidin-3-(6″- p-hydroxybenzoyl-6″′-feruloyl 
sophoroside)-5-glucoside
N/A
HPLC-DAD/ESI-MS2
ESI mode: positive ionization
Nebulizer temperature 270°C
Mass range m/z 100 and 2000
Jiang et al. 
(2020)
Red-fleshed radish 
(Raphanus sativus L.)
Pelargonidin 3-O-beta-D-glucoside
Cyanidin 3,5-O-diglucoside
Cyanidin 3-O-rutinoside
Pelargonidin
Cyanidin
Peonidin 3-feruloylsophoroside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-O-galactoside
70.29%
9.09%
7.97%
6.60%
5.29%
0.42%
0.33%
LC–ESI–MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Source temperature 500°C
Ion spray voltage 5500 V
Liu et al. 
(2023)
Radish (R. sativus L.) Delphinidin-3-O-(6″-O-alpha-rhamnopyranosyl-beta-
glucopyranoside)
Delphinidin-3-O-rutinoside-5-O-glucoside
Peonidin 3-O-glucoside-5-O-glucoside
N/A
UHPLC–Q–TOF–MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage 3.5 kV
Nozzle voltage 500 V
Fragmentor voltage 110 V
Full scan mode
Mass range 50 and 1000
Wang et al. 
(2023c)
(Continued)
  (Continued)

215
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
TABLE 11.2
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Veggies, Grains and Legumes
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Red-skin onion 
bulbs (Allium 
cepa L.)
Petunidin 3-rutinoside
Delphinidin 3-rutinoside
Cyanidin-3-rutinoside
Delphinidin 3-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-glucoside
Pelargonidin 3-glucoside
N/A
LC–LTQ-MS
ESI mode: positive ion
Mass range 100–2000 m/z
Mirzazadeh 
et al. (2024)
Carrots (Daucus 
carota L. cultivar 
“Guanghong”)
Peonidin-3-O-arabinoside
Peonidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Pelargonidin- 3-O-glucoside
0.01–5 µg/mL
0.001–5 µg/mL
0.002–5 µg/mL
50–5000 µg/mL
UPLC-APCI-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Entrance potential 10 V
Collision cell exit potential 13 V
Multiple reaction monitoring mode 
(MRM)
Ion source temperature 350°C
Bao et al. 
(2023)
Black carrot (Daucus 
carota L.)
Cya-xyl-glc-gal
Cya-xyl-gal
Cya-xyl-glc-gal sinapoly
Cya-xyl-glc-gal feruloyl
Cya-xyl-glc-gal p-coumaroyl
N/A
UHPLC-TimsTOF Pro-MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Ion mobility separation and PASEF
Ingemann 
Berentzen 
et al. (2024)
Red cabbage 
(Brassica oleracea L.)
Cyanidin 3-sophoroside 5-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-(sinapoyl)-diglucoside-5-glucoside isomer
Cyanidin 3-(caffeoyl)(p-coumaroyl)-diglucoside-5- glucoside
Cyanidin 3-(sinapoyl)-triglucoside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-(feruloyl)(feruloyl)-triglucoside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-(feruloyl)(sinapoyl)-triglucoside-5- glucoside
Cyanidin 3-(signapoyl) (sinapoyl)-triglucoside-5- glucoside g
Cyanidin 3-(p-coumaroyl)-diglucoside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-(sinapoyl)-diglucoside-5-glucoside isomer
Cyanidin 3-(feruloyl)-diglucoside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-(feruloyl)-triglucosides-5-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-(feruloyl)(feruloyl)-diglucoside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-(feruloyl) (sinapoyl)-diglucoside-5- glucoside
Cyanidin 3-(sinapoyl)(sinapoyl)-diglucoside-5- glucoside
307 ± 3 mg/100 g
60 ± 1 mg/100 g
27 ± 2 mg/100 g
17.6 ± 0.6 mg/100 g
154 ± 1 mg/100 g
58 ± 1 mg/100 g
46.6 ± 0.7 mg/100
15.2 ± 0.3 mg/100 g
700 ± 6 mg/100 g
262 ± 2 mg/100 g
10 ± 3 mg/100 g
110 ± 2 mg/100 g
140 ± 12 mg/100 g
420 ± 10 mg/100 g
UHPLC-ESI-QTOF-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage 4.5 kV
Full scan mode
Temperature 220°C
Mass range m/z 50–1500
Dong et al. 
(2024)
(Continued)
  (Continued)

216
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
TABLE 11.2
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Veggies, Grains and Legumes
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Red cabbage 
(B. oleracea L.)
Delphinidin-3-sambubioside
Cyanidin-3-sambubioside
Cyanidin-3-diglucoside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-(sinapoyl)-diglucoside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-(caffeoly)(p-coumaroyl)-diglucosides-5-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-(feruloyl)-triglucoside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-(sinapoyl)-triglucoside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-(feruloyl)(sinapoyl)triglucoside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-(sinapoyl)(p-coumaroyl)triglucoside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-(sinapoyl)(sinapoyl)triglucoside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-(p-coumaroyl)-diglucoside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-diglucoside-5-(sinapoyl)-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-(feruloyl)-diglucoside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-(feruloyl)(feruloyl)-diglucoside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-(feruloyl)(sinapoyl)-diglucoside-5-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-(sinapoyl)-(sinapoyl)-diglucoside-5-glucoside
N/A
HPLC-DAD/ESI-MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage: 49 V
Tube lens voltage: 250 V
Capillary temperature: 275°C
Full scan mass (selected ion 
monitoring, SIM)
Relative collision energies: 30 and 60 V
Mass range m/z 300 and 2000
Pereira et al. 
(2024)
Red lettuce (Lactuca 
sativa L.)
Delphinidin 3-(6-p-coumaroylgalactoside)
N/A
UPLC VION IMS QTOF MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage 2 kV
Collision energy 20–55 eV
Source temperature 115°C
Desolvation temperature 450°C
Mass range 50–1000 m/z
Hameed 
et al. (2023)
Okra pod skins 
(Abelmoschus 
esculentus L.)
Delphinidin 3-osambubioside
Cyanidin 3-osambubioside
7.00 ± 0.22 mg/g DW
4.05 ± 0.12 mg/g DW
UHPLC-Q-Orbitrap HRMS
Zhang et al. 
(2021)
  (Continued)

217
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
cyanidin-3-sophoroside-5-glucoside and peonidin-3-sophoroside-5-glucoside identified 
as the main acylated anthocyanins, either monoacyl or diacyl forms. These anthocyanins 
contained one or two p-hydroxybenzoic, caffeic, or ferulic acid groups. Most anthocyanins 
in purple sweet potatoes were conjugated forms of peonidin or cyanidin, primarily glyco­
sylated with glucose and sophorose.
Anthocyanins in red-fleshed radish were analyzed using an LC–ESI–MS/MS system 
consisting of a Shim-pack UFLC SHIMADZU CBM30A HPLC system and an Applied 
Biosystems 6500 quadrupole-linear ion trap (Q TRAP) mass spectrometer (Liu et al., 2023). 
The separation was achieved on a Waters ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3 C18 column (1.8 μm, 
2.1 mm × 100 mm), and the eluate was directed into the ESI-triple Q TRAP-MS. Mass data 
were acquired in positive ion mode and processed with Analyst 1.6.3 software (AB Sciex), 
using turbo spray ionization at 500°C and a spray voltage of 5500 V. Gas settings were 55, 
60, and 25 psi for ion source gases I and II and curtain gas, respectively, with high col­
lision gas pressure. Instrument tuning and calibration were done using polypropylene 
glycol solutions in QQQ and LIT modes. MRM experiments were performed with nitrogen 
as the collision gas at 5 psi. Each period’s MRM transitions were optimized for specific 
metabolites, and metabolite identification was based on primary and secondary spectral 
data compared with the Metware Biotechnology Co., Ltd. database and public sources. 
Quantification of metabolites was conducted through MRM and partial least squares 
discriminant analysis (PLS-DA). Seven anthocyanins were identified, with pelargonidin 
3-O-beta-D-glucoside and pelargonidin being the primary contributors to the color of the 
red-fleshed radish, constituting 70.29% and 6.6% of the total anthocyanin content, respec­
tively. Additionally, four cyanidin derivatives were detected, making up 22.68% of the 
overall anthocyanin content.
In another study, ultrasound-assisted extraction was employed to extract anthocyanins 
from radishes (Wang et al., 2023c) and their identification was performed using UHPLC-
Q-TOF-MS. The UHPLC analysis utilized an Agilent 1290 Infinity II LC system with an 
Eclipse-plus C18 column (150 × 3.0 mm id, 1.8 μm) and a gradient elution. MS was con­
ducted with an Agilent 6545 Q-TOF mass spectrometer in both positive and negative ion 
modes. Full-scan mode covered the m/z range of 50–1000, with two spectra recorded per 
second. The source parameters included a capillary voltage of 3.5 kV, a nozzle voltage of 
500 V in positive ion mode and 1490 V in negative ion mode, a fragmentor voltage of 110 V, 
sprayer pressure of 45 psi, and sheath gas flow rate of 8 L/min. Collision-induced dissocia­
tion voltages were set at 10, 20, and 40 V. The analysis revealed three distinct anthocyanins: 
delphinidin-3-O-(6″-O-alpha-rhamnopyranosyl-beta-glucopyranoside), delphinidin-3-O-
rutinoside-5-O-glucoside, and peonidin 3-O-glucoside-5-O-glucoside.
Mirzazadeh et al. (2024) used LC-MS to identify anthocyanins in red onion skin. Various 
extraction methods were employed, including solvent extraction, ultrasound-assisted 
extraction, subcritical water extraction, microwave-assisted extraction, pulsed electric 
field extraction, supercritical fluid extraction, and high hydrostatic pressure-assisted 
extraction. High hydrostatic pressure extraction yielded the greatest efficiency for antho­
cyanin extraction. LC-MS (Agilent 1200-6410, USA) with a C18 column, a pump connected 
to a photo diode array (PDA), and a linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) mass spectrometer was 
used in gradient mode for compound isolation and identification. Mass scanning was con­
ducted in the range of 100–2000 m/z in positive ion mode. The identified anthocyanins 
included petunidin 3-rutinoside, delphinidin 3-rutinoside, cyanidin-3-rutinoside, delph­
inidin 3-glucoside, cyanidin 3-glucoside, and pelargonidin 3-glucoside.
Extracted Guanghong carrot anthocyanins were identified by using UPLC-APCI-MS/MS 
system (UPLC, SCIEX ExionLC™ AD, Framingham, MA, USA; MS, Applied Biosystems 

218
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
6500 Q TRAP, Foster City, CA, USA) (Bao et al., 2023). A YMC Carotenoid C30 column 
(3 μm, 100 mm × 2.0 mm) was used with a gradient program for the LC, and mass data 
were acquired using a 6500 Q TRAP mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, 
CA, USA) equipped with an atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI) interface in 
positive ion mode. Detection was conducted in MRM mode. The ion source temperature 
was set to 350°C, while the entrance potential (EP) and collision cell exit potential (CXP) 
were set at 10 V and 13 V, respectively. The anthocyanins identified and their concen­
trations were as follows: peonidin-3-O-arabinoside ranged from 0.01 to 5 µg/mL, peoni­
din-3-O-glucoside from 0.001 to 5 µg/mL, cyanidin-3-O-glucoside from 0.002 to 5 µg/mL, 
and pelargonidin-3-O-glucoside ranged from 50 to 5000 µg/mL. In the study of Ingemann 
Berentzen et al. (2024), black carrot anthocyanins were extracted and analyzed using a 
TimsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker, MA, USA), which was coupled with an ELUTE 
UHPLC system outfitted with an Intensity Solo 2, C18 column (2 × 100 mm) (Bruker, MA, 
USA). The compounds were separated via gradient elution, and data collection was per­
formed using the vendor’s 4D metabolomics method, incorporating ion mobility separation 
and PASEF in positive ion mode. The researchers identified five different anthocyanins: 
cya-xyl-glc-gal, cya-xyl-gal, cya-xyl-glc-gal sinapoyl, cya-xyl-glc-gal feruloyl, and cya-xyl-
glc-gal p-coumaroyl.
11.2.3  Other Veggies
Anthocyanins from red cabbage were extracted using ultrasound-assisted methods and 
analyzed for identification (Dong et al., 2024). The analysis was performed using a Waters 
Acquity UHPLC HSS T3 RP18 column (100 × 2.1 mm i.d., 1.8 μm, 100 Å) with an UltraLine 
UHPLC In-Line Filter (RESTEK, Bellefonte, PA, USA). The extracted anthocyanins were 
screened using a Bruker Elute UHPLC coupled with a Bruker Compact QTOF mass spec­
trometer equipped with an ESI probe (Bruker, Bremen, Germany). Data were acquired 
in full scan mode (m/z range 50–1500) in positive ion mode, with a capillary voltage of 
4.5 kV. Nitrogen was used as the nebulizer (2.0 bar) and drying gas (8.0 L/min) at a tem­
perature of 220°C. MS/MS spectra were recorded in Auto MS/MS mode, with collision 
energy set between 20 and 50 eV for the top three precursor ions in the m/z 300–1500 range. 
Instrument calibration was performed with a 10-mM sodium formate solution introduced 
to the ion source via a 20-μL loop before each run. Compounds were identified by com­
paring fragmentation patterns and high-accuracy mass spectra, cross-referenced with the 
MetaboScape 2023 database (Bruker, Bremen, Germany). The majority of the identified 
anthocyanins were derivatives of cyanidin.
Pereira et al. (2024) identified anthocyanins in red cabbage using LC coupled with MS 
(LC-DAD/ESI-MS). The analysis was conducted with a Finnigan Surveyor series liquid 
chromatograph, equipped with a RP C18 column (Agilent), measuring 250 × 4.6 mm. Mass 
detection was performed using a Finnigan LCQ DECA XP MAX quadrupole ion trap 
mass detector (Finnigan Corp., San José, CA, USA), featuring an Atmospheric Pressure 
Ionization (API) source and an ESI interface. Spectra were recorded in positive ion mode, 
covering a range between m/z 300 and 2000. Fourteen anthocyanins were identified in the 
red cabbage extract, the majority of which were cyanidin derivatives.
The anthocyanins in red lettuce extracts were analyzed using the Acquity UPLC VION 
IMS QTOF-MS/MS system (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) (Hameed et al., 2023). A 
Waters Acquity UPLC HSS T3 column (100 mm × 2.1 mm, 1.7 μm) was utilized for the anal­
ysis with a 3-μL sample injection. The column temperature was maintained at 40°C. The 
mobile phase consisted of water and acetonitrile with a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min, applied 

219
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
in a gradient. For the first 0–3 minutes, a 100% gradient was used. From 3 to 5 minutes, a 
linear gradient of 90–100% water was maintained. Between 5 and 11.5 minutes, the gradi­
ent ranged from 65 to 90%, followed by 1–65% from 11.5 to 14 minutes. For 14–17 minutes, 
1% water was used, with a 1–100% transition between 17 and 17.1 minutes. The column 
was then re-equilibrated for 5 minutes. Capillary voltage was set to 2 kV, with a source 
temperature of 115°C and desolvation temperature of 450°C, and the desolvation gas flow 
rate was 800 L/h. The collision energy varied from 20 to 55 eV, and spectra were recorded 
in negative ion mode across a scan range of m/z 50 to 1000. Delphinidin 3-(6-p-coumaroyl­
galactoside) was the reported anthocyanin from red lettuce.
Ultrasound-assisted extracts of okra pod skins anthocyanins were identified by UHPLC-
Q-Orbitrap HRMS (Zhang et al., 2021). Anthocyanins were separated using a Vanquish 
Flex UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) paired with a Waters XBridge 
C18 column (1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 150 mm). UV detection was performed at 535 nm for antho­
cyanins and at 360 nm for flavonols. Gradient elution was applied. For metabolite identifi­
cation, a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was connected to the UHPLC 
system. The identified anthocyanins were reported as Delphinidin 3-O-sambubioside and 
Cyanidin 3-O-sambubioside.
Wang et al. (2024a) investigated the thermal stability of anthocyanins within a model 
dough system. To conduct this study, anthocyanins extracted from eggplant peels 
were incorporated into dough composed of microcrystalline cellulose, wheat starch, 
and isolated soy protein which was then exposed to thermal processing. Following 
the heat treatment, anthocyanins were re-extracted from the dough and analyzed 
using UPLC-MS/MS method on a Thermo Accela 600 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific, 
Bremen, Germany) with an Inertsil ODS-3 C18 column (4.6 mm × 250 mm, 5 μm, GL 
Sciences, Nakano, Tokyo, Japan). Detection was performed with diode array monitor­
ing at 280 and 520 nm. The gradient elution system was employed, and mass detec­
tion was carried out using a linear ion trap quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer 
equipped with a heated ESI probe (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) oper­
ating in both positive and negative ion modes. The parameters included a capillary 
voltage of −40 V, capillary temperature of 320°C, source voltage of 4 kV, and tube 
lens voltage of 110 V, with sheath and auxiliary gas flow rates (nitrogen) set at 42 and 
11 L/min, respectively. MS spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode across a 
mass range of 100–1500 m/z. The researchers identified three anthocyanins: delphin­
idin-3-O-rutinoside-5-O-glucoside, delphinidin-3-O-rutinopyranosyl-glucoside, and 
delphinidin-3-O-rutinoside.
11.2.4  Grains
Leonarski et al. (2023), compared the extraction of anthocyanins from rice bran using 
pressurized liquid extraction and heating-stirring extraction methods. Individual 
anthocyanins were identified using a Shimadzu HPLC-MS chromatography system 
(model LCMS-2020, Kyoto, Japan), which included an LC-20AD binary pump, photo­
diode array detector (PDA), SIL-20 AC HT autosampler, central controller, and single-
quadrupole MS detector with an ESI interface. The system utilized a Kromasil® C18 
column (100 Å, 300 mm × 4.6 mm i.d.) under gradient conditions, with eluates detected 
at 25°C. Ionization was performed using nitrogen with a drying gas flow of 15 L/min 
and a nebulizing gas flow of 1.5 L/min. Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside was identified (m/z 449) 
and quantified at 1.63 mg/g for pressurized liquid extraction and 1.07 mg/g for heating-
stirring extraction.

220
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Chen et al. (2022), explored the anthocyanin profile of Wugong Mount purple red rice 
bran pigment extracts. The anthocyanins were analyzed using an Agilent 1290 UPLC 
system coupled with an Agilent 6538 Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, 
Santa Clara, CA, USA). Separation was achieved using a Zorbax Eclipse Plus C18 col­
umn (2.1 × 100 mm, 1.8 μm). The optimal MS conditions involved analysis in positive 
ion mode, with a scan range of m/z 50–1000, a source temperature of 150°C, a desolvation 
temperature of 350°C, a cone gas flow of 10 L/h, and a desolvation gas flow of 900 L/h. 
The identified anthocyanins included cyanidin-3-arabinoside, petunidin-3-galactoside, 
cyanidin-3-galactoside, delphinidin-3-arabinoside, delphinidin-3-xyloside, cyanidin, 
cyanidin-3-glucoside, peonidin-3-galactoside, peonidin-3-glucoside, delphinidin, delph­
inidin-3,5-diglucoside, malvidin, peonidin, petunidin, malvidin-3-galactoside, malvidin-
3-glucoside, and delphinidin-3-sambubioside.
11.2.5  Legumes/Beans
Kuasnei et al. (2022) extracted anthocyanins from black bean hulls using subcritical 
water extraction. They compared the use of deep eutectic solvents with choline chloride-
citric acid mixture as extraction solvents and found that eutectic water demonstrated 
greater efficiency. The deep eutectic solvents were prepared by combining choline chlo­
ride with various organic acids and alcohols, including citric acid, propanediol, malic 
acid, lactic acid, and a mixture of lactic acid and propanediol, all at a concentration of 1%. 
Extracts were analyzed via LC-MS to determine the anthocyanin profile and quantify 
individual components. The analysis was conducted using a Shimadzu liquid chromato­
graph (Kyoto, Japan) equipped with a diode array detector (SPD-M20A) and an ESI mass 
spectrometer (MS-ESI, LCMS-2020). A C18 column (NST, Santos, Brazil), with dimen­
sions of 4.6 mm × 250 mm, 5.0 μm, was used at 40°C with gradient elution. Anthocyanins 
were identified by confirming their masses (m/z) in the mass spectrometer. The mass 
spectrometer parameters included spray interface temperature of 350°C and heat block 
temperature of 200°C. The interface voltage was set to 4.5 kV, and the RF-beam volt­
age was 60 V. The three primary anthocyanins detected, based on their respective ions, 
were delphinidin-3-O-glucoside [M+] 465.1, petunidin-3-O-glucoside [M+] 479.12, and 
malvidin-3-O-glucoside [M+] 493.13, which are the predominant anthocyanins present 
in black beans.
Nina et al. (2023) extracted anthocyanins from Chilean bean varieties using ultra­
sound assisted extraction method. An HPLC-DAD-Q-TOF-MSn analysis was conducted 
using a Bruker Elute UHPLC/HPLC-DAD system, coupled with a Q-TOF Compact mass 
spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Separation was achieved using a 
Kromasil® C-18 column (250 mm × 4.6 mm, 5 μm particle size, Kromasil, Akzo Nobel, 
Bohus, Sweden) alongside a C-18 pre-column (Nova-Pak Waters, 22 × 3.9 mm, 4 μm 
particle size, Waters Corp., Milford, Connecticut, USA). Data were collected in full scan 
mode across a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) range of 50–1500 in both positive and nega­
tive ionization modes. Nitrogen was employed as the nebulizer gas at 200°C, and MS 
detection was performed using base peak chromatograms. The MS conditions were 
set at +4500 V for positive ionization and −3500 V for negative ionization. Collision-
induced dissociation spectra were generated using a fragmentation amplitude of 1.00 V 
with helium as the collision gas. Auto MS/MS mode (four precursor ions per cycle) 
was employed with a scan range of 50–1500 m/z in centroid mode, with a scan time 
of 0.2 seconds. The main anthocyanins in black beans: delphinidin 3-O-hexoside was 
identified by the [M + H]+ ion at m/z 465 and the neutral loss of 162 amu leading to the 

221
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
aglycone at m/z 303; petunidin 3-O-hexoside was identified by the [M + H]+ at m/z 479 
and the MS2 ion at m/z 317; malvidin-3-O-glucoside was characterized by the [M + H]+ 
ion at m/z 331; delphinidin 3-(6′’-malonylhexoside) presented a neutral loss of 248 amu, 
an additional 86 amu to the neutral loss of the hexoside (162 amu), indicating the pres­
ence of a malonyl group.
Ma et al. (2023) examined black mung bean extracts using a LC-tandem MS system 
(Applied Biosystems 6500 QTRAP). The chromatographic setup involved a C18 column 
(ACQUITY BEH, 1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 100 mm). For MS, the conditions were as follows: the 
electrospray ion source temperature was set to 550°C, with a MS voltage of 5500 V and a 
curtain gas pressure of 35 psi. The MS data obtained were qualitatively assessed using a 
local database. Subsequently, the anthocyanin components were quantitatively evaluated 
using the MRM mode of triple quadrupole MS. Across the three stages, LC-MS/MS iden­
tified anthocyanin derivatives including five types of cyanidin, six types of delphinidin, 
two types of pelargonidin, three types of peonidin, and three types of petunidin.
11.2.6  Edible Flowers
Edible flowers have been used traditionally for their health promoting effects depend­
ing on a wealth of phytochemical content, and even for culinary purposes in some areas 
(Kandylis, 2022). The wide research of anthocyanin rich edible plants is not only due to 
their potential in preventing several diseases but also owing to their potential as appeal­
ing colorants (Teixeira et al., 2023). The red, thick, fleshy calyces are the most common 
products of commerce from the hibiscus plant (also known as roselle, family Malvaceae) 
have been well-investigated by means of their rich anthocyanin content (Li, Simon & Wu, 
2024). Hibiscus sabdariffa has been extensively used as an antihypertensive tea worldwide 
(Hopkins et al., 2013). Delphinidin and its glycosides were demonstrated in calyces of H. 
sabdariffa L. upon MS/MS analysis in the negative mode (Salem et al., 2020). Hibiscin, or 
delphinidin 3-sambubioside (C26H27O16), was confirmed due to the deprotonated mol­
ecules [M − H]− at m/z 595 and fragment ions at m/z 521, m/z 485, m/z 419, m/z 334, m/z 300, 
m/z 249, m/z 217, and m/z 189. Additionally, delphinidin (C15H9O7) aglycone (m/z =301), 
delphinidin 3-neohesperidoside (C27H30O16) (m/z =609), and delphinidin 3-O-galactoside 
(C21H19O12) (m/z =463).
When three roselle cultivars were compared, metabolome analysis using UPLC-Q-TOF/
MS showed that the total anthocyanin content in red calyx was the highest, followed by 
that in stripped calyx, whereas green calyx had the lowest content (Li et al., 2022). The 
flower color of Hibiscus syriacus (Qiansiban) transitions from fuchsia to pink–purple and 
finally to pale purple, thereby enhancing the ornamental value. In order to elucidate the 
pigmentation mechanism, Li et al. (2024) analyzed Qiansiban and reported that malvacin-
3-O-glucoside being the predominant compound in the flowers at different stages, fol­
lowed by petunidin-3-O-glucoside. Except peonidin, the amounts of the detected five
anthocyanin aglycones with a sugar moiety indicated gradual declines throughout the
flowering process leading the color of the petals to convert from purplish red to purple.
Mejía et al. (2023) evaluated flowers of 16 Hibiscus rosa-sinensis cultivars using an Orbitrap
high-resolution mass detector (Exactive Plus, Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA,
USA). Chromatographic separation was carried out with a Hypersil GOLD aQ column
(Thermo Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) of 100 mm, L, × 2.1 mm, id, × 1.9 μm particle size. 
Cyanidin-sophoroside ([M]+ at m/z 611.16066 with product ions at m/z values of 287, 147, 
137, and 121) was identified in extracts of lilac, pink, orange, and red flowers, but was not 
detected in extracts of white or yellow flowers. In the white flowers, the level of flavan-3-ols 

222
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
(catechin and epicatechin) were 120 times lower than that found in the red cultivars which 
was attributed to the biosynthetic pathway of anthocyanins.
In another work, researchers found a significant positive correlation between 
delphinidin-3-O-(6-O-Malonyl-β-D-glucoside) a* coordinate measured with a colorimeter 
in the red-purple cultivars of H. syriacus (Chen et al., 2023a). Hoang et al. (2023) purified 
anthocyanins using macroporous D101 resin isolated from H. sabdariffa L. flowers, where 
cyanidin-3-O-sambubioside was dominant. Anthocyanin (purity of 72.18%) possessing 
high antioxidant capacity and inhibiting both Gram (+) and Gram (−) bacteria had a very 
good color stability at low temperatures and in mildly alkaline media. On the other hand, 
when aqueous H. sabdariffa extract was subjected to in vitro digestion, the contents of cyani­
din-3-O-sambubioside and delphinidin-3-O-sambubioside drastically dropped from 2.91 ± 
0.03 and 8.53 ± 0.08 µg/g (w/w) cyanidin-3-O-glucoside (CG) in the raw extract, respec­
tively, to 0.12 ± 0.01 0.12 ± 0.01 µg/g (w/w) CG at the end of duodenal digestion (Majdoub 
et al., 2021). Song et al. (2024) reported that nanoencapsulation within chitosan derivatives 
or β-lactoglobulin could improve the bioaccessibility of cyanidin-3-sambubioside the most 
among the anthocyanin monomers present in roselle extract. A list of anthocyanins analy­
sis through LC-MS from edible flowers can be seen in Table 11.3.
In order to avoid quality loss and extend the shelf life of Roselle products available, 
LC-MS analysis is a helpful tool for the measurement of anthocyanins (Gweyi-Onyango, 
Osei-Kwarteng & Mahunu, 2021). Food processing such as fermentation has a crucial 
impact on the resulting sensory quality, including color, aroma, taste, and mouthfeel. 
Using an untargeted UHPLC-QE-MS approach, delphinidin 3,5-diglucoside, cyanidin 
3-(6′′-(E)-caffeylsambubioside), delphinidin 3-gentiobioside, pelargonidin 3-lathyroside, 
pelargonidin 3-(4′″-p-coumarylrutinoside)-5-glucoside, and petunidin were identified 
in roselle wine for the first time (Ai et al., 2021). When different commercially available 
hibiscus products were compared, significant variations were discovered in the contents 
of anthocyanins following the order of calyces > extracts > beverages (Li, Simon & Wu, 
2024). Recently, several research groups developed functional hibiscus drinks by taking 
the advantage of its characteristic flavor and therapeutic effects by analyzing the anthocy­
anin metabolites (Arce-Reynoso et al., 2023; Villalobos-Vega et al., 2023).
Saffron (family Iridaceae) plant belongs to the genus Crocus that produces the most 
expensive spice in the world. The aerial part of the plant consists of leaves and flowers, 
where stigma −the commercial saffron, constitutes only 7% of the flower (Bakshi et al., 
2022). Crocin, picrocrocin, and safranal are the main constituents responsible for its color, 
taste, and aroma, respectively. Saffron is also important in pharmaceutics, cosmetics, 
perfumery, and textile dye-producing industries (Kothari, Thakur & Kumar, 2021). The 
quality of saffron depends on the concentration of secondary metabolites, thus saffron 
from different origins have been studied from Iran, Spain, and Türkiye (Amanpour et al., 
2024), China (Li et al., 2024), and Italy (De Angelis et al., 2024). Due to its high cost, saffron 
adulteration is common by synthetic additives or safflower and turmeric (Salehi et al., 
2022). Thus, LC-MS analyses of saffron containing samples contribute to identify adulter­
ants, contaminant as well as its authentication (Avila-Sosa et al., 2022; Eghbali, Farhadi & 
Askari, 2023). Anthocyanins were quantified for the first time in saffron tepals by Goupy 
et al. (2013), 4804 ± 233 μg/g DW, using an UPLC-DAD/ESI-MSn. Senizza and co-authors 
(2019) observed that anthocyanins were strongly accumulated into the adulterated saf­
fron products. Delphinidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside accounts for 80% of the total anthocyanins 
followed by petunidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside, delphinidin 3-O-glucoside, malvidin 3,5-di-O-
glucoside, and petunidin 3-O-glucoside (Ruggieri et al., 2023). The production of 1 kg of 
saffron spice is estimated to generate around 350 kg of floral by-products, thereby the 

223
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
(Continued)
TABLE 11.3
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Edible Flowers
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Calyces of Hibiscus
(Hibiscus sabdariffa L.)
Delphinidin 3-sambubioside (Hibiscin)
Delphinidin 3-neohesperidoside
Delphinidin 3-O-galactoside
Delphinidin
Dimethyl-delphinidin-glucosyl acetate
N/A
UPLC-MS/MS
ESI mode: negative ionization
Capillary voltage: 3 kV
Alternating full-scan and all-ion 
fragmentation-scan modes
Capillary temperature: 150°C
Drying gas: 350°C
Mass range: 100–1500 m/z
Salem et al. 
(2020)
Flowers of 16 
Hibiscus cultivars
(Hibiscus 
rosa-sinensis)
Cyanidin-sophoroside 1
Cyanidin-sambubioside1
Cyanidin-3-glucoside
21–1.0 mg/g of extract
UHPLC-ESI+-Obitrap-MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Vspray: 3.5 kV
Cell energies: 10, 20, 30, 40 eV
Full scan mode
Nebulizer temperature: 350°C
Capillary temperature: 320°C
Mass range: m/z 80–1000
Mejía et al. 
(2023)
Hibiscus market 
samples (calyces, 
beverages, and 
extracts) (H. 
sabdariffa L.)
Delphinidin-3-sambubioside
Cyanindin-3-sambubioside
< 0.001–2.372% of total 
anthocyanins
UHPLC-QQQ/MS
Voltage: 4 V
MRM scan mode
Drying gas: 300◦C
Nebulizer: 250◦C
LOD:98.63, LOQ:197.27 ng/mL 
(delphinidin derivative)
LOD:26.56, LOQ:53.13 ng/
mL(cyanidin derivative)
Li (2023)

224
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
(Continued)
TABLE 11.3
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Edible Flowers
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Different calyx 
colors of roselle 
(red, green, 
stripped) (H. 
sabdariffa L.)
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-(6-O-malonyl-beta-D-glucoside)
Cyanidin-3-O-sambubioside-5-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-xyloside
Cyanidin-3-O-rutinoside-5-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-galactoside
Cyanidin-3-O-arabinoside
Cyanidin-3-O-sophoroside
Cyanidin-3-O-rutinoside
Cyanidin-3,5,3′-O-triglucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-sambubioside
Cyanidin-3,5-O-diglucoside
Delphinidin-3-O-rutinoside
Delphinidin-3-O-(6-O-malonyl-beta-D-glucoside)
Delphinidin-3-O-rutinoside-5-O-glucoside
Delphinidin-3-O-sambubioside-5-O-glucoside
Delphinidin-3-O-rhamnoside
Delphinidin-3-O-glucoside
Delphinidin-3-O-arabinoside
Delphinidin-3-O-sambubioside
Delphinidin-3-O-sophoroside
Malvidin-3-O-glucoside
Pelargonidin-3-O-galactoside
Pelargonidin-3-O-sambubioside
Pelargonidin-3-O-glucoside
Pelargonidin-3-O-sophoroside
Peonidin-3-O-sambubioside-5-O-glucoside
Peonidin-3,5-O-diglucoside
Peonidin-3-O-sambubioside
Peonidin-3-O-glucoside
Peonidin
Petunidin-3-O-galactoside
Petunidin-3-O-glucoside
Petunidin-3-O-arabinoside
Petunidin-3,5-O-diglucoside
Red calyx had the 
highest contents of 
anthocyanin 
derivatives such as 
delphinidin-3-O-
sambubioside (955.11 
μg/g) and cyanidin-
3-O-sambubioside 
(531.37 μg/g). 
Stripped calyx: 
(851.97 and 330.06 
μg/g, respectively).
UPLC-Q-TOF/MS
ESI mode: ionization
Drying gas: 350°C
HV capillary: –4100 V
End plate offset: –500 V
Capillary exit: 134.3 V
Skimmer: 40 V
Li et al. 
(2022)
  (Continued)

225
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
(Continued)
TABLE 11.3
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Edible Flowers
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Hibiscus flowers 
(Hibiscus syriacus L.)
Delphinidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Petunidin-3-O-glucoside
Pelargonidin-3-O-glucoside
Malvacin-3-O-glucoside
N/A
HPLC-MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Dryer temperature: 400°C
Ion source temperature: 120°C
Capillary voltage: 3.5 kV
Cone hole voltage: 40 V
Mass range: 100–1200 m/z
Li et al. 
(2024)
Hibiscus flowers 
from different 
strains
(H. syriacus L.)
Pelargonidin-3,5-Odiglucoside
Pelargonidin-3-Ogalactoside
Pelargonidin-3-Oglucoside
Pelargonidin-3-Oarabinoside
Pelargonidin-3-Orutinoside
Pelargonidin-3-O-(6″-Omalonyl-β-D-glucoside)
Cyanidin-3,5-Odiglucoside
Cyanidin-3-Ogalactoside
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-Oarabinoside
Cyanidin-3-O-rutinoside
Cyanidin-3-O-(6″-Omalonyl-β-D-glucoside)
Delphinidin-3,5-Odiglucoside
Delphinidin-3-Ogalactoside
Delphinidin-3-Oglucoside
Delphinidin-3-Oarabinoside
Delphinidin-3-Orutinoside
Delphinidin-3-O-(6″-Omalonyl-β-D-glucoside)
Peonidin-3,5-Odiglucoside
Peonidin-3-Ogalactoside
Peonidin-3-O-glucoside
Peonidin-3-Oarabinoside
Peonidin-3-O-(6″-Omalonyl-β-D-glucoside)
Petunidin-3-Ogalactoside
Petunidin-3-Oarabinoside
Petunidin-3-O-rutinoside
Petunidin-3-O-(6″-Omalonyl-β-D-glucoside)
Various concentrations 
among the samples
UPLC-ESI-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Source temperature: 550°C
Ion spray voltage: 5500 V
Zhang et al. 
(2022b)
  (Continued)

226
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
(Continued)
TABLE 11.3
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Edible Flowers
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
 
Malvidin-3,5-Odiglucoside
Malvidin-3-Ogalactoside
Malvidin-3-O-glucoside
Malvidin-3-Oarabinoside
Malvidin-3-O-rutinoside
Malvidin-3-O-(6″-Omalonyl-β-D-glucoside)
 
 
 
Saffron stigma from 
Iran, Spain, 
Türkiye
Petunidin-3-O-glucoside
Delphin-3,5-di-O-glucoside
Delphinidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
0.31–105 mg/kg
LC-DAD-ESI-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Collision energy: −35 V
Full MS scans
Desolvation temperature: 250 °C
Heat block temperature: 400 °C
Mass range: 100 and 1000 m/z
Amanpour 
et al. (2024)
Saffron Floral 
By-Products 
(Crocus sativus L.)
Delphinidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside
Petunidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside
Delphinidin 3-O-glucoside
Petunidin 3-O-glucoside
0.6–3.2 ppm
LC-ESI-QTOF MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage: 3500 V
Nozzle voltage: 500 V
Full scan
Drying gas: 300°C
Sheath gas: 250°C
Mass range: 40–1300 m/z
Masala et al. 
(2024)
Saffron petals (C. 
sativus L.)
Delphinidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside
Petunidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3,5-O-diglucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-(6-O-acetyl)-glucoside
N/A
LC-ESI-IT-TOF-MS
ESI mode: positive and negative 
ionization
Capillary voltage: 3 kV
Cone voltage: 30 V
Extractor voltage: 3.3 V
Source temperature: 100°C
Desolvation temperature: 210°C Full 
scan over 70–700 m/z (MS1) and 
70–500 m/z (MS2)
Shahtouri 
et al. (2024)
  (Continued)

227
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
(Continued)
TABLE 11.3
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Edible Flowers
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Pistacia chinensis 
leaves
Cyanidin-3-O-(6-O-malonyl-beta-D-glucoside)
Cyanidin-3-O-(coumaryl)-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-arabinoside
Cyanidin-3-O-galactoside
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-rutinoside
Cyanidin-3-rutinoside 5-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-sophoroside
Cyanidin-3-O-xyloside
Cyanidin-3,5,3′-O-triglucoside
Delphinidin-3-O-(6-O-acetyl)-glucoside
Delphinidin-3-O-(6-O-malonyl)-glucoside-3′-glucoside
Delphinidin-3-O-arabinoside
Delphinidin-3-O-galactoside
Delphinidin-3-O-rhamnoside
Delphinidin-3-O-sophoroside
Malvidin-3-O-glucoside
Pelargonidin-3-O-(coumaryl)-glucoside
Pelargonidin-3-O-arabinoside
Pelargonidin-3-O-glucoside
Peonidin-3-O-(6-O-p-coumaryl)-glucoside
Peonidin-3-O-arabinoside
Peonidin-3-O-galactoside
Peonidin-3-O-glucoside
Peonidin-3-O-sophoroside
Petunidin-3-O-galactoside
Petunidin-3-O-glucoside
All in a range of 
0.001–121.1 ng/g
UPLC-MS/MS
0.01–50,000 ng/mL
Song et al. 
(2022)
  (Continued)

228
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
(Continued)
TABLE 11.3
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Edible Flowers
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Perillae Folium leaf 
(Perilla frutescens 
var. crispa)
Caffeylcyanin
Cis-shisonin
Caffeylmalonylcyanin
Shisonin
Cyanidin-3-O-feruloylglucoside-5-O-glucoside
Manonyl-cis-shisonin
Malonylshisonin
Cyanidin-3-O-feruloylglucoside-5-O-malonylglucoside
Peonidin-3-O-coumaroylglucoside-5-Omalonylglucoside
N/A
RRLC-Q/TOF-MS
UPLC−TQ-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Temperature: 500°C
Ion spray voltage: +5500 V
Declustering potential (DP): 80 eV
Collision energy (CE):15 eV
CID: 35/−35 ± 15 eV
Mass range: m/z 100−2000
Zheng et al. 
(2020)
Perilla leaves (P. 
frutescens var. acuta)
Cis-shisonin
Cyanidin 3-O-caffeoylglucoside-5-O-glucoside
Cyanidin 3-O-caffeoylglucoside-5-O-malonylglucoside
Malonyl-cis-shisonin
Shisonin
Cyanidin 3-O-feruloylglucoside-5-O-glucoside
Malonyl-shisonin
N/A
UPLC-ESI-IT-TOF-MSn
ESI mode: positive ionization
Interface voltage: 4.5 kV
Detector voltage: 1.60 kV
Temperature: 200°C
The relative collision induced 
dissociation energy adjusted between 
20% and 30%
Mass range: m/z 150–1000 Da
He, Yao and 
Chang 
(2015)
Lemon bottlebrush 
flowers (Callistemon 
citrinus)
Cyanidin-3,5-O-diglucoside (cyanin)
Peonidin-3,5-O-diglucoside (peonin)
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-coumaroylglucoside-pyruvic acid.
295.58 ± 2.226 mg 
CyG/100 g DE 
(Cyanin)
182.03 ± 1.90 mg 
CyG/100 g DE 
(Peonin)
RP-HPLC-DAD-ESI-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Temperature: 350°C
CID: 1.0 V
Collision gas: 1.46 × 10−5 bar, helium
Laganà et al. 
(2020)
  (Continued)

229
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
TABLE 11.3
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Edible Flowers
Source of 
Anthocyanins
Analyte
Analyte Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
6 Halophytes 
(Aptenia cordifolia 
var. variegata, 
Glottiphyllum 
linguiforme, 
Carpobrotus edulis, 
Ferocactus 
glaucescens, F. 
pottsii and F. 
Herrerae)
Delphinidin malonyl hexoside
Malvidin acetyl hexoside
Petunidin coumaroyl hexoside
Cyanidin pentosyl hexoside
Petunidin
Cyanidin
Pelargonidin pentosyl hexoside
Delphinidin
Delphinidin dihexoside
N/A
LC-HR-ESI-MS
ESI mode: positive & negative 
ionization
Spray voltage: 4.5 kV
Capillary temperature: 320°C
Mass range: m/z 100–2000
Hamed et al. 
(2020)
Blue flowers of six 
grape hyacinth 
cultivars (Muscari 
spp.)
Delphinidin 3-O-glucoside
Petunidin 3-O-glucoside
Unknown compound
Malvidin 3-O-glucoside
Unknown compound
Pelargonidin-3-O-caffeoylsophoroside-5-O-arabinoside
Cyanidin
Cyanidin-3-O-caffeoylrutinoside
Cyanidin-3-O-(p-coumaroyl)glucoside-5-O-malonylglucoside
Pelargonidin-3-O-sinapylglucoside-5-O-glucoside
Pelargonidin-3-O-sinapylglucoside-5-O-arabinoside
Pelargonidin-3-O-ferulylglucoside-5-O-arabinoside
N/A
UPLC-QTOF-MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage: 3000 V
Cone voltage: 45 V
Extract cone voltage: 4 V
Ion source temperature: 100°C
Drying temperature: 350°C
Mass range: 100–1000 m/z
Lou et al. 
(2017)
  (Continued)

230
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
utilization of these has a considerable economical and bioactive potential (Cerdá-Bernad 
et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023). In the study of Masala et al. (2024), delphinidin and petuni­
din derivatives have also been detected in saffron flower by-products. (HR) LC-ESI-QTOF 
MS/MS analysis revealed the presence of delphinidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside and delphinidin 
3-O-glucoside due to the [M+H]+ at m/z 627.1564 with a fragment at 465.1039 and [M+H]+ 
at m/z 465.1015 with a fragment at 303.0092, respectively. Similarly, petunidin 3,5-di-O-glu­
coside and petunidin 3-O-glucoside were identified based on the [M+H]+ at m/z 641.1717 
with a fragment at 465.1044 and [M+H]+ at m/z 479.1108 with a fragment at 317.2589, respec­
tively. Recently, Shahtouri et al. (2024) synthesized zirconium-based nanocomposites for 
anthocyanin purification. Used in saffron petal waste, the adsorbents exhibited an excel­
lent selectivity leading to specific and sharper peaks. They identified new cyanidin deriva­
tives: cyanidin-3,5-O-diglucoside and cyanidin-3-O-(6-O-acetyl)-glucoside.
To date, different parts of saffron plant were attempted to be used in several food and 
pharmaceutical formulations such as cookies, pasta, and probiotic beverage in free (Bakshi 
et al., 2022) or encapsulated form (Akramiani, Afsahi & Akhavan, 2024). Moreover, Wang 
et al. (2023d) investigated the metabolomics of color change of saffron floral residues dur­
ing storage. Another group of researchers used saffron petals for fermentation for the first 
time, where 23 kinds of anthocyanin markers were found after fermentation based on 
untargeted metabolomics (Wang et al., 2024b).
Coming from Rhus coriaria L., sumac (family Anacardiaceae) is a medicinal plant that is 
native to the Mediterranean area and widely used in Turkish and Middle Eastern cuisine, 
especially in Lebanon, Iran, and Iraq (Zannou et al., 2025). The bark and leaves of the plant 
are astringent, antiseptic, alterative, and tonic properties while the berries have refrigerant, 
diuretic, emmenagogue, diaphoretic, and cephalic effects (Khoshkharam et al., 2022). The 
fruits can also serve as a coloring agent source in the food industry thanks to anthocyanin 
pigments. The anthocyanin content was reported to be ranging between 3.57 and 66.14 mg 
cyanidin-3-glucoside equivalents per gram of DW (Fereidoonfar et al., 2019). Mazzara et al. 
(2023) characterized sumac fruits from five Sicilian accessions by means of phytochemical 
composition using HPLC-MS/MS followed by principal component analysis. The domi­
nant anthocyanins were cyanidin 3-glucoside and delphinidin-3,5-diglucoside. Except for 
delphinidin-3,5-diglucoside, which was detected in higher amounts in San Biagio Platani 
sumac extract, all the other anthocyanins were prevalent in Giarratana sumac extract.
A number of studies demonstrated the addition of sumac extract or powder as natu­
ral food preservatives to bread (Dziki et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2024b), soybean oil (Rahmati, 
Bazargani-Gilani & Aghajani, 2022), and beef burgers (Grassi et al., 2024). LC-MS analysis 
of anthocyanins from different processed food matrices is shown in Table 11.4. Wang and 
co-authors (2023e) investigated the use of the Staghorn sumac fruit powder in cooked beef 
meatballs and Cheddar cheese. LC-MSn profiling disclosed the contribution of nonantho­
cyanin phenolics in addition to anthocyanins to the antimicrobial and antioxidant activi­
ties observed. The prevalence of 7-O-methyl anthocyanins and their galloylated derivatives 
in Staghorn sumac (Rhus typhina L.) was shown by UPLC–ESI-MS and NMR spectroscopic 
methods previously, which had been highlighted as being unusual by Kirby et al. (2013).
Color being one of the essential aspects in a consumer’s sensory perception of a food 
product leads to carrying out research on new and underexplored sources of anthocyanins. 
In that sense, Perilla frutescens L. belonging to the family Labiatae is widely consumed as 
either dietary vegetable or medicinal herb especially in China, Japan, Korea, Vietnam, and 
other regions in East Asia (Fan et al., 2022). Previously, cyanidin 3-O-feruloylglucoside-
5-O-glucoside, shisonin, and cyanidin 3-O-caffeoylglucoside-5-O-glucoside-plus their 
malonyl derivatives were identified in perilla leaves (He, Yao & Chang, 2015). Zheng et al. 

231
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
TABLE 11.4
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Different Processed Food Matrices
Source of Anthocyanins
Food Matrix
Analyte
LC-MS Method
Reference
Black chokeberry (Aronia 
melanocarpa L.)
Chokeberry fruit juice
Cyanidin-3-O-galactoside
Cyanidin-3-O-arabinoside
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-xyloside
LC-PDA-ESI-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Source voltage: 4 kV
Capillary temperature: 275°C
Mass range: m/z 100– 1000
Tasinov et al. 
(2022)
Eggplant peels (Solanum 
melongena L.)
Dough analoque; 
Microcrystalline cellulose
Wheat starch
Soy protein isolate
Delphinidin-3-O-rutinoside-5-
O-glucoside
Delphinidin-3-Orutinopyranosyl-
Glucoside
Delphinidin-3-O-rutinoside
UPLC-MS/MS
Capillary voltage: 40 V
Source voltage: 4 kV
Tube lens voltage: 110 V
Capillary temperature: 320°C
Mass range: 100–1500 m/z
Wang et al. 
(2024a)
Functional hibiscus 
beverage and commercial 
hibiscus beverage 
(Hibiscus sabdariffa L.)
Citric acid
Mint
Stevia
Delphinidin-3-sambubioside
Cyanidin-3-Glucoside
Delphinidin
HPLC-DAD-ESI-MS
ESI mode: Negative & positive ionization
Capillary voltage: 3500 V
Drying gas temperature: 350°C
Mass range: 100–1000 m/z
Rodríguez-
Romero 
et al. (2023)
Roselle wine (H. 
sabdariffa L.)
Sucrose
Dry yeast
Roselle calyces
Potassium metabisulfite
Delphinidin 3-gentiobioside
Cyanidin 3-(6″-(E)-caffeylsambubioside)
Delphinidin 3,5-diglucoside
Petunidin
Pelargonidin 3-lathyroside
Pelargonidin 
3-(4″′-p-coumarylrutinoside)-5-glucoside
Delphinidin 3-gentiobioside
Cyanidin 3-(6″-(E)-caffeylsambubioside)
Delphinidin 3,5-diglucoside
Pelargonidin 3-lathyroside
Petunidin
Pelargonidin 
3-(4″′-p-coumarylrutinoside)-5-glucoside
Pinotin A (Malvidin 
3-glucoside-4-vinylcatechol)
Delphinidin 
3-(6″-O-4-malyl-glucosyl)-5-glucoside
UHPLC-QE-MS
ESI mode: Negative & positive ionization
Spray voltage: 3500 V
Capillary temperature: 320°C
Probe heater temperature: 350°C
Mass range: (m/z) 100–1000
Ai et al. 
(2021)
(Continued)

232
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
TABLE 11.4
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Different Processed Food Matrices
Source of Anthocyanins
Food Matrix
Analyte
LC-MS Method
Reference
Mulberry (Morus alba)
Wine residues
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-O-rutinoside
UPLC-MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage: 3.0 kV
Source temperature: 100°C
Temperature: 52°C
Mass Range: 50–1500 m/z
Zhang et al. 
(2020)
Pomegranate (Punica 
granatum L.)
Commercially available 
pomegranate juice not 
from concentrate
Delphinidin-3,5-diglucoside
Cyanidin-3,5-diglucoside
Delphinidin-3-glucoside
Cyanidin-3-glucoside
Pelargonidin-3-glucoside
HPLC-PDA-ESI-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Voltage: 3000 V
Nebulizer (nitrogen): 50 psi
Drying gas: 365°C
Kostka et al. 
(2020)
Saffron floral by-products 
beverage (C. sativus L.)
Food thickeners (xanthan 
gum, guar gum, β-glucan, 
pectin)
Citric acid
Freeze-dried saffron floral 
by-products
Delphinidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside
Petunidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside
Delphinidin 3-O-glucoside
Petunidin 3-O-glucoside
HPLC-DAD-ESI/MSn
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage: 4 kV
CID fragmentation: 0.3–2 V
Capillary temperature: 350°C
Cerdá-
Bernad 
et al. (2024)
Saffron petals (C. 
sativus L.)
Yeast
Sodium bicarbonate
Sucrose
Potassium metabisulfite
Sixty-three anthocyanins were screened 
during fermentation; 13 cyanidins, 
5 delphinidins, 10 malvidins, 11 
pelargonidins, 10 peonidins, 5 petunians, 
2 procyanidins, and 7 flavonoids
UPLC-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Voltage: 5500 V
ESI temperature: 550°C
In Q-Trap 6500+, each ion pair is scanned 
against an optimized Declustering Potential 
and Collision Energy
Wang et al. 
(2024b)
Sumac fruits (Rhus 
typhina L.)
Cheddar cheese and 
ground beef
Petunidin
Peonidin
Unknown aglycone (443 Da)
LC-MSn
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage: 32.5 kV
ESI needle voltage: 5 kV
Temperature: 350°C
Wang et al. 
(2023e)
  (Continued)

233
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
(2020) conducted screening of anthocyanin compounds in two color varieties of perillae 
folium using rapid resolution LC coupled with quadruple-time-of-flight MS (RRLC-Q/
TOF-MS). The authors identified a new peonidin-derived anthocyanin, namely, peonidin-
3-Ocoumaroylglucoside-5-O-malonylglucoside in the purple variety.
El Bishbishy, Gad and Aborehab (2020) recorded pelargonidin-3-O-hexoside, malvi­
din-3-O-glucoside and malvidin-3,5-O-diglucoside via UHPLC-ESI-MS analysis in leaves 
of economically important Egyptian Pistacia plants, namely: P. chinensis, P. lentiscus, and P. 
khinjuk. In addition, the red leaves of Pistacia chinensis L. was studied through a detailed 
UPLC-MS/MS profiling by Song et al. (2022) who reported the presence of at least 27 
anthocyanins. Non-methylated methylated anthocyanins accounted for 99.80% of the total 
anthocyanin content while six of the 27 identified anthocyanins were acylated.
Laganà and co-workers (2020) reported on RP-HPLC-DAD-ESI-MS/MS identification 
of anthocyanin’s profile of lemon bottlebrush flowers for the first time. Chromatographic 
separation was carried out using a Luna Omega PS C18 column (150 × 2.1 mm, 5 µm; 
Phenomenex). In addition to cyanidin-3-O-glucoside, the most abundant anthocyanins in 
plant kingdom, the following ones were detected in positive ionization mode: cyanidin 
3,5-O-diglucoside by the molecular ion with m/z 611 (product ions at m/z 449, m/z 287); 
peonidin-3,5-O-diglucoside by the molecular ion with m/z 625 (product ions at m/z 463, 
m/z 301); and cyanidin-coumaroylglucoside-pyruvic acid by the molecular ion with m/z 
661 (product ions at m/z 595, m/z 482).
Halophyte species, salt-resistant plants that mostly grow in deserts and adapted to harsh 
environmental conditions, have been also investigated by means of their anthocyanin 
metabolites as these plants contain high polyphenol levels and possess strong biological 
activity (Falleh et al., 2011). For instance, Aptenia cordifolia and Carpobrotus edulis were used 
in African traditional medicine. Thus, Hamed et al. (2021) studied the chemopreventive 
effect of six halophyte plants belonging to Aizoaceae and Cactaceae families through LC/
MS—bioassay guided approach. LC-HR-ESI-MS metabolite profiling displayed the pres­
ence of mostly delphinidin derivatives in addition to petunidin, malvidin, pelargonidin, 
and cyanidin.
The sources of blue color in nature are limited to: phycocyanin from spirulina, iridoid 
from genipap fruit, and anthocyanin from butterfly pea flower according to previous 
research (Buchweitz, 2024). Belonging to family Fabaceae, butterfly pea flower (Clitoria ter­
natea L.) has been traditionally used as a food colorant in Southeast Asia. Different flower 
colors including light blue, dark blue, white, and mauve can be observed from several 
C. ternatea plants. The specific anthocyanin in butterfly pea flower is known as “terna­
tin” which is delphinidin triacylated by p-coumaroyl groups, resulting in the blue color 
(Jeyaraj, Lim & Choo, 2021). Handayani et al. (2024) investigated the use of an ethanol sol­
vent combination acidified with HCl extract of flowers as a colorimetric indicator pigment 
for monitoring seafood products. LC-MS/Q-TOF analysis identified delphinidin, and its 
glycosides, contributing to a reddish-blue to purple color of the flower.
Having distinctive dark blue colored flowers in spring, grape hyacinth (Muscari spp.) 
is one of the economically important species that can benefit to food, pharmaceutical, 
and dyeing industries (Khaleghi & Khadivi, 2022). The flower buds and bulbs of these 
plants also take their place in Mediterranean cuisine (Lim, 2014). A total of 14 anthocya­
nins were identified in the tepals of eight grape hyacinth cultivars for the first time via a 
Waters UPLC-Q-TOF-MS (Milford, MA, USA) system (Lou et al., 2017). From MS results, 
the presence of pelargonidin-3-O-caffeoylsophoroside-5-O-arabinoside with a molecular 
ion at m/z 889 and three mass fragment ions, one at m/z 757, due to the elimination of one 
molecule of arabinoside, one at m/z 595, indicating the loss of caffeoyl-group, and one at 

234
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
m/z 271 for the loss of sophoroside. Moreover, the characteristic fragment ion at m/z 287, 
cyanidin-3-O-caffeoylrutinoside was identified due to mass ions m/z 757 and 595 (loss 
of caffeoyl-group), respectively. Similarly, cyanidin-3-O-(p-coumaroyl)-glucoside-5-O-
malonylglucoside was detected exhibiting a molecular cation at m/z 887 and a fragment 
ion at m/z 757 for the loss of malonyl-group. Three pelargonidin (m/z 271) derivatives 
were assigned based on the losses of (i) sinapylglucoside (m/z 595) and sophoroside (m/z 
433) confirming pelargonidin-3-O-sinapylglucoside-5-O-glucoside (m/z 801); (ii) sinapyl-
group (m/z 565) and arabinoside (m/z 433) confirming pelargonidin-3-O-sinapylgluco­
side-5-O-arabinoside (m/z 771); and (iii) ferulyl-group (m/z 565) and arabinoside (m/z 433) 
confirming pelargonidin-3-O-sinapylglucoside-5-O-arabinoside (m/z 741). Although del­
phinidin-3-O-glucoside was found, no acylated delphinidin derivative was detected in 
the studied cultivars.
11.2.7  Seaweeds
Natural pigments are also found in marine sources. Seaweeds, named also macroalgae, 
comprise a few thousand species that each group is characterized by specific combina­
tions of photosynthetic pigments such as green (Chlorophyta), brown (Phaeophyta), and red 
(Rhodophyta) (Peng et al., 2015; Siddik et al., 2023). They have also emerged as a rich source 
of bioactive compounds with several health-promoting properties, thereby attracting 
interest of pharmaceutical, food, cosmetic, and textile industries, as reviewed recently by 
Sadeghi et al. (2024). LC-MS technique has been extensively used to identify the anthocy­
anin composition of algae species from different origins. The secondary metabolite analy­
sis of Indian red seaweed Jania rubens was achieved using LC-TOF MS/MS (Micromass, 
Waters, Milford, MA, USA) by Dixit and Reddy (2017). Their study unveiled the presence 
of two anthocyanins: malonylshisonin and 4′′′-demalonylsalvianin at m/z 825.19, that have 
the potential for the cosmetic industry.
Fresh seaweeds have been consumed as a valuable food source, especially in Southeast 
Asia and coastal communities. Thus, a comprehensive phenolic profiling of Australian 
red seaweeds was performed by Ebrahimi et al. (2024). Cyanidin 3-O-glucoside was 
found in two species (Areschougia congesta and Hypnea sp.). However, 6″-acetyl-gluco­
side ([M−H]− m/z 490.1110 and a product ion at m/z 287) and 6″-p-coumaroyl-glucoside 
([M+H]+ m/z 580.1789 with fragmentation ions at m/z 271 and 433) derivatives of cyani­
din was observed in Hypnea sp. and Plocamium preissianum, respectively. Pelargonidin 
3-O-rutinoside ([M+H]+ m/z 580.1789 with fragmentation ions at m/z 271 and 433) was only 
detected in Crouania attenuate. Duan et al. (2023) characterized the phenolic profile of four 
freeze-dried brown seaweeds using LC–ESI-QTOF–MS/MS, and only detected delphini­
din 3-O-glucosyl-glucoside by the [M + H]+ at m/z 628 with MS2 ions at m/z 465 and 303 in 
Fucus sp. while delphinidin 3-O-glucoside by the [M + H]+ at m/z 466 with fragment ion 
at m/z 303 in Ecklonia sp.
Khan, Mohamed and Islam (2024) investigated three freeze-dried South African sea­
weeds, namely Codium fragile, Radicilingua thysanorhizans (red), and Mazzaella capensis using 
a Shimadzu LC-MS system. Applying the following operational parameters − scan polar­
ity is positive, event duration is 1.00 s, detector voltage is +1.00 kV, threshold is 0, start m/z 
is 50.00, finish m/z is 1700.00, and scan speed is 1.667 u/sec; delphinidin 3-O-sambubioside 
was isolated from cold-water extract whereas malvidin 3-O-glucoside was found in etha­
nolic extract. The seaweeds exhibited anti-diabetic and anti-obesogenic potential in addi­
tion to antioxidant, making Codium fragile the most promising among them. Examples of 
LC-MS analysis of seaweed anthocyanins is given in Table 11.5.

235
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
Subbiah et al. (2023a) analyzed the phenolic composition of six Australian seaweeds 
obtained through two different extraction procedures. An Agilent HPLC connected via 
ESI to the Agilent 6530 Accurate-Mass Quadrupole Time-of-Flight (Q-TOF) LC/MS was 
used where nitrogen gas has been used as a nebulizer. The separation was carried out 
using a Synergi Hydro-Reverse Phase 80 Å, LC column 250 × 4.6 mm, 4 µm with tempera­
ture 25°C and sample temperature at 10°C. Notably, the authors observed anthocyanins 
including delphinidin 3-O-glucoside ([M − H]− at m/z 465.1016), pelargonidin aglycone 
([M − H]− at m/z 271.0618), cyanidin 3,5-O-diglucoside [M + H]+ at m/z 611.1632), and peon­
idin 3-O-diglucoside-5-O-glucoside) [M − H]− at m/z 787.2331) in conventional extract, yet 
not the one obtained by ultrasound-assisted method.
Fresh seaweeds contain a large amount of water (75–85%) and easily deteriorate within 
a few days after harvest, therefore are usually dried prior to industrial processing, which 
remarkably affects their nutritional and biological properties (Uribe et al., 2018). When the 
impact of drying conditions on phytochemical constituents of seaweeds, the same research 
TABLE 11.5
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins from Seaweeds (Macroalgae)
Source of 
Anthocyanins 
(Scientific Name)
Analyte
Analyte 
Quantity
LC-MS Method
Reference
Red seaweed (Jania 
rubens)
Malonylshisonin
4′′′-demalonylsalvianin
N/A
LC-TOF-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary: 2.5 kV
Cone voltage: 25 V
Source temperature: 110°C
Desolvation temperature: 
200°C
Mass range: 0–1000 m/z
Dixit and 
Reddy (2017)
Australian red 
seaweeds
(Crouania attenuata, 
Hypnea sp., 
Areschougia 
congesta, Hypnea sp., 
Plocamium 
preissianum)
Pelargonidin 
3-O-rutinoside
Cyanidin 
3-O-(6″-acetyl-
glucoside)
Cyanidin 3-O-glucoside
Cyanidin 
3-O-(6″-p-coumaroyl-
glucoside)
N/A
LC-ESI-QTOF-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage: 3.5 kV
Nozzle voltage: 500 V
Nebulizer temperature: 
300°C
Collision energies: 10, 15, 
30 eV
Mass range: 50–1300 amu
Ebrahimi 
et al. (2024)
Australian shoreline 
seaweeds (Phyllospora 
comosa, Ecklonia 
radiata, Durvillaea sp., 
Sargassum sp., 
Cystophora sp.)
Delphinidin 
3-O-glucoside
Pelargonidin
Cyanidin 
3,5-O-diglucoside
Peonidin 
3-O-diglucoside-5-O-
glucoside
N/A
LC-ESI-QTOF-MS/MS
Drying gas: 300°C
Capillary voltage: 3.5 kV
Nozzle voltage: 500 V
Collision energy: 10, 15, 
30 eV
Mass range: 50–1300 amu
Subbiah et al. 
(2023a)
Brown seaweeds 
(Fucus sp., 
Ecklonia sp.)
Delphinidin 
3-O-glucosyl-glucoside
Delphinidin 
3-O-glucoside
N/A
LC-ESI-QTOF-MS/MS
ESI mode: positive ionization
Capillary voltage: 3.5 kV
Nozzle voltage: 500 V
Nebulization gas: 300°C
Sheath gas: 250°C
Collision energy 10, 15, 30 eV
Mass scan: m/z 50–1300
Duan et al. 
(2023)

236
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
group compared the effect of different drying methods (freeze, oven, vacuum) on metabo­
lites of five brown seaweeds to gain insight regarding the resultant shelf-life (Subbiah et al., 
2023b). Besides two cyanidin derivatives, petunidin 3-O-(6″-acetyl-glucoside) ([M+H]+ m/z 
522.1373) was identified by the fragmentation peak at m/z 317 due to the loss of glucose 
and acetyl moiety from the precursor ion, which seems to be detected for the first time in 
brown seaweeds.
11.3  Conclusion
In conclusion, LC-MS analysis of anthocyanins provides detailed insights into their 
molecular composition, concentration, and potential health benefits. This makes LC-MS 
an indispensable tool in the fields of food science, nutrition, and agricultural research. The 
analysis of anthocyanins in fruits requires methods that are both sensitive and precise, 
given the complex nature of these compounds and the presence of numerous isomers. 
UPLC-MS/MS coupled with QTOF and ESI is a popular method for both qualitative and 
quantitative analyses of anthocyanins in numerous sources in nature due to its high sen­
sitivity, resolution, and ability to provide structural information. While each technique 
has its advantages, this configuration offers a good combination of speed, accuracy, and 
detailed insight; making it a suitable choice for anthocyanin metabolome studies.
References
Ai, J., Wu, Q., Battino, M., Bai, W., & Tian, L. (2021). Using untargeted metabolomics to profile 
the changes in roselle (Hibiscus sabdariffa L.) anthocyanins during wine fermentation. Food 
Chemistry, 364, 130425.
Aissat, A. K., Chaher-Bazizi, N., Richard, T., Kilani-Atmani, D., Pedrot, E., Renouf, E., … & Fonayet, 
J. V. (2022). Analysis of individual anthocyanins, flavanols, flavonols and other polyphenols 
in Pistacia lentiscus L. fruits during ripening. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 106, 
104286.
Akramiani, S., Afsahi, M. M., & Akhavan, H. R. (2024). Optimization of encapsulation and spouted 
bed drying of saffron petal extract and evaluation of its thermal stability in natural pomegran­
ate juice. Journal of Food Measurement and Characterization, 1–11.
Amanpour, A., Soltani, M., Lipan, L., Garcia-Garví, J. M., Hernández-García, F., Carbonell-Barrachina, 
Á. A., & Nadal, E. S.. (2024). Comparative study on nutraceutical and sensorial characteristics 
of saffron (Crocus sativus L.) cultivated in Iran, Spain, and Türkiye. Journal of the Science of 
Food and Agriculture, 104(12), 7580–7591.
Arce-Reynoso, A., Mateos, R., Mendivil, E. J., Zamora-Gasga, V. M., & Sáyago-Ayerdi, S. G. (2023). 
Bioavailability of bioactive compounds in Hibiscus sabdariffa beverage as a potential anti-
inflammatory. Food Research International, 174, 113581.
Avila-Sosa, R., Nevárez-Moorillón, G. V., Ochoa-Velasco, C. E., Navarro-Cruz, A. R., Hernández-
Carranza, P., & Cid-Pérez, T. S. (2022). Detection of saffron’s main bioactive compounds and 
their relationship with commercial quality. Foods, 11(20), 3245.
Avula, B., Katragunta, K., Osman, A. G., Ali, Z., John Adams, S., Chittiboyina, A. G., & Khan, I. A. 
(2023). Advances in the chemistry, analysis and adulteration of anthocyanin rich-berries and 
fruits: 2000–2022. Molecules, 28(2), 560.
Ayar-Sümer, E. N., Verheust, Y., Özçelik, B., & Raes, K. (2024). Impact of lactic acid bacteria fermen­
tation based on biotransformation of phenolic compounds and antioxidant capacity of mush­
rooms. Foods, 13(11), 1616.

237
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
Bakshi, R. A., Sodhi, N. S., Wani, I. A., Khan, Z. S., Dhillon, B., & Gani, A. (2022). Bioactive constitu­
ents of saffron plant: Extraction, encapsulation and their food and pharmaceutical applications. 
Applied Food Research, 2(1), 100076.
Bao, S., Li, X., Lan, T., Wang, J., Hu, Y., Sun, X., & Ma, T. (2023). Effects of different cooking treatments 
on the sensory qualities and pigmented phytochemicals of carrots. Food Chemistry, 405(PB), 
135015. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2022.135015
Buchweitz, M. (2024). Natural solutions for blue colors in food. In Handbook on natural pigments in 
food and beverages (pp. 437–464). Woodhead Publishing.
Cerdá-Bernad, D., Clemente-Villalba, J., Valero-Cases, E., Pastor, J. J., & Frutos, M. J. (2022). Novel 
insight into the volatile profile and antioxidant properties of Crocus sativus L. flowers. 
Antioxidants, 11(9), 1650.
Cerdá-Bernad, D., D’costa, A. S., Moreno, D. A., Bordenave, N., & Frutos, M. J. (2024). Functional 
model beverages of saffron floral by-products: Polyphenolic composition, inhibition of diges­
tive enzymes, and rheological characterization. Foods, 13(10), 1440.
Chen, J., Ye, H., Wang, J., & Zhang, L. (2023a). Relationship between anthocyanin composition and 
floral color of Hibiscus syriacus. Horticulturae, 9(1), 48.
Chen, J., Zhang, Y., Liu, F., Chen, J., Sun, Y., Ye, X., … & Cheng, H. (2023b). Ultrasound treatment 
improves fruit quality of postharvest blood oranges (Citrus sinensis L. Osbeck): Anthocyanin 
enrichment and its biosynthesis. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 71(38), 
14013–14026.
Chen, T., Lu, H., Shen, M., Yu, Q., Chen, Y., Wen, H., & Xie, J. (2022). Phytochemical composition, anti­
oxidant activities and immunomodulatory effects of pigment extracts from Wugong Mountain 
purple red rice bran. Food Research International, 157(235), 111493. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodres.2022.111493
Constantin, O. E., & Istrati, D. I. (2022). Extraction, quantification and characterization techniques for 
anthocyanin compounds in various food matrices—A review. Horticulturae, 8(11), 1084.
da Silva Oliveira, J. P., de Oliveira, R. T., Guedes, A. L., da Costa Oliveira, M., & Macedo, A. F. (2022). 
Metabolomic studies of anthocyanins in fruits by means of a liquid chromatography coupled 
to mass spectrometry workflow. Current Plant Biology, 32, 100260.
De Angelis, E., Al-Ayoubi, O., Pilolli, R., Monaci, L., & Bejjani, A. (2024). Time-of-flight secondary 
ion mass spectrometry coupled with unsupervised methods for advanced saffron authenticity 
screening. Foods, 13(13), 2033.
Dixit, D., & Reddy, C. R. K. (2017). Non-targeted secondary metabolite profile study for deciphering 
the cosmeceutical potential of red marine macro alga Jania rubens—An LCMS-based approach. 
Cosmetics, 4(4), 45.
Dong, W., Yang, X., Zhang, N., Chen, P., Sun, J., Harnly, J. M., & Zhang, M. (2024). Study of 
UV–Vis molar absorptivity variation and quantitation of anthocyanins using molar rela­
tive response factor. Food Chemistry, 444(February), 138653. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodchem.2024.138653
Duan, X., Subbiah, V., Xie, C., Agar, O. T., Barrow, C. J., Dunshea, F. R., & Suleria, H. A. (2023). 
Evaluation of the antioxidant potential of brown seaweeds extracted by different solvents and 
characterization of their phenolic compounds by LC–ESI-QTOF–MS/MS. Journal of Food 
Science, 88(9), 3737–3757.
Dziki, D., Cacak-Pietrzak, G., Hassoon, W. H., Gawlik-Dziki, U., Sułek, A., Różyło, R., & Sugier, D. 
(2021). The fruits of sumac (Rhus coriaria L.) as a functional additive and salt replacement to 
wheat bread. LWT, 136, 110346.
Ebrahimi, F., Subbiah, V., Agar, O. T., Bringloe, T. T., Legione, A. R., & Suleria, H. A. (2024). LC-ESI-
QTOF-MS/MS characterization of phenolic compounds from Victorian shorebound red sea­
weeds and their antioxidant capacity. Algal Research, 82, 103609.
Eghbali, S., Farhadi, F., & Askari, V. R. (2023). An overview of analytical methods employed for qual­
ity assessment of Crocus sativus (saffron). Food Chemistry: X, 20, 100992.
El Bishbishy, M. H., Gad, H. A., & Aborehab, N. M. (2020). Chemometric discrimination of three 
Pistacia species via their metabolic profiling and their possible in vitro effects on memory func­
tions. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis, 177, 112840.

238
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Ersan, S., Güçlü Üstündağ, O., Carle, R., & Schweiggert, R. M. (2016). Identification of phenolic com­
pounds in red and green pistachio (Pistacia vera L.) hulls (exo-and mesocarp) by HPLC-DAD-
ESI-(HR)-MS n. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 64(26), 5334–5344.
Falleh, H., Oueslati, S., Guyot, S., Dali, A. B., Magné, C., Abdelly, C., & Ksouri, R. (2011). LC/ESI-MS/
MS characterisation of procyanidins and propelargonidins responsible for the strong antioxidant 
activity of the edible halophyte Mesembryanthemum edule L. Food Chemistry, 127(4), 1732–1738.
Fan, Y., Cao, X., Zhang, M., Wei, S., Zhu, Y., Ouyang, H., & He, J. (2022). Quantitative comparison and 
chemical profile analysis of different medicinal parts of Perilla frutescens (L.) Britt. from different 
varieties and harvest periods. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 70(28), 8838–8853.
Fereidoonfar, H., Salehi-Arjmand, H., Khadivi, A., Akramian, M., & Safdari, L. (2019). Chemical 
variation and antioxidant capacity of sumac (Rhus coriaria L.). Industrial Crops and Products, 
139, 111518.
Gallego, A. M., Zambrano, R. A., Zuluaga, M., Rodríguez, A. V. C., Cortés, M. S. C., Vergel, A. P. R., 
& Valencia, J. W. A. (2022). Analysis of fruit ripening in Theobroma cacao pod husk based on 
untargeted metabolomics. Phytochemistry, 203, 113412.
Gamage, G. C. V., & Choo, W. S. Effect of hot water, ultrasound, microwave, and pectinase-assisted 
extraction of anthocyanins from black goji berry for food application. Heliyon 9 (3)(2023).
Gonzales, G. B., Raes, K., Vanhoutte, H., Coelus, S., Smagghe, G., & Van Camp, J. (2015). Liquid chro­
matography–mass spectrometry coupled with multivariate analysis for the characterization 
and discrimination of extractable and nonextractable polyphenols and glucosinolates from red 
cabbage and Brussels sprout waste streams. Journal of Chromatography A, 1402, 60–70.
Goupy, P., Vian, M. A., Chemat, F., & Caris-Veyrat, C. (2013). Identification and quantification of fla­
vonols, anthocyanins and lutein diesters in tepals of Crocus sativus by ultra performance liquid 
chromatography coupled to diode array and ion trap mass spectrometry detections. Industrial 
Crops and Products, 44, 496–510.
Grassi, G., Di Gregorio, P., Rando, A., & Perna, A. M. (2024). Quality and sensorial evaluation of beef 
burgers added with Sicilian sumac (Rhus coriaria L). Heliyon, 10(5).
Guo, W., Mehrparvar, S., Hou, W., Pan, J., Aghbashlo, M., Tabatabaei, M., & Rajaei, A. (2024). Unveiling 
the impact of high-pressure processing on anthocyanin-protein/polysaccharide interactions: A 
comprehensive review. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 132042.
Gweyi-Onyango, J. P., Osei-Kwarteng, M., & Mahunu, G. K. (2021). Measurement and maintenance 
of Hibiscus sabdariffa quality. In Roselle (Hibiscus sabdariffa) (pp. 47–67). Academic Press.
Hamed, A. R., El-Hawary, S. S., Ibrahim, R. M., Abdelmohsen, U. R., & El-Halawany, A. M. (2021). 
Identification of chemopreventive components from halophytes belonging to Aizoaceae and 
Cactaceae through LC/MS—Bioassay guided approach. Journal of Chromatographic Science, 
59(7), 618–626.
Hameed, M. K., Umar, W., Razzaq, A., Wei, S., Niu, Q., Huang, D., & Chang, L. (2023). Quantification 
of total polyphenols, antioxidants, anthocyanin and secondary metabolites by UPLC VION IMS 
QTOF MS/MS analysis in green and red lettuce cultivars. Scientia Horticulturae, 315(January), 
111994. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scienta.2023.111994
Handayani, L., Aprilia, S., Arahman, N., & Bilad, M. R. (2024). Identification of the anthocyanin 
profile from butterfly pea (Clitoria ternatea L.) flowers under varying extraction conditions: 
Evaluating its potential as a natural blue food colorant and its application as a colorimetric 
indicator. South African Journal of Chemical Engineering, 49, 151–161.
He, Y. K., Yao, Y. Y., & Chang, Y. N. (2015). Characterization of anthocyanins in Perilla frutescens 
var. acuta extract by advanced UPLC-ESI-IT-TOF-MSn method and their anticancer bioactivity. 
Molecules, 20(5), 9155–9169.
Hoang, T. N. N., Nguyen, N. P. M., Dong, T. A. D., & Le, T. H. A. (2023). Anthocyanin isolation from 
Hibiscus sabdariffa L. flowers by extraction, macroporous D101 resin purification, and biological 
evaluation. Journal of Agriculture and Food Research, 14, 100848.
Hopkins, A. L., Lamm, M. G., Funk, J. L., & Ritenbaugh, C. (2013). Hibiscus sabdariffa L. in the treat­
ment of hypertension and hyperlipidemia: A comprehensive review of animal and human 
studies. Fitoterapia, 85, 84–94.

239
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
Hsieh-Lo, M., Castillo-Herrera, G., & Mojica, L. (2020). Black bean anthocyanin-rich extract from 
supercritical and pressurized extraction increased in vitro antidiabetic potential, while having 
similar storage stability. Foods, 9(5), 655.
Huang, Y., Zhou, S., Zhao, G., & Ye, F. (2021). Destabilisation and stabilisation of anthocyanins 
in purple-fleshed sweet potatoes: A review. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 116, 
1141–1154.
Illiano, A., Pinto, G., Carrera, M. A., Palmese, A., Di Novella, R., Casoria, P., & Amoresano, A. (2022). 
LC–MS/MS-based quantification method of polyphenols for valorization of ancient apple cul­
tivars from Cilento. ACS Food Science & Technology, 2(4), 647–654.
Ingemann Berentzen, E., Hauer Møller, A., Danielsen, M., Jensen, M., Joernsgaard, B., & Kastrup 
Dalsgaard, T. (2024). Stability of individual anthocyanins from black carrots stored in light 
and darkness – Impact of acylation. Food Research International, 186(January). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodres.2024.114382
Jeyaraj, E. J., Lim, Y. Y., & Choo, W. S. (2021). Extraction methods of butterfly pea (Clitoria ternatea) 
flower and biological activities of its phytochemicals. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 
58(6), 2054–2067.
Jiang, T., Shuai, X., Li, J., Yang, N., Deng, L., Li, S., He, Y., Guo, H., Li, Y., & He, J. (2020). Protein-
bound anthocyanin compounds of purple sweet potato ameliorate hyperglycemia by regulating 
hepatic glucose metabolism in high-fat Diet/Streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 68(6), 1596–1608. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.9b06916
Kaiser, M., Müller-Ehl, L., Passon, M., & Schieber, A. (2020). Development and validation of meth­
ods for the determination of anthocyanins in physiological fluids via UHPLC-MSn. Molecules, 
25(3), 518.
Kandylis, P. (2022). Phytochemicals and antioxidant properties of edible flowers. Applied Sciences, 
12(19), 9937.
Khaleghi, A., & Khadivi, A. (2022). Genetic diversity of wild grape hyacinth (Muscari neglectum Guss. 
ex Ten.) germplasm with ornamental potential in the Central region of Iran. South African 
Journal of Botany, 148, 307–314.
Khan, M. Z., Mohamed, A. I., & Islam, M. S. (2024). The antioxidant, anti-obesogenic, and anti-dia­
betic potential of selected South African marine algal species. Scientific African, 25, e02284.
Khoshkharam, M., Shahrajabian, M. H., Singh, R. B., Sun, W., Magadlela, A., Khatibi, M., & Cheng, 
Q. (2022). Sumac: A functional food and herbal remedy in traditional herbal medicine in the 
asia. In Functional foods and nutraceuticals in metabolic and non-communicable diseases 
(pp. 261–266). Academic Press.
Kim, M., Nam, D. G., Choe, J. S., Hwang, K. A., & Choi, A. J. (2021). Optimization of pectinase-
assisted extraction condition of mulberry (Morus alba L.) fruit using response surface meth­
odology and its effect on anthocyanin synthesis pathway-related metabolites. Journal of Food 
Science, 86(9), 3926–3938.
Kirby, C. W., Wu, T., Tsao, R., & McCallum, J. L. (2013). Isolation and structural characterization of 
unusual pyranoanthocyanins and related anthocyanins from Staghorn sumac (Rhus typhina L.) 
via UPLC–ESI-MS, 1H, 13C, and 2D NMR spectroscopy. Phytochemistry, 94, 284–293.
Kodikara, C., Netticadan, T., Bandara, N., Wijekoon, C., & Sura, S. (2024). A new UHPLC-HRMS 
metabolomics approach for the rapid and comprehensive analysis of phenolic compounds in 
blueberry, raspberry, blackberry, cranberry and cherry fruits. Food Chemistry, 445, 138778.
Kostka, T., Ostberg-Potthoff, J. J., Briviba, K., Matsugo, S., Winterhalter, P., & Esatbeyoglu, T. (2020). 
Pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) extract and its anthocyanin and copigment fractions—Free 
radical scavenging activity and influence on cellular oxidative stress. Foods, 9(11), 1617.
Kothari, D., Thakur, R., & Kumar, R. (2021). Saffron (Crocus sativus L.): Gold of the spices—A compre­
hensive review. Horticulture, Environment, and Biotechnology, 62(5), 661–677.
Kuasnei, M., Wojeicchowski, J. P., Santos, N. H., Pinto, V. Z., Ferreira, S. R. S., & Zielinski, A. A. F. 
(2022). Modifiers based on deep eutectic mixtures: A case study for the extraction of anthocya­
nins from black bean hulls using high pressure fluid technology. Journal of Supercritical Fluids, 
191(June). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2022.105761

240
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Laganà, G., Barreca, D., Smeriglio, A., Germanò, M. P., D’Angelo, V., Calderaro, A., … & Trombetta, 
D. (2020). Evaluation of anthocyanin profile, antioxidant, cytoprotective, and anti-angiogenic 
properties of Callistemon citrinus flowers. Plants, 9(8), 1045.
Leonarski, E., Kuasnei, M., Moraes, P. A. D., Cesca, K., de Oliveira, D., & Zielinski, A. A. F. (2023). 
Pressurized liquid extraction as an eco-friendly approach to recover anthocyanin from 
black rice bran. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 86(May). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ifset.2023.103372
Li, D., Zuo, W., Ma, S., Li, R., & Ye, Z. (2024). Metabolomics characterization of two saffron from Iran 
and China using GC–MS and LC–MS methods. Journal of Analytical Science and Technology, 
15(1), 7.
Li, J., Li, Y., Li, M., Lin, L., Qi, J., Xu, J., … & Tao, A. (2022). Novel insights into anthocyanin synthesis 
in the calyx of roselle using integrated transcriptomic and metabolomic analyses. International 
Journal of Molecular Sciences, 23(22), 13908.
Li, N., Simon, J. E., & Wu, Q. (2024). Determination of anthocyanins, organic acids, and phenolic 
acids in hibiscus market products using LC/UV/MS. Journal of Food Science, 89(2), 1098–1113.
Li, X., Wang, Y., Jin, L., Chen, Z., Jiang, J., & Jackson, A. (2021). Development of fruit color in Rubus 
chingii Hu (Chinese raspberry): A story about novel offshoots of anthocyanin and carotenoid 
biosynthesis. Plant Science, 311, 110996.
Li, Z., Liu, D., Wang, D., Sun, M., Zhang, G., Wu, Y., … & Cheng, B. (2024). Study on the causes of 
changes in colour during Hibiscus syriacus flowering based on transcriptome and metabolome 
analyses. BMC Plant Biology, 24(1), 431.
Lim, T. K. (2014). Muscari neglectum. In: Edible medicinal and non-medicinal plants. Springer, 
Dordrecht. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-7395-0_7
Liu, T., Liu, T., Zhang, X., Song, J., Qiu, Y., Yang, W., Jia, H., Wang, H., & Li, X. (2023). Combined 
widely targeted metabolomics and transcriptomics analysis reveals differentially accumulated 
metabolites and the underlying molecular bases in fleshy taproots of distinct radish geno­
types. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, 195(January), 351–361. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
plaphy.2023.01.028
Lou, Q., Wang, L., Liu, H., & Liu, Y. (2017). Anthocyanin profiles in flowers of grape hyacinth. 
Molecules, 22(5), 688.
Lucci, P., Saurina, J., & Núñez, O. (2017). Trends in LC-MS and LC-HRMS analysis and characteriza­
tion of polyphenols in food. TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry, 88, 1–24.
Ma, C., Feng, Y., Zhou, S., Zhang, J., Guo, B., Xiong, Y., Wu, S., Li, Y., Li, Y., & Li, C. (2023). Metabolomics 
and transcriptomics provide insights into the molecular mechanisms of anthocyanin accumula­
tion in the seed coat of differently colored mung bean (Vigna radiata L.). Plant Physiology and 
Biochemistry, 200(May), 107739. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2023.107739
Ma, C., Meng, L., Wang, R., Fan, Y., & Wang, R. (2022). Dynamics of anthocyanin profiles of the fruits 
of four blueberry (Vaccinium sp.) cultivars during different growth stages. International Journal 
of Food Properties, 25(1), 1302–1316.
Majdoub, Y. O. E., Ginestra, G., Mandalari, G., Dugo, P., Mondello, L., & Cacciola, F. (2021). The 
digestibility of Hibiscus sabdariffa L. polyphenols using an in vitro human digestion model and 
evaluation of their antimicrobial activity. Nutrients, 13(7), 2360.
Masala, V., Jokić, S., Aladić, K., Molnar, M., & Tuberoso, C. I. G. (2024). Exploring phenolic com­
pounds extraction from saffron (C. sativus) floral by-products using ultrasound-assisted extrac­
tion, deep eutectic solvent extraction, and subcritical water extraction. Molecules, 29(11), 2600.
Mazzara, E., Caprodossi, A., Mustafa, A. M., Maggi, F., & Caprioli, G. (2023). Phytochemical inves­
tigation of sumac (Rhus coriaria L.) fruits from different sicilian accessions. Foods, 12(23), 4359.
Mejía, J. J., Sierra, L. J., Ceballos, J. G., Martínez, J. R., & Stashenko, E. E. (2023). Color, antioxidant 
capacity and flavonoid composition in Hibiscus rosa-sinensis cultivars. Molecules, 28(4), 1779.
Mirzazadeh, N., Bagheri, H., Mirzazadeh, M., Soleimanimehr, S., Rasi, F., & Akhavan-Mahdavi, S. (2024). 
Comparison of different green extraction methods used for the extraction of anthocyanin from 
red onion skin. Food Science and Nutrition, February, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1002/fsn3.4354

241
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
Nina, N., Theoduloz, C., Paillán, H., Jiménez-Aspee, F., Márquez, K., Schuster, K., Becker, L., Oellig, 
C., Frank, J., & Schmeda-Hirschmann, G. (2023). Chemical profile and bioactivity of Chilean 
bean landraces (Phaseolus vulgaris L.). Journal of Functional Foods, 104(January). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jff.2023.105513
Nonglait, D. L., & Gokhale, J. S. (2024). Review insights on the demand for natural pigments and their 
recovery by emerging microwave-assisted extraction (MAE). Food and Bioprocess Technology, 
17(7), 1681–1705.
Ojeda-Amador, R. M., Salvador, M. D., Fregapane, G., & Gómez-Alonso, S. (2019). Comprehensive 
study of the phenolic compound profile and antioxidant activity of eight pistachio cultivars 
and their residual cakes and virgin oils. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 67(13), 
3583–3594.
Peng, Y., Hu, J., Yang, B., Lin, X. P., Zhou, X. F., Yang, X. W., & Liu, Y. (2015). Chemical composition of 
seaweeds. In Seaweed sustainability (pp. 79–124). Academic Press.
Peng, Y., Zhang, H., Liu, R., Mine, Y., McCallum, J., Kirby, C., & Tsao, R. (2016). Antioxidant and anti-
inflammatory activities of pyranoanthocyanins and other polyphenols from staghorn sumac 
(Rhus hirta L.) in Caco-2 cell models. Journal of Functional Foods, 20, 139–147.
Pereira, A. R., Fernandes, V. C., Delerue-Matos, C., de Freitas, V., Mateus, N., & Oliveira, J. (2024). 
Exploring acylated anthocyanin-based extracts as a natural alternative to synthetic food 
dyes: Stability and application insights. Food Chemistry, 461(August), 140945. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2024.140945
Qu, S., Li, M., Wang, G., Yu, W., & Zhu, S. (2021). Transcriptomic, proteomic and LC-MS analyses 
reveal anthocyanin biosynthesis during litchi pericarp browning. Scientia Horticulturae, 289, 
110443.
Rahmati, S., Bazargani-Gilani, B., & Aghajani, N. (2022). Effect of extraction methods on the effi­
ciency of sumac (Rhus coriaria L.) fruit extract in soybean oil quality during accelerated condi­
tions. Food Science & Nutrition, 10(10), 3302–3313.
Rodríguez-Romero, J. D. J., Arce-Reynoso, A., Parra-Torres, C. G., Zamora-Gasga, V. M., Mendivil, E. 
J., & Sáyago-Ayerdi, S. G. (2023). In vitro gastrointestinal digestion affects the bioaccessibility of 
bioactive compounds in Hibiscus sabdariffa beverages. Molecules, 28(4), 1824.
Ruggieri, F., Maggi, M. A., Rossi, M., & Consonni, R. (2023). Comprehensive extraction and chemi­
cal characterization of bioactive compounds in tepals of Crocus sativus L. Molecules, 28(16), 
5976.
Sadeghi, A., Rajabiyan, A., Nabizade, N., Meygolinezhad, N., & Ahmady, A. Z. (2024). Seaweed-
derived phenolic compounds as diverse bioactive molecules: A review on identification, applica­
tion, extraction and purification strategies. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 
131147.
Salehi, A., Shariatifar, N., Pirhadi, M., & Zeinali, T. (2022). An overview on different detection methods 
of saffron (Crocus sativus L.) Adulterants. Journal of Food Measurement and Characterization, 
16(6), 4996–5006.
Salem, M. A., Michel, H. E., Ezzat, M. I., Okba, M. M., El-Desoky, A. M., Mohamed, S. O., & Ezzat, S. 
M. (2020). Optimization of an extraction solvent for angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors 
from Hibiscus sabdariffa L. based on its UPLC-MS/MS metabolic profiling. Molecules, 25(10), 
2307.
Senizza, B., Rocchetti, G., Ghisoni, S., Busconi, M., Pascual, M. D. L. M., Fernandez, J. A., … & 
Trevisan, M. (2019). Identification of phenolic markers for saffron authenticity and origin: An 
untargeted metabolomics approach. Food Research International, 126, 108584.
Shahtouri, M. G., Fooladi, E., Feizy, J., Jahani, M., & Marrazza, G. (2024). Valorization of saffron pro­
duction waste: Isolation of anthocyanins from saffron petal extract by zirconium-based adsor­
bents. LWT, 201, 116233.
Siddik, M. A., Francis, P., Rohani, M. F., Azam, M. S., Mock, T. S., & Francis, D. S. (2023). Seaweed 
and seaweed-based functional metabolites as potential modulators of growth, immune and 
antioxidant responses, and gut microbiota in fish. Antioxidants, 12(12), 2066.

242
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Singh, M. C., Kelso, C., Price, W. E., & Probst, Y. (2020). Validated liquid chromatography separation 
methods for identification and quantification of anthocyanins in fruit and vegetables: A sys­
tematic review. Food Research International, 138, 109754.
Singh, M. C., Probst, Y., Price, W. E., & Kelso, C. (2022). Relative comparisons of extraction methods 
and solvent composition for Australian blueberry anthocyanins. Journal of Food Composition 
and Analysis, 105, 104232.
Siniawska, M., & Wojdyło, A. (2023). Polyphenol profiling by LC QTOF/ESI-MS and biological activ­
ity of purple passion fruit Epicarp extract. Molecules, 28(18), 6711.
Song, W., Yuan, Q., Xie, Y., Wang, Y., Deng, D., & Guo, H. (2024). Formulation and characterization 
of nanocapsules loaded with roselle anthocyanins extract and enhancement of anthocyanins 
bioaccessibility. Food Chemistry, 459, 140446.
Song, X., Zhang, J., Chang, X., Xian, L., & Liu, Y. (2022). Characterization of the anthocyanin biosynthe­
sis pathway at the metabolic level in the red leaves of Pistacia chinensis. Scientia Horticulturae, 
302, 111158.
Subbiah, V., Ebrahimi, F., Agar, O. T., Dunshea, F. R., Barrow, C. J., & Suleria, H. A. (2023a). Comparative 
study on the effect of phenolics and their antioxidant potential of freeze-dried Australian beach-
cast seaweed species upon different extraction methodologies. Pharmaceuticals, 16(5), 773.
Subbiah, V., Duan, X., Agar, O. T., Dunshea, F. R., Barrow, C. J., & Suleria, H. A. (2023b). Comparative 
study on the effect of different drying techniques on phenolic compounds in Australian beach-
cast brown seaweeds. Algal Research, 72, 103140.
Tan, J., Han, Y., Han, B., Qi, X., Cai, X., Ge, S., & Xue, H. (2022). Extraction and purification of antho­
cyanins: A review. Journal of Agriculture and Food Research, 8, 100306.
Tasinov, O., Dincheva, I., Badjakov, I., Grupcheva, C., & Galunska, B. (2022). Comparative phyto­
chemical analysis of Aronia melanocarpa L. fruit juices on Bulgarian market. Plants, 11(13), 1655.
Teixeira, M., Tao, W., Fernandes, A., Faria, A., Ferreira, I. M., He, J., … & Oliveira, H.. (2023). 
Anthocyanin-rich edible flowers, current understanding of a potential new trend in dietary 
patterns. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 138, 708–725.
Tena, N., Martín, J., & Asuero, A. G. (2020). State of the art of anthocyanins: Antioxidant activity, 
sources, bioavailability, and therapeutic effect in human health. Antioxidants, 9(5), 451.
Uribe, E., Vega-Gálvez, A., Vargas, N., Pasten, A., Rodríguez, K., & Ah-Hen, K. S. (2018). Phytochemical 
components and amino acid profile of brown seaweed Durvillaea antarctica as affected by air 
drying temperature. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 55, 4792–4801.
Villalobos-Vega, M. J., Rodríguez-Rodríguez, G., Armijo-Montes, O., Jiménez-Bonilla, P., & Álvarez-
Valverde, V. (2023). Optimization of the extraction of antioxidant compounds from roselle 
hibiscus calyxes (Hibiscus sabdariffa), as a source of nutraceutical beverages. Molecules, 
28(6), 2628.
Viola, E., Mannino, G., Serio, G., La Rosa, L., Garofalo, G., Schicchi, R., … & Gaglio, R. (2024). 
Phytochemical profiling and investigation of antioxidant, anti-proliferative, and antibacterial 
properties in spontaneously grown Sicilian sumac (Rhus coriaria L.) fruits. Food Bioscience, 61, 
104704.
Wan, X., Wu, J., Wang, X., Cui, L., & Xiao, Q. (2024). Accumulation patterns of flavonoids and phe­
nolic acids in different colored sweet potato flesh revealed based on untargeted metabolomics. 
Food Chemistry: X, 23(March), 101551. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fochx.2024.101551
Wang, D., Chen, L., Yang, Y., Abbas, F., Qin, Y., Lu, H., … & Hu, G. (2023b). Integrated metabolome 
and transcriptome analysis reveals the cause of anthocyanin biosynthesis deficiency in litchi 
aril. Physiologia Plantarum, 175(1), e13860.
Wang, J., Wei, Q., Wang, W., Hu, H., Yan, Y., Wang, Y., Li, Y., Jiang, Y., Wu, G., Hu, T., & Bao, C. 
(2023c). Understanding the nutraceutical diversity through a comparative analysis of the tap­
root metabolomes of different edible radish types via UHPLC–Q–TOF–MS. Food Chemistry, 
403(June 2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2022.134469
Wang, L., Qin, Y., Wang, Y., & Zhou, Y. (2024b). Changes of anthocyanin and amino acid metabolites 
in saffron petals (Crocus sativus L.) during fermentation based on untargeted metabolomics. 
LWT, 192, 115724.

243
LC-MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
Wang, Q., Jing, L., Xu, Y., Zheng, W., & Zhang, W. (2023a). Transcriptomic analysis of anthocyanin 
and carotenoid biosynthesis in red and yellow fruits of sweet cherry (Prunus avium L.) during 
ripening. Horticulturae, 9(4), 516.
Wang, R., Chen, N., Li, J., Qian, D., Huang, X., & Yang, B. (2023d). Ultra-performance liquid chro­
matography-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry-based metabolomics to clarify 
the mechanism of color change of saffron floral bio-residues. Journal of Food Science, 88(2), 
732–743.
Wang, S., Nie, S., Gan, R. Y., & Zhu, F. (2023e). Properties of cheese and ground beef in the presence 
of staghorn sumac. eFood, 4(2), e74.
Wang, Z., Zhang, Y., Tu, Z., Yu, C., Liu, R., Deng, Z., & Luo, T. (2024a). The degradation and anti­
oxidant capacity of anthocyanins from eggplant peels in the context of complex food system 
under thermal processing. Food Bioscience, 59(March), 103914. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fbio.2024.103914
Wu, T., McCallum, J. L., Wang, S., Liu, R., Zhu, H., & Tsao, R. (2013). Evaluation of antioxidant 
activities and chemical characterisation of staghorn sumac fruit (Rhus hirta L.). Food Chemistry, 
138(2–3), 1333–1340.
Wu, Y., Gong, Y., Sun, J., Zhang, Y., Luo, Z., Nishanbaev, S. Z., … & Benito, M. J. (2023). Bioactive 
components and biological activities of Crocus sativus L. byproducts: A comprehensive review. 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 71(49), 19189–19206.
Xu, J., Li, H., Yang, H., Wang, T., Chang, Y., Nie, C., & Fu, Y. (2024a). Lingonberry (Vaccinium vitis-idaea 
L.) fruits: Potential characterization of flavor and functional profiles during ripening based on 
UHPLC-QqQ-MS/MS. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 130, 106143.
Xu, X., Ding, L., Fu, Y., Wang, Y., & Cai, S. (2024b). Polyphenol-rich extract of Chinese sumac (Rhus 
chinensis mill.) Fruits and its main component decrease in vitro starch digestibility of bread: 
Exploring the potential mechanisms from the perspective of molecular interactions. LWT, 195, 
115856.
Zannou, O., Oussou, K. F., Chabi, I. B., Alamou, F., Awad, N. M., Miassi, Y. E., … & Ibrahim, S. A. 
(2025). Phytochemical and nutritional properties of sumac (Rhus coriaria): A potential ingredi­
ent for developing functional foods. Journal of Future Foods, 5(1), 21–35.
Zhang, A., Yang, H., Ji, S., Tian, C., Chen, N., Gong, H., & Li, J. (2022a). Metabolome and transcrip­
tome analyses of anthocyanin accumulation mechanisms reveal metabolite variations and 
key candidate genes involved in the pigmentation of Prunus tomentosa Thunb. cherry fruit. 
Frontiers in Plant Science, 13, 938908.
Zhang, L., Fan, G., Khan, M. A., Yan, Z., & Beta, T. (2020). Ultrasonic-assisted enzymatic extraction 
and identification of anthocyanin components from mulberry wine residues. Food Chemistry, 
323, 126714.
Zhang, P., Li, Y., Chong, S., Yan, S., Yu, R., Chen, R., … & Zhang, X. (2022b). Identification and quanti­
tative analysis of anthocyanins composition and their stability from different strains of Hibiscus 
syriacus L. flowers. Industrial Crops and Products, 177, 114457.
Zhang, Y., Zhang, T., Zhao, Q., Xie, X., Li, Y., Chen, Q., Cheng, F., Tian, J., Gu, H., & Huang, J. (2021). 
Comparative transcriptome analysis of the accumulation of anthocyanins revealed the under­
lying metabolic and molecular mechanisms of purple pod coloration in okra (Abelmoschus escu­
lentus L.). Foods, 10(9), 1–19. https://doi.org/10.3390/foods10092180
Zheng, Y. F., Li, D. Y., Sun, J., Cheng, J. M., Chai, C., Zhang, L., & Peng, G. P. (2020). Comprehensive 
comparison of two color varieties of perillae folium using rapid resolution liquid chromatog­
raphy coupled with quadruple-time-of-flight mass spectrometry (RRLC-Q/TOF-MS)-based 
metabolic profile and in vivo/in vitro anti-oxidative activity. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 68(49), 14684–14697.

244
12
UHPLC/MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
Leo M.L. Nollet
12.1  UHPLC and UPLC of Anthocyanins
12.1.1  UHPLC and UPLC
Ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) is a technique similar to that of high-
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) when it comes to separating different com­
ponents of a sample, as well as identifying, quantifying, and separating the components 
of a mixture. The major difference in UPLC is the particle size in the column which is less 
than 2 µm providing better separation than in HPLC where the size of these is limited to 
5 µm. These smaller particles require higher pump pressures (100 MPa vs. 40 MPa) which 
makes this method very efficient with rapid analysis and higher resolution.
UHPLC (ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography) and UPLC are both liq­
uid chromatography (LC) techniques used to separate the different components found 
in mixtures. UHPLC and UPLC are the same techniques. In 2004, Waters launched the 
technique known as UPLC based upon sub 2-micron porous particles and trademarked 
the acronym UPLC. Other vendors entered the market with similar instruments named 
UHPLC as a way to refer to instruments similar to UPLC. The technology behind both 
UHPLC and UPLC instruments is sub 2-micron particles. Most HPLC methods are devel­
oped on particles between 2.5 and 5 microns in size. The smaller sub 2-micron particles 
require a higher pressure to work. UHPLC or UPLC systems need to be capable of operat­
ing above 6000 PSI.
Since sub 2-micron particles are so small the diffusion path between the sample analytes 
and the stationary phase is shorter and the efficiency is higher. HPLC, UHPLC, and UPLC 
rely on pumps, which pass a pressurized liquid containing a sample mixture through 
absorbent materials.
Here we consider both terms, UHPLC and UPLC, to be synonymous.
12.1.2  Anthocyanins
Analytical techniques for profiling anthocyanins have been widely reported in the last 
decade for in vitro and in vivo studies. A number of important technological advances 
in HPLC and the introduction of the UHPLC have achieved significant gains in both 
the speed and the separation of anthocyanins in the past decade. Advancements in 
mass spectrometry (MS), such as high-resolution and sequential collision MS (HRMS 
and MSn) allow fast structural elucidation of food anthocyanins that play a very 
important role in food anthocyanin research. A significant increase in the number of 

245
UHPLC/MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
studies has been reported for tandem MS-, HRMS-, and MSn-based approaches for 
food analysis. The article of Sun et al. (1) provides an updated review of the application 
of LC (HPLC and UHPLC) in combination with MS for the study of food anthocyanins 
in recent years.
Flavonoids can be separated on reverse phase (RP) columns due to their differential 
polarities resulting from their different functionalization of their central ring struc­
tures via hydroxylation, methylation, and glycosylation (2,3). The general elution order 
observed for reverse columns is glycosylated flavonoids first/earlier, followed by flavo­
noid aglycones and then methylated flavonoid aglycones. Flavonoid aglycones absorb 
UV light and thus can be detected using an UV absorbance or photodiode array (PDA) 
detector. Their UV spectra are typically characterized by two absorption maxima (i.e., 
Band II and Band I) (4). The absorption maximum at around 240–290 nm (Band II) is 
due to the A ring and its conjugation and functionalization. The other absorbance 
maximum (Band I) originates from the conjugation of B and C rings via the C2 and C3 
double bond and appears around 300–550 nm for most flavonoids. For anthocyanins, 
the Band I absorption maximum is at approximately 460–560 nm, and for flavones and 
flavonols, it is around 310–370 nm (5). Glycosylation decreases the Band I absorption 
maximum.
The best separation of flavonoids can be obtained with a Waters Corp Acquity UPLC 
system equipped with a C18 reversed-phase column (Acquity UPLC BEH C18 Column, 
130 Å, 1.7 µm particle, 2.1 mm diameter × 150 mm length). The gradient separations 
use a column temperature of 60°C, mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid, B: acetonitrile, 
and flow rate: 0.56 mL/min. The linear gradient includes mobile B increased from 5 to 
70% over 30 min, then to 95% over 3 min, hold at 95% for 3 min, then returned to 5% for 
re-equilibrium for 5 min. Injection volume is 2 µL.
Flavonoids are detected using PDA detectors with a wavelength range from 190 to 
400 nm. Scanning up into the visible light range between 400 and 600 nm will also enable 
observation of colored flavonoids and aurones.
Flavonoids can be detected with MS and MS/MS (3). Most are preferentially ionized in 
negative electrospray ionization mode (ESI) due to their acidic phenolic hydroxyl groups. 
Permethylated flavonoids and anthocyanins can be analyzed in positive ESI mode. 
Fragmentation of flavonoids in MS/MS is structure-specific and can be used to identify 
and/or elucidate flavonoid structures. Aglycone fragmentation may proceed through 
C-ring opening or rearrangement, depending on the hydroxylation patterns (3). A protocol 
is optimized for a Waters Acquity UPLC system coupled to a Bruker Impact quadrupole 
time of flight mass spectrometer or a Bruker Impact II quadrupole time of flight mass 
spectrometer.
12.2  UPLC of Anthocyanins in Plasma and Urine
Numerous studies on anthocyanins confirm health-promoting effects in humans. Daily 
anthocyanin intake can be estimated via food databases, but the amount absorbed by the 
organism still remains uncertain because anthocyanin bioavailability is yet to be eluci­
dated in its entirety. For this purpose, suitable and validated methods of sample prepara­
tion and analysis are needed. A sample preparation method for anthocyanin metabolite 
analysis in plasma was successfully established and validated by Kaiser et al. (6). The 

246
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
validation yielded acceptable results for the anthocyanins in terms of recovery (54–108%) 
and precision (coefficient of variation (CV) < 15%).
The UHPLC-MS method used in the consecutive reaction monitoring (CRM) mode was 
sufficiently sensitive, resulting in limits of detection <8.1 ng/mL.
The UHPLC consisted of an Acquity I-Class UPLC Binary Solvent Manager, an Acquity 
UPLC Sample Manager–FL, and an Acquity UPLC PDA eλ Detector from Waters each. 
The autosampler was cooled at 10°C, and the column oven was set at 40°C. For chromato­
graphic separation, an HSS T3 C18 column (2.1 mm × 150 mm; 1.8 µm) equipped with a 
VanGuard HSS T3 C18 precolumn (5 mm × 2.1 mm, 1.7 µm) from Waters was used. Eluents 
were 3% formic acid in water (A) and acetonitrile (B); the flow rate was set at 0.4 mL/
min, and the injection volume was 5 µL for all methods. The linear gradient to analyze 
the anthocyanins was as follows: 0 min 4% B, 7 min 8% B, 13 min 10% B, 19 min 17% B, 
23 min 30% B, 23.3 min 100% B, 25.3 min 100% B, and 25.3–25.8 min 4% B. The linear gra­
dient for the analysis of anthocyanidins was 0 min 15% B, 8.5 min 25% B, 9.5 min 100% B, 
11 min 100% B, and 11–13 min 15% B. The MS system was an LTQ XL Iontrap MSn from 
Thermo Scientific equipped with an electrospray ionization interface operating in positive 
mode. The spray voltage was 4 kV, and the capillary temperature was set at 325°C; for the 
anthocyanidins, the capillary voltage was 9 V with the tube lens voltage at 40 V, and, for 
the anthocyanins, the capillary voltage was 15 V with the tube lens voltage being 60 V. 
CRM with collision-induced dissociation (CID) was used to record the abundance of the 
analytes. The instrument was tuned automatically with delphinidin-3-O-glucoside for the 
anthocyanins and pelargonidin for the aglycones. Xcalibur software version 2.2.0.48 from 
Thermo Fisher Scientific was used.
A single-dose pharmacokinetic trial was conducted in six adults to evaluate the bioavail­
ability of anthocyanins and colonic polyphenol metabolites after consumption of 500 mg 
aronia berry extract (7). UHPLC-MS methods were developed to quantitate aronia berry 
polyphenols and their metabolites in plasma and urine. While anthocyanins were bioavail­
able, microbial phenolic catabolites increased 10-fold more than anthocyanins in plasma 
and urine. Among the anthocyanins, cyanidin-3-O-galactoside was rapidly metabolized 
to peonidin-3-O-galactoside. Aronia polyphenols were absorbed and extensively metab­
olized with tmax of anthocyanins and other polyphenol catabolites from 1.0 to 6.33 h in 
plasma and urine.
Dried residue from solid-phase extraction clean-up of urine or plasma was recon­
stituted with 100 µL methanol. UHPLC-MS analysis was conducted using a Shimadzu 
Nexera UHPLC equipped with DGU-20A5 Prominence degasser, SIL-30AC Nexera autos­
ampler, CTD-30A Nexera column oven, two LC-30AD pumps, LCMS-2020 mass spec­
trometer, and a Kinetex Pentafluorophenyl (PFP) column (1.7 µm, 100 Å, 2.1 mm–50 mm). 
Chromatographic methods were developed to optimize resolution and detection of aronia 
polyphenols and metabolites in the reconstituted samples. For all of the chromatographic 
methods, the mass spectrometer was set to a nebulizing gas flow of 1.5 l/min, a drying gas 
flow of 15.0 l/min, the desolvation line at 250°C, the heat block at 500°C, and the interface 
temperature at 350°C. Other detector parameters were set to optimize the response of 
individual compounds of interest.
Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside, cyanidin-3-O-galactoside, cyanidin-3-O-arabinoside, and 
peonidin-3-O-galactoside were resolved by a gradient of water with trifluoroacetic acid 
(99.9:0.1, v/v) (A) and methanol (B) that started at 80% A and 20% B, then increased to 40% 
B over the next 9 min, then increased to 100% B at 12 min, and returned to 20% B at 18 min, 
and was held until the stop time of 20 min. The flow was maintained at 0.2 mL/min and 
the sample injection volume was set to 5 µL.

247
UHPLC/MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
Red raspberries, containing ellagitannins and cyanidin-based anthocyanins, were 
fed to volunteers and metabolites appearing in plasma and urine were analyzed by 
UHPLC-MS (8).
The results showed an extensive degradation of raspberry anthocyanins and ellagitan­
nins as they pass through the body with a great variety of metabolites, including methyl, 
glycine, glucuronide, and sulfate derivatives of phenolic acids, phenylpropanoids, ellagic 
acid, and urolithins.
Qualitative and quantitative analysis of anthocyanins in urine and plasma samples 
was performed by UHPLC-MS. Anthocyanins were analyzed using an Accela UHPLC 
1250 with a LTQ XL linear ion trap-mass spectrometer fitted with a heated ESI probe 
(Thermo Scientific). Separation was performed with a Kinetex PFP (50 mm × 2.1 mm), 
2.6 μm particle size column (Phenomenex). The volume injected was 5 mL and column 
oven was set to 30°C. Elution was carried out at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. The gradient 
started with 10% acetonitrile in 0.1% aqueous formic acid, and after 1 min a 9-min linear 
gradient of 10–60% acetonitrile was applied. From 10 to 11 min the acidified acetonitrile 
increased to 80%, and after 2 min was reduced to 10% acetonitrile to re-equilibrate the 
column. The MS was operated in positive ionization mode with a capillary tempera­
ture of 275°C, with the source temperature of 300°C. Analyses were carried out using 
full scan, data-dependent MS3 scanning from m/z 100 to 600, with CID of 35 (arbitrary 
units). Helium gas was used for CID. Data processing was performed using Xcalibur 
software (Thermo Scientific). Anthocyanins were quantified using a cyanidin-3-O-
glucoside calibration curve.
12.3  UPLC of Anthocyanins in Juices
Individual anthocyanin analysis was carried out by ultra HPLC with PDA detection and 
electrospray ionization/MS (UHPLC-PDA-ESI/MSn) analysis (9). Five milliliter samples of 
centrifuged juice were loaded onto C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters) that were previously 
conditioned with 5 mL of methanol and 5 mL of pure water. The anthocyanins and other 
polyphenols were adsorbed by these columns; sugars, acids, and other soluble compounds 
were removed by washing the cartridges with water. Anthocyanins were eluted with 
methanol containing 1% formic acid. The acidified methanol solutions were evaporated 
to dryness, and the dried fractions were redissolved in 7% aqueous formic acid. Similarly, 
young shoots/flowers/peel/stigma methanolic extracts were dried under vacuum distilla­
tion, resuspended in an aqueous acidic solution (1% formic acid) and then loaded onto C18 
Sep-Pak cartridges that had been pre-washed with methanol and pre-equilibrated with 
water. The cartridges were eluted with acidified methanol (1% formic acid). The eluted 
methanolic solutions were evaporated to dryness, and the dried fractions were redissolved 
in 7% aqueous formic acid. Then, the samples were filtered through a 0.45 μm membrane 
filter and injected into the UHPLC-MSn chromatographic system to identify the individual 
anthocyanins.
Anthocyanin separation was conducted on a Chromolith Performance RP-18 end-capped 
column (100 mm × 3.0 mm inner diameter, monolithic particle size; Merck) using an Ultra-
Fast HPLC system coupled to a PDA detector and a Finnigan LXQ ion trap equipped with 
an ESI interface in series configuration (Thermo Electron). A binary gradient composed of 
water containing 7% formic acid (solvent A) and methanol (solvent B) was used. The gradi­
ent was run as: (1) B from 5 to 40% for 20 min, (2) isocratic for 7 min, and (3) re-equilibration 

248
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
to initial conditions. The flow rate was 300 µL/min, the column temperature was 30°C 
and the injection volume was 20 µL. The range of wavelengths was set between 210 and 
700 nm, and the chromatograms were recorded at 520 nm.
MS full-scan acquisition (scan range m/z 200–2000) was first performed in positive ion 
mode. Selected peaks were isolated in the ion trap and fragmented by MSn scan acquisi­
tion. Anthocyanins were identified using retention time (TR), MS and MSn data in positive 
ion mode, and also by comparison of the MS data with those of pure standards and/or lit­
erature values. The relative compositions (%) of individual anthocyanins were calculated 
from peak areas at 520 nm using Xcalibur, version 2.0.7 (Thermo Electron).
12.4  UPLC of Anthocyanins in Wines
The metabolic pigment composition of Sangiovese wines produced from grapes harvested 
at 20 different vineyards in Montalcino over three consecutive years (2008−2010) on a semi-
industrial scale and of 55 commercial Brunello di Montalcino wines (2004−2007) was stud­
ied, using a targeted method capable of analyzing 90 pigments in an 11 min UHPLCMS/
MS chromatographic run (10). Interesting correlations were shown between various pig­
ments formed during wine aging and those present in Sangiovese grapes. Vitisin B-like 
pigment and vitisin A-like pigment concentrations would seem to have a good correlation 
with ethyl-linked and direct-linked flavanol−anthocyanin concentrations, respectively. 
Moreover, the anthocyanic pattern recognition, genetically controlled by the plant variety, 
was shown to be inherited by the pigments formed during wine aging.
Analysis of the samples studied was performed with an Acquity UPLC system (Waters) 
coupled to a Xevo TQ MS system (Waters) operating under MassLynx XS software. All 
samples were analyzed on a RP Acquity UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 150 mm col­
umn (Waters), protected with an Acquity UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 5 mm pre­
column (Waters), at 40°C and under a mobile phase flow rate of 0.4 mL/min. Water was 
used as weak eluting solvent (A) and methanol as strong elution solvent (B); formic acid 
5% v/v was used as additive in both eluents. The multistep linear gradient used was as 
follows: from 95 to 60% of A for the first 4 min, from 60 to 45% A from 4 to 9 min, from 
45 to 5% A from 9 to 11 min, and an isocratic hold for 3 min to clean the column. The 
equilibration time was 4 min, and the injection volume was 2 μL. All of the samples were 
analyzed in triplicate. The column eluent was directed to the mass spectrometer, and 
analyte detection was performed by multiple reaction monitoring (MRM). Electrospray 
positive ionization mode (ESI) was applied for all compounds.
Pigments have very similar structural characteristics to one another and are already 
charged, so their detection using a mass spectrometer occurs under very similar condi­
tions. The chromatographic data reported in the literature were also used for identifi­
cation. Quantification of individual compounds was performed using UHPLC-MS/MS. 
When the authentic standard was not available, the analytes were quantified relative to 
malvidin 3-glucoside, by the malvidin 3-glucoside calibration curve. Data processing was 
performed using the MassLynx TargetLynx Application Manager (Waters).
Hyphenation of micro-liquid and UPLC with a hybrid (QqTOF) tandem MS was studied 
for monitoring of anthocyanin dyes in various cultivars and different vintages of red wine 
(11). UHPLC system provided lower LOD and LOQ values as well as higher productivity 
and precision of retention parameters and peak areas with respect to micro-LC method. 

249
UHPLC/MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
On the other hand, micro-LC method offers significant savings of mobile phase, less con­
tamination of ion source of mass spectrometer and makes the nebulization process in 
electrospray much easier.
In combination with principal component analysis (PCA), the method allows to eluci­
date long-term relations in a complete set of certified red wine cultivars grown in South 
Moravia (certified in Czech Republic until year 2005). Among the studied varieties Rubinet 
exhibit a specific anthocyanin profile. Especially interesting is a high content of 3-couma­
roylglucoside-5-glucosides of malvidin and peonidin. Those dyes can be used as markers 
of artificial color enhancement. PCA applied to data processed with regard to enzymatic 
activity markedly facilitate classification among varieties.
Analyses were performed on two liquid chromatographs CapLC XE System (Waters) 
and PLATINblue (Knauer).
µLC separation of anthocyanins was achieved on a CapLC XE System using a C18 micro­
column (Gemini C18, 5 µm, 150 mm × 300 µm, Phenomenex) at room temperature.
A Waters CapLC 2996 PDA was used as the UV–vis detector prior to connection to the 
mass spectrometer.
Analyses of the last vintage (2009) were performed on PLATINblue UHPLC system. The 
separation was carried out using a C18 column (Acquity BEH, 1.7 µm, 50 mm × 2.1 mm, 
Waters), also at room temperature.
Mass spectrometric detection was performed on QqTOF mass spectrometer (Q-Tof 
Premier, Waters) in a positive electrospray (ESI) mode. For the µLC/MS analysis, the cap­
illary voltage was kept at 3.2 kV, the temperature of the source was 120°C and the desol­
vation gas was set at 300°C with flow rates adjusted to 300 L/h. UHPLC/MS analysis 
required higher flow rates of the desolvation gas (550 L/h). Also, to facilitate the ioniza­
tion process, a usage of a flow-splitting device was necessary. The chromatographic and 
mass spectrometric processing software used for data evaluation was MassLynx 4.0 and 
Masslynx 4.1.
Malvidin-3-O-glucoside (MvG), malvidin-3-O-(6-O-acetyl)-glucoside (MvAG), and 
malvidin-3,5-O-diglucoside (MvDG) are three representative malvidin-type anthocya­
nins in red wine. In the study of (12), the influence of structural differences on the forma­
tion efficiency of two types of derived pigments ((−)-epicatechin-ethyl-anthocyanins and 
pyranoanthocyanins) was investigated in model solutions using UHPLC-MS. The results 
showed that the yields of MvAG were higher than those of MvG to form both types of 
derived pigments, and the formation rate of pyranoanthocyanin was also relatively higher. 
In contrast, acetylation slowed the formation of (−)-epicatechin-ethyl-anthocyanins, indi­
cating that the rate of covalent reactions may be linked to the affinity of (−)-epicatechin 
to copigment with anthocyanins. The condensation rate of MvDG with (−)-epicatechin, 
mediated by acetaldehyde, was much lower than that of the two monoglucosidic anthocy­
anins and also exhibited lower yields. In addition, pyranoanthocyanin was not generated 
from MvDG due to the absence of a free hydroxyl group at the C5 position.
The samples for the formation of (−)-epicatechin-ethyl-anthocyanins were taken at 0, 1, 2, 
3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 days, and the samples for the formation of pyranoanthocyanins were taken 
at 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, and 30 days. All the samples were transferred into 150-μL glass inserts 
in brown HPLC vials and stored at −40°C until further detection. Phenolic analysis was 
performed on an Agilent 1290 II series UHPLC system, combined with a 6545 series quad­
rupole time-of-flight MS (Agilent Technologies), using a Zorbax SB-C18 Rapid Resolution 
HD column (150 mm ×2.1 mm, 1.8 μm, Agilent Technologies) for separation. The mobile 
phase consisted of water/formic acid (100/1, v/v) (A) and methanol/acetonitrile/formic 

250
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
acid (50/50/1, v/v/v) (B). The other HPLC and MS conditions were based on reference 
(13). Qualitative analysis of anthocyanins and their derivatives was accomplished using 
UHPLC-MS according to the elution order, spectrum, molecular mass, and fragmentation 
pattern reported in refs 14 and 15 (14,15).
12.5  UPLC of Anthocyanins in Fruits
Euterpe oleracea fruits have gained much attention because of their phenolic constituents 
that have shown potential health benefits. The aim of the work of Dias et al. (16) is to 
develop a validated UHPLC–PDA method for major anthocyanins quantification in E. 
oleracea fruits. The separation was performed on HSS C18 column (1.8 µm) using a gradi­
ent elution with acetonitrile and 5% formic acid in a total run time of only 17 min. Total 
error and accuracy profiles were used as criteria for the validation process. Calibration 
in the matrix was found to be more accurate than calibration without matrix. Trueness 
(<6.76% relative bias), repeatability (<4.6% RSD), intermediate precision (<5.3% RSD), selec­
tivity, response function, and linearity for major anthocyanins, cyanidin-3-glucoside and 
cyanidin-3-rutinoside, were evaluated. The concentration range validated was 1–48 g/mL 
for both compounds. In addition two cyanidin-di-O-glycosides were detected for the first 
time in this fruit. A first extraction of the fruits with ethyl acetate removes the lipophilic 
compounds and allows an easier extraction by methanol and quantification of anthocya­
nins in this extract.
The analysis were performed on a Accela UHPLC system acquired from Fisher Scientific 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) consisting of a PDA detector, an autosampler equipped with a 
column oven and a tray compartment cooler and a quaternary pump with a built-in sol­
vent degasser, all piloted by ChemoQuest software. The chromatographic separation was 
performed on an Acquity UPLC HSS C18 column 1.8 µm, 100 mm × 2.1 mm ID (Waters) 
equipped with a VanGuard UPLC HSS C18 precolumn 1.8 µm, 5 mm × 2.1 mm ID (Waters). 
5 µL of samples was injected in a full loop injection mode. The separations were performed 
with a constant flow rate of 400 µL/min with the eluents being (A) H2O/HCOOH (95/5) 
and (B) ACN with the following gradients: 0–10 min: 5–15% B; 10–10.1 min: 15–95% B; 
10.1–12 min: 95% B; 12–12.1 min: 95–5% B; 12.1–17 min: 5% B. The column oven and tray 
cooler temperatures were set to 30 and 4°C, respectively. For quantitative analysis the PDA 
detector was used at 515 nm. The quantification was performed using the external calibra­
tion method. The Accela UHPLC system was hyphenated with a LTQ-Orbitrap XL MS 
system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The system was equipped with an ESI interface that was 
used in positive ionization mode.
The compounds were identified by comparison with reference compounds from reten­
tion times, MS and MS/MS analysis. For the MS experiments two scan events were 
applied. The first was a full MS scan, for which the spectra were recorded in the range 
of m/z 100–1000 with a resolution of 30,000. The second was a data-dependent scan that 
selected the most intense ion or specified ions in another setting from the first scan event 
for the acquisition of MS/MS spectra. The CID activation was set to a normalized collision 
energy of 20 or 15%.
The major non-anthocyanin flavonoids (NAF) in the juice of E. oleracea were quantified 
by an accurate method coupling UHPLC with a linear ion trap-high-resolution Orbitrap 
MS system (UHPLC-LTQ-Orbitrap MS) (17). Fruits were processed to juice, and then 
the juice was lyophilized and defatted. The residue was then extracted in the presence 

251
UHPLC/MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
of methanol by sonication. The extraction time was optimized and recovery rates of the 
extraction were >90%. The extracts were dried and solubilized again in 40% MeOH, which 
showed the best compromise for MS detection. For the UHPLC quantification, a HSS C18 
column (1.8 μm) was used with a gradient elution of methanol and water both with 0.1% 
formic acid. Seven compounds and their isomers were successfully separated, including 
the major NAF. Calibration in the matrix was found to be more accurate than calibration 
without matrix.
The UHPLC analysis was performed on an Accela UHPLC system acquired from Fisher 
Scientific (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that consisted of an autosampler equipped with a 
column oven, a tray compartment cooler, and a quaternary pump with a built-in solvent 
degasser, all piloted by Xcalibur software. The chromatographic separation was performed 
on an Acquity UPLC HSS C18column, 1.8 μm, 100 mm × 2.1 mm i.d. (Waters), equipped 
with a VanGuard UPLC HSS C18 precolumn, 1.8 μm, 5 mm × 2.1 mm i.d., from the same 
supplier. Five μL of samples were injected in a full loop injection mode. The separations 
were performed with a constant flow rate of 400 μL/min. The eluents were (A) 0.1% formic 
acid in water and (B) 0.1% formic acid in methanol. They were eluted with the following 
gradient: 0–2 min: 15% B; 218 min: 15–27% B; 18–28 min: 27–95% B; 28–30 min: 95% B; 
30–30.1 min: 95–15% B; 30.1–35 min: 15% B. The column oven and tray cooler temperatures 
were set to 30 and 4°C, respectively. The Accela UHPLC system was hyphenated with a 
LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The system was equipped 
with an ESI source that was operated in negative ion. Spectra were recorded in the range of 
m/z 100–1000 with a resolution of 30,000. For identification purposes, two scan events were 
applied for the MS experiments. The first was in a full scan MS mode and the second was a 
data-dependent scan that selected the most intense ion or specified ions in another setting 
from the first scan event for the acquisition of MS/MS spectra. The CID activation was set 
to normalized collision energy of 25%, except for quercetin and luteolin (35%), vanillic, caf­
feic, and protocatechuic acids (20%). The compounds were identified by comparison with 
reference compounds when available and with literature data, from retention times, MS, 
MS/MS, and MSn analysis.
The phenolic composition of grape berries grown in Italy (Cabernet Cortis, 
Johanniter, Solaris, Phoenix, and Regent) and in Germany (Regent and Phoenix) was 
analyzed using two complementary LC-MS/MS (LC-Tandem Quadrupole MS) meth­
ods (18). These five cultivars belong to fungus-resistant grape varieties (PIWI) and lit­
tle is known about their phenolic profile, although phenolics such as phytoalexins have 
been recognized, playing a key role in the resistance mechanism. A triple quadruple 
mass spectrometer detector was used for both identification and quantification, and 
analytical tools from untargeted metabolomics were applied to check and control the 
quality of the results. Specifically, biological, technical, and instrumental replications 
were included in order to study the variability at different levels. The results allowed 
tuning of the sampling protocol and provided a rich phenolic metabolite profile for the 
aforementioned PIWI varieties, as compared with Vitis vinifera cultivars, especially in 
the class of stilbenes.
Analysis was carried out on a Waters Acquity UPLC system, consisting of a binary 
pump, cooling autosampler, on-line vacuum degasser, and column oven, coupled to a 
Waters Xevo triple-quadrupole mass spectrometer detector. Flow injections of each indi­
vidual metabolite were used to optimize the MRM conditions. For the majority of the 
metabolites, this was done automatically by the Waters Intellistart software, whereas for 
some compounds, the optimal cone voltages and collision energies were identified during 
CID experiments and manually set.

252
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Analysis of phenolic metabolites (except anthocyanins) was performed according to 
Vrhovsek et al. (19), with a Waters Acquity HSS T3 column (1.8 μm, 100 mm × 2.1 mm). 
The injection volume was 10 μl. For the triple-quadrupole mass spectrometer, capillary 
voltage was 3.5 kV in positive mode and 2.5 kV in negative mode; the source was kept 
at 150°C; desolvation temperature was 500°C; cone gas flow, 50 l/h; and desolvation gas 
flow, 800 l/h. Unit resolution was applied to each quadrupole. The injection of samples 
was performed following the same randomized sequence used for extraction, and the 
QC sample was injected twice at the beginning of the sequence and after every six real 
sample injections. Analysis of anthocyanins was carried out according to Arapitsas et al., 
(20) with a few minor modifications. A reversed-phase Acquity UPLC BEH C18 (1.7 μm, 
2.1 mm × 150 mm) column, protected with an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 precolumn 
(1.7μm, 2.1 mm × 5 mm) was used and kept at 40°C. Mobile phase flow rate was 0.4 mL/
min, using water containing 5% v/v formic acid (A) and methanol containing 5% v/v 
formic acid as eluting solvents. The gradient was set as follows: 0 min 5% B, from 0 to 
4 min linear to 40% B, from 4 to 9 min linear to 55% B, from 9 to 11 min linear to 95% 
B, and from 11 to 14 min isocratic 95% B for washing and back to the initial conditions. 
Injection volume was 2 μl, and samples were analyzed in duplicate according to two dif­
ferent randomized sequences. Electrospray positive ionization mode was applied for all 
compounds. Once again, a QC sample was injected after every six real sample injections. 
The same injection procedure was also carried out by diluting the samples 10 times due 
to the signal above the linearity range in a few cases.
Identification was carried out on the basis of authentic standards by checking the related 
retention time and considering both qualifier and quantifier ions. For quantification, cali­
bration linear curves were built according to Vrhovsek et al. (19) and Arapitsas et al. (20) 
for metabolites with a signal-to-noise ratio higher than 10 (limit of quantification–LOQ s/
n=10). The limit of detection was given by s/n=3. LOD and LOQ were determined accord­
ing to the results of real injections and not calculated with mathematic formulas, so for 
some compounds, LOD and LOQ were identical. Data processing was carried out using 
Waters MassLynx version 4.1 and TargetLynx software. PCA was performed using IBM 
SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 19.0.
Avula et al. (21) developed a simple, quick, and reliable UHPLC-PDA-MS method to iden­
tify chemical markers for authentication and compare fruit samples of four elder species, 
Sambucus nigra, Sambucus ebulus, Sambucus canadensis, and Sambucus cerulea. The UHPLC 
method showed an adequate separation of 11 compounds including anthocyanins, phe­
nolic acids, and flavonoids in berries of the four Sambucus species. Quantitation, detec­
tion limits, precision, accuracy as well as robustness were determined. The analysis of 55 
different samples of four Sambucus species showed distinct phytochemical fingerprints. 
Thirty-one dietary supplements claiming to contain S. nigra berries extract were analyzed 
to determine authenticity. Ten (32%) of the 31 products complied with the label and con­
tained only elderberry. The application of UHPLC-QToF provided useful information to 
characterize 73 compounds that can be used to distinguish among the four Sambucus 
species and also help to determine the presence of adulterants. Extracts of black rice (Oryza 
sativa) were identified as the main adulterants in the dietary supplements, although other 
undeclared ingredients such as extracts of purple carrot (Daucus carota ssp. sativus var. 
atrorubens) and flowers of S. nigra were also found instead of elderberry in two products.
All analyses were performed on a Waters Acquity UPLC system (Waters) including qua­
ternary solvent manager, sample manager, column compartment, PDA (Waters Acquity 
model) connected to Waters Empower 3 data station. An Acquity UPLC HSS C18 column 
(100 mm × 2.1 mm I.D., 1.8 µm), also from Waters, was used for the separation. The column 

253
UHPLC/MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
and sample temperature were maintained at 45°C and 15°C, respectively. The column was 
equipped with a LC-18 guard column (Vanguard 2.1 mm ×5 mm, Waters). The mobile 
phase consisted of water (A), and acetonitrile (B) both containing 1% formic acid at a flow 
rate of 0.135 mL/min with a gradient of % B: initial, 11%; 8 min, 23%; 13 min, 35%; 18 min, 
100% (run time 20 min). Each run was followed by a 3 min wash with 100% B and an equili­
bration period of 5 min with 89% A/11% B. Strong (95/5; acetonitrile/water) and weak 
(10/90; acetonitrile/water) needle wash solutions were used to reduce the risk of carryover. 
Two μL of the sample was injected and peak identities were assigned based on the mass 
of the compounds, comparison of the retention times with standard compounds, and by 
comparison of the UV/Vis spectra to those of reference compounds. The effluent from the 
LC column was directed from the PDA into the ESI probe. Data acquisition with a QDa 
single quadrupole mass detector was performed in both positive and negative modes. 
Compounds were monitored in selected ion recording (SIR) mode.
For the UPLC-MS/MS method, the liquid chromatographic system was an Agilent Series 
1290 and the separation was achieved on an Acquity UPLC HSS C18 column (100 mm × 
2.1 mm I.D., 1.8 µm). The mobile phase consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (A) and 
acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (B) at a flow rate of 0.15 mL/min. Analysis was per­
formed using the following gradient elution: 11–23% B in 8 min, then to 35% B in the next 
5 min, and finally to 100% B at 18 min. Each run was followed by a 3 min wash with 100% 
B and an equilibration period of 5 min with 89% A/11% B. Two microliters of the sample 
were injected. The column temperature was 45°C. The mass spectrometric analysis was 
performed with a QToF-MS-MS (Model #G6545B, Agilent Technologies) equipped with 
an ESI source with Jet Stream. All the operations, acquisition and analysis of data 
were controlled by Agilent MassHunter Acquisition software Ver. A.10.1 and processed 
with MassHunter Qualitative Analysis software Ver. B.07.00.
Pistacia lentiscus L. is a shrub of the Anacardiaceae family whose fruits are used in 
Tunisian and Algerian diets. The phenolic composition at 5 different physiological stages 
of the fruit was investigated using two different targeted methodologies: UHPLC–UV/
visible detection (UHPLC-UV/vis) for anthocyanins and UHPLC coupled with tandem MS 
(UHPLC-MS/MS) for the other polyphenols (22). For the specific analysis of anthocyanins, 
compound identification was confirmed by UHPLC-MS/MS and LC-NMR analysis. This 
study revealed the identification of 30 phenolic compounds including 9 anthocyanins, 
7 flavanols, 7 flavonols, 2 phenolic acids, 1 stilbene, 2 flavanones, 1 flavanonol, and 1 dihy­
drochalcone. Quantification showed significant qualitative and quantitative variation in 
phenolic content during the ripening of P. lentiscus fruits, flavonols being the main com­
pounds for the unripe berries and anthocyanins for ripe berries. This study (22) reports 
the presence of piceid and protocatechuic acid in P. lentiscus L. fruits, as well as several 
anthocyanins in Pistacia, for the first time.
Individual anthocyanin identification was performed by a combination of HPLC-MS 
and HPLC-NMR analysis following the method developed by Acevedo De la Cruz et al. 
(23). Individual anthocyanin quantification was performed on a UHPLC-MWL-MS/MS 
system (Thermo Scientific) composed of an Accela 1250 system coupled to a TSQ Quantum 
Access Max triple quadrupole equipped with an H-ESI ion source. Anthocyanins were 
separated on a Zorbax SB-C18 column (2.1 mm × 100 mm, 1.8 μm, Agilent) with 1 μL of 
volume injection. Mobile phase A was deionized water containing 2.5% formic acid (v/v) 
and mobile phase B was methanol (UHPLC grade) containing 2.5% formic acid (v/v). The 
elution gradient was for solvent B: 2.5% (0 2 min); 15% (7 min); 23% (9.3 min); 55% (10 min); 
95% (11–12.5 min); 2.5% (13–15 min). The temperature and the flow were fixed to 35°C and 
0.4 mL/min, respectively. The mass detector operated in the positive mode. All compounds 

254
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
were quantified using the MWL detector at 520 nm using a calibration curve built with 
Dp3glu (range 0.97 1000 mg/L). Results were expressed as mg delphinidin 3-O-glucoside 
(Dp3glu) equivalents per 100 g of dry-weight fruits (mg DGE/100 g DW). The limits of 
detection (LOD =0.08 mg DGE/100 g DW) and quantification (LOQ = 0.23 mg DGE/100 g 
DW) were calculated as LOD =3.3 × s/b and LOQ = 10 × s/b, where “b” is the slope of the 
curve and “s” the standard deviation of the signal determined as the residual standard 
deviation of the calibration line in the LOD region (24).
An UHPLC-UV/vis-MS/MS methodology was used to obtain more details of the indi­
vidual anthocyanin composition of the fruits.
Gaultheria pumila (Ericaceae) (known as Chaura or Mutilla) is a Chilean native small 
shrub that produces berry fruits consumed by local Mapuche people. In the study of 
Fernández-Galleguillos et al. (25), the chemical fingerprinting and antioxidant, enzyme 
inhibition, and antiproliferative activities of the berries were investigated for the first time. 
Thirty-six metabolites were identified in the fruits by UHPLC- PDA detection, hyphenated 
with Orbitrap MS analysis (UHPLC-DAD-Orbitrap-MS). Metabolites included anthocya­
nins, phenolic acids, flavonoids, iridoids, diterpenes, and fatty acids.
LC was performed using a UHPLC C18 column (Acclaim, 150 mm × 4.6 mm ID, 2.5µm; 
Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating at 25°C. The detection wavelengths were 280, 254, 330, 
and 354 nm, and PDA detectors were set from 200 to 800 nm. Mobile phases were 1% 
formic aqueous solution (A) and acetonitrile 1% formic acid (B). The gradient program 
started at 5% B at time zero; was maintained at 5% B for 5 min; went to 30% B for 10 min; 
was maintained at 30% B for 15 min; went to 70% B for 5 min; was maintained at 70% B for 
10 min; and was finally returned to the initial conditions within 10 min and 12 min for col­
umn equilibration prior to each injection. The flow rate was 1.00 mL/min and the injection 
volume was 10 µL. The standards and lyophilized decoction dissolved in methanol were 
kept at 10°C during its storage in the autosampler.
The objectives of the work of Feuereisen et al. (26) were to determine the phenolic pro­
file of Schinus terebinthifolius and Schinus molle fruits and to develop a reliable method for 
the differentiation of these two similar spices both known as pink pepper. Anthocyanins, 
bioflavonoids, and gallotannins, some of which are reported for the first time in these 
species, were identified by UHPLC−UV/vis−MS/MS. Consideration of the relative and 
absolute amounts of phenolics as well as indicator compounds from 18 samples revealed 
that the relative amounts of anthocyanins and bioflavonoids are the most trustworthy 
parameters. PCA and cluster analysis (CA) allowed a grouping of the samples according 
to their species, showing that the anthocyanins are most important for the identification 
of species.
Two different LC−MS systems were used for the analysis of phenolic compounds. The 
MS of the first system is more sensitive and therefore particularly suitable for the detection 
of minor compounds, whereas the UV detector of the second, more acid-resistant system 
has a higher sensitivity and is therefore preferable for the purposes of UV/vis quantitation. 
For the identification of phenolic compounds, an Acquity UPLC system (Waters) was used 
as described previously. Also, the methods were the same with the exception of the eluents 
and the gradient used for anthocyanin analysis. For enhanced separation, 5 and 3% formic 
acid in water and acetonitrile, respectively, were used. The gradient for anthocyanin anal­
ysis was slightly modified as follows: 0.0 min, 0% B; 0.2 min, 5% B; 12 min, 16.9% B; 1 min, 
25% B; 17 min, 98% B; 19 min, 98% B; 20 min, 1% B; 22 min, 0% B. Furthermore, the gradient 
used for bilavonoid analysis was extended for more efficient detection of hinokiflavone: 
0 min, 2% B; 24 min, 71.6% B; 24.3 min, 100% B; 25.3 min, 100% B; 26 min, 2% B; 27.5 min, 2% 
B. Quantitation and determination of relative amounts of anthocyanins and bioflavonoids 

255
UHPLC/MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
were performed with an Acquity I-Class UHPLC system (Waters) equipped with a binary 
pump (BSM), an autosampler (SM-FL) cooled at 10°C, a column oven (CM) set at 40°C, 
a diode array detector (PDA eλ) scanning from 200 to 700 nm for the anthocyanins and 
from 200 to 480 nm for the biflavonoids, and an LTQXL linear ion trap mass spectrom­
eter (Thermo Scientific) with an electrospray interface. The mass spectrometer was tuned 
using a solution of cyanidin-3-O-glucoside for the anthocyanins and I3,II8-biapigenin 
for the bioflavonoids. The MS scan was performed in full scan mode, and MS2 and MS3 
spectra were acquired. Xcalibur version 2.2 (Thermo Electron) was used to control the 
UHPLC−MS system and to evaluate the results. The bioflavonoids and anthocyanidins 
were quantified by a calibration curve using amentoflavone and malvidin-3-O-glucoside 
as external standards.
Vortex-assisted matrix solid-phase dispersion (VA-MSPD) is used to determine phenolic 
compounds in the edible part of Myrciaria cauliflora combined with UHPLC coupled to 
tandem MS (UHPLC-MS/MS) analysis (27).
For the chromatographic analysis of the 10 selected phenolic compounds, which were 
chosen since they have been identified in M. cauliflora fruit (28–30), a UHPLC-MS/MS was 
developed. For this, a UPLC Acquity system coupled to a triple quadrupole mass spec­
trometer equipped with an electrospray ionization source (ESI, Waters Z spray™, Waters) 
was used. The mobile phase consisted of ultrapure water acidified with 0.1% formic acid 
(A), and methanol (B), using a gradient program elution. The percentage of the organic sol­
vent was changed linearly as follows: 10% B (0–4 min), 70% B (4–7 min), 100%B (7–8 min). 
The system was re-equilibrated with the initial conditions of the elution program for 6 min 
prior to the next injection. A column Acquity UPLC BEH C18 (2.1 mm × 50 mm i.d., 1.7 μm 
particle size) from Waters was used for the separation at a flow rate of 0.150 mL/min. The 
column temperature was held at 30°C and the injection volume was 1.5 μL. The mass spec­
trometer was operated using an electrospray (ESI) source in negative ion mode. The mass 
spectrometer was operated in MS/MS mode using selected reaction monitoring (SRM). 
Two characteristic ions were selected for identification and quantification for each ana­
lyte. The corresponding cone voltage and collision energy were optimized with maximum 
intensity. MassLynx™ v.4.1 software (Waters) was used for instrument control, data acqui­
sition, and processing.
Myrtus communis L.(Myrtaceae) is a self-seeded shrub, widespread in Sardinia, with 
anti-inflammatory, antiseptic, antimicrobial, hypoglycemic, and balsamic properties. 
Its berries, employed for the production of sweet myrtle liqueur, are characterized by a 
high content of bioactive polyphenols, mainly anthocyanins. Anthocyanin composition 
is quite specific for vegetables/fruits and can be used as a fingerprint to determine the 
authenticity, geographical origin, and quality of raw materials, products, and extracts. 
To rapidly analyze and determine anthocyanins in 17 samples of M. communis berries, 
a platform based on the integration of UHPLC–MS/MS quantitative data and multivari­
ate analysis with the aim of extracting the most information possible from the data was 
developed (31).
UHPLC-ESI-MS/MS methods, working in positive ion mode, were performed for the 
detection and determination of target compounds in MRM mode. Optimal chromato­
graphic conditions were achieved using an XSelect HSS T3 column and a gradient elution 
with 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. PCA was applied to the 
quantitative data to correlate and discriminate 17 geographical collections of M. communis.
The developed quantitative method was reliable, sensitive and specific and was success­
fully applied to the quantification of 17 anthocyanins. Peonidin-3-O-glucoside was the 
most abundant compound in all the extracts investigated.

256
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Full scan electrospray ionization MS (ESI-MS), MS/MS, and MS3 analyses of standards 
and samples were performed on an ABSciex API 4000 Q-Trap spectrometer. The analyti­
cal parameters were optimized by infusing each standard solution (1 μg/mL in metha­
nol 50%) in to the source at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. Data were acquired in the positive 
ion MS, MS/MS and MS3 modes. Direct infusions of each individual standard compound 
were used to optimize the MRM conditions, which was done automatically by the Analyst 
1.6.2 software, and then manually checked for selection of the quantifier and qualifier 
ions. Qualitative on-line HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses of extracts were performed using a 
UHPLC system interfaced to an ABSciex API 4000 Q-Trap instrument in ion trap mode. 
LC analyses were conducted using a system equipped with a Flexar UHPLC AS system 
(Perkin–Elmer) consisting of degasser, Flexar FX-10 pump, autosampler, and PE200 column 
oven. Samples were injected (5 μL) in to an XSelect HSS T3 column (Waters) (100 mm × 
2.1 mm i.d., 2.5 μm). Mobile phase A was water containing 0.1% formic acid while mobile 
phase B was acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. Elution was carried out at 40°C 
according to the following gradient: 0–0.5 min, isocratic 5% B; 0.519 min, linear gradient 
5–95% B. The flow rate was 300 μL/min and was injected from the chromatograph directly 
into the ESI source. Qualitative analysis of the compounds was performed using IDA 
(information-dependent acquisition).The IDA method created included an IDA criteria 
(specify the charge state, mass range), enhanced MS scan, enhanced resolution, enhanced 
product ion scan, or MS/MS scan. Enhanced MS (EMS) was conducted with mass range 
from m/z 200.0 to 800.0 with a scan rate of 10000 amu/s.
MS data were acquired using the software provided by the manufacturer (Analyst soft­
ware 1.6.2), and extracted ion fragmentograms (XIC) were elaborated in order to identify 
anthocyanins from their protonated molecular ions and retention time. In the product ion 
spectra obtained, the predominant fragments relative to anthocyanin compounds were 
chosen to develop the MRM method for quantification.
Quantitative on-line HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed using the same 
LC-ESI-MS/MS equipment but with the mass spectrometer having the triple quadrupole 
analyzer in MRM mode. Elution was carried out at 41°C according to the following flow 
and solvent gradient: 0–4 min, isocratic 0% solvent B and the flow changes from 300 μL to 
350 μL; 4–6 min, linear gradient 0–12% B and the flow achieves 400 μL/min; 6–12 min, lin­
ear gradient 12–20% B and flow constant at 400 μL/min; 16–17min, linear gradient 20–100% 
B and flow retrieves to 300 μL/min. The API 4000 ES source was operated in positive ion 
mode and was tuned by infusing solutions of standards (1 μg/μL in methanol 50%) in to 
the source at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. Data acquisition and processing were performed 
using Analyst software 1.6.2.
Anthocyanins are the major polyphenolic compounds in strawberry fruit responsible 
for its color. Due to their sensitivity, they are affected by food processing techniques such 
as fermentation that alters both their chemical composition and organoleptic properties. 
The work of Hornedo-Ortega et al. (32) aims to evaluate the impact of different fermenta­
tion processes on individual anthocyanins compounds in strawberry wine and vinegar by 
UHPLC-MS/MS Q Exactive analysis.
Nineteen, 18, and 14 anthocyanin compounds were identified in the strawberry initial 
substrate, strawberry wine, and strawberry vinegar, respectively. Four and 8 anthocyanin 
compounds were tentatively identified with high accuracy y for the 1st time to be present 
in the beverages obtained by alcoholic fermentation and acetic fermentation of strawberry, 
respectively. Both, the total and the individual anthocyanin concentrations were decreased 
by both fermentation processes, affecting the alcoholic fermentation to a lesser extent (19%) 
than the acetic fermentation (91%). Indeed, several changes in color parameters have been 

257
UHPLC/MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
assessed. The color of the wine and the vinegar made from strawberry changed during the 
fermentation process, varying from red to orange color, this fact is directly correlated with 
the decrease of anthocyanins compounds.
An UHPLC Dionex Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Scientific), coupled to a Thermo 
Scientific Q-Exactive TM hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer was used. 
The UHPLC system consisted of consisting of a quaternary Rs Pump Dionex Ultimate 
3000 and Rs autosampler Dionex Ultimate 3000, connected to a quadrupole-orbitrap (Q 
Exactive) hybrid mass spectrometer with heated-electrospray ionization probe (HESI-II, 
Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical method was previously published (Nati’ c and 
others 2015). Separation was performed on a column SB-C18 (2.1 mm × 100 mm, 1.8 µm) 
set at 40°C (Agilent). Injection volume was 1 µL and flow rate was 0.4 mL/min. The sol­
vents used as a mobile phase were solvent A (water/formic acid 95:5 v/v) and solvent B 
(acetonitrile/formic acid 95:5 v/v), scheduled in the following gradient: 0.0–2.0 min 5% B, 
2.0–12.0 min from 5 to 100% B, 12.0–13.0 min from 100 to 5% B, then 5% B up to 15.0 min.
Anthocyanin identification and quantitation were acquired in positive mode by full-
range acquisition covering m/z 100–1500 at 35,000 resolution and by targeted MS2 normal­
ized Higher Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD).
Xcalibur software (version3.0.63) was used for instrument control, data acquisition, and 
data analysis. Compounds were identified according to their calculated mass, accurate 
mass, mass spectra, characteristic fragmentation data, and retention time. Pelargonidin 
3-glucoside, cyanidin 3-glucoside, delphinidin 3-glucosise, and peonidin 3-glucoside 
available standards were used both for positive identification and quantification purposes. 
Anthocyanin compounds were quantified using the areas of the aglycone counterparts.
Sweet cherries are highly appreciated by consumers worldwide and are usually cold-
stored during postharvest to prevent over-ripening before distribution to the market. Sweet 
cherry is a non-climacteric fruit, for which ripening is known to be regulated by abscisic 
acid. The hormone profiles, including measurements of abscisic acid, auxins, cytokinins, 
and gibberellins by UHPLC coupled to tandem MS (UHPLC–MS/MS) were examined (33), 
in relation to variations in sugar and anthocyanin contents, during growth and ripening 
of this fruit. Hormonal profiling revealed that indole-3-acetic acid, GA1, and trans-zeatin 
levels decreased at early stages of fruit development, while GA3 levels decreased at early 
stages but also later, once anthocyanin accumulation started. Conversely, abscisic acid lev­
els rose significantly once the fruit started to synthetize anthocyanins, and isopentenyl­
adenosine levels also increased during the ripening of sweet cherries. A strong negative 
correlation was found between GA4 levels and both fruit biomass and anthocyanin levels, 
and between the levels of trans-zeatin and both fruit biomass and total sugar contents. 
In contrast, abscisic acid and isopentenyladenosine levels correlated positively with fruit 
biomass, anthocyanin, and total soluble sugar content. Results suggest that auxins, cyto­
kinins, and gibberellins may act coordinately with abscisic acid in the regulation of sweet 
cherry development and ripening. Furthermore, it is shown that hormonal profile mea­
surements by UHPLC–MS/MS may be a helpful tool to elucidate the timing of action of 
each specific hormonal compound during ripening, which has important applications in 
the agri-food biotechnological sector.
The system consisted of an Acquity UPLC System (Waters) quaternary pump equipped 
with an autosampler. An HALO C18 (Advanced Materials Technology) column (2.1 mm × 
75 mm, 2.7 µm) was used. Solvent A was water with 0.05% glacial acetic acid and sol­
vent B was acetonitrile with 0.05% glacial acetic acid. Flow rate was set at 0.6 mL/min. 
Quantification was made considering recovery rates for each sample by using the 
deuterium-labeled internal standards.

258
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Response surface methodology was employed to investigate the effects of pressurized 
liquid extraction (PLE) parameters on the recovery of phenolic compounds (anthocyanins, 
biflavonoids) from Brazilian pepper (S. terebinthifolius Raddi) fruits (34). The effects of tem­
perature, static time, and ethanol as well as acid concentration on the polyphenol yield 
were described well by quadratic models (p < 0.0001). A significant influence of the ethanol 
concentration (p < 0.0001) and several interactions (p < 0.05) were identified. Identification 
of the biflavonoid I30,II8-binaringenin in drupes of S. terebinthifolius was achieved by 
UHPLC-MS2. Interestingly, at high extraction temperatures (>75°C), an artifact occurred 
and was tentatively identified as a diastereomer of I30,II8-binaringenin. Multivariate opti­
mization led to high yields of phenolic compounds from the exocarp/drupes at 100/75°C, 
10/10 min, 54.5/54.2% ethanol, and 5/0.03% acetic acid. This study demonstrates that PLE 
is well-suited for the extraction of phenolic compounds from S. terebinthifolius and can effi­
ciently be optimized by response surface methodology.
The HPLC system was equipped with a quaternary pump, a degasser, an autosampler, 
and a column oven (e2965 Separation module, Waters). UV/Vis spectra were recorded 
from 210 to 800 nm using a Waters 996 PDA detector. A NUCLEODUR 100-5 C18 ec ana­
lytical column (150 mm, 2 mm i. d.; 3 µm, Macherey-Nagel) with a SecurityGuard Guard 
Cartridge (AQ C18, 4 mm, 2 mm, Phenomenex) was used for the separation of the phenolic 
compounds. Elution was conducted at 35°C with 1% (v/v) acetic acid in water (solvent A) 
and 1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B) at a constant flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. 
The gradient program was as follows: 0–40% B in 80 min, 40–100% B in 10 min, 100–0% 
B in 10 min, and 0% B for 10 min for equilibration. The injection volume was 20 µL for 
the exocarp samples and 10 µL for the drupe samples. The extracts were filtered through 
0.2 µm Chromafil RC-20/15 MS filters (Macherey-Nagel) prior to injection. According to 
their respective absorption maxima, the peak integration was done at a wavelength of 
500 nm for peaks 1–3, 330 nm for peaks 4–6, and 290 nm for peak 7. For quantification, a 
calibration was compiled with malvidin for the anthocyanins and with amentoflavone 
and naringenin for the biflavonoids. The characterization of the phenolic compounds was 
performed using an Acquity UHPLC-DAD-MS/MS system (Waters) as described in our 
previous work (35).
The majority of components in fruits are sensitive to heat-processing. Nevertheless, fruits 
are becoming popular ingredients in processed foods, like bakery foods. Therefore, the 
fate of the components in the fruit-involved food during thermal processing is important 
for the assessment of their nutritional values and sensory properties. Unfortunately, com­
prehensive knowledge of the compositional alteration in real food products during pro­
cessing is limited. In the study of Zheng et al. (36), a popular bakery food, blueberry-filled 
pastry, was taken as the object, and a widely targeted metabolomic approach was applied 
to investigate the holistic compositional variation of blueberry filling during pastry prepa­
ration. Amongst the total of 630 chemicals identified, 288 chemicals were screened as dif­
ferential compounds between samples collected at different processing stages. The most 
variation of the chemicals was observed during the process of stir-frying. A total of 197 
chemicals varied significantly in concentrations during stir-frying, while only 75 chemi­
cals altered significantly in contents during baking. Amongst 288 differential compounds, 
117 belonged to the group of phenolic compounds, with the others found to be sugars and 
organic acids, amino acids, lipids, nucleotides, etc. The possible mechanisms of the chemi­
cal alterations during thermal processing were also discussed. The data provide compre­
hensive information on the compositional changes in berry-containing fillings during 
thermal processing, and hints, and emphasis for further investigation of the underlying 
mechanisms.

259
UHPLC/MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
Exactly 2 µL of sample were injected and analyzed using a Shim-pack UFLC Shimadzu 
CBM 30A system (Shimadzu Corporation) interfaced to an Applied Biosystems 6500 
QTRAP mass spectrometer (ABSciex). The sample was separated on a Waters Acquity 
UPLC HSS T3 C18 column (100 mm × 2.1 mm, particle size 1.8 µm) (Waters Corporation, 
Milford, MA, USA) by using water (0.04% acetic acid) as solvent A and acetonitrile (0.04% 
acetic acid) as solvent B. The eluting gradient program was as follows: 0.0–11.0 min, 
5–95% B; 11.0–12.0 min, 95% B; 12.0–12.1 min, 95–5% B; and 12.1–15.0 min, 5% B. The 
flow rate was 0.4 mL/min. The temperature of column oven was kept at 40°C during 
the analysis. The effluent was connected to an ESI-triple quadrupole linear ion trap 
(QQQ-LIT) mass spectrometer equipped with an ESI Turbo Ion-Spray interface oper­
ating in both positive and negative ion modes and controlled by Analyst 1.6.3 soft­
ware. Instrument tuning and mass calibration were performed with 10 and 100 µmol/L 
polypropylene glycol solutions in QQQ and LIT modes, respectively. QQQ scans were 
acquired as MRM.
References
	
1.	 Sun, J., Lin, L., & Chen, P. (2013). Recent applications for HPLC-MS analysis of anthocyanins in 
food materials. Current Analytical Chemistry, 9(3), 397–416.
	
2.	 Lei, Z., Sumner, B. W., Bhatia, A., Sarma, S. J., & Sumner, L. W. (2019). UHPLC-MS analyses of 
plant flavonoids. Current Protocols in Plant Biology, 4(1), e20085.
	
3.	Lei, Z., Jing, L., Qiu, F., Zhang, H., Huhman, D., Zhou, Z., & Sumner, L. W. (2015). 
Construction of an ultrahigh pressure liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectral 
library of plant natural products and comparative spectral analyses. Analytical Chemistry, 
87(14), 7373–7381.
	
4.	 de Rijke, E., Out, P., Niessen, W. M. A., Ariese, F., Gooijer, C., & Brinkman, U. A. T. (2006). 
Analytical separation and detection methods for flavonoids. Journal of Chromatography A, 
1112(1), 3163.
vonoids by HPLC coupled to diode array detection. (C. Santos-Buelga & G. Williamson Eds.). 
Royal Society of Chemistry (Great Britain): United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge.
	
6.	 Kaiser, M., Müller-Ehl, L., Passon, M., & Schieber, A. (2020). Development and validation of 
methods for the determination of anthocyanins in physiological fluids via UHPLC-MSn. 
Molecules, 25(3), 518.
	
7.	 Xie, L., Lee, S. G., Vance, T. M., Wang, Y., Kim, B., Lee, J. Y., …, & Bolling, B. W. (2016). 
Bioavailability of anthocyanins and colonic polyphenol metabolites following consumption of 
aronia berry extract. Food Chemistry, 211, 860–868.
	
8.	 Ludwig, I. A., Mena, P., Calani, L., Borges, G., Pereira-Caro, G., Bresciani, L., …, & Crozier, A. 
(2015). New insights into the bioavailability of red raspberry anthocyanins and ellagitannins. 
Free Radical Biology and Medicine, 89, 758–769.
	
9.	 Fabroni, S., Ballistreri, G., Amenta, M., & Rapisarda, P. (2016). Anthocyanins in different Citrus 
species: An UHPLC-PDA-ESI/MS n-assisted qualitative and quantitative investigation. Journal 
of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 96(14), 4797–4808.
	 10.	 Arapitsas, P., Perenzoni, D., Nicolini, G., & Mattivi, F. (2012). Study of Sangiovese wines pig­
ment profile by UHPLC-MS/MS. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 60(42), 10461–10471.
	 11.	 Papoušková, B., Bednář, P., Hron, K., Stávek, J., Balík, J., Myjavcová, R., …, & Lemr, K. (2011). 
Advanced liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry profiling of anthocyanins in relation 
to set of red wine varieties certified in Czech Republic. Journal of Chromatography A, 1218(42), 
7581–7591.
 
5. Santos-Buelga, C., Garcia-Viguera, C., & Tomás-Barberán, F. A. (2003). On-line identification of fla-

260
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
	 12.	 Zhao, X., Zhang, N., He, F., & Duan, C. (2022). Reactivity comparison of three malvidin-type 
anthocyanins forming derived pigments in model wine solutions. Food Chemistry, 384, 132534.
	 13.	 Zhao, X., He, F., Zhang, X.-K., Shi, Y., & Duan, C.-Q. (2021). Impact of three phenolic copigments 
on the stability and color evolution of five basic anthocyanins in model wine systems. Food 
Chemistry, 131670.
	 14.	 Li, S. Y., He, F., Zhu, B. Q., Wang, J., & Duan, C. Q. (2017). Comparison of phenolic and chro­
matic characteristics of dry red wines made from native Chinese grape species and Vitis vinif­
era. International Journal of Food Properties, 20(9), 2134–2146.
	 15.	 Zhang, X. K., Li, S. Y., Zhao, X., Pan, Q. H., Shi, Y., & Duan, C. Q. (2020). HPLC-MS/MS based 
targeted metabolomic method for profiling of malvidin derivatives in dry red wines. Food 
Research International, 134, Article 109226.
	 16.	 Dias, A. L. S., Rozet, E., Chataigné, G., Oliveira, A. C., Rabelo, C. A. S., Hubert, P., …, & Quetin-
Leclercq, J. (2012). A rapid validated UHPLC–PDA method for anthocyanins quantification 
from Euterpe oleracea fruits. Journal of Chromatography B, 907, 108–116.
	 17.	 Dias, A. L., Rozet, E., Larondelle, Y., Hubert, P., Rogez, H., & Quetin-Leclercq, J. (2013). 
Development and validation of an UHPLC-LTQ-Orbitrap MS method for non-anthocyanin 
flavonoids quantification in Euterpe oleracea juice. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 405, 
9235–9249.
	 18.	 Ehrhardt, C., Arapitsas, P., Stefanini, M., Flick, G., & Mattivi, F. (2014). Analysis of the phe­
nolic composition of fungus-resistant grape varieties cultivated in Italy and Germany using 
UHPLC-MS/MS. Journal of Mass Spectrometry, 49(9), 860–869.
	 19.	 Vrhovsek, U., Masuero, D., Gasperotti, M., Franceschi, P., Caputi, L., Viola, R., & Mattivi, F. 
(2012). A versatile targeted metabolomics method for rapid quantification of multiple classes 
of phenolics in fruit and beverages. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 60, 8831.
	 20.	 Arapitsas, P., Perenzoni, D., Nicolini, G., & Mattivi, F. (2012). Study of Sangiovese wines pig­
ment profile by UHPLC-MS/MS. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 60, 10461.
	 21.	 Avula, B., Katragunta, K., Wang, Y. H., Ali, Z., Srivedavyasasri, R., Gafner, S., …, & Khan, I. A. 
(2022). Chemical profiling and UHPLC-QToF analysis for the simultaneous determination of 
anthocyanins and flavonoids in Sambucus berries and authentication and detection of adul­
teration in elderberry dietary supplements using UHPLC-PDA-MS. Journal of Food Composition 
and Analysis, 110, 104584.
	 22.	 Aissat, A. K., Chaher-Bazizi, N., Richard, T., Kilani-Atmani, D., Pedrot, E., Renouf, E., …, & 
Fonayet, J. V. (2022). Analysis of individual anthocyanins, flavanols, flavonols and other poly­
phenols in Pistacia lentiscus L. fruits during ripening. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 
106, 104286.
	 23.	 De la Cruz, A. A., Hilbert, G., Rivière, C., Mengin, V., Ollat, N., Bordenave, L., ... & Richard, 
T. (2012). Anthocyanin identification and composition of wild Vitis spp. accessions by using 
LC–MS and LC–NMR. Analytica Chimica Acta, 732, 145–152.
	 24.	 Kruve, A., Rebane, R., Kipper, K., Oldekop, M.-L., Evard, H., Herodes, K., Ravio, P., & Leito, I. 
(2015). Tutorial review on validation of liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry methods: 
Part I. Analytica Chimica Acta, 870, 29–44.
	 25.	 Fernández-Galleguillos, C., Quesada-Romero, L., Puerta, A., Padrón, J. M., Souza, E., Romero-
Parra, J., & Simirgiotis, M. J. (2021). Uhplc-ms chemical fingerprinting and antioxidant, antipro­
liferative, and enzyme inhibition potential of gaultheria pumila berries. Metabolites, 11(8), 523.
	 26.	 Feuereisen, M. M., Zimmermann, B. F., Schulze-Kaysers, N., & Schieber, A. (2017). Differentiation 
of Brazilian peppertree (Schinus terebinthifolius Raddi) and Peruvian peppertree (Schinus molle 
L.) fruits by UHPLC–UV–MS analysis of their anthocyanin and biflavonoid profiles. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 65(26), 5330–5338.
	 27.	 Senes, C. E. R., Rodrigues, C. A., Nicácio, A. E., Boeing, J. S., Maldaner, L., & Visentainer, J. V. 
(2021). Determination of phenolic acids and flavonoids from Myrciaria cauliflora edible part 
employing vortex-assisted matrix solid-phase dispersion (VA-MSPD) and UHPLC-MS/MS. 
Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 95, 103667.

261
UHPLC/MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
ties of Myrciaria genus. Food Chemistry, 153, 224–233.
	 29.	 Seraglio, S. K. T., Schulz, M., Nehring, P., Betta, F. D., Valese, A. C., Daguer, H., Gonzaga, L. V., 
Fett, R., & Costa, A. C. O. (2018). Nutritional and bioactive potential of Myrtaceae fruits during 
ripening. Food Chemistry, 239, 649–656.
	 30.	 Wu, C. C., Hung, C. N., Shin, Y. C., Wang, C. J., & Huang, H. P. (2016). Myrciaria cauliflora extracts 
attenuate diabetic nephropathy involving the Ras signaling pathway in streptozotocin/nico­
tinamide mice on a high fat diet. Journal of Food and Drug Analysis, 24, 136–146.
	 31.	 Maldini, M., Chessa, M., Petretto, G. L., Montoro, P., Rourke, J. P., Foddai, M., …, & Pintore, G. 
(2016). Profiling and simultaneous quantitative determination of anthocyanins in wild Myrtus 
communis L. berries from different geographical areas in Sardinia and their comparative eval­
uation. Phytochemical Analysis, 27(5), 249–256.
	 32.	 Hornedo-Ortega, R., Álvarez-Fernández, M. A., Cerezo, A. B., Garcia-Garcia, I., Troncoso, A. 
M., & Garcia-Parrilla, M. C. (2017). Influence of fermentation process on the anthocyanin com­
position of wine and vinegar elaborated from strawberry. Journal of Food Science, 82(2), 364–372.
	 33.	 Teribia, N., Tijero, V., & Munné-Bosch, S. (2016). Linking hormonal profiles with variations in 
sugar and anthocyanin contents during the natural development and ripening of sweet cher­
ries. New Biotechnology, 33(6), 824–833.
	 34.	 Feuereisen, M. M., Barraza, M. G., Zimmermann, B. F., Schieber, A., & Schulze-Kaysers, N. 
(2017). Pressurized liquid extraction of anthocyanins and biflavonoids from Schinus terebinthi­
folius Raddi: A multivariate optimization. Food Chemistry, 214, 564–571.
	 35.	 Feuereisen, M. M., Hoppe, J., Zimmermann, B. F., Weber, F., Schulze-Kaysers, N., & Schieber, 
A. (2014). Characterization of phenolic compounds in Brazilian pepper (Schinus terebinthifolius 
Raddi) exocarp. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 62, 6219–6226.
	 36.	 Zheng, J., Wu, Z., Yang, N., Zhou, K., Hu, W., Ou, S., & Liu, P. (2020). Widely targeted 
UHPLC-MS/MS metabolomic analysis on the chemical variation in blueberry-filled pastries 
during processing. Frontiers in Nutrition, 7, 569172.
 28. Borges, L. L., Conceição, E. C., & Silveira, D. (2014). Active compounds and medicinal proper-

262
13
NMR Analysis of Anthocyanins
Shigenori Kumazawa
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is an essential analytical tool for determining the 
structures of anthocyanins. Here, the preparation of anthocyanin samples for NMR analysis 
and the procedures for interpreting the NMR data using an actual example are described.
13.1  Sample Preparation for NMR Analysis
13.1.1  Amount for NMR Measurement
1H and 13C nuclei are generally used for NMR analysis of the structures of anthocyanins. 1H-
NMR analysis can be performed with high sensitivity because the natural abundance of 1H 
is close to 100%, whereas the sensitivity of 13C-NMR is low due to the natural abundance of 
only 1.1%. The sample used for the NMR measurements must be of high purity. The samples 
must also be thoroughly dried in a desiccator. Depending on the molecular weight of the 
anthocyanin, approximately 1 mg of the compound is sufficient for obtaining a 1H-NMR 
spectrum if the NMR instrument is operating at 400 MHz or higher. However, several mil­
ligrams or more are required to obtain 13C-NMR and two-dimensional (2D) NMR spectra.
13.1.2  Solvent for NMR Measurement
NMR analysis of anthocyanins requires a solvent in which the sample dissolves well. 
However, the solvent must be the same as that used in literature studies to enable com­
parison of the data. A solvent containing 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) is often used for 
NMR measurements because the aglycon structure of anthocyanins changes with pH. 
CD3OD:TFA-d1 (9:1) and DMSO-d6:TFA-d1 (9:1) are generally used as solvents for anthocy­
anin analysis. After dissolution in the deuterated solvent, NMR analysis of anthocyanins 
is performed immediately. Although some anthocyanins can be stably dissolved in the 
solvent for the NMR measurement, the sample should be stored in a cool and dark place 
away from light if measurement is not performed immediately.
13.2  Example for the Elucidation of NMR Data
In this section, the actual NMR spectral data of anthocyanins are presented, and the infor­
mation obtained from each spectrum is described. The anthocyanin used as an example 
is alatanin E (3-O-(6-O-(3-O-(β-d-glucopyranosyl)-6-O-(E)-sinapoyl-d-glucopyranosyl)-

263
NMR Analysis of Anthocyanins
β-d-glucopyranosyl)cyanidin) (Figure 13.1) [1]. This anthocyanin was isolated as a pig­
ment from purple yam (Dioscorea alata L.) and its molecular formula was determined to be 
C44H51O25 using high-resolution electrospray ionization mass spectroscopy (observed: m/z 
979.2691, calculated: 979.2714 M+). The MS/MS analysis revealed the presence of cyanidin, 
one (E) sinapic acid unit, and three glucose units.
13.2.1  1H-NMR
Figure 13.2 shows the 400 MHz 1H-NMR spectrum of alatanin E (5 mg) in CD3OD/
CF3COOD (9:1).
The characteristic H-4 signal of anthocyanidin is observed at δH 8.62. The signals at 3.3–
5.5 ppm are derived from the sugar moiety. The large coupling constant (J = 16 Hz) for 
the α/β positions of the sinapic group (δH 6.11/7.30) indicates that the sinapic acid moiety 
is in the (E) configuration. However, it is generally difficult to determine the full struc­
ture of anthocyanins using only 1H-NMR spectra. Thus, 13C-NMR and 2D NMR data were 
required.
13.2.2  13C-NMR
Figure 13.3 shows the 100 MHz 13C-NMR spectrum of alatanin E (5 mg) in CD3OD/
CF3COOD (9:1). The 1H-NMR spectrum in Figure 13.2 was obtained within 20 minutes, 
whereas acquisition of the 13C-NMR spectrum took 5 hours. It was impossible to quan­
tify each type of carbon in the molecule using the ordinally proton-complete decoupling 
13C-NMR spectrum. However, the 13C-NMR spectrum provides information about the 
skeleton of the molecule that is not obtained from 1H-NMR spectrum.
Distortionless enhancement by polarization transfer (DEPT) measurements are often 
used to obtain information on which carbon atoms are attached to hydrogen atoms. In the 
DEPT-135 spectrum, the CH3 and CH resonances were positive, the CH2 resonances were 
negative, and quaternary carbons did not appear because these carbons are not directly 
attached to hydrogen. Another DEPT experiment was conducted using DEPT-90. DEPT-
135 shows all the resonances of the protonated carbons, whereas DEPT-90 shows only the 
FIGURE 13.1
Structure of alatanin E.

264
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
FIGURE 13.2
1H-NMR spectrum of alatanin E (400 MHz, CD3OD/CF3COOD (9:1)).
FIGURE 13.3
13C-NMR spectrum of alatanin E (100 MHz, CD3OD/CF3COOD (9:1)).

265
NMR Analysis of Anthocyanins
CH peaks (positive). Recently, however, edited-heteronuclear single quantum correlation 
(edited-HSQC), 2D correlation spectroscopy of 1H and 13C combined with DEPT has often 
been used for anthocyanin analyses [2]. This method saves measurement time because 
there is no need to run a 13C DEPT spectrum.
The seven, large splitting signals observed at δC 49 are derived from the carbon of CD3 
(CD3OD). On the other hand, the four splitting signals at δC 112, 114, 116, and 118 are derived 
from the carbon of CF3 (CF3COOD), which is coupled with three F. The signal at δC 158 is 
derived from the carbonyl carbon of CF3COOD, and this signal is also split into to four due 
to coupling with the three F. The 13C-NMR spectrum was elucidated, except for the solvent 
signals.
The signals observed at 60–80 ppm and ~105 ppm are derived from 2 to 6-positions and 
1-position of the sugars, respectively. The signals of the carbons at the 6- and 8-positions of 
the anthocyanidin were observed at δC 95 and 104, respectively. Although the 13C signals 
derived from the benzene ring are usually observed at approximately 110–160 ppm, they 
are shifted according to the type of substituent. The signals at 165–170 ppm were derived 
from the carbonyl carbons. The 13C signals cannot be definitively assigned for structural 
determination; however, it is insufficient to analyze 1D NMR spectra alone. Therefore, 
spectral elucidation using various 2D NMR techniques is required.
13.2.3  1H-1H COSY
1H-1H correlation spectroscopy (COSY) is a homonuclear correlation NMR spectroscopy 
technique that enables determination of the proton-proton connectivity. Using this tech­
nique, we can identify protons that are directly coupled to each other within a molecule. 
Figure 13.4 shows the 1H-1H COSY spectrum of alatanin E.
In the 1H-1H COSY analysis, a 1D spectrum is displayed along each axis, with a contour 
projection of this spectrum along the diagonal axis. The off-diagonal peaks represent 
proton shift correlations (or proton couplings). The 1H-1H COSY correlations enabled 
assignment of the structural moieties. For example, a cross-peak was observed between 
the signals at δH 6.11 and δH 7.30, derived from the correlation between the α and β pro­
tons of sinapic acid. In some cases, it is difficult to elucidate cross-peaks in the 1H-1H 
COSY spectrum of compounds with sugar moieties, such as anthocyanins, due to the 
overlap of many peaks in the range of 3–4.5 ppm. Thus, double quantum filtered (DQF) 
1H-1H COSY in phase-sensitive mode, not in magnitude mode, is useful for structure 
elucidation.
13.2.4  TOCSY
TOCSY (total correlation spectroscopy), previously called HOHAHA (homonuclear 
Hartmann-Hahn spectroscopy), provides correlations between all protons within a given 
spin system, and not just between geminal or vicinal protons. Correlations are usually 
observed between distant protons as long as there are couplings between protons. This 
information is extremely useful for identifying the protons on sugar rings. Figure 13.5 
shows the 2D TOCSY spectrum of alatanin E.
In the TOCSY spectrum of anthocyanins, it is easy to distinguish the sugar signals 
because the cross-peaks from the 1- to 6-positions of the sugar appear in a straight line. 
1D TOCSY, similar to 2D TOCSY, provides correlations between all the protons within 
a given spin system. For the 1D TOCSY analysis, one 1H-NMR signal is selected (irradi­
ated), and the signal is transferred to all coupled protons in a stepwise process. Instead of 

266
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
FIGURE 13.4
1H-1H COSY spectrum of alatanin E (400 MHz, CD3OD/CF3COOD (9:1)).
FIGURE 13.5
2D-TOCSY spectrum of alatanin E (400 MHz, CD3OD/CF3COOD (9:1)).

267
NMR Analysis of Anthocyanins
cross-peaks, the magnetization transfer is observed as an increase in the signal intensity. 
Figure 13.6 shows the 1D TOCSY spectrum irradiated δH 4.67, i.e., the 1-position of the 
sugar. One-dimensional (1D) TOCSY is useful as it can be used to give sub-spectra of only 
protons coupled to the chosen irradiated atom.
13.2.5  HSQC and HMQC
Heteronuclear single quantum correlation spectroscopy (HSQC) or heteronuclear mul­
tiple quantum correlation (HMQC) is generally used to determine which hydrogen in 
a molecule is directly bonded to which carbon. Figure 13.7 shows the HSQC spectrum 
of alatanin E.
To analyze the spectrum, each carbon signal was numbered and correlated with hydro­
gen using cross-peaks. However, because quaternary carbons do not have attached 
hydrogen, it is difficult to elucidate their detailed bonding information. Therefore, 1H-13C 
long-range correlation spectroscopy measurements are usually performed. By measur­
ing the edited-HSQC with the functionality of DEPT-135, it is possible to simultaneously 
obtain information on the types of carbon and the direct bond between the hydrogen and 
carbon atoms.
13.2.6  HMBC
Heteronuclear multiple bond correlation (HMBC) is typically used to obtain information 
on 1H-13C long-range correlations. 2JHC and 3JHC can be determined from the HMBC spectra. 
Figure 13.8 shows the HMBC spectra of alatanin E.
FIGURE 13.6
1D-TOCSY spectrum of alatanin E (400 MHz, CD3OD/CF3COOD (9:1)).

268
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
FIGURE 13.7
HSQC spectrum of alatanin E (400 MHz, CD3OD/CF3COOD (9:1)).
FIGURE 13.8
HMBC spectrum of alatanin E (400 MHz, CD3OD/CF3COOD (9:1)).

269
NMR Analysis of Anthocyanins
To analyze the HMBC spectrum, the relationship between the hydrogen and carbon 
atoms, which are two or three bonds apart, was clarified with reference to the 1JHC correla­
tion information obtained from the HSQC or HMQC spectra. However, in the presence 
of a high-intensity 1H signal, it is necessary to distinguish the peaks from the long-range 
couplings of 1H-13C, as the satellite peaks of 1JHC may be observed.
13.2.7  NOESY and ROESY
The nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) is a phenomenon involving energy transfer between 
spatially close protons (within about 6 Å), which causes an increase or decrease in the 1H-
NMR signals. The 2D NOE spectrum was obtained using NOESY (NOE spectroscopy). 
The NOE intensity is related to the molecular weight of the compound and the magnetic 
field intensity of the NMR instrument. Therefore, rotating-frame nuclear Overhauser 
effect spectroscopy (ROESY) is used when NOE is difficult to observe. Figure 13.9 shows 
the ROESY spectrum of alatanin E.
NOESY and ROESY are often used to determine the steric structures of compounds. 
These techniques are used to determine the type of sugar or position of the bond in antho­
cyanins. In some cases, the structures of anthocyanins can be determined without NOE 
information.
FIGURE 13.9
ROESY spectrum of alatanin E (400 MHz, CD3OD/CF3COOD (9:1)).

270
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
13.3  Summary for the NMR Analysis of Anthocyanins
Here various NMR methods for the structural determination of anthocyanins are 
described. Details of the NMR methodologies can be found in various reviews on the 
structural analysis of natural products [2–4]. The purity and quantity of the samples 
are important for obtaining good NMR data, not only for anthocyanins. Therefore, the 
adequate chromatographic techniques for the isolation of anthocyanins need to be devel­
oped. The acquisition of good NMR data requires understanding the meaning of pulse 
sequencing and parameter settings for each NMR method and the execution of NMR mea­
surements under appropriate conditions.
Recently, quantitative analysis of anthocyanins using NMR has become commonplace 
[5, 6]. Metabolomic studies on anthocyanins using NMR have also been conducted [7, 8]. 
With advances in hardware and software, NMR continues to be an indispensable instru­
ment for anthocyanin analysis.
References
Kumazawa, S. (2015). New acylated anthocyanins from purple yam and their antioxidant 
activity. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., 79, 1484–1492.
	
2.	 Breton, R.C., and Reynolds, W.F. (2013). Using NMR to identify and characterize natural prod­
ucts. Nat. Prod. Rep., 30, 501–524.
	
3.	 Halabalaki, M., Vougogiannopoulou, K., Mikros, E., and Skaltsounis, A.L. (2014). Recent 
advances and new strategies in the NMR-based identification of natural products. Curr. Opin. 
Biotechnol., 25, 1–7.
	
4.	 Elyshberg, M. (2015). Identification and structure elucidation by NMR spectroscopy. Trends 
Analyt. Chem., 69, 88–97.
	
5.	 Teng, Z., Jiang, X., He, F., and Bai, W. (2020). Qualitative and quantitative methods to evaluate 
anthocyanins. eFood, 1, 339–346.
	
6.	 Constantin, O.E., and Istrati, D.I. (2022). Extraction, quantification and characterization tech­
niques for anthocyanin compounds in various food matrices – A review. Horticulturae, 8, 1084.
	
7.	 Consonni, R. (2018). The potentiality of NMR-based metabolomics in food science and food 
authentication assessment. Magn. Reson. Chem., 57, 558–578.
	
8.	 Avula, B., Katragunta, K., Osman, A.G., Ali, Z., John Adams, S., Chittiboyina, A.G., and Khan, 
I.A. (2023). Advances in the chemistry, analysis and adulteration of anthocyanin rich-berries 
and fruits: 2000–2022. Molecules, 28, 560.
 
1. Moriya, C., Hosoya, T., Agawa, S., Sugiyama, Y., Kozone, I., Shin-ya, K., Terahara, N., and 

271
14
Spectroscopic Methods in Analysis of Anthocyanins
Özlem ÇAG˘ INDI and Emine ERDAG˘  AKCA
14.1  Introduction
Anthocyanins are a subclass of flavonoids that belong to phenolic compounds. They are 
the most widely existing natural food pigment with a huge scale of shiny orange, pink, red, 
violet and blue colors besides chlorophyll. The growing interest in anthocyanins is caused 
by not only their unique red-blue color but also their health benefit. There are more than 
700 species of anthocyanin class, but approximately 90% of naturally found anthocyanins 
are represented by six members (cyanidin, pelargonidin, delphinidin, peonidin, petuni­
din, and malvidin) of this group. Several studies focused on qualitative and quantitative 
identification of anthocyanins, and it could be characterized by various chromatographic 
and spectroscopic analyses techniques. This analysis generally included pigment extrac­
tion followed by purification and application of spectroscopic methods. Traditional extrac­
tion methods, that have some disadvantages such as requiring more organic solvents and 
extraction times, lower extraction yields and selectivity, and thermal degradation, could 
be used for extracting pigments. However, new techniques getting more attractive to 
overcome the limitations of conventional extraction techniques and the most applied non-
conventional methods such as ultrasound-assisted extraction (UAE), microwave-assisted 
extraction (MAE), supercritical fluid extraction (SFE), pressurized liquid extraction (PLE), 
pulsed electric fields (PEFE), enzyme-assisted extraction (EAE) have been explained in 
this research.
The science of spectroscopy has been continuously developed by scientists since the 
demonstration of the light spectrum by Isaac Newton. It could explain that the science 
of spectroscopy is analyze matter with the help of electromagnetic radiation. For food 
analysis, spectrometric methods have been widely used detection of geographic origin, 
identification of composition, authentication and quality of elements, and effect of pro­
cessing and storage. Ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectroscopy is one of the most frequently 
used techniques for the analysis of compounds and is based on the measurement of the 
wavelength and intensity of ultraviolet and visible light absorbed by the matter. However, 
non-destructive spectroscopic techniques like Near-Infrared (NIR) Spectroscopy could be 
a solution for rapid and in situ measurements. Raman spectroscopy (RS) also could be 
a good alternative especially for reliable, fast, specific and sensitive measurements, that 
enable the result interaction of light with chemical bonds within a material for only Raman 
active substances. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy is another non-
destructive method for anthocyanin analyses, although further development is needed to 
improve detection limits. Fluorescence Spectroscopy has been used for chemical fluores­
cence chemical fingerprinting that specifically identifies each compound. In short, there 

272
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
is a wide variety of spectroscopic methods with advantages and disadvantages for the 
analysis of anthocyanins. This chapter presents current knowledge about anthocyanins 
and extraction methods and applications of spectroscopic analysis for the identification 
and characterization of anthocyanins.
14.2  Anthocyanins
Anthocyanins play an important role among water-soluble natural color pigments as they 
are widely distributed in nature, especially in roots, stems, tubers, leaves, fruits, and seeds. 
They are responsible for red-blue colors and their derivatives in the plants and these prop­
erties gain the attractiveness for fruit or vegetables (Mattioli et al., 2020; Enaru et al., 2021). 
It was reported that berries are the main source of anthocyanins, followed by red wine, 
vegetables, and other fruits. Especially elderberries, chokeberries, blueberries, pomegran­
ates, and acai are rich in anthocyanins with their unique color. There are huge species of 
over 700 anthocyanins, but 6 of them represent about 90% of naturally found like cyanidin, 
pelargonidin, delphinidin, peonidin, petunidin, and malvidin (Wallace and Giusti, 2019; 
Gonçalves et al., 2021).
Academic interest in the research and/or use of anthocyanins is not only related to their 
coloring properties but also to their potential health benefits. Anthocyanins are considered 
health promoting due to their special chemical structure and fragrance. Moreover, their 
consumption has been associated with several health benefits, including the mitigation of 
cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, neurological dis­
order, obesity, and cancer (Cappellini et al., 2021; Oteiza et al., 2023). It has been highlighted 
by in vitro and in vivo studies that they have low toxicity and high safety (Liu et al., 2021; 
Tan et al., 2022).
Anthocyanins are a subclass of the flavonoids group of phenolic. The phenylpropanoid 
pathway produces flavonoid derivatives of anthocyanidins, which are known as anthocy­
anins. Although more than 700 subspecies of anthocyanins with 30 different core struc­
tures, the major 6 anthocyanidin class represent approximately 90% of all anthocyanins. The 
major anthocyanidin subclasses (anthocyanidin metabolites) are: pelargonidin (pelargonidin-
3-glucoside, pelargonidin-3-rutinoside, pelargonidin-3-galactoside, pelargonidin-3-
arabinoside), cyanidin (cyanidin-3-glucoside, cyanidin-3-rutinoside, cyanidin-3-galactoside, 
cyanidin-3-arabinoside), delphinidin (delphinidin-3-glucoside, delphinidin-3-rutinoside, 
delphinidin-3-galactoside, 
delphinidin-3-arabinoside), 
peonidin 
(peonidin-3-glucoside, 
peonidin-3-rutinoside, peonidin-3-galactoside, peonidin-3-arabinoside), petunidin (petuni­
din-3-glucoside, petunidin-3-rutinoside, petunidin-3-galactoside, petunidin-3-arabinoside), 
and malvidin (malvidin-3-glucoside, malvidin-3-rutinoside, malvidin-3-galactoside, mal­
vidin-3-arabinoside). The chemical structure anthocyanidin is shown in Figure 14.1. The 
basic structure of the primary nuclei is based on a conjugated 2-phenylbenzopiran cation. 
The C6-C3-C6 skeleton is formed by bonding two benzene rings with three carbon atoms. 
According to the side chain differences in the carbon positions of the two benzene rings, sub­
groups of anthocyanidin are formed. Cyanidin R1=H, R2=OH, pelargonidin R1=H, R2=H, 
deltanidin R1=OH, R2=OH, peonidin R1=OCH3, R2=H, petronidine R1=OH, R2=OCH3, and 
malvidin R1=OCH3, R2=OCH3 are among the side chains mentioned (Houghton et al., 2021). 
The conversion of B rings to hydroxyl or methoxyl groups affects the maximum absorbance 
of anthocyanidins, so their color changes from orange (pelargonidin) to purple (malvidin) 
(Cai et al., 2022; Houghton et al., 2021).

273
Spectroscopic Methods in Analysis of Anthocyanins
Because of their susceptibility to degradation due to various factors of food process­
ing and storage conditions, ensuring the chemical stability of anthocyanins has been a 
major challenge. Besides being unstable in their aqueous solution, they are quite vulner­
able to environmental stresses such as relative humidity, oxygen, light, pH, temperature, 
sugars, ascorbic acid, sulfur dioxide or sulfites, enzymes, copigments, and metal ions. 
Table 14.1 represents the effects of major environment conditions on anthocyanin stability. 
Furthermore, the researchers have concluded that anthocyanins have less than 1% bio­
availability due to their high sensitivity, and it is possible to observe an enhancement of 
bioavailability with the help of some ways like polymerization, cleavage, and derivatiza­
tion (Yousuf et al., 2016; Enaru et al., 2021; Zang et al., 2022).
In the extraction of flavonoids, various techniques have been investigated to increase 
the extraction yields of major bioactive compounds. For this purpose, maceration, percola­
tion, hydro-distillation, boiling, and Soxhlet are widely used. However, these traditional 
techniques show some disadvantages such as requiring large amounts of organic solvent, 
FIGURE 14.1
The chemical structure anthocyanidin.
TABLE 14.1
Effect of Some Environmental Conditions on Anthocyanin Stability
Environmental 
Condition
Effect on Anthocyanins
pH
Acidic conditions improve the anthocyanin stability pH < 2
Alkaline conditions adverse effects for anthocyanin stability pH > 8
Oxygen
Leading the opening-ring reaction for further anthocyanin degradation
Light
While plays an indispensable role in anthocyanin biosynthesis, it can also accelerate its 
degradation.
Temperature
High temperatures increase the rate of anthocyanins’ degradation.
Ascorbic acid
Has an improved effect on anthocyanins stability and protects from enzymatic degradation.
Sugars
The high sugar content could help maintain stability due to limited water activity.
Copigmentation
It is known as interactions with other colorless organic compounds or metal ions and is 
often used to increase stability.
Enzymes
Active enzymes in the raw material could play a role in the degradation of anthocyanins. 
The most important of these are glycosidases, peroxidases (phenol oxidases) and phenolases 
(polyphenol oxidases), and these enzymes are commonly called anthocyanins.
Metal ions
Copigmentation can be created in metals such as copper (Cu), iron (Fe), magnesium (Mg), 
tin (Sn), and potassium (K), if there is no risk of metal contamination of the products and 
nontoxic for consumers. Such integration could be an effective tool for stability.
Source: Enaru et al. (2021); Cai et al. (2022).

274
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
low extraction efficiency, low selectivity, long extraction times, thermal degradation. 
Therefore, new extraction techniques have been developed to overcome such limitations 
of traditional methods (Chaves et al., 2020; Chemat et al., 2020). The most widely applied 
non-conventional techniques to extract anthocyanins are shown in Table 14.2.
There have been two types of anthocyanins including acylated and nonacylated forms. 
The acylated anthocyanins contain sugar that are bonded with an aliphatic/aromatic acid 
in their anthocyanidin structure. Additionally, it is known that more than 60% of naturally 
anthocyanins are the acylated form and these are more stable compared to nonacylated 
form. Many fruits and vegetables such as red cabbage, black carrots, red radishes, purple 
TABLE 14.2
Some Non-Conventional Methods for Anthocyanin Extraction
Extraction 
Methods
Basic Principle
Advantage
Disadvantage
References
Ultrasound-
assisted 
extraction (UAE)
The structure of the cell 
wall has been disrupted 
by the cavitation and 
strong shear forces 
created by ultrasound 
with 20–50 MHz 
frequency
Low cost
Need for lower 
solvent
Short time
The structure of 
anthocyanins could 
be disrupted by 
cavitation and 
mechanical effects.
Esclapez et al. 
(2011), Tan et al. 
(2022)
Microwave-
assisted 
extraction 
(MAE)
Electromagnetic radiation 
energy in the microwave 
region is absorbed by 
polar molecules. This 
absorption causes the 
movement of molecules 
and ion migration. This 
process evaporates the 
matrix water and creates 
high pressure in the cell 
wall. Thus, mass transfer 
of the target component 
occurs
Employment of a 
wider range of 
solvents
Local excessive 
vibration and high 
temperature could 
lead to structure 
degradation
Farooq et al. 
(2020), Tena and 
Asuero (2022), 
Tan et al. (2022)
Supercritical fluid 
extraction (SFE)
The supercritical fluid was 
applied above its critical 
pressure and 
temperature, thus 
gaining gas-like 
diffusivity and liquid-
like viscosity. This 
provides more easier 
penetration into solid 
matrices easier to 
penetration.
Supercritical CO2 has been 
commonly used due to 
its nontoxicity, 
cheapness, and 
protection of the extracts 
from atmospheric 
oxidation.
Sustainable green 
technologies
High efficiency
Absence of light 
and oxygen
Low temperature
High cost of 
equipment
Requiring more 
technical investment
Cheah et al. (2010), 
Geow et al. 
(2021), Tena and 
Asuero (2022)
(Continued)

275
Spectroscopic Methods in Analysis of Anthocyanins
potatoes, or purple corn contain acylated anthocyanins. It is called nonacylated anthocya­
nins when they do not contain bonded sugar (Saha et al., 2020; Dini et al., 2020).
14.3  Analysis of Anthocyanins by Spectroscopic Methods
Anthocyanins can be characterized using different chromatographic and spectroscopic 
analyses techniques. It is noteworthy that the most widely used method for the analysis of 
anthocyanins (especially color of blue and purple samples) was conducted with beginning 
of the pigment extraction, usually with weakly acidified alcoholic solvents, followed by 
purification and application of spectroscopic techniques (Bruni et al., 2023).
The science of spectroscopy has been continuously developed by scientists since the 
demonstration of the spectrum of light by Isaac Newton. This was followed by the discov­
ery by William Wollaston (in 1802) and Joseph Fraunhofer (in 1814) that some dark lines 
in the solar spectrum were recognized as the basis for spectroscopic analysis. Another 
milestone was the invention of a basic spectroscope for the systematic study of spectra 
by Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff in 1859–1860. This device works on the principle 
that light from a source is projected onto a screen by passing it through a sample and a 
prism, respectively. Bunsen and Kirchhoff studied various samples in the spectroscope 
TABLE 14.2  (Continued)
Some Non-Conventional Methods for Anthocyanin Extraction
Extraction 
Methods
Basic Principle
Advantage
Disadvantage
References
Pressurized liquid 
extraction (PLE)
It is based on the use of 
liquid solvent at 
temperatures 50–20°C 
and 3.5–20 MPa. The 
solvent maintains the 
liquid form even at 
temperatures above the 
boiling point with 
pressure and diffuses 
into the tissues through 
pores.
Sustainable green 
technologies
Reduce cost and 
time (5–20 min)
High costs for 
instrumentation and 
energy requirements
Andrade et al. 
(2021), Perez-
Vazquez et al. 
(2023), Višnjevec 
et al. (2024)
Pulsed electric 
fields (PEFE)
The electric fields have 
been applied to break 
down the cell wall by 
electroporate.
Classified as a 
non-thermal 
extraction
Less solvent and 
time requirement
High cost of the 
equipment
Lončarić et al. 
(2020), Tena and 
Asuero (2022), 
Choton et al. 
(2023)
Enzyme-assisted 
extraction (EAE)
It relies on enzyme power 
that breaks down the cell 
wall and releases 
targeted compounds. 
cellulase, α-amylase, 
β-glucosidase, protease, 
xylanase, or pectinase 
have often been used for 
the plant cell.
Usually not 
necessary for 
chemical solvent
Lower time and 
temperature
Expensive cost of 
enzymes
Required special 
condition for every 
enzyme activity
González et al. 
(2022), Tena and 
Asuero (2022), 
Amulya and ul 
Islam (2023)

276
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
and observed that each element exhibited a characteristic series of wavelengths absorbed 
by light. Thus, these scientists discovered spectroscopy as a method to find elements in 
samples (Ball, 2001; Nelson, 2017).
Spectroscopy is basically the analysis of matter using electromagnetic radiation (Ball, 
2001). Historically, spectroscopic techniques have been seen as attractive and promis­
ing for the fields of chemistry, pharmaceuticals, agri-food, and environmental analysis 
because they require minimal sample preparation steps, rapid and online analysis, and 
potentially multiple tests on a single sample (Baeten and Dardenne, 2002; Nawrocka and 
Lamorska, 2013). Spectrometric methods for food analysis are widely used for geographi­
cal origin determination, composition identification, elemental authentication and quality, 
and determination of the effect of processing and storage (Kharbach et al., 2023).
Spectroscopic methods are considered an effective way for both quantitative and quali­
tative identification. Multiple spectroscopic methods are available for solving a variety of 
analytical problems and categorized as the species to be analyzed (molecular or atomic 
spectroscopy), the type of radiation-matter interaction to be monitored (absorption, emis­
sion, or diffraction), and the region of the electromagnetic spectrum (Penner, 2017). The 
main features of spectroscopic methods are shown in Table 14.3 (Hassoun et al., 2020; 
Tombuloğlu et al., 2023).
14.3.1  Ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) Spectroscopy
UV-Vis spectroscopy is one of the most frequently preferred techniques for the analysis of 
compounds and based on measurement the wavelength and intensity of ultraviolet and 
visible light absorbed by the matter. For this purpose, it is applied that the UV radiation 
(ultraviolet) at a wavelength of 180–380 nm or visible (visible light) at a wavelength of 
380–780 nm in these techniques (Pratiwi and Nandiyanto, 2022).
The Lambert-Beer law, which is linked to the concentration of absorbing species in 
the solution and the path length, forms the measurements with UV spectroscopy. Part of 
the light energy is absorbed by the solution having a certain thickness, thus weakening the 
intensity of the light. This absorbance is proportional to the thickness and is expressed by 
Equation (14.1) (Verma and Mishra, 2018; Guo et al., 2020).
	
= ε ×
×
A
b
C	
(14.1)
A: the absorbance, is the coefficient of molar exclusion (M−1 cm−1)
B: the thickness of the cuvette (cm)
C: the concentration (M)
TABLE 14.3
The Main Features of Spectroscopic Methods
Methods
Wavelength Limits
Light Source
Signal Source
UV-Vis
190–750 nm
Deuterium/tungsten halogen
Absorption
NIR
750–2500 nm
Tungsten
Absorption
Raman
750–1064 nm
Laser
Scattering
NMR
1–1000 m
Fluorescence
250–750 nm
Laser
Emission

277
Spectroscopic Methods in Analysis of Anthocyanins
The simplicity and use for many purposes, as well as time and cost savings, have made 
UV spectroscopy frequently preferred (Mazza et al., 2004; Verma and Mishra, 2018).
UV-Vis spectroscopic analysis of anthocyanins uses the molar absorptivity of the domi­
nant anthocyanin. Anthocyanins generally tend to have typical absorption in the visible 
region, exhibiting maximum absorbance around the 510–550 nm wavelength regions. 
Depending on the structural nature, a peak can also be observed in the 310–340 nm range. 
This peak is absent in almost all nonacylated groups. It is also recommended to perform 
measurements at pH 2 to avoid interfering substances. A calibration graph constructed 
from the concentration versus standard anthocyanin absorbance curve can be used to 
determine the concentration of anthocyanin present in the sample (Mazza et al., 2004; Saha 
et al., 2020). Table 14.4 shows some of the studies performed with UV-Vis spectrometry to 
determine the total anthocyanin content.
TABLE 14.4
The Research that Conducted with UV-Vis Spectrometer to Total Anthocyanin Content 
Determination
Reference
Material
Solution of Extraction
Extraction 
Method
Conclusion
Agustin et al. 
(2021)
Red rice
0.1% HCl in methanol
Maceration
The highest total 
anthocyanin level among 
red rice varieties of 
10.87 mg/g was found in 
Aek sibundong red rice.
Taghavi et al. 
(2022)
Fresh, frozen, 
and lyophilized 
strawberry
1.	chloroform-methanol 
(2: 1 v/v, acidified with 
0.1% HCl)
2.	methanol (acidified with 
0.1% HCl)
3.	methanol:water:concentrated 
HCl (80:20:1)
4.	chloroform-methanol 
(3:4 v/v)
5.	pH differential method
6.	80:20:1 (methanol:water:HCl)
Extraction of 
six method
The 2, 3, and 4. The 
method showed the 
highest total anthocyanin 
content.
The researchers stated that 
water caused the 
chloroform phase to 
separate during the 
centrifugation and 
anthocyanins stayed in 
the methanol:water 
phase.
Due to lower anthocyanin 
yield and longer 
processing time, method 6 
was not found suitable for 
the extraction of 
anthocyanins.
The freeze-dried samples 
exhibited significantly 
higher amounts of 
anthocyanin.
Johnson 
et al. (2020)
Six plum 
varieties 
(Prunus 
domestica)
Methanolic extraction 
(90% v/v aqueous methanol)
Ethanolic extraction (25 ml of 
50% v/v aqueous ethanol)
Extraction
For the four varieties of 
plum, the anthocyanin 
content of the methanolic 
extract was found higher 
than the ethanolic 
extracts.

278
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
14.3.2  Near-Infrared (NIR) Spectroscopy
Near-infrared (NIR) spectroscopy is performed in the wavelength region 780–2500 nm, 
and the absorption bands correspond to the vibrations of chemical bonds such as O–H, 
C–H, C–O, and N–H in the structure. These molecular bonds undergo vibrational energy 
changes and as a result, energy absorption occurs in the NIR region of organic molecules 
when the molecules vibrate. However, in food analysis, a calibration model of NIR spec­
troscopy is required to confirm less precise reference analyses, which usually means more 
time. Furthermore, the method is often used in the analysis of major components; the 
sensitivity is reduced for minor components and some quality attributes (Osborne, 2006; 
Ertugay and Başlar, 2011; Le, 2020).
While NIR spectroscopy has some key advantages, such as minimal sample preparation 
requirements, suitability for interrogating moist samples, potential for accurate quantita­
tive analysis, its simplicity and rapid (between 15 and 90 seconds) analysis, and the fact 
that it can be implemented online are the main reasons that make this technology stand 
out (Osborne, 2006; Beć et al., 2020).
NIR spectroscopy has been successfully executed in the assay of anthocyanins with the 
advantage of rapid, in situ (with portable NIR), and non-destruction (Gales et al., 2021). 
Some examples of studies conducted with this technology are shown in Table 14.5.
14.3.3  Raman Spectroscopy
RS is based on determining the interactions created by photons sent from outside in the 
molecule. In other words, it produces results with the help of the interaction of light with 
chemical bonds within a material. Raman spectrometer, which uses the visible or near-
infrared monochromatic laser as a light source, provides measurements in the wavelength 
range of 750–164 nm (Şahin, 2021; Tombuloğlu et al., 2023).
When a light-induced photon encounters a molecule, it produces a scattered photon, 
which in turn causes inelastic light scattering from the sample. This energy shift of the 
outgoing photon is measured. The change in wavelength of the scattered light depends on 
the chemical composition of the molecules responsible for scattering. Two types of scatter­
ing can be mentioned here. The first is Stokes Raman scattering, which occurs when the 
scattered light is a photon with a lower frequency than the original photon. If the scattered 
light has a higher frequency than the original photon, this is known as anti-Stokes Raman 
scattering (Das and Agrawal, 2011; Rostron et al., 2016). Each peak obtained in the Raman 
spectrum corresponds to the organic compound or functional group in the sample. The 
spectral pattern is called a chemical fingerprint, which allows identification of the com­
pound, while the intensity of the bands can be used to calculate its concentration in the 
analyzed sample (Yaseen et al., 2017; Saletnik et al., 2021).
The researchers emphasized that RS is a reliable, fast, specific, and sensitive identifica­
tion method, can be easily and quickly set up, and is a portable analyzing system (Petersen 
et al., 2021; Qu et al., 2022). Moreover, it has a high sensitivity to even small structural 
changes, which enable comparative tests (Saletnik et al., 2021).
It should be noted that water can mask other characteristic peaks due to its strong 
infrared absorption properties. This makes it difficult to use infrared spectroscopy on 
samples/foods with high moisture content. In contrast, RS only enables the detection 
of Raman active material and water has no characteristic Raman shift. Therefore, RS 
has a unique ability to provide chemical and molecular information (Duan et al., 2024). 
The researcher used smartphone-based RS to measure anthocyanins in grapes, grape 

279
Spectroscopic Methods in Analysis of Anthocyanins
TABLE 14.5
NIR Application to Determination of Anthocyanin Content
Non-Destructive Methods
Reference
Material
Equipment Property
Analyze
Measurement
Conclusion
Amanah et al. 
(2020)
Black soybean
FT-NIR: indium–gallium–
arsenide (InGaAs) detector, 
region of 10,000–4000 cm−1 
at 4 cm−1 intervals
FT-IR: deuterated triglycine 
sulfate (DTGS) detector, and 
KBr beam splitter, region of 
4000–650 cm−1
Total anthocyanin 
content and the content 
of two major individual 
anthocyanins
Fourier Transform 
Near-Infrared 
(FT-NIR) and Fourier 
Transform Infrared 
(FT-IR)
The partial least squares regression 
(PLSR) models for the FT-NIR spectra 
indicated slightly better R2 and 
standard error of prediction (SEP) for 
the chemical components, compared to 
FT-IR.
The data showed that both techniques 
could be practical tools for rapid and 
non-destructive measurement of 
anthocyanin content in a single seed.
Stuppner et al. 
(2020)
Wild elderberry 
(Sambucus fructus)
InGaAs detector
Spectra region of 10,000–
4000 cm−1
Total anthocyanin 
content
NIR
The total anthocyanin content ranged 
between 632.87 and 4342.01 mg/kg in 
Sambucus nigra.
It was found that NIR spectroscopy is a 
fast, noninvasive, and cost-efficient 
alternative for screening TAC 
compared to pH-differential and 
UHPLC-MWD-UHR-TOF-MS 
methods.
Rouxinol et al. 
(2022)
Red wine grapes
InGaAs detector wavelength 
range of 1100–2300 nm
Total anthocyanin 
content
NIR
The total anthocyanin content of four 
grape variety were ranged between 
0.18 and 4.25 mg/mL.
The researchers demonstrated the 
ability of NIR spectroscopy, in 
combination with a portable device, to 
quantify entire grapes.

280
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
skins, and grape juice in situ, quickly and without destruction. They observed charac­
teristic peaks at 540, 630, 730, 1238, 1334, 1470, 1530, and 1608 cm in the Raman spectra 
of standard samples by the Raman activity of anthocyanin. Moreover, the intensities of 
these characteristic peaks were positively correlated with the concentration of anthocy­
anin solutions. These results showed that rapid determination of anthocyanin content 
in grape skins and grape juice by Raman technology is possible and eliminates the need 
for sample pretreatment (Gao et al., 2024).
14.3.4  Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy benefits from the interaction between the mag­
netic properties of atoms and compounds within a sample and the applied magnetic field. 
When the molecule is exposed to a magnetic field, rotation is observed in the nuclei with 
magnetic momentum, which are excited (Hassoun et al., 2020; Mishra, 2022).
Removal of the applied magnetic field triggers the atoms to back to their original 
state into the lower energy levels and this phenomenon causes the releasing of energy 
at frequency. Thus, the NMR spectrum of that nucleus is obtained (Sahoo et al., 2020). 
Electromagnetic pulse trains excite and change the spin direction of NMR active nuclei 
which is commonly used for this purpose, especially 31P, 15N, 1H, 17O, and 13C. When the 
pulses are turned off, the nuclei return to their base spin state. It has been specific for the 
molecule and its environment that the time required for return to the fundamental state 
(Hassoun et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021).
Researchers have emphasized that NMR can be useful for identifying compounds with 
the same mass and determining the structures of unknown compounds (Sahoo et al., 2020). 
Compared to mainstream analytical methods, NMR offers strong penetration capability 
for heterogeneous and complex food systems. It is considered useful for mixture analy­
sis due to the simultaneous determination of multiple analytes (Cao et al., 2021). NMR 
technology allows working on solid or liquid matrices without altering the sample and 
generating hazardous waste. Despite its advantages and wide range of applications, NMR 
spectroscopy is reported by researchers to be far from the desired sensitivity. Furthermore, 
further development is needed to improve detection limits (Marcone et al., 2013; Emwas 
et al., 2019).
The researchers have stated that both NMR and UV spectroscopies demonstrate more 
successful results, especially in anthocyanins analysis of acidic solutions. This is mainly 
due to the measurement being carried out only in the presence of the flavylium ion, avoid­
ing to copresence of various colored or colorless compounds that occur at higher pH values 
(Bruni et al., 2023).
14.3.5  Fluorescence Spectroscopy
Fluorescence is characterized as the absorption of light energy at one wavelength and 
almost instantaneous re-absorption at another wavelength, usually longer than the one 
absorbed. Fluorescence spectra enable the identification of the compound, which is unique 
to each compound and is called a fluorescence signature or fingerprint. Fluorescence com­
ponents may exhibit characteristic spectra that reflect the wavelength and amount of light 
absorbed (excitation spectrum) and reflect the wavelength and amount of light emitted 
(emission spectrum) (Naresh, 2014).
Compounds that absorb visible and/or UV light are called chromophores, while com­
pounds that emit light are called fluorophores (Zacharioudaki et al., 2022). In other words, 

281
Spectroscopic Methods in Analysis of Anthocyanins
fluorophores have the feature of releasing the light they absorb at a certain wavelength 
(UV or visible region) at a higher wavelength (Fan and Su, 2022). Due to the high sensi­
tivity of fluorophores to environment, this analysis quite sensitive to other spectroscopic 
methods (Shaikh and O’Donnell, 2017).
Fluorescence has become an irreplaceable analytical tool with fast and reliable detection 
properties. Being non-destructive, sensitivity and cost effective are the other reasons for 
popular use in many disciplines. Despite there may be opportunity, it has been stated that 
fluorescence spectroscopy lack of major compound analyses due to too low accuracy for 
large compounds. At the same time, the fact that not all elements and compounds have 
fluorescence properties also limits their usage area (Bose et al., 2018; Sultangaziyev and 
Bukasov, 2020; Dos Santos et al., 2022).
References
Agustin, A. T., Safitri, A., & Fatchiyah, F. (2021). Java red rice (Oryza sativa L.) nutritional value and 
anthocyanin profiles and its potential role as antioxidant and anti-diabetic. Indonesian Journal of 
Chemistry, 21(4), 968–978.
Amanah, H. Z., Joshi, R., Masithoh, R. E., Choung, M. G., Kim, K. H., Kim, G., & Cho, B. K. (2020). 
Nondestructive measurement of anthocyanin in intact soybean seed using Fourier transform 
near-infrared (FT-NIR) and Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy. Infrared Physics & 
Technology, 111, 103477.
Amulya, P. R., & ul Islam, R. (2023). Optimization of enzyme-assisted extraction of anthocyanins 
from eggplant (Solanum melongena L.) peel. Food Chemistry: X, 18, 100643.
Andrade, T. A., Hamerski, F., Fetzer, D. E. L., Roda-Serrat, M. C., Corazza, M. L., Norddahl, B., & 
Errico, M. (2021). Ultrasound-assisted pressurized liquid extraction of anthocyanins from 
Aronia melanocarpa pomace. Separation and Purification Technology, 276, 119290.
Baeten, V., & Dardenne, P. (2002). Spectroscopy: Developments in instrumentation and analysis. 
Grasas y aceites, 53(1), 45–63.
Ball, D. W. (2001). The basics of spectroscopy (Vol. 49). Spie press.
Beć, K. B., Grabska, J., & Huck, C. W. (2020). Near-infrared spectroscopy in bio-applications. Molecules, 
25(12), 2948.
Bose, A., Thomas, I., & Abraham, E. (2018). Fluorescence spectroscopy and its applications: A review. 
International Journal of Advanced Pharmaceutical Sciences, 8(1), 1–8.
Bruni, S., Longoni, M., Minzoni, C., Basili, M., Zocca, I., Pieraccini, S., & Sironi, M. (2023). Resonance 
Raman and visible micro-spectroscopy for the in-vivo and in-vitro characterization of anthocy­
anin-based pigments in blue and violet flowers: A comparison with HPLC-ESI-MS analysis of 
the extracts. Molecules, 28(4), 1709.
Cai, D., Li, X., Chen, J., Jiang, X., Ma, X., Sun, J., …, & Bai, W. (2022). A comprehensive review on 
innovative and advanced stabilization approaches of anthocyanin by modifying structure and 
controlling environmental factors. Food Chemistry, 366, 130611.
Cao, R., Liu, X., Liu, Y., Zhai, X., Cao, T., Wang, A., & Qiu, J. (2021). Applications of nuclear magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy to the evaluation of complex food constituents. Food Chemistry, 342, 
128258.
Cappellini, F., Marinelli, A., Toccaceli, M., Tonelli, C., & Petroni, K. (2021). Anthocyanins: From 
mechanisms of regulation in plants to health benefits in foods. Frontiers in Plant Science, 12, 
748049.
Chaves, J. O., De Souza, M. C., Da Silva, L. C., Lachos-Perez, D., Torres-Mayanga, P. C., Machado, A. 
P. D., & Rostagno, F. (2020). Extraction of flavonoids from natural sources using modern tech­
niques. Frontiers in Chemistry, 8, 507887.

282
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Cheah, E. L., Heng, P. W., and Chan, L. W. (2010). Optimization of supercritical fluid extraction and 
pressurized liquid extraction of active principles from Magnolia officinalis using the Taguchi 
design. Separation and Purification Technology, 71(3), 293–301.
Chemat, F., Vian, M. A., Fabiano-Tixier, A. S., Nutrizio, M., Jambrak, A. R., Munekata, P. E., …, & 
Cravotto, G. (2020). A review of sustainable and intensified techniques for extraction of food 
and natural products. Green Chemistry, 22(8), 2325–2353.
Choton, S., Bandral, J. D., Sood, M., Gupta, N., Singh, J., Langeh, A., & Choudhary, A. N. (2023). 
Green extraction technology and its application in food industry. Chemical Science Review and 
Letters, 12 (46), 79–88. DOI:10.37273/chesci.cs205402576.
Das, R. S., & Agrawal, Y. K. (2011). Raman spectroscopy: Recent advancements, techniques and 
applications. Vibrational Spectroscopy, 57(2), 163–176.
Dini, C., Zaro, M. J., Rolny, N., Caputo, M., Boido, E., Dellacassa, E., & Viña, S. Z. (2020). 
Characterization and stability analysis of anthocyanins from Pachyrhizus ahipa (Wedd) Parodi 
roots. Food Bioscience, 34, 100534.
Dos Santos, I., Bosman, G., Aleixandre-Tudo, J. L., & du Toit, W. (2022). Direct quantification of red 
wine phenolics using fluorescence spectroscopy with chemometrics. Talanta, 236, 122857.
Duan, C., Xiao, X., Yu, Y., Xu, M., Zhang, Y., Liu, X., … & Wang, J. (2024). In situ Raman character­
ization of the stability of blueberry anthocyanins in aqueous solutions under perturbations in 
temperature, UV, pH. Food Chemistry, 431, 137155.
Emwas, A. H., Roy, R., McKay, R. T., Tenori, L., Saccenti, E., Gowda, G. N., & Wishart, D. S. (2019). 
NMR spectroscopy for metabolomics research. Metabolites, 9(7), 123.
Enaru, B., Drețcanu, G., Pop, T. D., Stǎnilǎ, A., & Diaconeasa, Z. (2021). Anthocyanins: Factors affect­
ing their stability and degradation. Antioxidants, 10(12), 1967.
Ertugay, M. F., & Başlar, M. (2011). Gıdaların kalite özelliklerinin belirlenmesinde yakın kızılötesi 
(NIR) spektroskopisi. Gıda, 36(1), 49–54.
Esclapez, M. D., García-Pérez, J. V., Mulet, A., & Cárcel, J. A. (2011). Ultrasound-assisted extraction of 
natural products. Food Engineering Reviews, 3, 108–120.
Fan, K. J., & Su, W. H. (2022). Applications of fluorescence spectroscopy, RGB-and multispectral 
imaging for quality determinations of white meat: A review. Biosensors, 12(2), 76.
Farooq, S., Shah, M. A., Siddiqui, M. W., Dar, B. N., Mir, S. A., & Ali, A. (2020). Recent trends in 
extraction techniques of anthocyanins from plant materials. Journal of Food Measurement and 
Characterization, 14, 3508–3519.
Gales, O., Rodemann, T., Jones, J., & Swarts, N. (2021). Application of near infra-red spectroscopy as 
an instantaneous and simultaneous prediction tool for anthocyanins and sugar in whole fresh 
raspberry. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 101(6), 2449–2454.
Gao, Z., Yang, G., Zhao, X., Jiao, L., Wen, X., Liu, Y., & Dong, D. (2024). Rapid measurement of antho­
cyanin content in grape and grape juice: Raman spectroscopy provides non-destructive, rapid 
methods. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 222, 109048.
Geow, C. H., Tan, M. C., Yeap, S. P., & Chin, N. L. (2021). A review on extraction techniques and 
its future applications in industry. European Journal of Lipid Science and Technology, 123(4), 
2000302.
Gonçalves, A. C., Nunes, A. R., Falcão, A., Alves, G., & Silva, L. R. (2021). Dietary effects of anthocya­
nins in human health: A comprehensive review. Pharmaceuticals, 14(7), 690.
González, M. J. A., Carrera, C., Barbero, G. F., & Palma, M. (2022). A comparison study between 
ultrasound–assisted and enzyme–assisted extraction of anthocyanins from blackcurrant (Ribes 
nigrum L.). Food Chemistry: X, 13, 100192.
Guo, Y., Liu, C., Ye, R., & Duan, Q. (2020). Advances on water quality detection by UV-Vis spectros­
copy. Applied Sciences, 10(19), 6874.
Hassoun, A., Carpena, M., Prieto, M. A., Simal-Gandara, J., Özogul, F., Özogul, Y., & Regenstein, J. M. 
(2020). Use of spectroscopic techniques to monitor changes in food quality during application 
of natural preservatives: A review. Antioxidants, 9(9), 882.
Houghton, A., Appelhagen, I., & Martin, C. (2021). Natural blues: Structure meets function in antho­
cyanins. Plants, 10(4), 726.

283
Spectroscopic Methods in Analysis of Anthocyanins
Johnson, J., Collins, T., Walsh, K., & Naiker, M. (2020). Solvent extractions and spectrophotomet­
ric protocols for measuring the total anthocyanin, phenols and antioxidant content in plums. 
Chemical Papers, 74(12), 4481–4492.
Kharbach, M., Alaoui Mansouri, M., Taabouz, M., & Yu, H. (2023). Current application of advancing 
spectroscopy techniques in food analysis: Data handling with chemometric approaches. Foods, 
12(14), 2753.
Le, B. T. (2020). Application of deep learning and near infrared spectroscopy in cereal analysis. 
Vibrational Spectroscopy, 106, 103009.
Li, M., Xu, W., & Su, Y. (2021). Solid-state NMR spectroscopy in pharmaceutical sciences. TrAC Trends 
in Analytical Chemistry, 135, 116152.
Liu, J., Zhou, H., Song, L., Yang, Z., Qiu, M., Wang, J., & Shi, S. (2021). Anthocyanins: Promising natu­
ral products with diverse pharmacological activities. Molecules, 26(13), 3807.
Lončarić, A., Celeiro, M., Jozinović, A., Jelinić, J., Kovač, T., Jokić, S., & Lores, M. (2020). Green extraction 
methods for extraction of polyphenolic compounds from blueberry pomace. Foods, 9(11), 1521.
Marcone, M. F., Wang, S., Albabish, W., Nie, S., Somnarain, D., & Hill, A. (2013). Diverse food-based 
applications of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) technology. Food Research International, 
51(2), 729–747.
Mattioli, R., Francioso, A., Mosca, L., & Silva, P. (2020). Anthocyanins: A comprehensive review of 
their chemical properties and health effects on cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases. 
Molecules, 25(17), 3809.
Mazza, G., Cacace, J. E., & Kay, C. D. (2004). Methods of analysis for anthocyanins in plants and bio­
logical fluids. Journal of AOAC International, 87(1), 129–145.
Mishra, M. (2022). Spectroscopic techniques for the analysis of food quality, chemistry, and function.
Naresh, K. (2014). Applications of fluorescence spectroscopy. Journal of Chemical and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, 974, 2115.
Nawrocka, A., & Lamorska, J.. (2013). Determination of food quality by using spectroscopic methods. 
In Advances in Agrophysical Research. IntechOpen.
Nelson, D. L. (2017). Introduction to spectroscopy. In Spectroscopic methods in food analysis (pp. 3–34). 
CRC Press.
Osborne, B. G. (2006). Near-infrared spectroscopy in food analysis. Encyclopedia of Analytical 
Chemistry: Applications, Theory and Instrumentation, 1–13.
Oteiza, P. I., Cremonini, E., & Fraga, C. G. (2023). Anthocyanin actions at the gastrointestinal tract: 
Relevance to their health benefits. Molecular Aspects of Medicine, 89, 101156.
Penner, M. H. (2017). Basic principles of spectroscopy. Food Analysis, 79–88.
Perez-Vazquez, A., Carpena, M., Barciela, P., Cassani, L., Simal-Gandara, J., & Prieto, M. A. (2023). 
Pressurized liquid extraction for the recovery of bioactive compounds from seaweeds for food 
industry application: A review. Antioxidants, 12(3), 612.
Petersen, M., Yu, Z., & Lu, X. (2021). Application of Raman spectroscopic methods in food safety: A 
review. Biosensors, 11(6), 187.
Pratiwi, R. A., & Nandiyanto, A. B. D. (2022). How to read and interpret UV-VIS spectrophotometric 
results in determining the structure of chemical compounds. Indonesian Journal of Educational 
Research and Technology, 2(1), 1–20.
Qu, C., Li, Y., Du, S., Geng, Y., Su, M., & Liu, H. (2022). Raman spectroscopy for rapid fingerprint anal­
ysis of meat quality and security: Principles, progress and prospects. Food Research International, 
161, 111805.
Rostron, P., Gaber, S., & Gaber, D. (2016). Raman spectroscopy, review. Laser, 21, 24.
Rouxinol, M. I., Martins, M. R., Murta, G. C., Mota Barroso, J., & Rato, A. E. (2022). Quality assess­
ment of red wine grapes through NIR spectroscopy. Agronomy, 12(3), 637.
Saha, S., Singh, J., Paul, A., Sarkar, R., Khan, Z., & Banerjee, K. (2020). Anthocyanin profiling 
using UV-vis spectroscopy and liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Journal of AOAC 
International, 103(1), 23–39.
Şahin, Y. (2021). Raman spectroscopy and its applications. The World of Biomedical Technology, 1(1), 
15–18.

284
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
Sahoo, N. K., Tejaswini, G., Sahu, M., & Muralikrishna, K. S. (2020). An overview on NMR spec­
troscopy-based metabolomics. International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Developmental 
Research, 6(1), 016–020.
Saletnik, A., Saletnik, B., & Puchalski, C. (2021). Overview of popular techniques of Raman spectros­
copy and their potential in the study of plant tissues. Molecules, 26(6), 1537.
Shaikh, S., & O’Donnell, C. (2017). Applications of fluorescence spectroscopy in dairy processing: A 
review. Current Opinion in Food Science, 17, 16–24.
Stuppner, S., Mayr, S., Beganovic, A., Beć, K., Grabska, J., Aufschnaiter, U., & Huck, C. W. (2020). 
Near-infrared spectroscopy as a rapid screening method for the determination of total antho­
cyanin content in Sambucus fructus. Sensors, 20(17), 4983.
Sultangaziyev, A., & Bukasov, R. (2020). Applications of surface-enhanced fluorescence (SEF) 
spectroscopy in bio-detection and biosensing. Sensing and Bio-Sensing Research, 30, 100382.
Taghavi, T., Patel, H., Akande, O. E., & Galam, D. C. A. (2022). Total anthocyanin content of straw­
berry and the profile changes by extraction methods and sample processing. Foods, 11(8), 1072.
Tan, J., Han, Y., Han, B., Qi, X., Cai, X., Ge, S., & Xue, H. (2022). Extraction and purification of antho­
cyanins: A review. Journal of Agriculture and Food Research, 8, 100306.
Tena, N., & Asuero, A. G. (2022). Up-to-date analysis of the extraction methods for anthocyanins: 
Principles of the techniques, optimization, technical progress, and industrial application. 
Antioxidants, 11(2), 286.
Tombuloğlu, H., Öz, F., & Turhan, S. (2023). Raman spektroskopisinin et kalitesi ve güvenliğinin 
belirlenmesinde kullanimi. Gıda, 48(6), 1379–1393.
Verma, G., & Mishra, M. (2018). Development and optimization of UV-Vis spectroscopy—A review. 
World J. Pharm. Res., 7(11), 1170–1180.
Višnjevec, A. M., Barp, L., Lucci, P., & Moret, S.. (2024). Pressurized liquid extraction for the determi­
nation of bioactive compounds in plants with emphasis on phenolics. TrAC Trends in Analytical 
Chemistry, 117620.
Wallace, T. C., & Giusti, M. M. (2019). Anthocyanins—Nature’s bold, beautiful, and health-promot­
ing colors. Foods, 8(11), 550.
Yaseen, T., Sun, D. W., & Cheng, J. H. (2017). Raman imaging for food quality and safety evaluation: 
Fundamentals and applications. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 62, 177–189.
Yousuf, B., Gul, K., Wani, A. A., & Singh, P. (2016). Health benefits of anthocyanins and their encapsu­
lation for potential use in food systems: A review. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 
56(13), 2223–2230.
Zacharioudaki, D. E., Fitilis, I., & Kotti, M. (2022). Review of fluorescence spectroscopy in environ­
mental quality applications. Molecules, 27(15), 4801.
Zang, Z., Tang, S., Li, Z., Chou, S., Shu, C., Chen, Y., & Li, B. (2022). An updated review on the 
stability of anthocyanins regarding the interaction with food proteins and polysaccharides. 
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 21(5), 4378–4401.

285
15
GC/MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
Leo M.L. Nollet
15.1  Introduction
Gas chromatography (GC) is a powerful analytical technique used to separate, identify, 
and quantify compounds in a mixture. However, to analyze the water-soluble pigments, 
anthocyanins, GC is not the ideal method. High-performance liquid chromatography 
(HPLC) or ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) are the methods of choice to 
analyze, due to their polar nature and thermal instability.
The analysis of anthocyanins consists of different steps:
•	 Sample Preparation
Anthocyanins are usually extracted from plant materials using solvents like 
methanol, ethanol, or a mixture of solvents often acidified (e.g., with formic acid 
or hydrochloric acid) to stabilize the anthocyanins.
Next the extract may be filtered to remove solid particles and then concentrated 
to remove excess solvent.
•	 Chromatographic Analysis
HPLC or UPLC is typically employed for separating anthocyanins. Reverse-
phase columns (C18) are often used along with a gradient of water and an organic 
solvent both of which are acidified.
•	 Detection
Detection is typically done using a UV-Vis detector, at around 520 nm, where 
anthocyanins exhibit strong absorbance. Mass spectrometry (MS) can also 
be coupled with Liquid Chromatography (LC) for more detailed structural 
analysis.
GC can theoretically be used if the anthocyanins are derivatized to make them more 
volatile and stable at higher temperatures. Derivatization involves silylation, acylation, or 
methylation to make anthocyanins volatile.
The derivatized anthocyanins can then be analyzed using GC, often with a flame 
ionization detector (FID) or mass spectrometry (GC-MS) for identification and 
quantification.
The literature on GC analysis methods of anthocyanins is scarce and the publications 
are rather old.

286
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
15.2  Gas Chromatographic Methods
The extraction of anthocyanin from Bokbunja (Rubus coreanus Miq.) marc generated during 
traditional wine processing was optimized using response surface methodology (RSM).
One step in this analysis is silylation performed at 50°C for 30 min. The trimethylsilyl 
(TMS) derivatives were analyzed using a GC -mass spectrometer and a GC (1).
The TMS derivatives of the aqueous fraction eluted from a C18 cartridge were analyzed 
using a Shimadzu GC-17A. One microliter of each sample was injected into a GC equipped 
with a FID. Separation of the compounds was achieved using a SPB-5 silica fused capillary 
column (30 m × 0.25 mm I.D., 0.25 µm film thickness, Supelco, USA). The oven temperature 
was elevated from 150°C to 300°C at a rate of 5°C/min, and then held at 300°C for 10 min. 
The helium gas flow rate was 1 mL/min, the split ratio was adjusted to 10, and the FID and 
injection port temperatures were set at 280°C and 250°C, respectively.
The GC-MS parameters were similar to those used for the GC. An Agilent 6890 N 
GC/5973N MSD was used to obtain the mass fragmentation pattern of the compounds 
using a mass range of m/z 50–600 and electron ionization at 70 eV. Identification and quan­
tification of compounds was performed by comparison with authentic standards. Tartaric 
acid and methyl-3-a-glucopyranoside were used as internal standards for organic acid and 
sugar, respectively. The specific fragment (m/z 207) of fructose was used for quantitation 
in the single ion monitoring (SIM) mode of the GC-MS because the fructose and citric acid 
chromatogram produced using the GC were overlapping. The citric acid content was then 
calculated by subtracting the fructose content determined by the SIM mode calibration 
from the total content of the overlapping peak.
The results of HPLC-PDA-MS/MS analysis of the anthocyanins extracted from Bokbunja 
marc revealed the presence of six anthocyanin components, which were tentatively identi­
fied as cyanidin 3-O-sambubioside, cyanidin 3-O-xylosyl-rutino, cyanidin 3-O-rutinoside, 
pelargonidin 3-O-rutinoside, delphinidin 3-O-rutinoside-delphinidin 3-O-rutinoside, and 
delphinidin 3-O-glucuronide.
The anthocyanins responsible for the red color of red kiwifruit were extracted in acidi­
fied ethanol and isolated by solid phase extraction (SPE) followed by preparative HPLC (2). 
Five anthocyanins were obtained and subsequently identified as delphinidin 3-[2-(xylo­
syl)galactoside], delphinidin 3-galactoside, cyanidin 3-[2-(xylosyl)galactoside], cyanidin 
3-galactoside, and cyanidin 3-glucoside by a combination of LC-MS/MS, GC-MS, and 2D 
NMR. Delphinidin 3-[2-(xylosyl)galactoside] and delphinidin 3-galactoside have not previ­
ously been reported in the genus Actinidia.
Shimadzu QP5050A, the separation column was a 30 m × 0.25 mm I.D. × 0.25 μm film 
thickness Phenomenex ZB-5 ms (Phenomenex, Torrance,CA). The temperature was pro­
gramed from 40°C (held for 1 min) to 300°C at 7°C/min (held for 4 min). The derivatized 
sugar residues were identified by comparison of retention times and fragmentation pat­
terns with authentic standards. Hexoses (glucose or galactose) m/z (rel. intensity) 319(36), 
205(26), 147(30), 73(100); pentose (xylose) m/z (rel. intensity) 307(19), 217(39), 147(20), 103(53), 
73(100).
The quantitative and qualitative evolution of the anthocyanins and volatile compounds 
of four raspberry cultivars (cvs. Heritage, Autumn Bliss, Zeva, and Rubi) growing in Spain 
were analyzed raw, just frozen, and during long-term frozen storage at −20°C for a one 
year period (3). HS-SPME coupled with GC-MS and HPLC techniques were employed to 
study the evolution of the volatile compounds and the individual anthocyanins, respec­
tively. The volatile aroma composition changes produced by the freezing process and 

287
GC/MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
long-term frozen storage were minimal. Only a significant increase in extraction capacity 
was obtained for R-ionone (27%) and for caryophyllene (67%) in Heritage at 12 months 
of storage. The stability of anthocyanins to freezing and frozen storage depends on the 
seasonal period of harvest. Heritage and Autumn Bliss (early cultivars) were less affected 
by processing and long-term frozen storage (one year), and the total pigment extracted 
showed the tendency to increase 17 and 5%, respectively. Rubi and Zeva (late cultivars) 
suffered a decreased trend on the total anthocyanin content of 4% for Rubi and 17.5% for 
Zeva. Cyanidin 3-glucoside most easily suffered the degradative reactions that take place 
during processing and the storage period.
The GC-MS Volatile Compound Analysis was as follows. An SPME holder (Supelco) was 
used to perform the experiments. A fused silica fiber coated with a 100 ím layer of dimeth­
ylpolysiloxane was chosen to extract the volatile components of the raspberries. One gram 
of the fruit was cut in four pieces and placed in a 20 mL vial which was capped with plastic 
film. Extraction was performed by exposing the fiber to the headspace of the sample for 
30 min at 30°C.
A Perkin-Elmer model 8500 gas chromatograph equipped with a PTV injector and an 
FID detector was used to perform the analysis. The system was coupled to a model 2600 
chromatography software system (Perkin-Elmer Nelson Analytical). A 50 m × 0.25 mm 
I.D. fused-silica capillary column (Chrompack) coated with a 0.25 µm layer of CP-Sil-5 CB 
was used. Helium was the carrier gas. Thermal desorption of the compounds in the fiber 
took place in the GC injector at 200°C for 15 min in splitless mode for 5 min. The detector 
operated at 250°C. The oven temperature was programed from 50°C (3 min constant tem­
perature) to 250°C at 5°C/min. The final temperature was maintained for 17 min.
GC-MS analysis was carried out by coupling the gas chromatograph described above 
to a Perkin-Elmer ITD-50 ion trap detector (EI, 70 eV). The capillary column and chro­
matographic program used were as mentioned previously. Compounds were identified by 
comparison of the spectra with those in a general-purpose library. Moreover, the identity 
of the components was confirmed by matching their mass spectrometric data with those 
obtained from the same equipment and corresponding to authentic reference compounds.
Metabolite profiling of three blueberry species (Vaccinium bracteatum Thunb., Vaccinium 
oldhamii Miquel., and Vaccinium corymbosum L.) was performed using GC–time-of-flight-
mass spectrometry (GC-TOF-MS) and UPLC–quadrupole-time-of-flight-mass spectrometry 
(UPLC-Q-TOF-MS) combined multivariate analysis (4). Partial least-squares discrimi­
nant analysis clearly showed metabolic differences among species. GC-TOF-MS analysis 
revealed significant differences in amino acids, organic acids, fatty acids, sugars, and phe­
nolic acids among the three blueberry species. UPLC-Q-TOF-MS analysis indicated that 
anthocyanins were the major metabolites distinguishing V. bracteatum from V. oldhamii. The 
contents of anthocyanins such as glycosides of cyanidin were high in V. bracteatum, while 
glycosides of delphinidin, petunidin, and malvidin were high in V. oldhamii. Antioxidant 
activities assessed using ABTS 2,2′-azino-bis(3ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid 
(ABTS) and 2,2-Diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) assays showed the greatest activity in 
V. oldhamii and revealed the highest correlation with total phenolic, total flavonoid, and 
total anthocyanin contents and their metabolites.
Various metabolites act as plant defense molecules due to their antioxidant abilities. The 
study of five aimed to investigate the influence of UVB irradiation on the accumulation of 
metabolites, including primary metabolites (sugar, sugar alcohols, amino acids, organic 
acids, and an amine) and secondary metabolites (anthocyanins, fatty acids, and phenolic 
acids), and its synergistic antioxidant ability, in purple kohlrabi sprouts (5). Metabolite 
analyses revealed a total of 92 metabolites in the sprouts. Specifically, the levels of most 

288
Handbook of Analysis and Extraction Methods of Anthocyanins
amino acids increased after 24 h of UVB treatment, and then slightly decreased in the 
kohlrabi sprouts. The levels of most sugars and sugar alcohols increased after 24 h of UVB 
treatment and then decreased. The levels of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle (TCA) cycle interme­
diates and phenolic acids gradually increased during the UVB treatment. Furthermore, 
the levels of some fatty acids gradually increased during the UVB treatment, and the lev­
els of the other fatty acids increased after 6 h of UVB treatment and then decreased. In 
particular, the levels of most anthocyanins, known to be strong antioxidants, gradually 
increased after 24 h of UVB treatment. In the in vitro ABTS scavenging assay, UVB-treated 
purple kohlrabi sprouts showed increased scavenging ability. This may be attributed to 
the increased accumulation of metabolites acting as antioxidants, in response to UVB 
treatment. This study confirmed that UVB irradiation induced the alteration of primary 
and secondary metabolism in the kohlrabi sprouts.
GC was performed with an Agilent 6890N GC main frame (Agilent) and an Agilent 
7820A GC equipped with 5977E MSD for GC-MS. Each chromatography experiment used 
DB-5MS (60 m × 0.32 mm I.D. × 0.25 µm film thickness, Agilent). For samples that were only 
trans-methylated, 1 µL aliquots were injected into the GC via splitless injection, and the 
GC oven temperature program was set as follows: start at 50°C, increase at a rate of 4°C/
min to 190°C, decrease at a rate of 0.5°C/min to 180°C, hold for 5 min, increase at a rate of 
4°C/min to 280°C, increase at a rate of 10°C/min to 300°C, and hold at this temperature 
for 5 min. Ionization energy of 70 eV was used for GC-MS. After performing the total ion 
chromatography (TIC) of each sample, identification was conducted by comparing reten­
tion time using the Chemstation software library.
In the work of de Souza Dias et al. (6) a fast and simple methodology has been applied 
for the determination of gallic acid, resveratrol, catechin, and malvidin in Brazilian wines 
by GC–mass spectrometry. The procedure included a stage of ultrasound-assisted liquid–
liquid extraction and subsequent derivatization with N,O-bis(trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacet­
amide (BSTFA) and GC-MS analysis. The limit of detection varied from 0.41 to 1.18 mg/L 
in all the analytes. The relative standard deviations calculated for 8.0 and 20 mg/L were 
1.90 and 0.82% for gallic acid, 3.08 and 1.22% for catechin, 1.30 and 0.44% for malvidin, 
1.50 and 0.53% for resveratrol, and 1.41 and 0.61% for quercetin. The developed method­
ology was applied for the analysis of red wine samples collected in the São Francisco 
region, Bahia state, Brazil. Quercetin concentration varied from 2.4 to 3.0 mg/L, gallic 
acid 21.4–56.3 mg/L, resveratrol 1.5–5.9 mg/L, malvidin 15.3–32.2 mg/L, and catechin 
11.71–18.2 mg/L. The obtained concentrations are in agreement with those reported in the 
literature.
The GC-MS analysis was carried out with a Perkin-Elmer apparatus, Model Clarus 500, 
and the used temperature program were the following: initial temperature of 80°C, for 
1 min, then from 80°C to 250°C at a rate of 20°C/min, and held for 1 min; next, it was aug­
mented at 6°C/min to 300°C, held for 2 min, and finally increased at 20°C/min– to 320°C, 
and held for 24 min.
References
	
1.	 Ku, C. S. & Mun, S. P. (2008). Optimization of the extraction of anthocyanin from Bokbunja 
(Rubus coreanus Miq.) marc produced during traditional wine processing and characterization 
of the extracts. Bioresource Technology, 99 (17), 8325–8330.

289
GC/MS Analysis of Anthocyanins
	
2.	 Comeskey, D. J., Montefiori, M., Edwards, P. J., McGhie, T. K. (2009). Isolation and structural 
identification of the anthocyanin components of red kiwifruit. Journal of Agricultural and 
Food Chemistry, 57 (5), 2035–2039.
	
3.	 de Ancos, B., Ibanez, E., Reglero, G., & Cano, M. P. (2000). Frozen storage effects on anthocya­
nins and volatile compounds of raspberry fruit. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 
48 (3), 873–879.
	
4.	 Lee, S., Jung, E. S., Do, S. G., Jung, G. Y., Song, G., Song, J. M., & Lee, C. H. (2014). Correlation 
between species-specific metabolite profiles and bioactivities of blueberries (Vaccinium spp.). 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 62 (9), 2126–2133.
	
5.	 Yeo H. J., Lim S.-Y., Park C. H., Kim C. Y., Sathasivam R., Kim J. K., Park S. U. (2022) Metabolic 
analyses and evaluation of antioxidant activity in purple kohlrabi sprouts after exposed to 
UVB radiation. Antioxidants, 11 (8), 1443.
	
6.	 de Souza Dias, F., Silva, M. F. & David, J. M. (2013). Determination of quercetin, gallic acid, 
resveratrol, catechin and malvidin in Brazilian wines elaborated in the Vale do São Francisco 
using liquid–liquid extraction assisted by ultrasound and GC-MS. Food Analytical Methods, 
6, 963–968.


291
Index
Note: Bold page numbers refer to tables and Italic page numbers refer to figures.
A
Abdellatif, A. A., 127
Aborehab, N. M., 233
Absorption scheme, 69, 70
ABTS (2,2ʹ-azino-bis (3-ehtylbenzothiazoline-
6-sulfonic acid) diamonium salt) 
assay, 7–9, 287
Acevedo De la Cruz, 253
Acylation, 12, 44, 46–51
chemical acylation, 46
enzymatic acylation, 46, 51
Aglycones, 10, 12
Aissat, A. K., 210
Alatanin E, 262, 263
Albuquerque, Bianca R., 55
Alvarez-Suarez, J.M., 20
Amin, F.U., 22
Analysis, anthocyanins, 182
high-performance liquid chromatography 
(HPLC), 185–187
UHPLC, 187–190, 190–191
Anthocyanidin, 10
Anthocyanin-rich foods, 138–140
Anticancer activity, 21
Anticancer effects, 19
Antidiabetic activity, 107
Antidiabetic diseases, 119–120
Antidiabetic effects, 18, 20–21
Antimicrobial activity, 21
Antimicrobial effects, 19, 21
Antiobesity, 20–21
Antiobesity diseases, 119–120
Antiobesity effects, 18
Antioxidant activity, 3–7, 10, 14, 104–108
anticancer activity, 107–108
antidiabetic activity, 107
cardiovascular protection, 104–105
hepatoprotective effects, 106
measurement in vitro of, 5
nephroprotective effects, 106
neuroprotective effects, 105–106
Antioxidant bioassays, 4–5
ABTS (2,2ʹ-azino-bis 
(3-ehtylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic 
acid) diamonium salt) assay, 7–9
CUPRAC (cupric ion reducing antioxidant 
capacity) assay, 7
DPPH (diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl) assay, 5
FCT (ferric thiocyanate) assay, 6
FRAP (ferric reducing antioxidant power) 
assay, 7
ORAC assay (oxygen radical absorbance 
capacity), 6
TRAP assay (total peroxyl radical trapping 
antioxidant parameter), 6
Antioxidant mechanism, 103–104, 104
Antioxidant properties, 98–108
Anti-Stokes Raman scattering, 278
Apoptosis, 126
Aramwit, Pornanong, 38
Arapitsas, P., 252
Arjinajarn, P., 106
Aronia melanocarpa L., 211
Ascorbic acid, 39
Askar, Kahtan A., 37
Avula, B., 252
Awika, Joseph M., 53
B
Bae, J-S., 106
Bathochromic change, 54
Batista, Â. G., 126
Benefits, anthocyanins, 117
Benítez, V., 138
Benvenutti, Lais, 43
Bioaccessibility, 69–71
Bioactivity, anthocyanin pigments, 118–119
Bioavailability, 4, 13–17, 22, 65, 209
Bioflavonoid phytochemicals, 136
Biogenesis, 100
Biosynthetic pathway, 102
Biotransformation reactions, 15
Blackberry, 17
extracts, 21
Blackcurrant (Ribes nigrum L.), 85–86
Black goji berry (Lycium ruthenicum), 85
Blueberry (Vaccinium spp.), 83–85
Borompichaichartkul, Chaleeda, 72
Bowen-Forbes, C. S., 117

292
Index
Box-Behnken design (BBD), 169
Brouillard, Raymond, 35
Brownmiller, C., 37
Bunsen, Robert, 275
C
Caffeic acid, 70
prevention mechanism, 124
Capitani, D., 171
Carbon dioxide (CO2), 168
Cardiovascular diseases, 17, 18, 20, 122–123
Cardiovascular disorders, 137
Caryophyllene, 287
Chemical properties, 116–117
Chemical skeleton, anthocyanin, 164
Chemistry, anthocyanins, 99, 100, 101, 
163–164, 182
Chen, B., 105
Chen, J., 210
Chen, L., 120, 124
Chen, T., 220
Chen, Y., 155
Chlorogenic acid (CG), 38
Chlorogenoquinone, 38
Choi, Inyoung, 56
Choo, W. S., 198
Classification, anthocyanins, 9–13
13C-NMR, 263–265, 264
Coating materials, 66–69, 67
Colonic metabolism metabolites, 16, 16
Colon microbiota alteration, 16, 16
Color, anthocyanins, 116–117
Colorants, 118
Column chromatography method, 155
Combined extraction method, 154
Constantin, O. E., 198
Conventional solvent extraction, 196
Copigmentation effect, 51–54
intramolecular and intermolecular, 52–53
metal complexation, 53–54
1H-1H correlation spectroscopy (COSY), 
265, 266
Cranberry extracts, 21
CUPRAC (cupric ion reducing antioxidant 
capacity) assay, 7, 8
Cyanidin, 115, 179
Cyanidin-3,5-O-diglucoside, 230, 233
Cyanidin-3-arabinoside/cyanidin-3-O-
arabinoside, 246, 272
Cyanidin-3-galactoside/cyanidin-3-O-
galactoside, 10, 41, 115, 246, 272
Cyanidin-3-glucoside/cyanidin-3-O-glucoside, 
10, 12, 54, 86, 87, 106–108, 233, 234, 246, 
257, 272, 287
Cyanidin-3-O-(6-O-acetyl)-glucoside, 230
Cyanidin 3-O-(6-O-malonyl-beta-D-glucoside), 
200
Cyanidin-3-O-caffeoylrutinoside, 234
Cyanidin-3-O-glycoside, 138–139
Cyanidin-3-O-(p-coumaroyl)-glucoside-
5-O-malonylglucoside, 234
Cyanidin 3-O-rutinoside, 87, 286
Cyanidin-3-O-sambubioside, 219, 222, 286
Cyanidin 3-O-xylosyl-rutino, 286
Cyanidin-3-rutinoside/cyanidin 
3-O-rutinoside, 41, 107, 272
Cyanidin-3-sambubioside, 222
Cyanidin-3-sophoroside-5-glucoside, 217
Czank, C., 14
D
Deep Eutectic Solvents (DES), 41, 43
Delaporte, Bernard, 35
Del Bo’, C., 107
Delphinidin, 115, 179, 221
Delphinidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside, 222, 230
Delphinidin 3-(6″-malonylhexoside), 221
Delphinidin 3-(6-p-coumaroylgalactoside), 219
Delphinidin-3-arabinoside, 41, 272
Delphinidin-3-galactoside, 272
Delphinidin-3-glucoside/delphinidin-
3-O-glucoside, 10, 12, 54, 86, 222, 230, 
257, 272
Delphinidin-3-O-(6-O-malonyl-β-D-
glucoside), 222
Delphinidin 3-O-glucuronide, 286
Delphinidin 3-O-hexoside, 220
Delphinidin-3-O-rutinopyranosyl-
glucoside, 219
Delphinidin 3-O-rutinoside, 286
Delphinidin-3-O-rutinoside-5-O-glucoside, 219
Delphinidin 3-O-sambubioside, 219, 234
Delphinidin-3-rutinoside/delphinidin-3-O-
rutinoside, 219, 272
De Souza Dias, F., 288
Diabetes, 119
Dias, A. L. S., 250
Díaz-Álvarez, 44
Dietary antioxidants, 105, 137
Dietary fiber, 136
Digestion process, 3, 71
Distortionless enhancement by polarization 
transfer (DEPT), 263
Cancer, 123–124, 125

293
Index
Dixit, D., 234
DPPH (diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl) assay, 5, 8, 
287
Duan, X., 234
E
Ebrahimi, F., 234
Eggplant, 139
El Bishbishy, M. H., 233
Electrospinning, 68
Emulsions, 68
Encapsulated anthocyanins, controlled 
release, 71–73
Encapsulation, 65–75, 67, 91
bioaccessibility and bioavailability, 69–71
Enzymes, 38–39
Essential fatty acids, 136
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) 
guidance, 9
European Health Claims Regulation, 9
Extraction approaches, 164–165
Extraction methods, 150–154, 151–153, 163–173
combined extraction method, 154
conventional methods, 165–167
maceration, 166–167
percolation, 166
Soxhlation, 167
microwave-assisted extraction (MAE), 150, 
153
modern methods, 168–172
enzyme-assisted extraction, 171–172
microwave-assisted extraction, 168–169
solid-phase extraction, 170–171
supercritical fluid extraction, 169–170
ultrasound-assisted extraction, 169
solvent extraction method (SEM), 150
supercritical carbon dioxide extraction 
(SCDE), 154
ultrasound-assisted extraction (UAE), 150
Extraction techniques, 44, 45
Eye health, 17, 120–122
F
Fan, M., 122
Fang, Zhongxiang, 39
FCT (ferric thiocyanate) assay, 6
Fernández-Galleguillos, C., 254
Ferrars, R.M., 14
Feuereisen, M. M., 254
Fickian diffusion, 72
Flavonoids, 99, 114, 129, 138, 139, 245, 272, 273
Flavonols, 117
Flavylium cation, 3, 35, 65, 74, 99, 116
Fluorescence spectroscopy, 280–281
Food colorants, 81–91
sources of anthocyanins as, 82–87
blackcurrant (Ribes nigrum L.), 85–86
black goji berry (Lycium ruthenicum), 85
blueberry (Vaccinium spp.), 83–85
grumixama (Eugenia brasiliensis), 86
mulberry (Morus spp.), 86–87
Food digestion, 14
Food formulations, 90
anthocyanin application, 90
Food industries, 87–90
anthocyanin application, limitations, 
87–90
Foods containing anthocyanins, 117–118
Forester, S.C., 21
FRAP (ferric reducing antioxidant power) assay, 
7, 8, 12
Freeze-drying, 66, 68
Functional foods, 135–140
Functional products, 135
Furfural, 40
G
Gad, H. A., 233
Gallego, A. M., 209
Gallic acid, 70
Gamage, G. C. V., 198
Garcia-Mendoza, Maria del Pilar, 44
Gas chromatographic methods, 286–288
Gas chromatography (GC), 285
Gaultheria pumila (Ericaceae), 254
GC/MS analysis, 285–288
Giusti, M. M., 56
Glycosylation, 99, 209
Gowd, V., 15, 74
Gram-negative bacteria, 21
Grapes, 138
Grimes, K. L., 123
Gris, E. F., 52
Grumixama (Eugenia brasiliensis), 86
H
Hagiwara, A., 119
Hamed, A. R., 233
Handayani, L., 233
Hassellund, S. S., 122
He, Y. K., 156
Health benefits, 18–19

294
Index
Health effects, 114–129, 209
on antidiabetic and antiobesity diseases, 
119–120
cancer, 123–124
cardiovascular diseases, 122–123
eye health, 120–122
neurodegenerative diseases, 124–127
skin health, 127–128
Hepatoprotective effects, 106
Herrera-Balandrano, D. D., 119
Heteronuclear multiple bond correlation 
(HMBC), 267, 268, 269
Heteronuclear multiple quantum correlation 
(HMQC), 267
Heteronuclear single quantum correlation 
spectroscopy (HSQC), 267, 268
Heyman, L., 20
High-density lipoprotein (HDL), 20, 120
High-performance liquid chromatography 
(HPLC) analysis, 179–191
High performance preparative liquid 
chromatography (HPPLC) method, 
156–157
High-speed counter-current chromatography 
(HSCCC) method, 156
High-voltage electrical discharge (HVED), 44
Higuchi, W.I., 71
History, anthocyanin, 115–116
1H-NMR, 263, 264
Hoang, T. N. N., 222
Honeysuckle anthocyanins (HA), 120
Hornedo-Ortega, R., 256
Hou, Zhaohua, 35, 37
Hou F, 106
Houghton, A., 182
Hydrogels, 68
Hydrogen atom donator (HAT), 4
Hyperchromic properties, 54
I
Industrial applications, 55–56
Inflammation, 137
Interaction, food components, 38–40
ascorbic acid, 39
enzymes, 38–39
sugars, 39–40
sulfites, 40
Interconversion, 36
Islam, M. S., 234
Istrati, D. I., 198
Iwamoto, Satoshi, 72
J
Jankowski, A., 20
Jia, Q., 187
Jiang, T., 211
Jing, P., 21, 123
Jo, K., 127
Johnson, S. A., 123
Joo, H. K., 123
Joseph, J. A., 119
Joseph Fraunhofer, 275
K
Kaiser, M., 209, 245
Kang, K., 121
Karaaslan, Mehmet, 56
Khan, M. Z., 234
Khan, N.H., 186
Khoo, H.E., 182
Kim, Ah-Na, 38, 87
Kim, I., 14
Kim, M., 200
Kirby, C. W., 230
Kirchhoff, Gustav, 275
Klisurova, Daniela, 52
Kodikara, C., 199
Kohno, Yoshiumi, 54
Korsmeyer-Peppas model, 71–73
Kosehira, M., 121
Kostka, T., 210
Kuasnei, M., 220
L
Laganà, G., 233
LC-MS analysis, 196–236
edible flowers, 221–234, 223–229
fruits, 198–211, 201–208
grains, 219–220
legumes/beans, 220–221
root vegetables, 211–218, 212–216
seaweeds, 234–236, 235
veggies, other, 218–219
Lee, I-C., 106
Lee, J., 87
Leonarski, E., 219
Leong, Chean Ring, 74
Li, D., 186, 221
Li, J., 126
Li, X., 200
Liang, C.A., 156
Light, 37–38

295
Index
Liquid chromatography, 185
Lopez, Cecilia Jimenez, 55
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL), 20, 120
Loypimai, Patiwit, 37
M
Ma, C., 199, 221
Maceration, 166–167
Maltodextrin, 66
Malvacin-3-O-glucoside, 221
Malvidin, 115, 179
Malvidin 3,5-diglucoside/malvidin-3,5-di-O-
glucoside/malvidin-3,5-O-diglucoside, 
12, 222, 233, 249
Malvidin-3-arabinoside, 272
Malvidin-3-galactoside, 12, 41, 272
Malvidin-3-glucoside/malvidin-3-O-glucoside, 
12, 41, 221, 233, 234, 249, 272
Malvidin-3-O-(6-O-acetyl)-glucoside, 249
Malvidin-3-rutinoside, 272
Maner, Salama, 55
Masala, V., 230
Matera, R., 9
Mazzara, E., 230
McGhie, T. K., 119
Mejía, J. J., 221
Membrane separation method, 155–156
Metabolite profiling, 287
Microencapsulated anthocyanins, 73, 75
for food application, 73–74
Microencapsulation techniques, 66–69
Microwave-assisted extraction (MAE), 150, 153
Mirzazadeh, N., 217
Miyake, S., 121
Miyazaki, K., 122
Modesto Junior, E. N., 86, 90
Mohamed, A. I., 234
Molecular stability, 66
Moncada, Margarida C., 54
Montibeller, Maria Jara, 56
Myrciaria cauliflora, 255
Myrtus communis L.(Myrtaceae), 255
N
Nanoencapsulation, 68, 69
Naringenin, 100
Natural colorants, 118
Natural sources, anthocyanins, 9–13
Near-infrared (NIR) spectroscopy, 271, 278, 279
Nephroprotective effects, 106
Neurodegenerative diseases, 19, 22, 124–127
Neuroinflammation, 126
Neuroprotective effects, 105–106
Newton, Isaac, 271, 275
Ngo, Thao, 54
Nikkhah, E., 40
Nina, N., 220
NOESY (NOE spectroscopy), 269
Non-communicable chronic diseases (NCDs), 81
Non-conventional methods, 274–275
Non-Fickian diffusion, 73
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) analysis, 
262–270
1H-1H correlation spectroscopy (COSY), 265, 
266
1H-NMR, 263, 264
13C-NMR, 263–265, 264
data elucidation, example, 262–269
heteronuclear multiple bond correlation 
(HMBC), 267, 268, 269
heteronuclear multiple quantum correlation 
(HMQC), 267
heteronuclear single quantum correlation 
spectroscopy (HSQC), 267, 268
measurement, amount, 262
measurement, solvent, 262
NOESY (NOE spectroscopy), 269
rotating-frame nuclear Overhauser effect 
spectroscopy (ROESY), 269, 269
sample preparation for, 262
TOCSY (total correlation spectroscopy), 
265–267, 266, 267
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
spectroscopy, 271, 280
Nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE), 269
O
Oancea, Simona., 35
ORAC assay (oxygen radical absorbance 
capacity), 6, 8
Oxidative equilibrium, human body, 103
Oxidative stress, 3, 120, 126
Oxygen, 38
Oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC) 
activity, 101, 103
P
Pacheco-Palencia, Lisbeth A., 39, 52
Papaioanou, M., 128
Papillo, Valentina Azzurra, 55

296
Index
Parkinson’s disease, 22
Pasqualone, Antonella, 55
Pathophysiology, human body, 103
Paun, N., 185, 197
Peanparkdee, Methavee, 72
Pelargonidin, 115, 179
Pelargonidin 3,5-diglucoside, 12
Pelargonidin-3-arabinoside, 272
Pelargonidin-3-galactoside, 272
Pelargonidin-3-glucoside, 12, 257, 272
Pelargonidin-3-O-caffeoylsophoroside-
5-O-arabinoside, 233
Pelargonidin-3-O-hexoside, 233
Pelargonidin 3-O-rutinoside, 286
Pelargonidin-3-O-sinapylglucoside-5-O-
arabinoside, 234
Pelargonidin-3-O-sinapylglucoside-5-O-
glucoside, 234
Pelargonidin-3-rutinoside, 12, 272
Peonidin, 11, 115, 179
Peonidin-3,5-O-diglucoside, 233
Peonidin-3-arabinoside, 41, 272
Peonidin-3-galactoside/peonidin-3-O-
galactoside, 246, 272
Peonidin-3-glucoside, 11, 106, 108, 257, 272
Peonidin-3-rutinoside, 272
Peonidin-3-sophoroside-5-glucoside, 217
Percolation, 166
Pereira, A. R., 218
Petunidin, 11, 115, 179
Petunidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside, 222, 230
Petunidin-3-arabinoside, 10, 272
Petunidin-3-galactoside, 10, 272
Petunidin-3-glucoside/petunidin-3-O-
glucoside, 10, 11, 41, 221, 222, 230, 272
Petunidin 3-O-hexoside, 221
Petunidin-3-rutinoside, 272
PH, 35
alteration, 67, 69, 88
effect, 12–13, 13
Pharmacological activities, 183
Phenolic metabolites, anthocyanin, 14
Phenylpropanoid pathway, 272
Photodiscoloration, 38
P-hydroxybenzoic acid, 70
Phytochemicals, 119, 136
Pistacia lentiscus L., 253
Pojer, E., 104
Pomegranate (Punica granatum), 127, 139
Poomanee, W., 127
Porcine pancreatic elastase, 20
Poulose, S. M., 126
Prebiotics, 136
Pressurized liquid extraction (PLE), 42–43
Primary metabolites, 114
Probiotics, 136
Processing factors, 40–44
extraction, 40–41
processing methods, 41–42
high-voltage electrical discharge 
(HVED), 44
pressurized liquid extraction (PLE), 42–43
pulsed electric field (PEF), 43–44
supercritical fluids extraction (SFE), 43
ultrasound-assisted extraction, 42
Protocatechuic acid, 70
Pulsed electric field (PEF), 43–44
Purification methods, 155–157
column chromatography method, 155
high performance preparative liquid 
chromatography (HPPLC) method, 
156–157
high-speed counter-current chromatography 
(HSCCC) method, 156
membrane separation method, 155–156
Purple asparagus (Asparagus officinalis L.), 139
Purple sweet potato (Dioscorea alata L.), 127
Purple sweet potato anthocyanin (PSPA), 122
Q
Qi, Z-L., 106
Qian, F., 127
Qu, S., 200
Quasi-Fickian diffusion, 72, 73
R
Raman spectroscopy (RS), 271, 278
Reddy, C. R. K., 234
Redox homeostasis, 3
Rehman, S.U., 22
Reversed-phase (RP) HPLC, 197
Rigolon, Thais Caroline Buttow, 38
R-ionone, 287
Rodriguez-Mena, Azucena, 35
Rose, P. M., 127
Rotating-frame nuclear Overhauser effect 
spectroscopy (ROESY), 269, 269
Rubinskiene, M., 187
Rubus idaeus L., 128
S
Sadeghi, A., 234
Saffron, 222

297
Index
Sandoval-Ramirez, B.A., 14
Schreiber, Henry D., 54
Secondary metabolites, 114
Sekikawa, T., 121
Self-association, 54–55
Shahtouri, M. G., 230
Shamshad, Aneela, 73
Shih, P.-H., 22
Single-electron transfer (SET), 3, 4
Skin aging, 127
Sodium alginate, 68
Solid phase extraction (SPE), 286
Solvent extraction method (SEM), 150
Song, W., 222
Song, X., 233
Sources, anthocyanins, 163–164
Soxhlation, 167
Soxhlet, Franz von, 167
Spectroscopic methods, 271–281
fluorescence spectroscopy, 280–281
near-infrared (NIR) spectroscopy, 278, 279
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
spectroscopy, 280
Raman spectroscopy, 278
ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectroscopy, 
276–277
Spray drying, 66
Stability, anthocyanins, 149
acylation, 44, 46–51
copigmentation effect, 51–54
factors affecting, 34–38
food processing, 34–57
intrinsic and extrinsic factors, 34
light, 37–38
oxygen, 38
pH, 35
self-association, 54–55
strategies to improve, 44, 46–55
temperature, 35–37
Stintzing, F.C., 103
Stokes Raman scattering, 278
Strathearn, K.E., 22
Structure, anthocyanidin, 272, 273
Structure, anthocyanins, 115, 115, 149, 149, 181
Structure-activity relationships (SAR), 
100–103
Subbiah, V., 235
Sucrose, 40
Sugars, 39–40
Sui, Xiaonan, 56
Sulfites, 40
Sulfur dioxide (SO2), 40
Supercritical carbon dioxide (scCO2), 43, 170
Supercritical carbon dioxide extraction 
(SCDE), 154
Supercritical fluids extraction (SFE), 43
Synbiotics, 136
Synergistic effect, 210
T
Tabart, J., 123
Tachibana, Noriko, 54
Talcott, Stephen T., 52, 53
Tasinov, O., 211
TEAC (6-hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethyl
chroman-2-carboxylic acid) (Trolox), 
7, 8, 12
Technological strategies, 65–75
Temperature, 35–37
Terefe, Netsanet Shiferaw, 53
Therapeutic effects, 17–22
Thermal degradation, 36
mechanisms, 89
Thin-layer chromatography (TLC), 185
TOCSY (total correlation spectroscopy), 
265–267, 266, 267
Total anthocyanins concentration (TAC), 8
Toufektsian, M.C., 104
TRAP assay (total peroxyl radical trapping 
antioxidant parameter), 6
Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle (TCA) cycle, 288
Tsai, P. J., 40
Tsuda, T., 9
Type 2 diabetes, 20
U
UHPLC/MS analysis, 244–259
Ullah, I., 126
Ultra-high-performance liquid 
chromatography (UHPLC), 185, 187, 
244
Ultra-performance liquid chromatography 
(UPLC), 244
in fruits, 250–259
in juices, 247–248
in plasma and urine, 245–247
in wines, 248–250
Ultrasonic-MAE (UMAE) methods, 154
Ultrasound-assisted deep eutectic solvent 
extraction (UADESE), 154
Ultrasound-assisted enzymatic extraction 
(UAEE), 154
Ultrasound-assisted extraction (UAE), 42, 
150, 168

298
Index
Ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectroscopy, 271, 
276–277
V
Vaccinium uliginosum, 127
Vrhovsek, U., 252
W
Wallace, T. C., 56
Wan, X., 211
Wang, D., 209
Wang, H., 100
Wang, Q., 209
Wang, R., 230
Wang, S., 230
Wang, Wenjie, 41
Wang, Z., 219
Wollaston, William, 275
Woo, A.H., 156
Wu, T., 120
Wu, Y., 17
X
Xiao, H.U., 156
Xu, J., 209
Xue, H.K., 155
Y
Yang, L., 120
Z
Zannou, Oscar, 41
Zhang, A., 200
Zhang, Lingli, 52
Zhang, X., 138
Zhao, Yanyun, 54
Zheng, J., 258
Zheng, Y. F., 230
Zhou, L., 15
Zhou, Y., 186
Žilić, Slađana, 37

