Foundations of Physics, Vol. 11, Nos. 7/8, 1981 
Nonlocality in Quantum Theory 
Understood in Terms of 
Einstein's Nonlinear Field Approach 1 
D. Bohm 2 and B. J. Hiley 2 
Received September 24, 1980 
We discuss Einstein's ideas on the need for a theory that is both objective and 
local and also his suggestion for realizing such a theory through nonlinear field 
equations. We go on to analyze the nonIocality implied by the quantum theory, 
especially in terms of the experiment of Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen. We then 
suggest an objective local fietd model along Einstein's lines, which might explain 
quantum nonlocatity as a coordination of the properties of pulse-like solutions of 
the nonlinear equations that would represent particles. Finally, we discuss the 
implications of our model for Bell's inequality. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
It is well known that Einstein did not accept the fundamental and irreducible 
indeterminism of the usual interpretation of the quantum theory, e.g., as 
revealed in his statement(2): "God does not play dice." However what is 
much more important is his rejection of another fundamental and irreducible 
feature of the quantum theory, i.e., nonlocality. Indeed it was implicit in his 
entire world view that connections between any elements whatsoever had to 
be local. That is, they could take place either when such elements were in 
contact at the same point in space-time, or else, they could be propagated 
continuously, across infinitesimal distances by the actions of fields. He 
regarded the failure of quantum mechanics to fit in with this notion of 
locality as a fundamental criticism of the whole structure of quantum 
mechanics, which indicated the need for developing a basically new kind of 
theory, making possible a deeper concept of reality that would ultimately 
This article is an extension and modification of a previously published article. (See Ref. 1.) 
z Department of Physics, Birkbeck College, University of London, London, England. 
529 
0015-9018/81/0800-0529503.00/0 © I98I Plenum Publishing Corporation 
825/11/7/8/1-3 

530 
Bohm and Hiley 
permit us to properly understand this feature of nonlocality in terms of an 
underlying local field structure. 
We feel that Einstein was right to ask for a deeper concept of reality, 
though we do not agree with his insistence that the basic elements of such a 
theory could only be local. Instead, we regard this question as open and 
indeed, we have elsewhere ~3~ explored specific possibilities for nonlocal 
theories. However, it is not our intention to discuss our views on the subject 
in this paper. Instead, we shall indicate an alternative set of ideas that may 
open the possibility of explaining quantum-mechanical nonlocality along 
Einstein's lines, i.e., in terms of a local field with local connections, obeying 
nonlinear equations. As we shall see such ideas may point to some radically 
new concepts that could help us towards a better understanding of the 
universe. 
2. EINSTEIN'S VIEWS ON LOCALITY 
Let us begin with a brief discussion of why Einstein's notion of tocality 
is essential to the theory of relativity. Now, by contrast, the previous 
nonrelativistic theory did not require locality. Indeed, one of the basic 
notions of nonrelativistic mechanics was that of the extended rigid body, 
which would instantly respond as a whole (i.e., nonlocally) if a force were 
applied to any part. We illustrate this feature in the space-time diagram in 
Fig. 1. 
The world lines of the boundaries of an object at rest are given by A'A 
and B'B. A force, F, is applied at A, and the entire object accelerates as a 
single rigid body, so that the subsequent world lines of its boundaries are 
AA" and BB". The force, F, is thus transmitted instantaneously from A to B. 
But, as is well known, relativity theory implies that such an instantaneous 
transmission of force across a finite distance would be inconsistent with the 
F .... 
Fig. 1. 
t 
/A" 
B" 
A[ 
B 
/ 
A" 
x 
Instantaneous 
response of a rigid 
body to an impulse F. 

Quantum Theory Understood in Terms of Einstein's Nonlinear Field Approach 
531 
Fig. 2. 
x 
World line of an exten- 
sionless point object. 
principle of causality, It follows that the concept of the extended rigid body 
cannot be used in relativity theory. Nor can we regard such a body as made 
of smaller objects (e.g., atoms) that are rigid, since the same problem of 
infinite speed of transmission of force would arise with these. Ultimately, we 
would have to suppose that the particle was a mathematical point, P, of no 
extension at all (i.e., entirely local). Its world line is illustrated in Fig. 2. 
However, it is necessary, in general, that particles be considered as 
sources of fields. As soon as we do this we discover that the field at such a 
point is infinite. This leads to various inconsistencies, such as an infinite 
mass for the particle. As Dirac ~4) has shown (in a classical model of the 
electron) this infinity can be consistently "subtracted off," but then this leads 
to other incorrect features for the motion of the particle, such as instability 
(i.e., self-acceleration). So it appears that relativity denies the extended rigid 
body, and yet must also reject the point particle which appears to be a 
natural alternative to this? 
Einstein hoped that a way out of this dilemma could be found through 
the general theory of relativity. This theory begins, indeed, with a further 
extension of the concept of locality. Thus, the principle of equivalence of 
inertial and gravitational masses is interpreted through a curvilinear transfor- 
mation of space-time coordinates, 
which 
can "transform away" the 
gravitational field in a given infinitesimal region, thus demonstrating a 
connection between the properties of inertia and the local gravitational field. 
Einstein then deduced a set of nonlinear differential equations for these fields 
which were, of course, also local. 
It was Einstein's further new idea that he could explain the extended 
object (e.g., a particle) as a feature of such a field. In particular he supposed 
3 Quantum mechanically, similar infinities arise, and these can be also "subtracted off" to give 
what is called a renormalized theory. But it is not clear what this means with regard to the 
local and nonlocal character of the electron, especially since the very process of renor- 
malization is, in itself, a nonlocal transformation of the "quantum state of the universe." 

532 
Bohm and Hiley 
Z_ 
p, 
× 
Fig. 3. Einstein's view of an extended 
object in a fieLd-theoretic view. 
that there could exist a singularity of this field, or at least a field function ~, 
which was large only in a small region, as illustrated in Fig. 3. 
The maximum field would be at A, and the field would quickly fall to 
small values at appreciable distances from A. If the field equations had been 
linear, such a field would have been unstable, and indeed would have spread 
out very quickly. But it was well known that nonlinear equations could in 
principle admit of such pulse-like solutions that were stable, even allowing 
the field pulse to remain together as it moved as a whole through space, with 
a certain overall momentum. Einstein took such a pulse as a model of a par- 
ticle. 
In this theory, the basic concept is that of a field, with entirely local 
properties. A particle is regarded as a nonlocal form in this field. But this 
nonlocal form plays no fundamental part in the theory. It is an abstraction, a 
shadow, so to speak, that has to move according to the laws of the local field 
on which this form lies. Nevertheless, it is important to note that highly 
nonlocal features of particles may thus be comprehended in terms of local 
field entities. Consider, for example, two particles as shown in Fig. 4. 
Actually, the fields of these bodies never fall to zero, so that in some 
sense, the two particles merge, in one continuous field that has two maxima. 
A 
B 
× 
Fig. 4. 
Representation 
of 
two 
particles 
illustrating 
their 
connection through 
the 
continuous field. 

Quantum Theory Understood in Terms of Einstein's Nonlinear Field Approach 
533 
The separate "particles," A and B, are thus abstractions, that may be 
generally useful, when the pulses are sufficiently separated. But in a 
fundamental sense there is no localizable particle at all. Instead, Einstein 
describes the universe as an undivided whole. Nevertheless, he constructs it 
as a set of extended forms lying on entirely local field elements, obeying laws 
based only on local connections of these elements. 
It has to be added, however, that Einstein was well aware that the 
actual stability of matter (e.g., stationary states of atoms) must be closely 
related to the laws of quantum theory. Therefore, it would be of no use to 
postulate nonlinear equations that gave structures whose size and general 
behavior were unrelated to these laws. Indeed he hoped that by including 
some sort of random fluctuations in his field quantities, he could 
simultaneously comprehend relativistic and quantum laws. 
In this connection, one should note that the present quantum theory 
implies that even in empty space, any field undergoes certain irreducible 
"zero-point" fluctuations, which do not directly show up in the movement of 
matter or light. Current calculations lead to an infinite value for this energy, 
but one may surmise that some factor not clearly evident in current theories 
will limit this to a finite, but rather large value. Einstein's idea might, thus, 
take the form of supposing that empty space contains a random background 
of fluctuating fields obeying nonlinear equations, and that with the aid of 
this, the statistical feature of the quantum theory (as well as other features) 
could ultimately be explained. 
During the latter part of his life, Einstein made a serious and sustained 
attempt to realize such a program. In doing this he was hampered by the fact 
that his nonlinear field equations were too difficult to solve by any known 
method. On the whole, what he was able to achieve was not very promising 
particularly with regard to the ultimate goal of incorporating quantum laws 
in his nonlinear field equations. At best, one can say that his results were 
inconclusive, but most physicists who work in the field seem to regard such a 
goal as unrealizable. 
To sum up Einstein's views, then, we repeat that Einstein took locality 
as an absolutely inevitable requirement for any reasonable physical theory. 
Thus, in commenting on the possibility of nonlocality in quantum theory he 
said: "Quantum theory cannot be reconciled with the idea that physics 
should represent a reality in time and space, free from spooky action at a 
distance. ''(5) 
This way of thinking was certainly required for consistency with 
relativity theory. But Einstein did not primarily regard the need for locality 
as an inference from relativity theory. Instead, he felt that locality was so 
self-evident that he would regard the feature of nonlocality in a theory as 
evidence that it was either incorrect, or at the very best, a fragmentary 

534 
Bohm and Hiley 
abstraction from a more nearly correct theory that would be local (e.g., as 
his proposed nonlinear field theory, nonlocal features of extended particles 
are explained as forms on a deeper local field). 
3. NONLOCALITY AS IMPLIED BY QUANTUM THEORY 
Let us now go on to consider the quantum theory. Here one encounters 
nonlocal features even at a very elementary level. Thus, if electrons are 
diffracted by a pair of slits, one finds that when two slits are open, electrons 
fail to arrive at certain points where they actually can arrive when only one 
slit is open. If the electron is thought of as a particle which either goes 
through one slit or the other, this experiment indicates that its behavior 
depends on conditions at the second slit, which is far away. This already is 
at least some form of nonlocality. On the other hand, the electron might be 
thought of as an extended entity that goes through both slits together. But 
this would be a more extreme form of nonlocality, in the sense that it would 
deny that the electron occupies a definite region of space, even when the 
region is defined only within microscopic orders of magnitude. 
A much more deeply penetrating kind of nonlocality in the quantum 
theory is demonstrated by the well-known experiment of Einstein, Podolsky, 
and Rosen. (6) We shall discuss this experiment briefly in terms of the 
measurement of spin variables as indicated in Fig. 5. Let us begin with a 
molecule, M, of total spin zero, consisting of two atoms, A and B, each 
having spin, h/2. Let this atom be disintegrated by some means (e.g., purely 
electrostatic forces) that do not affect the spin variables in any significant 
way. The atoms start to separate, after which they cease to interact. To make 
the implications more clearly, let us imagine that the experiment is done in 
interstellar space, leaving room to allow the atoms to separate by many 
miles, before they are measured, so that a considerable amount of time 
(perhaps a minute or an hour) might elapse, between the disintegration of the 
A 
B 
Fig. 5. Schematic representation of 
the measurement of spin variables in 
the Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen 
experiment. 

Quantum Theory Understood in Terms of Einstein's Nonlinear Field Approach 
535 
molecule, and the detection of the atoms. The experiment then consists in 
measuring the spins of atoms A and B. 
Let us begin by measuring the Z component of the spins of both atoms. 
The quantum theory predicts that these two results will always come out 
opposite (as indicated by the arrows in Fig. 5). We then go on to measure 
the X component or, indeed, any other component of the spin of each atom. 
The theory states that these also will come out opposite. 
It is easy to see that a similar result would be obtained in classical 
mechanics. Here a molecule of total spin zero would have the respective spin 
vectors of atom A and atom B oppositely directed. As the atoms fly apart, 
the spin vectors would remain opposite (since they would not be affected by 
the force that disintegrated the atom). And so, no matter which components 
were measured they would evidently have to come out opposite. This is 
explained with the aid of the simple, classical model, which always attributes 
to each atom a well-defined spin vector, opposite to that of the other. 
In quantum mechanics, however, this kind of simple model can no 
longer be used. As is well known, the operators for the spin components in 
different directions do not commute, from which it follows that they all 
cannot be determined together in a measurement. Indeed only one 
component can be measured at a given time, though this may be any 
component. 
One may illustrate the meaning of this by considering an atom whose 
spin is well defined in the Z direction (say +h/2). It follows then that the X 
and Y directions are not defined. In a rough picture we may imagine that the 
spin vector lies in a cone, whose axis is in the Z direction, as illustrated in 
Fig. 6. Its direction, normal to Z however, fluctuates at random so that the X 
spin vector 
Fig. 6. 
Illustration of a 
particular way of imagining 
the spin vector to account 
for the fluctuations in the X 
and Y components when 
the Z-component is well 
defined. 

536 
Bohm and Hiley 
and Y components are not detected. If one now measures the spin in the X 
direction then, after the measurement is over, this cone will point in the X 
direction, while the Y and Z components will fluctuate at random. More 
generally, if the spin is measured in the direction of any unit vector fi, the 
components perpendicular to fi will fluctuate at random. 
It seems clear from the above description that a measurement of the 
component of the spin in the direction, fi, must do more than merely 
establish the value of that component. It must also somehow introduce a 
random fluctuation in the two perpendicular components. This evidently 
implies that a measurement disturbs or modifies the observed system in a 
certain unpredictable and uncontrollable way. Indeed, the notion of such a 
disturbance has long been familiar to us, having first been suggested by 
Heisenberg, in connection with how, in his hypothetical gamma-ray 
microscope, the particle momentum is unpredictably altered in its interaction 
with the quantum of electromagnetic energy used to make it visible. 
Let us now return to the measurement of spin variables for the two 
atoms, A and B. It is clear that in measuring the spin of atom A in any 
direction, fi, we may suppose that the measuring apparatus disturbs the two 
components of the spin perpendicular to fi in an unpredictable and uncon- 
trollable way. But what about atom B? Quantum theory predicts not only 
that the spin component in the direction of fi will be opposite to that of B, 
but that the two perpendicular spin components will also fluctuate at 
random. But recall that after atoms A and B separate, they do not interact in 
any way at all. How then can a random disturbance of the spin components 
of atom A normal to fi bring about a corresponding random disturbance of 
these components of the spin of atom B? 
The difficulty can be made even more evident, by considering that while 
the atoms are still in flight, the apparatus measuring atom A may be orien- 
tated in a different direction, fi'. Atom B must then respond with an opposite 
spin in this direction and with a corresponding random fluctuation in the two 
perpendicular directions. All of this must happen without any interaction 
between these two atoms. Surely this would seem to be an example of the 
"ghostly" nonlocal connection of distant events that Einstein regarded as 
absurd. Certainly, at least we can say that any simple model resembling the 
classical type which attributes independent spin properties to each of two 
noninteracting atoms separated in space, would not be able to fit in with the 
implications of the quantum theory (as we shall indeed bring out in more 
detail later). 
As we have already indicated, Einstein regarded such an idea as so 
unacceptable that he took the analysis of this experiment as a devastating 
criticism of the quantum theory. In particular, his proposal was that the 
quantum theory, while probably yielding correct predictions for this 

Quantum Theory Understood in Terms of Einstein's Nonlinear Field Approach 
537 
experiment, did not provide a complete or even adequate description of the 
reality which underlies this peculiar connection of distant events. Instead, he 
considered it to be little more than a fragmentary abstraction that is useful 
for calculations. In doing this he was, of course, going against the view of 
most physicists, who regarded (and still generally regard) the quantum 
theory as capable of yielding the most complete description of reality that is, 
in principle, possible. 
In further orienting our thoughts about this question, it is evidently 
important to consider experimental tests for whether or not this nonlocal 
feature is actually present. One of the earliest such tests ~7) was made possible 
by observations carried out on a pair of gamma-ray photons, with mutually 
perpendicular plane polarizations, arising in the annihilation of positronium. 
Mathematically, this leads to the same sort of situation as that arising in the 
example treated in this paper (i.e., the molecule of total spin zero). In an 
analysis of the two-photon experiment (8~ the predictions of the quantum 
theory were compared with those of a model originally suggested by 
Furry. °) In this model one supposed that, after the two quanta separated, 
each went into a definite polarization state that was opposite to that of the 
other, but with a random distribution of orientations of this state. The actual 
experimental results agreed with the quantum theory and clearly did not 
agree with the predictions arising from Furry's model. Since the essential 
assumption of this model is that after the two particles separate, their spin 
states are independent, it is clear that the experiment constitutes a confir- 
mation of quantum mechanical nonlocality. 
Later, an important refinement of the criteria distinguishing locality and 
nonlocality was developed by Bell, (1°) in the form of an inequality that has to 
be satisfied, if the states of two separated particles are to be functionally 
independent. A considerable number of experiments has been done, aimed at 
testing this inequality, (I1) and it may be said that they generally confirm the 
quantum theory with its feature of nonloeality. Other experiments ~12) which 
are refinements of the test of the Furry model provide a similar confirmation 
of up to distances of the particle which are as great as 5 m. 
4. A SUGGESTED WAY OF UNDERSTANDING NONLOCALITY IN 
EINSTEIN'S APPROACH 
It seems clear from both the theoretical analysis and from the 
experiments that some kind of nontocality is a fact and that we have to 
understand what it means. If we accept the fact that quantum theory 
provides the most complete possible description of reality, then nonlocality 
means simply a further extension of the many ways in which this theory 

538 
Bohm and Hiley 
defies understanding in terms of any ordinary conception of reality. So we 
have merely to agree that to obtain a successful algorithm for computations, 
correctly predicting the results of experiment is the only genuine goal of 
physics. On the other hand, Einstein could not accept this approach. Instead, 
as we indicated earlier, he felt that the theory must yield an objective 
description of the universe, whose elements are moreover local, as well as 
locally connected. As we have already pointed out, an experimental proof of 
nonlocality as implied by quantum theory, was not contrary to Einstein's 
expectations. What Einstein insisted on was the need for some new and 
broader theoretical framework, within which the question of how nonlocality 
of this kind comes about could be discussed on the basis of a more 
fundamental notion of a reality that is objective and local. To indicate how 
this question may be approached in a new way, we first call attention to a 
well-known property of nonlinear equations, i.e., the existence of stable orbits 
or limit cycles, which are such that small deviations lead either to rapid 
oscillatory motion around the stable movement, or to motions that die away 
exponentially. Work on these lines has recently been extended by Thom (~3) 
who has systematically expressed the conditions in which whole families of 
orbits bifurcate into two groups, one of which goes toward one stable state of 
motion while the other goes to a second such state, This sort of behavior 
might well be considered to be a possible model of the transition between 
quantum states, in which a given atom may jump from any particular state 
into one of a range of possible states. 
If we consider that in Einstein's nonlinear field theory the vacuum 
would contain an intense excitation of field energy, a kind of random 
background, we can see that even if the basic equations of this field are locat, 
their nonlinearity might bring about stable movements involving a coor- 
dination of fields at separated parts of space and time (e.g., as coupled 
nonlinear oscillators that are separated can tend to fall into synchronism). So 
the universal field may get into a state of motion, near a stable set of 
"orbits" in which the distant and separate particle-like pulses move together 
in coordination (more like what happens in a ballet dance, rather than in a 
crowd of people who jostle each other at random). We must recall here that 
this applies not only to the observed system, but also to the "particles" that 
constitute the observing apparatus. Of course, such coordinated sets of 
movements would correspond only to certain states of movement of the 
whole (e.g., those containing a molecule of total spin zero) while there would 
be other states (e.g., those containing two atoms, each with well-defined 
spins) in which there would not be this kind of coordination. 
Let us now consider the experiment in which positronium decays into a 
pair of gamma-rays with mutually perpendicular planes of polarization (see 
Fig. 7). 

Quantum Theory Understood in Terms of Einstein's Nonlinear Field Approach 
539 
Detector B 
positronmm 
Detector A 
0 
-~ 
.~ 
~ 
0 
Fig. 7. 
Schematic representation of the EPR experiment 
using annihilation photons from positronium decay. 
We are supposing that through nonlinearity the movements of the 
positronium and of the "particles" constituting the detectors, A and B, are 
coordinated in a certain way. The nature of the coordination is such that a 
positronium atom decays into two photons with suitably related, but well- 
defined polarizations, only when the detectors are in a condition to absorb 
these photons. Once the photon has started to move toward the detector, it 
simply "carries" its own state of polarization. So there is no direct nonlocal 
connection in the movements of the photons. Instead, the nonlocality is of a 
different kind, arising in a new quality of coordinated movement. This coor- 
dination is not the result of "preestablished harmony" (e.g., on the lines of 
the monads of Leibniz). Nor is it like a "conspiracy" (any more than the 
common phase of two coupled synchronous motors would be a conspiracy). 
Instead, it is a stable form of overall movement, carried in a continuous and 
local way by the "vacuum" fields in the background. Small deviations from 
this stable form of the whole movement either oscillate so rapidly that they 
produce negligible effects, or else die away exponentially. The results of 
measurements carried out in any one place may thus not be totally 
independent of what measurements are being carried out at another far away 
place, and this makes possible an explanation of the experiment of Einstein, 
Podolsky, and Rosen. And yet one may still be able to understand all of this 
by means of the underlying local field. 
The above discussion deals with those photons that are actually 
detected and measured. But one may ask what happens to those that go off 
in some other direction, and which do not go through any detectors, to be 
measured? To deal with these, one generalizes the idea of coordinated 
movement and says that any material system which absorbs a quantum is 
similarly coordinated with the source of that quantum. (Thus, the measuring 
apparatus now plays no special rote in our theory, but it is treated as just a 
special case of the properties of the universal field.) Thus, it is essentially an 
extension of Wheeler and Feynman's absorber theory of radiation (14~ in 
which no photon is emitted unless there is matter somewhere which will 
absorb it. As Wheeler and Feynman showed, this theory can give just as 
consistent a description of the process of radiation as is given by the current 
theory, in which an atom radiates independently of whether an absorber is 
available or not. 
More generally, no transitions from one state to another take place 

540 
Bohm and Hiley 
unless the rest of the universe, in its coordinated movements, is ready to 
absorb (or emit) the energy which has to be exchanged in this transition. 
To return to the experiment with the gamma-rays from positronium 
decay, one sees that it is crucial to understand the question of relative timing 
of the operation of detectors A and B. Thus, in one of the experiments that 
has actually been done, (11) the detectors are arranged to work simultaneously 
within 10 -9 sec. The distance from source to detector is so large that a light 
signal would take about 10 -8 sec so that there evidently can be no 
immediate connections of the two events through the fluctuations of the 
"vacuum" field. Nevertheless, all of the parts of the system have had a long 
time (many days at least) to come to equilibrium through the forces carried 
in these vacuum fluctuations. So the positronium will be ready to decay into 
photons of a certain polarization only when the detectors are ready to 
receive these photons. This experiment will, therefore, still be comprehended 
within this "local" explanation of quantum-mechanical nonlocality. 
If we recall that the coordinated movements are only the stable limit of 
fluctuations around them, the idea arises that one might destroy the coor- 
dination by suddenly disturbing one of the detectors in a way that is not 
related to what happens to the rest of the system. Thus, we might hope to 
obtain a result, in which the predictions of the quantum theory break down. 
The extreme difficulty of doing this becomes evident, however, when we 
recall that all matter is constituted of field pulses, on top of the vacuum fluc- 
tuations, and that these pulses have generally been in existence tbr at least 
some thousands of millions of years. So it seems tikely that even the 
apparatus that is used to "disturb" the detector will be in "equilibrium" and 
will, thus, simply combine with the rest, to form a larger whole, that is still 
coordinated according to the laws of the quantum theory. 
Of course, one cannot say a priori how far these coordinations will 
actually go. It is always in principle possible that when the detectors are 
sufficiently separated, and when they are "disturbed" in a sufficiently rapid 
and "random" way, the coordination will break down. Thus, experiments 
such as those of Aspect, "9) which are designed to test this point, are always 
worth doing. Yet one must remember that at present there is no known 
reason to suppose that they will be successful in finding a set of conditions in 
which quantum theory will yield wrong predictions. 
We see, then, that the nonlocality of quantum theory points to the need 
to develop a new principle of coordinated movements, which may well 
extend over the entire universe. Even though the fields are propagated 
locally, the forms of matter will have to be understood as an undivided 
whole not only because they merge and unite through the background of 
vacuum fluctuations, but also because through nonlinearity they may work 
together even over long distances. This indicates that though the universe 

Quantum Theory Understood in Terms of Einstein's Nonlinear Field Approach 
541 
may be immense, the various parts are not basically isolated from each 
other. Such a universe could perhaps be contained within Einstein's vision of 
a fundamental reality, ordered and lawful, and yet rich and subtle enough to 
comprehend all the complexities of the world as we know it. 
5. IMPLICATIONS OF OUR MODEL FOR BELL'S INEQUALITY 
Bell's inequality (1°) has commonly been taken to imply that the 
quantum theory is not compatible with local hidden variables. Since we have 
proposed a model based on determinate local connections of field quantities 
that would explain the quantum theory, we have evidently to ask whether our 
proposal is ruled out by Bell's theorem. We shall see that it is indeed not 
ruled out, but that to demonstrate this we have to go more carefully into the 
meaning of the Bell inequality. 
To formulate this question more precisely we shall begin by briefly 
reviewing Bell's arguments, which are applied to the case of measurements of 
the spins of two atoms, by means of two instruments, 1 and 2, which are 
separated by a large distance. It is supposed that each experimental result is 
determined completely by a set of hidden variables, ,t. (whose meaning will 
be discussed in more detail later). However, along with Bell, (9) we also 
assume that the result, A, of measurement of spin in the direction, d, depends 
only on it and on d, while the result B, of measurement of spin in the 
direction 6, depends only on )~ and 6. In other words, while nothing is said 
about the general dynamical laws of the hidden variables, ~, which may be 
as nonlocally connected as we please, we are requiring that the response of 
each particular observing instrument to the set, ~, depends only on its own 
state and not on the state of any other piece of apparatus that is far away. 
Thus, we write 
a =A(a, ~) 
B = B(6, it) 
while we specifically exclude possibilities, such as A =A(c~, 6, it) and B = 
B(d, 6, ~). 
Finally, we state Bell's additional basic assumption which is that the 
statistical distribution of hidden variables is a function p(2) that is 
independent of d and 6. 
The correlation function for the observations A and B is then given by 
P(d, 6) = .f p(~) A (,~, ,~) B(6, ~t) d~t 
For these assumptions, one readily obtains the well-known Bell inequality for 
four measured directions, d, ~, & d. 
[P(d, ~) -- P(d, a)t + [P(~, d) + P(8,/~)1 ~ 2 

542 
Bohmand Hiley 
As already emphasized in the work of Stapp (~6) this result depends on the 
more general supposition that whatever may be the deeper structure of the 
universe, whether this be local or nonlocal, a given large scale system will 
respond to this structure in a way that is not affected by the states of other 
such systems that are far away. However, what we wish to emphasize further 
here is that it also depends crucially on the assumption that the probability 
distribution of hidden variables does not depend on the states of any large 
scale systems (such as the various pieces of observing apparatus). 
In our model, which works in terms of a rather different set of concepts, 
this latter assumption is not valid. The main similarity between our model 
and the set of theories that are compatible with Bell's assumptions is that we 
are indeed regarding the underlying fields as equivalent to a set of hidden 
variables, ~.. But the key difference is that we do not begin by assuming the 
independent existence of various large scale systems (e.g., pieces of observing 
apparatus). Instead, these are, like "elementary particles" mere abstractions 
or empty forms, which are (as emphasized in Section 2) "shadows" of the 
activities of the underlying fields. What further distinguishes these 
abstractions is, of course, that they have a certain persistence, relative 
autonomy, and stability (much like a pattern of stable vortices in a stream). 
In this context, we evidently cannot discuss consistently in terms of 
direct connections between large scale systems and the hidden variables, nor 
indeed can we properly talk about direct connections of large scale systems 
with each other. This means that the ordinary description of an experiment 
(such as "the observing instruments and the observed system interact with 
each other") is just a picturesque way of implying an infinitely complex set 
of movements in the underlying field. In these movements, there is no way of 
separating the observed system from the observing apparatus, nor can one 
even properly regard the various large scale forms observable in common 
experience (e.g., "pieces of apparatus" and "the experimenter who assembles 
and operates this apparatus") as sharply divided from each other. All such 
forms merely reveal some abstract properties of the whole set of underlying 
field variables. 
Actually, this sort of situation is fairly common in physics in other 
contexts. For example, the temperature and pressure of an aggregate of 
atoms is not a separate property, but just an abstract form on the underlying 
atomic variables a. This is revealed by the functional relationship between 
these variables and the parameters concerned. Thus, the probability 
distribution over a takes the form 
p =p(a, ~r; p,...) 
and it is clear that this does not mean that T and P "interact" with a or with 
each other. 

Quantum Theory Understood in Terms of Einstein's Nonlinear Field Approach 
543 
In our model of the quantum theory we are, thus, led to write 
p =p(a,6,2) 
implying that there is a functional relationship between the distribution of 
hidden variables, and the abstract tbrms corresponding to the orientations, d 
and #. 
We emphasize once again that, as with T and P, we are not implying 
that the two pieces of apparatus interact directly, nor are we implying that 
the response of A to the hidden variables directly depends "nonlocally" on B. 
Rather the distribution of the total set of hidden variables is restricted in 
such a way that whenever it gives rise to the emergence of given orientations 
of the two pieces of apparatus, it gives rise also to the emergence of properly 
correlated pairs of photons. 
To go back to the proof of Bell's theorem, we may still assume that the 
laws of the underlying field are such that a given result A is determined as a 
specified function of the hidden variables A(d, k). But when we compute the 
correlation function we must write 
P(d, #) = f p(d, 6, )t) A (d, 2) B(#, 2) d2 
and from this, it is easy to show that Bell's inequality no longer follows. 
(The failure of this inequality to follow is clearly a consequence of the very 
different set of physical concepts from which we are proceeding.) 
At this point, we can throw some light on an earlier model of hidden 
variables proposed by one of us (17) in 1952. In this model, the hidden 
variables are the actual positions )~, of all the particles constituting the total 
system, consisting of "observed object" plus all the pieces of observing 
apparatus. These positions are conceived as well defined, and follow 
continuous and well defined trajectories. ~18) In addition to these hidden 
variables, we also introduce the wave function of the entire system, ~()~i, t), 
as a basic concept, and suppose that this satisfies the Schr6dinger equation 
for 
the 
corresponding many-body problem. 
For 
the 
case of spin 
measurements, the total wave function will be functionally related to the 
orientations of both pieces of observing apparatus, so that we can write 
7:'= ~'(a, 6,£, t)-- ~'(a, 6,2, 0 
(where we have denoted the set of hidden variables, Xi, by the symbol 2). 
We now assume that in addition to the classical potentials operating on 
the hidden variables, there is a further quantum potential 
Q = 
2, t)) 

544 
Bohm and HUey 
where Q is a certain specified function of the overall wave function. We then 
show that on the basis of this potential it is consistent to define a probability 
distribution over 2, which is 
p = 
6, 4, 0) 
In this model, the observed result for each piece of apparatus corresponds to 
a set of hidden variables associated with that piece of apparatus alone, so 
that Bell's first condition A =A(d, 2) and B =B(6,)~) is satisfied. However, 
as indicated above, Bell's second condition, p = pot) is not satisfied, so that 
Bell's inequality is violated. 4 In this case, the dynamical laws of the system 
are nonlocal in the sense that the quantum potential, Q, permits strong 
instantaneous interactions of particles at indefinitely large distance. The 
model now under discussion, thus, differs significantly from the one 
suggested earlier in this paper, which has only locally connected hidden 
variables. But as we have already pointed out, dynamical laws of the hidden 
variables play no direct part in the proof of Bell's theories. All that is 
important in this proof is whether, for any reason whatsoever, the probability 
distribution of the hidden variables is functionally related to the states of the 
various pieces of observing apparatus, even when these are indefinitely far 
apart. In the model based on locally connected fields, this functional 
relationship arises because the observing apparatus and the observed system 
emerge together from the underlying field, in a way that requires certain 
restrictions on the distribution of hidden variables. In the model proposed in 
1952, such a relationship arises because of the quantum potential which 
implies a nonlocal connection in the total set of hidden variables, that 
depends on the state of the observing apparatus. 
To return to the model based on nonlinear, but locally connected fields, 
we recall that, as pointed out in Section 4, in the process in which the 
"observed system" and "the apparatus" emerge from the underlying 
universal background, there has been plenty of time for correlations between 
these to arise through stable limit cycles in the total field. Thus, as we have 
already indicated it is quite possible that even experiments such as those of 
Aspect ~15~ will involve processes too slow to go beyond the limits of stability 
of these cycles. In this connection, it must be remembered that the 
"particles" constituting the entire apparatus including the "switching device" 
are also generally assumed to obey the laws of the quantum theory. In terms 
of our model, this means that they too are merely abstract forms of the 
underlying field, and that their relationships depend on the limit cycles in 
4 This point has already been noted by Selleri and Tarozzi. ~9~ However, they do not take into 
account that p depends on d and 5, and so, they are led to the wrong conclusion that this 
satisfies Bell's inequality. 

Quantum Theory Understood in Terms of Einstein's Nonlinear Field Approach 
545 
question. For example, during the long period while these systems were being 
assembled the laws of quantum mechanics would have to apply. Thus, 
although the "switching time" in this experiment may be very short 
compared with the flight time of the photons, the precise details of how the 
switch operates may have emerged from the field background in such a 
manner that whenever the latter gives rise to a certain switching process, it 
also gives rise to photons that emerge in a corresponding way. 
Of course, in terms of our usual mode of thinking, it is hard to believe 
that this sort of extremely extensive correlation could ever happen. Most 
physicists are, however, ready to accept that it may happen at a sufficiently 
short distance (of a few interatomic spacings). But logically the distance has 
nothing to do with the question. It is only a matter of fact, to be tested 
experimentally, as to how far such correlation of emergent forms will 
actually go. 
It is interesting to ask whether this sort of chain of correlations would 
include even the human observer. Of course, we are not at present in a 
position to test this experimentally because human actions are even slower 
than those which we have been discussing. Nevertheless, one may wonder 
whether all the actions of the human being, including the choices that he 
makes, can also be understood as emerging out of the same general field 
from which matter emerges. Here, it must be pointed out that the sense of 
free will that 
one commonly experiences is not relevant. For as 
Schopenhauer has pointed out, we may perhaps be free to do as we will, but 
we are not able to will the content of this will. One possibility is that all of 
this content emerges, as suggested above, from the general field, and another 
is that at least some of it does not. Whether this question can ever be 
resolved in a physical experiment is something that we can, for the present, 
say nothing about. Indeed, even if, as Wigner (2°) suggests, there is a 
connection between mental and physical events, one cannot exclude the 
possibility that both of these are abstract forms emerging from the 
underlying field. So this question must remain open. 
REFERENCES 
1. M. Goldsmith, A. MacKay, and J. Woudhuysen, Einstein, The First Hundred Years 
(Pergamon, Oxford, 1980). 
2. P. A. Schilpp, Albert Einstein: Philosopher Scientist (Harper Torchbooks, New York, 
1959). 
3. D. Bohm, Found. Phys. 1, 359 (1971); Found. Phys. 3, 139 (1973); Wholeness and the 
Implicate Order (Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1980); F. A. M. Frescura and B. J. 
Hiley, Found. Phys. 10, 7 (1980). 
825/11/7/8/1-4 

546 
Bohm and Hiley 
4. P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. A.167, 148 (1938); Proc. Roy. Soc. A.180, 1 (1942). 
5. The Born-Einstein Letters (Correspondence Between Albert Einstein and Max and 
Hedwig Born (1916-1955) with Commentaries by Max Born), I. Born, ed. (MacMillan, 
London, 1971). 
6. A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935). 
7. C. S. Wu and I. Shaknov, Phys. Rev. 77, 136 (1950). 
8. D. Bohm and Y. Aharanov, Phys. Rev. 108, 1070 (1957). 
9. W. H. Furry, Phys. Rev. 49, 393 (1936). 
10. J. S. Bell, Physics 1, 195 (1964). 
11. M. Paty, Quantum Mechanics, a Half-century Later, J. L. Lopes and M. Pary, eds. 
(Reidel, Dordrecht, Holland, 1977); J. F. Ctauser and A. Shimony, Rep. Prog. Phys. 41, 
1881 (1978). 
12. A. R. Wilson, J. Lowe, and D. K. Butt, J. Phys. G. Nucl. Phys. 9, 613 (1976)~ 
13. R. Thorn, Structural Stability and Morphogenesis, (Benjamin, London, 1973). 
14. J. A. Wheeler and R. Feynman, Rev. Mod. Phys. 21,425 (1949). 
15. A. Aspect, Phys. Lett. 54A, 117 (1975); Phys. Rev. 14D, 1944 (1976). 
16. H. P. Stapp, Phys. Rev. 3D, 1303 (171). 
17. D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 166 (1952). 
18. C. Philippidis, C. Dewdney, and B. J. Hiley, Nuovo Cimento 52B, 15 (1979). 
19. F. Selleri and G. Tarozzi, Epistemological Letters, p. 1 (Institut de ta Methode, Oct. 
1978). 
20. E. P. Wigner, in The Scientist Speculates, I. J. Good, ed. (Putnam, New York~ 1965). 

