

Norbert Wiener—A Life in Cybernetics


Norbert Wiener—A Life in Cybernetics
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
and
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
Norbert Wiener
with a new foreword by Ronald R. Kline
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

© 2017 Norbert Wiener
Foreword © 2017 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Ex-Prodigy copyright © 1953 by Norbert Wiener. First edition published 1953 by Si-
mon and Schuster, Inc. First MIT Press Paperback Edition, August, 1964
I Am a Mathematician copyright © 1956 by Norbert Wiener. First MIT Press Paperback 
Edition, August 1, 1964. Published by agreement with Doubleday & Co., Inc.
This work is subject to a Creative Commons CC-­BY-­NC-­ND license.
Subject to such license, all rights are reserved.
Funding for the open access edition was provided by the MIT Libraries Open Mono-
graph Fund.
This book was set in ITC Stone Sans Std and ITC Stone Serif Std by Toppan Best-set 
Premedia Limited.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Wiener, Norbert, 1894-1964, author. | Kline, Ronald R., writer of foreword. 
| Container of (work): Wiener, Norbert, 1894-1964. Ex-prodigy. | Container of 
(work): Wiener, Norbert, 1894-1964. I am a mathematician.
Title: Norbert Wiener—a life in cybernetics : Ex-prodigy : my childhood and youth, 
and I am a mathematician : the later life of a prodigy / Norbert Wiener ; with a 
new foreword by Ronald R. Kline.
Description: Cambridge, MA : The MIT Press, 2018. | Includes bibliographical 
references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2017042823 | ISBN 9780262535441 (pbk. : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Wiener, Norbert, 1894-1964. | Mathematicians—United States—
Biography.
Classification: LCC QA29.W497 A25 2018 | DDC 510.92 [B] —dc23 LC record  
available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017042823
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

Contents
Foreword by Ronald R. Kline 
vii
I	
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth 
1
Dedication 
3
Foreword 
5
Introduction 
7
1	
A Russian Irishman in Kansas City 
11
2	
The Proper Missourians 
23
3	
First Remembered Patterns: 1894–1901 
29
4	
Cambridge to Cambridge, via New York and Vienna: 
June–September, 1901 
41
5	
In the Sweat of My Brow: Cambridge, September, 1901–September, 
1903 
49
6	
Diversions of a Wunderkind 
63
7	
A Child among Adolescents: Ayer High School, 1903–1906 
73
8	
College Man in Short Trousers: September, 1906–June, 1909 
81
9	
Neither Child nor Youth 
91
10	 The Square Peg: Harvard, 1909–1910 
99
11	 Disinherited: Cornell, 1910–1911 
113
12	 Problems and Confusions: Summer, 1911 
123
13	 A Philosopher Despite Himself: Harvard, 1911–1913 
129
14	 Emancipation: Cambridge, June, 1913–April, 1914 
141
15	 A Traveling Scholar in Wartime: 1914–1915 
159
16	 Trial Run: Teaching at Harvard and the University of Maine: 
1915–1917 
175
17	 Monkey Wrench, Paste Pot, and the Slide Rule War: 
1917–1919 
189
18	 The Return to Mathematics 
201
19	 Epilogue 
219

vi 
Contents
II	
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy 
227
Dedication 
229
Preface 
231
20	 My Start as a Mathematician 
233
21	 The International Mathematical Congress of 1920 at 
Strasbourg 
253
22	 1920–1925: Years of Consolidation 
273
23	 The Period of My Travels Abroad—Max Born and Quantum 
Theory 
287
24	 To Europe as a Guggenheim Fellow with My Bride 
303
25	 1927–1931: Years of Growth and Progress 
313
26	 An Unofficial Cambridge Don 
329
27	 Back Home: 1932–1933 
343
28	 Voices Prophesying War: 1933–1935 
349
29	 China and Around the World 
357
30	 The Days before the War: 1936–1939 
375
31	 The War.Years: 1940–1945 
389
32	 Mexico: 1944 
425
33	 Moral Problems of a Scientist. The Atomic Bomb: 1942– 
437
34	 Nancy, Cybernetics, Paris, and After: 1946–1952 
453
35	 India: 1953 
471
36	 Epilogue 
485
Index 
493

Foreword
F
o
r
e
w
o
r
d
F
o
r
e
w
o
r
d
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
When the two-volume autobiography of Norbert Wiener was published 
in the 1950s, newspapers and magazines in the United States reviewed it 
widely because the author, a distinguished mathematician at the Massa­
chusetts Institute of Technology, had become a public figure. Following the 
surprising success of his runaway scientific bestseller, Cybernetics, published 
in 1948, journalists ignored its arcane mathematics to interview Wiener 
about the philosophical and social issues raised in the book. They asked the 
polymath professor whether the newly invented electronic digital comput­
ers, dubbed “electronic brains” by the press, could think, the extent of the 
unemployment that computerized automatic factories would cause in what 
Wiener called the second industrial revolution, and what the field of cyber­
netics, coming out of the scientific laboratories of World War II, had to say 
about the new relationships between humans and machines being forged 
in the post-war order.
Wiener’s next book, The Human Use of Human Beings, published in 1950, 
reached a wider and even larger audience, securing his place as a pubic 
intellectual. Wiener drew on his cybernetic vision of the world to analyze 
such wide-ranging issues as the nature of law, education, and language, 
the harmful effects of lavish government funding and military secrecy on 
science, and the Cold War anxieties surrounding McCarthyism and the 
nuclear threat of the Soviet Union. He thought the mathematical science of 
cybernetics could shed light on the atomic age because it was based on the 
idea that the principles of control and communication engineering could 
explain all self-regulating organisms, living and nonliving, from the level 
of the cell to that of society. Wiener and his followers touted cybernetics as 
a universal science, one that could model humans as machines in the social 
sciences, build human-like machines in the new field of artificial intelli­
gence, and create prosthetic cyborgs (short for “cybernetic organisms”) by 
merging humans and machines. Wiener defined cybernetics as a theory 

viii 
Foreword
of the messages that held together all organisms, including society. It was 
thus a science of the future, where “messages between man and machines, 
between machine and man, and between machine and machine, are des­
tined to play an ever-increasing part.”1
At the height of the enthusiasm for cybernetics—-when it was taken 
up by scientists, engineers, humanists, science-fiction writers, artists, and 
musicians—-Wiener published his two-volume autobiography. Ex-Prodigy 
appeared in 1953, followed by I Am a Mathematician in 1956. Ex-Prodigy 
received the most publicity. Wiener promoted the book on radio and televi­
sion shows in New York City, including the Today Show on NBC. Newspa­
pers and magazines followed up the stories they had carried about Wiener, 
cybernetics, and the automatic factory with rave reviews of Ex-Prodigy. 
High-brow and middle-brow outlets—including the New York Times, the 
New York Post, the Chicago Tribune, and the San Francisco Chronicle, as well 
as the New Yorker, Saturday Review, and Time magazines—praised Wiener 
for baring his soul about how he overcame the traumas of being raised as 
a child prodigy by his overbearing father, Leo Wiener, who became a pro­
fessor of Slavic languages at Harvard University, to become the eminent 
mathematician who founded cybernetics. Among those reviewing the book 
were the liberal public intellectuals journalist Max Lerner, historian Henry 
Steele Commager, and anthropologist Margaret Mead. Mead knew Wiener 
well, having participated with him in the Josiah Macy, Jr., Foundation con­
ference series on cybernetics. Held from 1946 to 1953, the interdisciplinary 
meetings did much to introduce Wiener’s ideas into biology and the social 
sciences. Writing in the scholarly Virginia Quarterly Review, Mead observed 
that the “story is shot through with pain,” but Wiener “measures his words, 
uses them sparingly and with precision, and achieves an almost Olympian 
objectivity and gentleness.”2 It was Wiener’s favorite review; he thought she 
understood him the best. The sequel, I Am a Mathematician, subtitled “The 
Later Life of a Prodigy,” did not receive as much press, even though editor 
Jason Epstein at Doubleday succeeded in prodding Wiener to explain his 
advanced mathematics in lay terms.
Although the MIT Press has kept the two volumes in print since Wiener’s 
death in 1964, this is an excellent time to republish them as one volume. 
The past few years have witnessed a renaissance of interest in Wiener and 
cybernetics in the humanities and social sciences, systems science, and the 
biological sciences.
The two volumes cover what seem at first glance to be two tenuously 
related eras of Wiener’s life. Ex-Prodigy recounts the period from his birth to 
an immigrant Russian-Jewish father and a German-American mother in the 

Foreword 
ix
university town of Columbia, Missouri, in 1894, through his trials as a child 
prodigy—when he entered Tufts college at the age of eleven, obtained his 
bachelor’s degree at fourteen, and his doctorate from Harvard at eighteen—
to his emancipation from his father upon his appointment to MIT in 1919 
and his marriage to Margaret Engemann in 1926. I Am a Mathematician 
takes up the story from there. It relates how he became a world-renowned 
mathematician at MIT by doing research in pure and applied mathematics 
in the areas of Brownian motion, generalized harmonic analysis, probabil­
ity theory, and the statistical theory of communication, which forms a basis 
for cybernetics.
Yet each volume informs the other. We gain a much better understand­
ing of why Wiener viewed mathematics as an aesthetic, creative art and 
how he helped establish the interdiscipline of cybernetics, discussed in I 
Am a Mathematician, by reading about his unusual education and his varied 
life experiences in Ex-Prodigy. Before joining MIT, he worked as a journal­
ist and encyclopedia writer, an engineering apprentice at General Electric, 
and a human “computer” of gunnery tables in World War I. Likewise, we 
understand more fully why he viewed his appointment at MIT as marking 
the end of his career as a prodigy, thus becoming an “ex-prodigy,” by read­
ing about how he blossomed as a mathematician in the second volume. 
Although cybernetics only makes its appearance at the end of the autobi­
ography, the title chosen for the combined volumes, A Life in Cybernetics, 
is apt. It refers to the fact that Wiener drew on his entire life experience, 
as recounted in both volumes, to create the science of cybernetics, which 
social scientists and humanists are still engaging with today.
A Life in Cybernetics takes up many themes of interest then and now. 
First and foremost is the new relationship between humans and machines 
that became evident with the fast-paced development of modern comput­
ing after the war. Just as readers in the 1950s turned to Wiener to under­
stand cybernetics, the science associated with the invention of room-sized 
electronic computers, many readers today turn to books on cybernetics to 
understand the long history of the information revolution embodied in 
smart phones, the Internet, and all things “cyber.”
The cybernetics breakthrough is the climax of the autobiography. Near 
the end of I Am a Mathematician, Wiener explains that the “whole back­
ground of my ideas on cybernetics lies in the record of my early work. 
Because I was interested in the theory of communication, I was forced to 
consider the theory of information and, above all, that partial informa­
tion which our knowledge of one part of a system gives us of the rest of 
it. Because I had studied harmonic analysis and had been aware that the 

x 
Foreword
problem of continuous spectra drives us back on the consideration of func­
tions and curves too irregular to belong to the classical repertory of analysis, 
I formed a new respect for the irregular and a new concept of the essential 
irregularity of the universe. Because I had worked in the closest possible 
way with physicists and engineers, I knew that our data can never be pre­
cise. Because I had some contact with the complicated mechanism of the 
nervous system, I knew that the world around us is accessible only through 
a nervous system, and that our information concerning it is confined to 
what limited information the nervous system can transmit.” Above all, he 
concluded, it “became clear to me almost at the very beginning that these 
new concepts of communication and control involved a new interpretation 
of man, of man’s knowledge of the universe, and of society.”3
In this remarkable passage, Wiener draws together the two threads that 
made his vision of cybernetics possible: his mathematical research—on 
harmonic analysis before World War II, prediction theory during the war, 
and information theory and the nervous system after the war—and his 
collaboration with mathematicians, scientists, and engineers—at MIT and 
throughout the world.
Collaboration is a second major theme in the autobiography. Early on, 
Wiener lets us know that the traditional path for an aspiring mathema­
tician in the early twentieth century was to work with an accomplished 
mathematician on a specific problem. After finishing his Ph.D. in Philoso­
phy, with a thesis on the system of logic in Alfred North Whitehead’s and 
Bertrand Russell’s masterwork, Principia Mathematica (1910–1913), Wie­
ner studied with Russell on a fellowship at the University of Cambridge 
in England. Russell convinced him to learn more about the mathematics 
he philosophized about. Wiener learned what it meant to be a research 
mathematician from attending G. H. Hardy’s lectures at Cambridge. There­
after he sought out senior mathematicians, including Maurice Fréchet, 
with whom he worked on topology in France for a week before attend­
ing his first International Mathematical Congress, held in Strasbourg in 
1920. After gaining some renown as a mathematician in the 1920s, Wie­
ner used his facility with languages—learned under the strict discipline of 
his father, a philologist—to collaborate with several mathematicians and 
engineers in Europe, Asia, and the United States. In the interwar years at 
MIT, he worked closely with mathematician Eberhard Hopf and electrical 
engineer Vannevar Bush. Bush requested his help in putting the Heavi­
side Operational Calculus, used to design telecommunications circuits, on 
a firm mathematical foundation. During World War II, Bush directed the 
National Defense Research Committee in Washington, D.C. In addition to 

Foreword 
xi
funding the development of such major weapons as the atomic bomb and 
microwave radar, the NDRC supported numerous small projects such as 
Wiener’s research on an anti-aircraft gun director at MIT. The mathematical 
theory of prediction that came out of this project, which used autocorrela­
tion to separate signals from noise in a time series, forms the mathematical 
basis of Wiener’s vision of cybernetics. The biological aspect of his vision—
that both animals and machines could be modeled using the engineering 
theories of control and communication—came from collaborating with 
Mexican physiologist Arturo Rosenblueth, first in Cambridge, when Rosen­
blueth was at Harvard, and then at Rosenblueth’s laboratory in Mexico, 
on a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation to do research on mathemati­
cal biology. Wiener wrote Cybernetics while on leave at this laboratory. He 
dedicated the book to “Arturo Rosenblueth, for many years my companion 
in science.”
Wiener discusses his competition with several mathematicians. Among 
these is Claude Shannon, who studied under him at MIT. Shannon later 
founded what came to be known as information theory, based on his 
classified work on cryptography during the war at AT&T’s Bell Telephone 
Laboratories, then located in New York City. In 1948 Wiener and Shan­
non independently published their similar definitions of the amount of 
information as being mathematically equivalent to the physical concept 
of entropy. Although the identity was known as the Wiener-Shannon or 
Shannon-Wiener definition of information for several years, Shannon is 
credited today for creating information theory as a discipline because he 
proved numerous coding theorems based on that definition.
We also hear about Wiener’s high opinion of the émigré Hungarian 
mathematician John von Neumann, after whom the architecture that 
structures today’s computers is named. Von Neumann hired Julian Bigelow, 
who was Wiener’s engineer on the war-time anti-aircraft project, to be his 
chief engineer in building a pioneering digital computer at Princeton. But 
Wiener does not mention that he participated in the Macy conferences on 
cybernetics with von Neumann and Bigelow.
There are some significant collaborations that Wiener leaves out of 
his account. He does not mention by name three prominent cybernetics 
researchers at MIT, with whom he had a falling-out over a misunderstood 
family matter.4 From 1952 to the end of his life, Wiener did not speak to 
Warren McCulloch, the eminent neurophysiologist who chaired the Macy 
conference series, mathematical prodigy Walter Pitts, McCulloch’s collabo­
rator on neural net modeling who studied with Wiener as a graduate stu­
dent, and Jerry Lettvin, a mainstay of McCulloch’s laboratory at MIT.

xii 
Foreword
A third theme, overcoming the trauma of being a child prodigy, is indi­
cated by Wiener’s original title for Ex-Prodigy, “The Bent Twig.” Because of 
how frankly scholarly journals and newspapers covered his father’s educa­
tional experiment with him, and also how the New Yorker magazine depicted 
the unsuccessful career of W. J. Sidis, one the four prodigies who entered 
Harvard with him in 1909, Wiener feared that he would become a failed 
prodigy. He worried that he had not won the fame as a mathematician that 
was expected of him as a prodigy, that he had not been recognized as such 
by Harvard mathematicians and the rest of the American mathematical 
community. These worries continued, even though European mathemati­
cians accepted him early in his career, the American Mathematical Society 
honored him, and several mathematical terms—such as the Wiener mea­
sure, Wiener Tauberian theorem, and Hopf-Wiener integral equation—bear 
his name. This insecurity is evident in the autobiography, from beginning 
to end, and informs the choice of the titles Ex-Prodigy and I Am a Mathema­
tician. The lifelong insecurity drove him to produce a voluminous body of 
research up to the time of his death at the age of seventy. But it also led to 
psychoanalysis, to the extent that he listed his psychiatrist, Dr. Janet Rioch 
of New York City, in the acknowledgments to Ex-Prodigy. Wiener admitted 
in print that writing the volume had proved therapeutic for him.
A fourth theme, which resonates as powerfully today as it did sixty years 
ago, is the ethical responsibility of scientists and engineers. Wiener’s title 
for his chapter on this topic, “Moral Problems of a Scientist. The Atomic 
Bomb. 1942,” reflects his belief that this issue would persist for years to 
come, which it has. In the chapter, Wiener explains his decision in 1947 to 
no longer accept military funding for his research because of the horrors of 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. He also addresses another moral issue: his deci­
sion to include in Cybernetics a warning about the technological unemploy­
ment that the new science he had helped to create could cause with the 
advent of the automatic factory. Newspapers and magazines extensively 
covered Wiener’s views on these subjects before the publication of his 
autobiography. The Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, the organ of the scientists’ 
movement against nuclear proliferation, thought the chapter was valuable 
enough to reprint, almost in its entirety, under the title “Moral Reflections 
of a Mathematician” in 1956.
One of the pleasures of reading A Life in Cybernetics is to vicariously expe­
rience the politics, history, and culture of the times. We travel with Wiener 
by steamship to Europe and China, and then by air to India to spend weeks 
at a time abroad, as a tourist and a collaborator with mathematicians in 
their homelands. That was necessary to gain a reputation in mathematics 

Foreword 
xiii
early in the twentieth century when Europe outranked the United States in 
all sciences. It was less so after the influx of scientific émigrés to the U.S. 
following Hitler’s rise to power. Wiener helped several Jewish mathemati­
cians land jobs in the U.S. in the 1930s, and also lobbied for relief efforts for 
Chinese scholars at this time. After the war, he brought Yuk-Wing Lee from 
China to MIT as a professor of electrical engineering. Wiener had advised 
Lee on his Ph.D. at MIT, had spent a sabbatical year with him in China in 
1935, and had taken out a patent with him on filters for telephone systems. 
Lee thrived at MIT, where he became the chief expositor of Wiener’s statisti­
cal theory of communications.
Wiener opens a few windows on his private life. We watch him as a 
boy enjoy spending summers with his parents, and then as an adult with 
his wife and daughters in a farm house they restored, in his beloved New 
Hampshire countryside. There, the portly mathematician relaxes from an 
intense year of teaching at MIT by swimming in nearby Bear Camp Pond 
and hiking the mountain trails he climbed as a youth. We feel the angst of 
Wiener discovering at the age of fifteen that he is Jewish—seven-eighths 
Jewish by his calculation—a fact his parents had kept from him until his 
father accidentally revealed that they were descended from the legend­
ary medieval Jewish philosopher Moses Maimonides. Although Wiener 
was proud of his heritage, he was extremely conflicted by this revelation, 
especially because, when growing up, he had regularly heard anti-semitic 
remarks from his mother, whose father was a German-Jewish immigrant! 
The feelings that Wiener allows us to glimpse are palpable and help us 
understand why he dedicated the first volume of his autobiography to his 
wife Margaret and the second one to MIT. The dedications honor their roles 
in helping him overcome his inner turmoils to become an ex-prodigy, a 
distinguished mathematician, and the founder of a science whose history 
sheds light on the digital utopianism of our time.
Ronald R. Kline
Notes
1.  Wiener, Human Use of Human Beings, 9.
2.  Mead, “Analyzing a Prodigy,” 438.
3.  Wiener, I Am a Mathematician, 323–324, 325.
4.  For details, see Conway and Siegelman, Dark Hero, chapter 11.

xiv 
Foreword
Bibliography
Conway, Flo, and Jim Siegelman. Dark Hero of the Information Age: In Search of Norbert 
Wiener, the Father of Cybernetics. New York: Basic Books, 2005.
Dunbar-Hester, Christina. “Listening to Cybernetics: Music, Machines, Nervous 
Systems, 1950–1980.” Science, Technology, and Human Values 35 (2010): 113–139.
Galison, Peter. “The Ontology of the Enemy: Norbert Wiener and the Cybernetics 
Vision.” Critical Inquiry 21 (1994): 228–266.
Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Became Post-Human: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, 
Literature, and Informatics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Heims, Steve J. The Cybernetics Group. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.
Heims, Steve J. John von Neumann and Norbert Wiener: From Mathematics to the Tech­
nologies of Life and Death. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1980.
Kay, Lily E. “Cybernetics, Information, Life: The Emergence of Scriptural Representa­
tions of Heredity,” Configurations, 5, no. 1 (1997): 23–91.
Kline, Ronald R. The Cybernetics Moment: Or Why We Call Our Age the Information 
Age. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2015.
Masani, Pesi R. Norbert Wiener, 1894–1964. Basel: Birkhauser, 1990.
Mead, Margaret. “Analyzing a Prodigy.” Virginia Quarterly Review 29 (1953): 438–441.
Peters, Ben. “Toward a Genealogy of a Cold War Communication Science: The 
Strange Loops of Leo and Norbert Wiener.” Russian Journal of Communications 5 
(2013): 31–43.
Turner, Fred. From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth Net­
work, and the Rise of Digital Utopianism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006.
Wiener, Norbert. Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal and the 
Machine. Cambridge, MA: Technology Press; New York: John Wiley, 1948.
Wiener, Norbert. The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1950.
Wiener, Norbert. Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1953.
Wiener, Norbert. I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy. New York: 
Doubleday, 1956.
Wiener, Norbert. Collected Works with Commentaries, ed. Pesi R. Masani, 4 vols. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1976–1986.

I  Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth


To my wife
Under whose gentle tutelage 
I first knew freedom


Foreword to Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
Ex-Prodigy: 
My 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
F
o
r
e
w
o
r
d
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
The author wishes to acknowledge the help he has received from many 
sides in the writing of this book. First of all, the greater part of the first 
draft of the manuscript was dictated to my wife in Europe and Mexico in 
1951, in such divers places as Madrid, Saint-Jean de Luz, Paris, Thonon-les-
Bains, Cuernavaca, and Mexico City. In Mexico, Miss Concepcion Romero 
of the Instituto Nacional de Cardiologia helped me in the retyping of a 
revised version of the manuscript. And finally at the Massachusetts Insti­
tute of Technology, my secretary, Mrs. George Baldwin, has borne with me 
through the long work of revision and selection which has been necessary 
for the production of the finished manuscript. I have been greatly assisted 
in the final typing of the manuscript by Miss Margaret FitzGibbon, Miss 
Sally Starck, and Miss Katharine Tyler of the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. As this book has been done almost entirely by dictation, the 
secretarial assistance I have received from these various sources is a vital 
and constructive contribution to the production of the book.
I have submitted my manuscript for inspection to many friends, and I 
wish to thank them for their detailed criticism and their positive and nega­
tive suggestions. Besides my wife, who has collaborated with me through 
the entire book, I wish to mention Dr. Marcel Monnier of Geneva; Mr. F. 
V. Morley and Sir Stanley Unwin of London; Dr. Arturo Rosenblueth of the 
Instituto Nacional de Cardiologia in Mexico City, Dr. Moritz Chafetz and 
Dr. William Osher, also temporarily at the Instituto; Dr. Dana L. Farnsworth, 
Dean F. G. Fassett, Jr., Professors Georgio de Santillana, Karl Deutsch, Arthur 
Mann, and Elting E. Morison of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology; 
Professors Oscar Handlin and Harry Wolfson of Harvard University; and Dr. 
Janet Rioch of New York. Of all these, I should like particularly to single out 
Professor Deutsch, who has gone into my work with an amount of detailed 
criticism which is altogether beyond what I could expect of a friend who 
has volunteered to read the book.

6 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
In the firm of Simon and Schuster, my publishers, Mr. Henry W. Simon 
has had the job of seeing this book through the press. I wish to express 
particularly my gratitude for his sensitive criticism and his understanding 
comments.
Norbert Wiener
Cambridge, Massachusetts
June, 1952

Introduction
Ex-Prodigy: 
My 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
I
n
t
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
As this book will show, at one period I was an infant prodigy in the full 
sense of the word, for I entered college before the age of twelve, obtained 
my bachelor’s degree before fifteen, and my doctorate before nineteen. 
Yet any man who has reached the age of fifty-seven is certainly no lon­
ger an infant prodigy; and if he has accomplished anything in life, what­
ever temporary conspicuousness he may have had as a prodigy has lost all 
importance in view of the much greater issues of success or failure in his 
later life.
But the present book does not attempt to be an evaluation of my whole 
life for better or for worse. It is rather the study of a period in which I under­
went a rather unusual and early course of education, and of the subsequent 
period in which the unevenness and irregularity thus accentuated in my 
nature had an opportunity to work themselves out in such a way that I 
could consider myself launched on an active career both as a scholar and as 
a citizen of the world.
The infant prodigy or Wunderkind is a child who has achieved an appre­
ciable measure of adult intellectual standing before he is out of the years 
usually devoted to a secondary school education. The word ''prodigy'' can­
not be interpreted as either a boast of success or a jeremiad of failure.
The prodigies whom we generally call to mind are either people like 
John Stuart Mill and Blaise Pascal, who had proceeded from a precocious 
youth to an effective adult career, or their antitheses, who have found the 
transition between early precocity and later effectiveness one which they 
have become too specialized to make. Yet there is nothing in the word 
itself which restricts us to these two opposite cases. It is perfectly conceiv­
able that after an especially early start, a child may find a place in life in 
which he has a good, modest measure of success without having stormed 
Olympus.

8 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
The reason infant prodigies are generally adjudged in terms of immense 
failure or immense success is that they are somewhat rare phenomena, 
known by hearsay to the public; and, therefore, the only ones the public 
ever hears of are those who “point a moral or adorn a tale.” There is a 
tragedy in the failure of a promising lad which makes his fate interesting 
reading; and the charm of the success story is known to all of us. Per con­
tra, the account of a moderate success following a sensationally promising 
childhood is an anticlimax and not worth general attention.
I consider this attitude of extremes toward the infant prodigy false and 
unjustified. In addition to being unjustified, it is in fact unjust; for this 
feeling of anticlimax which the story of the moderately successful prodigy 
excites in the reader leads the prodigy to a self-distrust which may be disas­
trous. It takes an extremely solid character to step down gracefully from the 
dais of the prodigy onto the more modest platform of the routine teacher 
or the laboratory floor of the adequate but secondary research man. Thus 
the child prodigy who is not in fact a prodigy of moral strength as well 
must make a career success on a large scale, for want of which he is likely to 
consider himself a failure, and actually to become one.
The sentimentality with which the adult regards the experiences of 
a child is no genuine part of a child’s attitude toward himself. To the 
grownup, it is lovable and right for the child to be confused, to be at a loss 
in the world of adults around him; but it is far from a pleasant experience 
for the child. To be immersed in a world which he cannot understand is 
to suffer from an inferiority which has no charms whatever for him. It 
may be ingratiating and amusing to his seniors to observe his struggles in 
a half-understood world, but it is no more pleasant for him to realize that 
his environment is too much for him to cope with than it would be for an 
adult under the same circumstances.
Our present age is sundered from that of the Victorian by many changes, 
not least among which is the fact that Sigmund Freud has lived, and that no 
one can write a book nowadays without being aware of his ideas. There is 
a great temptation to write an autobiography in the Freudian jargon, more 
especially when a large part of it is devoted to the very Freudian theme of 
father-and-son conflict. Nevertheless, I shall avoid the use of this termi­
nology. I do not consider that the work of Freud is so final that we should 
freeze our ideas by adopting the technical language of what is certainly 
nothing but the contemporary phase of a rapidly growing subject. Yet I can­
not deny that Freud has turned over the stone of the human mind and has 
shown a great population of pale and emotionally photophobic creatures 

Introduction 
9
scuttling back into their holes. However, I do not accept all Freudian dog­
mas as unquestionable truth. I do not consider that the present vogue of 
the emotional strip-tease is a wholly good thing. But, let my reader make 
no mistake: the resemblance between many of the ideas of this book and 
certain of the notions of Freud is not purely coincidental; and if he finds 
that he can carry out the exercise of translating my statements into Freud­
ian jargon, he should consider that I am quite aware of this possibility and 
have rejected it deliberately.


1  A Russian Irishman in Kansas City
Ex-Prodigy: 
My 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
1: 
A 
Russian 
Irishman 
in 
Kansas 
City
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
My impression of the intellectual environment in the first decade of this 
century is intense and actual, and I have learned much of it as a child sit­
ting in the kneehole of my father’s desk while he discussed with his friends 
the vicissitudes of those times and the facts of all times. Child as I was, I 
absorbed a real understanding of many things, and my childish point of 
view is not totally devoid of significance. Those of us who make scholar­
ship our career are often able to take the dispersed and uncorrelated memo­
ries of our childhood, covering much which we had not understood at the 
time they were received, and to build them into an organized and cogent 
structure.
Today all of us have grown up into an age which, while it may be an 
age of losses and of decline, has also been an age of new beginnings. In 
these beginnings the scientist and even the mathematician have had a large 
share. I have been both a witness of and a participant in them. Thus I may 
speak of them, not only with the understanding of the participant, but 
I hope also with something of the normative judgment of the objective 
critic.
That part of my work which appears to have excited the greatest pub­
lic interest and curiosity concerns what I have called Cybernetics, or the 
theory of communication and control, wherever it may be found, whether 
in the machine or in the living being. I have had the good fortune to say 
something about these matters. This has not been merely the aperçu of a 
moment. It has its deep roots both in my personal development and in the 
history of science. Historically it stems from Leibnitz, from Babbage, from 
Maxwell, and from Gibbs. Within me, it stems from the little I know of 
these masters and from the way this knowledge has fermented in my mind. 
Therefore, perhaps, an account of the origins of my predisposition toward 
these ideas, and of how I came to take them as significant, may be of inter­
est to the others who are as yet to tread my road.

12 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
As far as I know, I am about seven-eighths Jewish in ancestry, with one 
possible German Lutheran great-grandparent on my mother’s side. Because 
I am myself overwhelmingly of Jewish origin, I shall have more than one 
occasion to refer to Jews and Judaism. Since neither I myself nor my father 
nor, so far as I know, his father has been a follower of the Jewish religion, I 
must explain the sense in which I tend to use the word “Jew” and all related 
words such as “Judaism” and “Gentile” which are given a definition in 
terms of the master word.
The Jews seem to me primarily a community and a social entity although 
most of them have been members of a religion as well. Nevertheless, when 
this religion has begun to offer a less impenetrable barrier to the surround­
ing community, and when the surrounding community has begun to offer 
a less impenetrable barrier toward it, there are many factors in the life of 
those who had adhered to the religion which have continued to follow 
more or less the original religious patterns. The Jewish family structure is 
somewhat closer than the average European family structure, and much 
closer than that of America. Whether the Jews have had to meet a religious 
prejudice or a racial prejudice or simply a minority prejudice, they have 
had to meet a hostile prejudice, and even though this may be disappearing 
in many cases, the Jews are well aware of it, and it has modified their psy­
chology and their attitude toward life. When I speak of Jews and of myself 
as a Jew, I am merely stating the historical fact that I am descended from 
those belonging to a community which has had a certain tradition and 
body of attitudes, both religious and secular, and that I should be aware of 
the ways in which I myself and those around me have been conditioned 
by the very existence of this body of attitudes. I am saying nothing about 
race, for it is obvious that the Jews have sprung from a mixture of races, and 
in many cases are being absorbed again into another mixture. I am saying 
nothing about Zionism and other forms of Jewish nationalism, for the Jews 
are much older than any movements of this sort which have amounted to 
more than literary and ritual conventions, and might well continue to exist 
even though the new state of Israel succumbs or gives way to other manifes­
tations of nationalism. I do not pretend to assign a normative value either 
to language or religion or race or nationalism, and least of all to mores. 
What I assert is that I myself and many of those about me come from an 
environment in which our knowledge of the fact of our Jewish origins is 
significant for our own understanding of what we are, and for our proper 
orientation in the world about us.
On the side of my father, Leo Wiener, the documents are scanty and 
perhaps largely irrecoverable. This is all the more so since the Nazi sack of 

1: A Russian Irishman in Kansas City 
13
the White Russian city of Byelostok during the Second World War. There 
my father was born. My grandfather is said to have lost the family geneal­
ogy in the burning of a house in which he lived, although indeed from 
what I have heard of him he was capable of losing documents in the most 
calm and sober of times. As I shall point out later, there is a tradition that 
we are descended from Moses Maimonides, the Jewish philosopher of Cor­
dova, and the body physician of the Vizier of King Saladin of Egypt. Even 
though a man is but a distant kinsman of his own ancestors of seven hun­
dred years ago, I should like to imagine that this tradition is true, because 
Maimonides, the philosopher, the codifier of the Talmudic law, the physi­
cian, the man of affairs, is a much more pleasing ancestor to me than most 
of his contemporaries. It would scarcely be respectable to claim to be the 
descendant of a medieval monk—the only type of intellectual then exist­
ing in Western Christendom. But I am afraid that after so much passage of 
time our supposed ancestry is a very shaky legend, and perhaps is based on 
no more than a dash of Sephardic blood which has leaked into our veins 
at some epoch.
The next outstanding figure in our ancestry is a much more certain one, 
even though I find him far less attractive. He is Aqiba Eger, Grand Rabbi of 
Posen from 1815 to 1837. Like Maimonides, he was recognized as one of 
the greatest Talmudic authorities, but unlike Maimonides, he was opposed 
to secular learning, which was coming into Judaism through such men as 
Mendelssohn. On the whole, I feel quite content that I did not live in his 
times and that he does not live in mine.
My father has told me that one thread of our ancestry leads down 
through a family of publishers of the Jerusalem Talmud which appeared in 
Krotoschin in 1866. I do not know their precise relationship to my grandfa­
ther, Solomon Wiener. I only saw my grandfather once in New York when I 
was a small boy, and he made no particular impression on me. I gather that 
he was a scholarly journalist and a most irresponsible sort of person, unable 
to hold his family together. He was born in Krotoschin, but married and 
settled down in Byelostok, where my father was born in 1862. One thing 
he did has had a great though indirect influence on my life: he sought to 
replace the Yiddish of his environment by literary German. In doing so, he 
made certain that German should be my father’s native language.
My father’s mother came from a family of Jewish tanners in Byelostok. 
I am told that they had been honorary citizens of Russia in the old days. 
For a Jew this amounted to a minor patent of nobility. For example, when 
the Tsar came to Byelostok, it was the house of my grandmother’s fam­
ily that was selected as his residence. Thus, their tradition was somewhat 

14 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
different from the tradition of learning of my grandfather. I suspect that 
it was his solid, business-like habits that gave my father a firm footing in 
life; and although he was an enthusiast and an idealist, he had his feet 
well planted on the ground and was always a good custodian of the family 
responsibility.
Let me insert here a word or two about the Jewish family structure which 
is not irrelevant to the Jewish tradition of learning. At all times, the young 
learned man, and especially the rabbi, whether or not he had an ounce of 
practical judgment and was able to make a good career for himself in life, 
was always a match for the daughter of the rich merchant. Biologically 
this led to a situation in sharp contrast to that of the Christians of earlier 
times. The Western Christian learned man was absorbed in the church, and 
whether he had children or not, he was certainly not supposed to have 
them, and actually tended to be less fertile than the community around 
him. On the other hand, the Jewish scholar was very often in a position 
to have a large family. Thus the biological habits of the Christians tended 
to breed out of the race whatever hereditary qualities make for learning, 
whereas the biological habits of the Jew tended to breed these qualities 
in. To what extent this genetic difference supplemented the cultural trend 
for learning among the Jews is difficult to say. But there is no reason to 
believe that the genetic factor was negligible. I have talked this matter over 
with my friend, Professor J. B. S. Haldane, and he certainly is of the same 
opinion. Indeed, it is quite possible that in giving this opinion I am merely 
presenting an idea which I have borrowed from Professor Haldane.
To return to my grandmother, it is certain, as I have said, that she 
received very little aid from my grandfather at any time, and the young 
family had to be brought up to earn its own living. The age of thirteen is 
a rather critical one in the Jewish tradition, for it represents the admission 
of the boy into participation in the religious community. In general the 
prolongation of youth into the period of high school and college which 
belongs to our Western culture is foreign to Judaism. From the beginning of 
adolescence, the Jewish boy is given both the dignity and the responsibility 
of a man. My father, who was an intellectually precocious child, had begun 
to support himself at the age of thirteen by tutoring his fellow students. At 
that time, he already spoke several languages. German was the language of 
the family, and Russian that of the State. The role of German in his life was 
reinforced by the fact that because of the German bias of my grandfather 
my father went to a Lutheran school. He learned French as the language of 
educated society; and in Eastern Europe, especially in Poland, there were 
still those who adhered to the Renaissance tradition and used Italian as 

1: A Russian Irishman in Kansas City 
15
another language of polite conversation. Moreover, my father soon left the 
Minsk Gymnasium for that of Warsaw, where the classes were also con­
ducted in Russian, although Polish was the language that he spoke with his 
playmates.
Father always felt very close to his Polish schoolmates. He told me that 
so far as he knew he was the only non-Pole at that time to be identified with 
the underground Polish resistance movement and to be privy to its secrets. 
As a Warsaw Gymnasium student he was a contemporary of Zamenhof, 
the inventor of Esperanto, and although the two were students in differ­
ent Gymnasia, my father was one of the first to study the new artificial 
language.
This gives more force to his later rejection of its claims, and indeed of 
those of all artificial languages. He asserted, and I believe rightly, that by the 
time an artificial language would have developed a sufficient tradition to be 
used with the intellectual precision and emotional content of the existing 
natural languages, it would also have developed a burden of idiom struc­
ture equal to that of its competitors. Father’s fundamental idea was that to 
a very considerable extent the difficulty of a language reflects the amount 
of thought that has come to make up its tradition, and that the English 
language is as dependent on its idioms for expressing complicated ideas as 
written Japanese (which can express every word by its phonetic notation) 
is dependent on Chinese characters for terseness. Father always considered 
Basic English less basic than debased. No language with idioms adequate to 
express complex ideas concisely, he said, would be able to serve as an easy 
vehicle of neutrality between competing cultures.
From the Gymnasium my father went on to the medical school of the 
University of Warsaw. I dare say that at least part of his motive was one 
so common in Jewish families, which generally desire to have at least one 
son a professional man and if possible a doctor. The motive is strong and 
easily understandable in a group which has long been undervalued in the 
community. Lord only knows how many tongue-tied rabbis, discontented 
lawyers, and physicians without a practice this motive has produced.
At any rate, my father soon found out that he had not the stomach to 
be a doctor. The work of dissection, as well as, I surmise, the self-defensive 
coarseness of his fellow students, sickened him. At any rate, he soon left 
Warsaw to enroll in the Polytechnicum which was then in Berlin, although 
it has now been situated for many years in Charlottenburg.
Father came to Berlin with an excellent secondary training. The Gym­
nasium, as opposed to the Realgymnasium and the Oberrealschule, stresses 
the classics above all else, and my father was an excellent Latin and Greek 

16 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
scholar. However, the Gymnasium does not scamp its mathematical train­
ing. Indeed, Father continued to be an amateur mathematician all his life, 
and to contribute now and then to obscure popular American mathemati­
cal journals, so that it was not until I had begun work which was already of 
late college or early graduate-school standard that I came to feel that I had 
outdistanced him.
I do not know that my father was much more successful as a budding 
engineer than as a budding doctor. He has told me very little of this time 
of his life save that it included the frugal beer, cigars, and meat cookery of 
the impecunious Jewish student. I do know that he worked in the drafting 
room between a Serb and a Greek, and that he added Serbian and modern 
Greek to his linguistic repertory.
My father had wealthy relatives in Berlin. They were bankers, connected 
with the Mendelssohn bank, with traditions going back to Moses Mendels­
sohn and the eighteenth century. They tried to persuade my father to join 
them as bankers, but he did not like the confined life, and was still hungry 
for adventure.
One day he happened to go to a student meeting of humanitarian 
nature. The speeches reinforced a vein of Tolstoyanism which had long 
been in him, and he decided to forswear drink, tobacco, and the eating of 
meat for the rest of his life. This decision certainly had important conse­
quences for my future. In the first place, without this decision my father 
would never have come to the United States, he would never have met my 
mother, and this book would never have been written. However, assuming 
for the sake of argument that all these events had occurred in their due 
sequence, I should still not have been brought up as a vegetarian, should 
not have lived in a house in which I was surrounded by horrible and hair-
raising vegetarian tracts concerning cruelty to animals, and should not have 
been subjected to the overwhelming precept and example of my father in 
such matters.
All this is speculation. The fact is that Father did join up with a student 
colleague in a wild undertaking to found a vegetarian-humanitarian-social­
ist community in Central America. His companion reneged, and Father 
found himself alone on board a ship bound for Hartlepool, after showing 
a bewildered official his Russian school certificate in lieu of the German 
military papers which he should have possessed. After crossing England 
to Liverpool, he sailed again for Havana and New Orleans. This was a two 
weeks’ trip, during which my father learned the essentials both of Spanish 
and English. I am told that he took his English very largely out of the plays 
of Shakespeare. The combination of his linguistic fluency with his archaic 

1: A Russian Irishman in Kansas City 
17
vocabulary must have left quite a strange impression on the people he met 
on the levee at New Orleans. The harebrained scheme of a Central Ameri­
can colony had already exploded, and Father was left with his career to 
make in the United States.
I have before me as I write a copy of a series of articles entitled “Stray 
Leaves from My Life,” written by my father in the spring of 1910 for the 
Boston Transcript—the dear, stodgy, civilized old Transcript! It is a shock for 
me to realize that they were written by my father when he was ten years 
younger than I am now. They cover his youth and education in Europe, 
his trip to America, and his life here until he had arrived at a successful 
academic career at the University of Missouri. They are written with the 
full romantic joy in living and the adventurous indifference to poverty and 
hardships that belong to a vigorous young man, more especially to one 
who has just escaped from the rigid discipline of a European secondary 
education. Dans un grenier, qu’on est bien à vingt ans!
The expatriate American who consciously seeks the titillations of Bohe­
mia on the Left Bank is generally ill-prepared for this experience, and is not 
aware of its real significance to the young European. He has never been 
subject to the strict discipline which belongs alike to the French lycée, the 
German Gymnasium, and the English public school. He does not feel the 
utter hunger for a period of growth and freedom between his escape from 
this servitude and the stricter servitude of earning his own living in a hard 
competitive world. For him Bohemia is nothing but an extra period of lax­
ity superimposed on the lax and undemanding education he has already 
known. Even worse, it is a laxity in which he has freed himself from the 
demands and standards of American society without assuming those of the 
country in which he finds himself. He is lucky if he does not give himself 
over completely to drink, lust, and unproductive sloth.
The European boy, on the other hand, and especially the European boy 
of the last century, had to burst the hard cocoon of an education, effective, 
severe, and traditional, and to try his wings. It mattered little whether he 
did this among the cloistered pleasures of Oxford or Cambridge, in the 
beer-and-song Burschenleben of the German university, or in a garret in the 
Quartier Latin. The supreme assertion of youth and freedom was to wander 
in new lands at a time when the United States was itself emphatically a 
new land.
Thus Father’s artless tale is written in the genuine spirit of the purely 
American counterpart found in Mark Twain and Bret Harte. It breathes the 
quintessence of youth, courage, and adventure, seen through rose-colored 
glasses. One senses the dust of the Southern roads and the new-turned 

18 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
furrow of the Kansas farm, the clamor of the raw Western city, and the 
keen wind off the peaks of the Sierras. All through it goes the slight, active, 
bespectacled figure of my father, alert to everything strange and striking, 
living the new life to the full, losing a job and taking a job without thought 
of the morrow, and having a glorious time through it all.
He was a small man, about five feet two or three inches in height, very 
quick in his movements, and a person who made a sharp and definite 
impression on everyone who saw him. He had the chest and shoulders of 
an athlete, with narrow hips and slender legs, and in those days he had the 
lean alertness of the athlete as well. His eyes were dark and flashing and 
beamed quick and penetrating intelligence behind the heavy glasses of the 
myope. His hair and mustache were black and remained black until his late 
middle age, and his face was ascetic. An enthusiastic walker and cyclist, he 
used to lead a crowd of young people on excursions into the country; and I 
still remember a photograph of a group of these in which he was standing 
beside a high-wheeled bicycle of early vintage.
He had a sharp and decisive voice and an excellent command of English, 
as of every other language which he spoke. I am told that he had a strong 
foreign accent, but through habit my ear was early blunted to this, and my 
impression of his English is that it showed its foreignness more in an exces­
sive precision of diction and of vocabulary than in any other way.
He was a combative and fascinating conversationalist, although with 
his great intellectual power and aggressiveness it was difficult for him to 
limit his share in a discussion. Many times what he said would be a series 
of brilliant dicta rather than the give and take which best brings the other 
person out. He was impatient of fools, and I am afraid that to his keen intel­
ligence very many people seemed to be fools. He was kind and beloved by 
his students, but he could be overwhelming through the very impact of his 
personality, and he was constitutionally incapable of allowing for his own 
forcefulness.
He was an enthusiastic farmer and outdoor man and a tireless walker. 
He tended to impose his amusements and preferences on those about him 
without fully realizing that many of them might have come to a fuller par­
ticipation in a life together with him if this participation had not been 
so obviously enforced. One of his particular hobbies was the collection, 
cooking, and eating of such fungi of the region as were reasonably safe. 
Perhaps the infinitesimal chance of a catastrophe from eating poisonous 
mushrooms lent a certain savor to this sport.
He was eighteen when he arrived in New Orleans in 1880, with fifty 
cents in his pocket. Most of this went into his first few meals of bananas, 

1: A Russian Irishman in Kansas City 
19
and he had to look around for work. His first job was in a factory where 
cotton was baled by a hydraulic press. However, when a comrade fell into 
the press and was badly mangled, Father lost his interest in the work. Then 
he got a job as a water boy on a railroad being built across Lake Pontchar­
train. He lost the job through some maladroit blunder of a boy unfamiliar 
with manual labor. There followed a period of aimless tramping through 
the deep South with a comrade or two, and after that a further period of 
farming in Florida and in Kansas. No farmer can be more enthusiastic than 
the Jew when he decides to turn his hand to the plow. To my father’s dying 
day, he was more pleased by raising a better crop than his professional 
farmer-neighbors than he would have been by the greatest philological 
discovery.
At one point in his farming career, Father ran into the remains of an old 
Fourierist community in Missouri. It had gone to seed, and all the efficient 
people had left it, while all the rogues and footless, incompetent idealists 
remained. Father soon had his fill of this, and while he continued to be 
a Tolstoyan all his life, he never afterward had much use for those whose 
idealism was not mixed with a certain practical sense.
I don’t know just how Father came to Kansas City in the first instance, 
nor exactly what he did there. There was a period during which he worked 
as a peddler. On another occasion he pushed a broom through a Kansas 
City store. By this time the fun of the new American adventure was wearing 
rather thin. Father had begun to be a bit envious of the well-clad customers. 
He had decided that he was entitled to some of the pleasures and amenities 
of the life about him. It must have been during this time that he passed a 
Catholic church on which there was a sign: GAELIC LESSONS GIVEN. This was 
too much for Father’s philological curiosity to bear. He joined the class; and 
because he was a far more gifted linguist than the others, he rapidly became 
the teacher of the class and soon the head of the local Gaelic society.
The fame of the “Russian Irishman,” as he was called, was widespread 
about Kansas City. It had for some time been notorious in the public library 
that the humble immigrant peddler was calling for books that no one else 
could read, and was reading them.
At length my father decided to end this anomalous existence and to go 
back into that intellectual work for which he was cut out. He ventured to 
ask the Kansas City superintendent of schools for a job; and after a trial 
period in a wild sort of country school in Odessa, Missouri, he was taken on 
in the Kansas City high school. Here he showed himself a brilliant teacher, 
a great friend of the students, and a reformer who left his mark on the Kan­
sas City school system. When Father was teaching (but not always when he 

20 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
was teaching me), he tried to draw out his students’ interests rather than 
to compel them to think in preassigned directions. He aimed at exciting 
their independent thought, not their involuntary obedience. He took part 
in their sports and their excursions, and managed to transfer to them some 
of his love for the out-of-doors.
During the period of his teaching at the Kansas City high school, my 
father took a trip to California with some of his friends. He used to delight 
in telling me of the romantic city of San Francisco, of his tramp through the 
Yosemite Valley, and of his initiation into mountain climbing in the high 
Sierras. He told me that on the occasion of his climbs, he met a lady tour­
ist, who was greatly interested in the young man’s romantic love of nature 
and adventure. This lady was Miss Annie Peck, who later became one of the 
most distinguished mountaineers of her generation, and who made notable 
climbs in the Andes, among them the ascent of Chimborazo and Cotopaxi. 
Later on Miss Peck wrote to Father, saying that her alpinism was first stimu­
lated by his enthusiasm.
One of my father’s amusements during his Kansas City period was to 
attend spiritualistic seances and to try to discover the sleight-of-hand tech­
nique of the mediums. I don’t think that Father was very much excited 
with the ideas of spiritualism either pro or con, but the chance to do a little 
detective work appealed to his adventurous spirit and to his intellectual 
curiosity. He became firmly convinced that if there were anything what­
ever in spiritualism, it was not to be found among the mediums he had 
investigated.
The budding culture of the Middle West of this period was attracted to 
the anfractuous style and the puzzling allusions of Browning’s poetry. Of 
course, to a man of my father’s breadth of cultural background neither the 
style nor the allusions offered much difficulty. Father became rather a lion 
to roar at the meetings of ladies’ Browning clubs, and I believe it was there 
that he met my mother. Be that as it may, they certainly enjoyed reading 
together The Ring and the Book and On a Balcony. My own name and that 
of my sister Constance represent characters from On a Balcony, and we are 
thus unwilling fossils of a bygone intellectual era. I must think that my par­
ents’ indifference to the consequences of giving me such a recondite and 
unusual name was part and parcel of the decision which they had already 
made to direct and to channel my life in every detail.
My father chose to become a teacher of languages. He might almost as 
readily have become a teacher of mathematics, for he had both talent and 
interest in the field. Indeed, throughout my college training I learned the 
large part of my mathematics from him. There are times when I think that 

1: A Russian Irishman in Kansas City 
21
it would have been more fortunate for my father if he had taken mathemat­
ics for his field rather than philology. The advantage is that mathematics 
is a field in which one’s blunders tend to show very clearly and can be 
corrected or erased with a stroke of the pencil. It is a field which has often 
been compared with chess, but differs from the latter in that it is only one’s 
best moments that count and not one’s worst. A single inattention may lose 
a chess game, whereas a single successful approach to a problem, among 
many which have been relegated to the wastebasket, will make a mathema­
tician’s reputation.
Now, philology is definitely a field dependent on the careful assessment 
of a number of small considerations rather than on a mechanical ride in 
a train of logic. For a man with intuitions and imagination, philology is a 
field in which he may easily go wrong and in which, if he does go wrong, 
he may never find it out. The mathematician who makes serious mistakes 
and never finds them out is no mathematician, but an imaginative phi­
lologist may go very far wrong before a demonstrable error pulls him up 
sharp. My father’s success in philology was unquestioned, but his sanguine 
temperament would have benefited under the discipline of a field in which 
discipline is automatic.
This, then, was the strange young man who became my father and my 
teacher. In 1893 he married my mother, who had been Miss Bertha Kahn, 
the daughter of Henry Kahn, a department store owner, of St. Joseph, Mis­
souri. Let me say something of my mother and her background.


2  The Proper Missourians
Ex-Prodigy: 
My 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
2: 
The 
Proper 
Missourians
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
Henry Kahn, my mother’s father, was a German Jewish immigrant from the 
Rhineland, and a department store owner of St. Joseph, Missouri. His wife 
belonged to a family named Ellinger, which had been settled in the United 
States for at least two generations previously. I gather that my grand­
mother’s mother was not Jewish. This seems to have introduced a peculiar 
pattern of marriages into the Ellinger family, so that the girls of that genera­
tion tended to marry Jews like their father, and the boys Gentiles like their 
mother. At any rate, even a hundred years ago the family was hovering in a 
state of unstable equilibrium between its Jewish background and an absorp­
tion into the general community.
This tendency for the marriage pattern of the boys to differ from that of 
the girls is something of which I have heard under quite different circum­
stances. I have been told of a family in New York in which the wife was 
Dutch and the husband a Chinese Protestant clergyman. All the boys of 
that marriage seem to have lost themselves in the general American back­
ground, taking American wives and putting behind them the Oriental part 
of their ancestry. The girls, on the other hand, all married Chinese and 
returned to China. In that case, the motive for the differentiation seems 
to have been the extreme demand on the part of young Chinese men for 
wives with a Western education and background, which gave the daughters 
unusually favorable opportunities for Chinese marriages as against Ameri­
can marriages, conditioned at least in part by the restrictions of race preju­
dice. Whether motives paralleling these to at least some extent existed as 
well in the Ellinger family, I do not know; but it is interesting to observe the 
phenomenon cropping up in such different situations. The Sword follows 
the Sword, the Distaff the Distaff.
The Ellinger family appears to have had its American origins in Missouri 
and perhaps even further to the south. Its members combined a proper 
Southern gentility of outlook with a high degree of unpredictableness. 

24 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
More than one of the men ended a career of impeccable propriety by sud­
denly leaving his family and taking to the great open spaces. There is a 
legend that one of the Ellinger family finally became a Western bandit and 
was shot down while resisting capture.
Even apart from such radical manifestations of individuality, the Ellingers 
were and are a centrifugal clan. It is only in the later history of the family 
that the gradual dilution of these idiosyncrasies has permitted them to take 
the full place in the community that their abilities have always justified.
We are now used to the fact that almost all of us are the descendants 
of immigrants. This was not true in the middle of the last century. Today 
the melting pot not merely melts but alloys. It does this much more easily 
because it is not overloaded with strange and refractory metals which have 
been thrown into it cold. The immigrant family which has already begun 
to lose itself in the general American picture is no longer faced by the even 
more recent immigrant who has just stepped out of the steerage. No longer 
is our American of Continental ancestry confronted with a hierarchy of 
greenhorns, established immigrants, and old Americans, forming a stable 
ladder of social ascent in which each man has his rigid place.
In many ways the early immigrants who had the easiest emotional time 
of it were the Eastern European serfs, who had almost literally nothing to 
lose but their chains. For the immigrants of higher caste in the European 
system, their Americanization and subsequent ascent in the social hierar­
chy was preceded by a disinheritance and a leveling downward.
All this was inevitable and perhaps even an essential part of the disci­
pline which the foreigner needed to fit him to take a place in a community 
very different from the one into which he was born. Today, however, the 
immigrant is not only the beneficiary but a benefactor to the country to 
which he has immigrated. His native culture often has a richness which 
should not be degraded and lost in the general mist of a tradition aver­
aged thinly over a continent. There are facets of his art and his thought, of 
his folklore and his music, which are well worth resetting in the regalia of 
America. Yet in the presence of the overwhelming invasion of greenhorns 
from the old country, these heirlooms of the immigrant were difficult to 
evaluate and to appreciate. He was only too likely to accept without protest 
the inferior position which was allotted to him, and to protect his ego by a 
similar depreciation of the even more recent immigrant.
In such a community and such a period, respectability is a pearl beyond 
price. Schmidt becomes Smith, and Israel Levin becomes Irving Le Vine. 
The evangelical (and, incidentally, also the rabbinical) religious injunction 
to avoid even the appearance of evil is interpreted as an injunction to avoid 

2: The Proper Missourians 
25
the appearance of evil and vulgarity far more than evil and vulgarity them­
selves. A strong character may indeed defy such a society and live according 
to his own values. It is much easier for the less forceful character to accept 
these values, and to fall on his knees before Mrs. Grundy. Only a man like 
my father, who was ready to defy the almighty Jehovah himself, was not 
likely to fall into the orthodoxy of Grundy worship.
The specific frustrations of the immigrant and Jewish families of the 
seventies and eighties and nineties were reinforced by the general moral 
backwater of the Gilded Age. It was an age in which the Grant of the Whis­
key Ring had replaced the Grant of the Civil War and in which Lincoln 
was dead and the Daniel Drews and the Commodore Vanderbilts were very 
much alive. The enthusiasms and devotions of Civil War times had run out 
and the enthusiasms and devotions of the twentieth century had not yet 
appeared above the horizon. There was a general slackness and letdown. 
This letdown must have been most intense in the defeated South, and in 
the Missouri which was almost an anteroom to the South.
Besides these stresses and strains belonging to the social group and to 
the time, my mother’s family was also subject to more personal dissensions. 
Her family was split by an alienation between her parents. My mother’s 
mother was a person of good general culture and vigorous and uninhibited 
emotions. She had a strong, undirected vitality which enabled her to live to 
a great age, and she was simply too much for her quieter and less energetic 
husband.
Then, too, one of my mother’s older sisters had ambitions to be the 
woman intellectual of the family, and rather looked down on her sisters. 
This led to an ultimate rift, in which my mother and father stood on one 
side and most of her family on the other. At least one cause of this rift 
was the traditional friction between the German Jew and the Russian Jew 
and their differences in social status. This was supplemented by my father’s 
downrightness and naïveté in social matters.
In any case, my mother, with my father’s support, gradually broke with 
her family. Although he must often have been a puzzle to her, she was 
deeply in love with my father, and admired him greatly. Nevertheless, it 
was not an easy step for my mother to take. She had been brought up 
with the indulgence often extended to the belle of the family. I remember 
one photograph of her made when I was about four years old. She looked 
extremely handsome in the short sealskin jacket of that period. I had great 
pride in that picture and in her beauty. She was a small woman, healthy, 
vigorous, and vivacious, as she has indeed remained to this present day. She 
still carries herself like a woman in her prime.

26 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
In the family of divided roots and Southern gentility into which she was 
born, etiquette played a perhaps disproportionately large part, and tres­
passed on much of the ground which might be claimed by principle. It is 
small wonder, then, that my mother had, and conceived that she had, a 
very heavy task in reducing my brilliant and absent-minded father, with 
his enthusiasms and his hot temper, to an acceptable measure of social 
conformity.
The permissions and demands of our society in this matter differ widely 
for the man and the woman. For the man, a certain degree of shaggy 
unconformity may be permitted in return for character and genius. But the 
woman is expected to be the custodian of the more conformist and con­
ventional virtues, which indeed need someone to cultivate them. A man 
may have a hot temper without reproach, but a woman must be smooth 
and suave. When I was born there was added to my father’s downrightness 
the problem of a child with somewhat similar ability, the same hot temper, 
and the same resistance to taming; and it is not surprising that my mother 
sometimes must have felt at her wits’ end. Later, when my father’s temper 
and mine came into head-on collision, mother could do little but act as 
a general peacemaker, without indulging in any too definite opinions or 
convictions of her own on which to base this peacemaking. This made it 
hard for me to understand her. In my collisions with my father, dramatic 
as they were, I could generally recognize a principle which I had to respect, 
even when I was suffering from my father’s interpretation of it. My mother 
was scarcely able to afford such luxuries. When the husband is a zealot, the 
wife must be a conformist. How many unworldly scholars, whether Jews or 
Christians, must have depended for their very existence on their conform­
ist wives!
When my parents married, my father was already Professor of Modern 
Languages at the University of Missouri in the town of Columbia. He taught 
both French and German, and my parents shared in the simple social life 
of a small college town. They lived in a boardinghouse together with many 
members of the faculty, and there I was born on November 26, 1894.
Of course, I have no memories of the town which I left as a babe in 
arms, but there were family stories which go back to that boardinghouse, 
and to Father’s friend of those days, W. Benjamin Smith (who later taught 
mathematics at Tulane University). He was a particular crony of my father’s 
and a great practical joker. One time Smith came back to the boardinghouse 
and found that the colored waiter of ample dimensions had been replaced 
by a wizened little fellow. “Sam!” roared Professor Smith, “how you have 
shrunk!” The puzzled waiter left the room on the run, never to return.

2: The Proper Missourians 
27
I mention a story concerning Smith and a Negro since it was on this 
racial issue that his friendship with my father broke up many years later. 
Smith, who was an unreconstructed rebel, had published a pseudolearned 
book on the inferiority of the Negro, and that was too much for my father’s 
liberalism, and for his respect for facts.
As little more than an infant, I accompanied my parents on a one-way 
trip that ended in Boston. The motive power behind this trip was a power 
rooted deeply in Missouri. A Missouri politician had his eye on my father’s 
job for kinsman or henchman. My father had met with such success that 
it was no longer possible to run Modern Languages at the University of 
Missouri as a one-man show. It was decided to put a man in charge of each 
of the departments of French and German. When offered his choice, my 
father chose German. Unfortunately, there was a protégé or connection 
of the politician’s family who also had his eye on this chair, and Father 
was left out when the department was split. Father had no connections 
in the academic life of the rest of the country. He came to Boston on a 
pure speculation, for he thought that it was best to look for jobs where the 
jobs were.
He soon attracted the attention of Professor Francis Child, the learned 
editor of Scottish Ballads. Child traced the Scottish ballads and their paral­
lels through the various languages of Europe and Asia, and needed help in 
collating sources for many of them. Father was given the southern Slavic 
languages as his assignment. He made himself so useful to Child that Child 
helped him find a position around Boston. Father’s first teaching jobs were 
at Boston University and the New England Conservatory of Music, and he 
did some work in the cataloguing department of the Boston Public Library. 
Finally, Child obtained for him an instructorship in Slavic Languages at 
Harvard, the first of its kind at Harvard and, I believe, in the country. This 
led to a career of gradual promotion through the successive ranks of assis­
tant professor and professor until my father retired in 1930.
Nevertheless, for many years he had to reinforce his salary with outside 
jobs. Although living expenses were low, salaries were also low. Father con­
tinued his work at the New England Conservatory and at Boston University 
for several years, and did occasional jobs for the Boston Public Library. He 
also did a considerable amount of important etymological work for several 
editions of the Merriam-Webster Dictionary; in this work he was associated 
with Professor Schofield, also of Harvard. In later years, Father’s main source 
of academic pin money was Radcliffe College, which had served Harvard 
professors for so many years as a supplement to salary.

28 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
Professor Child was a remarkable and most democratic person, and a 
sincere friend of my father. One day Father saw another short, nearsighted, 
vigorous young man leaving Child’s house. When Father came in, Child 
told him that he had just missed meeting Rudyard Kipling. Apparently 
Kipling had got off to a bad start with Child, who had been out in his 
garden in his old clothes watering his roses. Mr. Kipling had mistaken him 
for the hired gardener. “Ah,” said Child, “a workman looked over my fence 
yesterday and was drinking in the odor of my flowers. He was my brother.”

3  First Remembered Patterns
1894–1901
Ex-Prodigy: 
My 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
3: 
First 
Remembered 
Patterns
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
It is a disservice of some Freudians (and I do not mean Freud himself) 
to have reduced the infant to a homunculus possessing little mental life 
outside of a rudimentary sexuality. Many a Freudian looks askance at all 
other recollections from infancy and very early childhood. I will not for a 
moment deny that infantile sexuality exists and is important. But it is far 
from an exhaustive description of the child’s early mental life, both emo­
tional and intellectual.
My conscious memory goes back to a time when I was about two years 
old, when we lived in a second-story apartment on Leonard Avenue, in 
a rather obscure and not too desirable region on the boundaries of Cam­
bridge and Somerville. I remember the staircase leading to our quarters: 
that it seemed to rise for what was for me an interminable distance. We 
must have had a nursemaid even at that remote period, for I recollect going 
out with her to make purchases at one of the little shops which I was told 
was in Somerville. The whole region is a confusion of streets belonging to 
the unconformable systems of the two cities, and I distinctly remember the 
acute angle at which these streets intersected before our particular grocery 
shop.
Around the corner was a rather grim and terrifying building which, I 
learned, was a hospital for incurables. It still stands, and is the Hospital 
of the Holy Ghost. I am quite certain that I had at that time no clear idea 
of what a hospital was, and even less idea of an incurable, but the tone in 
which my mother or our nursemaid mentioned the place was enough to fill 
me with gloom and foreboding.
This is all that I can truly remember about Leonard Avenue. I was later 
told that my mother had a second child there who died on the day of its 
birth. When I was told this, I was a child of thirteen; the news shocked me 
to the extreme, for I was afraid of death and had comfortingly believed 
that our own family circle had never yet been broken. I have no direct 

30 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
recollection of the existence of this child, and I still do not know whether 
it was a boy or a girl.
We spent the summer of 1897, when I was two and a half years old, in 
a hotel in Jaffrey, New Hampshire. There was a pond nearby with rowboats 
on it, and a path leading up a mountain whose name I understood to be 
Monadnock. My parents climbed the mountain, naturally without me, and 
they also took me to a neighboring village where for some reason or other 
they visited the blacksmith shop. The blacksmith had had a toe crushed 
from a horse stepping on it, and I was frightened to hear of it, for even at 
that time I had a very lively terror of injury and mutilation.
The academic year of 1897–98 found us on Hilliard Street in Cambridge. 
I have a dim recollection of seeing the moving van which transferred our 
goods from Leonard Avenue. From this point on, my recollections come 
thick and fast. I remember my third birthday, and my two playmates, Her­
mann Howard and Dora Kittredge, the children of Harvard professors who 
lived on the same street. I am sorry to say that my first recollection of Her­
mann is quarreling with him at his own birthday party, when he was five 
and I was three.
I am told by my parents that while we lived on Hilliard Street I was 
taught French by Josephine, a French maid who worked for us. I have no 
recollection of Josephine herself, but I do remember the children’s textbook 
which she used, with the names and pictures of a spoon, a fork, a knife, and 
a napkin ring. What French I learned at this time I must have unlearned 
with equal rapidity, for when I studied French again in college at the age of 
twelve, no obvious trace of my former knowledge of the language remained.
It must have been Josephine who took me for walks on Brattle Street and 
about the Radcliffe grounds. The darkness of what I now feel as the pleasant 
shade of the trees on Brattle Street terrified me at the time; the geography 
of the neighboring street left me in utter confusion. There was a house on 
the corner of Hilliard and Brattle Streets which had a closed-off bay window 
that frightened me very much because it looked as if it were a blind eye. I 
had the same feeling of terror and claustrophobia when my parents had the 
carpenter close up some sort of serving hatch connecting the dining room 
of our house with the butler’s pantry.
Not far from our house was an old school building, but whether it was 
used or deserted at the time I do not remember. Mount Auburn Street was 
only a few houses away, and around the corner was a blacksmith shop, 
with a driveway lined with white painted cobblestones. I tried to lift one of 
them once and take it away, and I was duly reproved. An alley by the side 
of our house led back to a little garden where an old gentleman by the 

3: First Remembered Patterns 
31
name of Mr. Rose—at least he seemed old to me—would take the air and 
smoke his pipe. Behind that was another house where there lived two 
older boys who took me under their wing. I remember that they were 
Catholics and had in their house an image of the crucified Christ with the 
wounds and a crown of thorns which struck me as the image of a victim of 
cruelty and injustice. They also had a potted plant which they called Wan­
dering Jew, and to explain its name they told me a legend which I did not 
understand but found very painful.
Over all this early period of my life, I have very little recollection of my 
father. My mother figures largely in my early memories, but my father was 
an austere and aloof figure whom I saw only occasionally in his library, 
working at his great desk. I used to play under that desk. I have no recol­
lection of any coldness or harshness on his part, but the low timbre of the 
male voice was in itself enough to scare me. To the very young child, the 
only parent is the mother, with her solicitude and tenderness.
Mother used to read to me in the garden. I know now that the yard 
was a mere three or four feet of grass outside the front steps, but then it 
seemed to me enormous. The book from which she most enjoyed reading 
was Kipling’s Jungle Book, and her favorite story was “Rikki-Tikki-Tavi.” I 
myself was beginning to read at the time, but I was only three and a half 
years old, and there were many words that caused me difficulty. My books 
were not particularly adapted to my years. My father had an old friend, a 
lawyer by the name of Hall, who was blind in one eye and deaf in one ear, 
and quite abstracted from human society and ignorant of the needs of a 
small child. He gave me for my birthday the volume on mammals of the 
old Wood’s Natural History. It was in small type, and an nth reprint at that, 
with the type and the woodcuts blurred and clogged with ink. My parents 
lost the original copy, but in order not to disappoint the old gentleman 
they promptly got another, and even before I could read it with any ease, I 
used to finger through the pictures.
Another book which I received as a present about the same time is rather 
a puzzle to me. I know that it was a children’s book on elementary science, 
and I know that among other things it discussed the planetary system and 
the nature of light. I know that it was a translation from French, and that at 
least some of the woodcuts represented Paris. However, I do not know the 
name of the book, and I do not believe that I have seen it since I was five 
years old. Perhaps it was a translation of a work by Camille Flammarion. If 
any of my readers can identify the work and I can lay my hand upon it, I 
can certainly check up from my memory of the pictures whether it is the 
book to which I am referring. As I have made my career in science, and as 

32 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
the book was my first introduction to science, I should very much like to 
see the point from which I started.
I cannot remember many of my toys of that time. One, however, which I 
can remember with absolute clarity, was a little model of a battleship which 
I pulled along on a string. It was the time of the Spanish-American War, 
and toy battleships were all the rage among the youngsters. Even now I 
can recall the white paint and the straight masts of the battleship of that 
transitional period before the days of the dreadnaught, with the small deck 
turrets of the secondary battery, and only a few turrets containing guns of 
the larger caliber.
My nursery was a room at the back of the house, separated from other 
rooms on the second floor by a step or two. One day I stumbled and fell up 
this little flight of steps, gashing my chin and leaving a scar which I bear 
to this present day and which is one of the reasons for my wearing a beard. 
I also cut my hands on the metal fins of the little iron cot in which I slept. 
I can still recall just how uncomfortable it felt.
I remember the songs with which my parents sang me to sleep. My 
mother was a great lover of The Mikado, and its arias are among my very 
early recollections. Some music-hall songs also played a role in my child­
hood, and among these were “Ta-ra-ra-boom-de-ay,” and “Hush, Hush, 
Hush! Here Comes the Bogey Man.” My father preferred the “Lorelei,” and 
a Russian revolutionary song which I never understood but whose syllables 
I remember to the present day.
My sister Constance was born in the early spring of 1898. The midwife, 
a genial Irishwoman by the name of Rose Duffy, was a particular friend of 
mine, and I named a rag doll after her. She lived on Concord Avenue with 
a sister, Miss Mary Duffy, who did her housekeeping. When I visited them I 
had the run of their box of gingersnaps and molasses cookies.
I am told that the arrival of my sister disconcerted me very much. Cer­
tainly some years after, when she was old enough to be an individual, I did 
begin to quarrel with her in a most reprehensible way, but this was suc­
ceeded by many years of companionship and good feeling. To have a baby 
in the house taught me much I did not forget later about the mysteries of 
bottles and diapers.
During that summer, Father traveled in Europe. I was delighted with his 
post cards from strange cities, with the text printed out for me in consider­
ation of my childish inability to read handwriting. Also during that sum­
mer I began to read a certain natural history magazine which had pictures 
of birds. I can even recall the queer, old-fashioned advertisements on the 
pages of this magazine, but its name has escaped me.

3: First Remembered Patterns 
33
Already Father had much contact with the staff of the Boston Public 
Library. One of his friends there, a Mr. Lee, had a wife who was an illustrator 
and author of children’s books, and a little daughter of my own age. They 
lived in Jamaica Plain, within a stone’s throw of Franklin Park. I remember 
reading Mrs. Lee’s books and playing with the little girl in the stone grot­
toes of that part of the park. I remember the streetcar trip by way of Central 
Square and the Cottage Farm Bridge, across a part of Boston which has com­
pletely changed character since that time. I used to read the Lee girl’s copy 
of The Arabian Nights. Some years later she fell victim to diabetes, which was 
a death sentence to a youngster in those days before insulin. Mr. Lee gave 
me the book, together with some other belongings of his daughter, but it 
was a sad pleasure for me to read it.
One of the other books which I read at the time was Alice in Wonderland, 
but it took me years to get the full flavor of Lewis Carroll’s humor, and the 
metamorphosis of Alice in the book had a sort of terror for me. Indeed, 
when I saw a copy of Through the Looking Glass I lost all sense of humor and 
flatly regarded the book as superstitious.
I was an easily frightened child. One time when my parents took me to 
the old Keith’s vaudeville theater for want of a baby-sitter, I saw a pair of 
slapstick comedians hitting one another about. After a sudden blow, one of 
them appeared in a glaring red wig, and the whole thing scared me so much 
that I burst out weeping and had to be taken out of the theater.
The next year after Father had returned from Europe, we continued to 
live in the same house on Hilliard Street. I was sent to a kindergarten on 
Concord Avenue, opposite the Harvard Observatory. I have not forgotten 
the woolies and long leggings which I put on, or the conducted games with 
the other children, or the webs of paper which we had to weave. I met my 
first sweetheart there, a dear little girl whose voice charmed me, and in 
whose neighborhood it was good to be. I recall the delightful visit we kin­
dergarten children made to a nearby garden with its crocuses and tulips and 
lilies of the valley under the broad spreading fir trees.
We spent the summer of 1899 at Alexandria, New Hampshire. At four 
and a half, I was old enough to look out of the train window and to watch 
the landscape flash backward. I had already begun to be interested in the 
technique of the railroad. By this time I must have had a toy “puff-puff” of 
my own to add to my interest.
From that time to about 1933 I had no occasion to revisit Alexandria. 
When I first revisited it I found that my memories of the geography of 
the place exactly fitted the scene before me: Bristol, with its Civil War 
monument and its old-fashioned mortar in the center of the village square; 

34 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
Newfound Lake, the boardinghouse where we stayed, the little house oppo­
site it where a colleague of my father’s had lived and with whose son I had 
played. All were just as I had pictured them from memory. I found the vil­
lage of Alexandria itself unchanged, and Bear Hill, where I had taken a walk 
with my parents through the pine woods with their Indian pipes, and had 
had to be carried back on my father’s shoulder. It all was just as I had fan­
cied it. I well remember the textile mill at Bristol, with its whirring looms, 
where my father had taken me as a boy.
We spent the next winter—that of 1899 to 1900—in one half of a double 
house on Oxford Street in Cambridge. My parents already had plans to 
put me in school, and they took me with them to visit Miss Baldwin, the 
principal of the Agassiz School, which was only two doors from us. No final 
arrangement was made to put me in school. Miss Baldwin, an extremely 
distinguished schoolteacher and a woman of great dignity, was a Negro. 
She had entered the Cambridge school system in the 1880s at a time when 
the humanitarian impulse of the abolitionists had not entirely died out and 
before New England snobbery had surrendered to Southern gentility at the 
beginning of the twentieth century.
I received the St. Nicholas Magazine as a birthday present while I was liv­
ing on Oxford Street. I remember very well the day on which the postman 
brought me one back number and one current number dated in 1899, and 
from then on, the new century had begun and I was in 1900. St. Nicholas 
was a revelation to me and constituted much of my most pleasant reading 
in my childhood. It is scarcely possible for me to conceive how the present 
generation of children gets along without it or its equivalent. St. Nicho­
las always assumed that the child, for all his few years, was an essentially 
civilized individual, and disdained to put before him intellectual pabulum 
which in essence would not be worthy of an adult. How the present genera­
tion of children has been able to substitute for this the blatant and inane 
fare of the funnies on the one hand and the highly artistic picture book 
without literary content on the other is a profound mystery to me. The 
children of my day would consider that the children of the present day are 
letting themselves be shortchanged.
The autumn marked the triumphant return of Admiral Dewey to Boston 
after the Spanish-American War. My parents took me to see the parade that 
marked this occasion; but I did not and could not have had a sense of the 
historic importance of the occasion, for a war meant to me certain military 
toys that went bang-bang rather than anything that had to do with real 
people losing real lives.

3: First Remembered Patterns 
35
Another clear recollection of this winter is of Christmas. I woke up in the 
morning well before dawn to look into my stocking and to discover what 
Santa Claus had put in it. At this time I did not know that Santa Claus was 
my father, but I appreciated the sweets and toys and little written jests that 
I found with the tangerine and the nuts and candy in my stocking. The 
larger presents were under the tree, and my sister and I should have waited 
until morning to see them, but we interpreted morning in a very loose 
sense, and made our way downstairs around four o’clock.
The other pictures I carry of the year are completely isolated. Our next-
door neighbor, a militant Irishwoman, the wife of a policeman, valiantly 
drove off from her fortress some naughty boys who were invading it. I 
believe she used a broom. I rode up and down the sidewalk on my tri­
cycle, and used to meet on my daily rides boring grown-up friends of my 
father. There was a one-legged boy in the neighborhood who puzzled me 
by appearing alternately with and without an artificial leg; he used to pass 
our house on his way to school on a bicycle.
It is strange how pictures of suffering and mutilation recur among my 
very early impressions. I doubt whether much of my interest in these mat­
ters was humanitarian or proceeded from a genuine compassion for the suf­
fering. Part of my interest was the cruel, staring curiosity of the child, and 
another part was the genuine fear of catastrophe as something which had 
occurred to people whom I could see and which might conceivably occur 
to me. I had had a minor surgical operation for tonsils and adenoids about 
this time and was terrified by the harsh swirl of confusion that followed the 
administration of the anesthetic. But I perceived no relation between my 
own minor surgical operation and my terror at the fact of mutilation. All 
this is a repetition of an observation amply familiar to the Freudians, and 
efficiently explained by them.
My father was very proud of his early record as a farmer and had long 
aspired to be a landed proprietor. In this there was a mixture of Tolstoya­
nism and a pride in having overcome one of the traditional limitations of 
the Jew. In the spring of 1900 he bought the farm of his dreams in Foxboro. 
The house was set well back from a road, lined with a row of catalpa trees 
which gave the place its name: Catalpa Farm.
I do not remember what Father raised on the place, although I cannot 
imagine him not farming. I am sure that that summer contributed greatly 
to my knowledge of country life and of the New England trees and plants. 
The country children on the next farm took the usual advantage of me 
which they considered themselves entitled to take of a city boy, and filled 
my mouth with the filth of the road. I found a few more suitable playmates 

36 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
in the village, or at least a few playmates more willing to accept me. They 
acquainted me with the existence of earthworms, and surprised me by 
exhibiting the very moderate inconvenience which the worm suffers by 
being cut in two. The cruelty of this process gave me only some minor 
twinges of conscience.
I remember very little of Foxboro as it was at that time, although I am 
sure that the most exciting thing about it for us was the gossip concerning 
a church which had recently been founded there by the Holy Rollers. I also 
remember an older boy who took me to a baseball game between Foxboro 
and Attleboro. The mysteries of baseball were too much for me, and it was 
only much later that I was able to take an interest in the game.
The early summer was marked by the arrival of my Grandmother Wiener 
from New York, accompanied by my cousin Olga. I remember Grandmother 
even then as an old lady, although she cannot have been much older than 
I am at the present time. She was always dressed in the dark clothes of an 
elderly European, and she had definitely foreign mannerisms, exhibited in 
the way she would gesture with her forefinger and would shake her head. 
She was a tiny, active person, with the air of having suffered much; and 
from everything that I have heard about my grandfather, he was not a man 
with whom it was possible to live without suffering, if only because of his 
temper and improvidence. In Europe Grandmother had been thrown on 
her own devices for earning her living; and now that my father’s example 
had been followed by the other Wieners and they had come to America too, 
she was passed on from child to child according to their financial ability to 
support her.
Grandmother always spoke with a strong accent and was never able to 
distinguish between the words “kitchen” and “kitten.” She read her own 
newspaper, printed in a foreign type-face which I later found out to be 
Yiddish. She always signaled her coming to visit us by bringing us dainties 
and toys from New York, but we would have loved her even without this. 
My mother, who looked rather askance on my father’s New York kinsfolk, 
from the vantage point of having been in the land for one more generation, 
could not help loving Grandmother, or Grossmutter, as we always used to 
call her to distinguish her from Grandmother Kahn.
Cousin Olga was a sharp young person of nine years, four years older 
than I. Her mother, my Aunt Charlotte, had been left alone in the world by 
a runaway husband, and it was very important for Olga to have a chance for 
a healthy summer vacation in the country. She and my mother were always 
at swords’ points. The life of the New York back streets tends to make one 
worldly-wise before one’s time and this was hard on my mother.

3: First Remembered Patterns 
37
Olga and I often quarreled. On one occasion, she and I got into a 
quarrel—I do not know about what. Olga told me that God knew every­
thing, and would not approve of my behavior. I then and there made the 
statement that I did not believe in God. Seeing no lightning descending 
from heaven to smite me dead on the spot, I persisted in my godlessness 
and told my parents about it. I found enough sympathy in my father’s atti­
tude to encourage me to persist in this point of view.
I have never made up my childish quarrel with Jehovah, and a skeptic I 
have remained to the present day, although I look askance at those skeptics 
who make their skepticism into a positive religion, and are Bezbozhnik in 
the same spirit in which they might be churchmen.
There were lilac bushes under the catalpa trees, and in them I found a 
little nest with blue eggs. Olga told me that because I had touched them, 
the mother bird would leave them alone and never come again, and that 
the eggs would not hatch or the nestlings would die. For a child of five, that 
made me as good as a murderer in my own mind, and the sense of guilt 
that it gave troubled me for a long time afterward.
Father took me on several excursions about the neighborhood, some 
of them for the sake of the tramp and the chance to engage in his favor­
ite sport of collecting mushrooms, and some of them to contribute to my 
education. For example, he took me to a foundry and machine shop in the 
neighborhood. The blast furnace was fed with scrap, not ore; and I saw the 
metal run into the molds for pigs and the more elaborately shaped molds 
for parts to be machined. The machine shop worked in brass as well as in 
steel. It was a delight to see the white and yellow shavings turning up into 
curls under the pressure of the tool.
Father often tried to secure my education at school, but he found some 
obstacles in his way, though I don’t quite know what the difficulties were. I 
fancy I was just too young for the standards of the school board. I was vac­
cinated for the village school, and went to it for a few days, and then Father 
transferred me to a little red schoolhouse in the country, where children of 
all ages studied together under one teacher. All that I remember of it is that 
there was a pond outside the schoolhouse, and that it was winter, and that 
children were sliding and skating on it.
Some time in the spring of 1901, when I was six years old, we took rooms 
in a boardinghouse on Concord Avenue opposite the Harvard Observatory 
in Cambridge. We had returned to a Cambridge boardinghouse because 
we were contemplating a summer trip to Europe. My parents were busy 
making the necessary purchases of equipment for the trip, and buying toys 
and other amusements to occupy my sister and me on the ship. I have not 

38 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
many recollections of this time except that I again visited my playmate 
Hermann Howard, and that an older girl, Renée Metivier, who was lodging 
in the same boardinghouse, took me under her wing. She taught me how 
to make and to fly a kite, and I remember going down with her to Church 
Street to get the material. Church Street at that time was even more the 
artisan’s section of Cambridge than it is at the present day. While I was in 
kindergarten the teacher had taken us down there to see the delightful mys­
teries of its forges and wheelwright shops and carpenters’ yards.
There is one point which I would append to the discussion of my early 
reminiscences. It is probably of considerable interest to the reader to know 
how the very early intellectual development of the prodigy differs from 
that of other children. It is, however, impossible for the child, whether he 
be prodigy or not, to compare the earlier stages of his intellectual develop­
ment with those of other children until he has reached a level of social 
consciousness which does not begin until late childhood. To say that one is 
a prodigy is not a statement which concerns the child in question alone. It 
is a statement which concerns the relative rate of his intellectual develop­
ment with that of others. And it is a thing which his parents and teachers 
can observe far earlier than he can himself. In one’s earlier stages of learn­
ing, one is one’s own norm, and if one is confused, the only possible answer 
is that of the Indian, “Me not lost, wigwam lost.”
I was well along in childhood, probably seven or eight, before I knew 
enough about the intellectual development of other children to comment 
in my own mind on their relative speed of learning and my own. By this 
time the earlier stages of the process of learning how to read and even the 
simpler aspects of learning my arithmetic had receded into the past almost 
as thoroughly as the average child’s consciousness of learning how to speak. 
For this reason what I shall have to say about these matters will scarcely be 
distinguishable from the history of any other child, except on the basis of 
the precise year and month in my life at which I passed various stages of 
development.
For mark this well: all early learning is a miracle, even on the part of the 
child whom we later consider to be somewhat dull. When a child begins 
to speak, it has already learned its first foreign language. Between birth and 
the age of two years there is a blossoming out of new intellectual acquisi­
tions which can never be paralleled in later life, and this whether the child 
is a genius or a moron. This is a development of doing rather than of reflec­
tion about doing; a spontaneous burgeoning of new talents and not the 
work of the child as his own self-conscious schoolmaster. It is a fact that in 
my case the beginnings of reading go back to an age not twice that of the 

3: First Remembered Patterns 
39
beginnings of speech with many children, and that this is obscured by the 
fact that I was learning to read, not learning to think about reading. Later, 
when I went through my earlier schoolbooks (at home under my parents’ 
guidance), I learned some of the puzzling distinctions between capitals and 
small letters and script. I have memories only of the obstacles in my way, 
and not of the greater part of the task, which was accomplished sponta­
neously and unconsciously. I remember that the similarity between i and 
j puzzled me, and that in old-fashioned books there was a long s which 
looked curiously like an f. I remember the mechanical difficulty of writing, 
and that my best handwriting was and long remained below the acceptable 
standard of the class. As to arithmetic, I counted on my fingers and con­
tinued that long after it was regarded as unpermissible by the standards of 
my school classes. I was puzzled by such things as the axiom that a times 
b equals b times a, and I tried to clear this up by drawing a rectangle of 
points and turning them through a right angle. I was not particularly fast 
in learning my multiplication tables or, in fact, anything else that had to 
be learned by rote, although I had a good understanding of the principles 
of fairly complicated operations from a very early period in my early child­
hood. I remember the old Wentworth Arithmetic, in which I read ahead 
into the discussion of fractions and decimals without any great difficulty. 
In general the two things that held me up were at the opposite ends of the 
game: the technique of adding and multiplying rapidly and precisely and 
the understanding of why the various laws of arithmetic, the commutative 
and the associative and the distributive, were true. On the one hand, my 
understanding of the subject was too fast for my manipulation, and on the 
other hand, my demands in the nature of fundamentals went too far for the 
explanations of a book devoted to manipulation. But if we go beyond that 
to the very first beginnings of my arithmetic, they are nearly as hard for me 
to recall as the beginnings of my reading or speaking.
This relegation of the difficult and the truly intellectual part of my work 
to a level below full consciousness is not merely a matter of my childhood, 
but something that has continued to the present day. I do not fully know 
how I get new ideas or how I resolve the apparent contradictions between 
those already in my mind. I do know that when I think, my ideas are my 
masters rather than my servants, and that if they resolve themselves at all 
into a usable and understandable pattern, they do that at a level of con­
sciousness so low that much of it happens in my sleep. I shall have to speak 
of this elsewhere, but I cannot find in my own intellectual history any 
brusque change between the striving of childhood after childish knowl­
edge and the power and the striving of my grown life after the new and the 

40 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
unknown. I know more and I have better tools, but it would often be hard 
for me to say just when and how I have acquired these tools and this new 
knowledge.
One thing that I share with my father is an excellent memory. By this 
I do not mean that we cannot and have not been perfect examples of the 
absent-minded professor, and that our capacity to forget in matters of daily 
life has not been ample. But I mean that when we have acquired a range 
of ideas or a way of looking at things, this has become a part of us not to 
be lost through any vicissitudes whatever. I remember the last stages of my 
father’s life when he was on his death bed with apoplexy, and when his fine 
intelligence no longer enabled him even to recognize the loved ones about 
him. And I remember that he spoke as though he had the gift of tongues, 
in English, in German, in French, in Russian, in Spanish. Confused as to 
what he saw about him, his languages nevertheless were clear, grammatical, 
and idiomatic. The pattern went through the fabric, and neither wear nor 
attrition could efface it.

4  Cambridge to Cambridge, via New York and Vienna
June–September, 1901
Ex-Prodigy: 
My 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
4: 
Cambridge 
to 
Cambridge, 
via 
New 
York 
and 
Vienna
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
G. K. Chesterton has said somewhere that the best way to see London is 
to make a voyage from London to London around the world. We cannot 
appreciate an experience until and unless we have other experiences which 
differ from it to serve us as points of orientation. I am certain that I could 
never have learned to understand New England if I had not at some period 
in my life got far enough away from it to see the great lines of its spiritual 
character spread before me as a map.
In the late spring of 1901, when I was six and a half and my sister was 
about three, our family took the Fall River boat to New York where we were 
to stay with my father’s relatives. They were living somewhere in the East 
Sixties between Third and Fourth Avenues. Upper Fourth Avenue had not 
at that time gained its present prestige as Park Avenue; the region was a 
slightly superior East Side slum. The typical old-fashioned apartment in 
which my relatives lived was at the top of a long flight of outside steps 
leading in from the street. It was dark, overcrowded, and stuffy. The only 
windows were at the very front and at the very back, and the apartment was 
already more than full before it had to take the burden of four more visitors 
from Boston. But we were near enough to Central Park to be able to reach it 
by a short walk past the palaces then lining Fifth Avenue, and the Central 
Park Zoo was always a delightful goal for us.
My Uncle Jake Wiener was the only man of the establishment. He was 
a journeyman job printer and very good at his trade. His main amusement 
was gymnastics. At one time he had been number three man in the Ameri­
can rating on the parallel bars. Certainly, if ever a man was built for the 
sport it was Uncle Jake. I have said that my father had powerful shoulders, 
but his brother Jake’s were enormous, and he was muscled like a wrestler. 
He was even shorter than my father, who was also a short man; and his 
legs were thin and spindling. He had the drawn-in muscular abdomen of 
the athlete. His face was twisted to one side by some early injury which 

42 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
had caused the necrosis of one side of his lower jaw. He was very kind to us 
children, and I remember his showing us a fool’s cap with bells which he 
had worn at some lodge entertainment. He was scarcely thirty at that time, 
and single, though he later married and had a family.
My aunts had had better cultural opportunities than Uncle Jake. They 
had retained a good deal of Russian culture, though they later found that 
French culture had a greater commercial value for them in the garment 
trades. Aunt Charlotte, the mother of Olga, had a husband who had left 
her. She was divorced from him and was destined to know a similar misfor­
tune again. Like her sister Augusta, who never married, she was in the nee­
dle trades. Both of them were exceptionally intelligent women; and with 
half an opportunity in life, they would have had careers comparable with 
that of my father. They spoke several languages fluently; and later on, when 
they had spent some years in Paris, they both became valuable assistants in 
the business of a New York couturier, where they passed themselves off as 
Frenchwomen.
Aunt Charlotte continued to work to a very advanced age and died 
only relatively recently from an accident. She was a very definitely Jewish-
looking type, resembling some of those French Jewish women drawn with 
such zest by Du Maurier. Aunt Augusta rather resembled her, though she 
was much the better looking of the two. Like her sister, she also lived to an 
advanced age. There was an Aunt Adele as well, who later married and was 
a neighbor of ours for a brief time in the country, and still later moved out 
to the Pacific coast; but of her I have very little recollection.
There had been another brother, Moritz, older than my father, who had 
disappeared from the family view for many years. The last place from which 
he had been heard was Colon, or Aspinwall as it was then called, and the 
time had been one of a notorious outbreak of yellow fever. My grandmother 
always spoke of him as if he were still alive and might turn up at any time; 
but in her heart she knew that he had been long dead. Still, although it is 
rather late in the day, when my daughters wish to indulge in daydreams of 
sudden fortune, there is always the remote possibility that a very old gentle­
man may come to our house from a distant place, say in Australia, where 
he had made his fortune, and leave it to us in a burst of family sentiment.
As long as my grandmother lived, a visit to New York meant an unend­
ing series of courtesy visits to third and fourth cousins and their friends. I 
now know that this is an established part of the Jewish family structure, but 
at the time I did not even know that our family was Jewish. Of course, it was 
necessary for my mother to have some phrase in which to describe those 
qualities of my father’s relatives which she did not want us to imitate; but 

4: Cambridge to Cambridge, via New York and Vienna 
43
the words “New York,” spoken with a properly contemptuous intonation, 
was quite adequate to the purpose.
A child, however, is mostly interested in childish things, and the one 
of the family who was chiefly interesting to me was Olga. She showed me 
a few of the city child’s tricks, such as putting pins on the streetcar tracks 
to be flattened out by the passing cars, and I believe that we used to play 
cassino together. Uncle Jake would show me card tricks, and how to build 
little houses out of old packs of cards. There were miniature children’s cards 
that Olga used to buy in nearby stationery shops; the packs were always 
incomplete and there wasn’t much to be done with them except to build 
houses.
The puffy little steam trains that ran over the Third Avenue Elevated 
delighted me. We used to travel downtown on it to make purchases in the 
big shops. One of my unpleasant memories is that of chasing around after 
my mother on these shopping errands, although there was no other way to 
outfit me for the ocean voyage to come, and many of the purchases were 
toys for the amusement of my sister Constance and me. I remember a little 
sailboat which I tried to sail on the lakes of Central Park. Neither my father 
nor I had the knowledge or experience to enable us to manage it.
Other presents for the voyage were sets of scientific experiments for chil­
dren, entitled “Fun with Electricity,” “Fun with Magnetism,” and “Fun with 
Soapbubbles.” I wonder whether the present generation, under the stimu­
lus of Charles Addams, has extended the scope of these sets to cover “Fun 
with Atomic Physics,” “Fun with Toxicology,” and “Fun with Psychoanaly­
sis.” Whether they have or not, the sets of my childhood were thoroughly 
delightful, and even today I can remember the details of the experiments 
they contained.
At length we crossed the harbor by ferry to Hoboken, to embark in a ship 
of the Holland-America Line. We traveled second class, which represented 
the cheapest travel decently possible for a family with children in those 
days, when third class still meant steerage. Even in my early westbound 
trips after the First World War, I can remember looking down from the 
second-class deck onto the varied assemblage of steerage passengers, often 
still in their native costume, who herded together in a discomfort sugges­
tive of the days of the Middle Passage.
A ship is a delightful place for a young child. There were a number of 
other children on board with whom I could play; and seasickness is chiefly 
a disease of the adult. I got into the proper amount of mischief, being duly 
chased out of the ship’s working alleyway. I delighted in looking down 
from the deck on the ever-changing marbling foam. The ship’s notices 

44 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
in English, German, and Dutch excited my interest, and I already knew 
enough German—I do not know how I learned it—to make out the similar­
ity between the stateroom notices in German and Dutch. I unquestionably 
made a nuisance of myself to the passengers in the steamer chairs, as chil­
dren always do on board ship, but I got properly punished for my sins when 
one passenger held me under his chair and tickled me past the point of all 
bearing. Finally, one morning I awoke to find the ship’s engines stopped 
and a view of Rotterdam facing me through the porthole.
We took a compartmented European train to Cologne. I can still picture 
the railway station, the hotel at which we stayed, and the cathedral. The 
penny-in-the-slot machines of Germany were much bigger and finer than 
anything I had known at home, and the burnt almonds they sold were a 
new treat. Finally we went out to a suburb of Cologne where a cousin of 
my father lived.
I have said that I already had some fragmentary ideas of German before 
I left for Europe, but I doubt whether they would have added up to enough 
to allow my father to say that I knew any German at all. My father was 
a perfectionist in languages, as befitted a man to whom languages came 
easily, and who had penetrated very deeply into them. His desire for the 
utmost finish and correctness was not always easy on his students, and 
was even harder on his family. My mother probably had a better than aver­
age ability to speak foreign languages and a fairly good acquaintance with 
German. Nevertheless, she was tongue-tied before Father’s overwhelm­
ing proficiency. She admired his skill in languages, and let herself become 
unnecessarily dependent on it. As for me, it was not until I had left my 
home and married, and had come under the milder guidance of my wife, 
that I ever ventured to use a foreign language without a sense of guilt that 
led me to hesitate and to stammer each word.
To visit Europe with my father was to see it with the eyes of the Euro­
pean. Strictly speaking, I never went through that period of the tourist in 
which every door and every wall seems a fortress against him. For during 
this first visit my inadequacies as a stranger in the land were completely 
dwarfed by the different and greater inadequacies of the child. By the time 
of my second visit to Europe, when I was a young man, the memory of my 
first visit, my studies and reading, together with the continued presence of 
my father, had made Europe nearly as familiar to me as the United States. 
At no time could I thus contrast an unknown Europe with an America I 
knew well.
I will not say that I never went through any of the stages of brashness 
and bluster which belong to the innocent abroad. But the disease was brief, 

4: Cambridge to Cambridge, via New York and Vienna 
45
and it was greatly alleviated by my earlier inoculation with Europe. It has 
always seemed to me that Henry Adams, in his late attack of tourist frus­
tration, was like a man who is first exposed to the mumps in his twenties. 
Adams remained allergic to modern Europe all his life. As for me, my early 
visit was perhaps the very best of all possible trainings, for the scientist 
must be a citizen of the world.
From Cologne we went up the Rhine on a steamer. We left the boat at 
Mainz, and made our way to Vienna. Vienna was our headquarters for a 
considerable period, and it is the part on our trip that has left the greatest 
impression on me. It is the little things that impress a child, and of these it 
is perhaps the smells which stay longest in one’s memory. The smell of the 
alcohol lamp over which my parents prepared my sister’s warm evening 
meals, the smell of the rich European chocolate with whipped cream, the 
smell of the hotel and the restaurant and café—all these are still sharp in my 
nostrils. I can remember the vegetarian restaurants at which we ate, which 
were generally up a flight or two in some obscure part of the city, and the 
skin on the boiled milk which I could scarcely bear to swallow. In Frank­
furt we had tried a glass of Apfelmost, which had even worse consequences 
for me.
It was new for me to see the newspapers mounted on their wooden 
frames in the cafés. While Father would read his for the news, I would look 
over an English paper which contained a children’s story as a feuilleton. My 
reading was not yet very fluent, and it was not easy for me to reconstruct 
the story out of the straggling portions which appeared from day to day and 
on which I could lay my hands, but I have a dim impression that the story 
was Kipling’s “Puck of Pook's Hill.” Certainly the dates are about right, since 
Kipling’s story was written for his children when they were a trifle older 
than I was then, and they must have been born during his stay in Brattle­
boro slightly before my own birth.
One of my father’s purposes in going to Vienna was to see a journalist 
by the name of Karl Kraus. I do not know what they discussed, though 
they probably concerned themselves with Jewish matters and quite pos­
sibly with the problem of the translation into literary German of the Yid­
dish poems of Moritz Rosenfeld, the New York garment worker-poet, whom 
father had “discovered.” I remember being taken into Kraus’s apartment 
in an old-fashioned Vienna apartment house, and there I remember what 
seemed to me a confusion and disorder which I have never seen equaled 
elsewhere.
Vienna was hot and uncomfortable, and the bedbugs bit us children 
unmercifully. My parents did not know what had affected us, nor was the 

46 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
prominent dermatologist whom we called in of much use in the matter. He 
diagnosed our affliction as the itch, whose appellation of the “seven-year 
itch” did nothing to quiet the alarms of my parents.
When the true nature of the disease became manifest, we got no sym­
pathy from our landlady. She informed us that in Vienna, that old city of 
stucco and crumbling plaster, no one was immune from them—not even 
the Emperor in his palace. They may have been old to the Emperor, but 
they were new to us; and they served a fully adequate notice on us to leave 
the city for a more salubrious place.
We found lodgings with a cobbler in the little Wienerwald town of Kalten­
leutgeben. The house opened directly on the village street with scarcely any 
pavement in between. Behind it, the hill rose abruptly, and a little flight of 
steps led to a pleasant garden arbor. As in the case of the farmhouse where 
we had stayed in Alexandria, my early experience in Kaltenleutgeben was 
enough to fix the geography of the place sufficiently in mind so that I was 
able to recognize the house when I visited it more than thirty years later.
There were several boys in the cobbler’s family, and they were my play­
mates. How we communicated with one another is a difficult question 
to settle now, for they certainly spoke no English, and my parents have 
assured me that I spoke no German—at least none by the standards of my 
father. That we did come to an understanding is clear, for we participated 
in more pranks together than did Max and Moritz, the young rascals whose 
history has been given us by Wilhelm Busch. When we were not examining 
the fat slugs and snails which peopled the back garden, we were playing for­
bidden games with the balls of the bowling alley attached to a neighboring 
restaurant, or decidedly not benefiting the cobbler’s machinery by the liber­
ties we took with it. We were to be found in the not too clean environs of 
the nearby open-air bath or buying little imitation baby bottles of colored 
water at the local fair.
Eventually, after a slow trip across Germany and Holland, we reached 
London. We found a vegetarian hotel in Maida Vale, which consisted of 
two large houses thrown into one, and behind it was a garden reserved for 
the abutting householders. I played with some of the children there, who, if 
I remember right, were the younger brothers and sisters of the famous pia­
nist Mark Hambourg. The Boer War was still being fought at the time; and 
as my father was politically liberal, I echoed his opinions to my playmates 
by calling myself a pro-Boer, though I did not have the slightest idea what 
the conflict was all about. The English children retaliated by piling three-
deep on top of me.

4: Cambridge to Cambridge, via New York and Vienna 
47
Not far from Maida Vale was the house of Israel Zangwill, with whom 
my father had corresponded about Zionist matters. Zangwill was one of 
the most eloquent British Zionists. My father foresaw the difficulties which 
have arisen since then from the superimposition of a Jewish colony upon a 
Moslem background. He was an assimilationist in a quite genuine sense, for 
he felt that the future of the Jews in the newer countries lay in their iden­
tifying their interests with those of the country, not in opening the wound 
of a separate new nationalism.
We visited Zangwill at his house near Maida Vale, which had a pretty 
little garden in front of it. He carried me upstairs on his shoulders. I remem­
ber his face: very Jewish, strongly lined, and not handsome but interesting 
and sensitive. I was to see him again on my next visit to Europe, which did 
not take place until I was eighteen years old.
He was not the only literary figure whom we visited in England. There 
was also Kropotkin, the great geographer and a genuine Russian prince of 
the imperial blood, who had turned anarchist as a young man, had tried to 
assassinate his cousin the Tsar, and had been obliged to flee the country. He 
had visited Boston about a year before and had been shown around by my 
father. He had given me as a present a little cardboard cabinet of minerals. 
One evening after he had been dined and wined by Mrs. Jack Gardner at her 
Fenway Palace, he turned up at our house, angry and inarticulate. “Wiener,” 
he said to my father, “I have been insulted!” When Father had reduced him 
to comparative calm, the story came out. A Boston society lady had asked 
him, “Oh, Prince Kropotkin, how is your dear cousin the Tsar?”
We visited Kropotkin in his little house at Bromley, Kent. It was a work­
ingman’s home, with the usual depressing similarity to every house up and 
down the street. The back garden was a pleasant place, however, where his 
two daughters served us tea.
We saw the usual sights of London, such as the Houses of Parliament 
and Westminster Abbey. Sometimes we ate in a vegetarian restaurant on 
Holborn, and sometimes at an A.B.C. tearoom. We traveled mostly on bus­
ses, the upper deck delighting me; sometimes we took the new tube rail­
way which in those remote days was known as the “tuppenny tube.” The 
hansom cab still had no real competitor, and the London streets had what 
I later learned to recognize as the full, rich flavor of the Sherlock Holmes 
stories.
We left for Liverpool on the last lap of our journey, and of course the 
return voyage seemed as dull and uneventful as all such voyages, without 
the prospect of new adventure abroad to enliven them.


5  In the Sweat of My Brow
Cambridge, September, 1901–September, 1903
Ex-Prodigy: 
My 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
5: 
In 
the 
Sweat 
of 
My 
Brow
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
On Avon Street in Cambridge we took a moderately old but pleasant house, 
with an ell behind and a little below the level of the main house. It had 
ground- and cut-glass front doors, a library and living room in front, and a 
small but adequate study for my father. The upstairs rooms were large and 
sunny, and the little upper story of the ell housed our nursery. There was a 
fairly large back yard for my sister and me to play in.
Some two houses from us lived Professor Bôcher, who, we later learned, 
was a great mathematician. He was the son of a former French professor of 
modern languages at Harvard, and I believe he had a family of two children 
about my own age. On the Easter of 1903, I joined his children to look for 
the Easter eggs which had been planted for their benefit. A little beyond 
him, well back from the road, was the house of Professor Otto Folin, the dis­
tinguished physiological chemist. Of Swedish peasant origin, he was mar­
ried to an old-stock Western American woman, one of my mother’s closest 
friends from her Missouri days. I had the run of their house and used to 
read their books. Both my mother and Mrs. Folin are still alive, and are still 
close friends.
The geneticist Castle and the physiologist Walter Cannon were two other 
friends of my father and of them I asked childish questions about science. 
My father and I went to see Cannon in his laboratory at the Harvard Medi­
cal School of that day, which was then behind the Boston Public Library, 
in a building now used by Boston University. I was particularly interested 
in the pictures Dr. Cannon showed us of the Canadian backwoodsman, 
Alexis St. Martin, who had accidentally shot a hole in his stomach, and of 
the American Army doctor, Beaumont, who had used him as a guinea pig 
for the study of digestion. Cannon himself told us the fascinating story of 
this partnership.
I was also interested in Dr. Cannon’s X-ray machine, which, if I remem­
ber correctly, was excited by some sort of electrostatic generator. Cannon 

50 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
was perhaps the very first man to use the new ray of Röntgen in the study of 
the softer tissues, such as the heart and the stomach, and thus to continue 
the early work which St. Martin’s ghastly fistula had made possible. He 
was also a pioneer in the use of lead screens for the protection of the X-ray 
operator. It was because of this precaution that he seemed for many years to 
have gone scatheless from these dangerous beams, while the majority of his 
early colleagues had crumbled to pieces by bits, submitting to amputation 
after amputation. Yet while he lived well into his seventies, his early X-ray 
burns killed him in the end.
These men I saw only occasionally. A much commoner visitor to our 
house was Father’s friend, the Assyriologist Muss-Arnoldt. Muss-Arnoldt 
was, I believe, an Austrian Jew, and he had almost exactly the face and 
expression of his own Assyrian winged bulls. He was black-bearded and 
rather burly, a great scholar, and a man with an irascible disposition. He 
taught me occasionally when he was staying at our house, and my father 
was otherwise occupied; and he was a strict but unskillful disciplinarian. 
One day a few years later, after a Latin lesson which particularly rankled in 
me, I was watering the lawn, and obeying a sudden and irrational impulse, 
I turned the hose on him. I was duly punished by my parents and Muss-
Arnoldt looked askance at me ever after.
To a person who has seen the intervening stages of its development and 
decadence, it is difficult to compare the American Cambridge of today with 
the Cambridge of the beginning of the century. It is only by impercep­
tible steps that the houses have become grimier, that the traffic has become 
heavier, that the vacant lots have vanished, and that a community which 
in 1900 preserved much of the atmosphere of the country town has grown 
into a great, dirty, commercial city.
When I was a child, there were those who still spoke of Massachusetts 
Avenue by its old name, North Avenue; and it was lined by the inartis­
tic but attractive and comfortable mansions of well-to-do businessmen. 
They are still standing, but fallen from glory. Their porte-cocheres shel­
ter no coaches, and the elaborate wood carving of their porches is rotting 
away. They were inhabited by families with four or five children, and were 
ruled from the kitchen by a competent and masterful servant girl. The chil­
dren had ample yards to play in, and the trees which shaded them had 
not yet been reduced to sickly pallor by the smoke of the East Cambridge 
factories.
The vacant lots of Cambridge bloomed with dandelions in the spring, 
buttercups in the summer, and the bluish blossom of chicory in the fall. 
The streets were, for the most part, unpaved; and when it rained, they were 

5: In the Sweat of My Brow 
51
deeply rutted by the wheels of the horse-drawn delivery trucks. In the sea­
son of snow, the wagons were replaced by sleighs and sledges, and it was 
a favorite pastime of the youngsters to tie their sleds behind the delivery 
sleighs then known as pungs. On the hilly streets there was coasting, not 
only on the small sleds which one rode belly-bump but on large double-
runners made up of two such sleds, a plank, and a steering wheel. There 
was an abundance of frozen puddles on which one could skate, and it was 
always possible to go to Jarvis Field and watch the Harvard hockey team at 
practice.
As I have said, my father was an enthusiastic amateur mycologist; and 
under his guidance, I toured vacant lots in search of morels in the spring 
and field agarics in the fall. The morels were confined to a few well-known 
spots, and the Harvard mycologists considered that they had duly staked 
their claims on these spots. It was a frequent cause of bad feeling when 
one of them stole a march on a colleague and reaped the little clump that 
the latter had considered his private property. Stands of field agarics were 
less subject to this test of ownership, and coprinus was too common to be 
considered a property at all.
These additions to our kitchen were supplemented by an occasional lepi­
ota or a batch of elm mushroom. Every now and again we would find a 
clump of clavaria or hydnum, and even a few rarer delicacies; but these 
were mostly reserved for our summer vacations. Part of the fun was the fact 
that one might just possibly confuse these edible fungi with an amanita, or 
at least an emetic russula; and the knowledge that one would have to wait 
some twelve hours before the symptoms became obvious was a source of 
more than one sleepless night to my parents and to myself.
I have botanical memories beyond these stray fruits of the field. I can 
never forget the little maple keys taking root in the soil, nor the tiny trees 
which started from them. The smell of fresh earth, of maple bark, of the 
gum of cherry trees, and of newly mowed grass all belonged to my youth, 
with the drawl of the lawn mower and the pattering of water from the 
spray which kept our grass green. In the fall it was always delightful to 
trudge through the crisp heaps of fallen leaves in the gutter or to smell 
their aromatic smoke as they burned. In my childhood recollection, these 
are supplemented by the resinous perfume of freshly cut pinewood and the 
various builders’ smells of linseed oil and new cement.
The whole frame of our lives has changed between that day and this. 
Wood then was so cheap that we used to knock up for firewood the boxes 
in which our groceries were delivered, and our butter came in wooden tubs 
or in neatly dovetailed wooden boxes with sliding lids. The chief token 

52 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
of those ampler days was, however, the ease with which one could secure 
servant girls. Mother never had less than two, a cook and a children’s maid, 
together with the services of a laundress, and yet my father was only an 
impecunious instructor or assistant professor, with no promise of tenure for 
some time to come. For a large part of our time on Avon Street I nearly wor­
shipped our maid, Hildreth Maloney, an intelligent, loyal and competent 
young woman, who was later to improve her position in the world. I do 
not remember our cook, but our laundress was a faithful and hard-working 
woman by the name of Maggy, to which we added the soubriquet, “The 
Button-breaker.”
I was brought up in a house of learning. My father was the author of 
several books, and ever since I can remember, the sound of the typewriter 
and the smell of the paste pot have been familiar to me. But it was not the 
efforts of the literary scholar that first seized my imagination. By now I 
could read freely. I had full liberty to roam in what was the very catholic 
and miscellaneous library of my father. At one period or other the scientific 
interests of my father had covered most of the imaginable subjects of study. 
Somewhere in our bookcases there was a Chinese dictionary, there were 
grammars of unusual and exotic languages, there were charlatanlike books 
on the occult, there were accounts of the excavations of Troy and Tiryns, 
and there were a series of the English scientific primers of late Victorian 
times. Above all, there was a compilation of papers on psychiatry, electri­
cal experiments, and travels of naturalists in the wilder parts of the world, 
that went by the name of the Humboldt Library. There were two odd vol­
umes of the excellent Natural History of Kingsley, together with the far less 
scholarly and more anecdotic book of Wood which Mr. Hall had given me 
years before.
I was an omnivorous reader, and by the time I was eight I had over­
strained a pair of rather inefficient eyes in consuming whatever books came 
my way. The learned works of my father’s library shared my attention with 
the books of Dickens which my mother read to me, Stevenson’s Treasure 
Island, The Arabian Nights, and the writings of Mayne Reid. To me they were 
all books of high adventure; yet the tale of Long John Silver and the stories 
in the St. Nicholas Magazine were pale to me beside the true accounts of the 
adventures of those naturalists who had found new beasts and birds and 
plants in the somber darkness of the rain forest, and had heard the raucous 
calls of the macaws and the parakeets.
Thus I longed to be a naturalist as other boys long to be policemen and 
locomotive engineers. I was only dimly aware of the way in which the age 
of the great naturalists and explorers was running out, leaving mere tasks 

5: In the Sweat of My Brow 
53
of gleaning to the next generation. Yet even if I had been fully aware of 
this, my allegiance in science was already mixed. My father had brought 
me from the Harvard library a book devoted to the various branches of the 
study of light and electricity, which included a stillborn theory of televi­
sion, frustrated by the inadequacies of the selenium cell. This book had 
attracted my fancy. I followed it up by further reading in physics and chem­
istry. When I was about seven years old, Father recognized this interest by 
inviting a chemical student, who had shown an interest in Russian and had 
attended his classes, to set up a little laboratory in the nursery and to show 
me some simple experiments.
Of course, I was particularly interested in the smellier of the experiments, 
and learned the trick of making a sulphide by heating scraps of metal with 
sulfur, and then of generating hydrogen sulphide by exposing this sulphide 
to the action of an acid such as vinegar. Mr. Wyman, my instructor, contin­
ued to teach me over the period of a few months later when I was forbid­
den to read because of my rapidly advancing myopia. Not long after this, I 
heard of his early death in an automobile accident not far from where my 
M.I.T. office is today. I believe that this was one of the earliest automobile 
fatalities in Cambridge.
Even in zoology and botany, it was the diagrams of complicated struc­
ture and the problems of growth and organization which excited my inter­
est fully as much as the tales of adventure and discovery. Once I had been 
sensitized to an interest in the scientific—and various toys of scientific con­
tent played almost as great a role in this as my reading—I became aware 
of stimulating material all about me. I used to haunt the Agassiz Museum 
until there was more than one exhibit which I knew almost by heart. I 
read one scientific article that has had a direct influence on my present 
work, but I am unable to recollect where I saw it. It is confused in my 
memory with an article by Dan Beard which appeared in the St. Nicholas 
Magazine and was called “The Jointed Stick.” It contained some material 
on the analogies and homologies of the skeleton of the vertebrates. The 
deeper article which my memory has long confused with this must have 
been written by some professional physiologist. It contained a very sound 
account of the progress of a nerve impulse along a nerve fiber, as a consecu­
tive process of breakdown, analogous to the consecutive fall of a train of 
blocks rather than to a continuous electrical phenomenon. I remember that 
the article excited in me the desire to devise quasi-living automata, and that 
the notions I acquired from it survived in my mind for many years until 
they were supplemented in my adult life by a more formal study of modern 
neurophysiology.

54 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
Behind these books, which I read freely, there were a number that 
caused me a very real pain, yet a pain in whose titillations I was ashamed 
to observe elements of pleasure. No one had forbidden them to me, but I 
had forbidden them to myself, and yet when I turned past the fearful pages 
I could not refrain from giving them a stray glance. Much of Struwwelpeter 
came under this heading and a good deal of Max und Moritz. In The Arabian 
Nights there is a terrible “Tale of the Greek Physician,” and there is Grimm’s 
fairy tale of “The Boy Who Did Not Know Fear.” There were certain parts of 
the scientific books to which I had access that excited this baser mixture of 
emotions, and I remember in particular terrifying but fascinating passages 
in the Humboldt Library which were devoted to an account of execution 
by electricity and of fashion in deformity. I had an early interest in medical 
books which was partly legitimate and scientific but which also contained 
not a little element of “looking bogy in the face.” I was quite aware of the 
mixture of emotions with which I read these, and I was not able for any 
length of time to pretend that my interest was altogether innocent. These 
books aroused or recalled emotions of pain and horror, yet showed these 
emotions to be related to those of pleasure. I knew this then, long before 
Freud’s work had come to my attention and helped me to understand these 
tangled emotions.
Probably much of my early reading was over my head at the time. It is 
not essential for the value of education that every idea be understood at the 
time of its accession. Any person with a genuine intellectual interest and a 
wealth of intellectual content acquires much that he only gradually comes 
to understand fully in the light of its correlation with other related ideas. 
The person who must have the explicit connection of his ideas fed to him 
by his teacher is lacking in the most vital characteristic that belongs to the 
scholar. Scholarship is a progressive process, and it is the art of so connect­
ing and recombining individual items of learning by the forces of one’s 
whole character and experience that nothing is left in isolation, and each 
idea becomes a commentary on many others.
This unusual reading history of mine made me difficult to place in 
school. At seven, my reading was far in advance of my handwriting, which 
was awkward and ugly. My arithmetic was adequate but unorthodox, in 
that I preferred to use such shortcuts as to add nine by adding ten and 
subtracting one. I still was inclined to do sums on my fingers, and was not 
yet very sure of the later parts of my multiplication tables. I had the begin­
nings of a familiarity with German, and I devoured every scientific book on 
which I could lay my hands.

5: In the Sweat of My Brow 
55
After a certain amount of looking around, it was decided to put me in 
the third grade of the Peabody School on Avon Street. The teacher was kind 
and intelligent, as well as very tolerant of my infantile maladroitness. I do 
not know how long it was before my parents and my teachers came to the 
conclusion that I should be shifted to the fourth grade. I do not believe 
that they waited all year to make this decision. I still could scarcely have 
been much more than seven years old at the time. At any rate, the fourth 
grade teacher was less sympathetic with my shortcomings, and in one way 
or another I did not click.
My chief deficiency was in arithmetic. Here my understanding was far 
beyond my manipulation, which was definitely poor. My father saw quite 
correctly that one of my chief difficulties was that manipulative drill bored 
me. He decided to take me out of school and to put me on algebra instead 
of arithmetic, with the purpose of offering a greater challenge and stimulus 
to my imagination. From this time until I went to the Ayer High School 
at the age of nearly ten and even later, all my teaching was in my father’s 
hands, whether directly or indirectly.
I do not think that his original purpose had been to push me. However, 
he had himself started his intellectual career very young, and I think that 
he was a little surprised by his own success with me. What had started 
as a makeshift was thus continued into a definite plan of education. In 
this plan, mathematics and languages (especially Latin and German) 
were central.
Algebra was never hard for me, although my father’s way of teaching it 
was scarcely conducive to peace of mind. Every mistake had to be corrected 
as it was made. He would begin the discussion in an easy, conversational 
tone. This lasted exactly until I made the first mathematical mistake. Then 
the gentle and loving father was replaced by the avenger of the blood. The 
first warning he gave me of my unconscious delinquency was a very sharp 
and aspirated “What!” and if I did not follow this by coming to heel at once, 
he would admonish me, “Now do this again!” By this time I was weeping 
and terrified. Almost inevitably I persisted in sin, or what was worse, cor­
rected an admissible statement into a blunder. Then the last shreds of my 
father’s temper were torn, and he addressed me in a phraseology which 
seemed to me even more violent than it was because I was not aware that 
it was a free translation from the German. Rindvieh is not exactly a compli­
mentary word, but it is certainly less severe than “brute”; and Esel has been 
used by so many generations of German schoolteachers that it has almost 
become a term of endearment. This cannot be said of the English word 
“Ass!” or of its equivalents, “Fool! Donkey!”

56 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
I became accustomed to these scoldings quite rapidly; and in view of the 
fact that my lessons never lasted many hours, they were emotional hurdles 
which I could take in my stride. However, they never ceased to be genuine 
hurdles. The schoolmaster everywhere can summon to his aid the absurdity 
of his pupil. The very tone of my father’s voice was calculated to bring me 
to a high pitch of emotion, and when this was combined with irony and 
sarcasm, it became a knout with many lashes. My lessons often ended in a 
family scene. Father was raging, I was weeping, and my mother did her best 
to defend me, although hers was a losing battle. She suggested at times that 
the noise was disturbing the neighbors and that they had come to the door 
to complain, and this may have put a measure of restraint on my father 
without comforting me in the least. There were times for many years when 
I was afraid that the unity of the family might not be able to stand these 
stresses, and it is just in this unity that all of a child’s security lies.
But much more serious for me were the secondary consequences of my 
father’s discipline. I used to hear my juvenile ineptitudes repeated at the 
dinner table and before company until I was morally raw all over. On top of 
this, I was made well aware of the shortcomings of my father’s father, and it 
was borne in upon me that his worst traits were latent in my makeup, and 
only waiting for a few years to be brought out.
When I now read John Stuart Mill’s account of his father, it seems on 
the surface to have represented a completely virtuous relationship on both 
sides. I know better, and when I read his few words about his father’s iras­
cibility I know just how to interpret these statements. I am certain that 
even if that irascibility had been more decorous than that of my father, it 
had probably been no less unremitting. There is passage after passage in 
Mill which could well be the statement by a proper Victorian of a course of 
training which had been very close to that I had experienced.
My own education had both remarkable similarities to that of Mill and 
important differences from it. Mill’s education was predominatingly clas­
sical at a time when there was no other basis for a sound training. Hence 
Mill covered a wider range of the classics than I did, and at an earlier age; 
but he began mathematics rather later, and his father was a less authorita­
tive preceptor in these matters. My father had shown from his youth a 
rather outstanding mathematical ability, which he imparted to me from my 
seventh year on. Moreover, by the time I was seven, my own reading had 
penetrated into branches of biology and physics which were even beyond 
my father’s own scope, and which must have gone far beyond the rather 
pedantically classificatory natural history available to the boy Mill during 
his tramping excursions.

5: In the Sweat of My Brow 
57
In one respect my father resembled James Mill: both were ardent walkers 
and loved the countryside. I gather, however, that the elder Mill did not 
have the green thumb of which my father was so proud, and that the boy 
was not under the same pressure to work in the garden and in the field. 
With Mill as with myself, walks with our fathers seemed to be a fruitful 
source not only of outdoor pleasure but of the moral stimulus derived from 
contact with men of learning and of character.
Both the Mills seem to have centered their lives around questions of eth­
ics. They were of a Scottish family, and it is every Scotsman’s birthright to 
be a philosopher and a moralist. It is likewise the birthright of every Jew. 
And yet the more impulsive character of the Mediterranean gives to his 
philosophizings and moralizings a different appearance from that which 
belongs to the man of the north.
The Mills rank as two of the great humanitarians of history. My father’s 
career shows an almost equal depth of humanitarian motivation. Yet the 
roots of his humanitarianism were different from the Mills’, as different as 
Jeremy Bentham and Leo Tolstoy. The Mills’ passion for mankind was an 
intellectual passion, full of nobility and righteousness, but perhaps rather 
arid in its lack of an emotional participation with the oppressed. The roots 
of my father were in the deep human sympathy of Tolstoy, which itself has 
much of the compassion and self-abnegation of the Hindu Holy Man. In 
short, the Mills were classicists partaking of the sympathies of a romantic 
period, whereas my father, although educated in the classical tradition, was 
a romanticist of the romanticists.
I cannot imagine my father or myself being greatly moved as the Mills 
were by the icy glitter of Pope’s translation of Homer. The poetry that most 
moved my father, as it has most moved me, was that of Heine, with its aspi­
ration for the beautiful and the bitter revulsion which comes as the poet 
sees far too clearly the horrible contrast of that which is with that which he 
would like to believe. I cannot imagine Mill regarding Heine as more than 
an impertinent upstart, although there well may be hidden references to 
Heine in Mill’s books which give me the lie.
In the details of Mill’s experience and of my own as well as in their 
larger lines, there is much that is parallel. It is clear that both of our teach­
ers wished to prevent us from taking ourselves too seriously by a policy 
of enforced modesty, which at times amounted to systematic belittling. It 
is clear that both children combined a profound respect for their fathers 
with a certain degree of an inner feeling of deprivation and resentment. 
Yet the conflict of son and father has come to show itself in very different 
ways. There seems to have been in both Mills an aversion to any display of 

58 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
emotion, which was certainly not present in my father. Yet it is quite clear 
from Mill’s account of his training that strong emotions were there and that 
they were not weakened in any way by the impassive façade which both 
father and son maintained.
I doubt whether the older Mill had any of the possibilities of explosive­
ness and anger that certainly existed in my father, and I equally doubt 
that he showed the human weaknesses and longings which at times almost 
reversed the roles of father and son in my family, and made me love my 
father the more deeply because he never wholly ceased to be a child. In 
Mill’s book it always seems that the awareness of his ambivalence toward 
his own education is pruned like the trees of an eighteenth-century garden.
That we may readily be aware of the suppressed conflict between John 
Stuart Mill and his father we owe in part to Samuel Butler. Samuel Butler 
was perhaps not a prodigy in the full sense of the word, but like many of the 
infant prodigies, he had been brought up under the intimate supervision of 
a dominant father, and like many of the infant prodigies including myself, 
this supervision had led to a certain degree of revolt in his reminiscent atti­
tudes. Indeed, I feel that Samuel Butler as the Ernest Pontifex of The Way 
of All Flesh suffered from a parental tutelage at least as strict as my own, 
and at the hands of a man infinitely more commonplace and less sympa­
thetic than my father. His ambivalence toward his own father had much 
more in it of hatred than of love, and what respect it contained was more 
a respect for strength of character than for good will. I cannot deny that in 
my own attitude to my father there were hostile elements. There were ele­
ments of self-defense and even fear. But I always recognized his exceeding 
ability in intellectual matters and his fundamental honesty and respect for 
the truth, and these made tolerable the many frequently occurring painful 
situations which must have been absolutely intolerable to the son of a Rev. 
Mr. Pontifex.
As far as the impact of the outer world is concerned, the convention­
ality of the parental Pontifex certainly offered Ernest a most intense 
situation of conflict, but it spared him from something of the potential 
disapproval of the world about him as a breakwater spares the ships of the 
harbor. The Rev. Mr. Pontifex was unconventional in nothing but the mas­
siveness and whole-souledness of his conventionality. For myself, with all 
the understanding of my father, I had to pay the double penalty of being 
the unconventional child of an unconventional man. Thus I was isolated 
from my environment by two separate isolations.
Religious problems seem to have dominated Samuel Butler and also John 
Stuart Mill in the relations with their fathers. These problems were even 

5: In the Sweat of My Brow 
59
more acute in the youth of Edmund Gosse, another writer who must be 
mentioned in the discussion of father-son relations. Gosse’s book Father 
and Son is like Butler’s in being the account of the relations of a boy with a 
desire for independence to a very dominant father with theological inter­
ests. Indeed, Mill’s book, for all of the want of a formal theology on the 
part of both father and son, has a strongly ethical tone which echoes simi­
lar preoccupation. In my own case, while my father was a man of strong 
moral sense, it cannot be said that he had any great interest in theology. 
The source of his humanitarianism was Tolstoy, and even though Tolstoy 
embellishes his propagandist texts with many quotations from the Bible, he 
is at home with that side of Christianity which preaches humility and char­
ity and extols the virtue of the oppressed and undervalued. I have already 
said that I had begun to express doubts of religion at the early age of five, in 
terms that would have brought me severe castigation and even more severe 
chiding at the hands of the elder Butler or the elder Gosse.
Let me return to the details of my own history. I certainly do not remem­
ber any effective opposition on the part of my father. Indeed, I strongly sus­
pect that my infantile adventures in agnosticism and atheism were scarcely 
more than a reflection of my father’s own attitude which may have reflected 
the attitude of my scapegrace grandfather, who had already left the fold 
of Judaism without embracing any equivalent religion. Even a skeptic like 
James Mill would have found my levity intolerable. My own career as an 
infant prodigy thus differs from that of these victims or beneficiaries of 
dominant fathers in that it was entirely on a secular plane.
It is clear that religion or the equivalent moral questions were what 
made the mid-Victorian tick. With my father as with me, the predominat­
ing motive was that of a profound intellectual curiosity. He was a philolo­
gist; and for him, philology was more nearly an exploratory tool for the 
historian than a declaration of learning, or the means of taking to one’s 
own soul the great writers of the past. Although there was always a strong 
moral implication in my father’s personality and in the course of life toward 
which he directed me, my interest in science started with a devotion rather 
to the service of truth than to the service of humanity. Such interests in 
the humanitarian duties of the scientist as I now have are due more to 
the direct impact of the moral problems besetting the research man of the 
present day than to any original conviction that the scientist is primarily a 
philanthropist.
The service of truth, though not primarily a task of ethics, is one which 
both my father and I conceived to impose upon us the greatest moral obli­
gation possible. In a later interview which my father gave to H. A. Bruce, he 

60 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
stated this in his own words.1 The legend that Galileo after his conviction 
was heard to say, “Eppur’si muove!” (“But it does move!”), while apocryphal, 
is true in essence as depicting the code of the scientist. My father felt the 
demand of intellectual honesty to be one which the scholar can as little 
repudiate on the basis of any personal danger into which it might lead him 
as the soldier can repudiate the duty to fight at the front or the doctor to 
stay and be effective in a plague-stricken city. Nevertheless, it was an obliga­
tion which both of us conceived to belong to a man, not merely as a human 
being, but precisely because he had chosen himself for the specific devotion 
of being a servant of the truth.
I have said that my father was a romanticist rather than a Victorian clas­
sicist. His closest spiritual kin, besides Tolstoy and Dostoevsky, were the 
German Liberals of 1848. His righteousness partook of the element of élan, 
of triumph, of glorious and effective effort, of drinking deep of life and 
the emotions thereof. For me, a boy just starting life, this made him in 
many ways a noble and uplifting figure, a poet at heart, amid the frigid and 
repressed figures of an uninspiring and decadent Boston. It was because of 
this, because my taskmaster was at the same time my hero, that I was not 
bent down into mere sullen ineffectiveness by the arduous course of disci­
pline through which I went.
My father not only taught me directly but also had a Radcliffe pupil of 
his, Miss Helen Robertson, come several times a week to review my Latin 
with me by ear and to help with my German. It was a delight to have her 
come and to have opened to me another contact with the world of grown­
ups besides that of my family. I learned from her the legends of Harvard and 
of Radcliffe; of the acerbity of this professor, of the wit of that; of the old 
peddler known as John the Orangeman and the cart which the Harvard stu­
dents had given him with the donkey bearing the name of Ann Radcliffe; 
and of the wonderful blind-and-deaf student, Helen Keller. I learned of the 
visit of Prince Henry of Prussia and of the student pranks on that occasion. 
In short, even at the age of eight, I had a foretaste of the life of a college 
student.
It was about this time that I began to discover that I was clumsier than 
the run of children about me. Some of this clumsiness was genuinely poor 
muscular co-ordination, but more of it was based on my defective eyesight. 
I thought that I could not catch a ball, when the really fundamental fact 
was that I could not see it. Undoubtedly all this was accentuated by the 
early age at which I learned to read and by my immoderate indulgence in 
that pastime.

5: In the Sweat of My Brow 
61
My appearance of clumsiness was accentuated by the learned vocabulary 
which I had acquired from my reading. While it was entirely natural and 
not in any degree an affectation, it emphasized to my elders and particularly 
to those who did not know me very well that I was in some sense a misfit. 
As I shall point out in the next chapter, I had a fairly normal acquaintance 
with other boys of my age, so that I do not believe this anomaly in fact 
excited as much attention among my contemporaries as it did among my 
seniors. If my contemporaries received any particular impression from my 
adult vocabulary, I am inclined to believe it was only a secondary impres­
sion conveyed to them by their parents.
During the year when I was eight, my eyes began to trouble me in a 
rather alarming way. Of course my parents noticed this long before I did. A 
child is not aware of a constant deficiency of sense such as of eyesight. He 
accepts his own vision as the norm of vision, and if there are any defects, 
he assumes that they are common to the human race. Thus while a rapid 
aggravation of eye trouble is noticeable, a steady level of visual deficiency 
calls no attention to itself, especially when, as is the case with the myope, 
the difficulty does not interfere with reading. The myope tends to hold the 
book too close to his eyes, and this is conspicuous to his more sophisticated 
parents. But it is not conspicuous to himself until it has been pointed out, 
and until he has been given the advantage of adequate glasses.
My parents took me to Dr. Haskell, our oculist, who gave strict orders 
that I was not to read for a period of six months, and that at the end of this 
period the entire question of my reading was to be reconsidered. Father 
went ahead teaching me mathematics, both algebra and geometry, by ear, 
and my chemistry lessons went on. This period of ear training rather than 
eye training was probably one of the most valuable disciplines through 
which I have ever gone, for it forced me to be able to do my mathematics in 
my head and to think of languages as they are spoken rather than as mere 
exercises in writing. Many years later my training proved of great service to 
me when I came to learn Chinese, which a complicated notation has ren­
dered far more difficult to the eye than it is to the ear. I don’t suppose that 
this early training created the very good memory which I have carried with 
me down to the present day, but it certainly showed me that I had such a 
memory and made it possible for me to exploit it.
At the end of six months, my myopic eyes showed no further alarming 
symptoms, and I was allowed to read once more. The doctor’s judgment 
in permitting me to go back to my work has been justified by the last fifty 
years of my life, for in spite of increasing nearsightedness, cataracts, and the 

62 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
removal of both lenses, I still have very fair vision, and I see no prospect 
that my eyes will let me down as long as I live.
There is one particular passage in Mill’s Autobiography which excites 
a certain resonance in my own experience. Mill speaks of passing on his 
instruction to his younger brothers and sisters. My sister Constance tells 
me that she suffered much from my juvenile didacticism. I certainly was 
not made the official pupil-teacher in my family as Mill was. Yet the entire 
example of a life in which the person one most respects always appears as 
a teacher can only make the child think of maturity and responsibility as 
the maturity and responsibility of the school master. It is inevitable that all 
concentrated teaching teaches the boy to be a teacher. This may be over­
come later, but it represents a trend that must always be there.
During the next years, without excessive difficulty but with a severely 
lacerated self-esteem, I labored under my father’s tutelage through the Wen­
tworth textbooks on algebra, plane geometry, trigonometry, and analytical 
geometry, and learned the rudiments of Latin and German. I recognized 
that my father spoke with the authority of the scholar, even as I recognized 
that most of my outside teachers had spoken with something less.
Note
1.  The American Magazine, July, 1911.

6  Diversions of a Wunderkind
Ex-Prodigy: 
My 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
6: 
Diversions 
of 
a 
Wunderkind
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
The last chapter was devoted to my work in the early days of my career 
as a Wunderkind. However, my life was one of play as well as work. My 
parents entered me as a member of a playground which had been set up 
in a vacant lot next to the Peabody School. We had to show a card to get 
in and to allow us to use the services of the playground teacher as well as 
to crawl through the jungle gym and to coast down the slide or to employ 
such other devices as were there for our use and our exercise. I spent much 
time there talking with the policeman on the beat. Patrolman Murray lived 
opposite us and he loved to tease me with tall tales of police service.
I had many playmates whom I found at the Peabody School and retained 
even after my father had taken over my education. There was Ray Rock­
wood, who later went to West Point and died many years ago as an officer 
in the service. He was endowed with two aunts, whose efforts mutually 
canceled each other. One was a Christian Scientist, and the other manufac­
tured some sort of proprietary medicine.
Walter Munroe was a son of a starter of the Boston Elevated Railway, and 
Winn Willard was a carpenter’s son. Another of my playmates was the son 
of a man who later became mayor of Cambridge. The King boys, the sons 
of a Harvard instructor, were mechanically gifted and owned a little work­
ing steam engine which was my envy. The Youth’s Companion, for which 
my parents then subscribed on my behalf, offered such engines among the 
premiums in their subscription contests, but even without competing, it 
was possible to buy the premiums through their services at a reduced rate. 
My parents bought many toys for me in that way, but they never went quite 
so far as the steam engine.
In those days the papers were full of what was then an unfailing source 
of news: the persecution of the Armenians by the Turks. How we came 
to the conclusion that it was any of our business, I do not know, for we 
certainly knew little about Turkey and less about Armenians. One day the 

64 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
King boys and I decided to run away to the wars and fight on behalf of the 
oppressed. How my father got on our trail I do not know, but in about a half 
hour he found three very confused little boys gazing into a shop window 
on Massachusetts Avenue half way between Harvard Square and Central 
Square. He delivered the King boys to the mercy of their own family. To me 
he administered no punishment except that of a biting ridicule. It was years 
before my parents stopped teasing me about this occurrence, and even to 
the present day the memory of this teasing can hurt.
Most of the survivors among my childhood playmates have made good 
in the world. One of them, who was notorious among us all as a particu­
larly nasty and vicious child, is now a great tycoon of industry. Another, 
who distinguished himself by chasing a comrade through the streets with a 
hatchet, has disappointed all of us by eschewing the life of violence for the 
scarcely more satisfactory career of a petty swindler.
We had all sorts of fights in those days, from snowball fights to a serious 
gang affair in which two armies of boys met on Avon Hill Street and pelted 
one another with stones. Our parents soon broke this up. In one snowball 
fight a companion of mine, who suffered from a high degree of nearsight­
edness, incurred a detached retina and lost the sight of one eye.
I have said that I, too, was a myope, and I suppose it was this snowball 
accident as much as anything else that led my parents to punish me for 
fighting and otherwise discouraged fighting at all costs. I never would have 
made a good fighter, as the effect of any severe emotion was to paralyze 
me with such weakness of fear that I could scarcely utter a word, let alone 
strike a blow. I suppose the reason was as much physiological as psycho­
logical, as I have always gone into fits of weakness when my blood sugar 
was low.
I took a sufficient part in the sports of the children of my age. I helped to 
make snow forts for snowball battles, as well as the snow prisons in which 
we immured our captives and in which I occasionally got immured myself. 
I jumped on behind the delivery sleighs or “pungs” which traversed the 
yellow slush-covered streets of the winter Cambridge of those days. I scaled 
the back fences with the best of them, and ruined my clothes when I fell 
off. I tried to skate on a child’s doublerunner skates, but my ankles were 
weak and lax, and I never graduated to the more efficient single runners. I 
coasted down Avon Hill Street and would try to persuade my seniors and 
betters to give me a ride on their swifter double-runner sleds. In the spring I 
searched the pavements and the yards for little pebbles which I could grind 
up with spittle to make a crude sort of paint, and I would chalk the pave­
ments to make hopscotch courts on which my comrades and I could play. I 

6: Diversions of a Wunderkind 
65
walked over to North Cambridge to get comic valentines or Christmas cards 
from the stationery shops, according to the time of year, as well as cheap 
candies and the other delightful trifles of extreme youth.
I used to play a great deal with miniature electric motors. At one time I 
had the vision of making one of these, following the directions in a book 
which I had received as a Christmas present. However, the book was writ­
ten from the point of view of the boy who has a small machine shop at his 
disposal; and even if I had possessed one, I neither then nor later would 
have had the mechanical skill to make use of it.
I remember among my toys a megaphone, a kaleidoscope, and a magic 
lantern, as well as a series of magnifying glasses and simple microscopes. 
The magic lantern had a number of comic slides with it, which were quite 
as gratifying to a small boy of that day as is a Walt Disney movie to his 
present successor. We used to hold magic lantern shows in the nursery and 
to take our pay in pins.
There were times when we tried to make a little real money for our 
undertaking. Father had a series of photographs of Greek art which I under­
stood had been given to me, and I tried to sell them around the neighbor­
hood. I had a pretty task to collect them when my parents found out what 
I had done.
Christmas of 1901 was hard for me. I was just seven. It was then that 
I first discovered that Santa Claus was a conventional invention of the 
grownups. At that time I was already reading scientific books of more than 
slight difficulty, and it seemed to my parents that a child who was doing 
this should have no difficulty in discarding what to them was obviously a 
sentimental fiction. What they did not realize was the fragmentariness of 
the child’s world. The child does not wander far from home, and what may 
be only a few blocks away is to him an unknown territory in which every 
fancy is permissible. These fancies often become so strong that even when 
the child has penetrated beyond the previously unknown boundaries, the 
conviction of his imagination maintains him in accepting a geography that 
his experience has already shown him to be false.
What is true concerning the physical map is also true concerning the 
chart of his ideas. He has not yet had the opportunity to explore very far 
from the few central notions that are his by experience. In the intermedi­
ate regions, anything may be true; and what is for his elders at least an 
emotional contradiction is for him a blank which may be filled in any one 
of several ways. For the filling of much of this blank he must depend on 
the good faith of his parents. Thus the breaking of the Santa Claus myth 
discloses to him that this dependence on the good faith of his parents has 

66 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
its limitations. He may no longer accept what they have told him, but must 
measure it by his own imperfect criteria of judgment.
The family was enlarged again in the spring of that year. My sister Ber­
tha was born, and her birth nearly cost my mother’s life. Our neighbor, 
Dr. Taylor, attended my mother. He was a gray-bearded, elderly man, with 
two sons who were among my playmates. As before, Rose Duffy was the 
midwife. I was full of fancies about what birth might mean, and had a 
weird idea that if one could put a doll, say a doll made out of a medicine 
bottle, through the proper course of incantation, one could make a baby 
out of it.
This naïveté was remarkable in view of my scientific sophistication at 
the time. The various biological texts which I read between my sixth and 
my ninth years contained a great deal of material on the sexual phenomena 
of animals in general and of vertebrates in particular. I was quite aware of 
the main outlines of mitosis, of the reduction divisions of the egg and the 
spermatozoon, and of the fusion of male and female pronuclei. I had a fair 
idea of the elements of embryology and of the gastrulation of some of the 
lower invertebrates. I knew that these facts were somehow connected with 
human reproduction, but my inquiries of my parents in that direction were 
not encouraged, and I was quite aware that at some place in my line of 
thought there was a clue missing. Intellectually, I was far advanced in the 
understanding of the phenomena of sex both in plants and animals. But 
emotionally the whole matter was as indifferent to me as it can only be to a 
young child: or rather, where it was not a matter of indifference to me, the 
only emotions it excited were those of puzzlement and terror.
What made the family situation even worse at Bertha’s birth was that 
both my sister Constance and I came down with measles about the time of 
mother’s delivery. I don’t remember how we managed to take care of the 
three of us at the same time.
It was about this time that my parents tried to see if I could be brought 
into greater conformity with the habits of the other faculty children. They 
sent me to a Unitarian Sunday school after a considerable amount of pro­
test which I took out in philosophical debate with the minister after Sun­
day school. The minister was Dr. Samuel McCord Crothers, that admirable 
essayist and litterateur, who was a friend of the family for many years 
and who more than twenty years afterward officiated at the marriages 
of my sisters. Dr. Crothers was not shocked by my youthful rejection of 
religion, and tried to meet my arguments seriously. At any rate, through 
his forbearance it was not absolutely impossible for me to continue in 
Sunday school.

6: Diversions of a Wunderkind 
67
The Sunday school had a good library, and there were two books which 
I remember impressed me particularly. One was Ruskin’s King of the Golden 
River. Many years afterward, when I read his Modern Painters, I recognized 
the same sense for mountain scenery and the same strong ethical attitude 
which I already knew in his story for children. The other book was an Eng­
lish version of a French story of the seventies entitled The Adventures of a 
Young Naturalist in Mexico. It is only within the current year that I have seen 
this book again and I have renewed my impression of the rich picture it 
gives of the lushness of the tropical forests of the Mexican lowlands.
The Sunday school gave a Christmas play in which I was due to appear 
somehow or other in a minor part. The making up and dressing up embar­
rassed me exceedingly, and created a disgust for participating in amateur 
dramatics which has lasted to this day.
That summer, which we spent in a cottage in Foxboro, Cosmopolitan 
Magazine published the serial story by H. G. Wells entitled, “The First Men 
in the Moon.” My cousin Olga and I devoured it, and although I was not 
able to appreciate all the social significance of the writing, I was properly 
shocked and terrified by the brittle figure of the Grand Lunar. About the 
same time, I had been reading Jules Verne’s The Mysterious Island. These 
were the two books which introduced me to science fiction. Indeed, for 
many years I remained an aficionado of Jules Verne, and a trip to the library 
to find yet another volume of his writing was probably a greater delight 
than this generation of children can get out of the movies.
Parenthetically, for all this I am not enthusiastic over modern science 
fiction. Science fiction has been rapidly formalized and it is no longer a 
genre which offers sufficient freedom for the author who tries to follow its 
accepted canons. I have tried a little fictional writing about scientific mat­
ters, but it is entirely outside the frame of the science fiction monopoly. 
Some writers in this field have let their taste for fiction outstrip their sense 
for fact, and have allowed themselves to be used as promoters for various 
schemes of charlatans. The very originality of science fiction has become a 
cliché. Its slickness is quite different from the enthusiasm and verve with 
which Jules Verne adapted the romantic milieu of Dumas, or the sincer­
ity by which H. G. Wells made his sociological discourses palatable and 
fascinating.
Whether it was summer or winter, Father did a considerable amount 
of literary work, and I always found it very exciting to follow the succes­
sive stages of publication. The first book of his own, as contrasted with the 
Poems of Moritz Rosenfeld (which he had helped to see through the press), 
was a History of Yiddish Literature. This was a little too early for me to have 

68 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
clear memories, but I well remember his next book, the two-volume Anthol­
ogy of Russian Literature, which he edited and the component parts of which 
he in large measure translated. This was followed by a great contract with 
Dana Estes and Sons, by which my father agreed to translate all the works of 
Tolstoy for the cash sum of ten thousand dollars. This was a rather skimpy 
reward even at that time, and today it seems a ridiculously small sum to 
pay for the translation of twenty-four volumes. My father accomplished 
this task in twenty-four months. In this he was helped by a very competent 
secretary, Miss Harper, and I believe that she was paid directly by the pub­
lishers. Father’s relations with his publishers were never very smooth, and I 
think that he was justified in his general attitude of suspicion.
I soon learned that a manuscript is followed by the long banners of gal­
ley proof, and these in turn by the smooth oblongs of page proof and the 
leaded oblongs of plate proof. I learned the main signs of the proofreader 
and the general technique of proof correction. I learned that authors’ cor­
rections in galley proof are expensive, while they are exorbitant in page 
proof and practically prohibitive in plate proof. I saw Father cut up two or 
three Bibles in order to translate the Biblical quotations of Tolstoy, and I 
used to play with the discarded proof sheets and remains of these Bibles as 
if I were reading proof myself.
Although I had met my mother’s family before we moved to Avon Street, 
most of my recollections of them belong to that time. My mother’s mother 
and two of her sisters followed her to Boston at some period which I do 
not remember. My grandmother lived in a Cambridge lodging house on 
Shephard Street at the time that my sister Bertha was born; and I can still 
remember a heroically determined effort on her part to bathe me, in which 
she showed herself quite indifferent to my imminent suffocation and to the 
action of soap on my eyes.
I do not think that she had any particular quarrel with me, but she cer­
tainly did with my parents. I do not know in what manner the latter had 
offended, although it seems clear that the old quarrel between German Jew 
and Russian Jew played at least a role. At any rate, my parents accused my 
mother’s family of trying to break up their marriage, and there followed 
one of those family feuds that are not even terminated by death. Some of 
the participants in these feuds may die, but the rancor of the survivor lives 
with their memory.
I met my Grandfather Kahn only once if at all. I know his looks very well 
from his photograph, which is that of a tall, grave man with a long, gray 
beard. He was already separated from my grandmother, and lived in some 

6: Diversions of a Wunderkind 
69
sort of old people’s home in Baltimore. I remember that at some later birth­
day he sent me a gold watch for a present. He died about 1915.
My father and I spent a great deal of time in the spring of 1903 looking 
for a place to pass the summer. We made a regular circuit of the villages 
south of Boston, from Dedham to Framingham, and even along the sea­
coast around Cohasset, but we never found the right place. We asked the 
advice of all of father’s friends who lived in the outer suburbs. Finally, we 
decided to look a little farther afield in the northwest sector, and hit on a 
place called Old Mill Farm in the town of Harvard, about halfway between 
Harvard Village and Ayer Junction. We spent one summer there getting 
acquainted with the place, and decided that the next summer should see 
us engaged in modernizing the farmhouse and preparing to lead the simple 
life of a farmer and a college professor.
I do not know precisely what relation the name of the town of Har­
vard has to Harvard University, but any connection between the two places 
themselves is remote. The town of Harvard is distinguished historically for 
containing the site of the first or second water-driven grist mill built in 
inland Massachusetts. Though this mill was not on the farm we eventually 
bought, the old dam still stood near its boundaries, and the pond had been 
successively enlarged by later and later structures until the dam had come 
to stand opposite the farmhouse. Hence the place was called Old Mill Farm, 
and this is the name by which I shall refer to it in the ensuing chapters.
When Father bought Old Mill Farm and decided to live there later all the 
year round, I think there were several motives at work. One was his love of 
the country and his desire to work in the soil. Another (which I think must 
have been much less important) was the pride in the additional status of 
the landowner. Without any doubt, Father considered it essential for his 
children to have as much of their bringing up as possible in the country, 
and I believe he found my schooling problem less unsolvable than it might 
have proved in the city where the only choice would have been either a 
rather rigid public school or a rather expensive private school. I don’t think 
Father could have found the country more conducive to his literary and 
scientific work than the city, and indeed it was pretty obvious to me that 
he made a considerable sacrifice in commuting as he did between Ayer and 
Cambridge.
When we first came to Old Mill Farm in the summer of 1903, the farm­
house was a gaunt, unattractive structure, dating from the decade before 
the Civil War. The house stood gable-end to the road, and was connected 
with a large barn by the usual sequence of ells and woodsheds. Opposite 
the house was the pond, which then seemed to me almost a lake but which 

70 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
could scarcely have been more than two hundred feet wide. It had a marshy 
island in it and a little grove of trees on the right side, in which we found 
ferns and trilliums in the early summer. On the other side was the dam, 
from which two streams led across a boggy meadow and under the road 
to the extreme limits of our farm. Beside one of the streams, and nestling 
under the dam, was a shed equipped with a turbine; it had been used by 
a previous owner as a small factory for some product I cannot remember.
The land between the two streams and the road was a tangle delightful 
to a youngster. There were frogs and turtles in the streams. The little fox 
terrier who was my personal pet soon learned that I was interested in them, 
and would retrieve turtles for me between his jaws. The tangle of weeds in 
the half-marshy triangle of land was rich in flowers interesting to the child, 
such as touch-me-not, joe-pye weed, turtle mouth, and spiraea. Down from 
the stone embankment which carried the road hung festoons of the vine of 
the wild grape. The meadows were full of blue, yellow, and white violets, of 
wild iris, and of bluets and sweet grass after their season. In a more remote 
pasture there grew the two gentians, fringed and closed, as well as both the 
pink and the white spiraea and an occasional bush of rhodora.
All these were delightful to me. Not less so were the willows which 
lined the pond, together with an old stump grown up with withies, which 
formed our playhouse. There was a nearby sandpile, where we pitched a 
tent made of old rugs and piano boxes. By the sandpile were needle-covered 
banks under a spreading pine tree, and there we could burrow and make 
little ovens in which we baked potatoes. The sandpile was the washed-out 
part of an old road which had led past our house before the present one 
had been located, and down which Lafayette is said to have ridden on his 
great tour about the United States, when he came back as the guest of the 
country. A trail from the sandpile led down through a wet wood of alders 
to the sandy shore of the lake, where my sister and I used to bathe among 
tadpoles, leeches, and tiny frogs, before we had learned to swim enough to 
be trusted off a shelving beach. Later on, when we were older, our favorite 
bathing place was a pool just above the great dam, where the main stream 
poured over in a waterfall, and I could just stand up on tiptoe with my nose 
out of the water.
There was a boat on the pond, and we used to row up past the ruins 
of the seventeenth-century dam well into the inlet of the pond. With its 
water lilies, yellow and white, its pickerel weed, its bladderwort, and the 
mysteries of its turtles, its fish, and its other submerged inhabitants, the 
pond was always a delightful place for us. So was the old henhouse, with its 
chicken-wire supported on live willow posts which had struck root and had 

6: Diversions of a Wunderkind 
71
grown into young trees. So was the barn with its hay loft, where one could 
hide and slide and jump to one’s heart’s content. So were the neighbor­
ing farmhouses, at whose back doors we always stopped for a glass of cold 
water and a pleasant word with the farmer’s wife. We learned to avoid the 
front door, with the untrodden grass before it; for it led to the forbidden 
regions of the front parlor, open only for weddings and funerals, with its 
reed organ, its stiff haircloth furniture, its tinted family photographs, and 
its whatnot, laden with the particular treasure of the house and with the 
family album.
A little farther afield—about a mile and a half—lay the Shaker village. 
This was a particular treasure; a Protestant monastery, where the brothers 
and sisters of a sect doomed to perpetual celibacy sat on opposite sides 
of the aisle of their little chapel, dressed in an extreme version of the tra­
ditionally austere Quaker costume. I remember venerable Sister Elizabeth, 
and Sister Anne as well, who retained the worldly coquetry of wearing false 
hair under her coal-scuttle straw bonnet. One or the other would preside 
at the little shop in their great empty main building. They sold souvenirs 
and simples, as well as sugared orange peel and enormous disks of sugar 
flavored with peppermint and wintergreen. These were ridiculously inex­
pensive, and were the one sort of sweet which our parents allowed us to eat 
as far as our appetites might go.
The colony must have been about a century old and had an atmosphere 
of antiquity and permanence about it which was far more European than 
American. A celibate sect is always likely to find recruitment very difficult, 
and even though the Shakers would adopt children in the hope that they 
would grow up in their austere faith, something usually happened dur­
ing adolescence or immediately after, and the youngsters almost always 
abjured the righteous faith of their foster parents to go the way of Satan 
and the flesh. Thus the great communal workshops and the two-story stone 
barns stood empty, and the fields went half tilled, while the outlying com­
munity houses under their spreading fir trees became orphanages or board­
inghouses. The cemetery was a waste of weeds and brambles battening on 
the bones below, and the landing platforms which Shaker modesty had 
ordained to be built before each house, in order that the women mounting 
into the carriages should not display their feet in an unseemly and indeco­
rous manner, were rotting away.
For some years Constance and I had been continually at odds with each 
other, and this seemed to my inexperienced parents a sign of original sin. 
I call them inexperienced because they were just beginning to realize the 
conflicts implicit in the growing up of brother and sister. Now, however, I 

72 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
was eight and Constance was four, and there began to be a possibility of our 
being comrades. I know that we explored the thirty-acre farm together, and 
that for the first time I began to see her as an individual.
Although my new country life had its delights, the breaking of my 
acquaintance with children of my own age was a strong countervailing dis­
advantage. I found, indeed, a group of children from Ayer and from neigh­
boring farms with whom I could play. But the frequency of my play was 
cut down by our relative isolation. Indeed, I never again fully caught up 
with the richness of companionship which seemed to me on retrospect to 
belong to our years on Avon Street. I know very well that the. disadvantages 
of being too much alone and isolated were not easy to overcome in view of 
the financial struggles of the family at that time, but the effects were seri­
ous and long-lasting. When I left Cambridge for Harvard, I broke up the 
acquaintanceships of my early childhood, and although I made new ones 
in Ayer and later in Medford, I was never again to feel the continuity of so 
rich an environment of childhood friendships.

7  A Child among Adolescents
Ayer High School, 1903–1906
Ex-Prodigy: 
My 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
7: 
A 
Child 
among 
Adolescents
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
Father intended to live on the farm in Harvard and commute into Cam­
bridge each day. He was a very busy man, for, as I said, he had undertaken 
to translate twenty-four volumes of Tolstoy into English in a period of two 
years. This was a tremendous task to add to his Harvard teaching and the 
running of the farm. The amount of time he could devote to my education 
was limited, so he began looking around for a school to which he could 
send me. Even so, he intended to go over my lessons with me each night. 
I was by this time too far along in my studies to profit by any ordinary 
grade school, and the only solution seemed to be to send me to some one 
of the high schools in the neighborhood, and to let me find my own level. 
The Ayer high school was willing to try this unorthodox experiment. Ayer 
suited my father perfectly, as it was the nearest station on the main railroad 
to Boston and he had to drive there every morning to take the Cambridge 
train, leaving his horse and carriage in an Ayer livery stable till he should 
return in the evening.
I entered the Ayer high school in the fall of 1903 at the age of nine as a 
special student. We left the problem of my eventual classification for the 
future to decide. It soon became clear that the greater part of my work 
belonged to the third year of high school, so when the year was over I was 
transferred to the senior class to be graduated in June, 1906.
The brains and conscience of the school were Miss Laura Leavitt, who 
has just retired after fifty years of service. She was gentle but firm, and an 
excellent classicist, with a feeling for Latin which went far beyond the per­
functory requirements of the average high school. I read Caesar and Cicero 
with her my first year, and Virgil my second. I also studied algebra and 
geometry, but these courses were largely review for me. I studied English 
literature and German from teachers who have left no particular impres­
sion on me. They were probably young women filling in their time between 
graduation from college and matrimony.

74 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
Although I could recite my lessons as well as most of the older pupils, 
and although my sight translations from the Latin were reasonably accept­
able, I was socially an undeveloped child. I had not attended school since 
I had gone to the Peabody School in Cambridge at the age of eight, and I 
had never attended school regularly. Now at the Ayer high school the seats 
were much too big for me and my adolescent fellow students seemed to 
me already full adults. I know that Miss Leavitt tried to relieve me from the 
alarm of being in this unfamiliar place among unfamiliar figures, and on 
one occasion during my first few months at school, she took me on her lap 
during a recitation of the class. This kind act did not lead to any outburst of 
laughter or ridicule by the class, who seemed to consider me as the equiva­
lent of their kid brothers. It was quite natural for a friendly teacher to take 
such a child on her lap when he visited the high school.
Of course, such treatment was in the long run incompatible with the 
proper discipline of the school, and before long I had learned the elements 
of schoolroom behavior. The discrepancy between my age and that of my 
classmates continued to protect me from their ridicule. I think this would 
have been less true had I been only four years younger than they rather 
than seven. They viewed me socially as an eccentric child, not an underage 
adolescent. Hence, it was fortunate that the school shared a building with 
what would now be called a junior high school, where I was able to find 
some playmates among eleven and twelve-year-olds, some of whom were 
the younger brothers of my classmates.
My training and social contacts at high school were only the obverse of 
the coin. The reverse was my continuing recitation to my father at home. 
My routine when I was in high school scarcely differed from that which had 
obtained when he was my full teacher. Whatever the school subject was, I 
had to recite it before him. He was busy with his translation of Tolstoy and 
could scarcely devote full attention to me even during my recitation hours. 
Thus I would come into the room and sit down before a father dashing off 
translations on the typewriter—an old Blickensderfer with an interchange­
able type wheel that permitted my father to write in many languages—or 
immersed in the correction of endless ribbons of galley proof. I would recite 
my lessons to him with scarcely a sign that he was listening to me. And 
in fact he was listening with only half an ear. But half an ear was fully 
adequate to catch any mistake of mine, and there were always mistakes. My 
father had reproved me for these when I was a boy of seven or eight, and 
going to high school made no difference in the matter whatever. Although 
any success generally led at most to a perfunctory half-unconscious word 
of praise such as “All right,” or “Very good, you can go and play now,” 

7: A Child among Adolescents 
75
failure was punished, if not by blows, by words that were not very far 
from blows.
When I was dismissed from my responsibility with my father, I often 
spent the afternoon with Frank Brown. He was a boy of my age, the son of 
the local druggist and the nephew of Miss Leavitt, and he became a lifelong 
friend. We lived only two miles apart, so that it was not difficult for me to 
play with him after school or to walk out to see him on Saturdays and Sun­
days. His family looked favorably upon our acquaintanceship, and I have 
always considered them among my dearest friends.
Frank and I used to punt our boat from the pond up by the side of the 
old seventeenth-century mill dam into the brook and work it over stones 
and shallows until we came into a dark tunnel in the bushes, which led in a 
mile or two to a back road to Harvard Center. We would imagine all sorts of 
weird possibilities in an old slough in the woods. We poked sticks into it to 
see the bubbles of marsh gas rise and burst. We captured frogs and tadpoles 
in the pond and tried to make pets of these unappreciative and refractory 
animals.
Once I burned the skin off the back of Frank’s hand when we tried to 
make firecrackers out of material snitched from his father’s drugstore. On 
another occasion we loaded up a tire pump with water and lay in wait on 
the piazza to spray one of the early motorcars of that remote epoch. We 
assembled old cartons and carriage wheels into a ramshackle toy train and 
played railway man. And sometimes we went up to the attic, where we 
spent part of our time reading Treasure Island or Black Beauty and part of our 
time assembling bits of electrical apparatus to make an electrical bell. We 
once assembled something we conceived to be a wireless. We were boys as 
boys always have been and as boys will always be. Certainly I was neither 
particularly oppressed nor particularly impressed by my unusual school sta­
tus at this age.
On one day every two weeks the high school had a debate and an ora­
torical contest in which the children recited standard passages from a com­
pilation made for the purpose. Toward the middle of the vacation between 
my two years, I decided to write a philosophical paper which I could use for 
future occasions of this sort. I recited it the next winter, but not as an active 
participant in the competition. It was called the Theory of Ignorance, and was 
a philosophical demonstration of the incompleteness of all knowledge. Of 
course, the paper was unsuited for the purpose and beyond my age. But my 
father liked it, and as a reward for this paper he took a long trolley ride with 
me to spend a few days at Greenacre, Maine, near Portsmouth, New Hamp­
shire, among the mists of the Piscataqua River. Greenacre was a colony of 

76 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
Bahaists, receptive to all forms of oriental religiosity. It represented a trend 
which now belongs rather to Los Angeles than to New England. I wonder 
what some of the good New England Bahaists must have thought when 
they found that Bahaism was a Sufiist variant of Islam.
Old Mill Farm was a real working farm, with cows, horses, and all the rest of 
it, under the supervision of a hired man and his wife. My personal posses­
sions among the livestock of the farm were a goat and my special crony, my 
shepherd dog, Rex. Rex stayed with us until 1911 when my parents could 
no longer tolerate his habit of chasing automobiles, and they decided that 
he had better be put away. Though it may have been necessary, I could 
scarcely bring myself to consider it as anything but an act of treason to 
an old friend. The goat was bought by my parents as a present to me, to 
pull a little carriage which they had the hired man make. The carriage was 
good fun as a toy but rather unsatisfactory as a means of transportation. 
Rex and the goat seemed to have misunderstandings about a good many 
issues. The goat’s horns and hard head were a perfectly adequate match for 
Rex’s teeth.
The hardest time of the year was the late winter and early spring. Coun­
try roads were not paved at the time, and the carts and carriages made them 
into a mass of ruts which froze into brutally impassable ridges. A neighbor 
about a half mile away used to invite me to come over in this miserable, 
dreary time and play bezique with him and his wife. I had a great deal of 
time alone in the house to spend reading in father’s library. I was particu­
larly fascinated by Isaac Taylor’s book on the alphabet, which I knew nearly 
from cover to cover.
But summer was different. Besides rowing and swimming in the pond, 
a little desultory botanizing, and mushroom-hunting trips with my father, 
I used to play with Homer and Tyler Rogers, two boys about my age who 
lived on a neighboring farm. We almost blew ourselves up by trying to 
make an internal combustion engine out of a tin fly spray, and we nearly 
shocked ourselves to death in amateur radio experiments, using apparatus 
which my father bought for me and which I was never able to put to any 
really effective use.
Father encouraged me to raise a garden, although he was not very enthu­
siastic over my horticultural proficiency. I dragged one load of beans after 
me in a boy’s express wagon and managed to sell it to Mr. Donlan, the Ayer 
grocer. Donlan, who combined his grocery business with an agency of a 
steamship company, was a particular crony of my father’s and they used to 
talk Gaelic together. To keep up with Mr. Donlan’s Gaelic, Father borrowed 

7: A Child among Adolescents 
77
a few books of Irish fairy stories from the Harvard library. He used to trans­
late them to me as I lay in bed, and I was astonished at the grotesqueness 
and the formlessness of the tales, so different from the tales of Grimm to 
which I had been accustomed.
Late in the winter my father had a visit from Professor Milyukoff, a 
member of the Russian Duma (or limited parliament), an authority on 
political institutions and later a cabinet member under the ill-fated Keren­
sky regime. Milyukoff was a tall, genial, bearded Russian, and since he came 
about Christmas time, he brought my sister and me tufted children’s snow­
shoes, with which we could traverse the white countryside as with seven-
league boots. My parents had already their own snowshoes, and found that 
the regions that were too swampy to cross at other seasons were now as 
accessible as the open highway.
Milyukoff was writing a book about American political institutions, and 
Father guided him about the local points of interest in political and social 
history. Our neighbor Farmer Brown drove us around in his sleigh to the 
Shaker villages, to the estate of a neighboring single-taxer, and to the cot­
tage of Fruitlands, where the Alcotts had lived after the breakdown of the 
Brook Farm project. Father explained everything to Milyukoff—or at least 
I thought he did, but I could not understand the Russian in which they 
spoke.
In the spring of 1906 when I was eleven years old, my brother Fritz was 
born. He was always a frail child, and I shall have more to say later con­
cerning the problems of his development and education. My sister Bertha 
was seven years younger than I, but still near enough to share with me a 
considerable period of growth and development. But Fritz came at a time 
when I was already approaching adolescence; when he himself had come to 
adolescence I was already a young adult busy with the problems of making 
a career and of finding my social place in the world of ideas, so we could 
never be companions.
As I have said, I was put into the senior class at the beginning of my second 
year at the Ayer high school. I was almost eleven and full of rebellion. I 
had a wild idea (which never came to any sort of expression, even among 
my closest companions) of forming some sort of organization among 
children of my age to resist the authority of their elders. Then I had fits of 
conscience, and wondered if I had not committed a crime equivalent to 
treason by even contemplating such a thing. I consoled myself by think­
ing that even if I had, I was too young to be subject to serious punishment 
for it.

78 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
Toward the end of the high school spring term, I used to eat lunch 
with some of my schoolmates and teachers in a scrubby second-growth 
wild cherry grove near the school building. The ground was carpeted with 
anemones and violets, and there was an occasional lady’s-slipper. The warm 
spring sun, shining through the branches which were as yet only covered 
with a green fuzz of foliage, summoned to a new life and activity.
There, in my last year of high school and at the age of eleven, I fell in 
love with a girl who played the piano at our school concerts. She was about 
fifteen, the freckled daughter of a railroad man. Futile as it was, it was real 
love, and not the almost sexless affection of undeveloped children. She was 
developed beyond her years. I was only eleven, but I was not even physi­
cally the typical eleven-year-old. My make-up was a mosaic of elements as 
young as eight and at least as old as fourteen. This calf love was quite as 
ridiculous to me as it must have seemed to others, and I was ashamed of it. 
I tried to show off in what was actually the least effective way open to me, 
and to compose a piece of music for her—I, the least musical of all boys. 
Like so many of these primitive attempts at composition, it sounded like 
nothing so much as the black keys of the piano struck in succession.
Of course, nothing could come of this friendship, not even an “affair.” 
Besides the fact that I was a child in age, I was too alarmed at the new and 
half-understood powers within me to break with my infancy and indulge 
in unpermitted pleasures. My parents’ inquiries of me and of other people 
showed them that this girl was not leading my body to destruction and my 
soul to perdition—though there had never been the slightest danger. The 
experience marked the end of carefree childhood. Little as I wished to grow 
up, I found myself rushing toward maturity, with its unknown duties and 
possibilities.
Calf love is the experience of every normal boy. But after a couple of 
years the boy finds himself associated with girls about his own age with 
whom he learns to be at home. And by the time he is in college, he is 
already sufficiently hopeful of eventual success to court girls seriously with 
a view to marriage not to be too long delayed. My calf love, however, was 
especially early, and when I entered my twenties I was still not nearly out of 
the woods, nor was I able to think of marriage.
The end of the school year was occupied with the graduation parties of 
my classmates who were then seventeen and eighteen years old. Even when 
I was the nominal host, and the guests arrived at Old Mill Farm in brakes 
rented from the Shakers, I was rather an outsider at the feast. I sat on one 
side of the room in the kneehole of the desk and watched the dancing as a 
ritual in which I had no part.

7: A Child among Adolescents 
79
After the round of festivities and the graduation ceremonies, I passed the 
summer on Old Mill Farm with my St. Nicholas Magazine and my Ayer play­
mates and occasional visits to the farm of Homer and Tyler Rogers. I had 
tried several times to get a contribution accepted in the St. Nicholas League, 
that cradle of young artists, poets, and novelists, but the best I could make 
was honorable mention, and I rated that only once. I had to content myself 
with purchasable pleasures. I got hold of a cheap Brownie camera about this 
time; and I hoped to buy an air rifle, but because my parents frowned on 
this, the best I could get was a popgun with a cork.
I owe a great deal to my Ayer friends. I was given a chance to go through 
some of the gawkiest stages of growing up in an atmosphere of sympa­
thy and understanding. In a larger school it might have been much harder 
to come by this understanding. My individuality and my privacy were 
respected by my teachers, my playmates, and my older schoolmates. I was 
treated with particular affection and understanding by Miss Leavitt. I had a 
chance to see the democracy of my country at its best, in the form in which 
it is embodied in the small New England town. I was prepared and ripened 
for the outer world, and for my college experiences.
Since leaving high school, I have visited Ayer several times although 
with long intervals between visits. I have seen the town burst from its status 
as a railway junction into that of a military cantonment, and I have seen 
the greater part of its lines of railway go away. I have seen the Second World 
War inflate the village once more, and I suppose that I shall see it sink 
again into relative unimportance. Yet, through all these vicissitudes, there 
has been a definite progress toward unity and serenity on the part of the 
families I have known. They are people living in a small town, but they are 
emphatically not small-town people. They are well read in an age of little 
reading. And they know the theater well, although the nearest theater is 
thirty-five miles away. Two generations have risen to maturity since I left 
the place, growing up in an atmosphere of love and of deference. I have the 
impression that my friends in this small industrial town represent a sort of 
stability without snobbishness which is universal rather than provincial, 
and that the structure of their society compares well with the best that a 
similar place in Europe would have to offer. When I go back among them it 
is expected of me, and rightly expected of me, that I revert in some measure 
to my status as a boy among the elders of the family. And I do so gratefully, 
with a sense of roots and security which is beyond price for me.


8  College Man in Short Trousers
September, 1906–June, 1909
Ex-Prodigy: 
My 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
8: 
College 
Man 
in 
Short 
Trousers
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
With my high school days over, my father had decided to send me to Tufts 
College rather than to risk the strain of the Harvard entrance examinations 
and the inordinate publicity which could have been caused by sending an 
eleven-year-old boy to Harvard. Tufts was an excellent small college, so near 
to Harvard as to be overshadowed by it in the public eye. By virtue of that 
very fact, it shared in the intellectual advantages of the Boston metropolis. 
It was possible for us to live near Tufts on Medford Hillside, and for Father 
to take the trolley from there every day to his Harvard work.
I was admitted to Tufts on the basis of my high school record and a 
few easy examinations, which in my case were mostly oral. We bought 
a nearly finished house on the Hillside from the contractor builder, who 
lived next door to us, and had him complete it in accordance with our 
requirements.
We came down from the Old Mill Farm a little early to get settled in our 
new house and to familiarize ourselves with the college. I read the college 
catalog assiduously, and was then more familiar with the details of Tufts 
College than at any time later.
I began to get acquainted with the children of the neighborhood. In my 
early reading I had learned something about hypnotism and decided to try 
it out myself. I succeeded in nothing, except in offending and terrifying 
the parents of my playmates. I played a good deal with children of my own 
age, but without any great community of interest. I found the clerk at the 
corner drugstore an interesting young medical student, who was prepared 
to discuss my scientific reading with me and who seemed to be acquainted 
with the whole of the writings of Herbert Spencer. I have since found Her­
bert Spencer to be one of the most colossal bores of the nineteenth century, 
but at that time I held him in esteem.
My duties began with the beginning of term. I was deeply impressed by 
the age and dignity of my professors, and I find it hard to be aware that I 

82 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
am now much older than most of them were then. I did not find it easy to 
make the transition between the special privileges of a child, which I had 
received in high school, and the more dignified relation I was now to have 
with these older men.
I started to study Greek under a rather remarkable professor by the name 
of Wade. His family had come from the neighborhood of Tufts College; and 
as a boy, while stealing a ride on a Boston-and-Maine freight car, he had 
fallen off and lost a leg. He must always have been shy, and this accident 
had made him a lonely man; but it had not seemed to interfere greatly 
with his love for European and Near Eastern travel. He would spend every 
summer abroad, and he seemed to know every relic of the classical world, 
whether it was a statue or a local tradition, from the Pillars of Hercules to 
Mesopotamia. He had a true poetic sympathy with the Greek classics as well 
as a gift of imparting this sympathy to others. His lantern lectures on Greek 
art were a delight to me. My father was fond of him, and he used to come 
over to our house. I would play on the floor and listen with fascination to 
the wide-ranging conversation between the two men. If anything could 
have made a classicist of me, it was these experiences.
I had not yet reached the proper stage of social maturity for my English 
courses. Moreover, the mere mechanics of writing were a serious hurdle to 
take. My mechanical clumsiness in writing tended to make me omit any 
word that I could eliminate, and to force me into a great crabbedness of 
style.
I was already beyond the normal freshman work in mathematics. There 
was no course which exactly fitted my requirements, so Professor Ransom 
took me on in a reading course on the Theory of Equations. Professor Ran­
som has only just retired from Tufts College after a half-century of service. 
He was a young man when I studied with him, and it stands to reason 
that he cannot be young now; but in the course of the years I have seen 
very little change in his vigorous, alert walk, in the forward poise of his 
bearded chin, and in his enthusiasms and interests. He was a zealot, but a 
self-effacing zealot. The course was really over my head, particularly in the 
parts concerning Galois’ theory, but with a great deal of help from Professor 
Ransom I was able to get through. I had started my mathematics at the hard 
end. Never again at Tufts did I have a mathematics course that demanded 
so much of me.
I studied German under Professor Fay, known as “Tard” Fay from his 
lateness to class. He was a thoroughly cultured gentleman with a strong 
sense of literary values in French and German; and in addition, he was a 
great mountain climber. I believe that a mountain in the Canadian Rockies 

8: College Man in Short Trousers 
83
bears his name. Naturally, this seemed very romantic to me. Although we 
did a little bit of easy prose reading in German, the part of the course that 
attracted me the most was a collection of German lyrics. Here Professor 
Fay’s efforts were more than supplemented by the emotion with which my 
father would recite to me the many German poems which he knew by 
heart, and by the work of memorization which was both part of my class 
duties and which in its way was very welcome to me. My physics classes 
consisted as usual of recitations and some lectures and demonstrations. It 
took me some time to develop a proper physical sense to enable me to 
handle my exercises correctly, but I was always delighted in the demonstra­
tions. I was equally delighted in my work in the chemical laboratory where, 
in my last year, I studied organic chemistry at probably the greatest cost in 
apparatus per experiment ever run up by any Tufts undergraduate.
I had a friend and neighbor, Eliot Quincy Adams, who was an under­
graduate at M.I.T. during the time I was an undergraduate at Tufts. He 
introduced me to the possibility of representing four-dimensional figures 
on the plane or in three-space, and to the study of the four-dimensional 
regular figures. On one occasion we tried to make a water-dripping electri­
cal machine from old tin cans.
I had several other extracurricular adventures in physics and engineer­
ing, more especially in the study of electricity. I shared electrical experi­
ments with a Medford neighbor. We used to generate electricity by turning 
a hand-run dynamo for the making of colloidal gold and colloidal silver. 
Whether we actually made these substances I cannot remember, but we 
thought we did. We also made attempts to realize in practice two physical 
ideas of mine. One of them was an electromagnetic coherer for radio mes­
sages different from the electrostatic coherer of Branly. It depended on the 
effect of a magnetic field independently of its direction, in compressing a 
mass of iron filings and powdered carbon, and thus in changing its resis­
tance. There were times when we thought we had obtained a positive effect, 
but we were not certain whether it was due to this magnetic cohesion or to 
something quite different. Nevertheless, the idea was sound and if the day 
of all such devices had not passed with the invention of the vacuum tube, 
I should be interested to undertake these experiments over again from the 
beginning.
The other piece of apparatus we tried out was an electrostatic trans­
former. It depended on the fact that the energy or charge of a condenser is 
carried as a dielectric strain. The trick was to charge a rotating glass disk or 
series of disks through electrodes arranged in parallel and to discharge them 
through electrodes arranged in series. It differed from the electromagnetic 

84 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
transformer in acting on direct currents, and also in the fact that it was 
essential to the apparatus that the disks should be revolved. We broke an 
indefinite number of panes of glass in trying to make the machine, and we 
never quite got it to work. Unbeknown to us, the idea was already in the 
literature and had been there for a long time. In fact, I have seen a very 
similar piece of apparatus within the last two years in the laboratories of the 
School of Engineering of the University of Mexico. It functioned very well. 
Two successive stages of this machine multiplied the potential by several 
thousand.
I had an early interest in wireless. I believe that on rare occasions I was 
able to get a few successive dots and dashes of code signal from the wireless 
apparatus which I had on my study desk. I was able neither to learn code 
nor to distinguish myself as a practical constructor of radio sets.
I was socially dependent far more on those of about my age than on the 
college students with whom I was to study. I was a child of eleven when 
I entered and was in short trousers at that. My life was sharply divided 
between the sphere of the student and that of the child.
I was not so much a mixture of child and man as wholly a child for 
purposes of companionship and nearly completely a man for purposes of 
study. Both my playmates and the college students were aware of this. My 
playmates accepted me as a child with them, although I might have been 
a slightly incomprehensible child, while my fellow students were willing 
to allow me to participate in their bull sessions if I wasn’t too loud and too 
insistent. I was homesick for the earlier days when I had had a wealth of 
playmates in Cambridge.
While I was at Tufts, I continued to spend summers on Old Mill Farm 
where I kept up my contacts with my Ayer friends, and where an occasional 
Tufts fellow student would come up to visit us. All summers were alike, with 
the same mushroom-hunting trips, the same general botanizing, the same 
tramps, and the same swimming in the pond. With my increasing maturity, 
I came to be taken in as a part of the family on those occasions when we 
had visits from my parents’ friends.
In term time I tried to renew my acquaintance with my old friends of 
Avon Street. These attempts at renewing the past were not uniformly suc­
cessful, and finally ceased altogether. Medford Hillside was too far from 
Cambridge to make it easy for me to visit my friends except on week ends. 
In addition, with my own isolation from Avon Street, I had become more 
exacting and jealous. What is more, my Avon Street comrades were growing 
in divergent directions. The King boys were showing, indeed, an increas­
ing interest in science. While I later came to see a good deal of the King 

8: College Man in Short Trousers 
85
boys again and to play with them in a desultory fashion in their basement 
laboratory, I saw very little more of many other Cambridge acquaintances.
I have already had something to say about my taste in scientific reading. 
My nonscientific reading was omnivorous. I made free use of the resources 
of the various public libraries to which I had access, and I spent a great deal 
of time in the Children’s Room at the Boston Public Library.
That I loved the writings of Jules Verne I have said already, and for 
adventure I alternated them with Cooper and Mayne Reid. Later, when I 
came to years of greater discretion and was able to stand a stronger literary 
diet, Hugo and Dumas were added to my repertory. Dumas in particular was 
a writer whom I could not bear to put down, and I have spent many hours 
unaware of the world about me, immersed in the adventures of D’Artagnan 
or the Count of Monte Cristo.
Naturally I read many of the children’s books which the public library 
had hoarded from an older generation. Louisa Alcott was pleasant enough, 
but I was a young male snob, and I considered that it was mostly for girls. 
Horatio Alger combined a superficial appearance of prudence and morality 
with a crassness of standards of success which was very distasteful to me. I 
even ventured on a course of reading dime novels, but found them pretty 
thin. My favorite author among the American boys’ writers in the narrower 
sense was J. Trowbridge, even though his tales of New England and upper 
New York State boyhood do not impress me quite as much as they once 
did. On the other hand, I think his three Civil War novels, Cudjo’s Cave, The 
Drummer Boy, and Three Scouts, represent as high a level as can be achieved 
in boys’ war stories.
I used to buy the old Strand Magazine at the newsstands. This was an 
English periodical which did very well in the United States for many years. 
It contained some of the Sherlock Holmes stories, some excellent children’s 
tales by Evelyn Nesbit, and a few of A. E. W. Mason’s excellent detective sto­
ries. It was better written than the majority of American periodicals at the 
time, and introduced me to many new authors and renewed in my mind 
much of the quaint, grim aspect of London.
I was not an indoor boy even in the winter. The road that passed by 
the Tufts College Reservoir offered a great opportunity for coasting. I also 
enjoyed the crisp, bitter air of winter as I drew it into my lungs on my 
jaunts with a friend on his newspaper route; and there was a thrill in rush­
ing from building to building on the open spaces of College Hill even in the 
intense and numbing cold.
My father took a certain glibness of vocabulary of philosophy on my 
part as indicating that it was my true intellectual field and he encouraged 

86 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
me in it. Therefore in my second year at Tufts, I took several courses in 
philosophy and psychology under Professor Cushman. He was rather an 
amateur in philosophy.
The two philosophers who influenced me most in my reading were Spi­
noza and Leibnitz. The pantheism of Spinoza and the pseudomathematical 
language of his ethics mask the fact that his is one of the greatest religious 
books of history; and if it is read consecutively instead of broken up into 
axioms and theorems, it represents a magnificent exaltation of style and an 
exertion of human dignity as well as of the dignity of the universe. As for 
Leibnitz, I have never been able to reconcile my admiration for him as the 
last great universal genius of philosophy with my contempt for him as a 
courtier, a placeseeker, and a snob.
The rather dilute material of my courses in philosophy and psychology 
showed up poorly in comparison with the outside reading and in particular 
with the great books of Professor William James, which I devoured almost as 
much as literary tidbits as for their serious content. I learned that James was 
one of the heroes of my father, and it was not long before I had a chance to 
visit him in his own house. I do not recall the visit too distinctly, but I have 
the impression of an amiable, elderly, bearded man who was kind to me 
in my confusion, and who later invited me to sit in on his Lowell lectures 
on pragmatism. I attended them and was delighted when Professor James 
presented my father with a copy of the book in which he embodied this 
series of lectures. I learned later that the book was really intended for me, 
and that neither James nor my father wished to raise my conceit by having 
him make the gift directly.
I do not have the impression that James was at his best in pragmatism. In 
the more concrete material of psychology, his insight showed itself in every 
paragraph; but pure logic was never his strongest point. It is one of the cli­
chés in American intellectual history that while Henry James wrote novels 
in the style of a philosopher, his brother William James wrote philosophy 
in the style of a novelist. There was more than the style of the novelist in 
William James, and perhaps less of the philosopher than one might have 
thought, for his ability to evoke the concrete was to my mind many times 
greater than his ability to organize it in a cogent logical form.
Also during my second year at Tufts, I found the biology museum and 
laboratory a place of fascination. The custodian of the live animal house, 
who was janitor as well, became one of my particular cronies. These non­
commissioned officers of science, without whom no laboratory could ever 
function, are a fascinating group of people, and particularly attract the 
imagination of a young boy with ambition to go into science. I thought 

8: College Man in Short Trousers 
87
that I would take a fling at a little biological work. I had already gone with 
Professor Lambert and a group of students on several spring biological 
excursions to the Middlesex Falls and elsewhere and watched them collect 
frog spawn, algae, and other objects of biological interest.
I had long shown an interest in biological matters, and my father wished 
to find out whether it would be worth my while to take up biology for my 
specialty in my further studies. We took a train trip together to Wood’s 
Hole, where Professor Parker of the Harvard Biology Department allowed 
me to try my hand in dissecting some dogfish. All that I remember is 
that my dissections were not particularly brilliant and that in a few days 
a notice appeared on the dock where I was working saying: “No fish cut 
up here.”
In my last year I decided to have a serious try in biology. I took Kingsley’s 
course on the comparative anatomy of vertebrates. Kingsley, by the way, 
was the author of the Natural History which had so intrigued me about my 
eighth year. He was a small, birdlike, alert man, and the most inspiring sci­
entist whom I met in my undergraduate days. I had no trouble whatsoever 
with the class work, for I had always had a good sense of the arrangement 
of things; but my dissection was too fast and too sloppy. Kingsley saw to 
it that I had enough work to do, and he gave me a large number of reptil­
ian, amphibian, and mammalian skulls to learn in order to see whether I 
could discover the secret of their homology. Even here I worked too fast 
and too messily. I used to spend a great deal of time in the library of the 
laboratory where I would read such books as Bateson’s Material for the Study 
of Variation.
Now biological study may have a morbid attraction for a young student. 
His legitimate curiosity is mixed with a prurient interest in the painful and 
the disgusting. I was aware of this confusion in my own motives. I have 
said that there were passages in my books, scientific treatises and fairy tales 
alike, which I turned over quickly to avoid but which I would seize on now 
and then with grim pleasure. The humanitarian tracts about antivivisection 
and vegetarianism which cluttered up our study table increased my confu­
sion by their exaggeration. In this confusion, I found myself in more than 
one doubtful situation.
The most serious experience of this confusion occurred in my last year at 
Tufts. Several of us had been in the habit of doing our dissection of the cat 
with the aid of a human anatomy—I forget now whether it was Quain’s or 
Gray’s. This was a highly desirable practice inasmuch as the anatomy of the 
cat and of man, though closely parallel, are not literally identical, and so 
the very differences put us on our mettle and made us better observers. Now 

88 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
some of these human anatomies contain interesting observations concern­
ing the ligature of arteries and the new anastomoses which are established 
to set the circulation up again. Two or three of us were particularly inter­
ested in these passages. The older boys were naturally much more mature 
than I was, but I am afraid that I must admit that I was the ringleader in 
the affair. Through the complacency of the janitor we obtained a guinea 
pig and ligated one of the femoral arteries. I do not remember whether 
we used anesthetic or not, although it is my faint impression that we did 
after a fashion, and that the animal got a whiff of ether. The surgery was 
botched, as we had not properly separated the artery from the accom­
panying vein and nerve, and the animal died. When Professor Kingsley 
found out about our misadventure, he was very indignant as the vivisec­
tion was undoubtedly a criminal undertaking and might very well have 
forfeited important privileges of the laboratory. Although I was not effec­
tively punished from outside, I was humiliated and deeply disturbed. It was 
very clear to me that I could give to myself no account of my motives that 
would stand inspection before the court of my own conscience. I tried to 
bury the act in a premature obliviscence which, of course, drove it further 
into my consciousness. My feeling of guilt about this episode led me to 
greater tension.
In spite of this interest in biology, it was in mathematics that I was grad­
uated. I had studied mathematics every year in college, largely under Dean 
Wren whose point of view was more nearly that of the engineer than that 
of Professor Ransom, who had taught me in my freshman year. I found 
the courses on calculus and differential equations quite easy, and I used to 
discuss them with my father who was thoroughly oriented in the ordinary 
college mathematics. For my routine of double recitation had not changed 
so far as my mathematical and cultural courses were concerned. In these 
my father remained my complete master, and there was not the slightest 
slackening in his stream of invective.
I was graduated in the spring of 1909, having completed my academic 
course in three years. This does not represent quite as much of a triumph 
as it seems, for I had fewer distractions than other boys. Only the child can 
devote his whole life to uninterrupted study.
I decided to go to the Harvard Graduate School the next year to continue 
my work in zoology. This was primarily my decision but Father was rather 
unwilling to concur in it. He had thought it might be possible for me to 
go to medical school, but Professor Walter B. Cannon advised him strongly 
against it, saying that my youth would be an even greater handicap there 
than elsewhere.

8: College Man in Short Trousers 
89
Since I was no longer to be at Tufts, my father planned to move into 
Cambridge for the next year. This meant the buying or building of a house. 
The persuasion of a firm of architect colleagues at Harvard led my father 
to buy a pair of lots on the corner of Hubbard Park and Sparks Street, on 
one of which was erected a truly magnificent structure symbolic of the 
family’s growing prosperity. This involved complicated maneuvers, aimed 
at disposing of the house on Medford Hillside and of the Old Mill Farm 
at Harvard. It became a part of the family articles of faith to consider that 
these maneuvers showed an extraordinary foresight and knowingness. The 
extra lot was to have been sold as soon as we could find a purchaser, but 
no purchaser presented himself until the house and lot were sold together 
fifteen years later.
At any rate, we could not spend the summer at Old Mill Farm. We 
returned to Harvard for the first part of the summer, but in a different part 
of the township and in an old, tumbledown house which proved to be 
bad for the health of all of us. We gave up the house before the end of 
the summer, and left Harvard to finish the vacation in a boardinghouse at 
Winthrop, from which location my father could watch the completion of 
our new house. Through the kind offices of two ladies who worked at the 
Harvard library, we found a tolerable boardinghouse. I had time to waste 
until Harvard should open. I spent it, partly in the Winthrop public library, 
partly in Boston where I visited the museums and movies, and partly among 
the mechanical amusements of Revere Beach.
This was the exciting time of the discovery of the North Pole and the 
conflicting reports which came in from Cook and Peary. I remember Cook’s 
ingratiating newspaper personality, and the hopes we had falsely put on 
him. The Mutt and Jeff caricatures of Bud Fisher had but recently started, 
and they concerned themselves largely with the tragicomedy of polar 
exploration. As they were portrayed then, Mutt and Jeff could have scarcely 
been less than thirty years old. It is astounding how spry they remain at the 
age of more than seventy-two.
One scientific idea had haunted me that summer. It was that the ver­
tebrate embryo represented a coelenterate polyp in which the pouches 
leading into the arms had become the myotomes. The nerve-belt about 
the mouth seemed to me to correspond to the brain and the spinal cord, 
and the bottom part of the central cavity to the vertebrate digestive tube. 
I remember that I used the microscope of our doctor in Ayer to examine 
some slides sent me by a friend from Wood’s Hole, and I pestered the Carn­
egie Foundation with the request to allow me to do research on the subject. 
Of course, this came to nothing.


9  Neither Child nor Youth
Ex-Prodigy: 
My 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
9: 
Neither 
Child 
not 
Youth
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
I had not realized until my graduation how much the three years at Tufts 
had taken out of me. I was exhausted, but I could not stop the wheels from 
going around, and I could not rest.
I did not prosper physically that summer. Every time I got a scratch I 
festered mildly, and I was in a continual low fever. My emotional state cor­
responded with my physical condition. The feeling of growing up out of 
the protection of childhood into that of responsibility had not been wel­
come to me. With my undergraduate days over, and an unknown future 
confronting me, I felt at loose ends.
I had had my due share of the brief gratification of Commencement; but 
behind this happy moment were running the great questions: what should 
I do in the future and what hopes might I have of success?
The first question had been partly answered by my decision to do gradu­
ate work at Harvard. But the question of my success had an added poi­
gnancy. Though I had graduated cum laude, I had not been elected to Phi 
Beta Kappa. My record could be interpreted in two ways, and both my 
appointment and my nonappointment were defensible. But I was given 
to understand that the chief reason I did not receive the appointment was 
the doubt as to whether the future of an infant prodigy would justify the 
honor. This was the first time that I became fully aware of the fact that I 
was considered a freak of nature, and I began to suspect that some of those 
about me might be awaiting my failure.
Fifteen years later when I received the honor denied me at my gradua­
tion, I had begun to make my mark on the scientific world. To appoint me 
then was to bet on a horse after the race was over. The appointment at the 
time of my graduation would have meant a trust in myself and in my future 
which would have been a source of strength. For a good measure of conceit 
mingled in me with a greater measure of unsureness.

92 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
I have indeed taken a very dim view of all honor societies. This is, of 
course, the result of my own experience at Tufts, but it has been fortified 
and strengthened by my subsequent contact with such societies. The fun­
damental difficulty is that the recognition given by such societies—and 
indeed by universities in the awarding of honorary degrees—is secondary. 
They do not seek out young men deserving recognition, but award rec­
ognition largely on a basis of past recognition. There is thus a pyramid of 
honors for those who already have honors, and, per contra, an undervalu­
ing of those who have behind them accomplishments rather than prior 
recognition.
There is a certain moral duty which I have felt here. I was only too con­
scious of the bridge that I had to cross to achieve any recognition whatever, 
and I resented the closed and serried ranks of my seniors as a direct obstacle 
to advancement and to confidence in myself. Therefore, when later recog­
nition has come to me I have felt loath to be the beneficiary of a process of 
secondary recognition which I had resented as a young man. In this way, 
my early rejection by Phi Beta Kappa has strengthened me in a policy on 
the basis of which I have resigned from the National Academy of Sciences, 
and have discouraged my friends in the attempt to obtain for me simi­
lar honors elsewhere. I have not been absolutely consistent in this matter 
because there are cases in which the refusal of honors is viewed, not as a 
sturdy independence on the part of the recipient, but as an ungracious­
ness to worthy intellectual groups which are consciously or unconsciously 
seeking the support of their name. Be this as it may, my reaction is essen­
tially the same at the present day as it has been for nearly forty years—that 
academic honors are essentially bad, and that other things being equal, I 
choose to avoid them.
Thus my graduation from Tufts forced me to face one of the greatest 
realizations that the infant prodigy must make: he is not wanted by the 
community. He has received no special rebuffs from his contemporaries. All 
children quarrel, and it is not until they reach the years of discretion that 
they acquire something superior to the social mores of the zoo. But as the 
infant prodigy comes to realize that the elders of the community are suspi­
cious of him, he begins to fear reflections of this suspicion in the attitude 
of his contemporaries.
There is a tradition, not confined to the United States, that the child who 
makes an early start is intellectually drawing on his life capital of energy 
and is doomed to an early collapse and a permanent second-rateness, if not 
to the breadline and the madhouse.

9: Neither Child not Youth 
93
My experience leads me to believe that the prodigy is desperately unsure 
of himself and underrates himself. Every child, in gaining emotional secu­
rity, believes in the values of the world around him and thus starts by being, 
not a revolutionary, but an utter conservative. He wishes to believe that his 
elders, on whom he is dependent for the arrangement and control of the 
world in which he lives, are all wise and good. When he discovers that they 
are not, he faces the necessity of loneliness and of forming his own judg­
ment of a world that he can no longer fully trust. The prodigy shares this 
experience with every child, but added to it is the suffering which grows 
from belonging half to the adult world and half to the world of the children 
about him. Hence, he goes through a stage when his mass of conflicts is 
greater than that of most other children, and he is rarely a pretty picture.
In my earlier years, I had not been aware that I was an infant prodigy. 
Even in my high school days the matter just began to become clear to me, 
and during my college training I could not avoid facing it. One of the less 
agreeable consequences was that I was pestered by a swarm of reporters who 
were eager to sell my birthright at a penny a line. I soon learned that whin­
ing tone in which a reporter, bent on intruding on one’s privacy, will tell 
you, “But my job depends on my getting this interview!” Finally I learned 
that reporters were on the whole to be avoided, and I ultimately developed 
enough fleetness of foot and ability at dodging to conduct a reporter across 
the college campus, later through the back alleys of Harvard Square, with­
out giving his partner a chance to take a usable photograph.
Most of these articles appeared in the Sunday supplements of the news­
papers. They belonged to a class of ephemeral literature which has long 
since returned to the gutters from which it emanated. While they flattered 
my childish desire for attention, both my parents and I recognized this for 
the sickly narcissism which it was; and it was not pleasant to see oneself 
endowed with a ten days’ immortality between an account of a two-headed 
calf and the more-or-less true tale of the amours of the Count of X with the 
elderly wife of the millionaire Y.
It was the more serious articles that did the most harm. The suave and 
flattering articles of H. Addington Bruce1 gave my father a chance to sound 
off with his unflattering theories of my education, while an occasional arti­
cle in the trade journals of the educationalists2 displayed to me the full tally 
of my gaucherie and social rejection.
I fear that Father himself was not immune to the temptation to grant 
interviews to the slicks about me and my training. In these interviews, he 
emphasized that I was essentially an average boy who had had the advan­
tage of superlative training. I suppose that this was in part to prevent me 

94 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
from being conceited, and that it was no more than a half-representation 
of my father’s true belief. Nevertheless, it rendered me more diffident as to 
my own ability than I would have otherwise been even under my father’s 
scolding. In short, I had the worst of both worlds.
Besides the direct damage to me, these articles could only have accentu­
ated that feeling of isolation forced on the prodigy by the hostility latent in 
the community around him.
The end of my college career forced me to take stock of myself and of my 
position in the world about me. In my exhausted state, this assessment and 
evaluation took on a dismal tone. I had for the first time become acutely 
conscious of the fact of death. I would count the fourteen and a half years 
that I had lived, and would measure my probable future life, and what I 
might expect of that. I could not read a novel without figuring out the ages 
of the characters and how many years they had left them to live, nor could 
I avoid looking up the lives of the authors of great books, and finding out 
for myself their own ages at the writing of these works and how many more 
years had been granted them. This obsession, of course, touched my rela­
tions to my parents and my grandparents, and for a period made my life 
utterly intolerable.
The fear of death ran parallel to and was reinforced by the fear of sin. My 
adventure in vivisection had brought a terrible awareness of possibilities in 
me of cruelty and the delight in cruelty which could only be brought into 
full focus with pain and suffering. My years in college had come at almost 
precisely the period in which I was turning from a boy into a very young 
and inexperienced man. The consciousness of the possibilities of man­
hood in me without any corresponding experience and worldly wisdom by 
which I could guide them led me into a frightful panic in which at times I 
sought for the blocked way back into childhood. I had been brought up in 
a doubly Puritan environment which supplemented the original intrinsic 
puritanism of the Jew with the puritanism of the New Englander. And the 
most elementary phases of my self-esteem from childhood into adolescence 
appeared to me either sinful or fraught with the possibilities of sin. These 
possibilities were things that I could not discuss freely even with my par­
ents. My father would have taken what was on the whole a sympathetic 
attitude, but an attitude expressing a sympathy which was loath to go into 
details, and which on the whole was not likely to answer my inarticulate 
attempts to express myself about disagreeable matters with a willingness to 
listen and to find out what was really troubling me. On the other side, my 
mother combined a literal acceptance of the minutest code of puritanism 

9: Neither Child not Youth 
95
with an adamantine unwillingness to admit that anything that a child of 
hers might do could be a possible offense against this code.
In other words, in these matters which were of great concern to me, I 
was met not so much with an accusing hostility as with a blockage of com­
munication which left me substantially alone with my problems. This is no 
peculiar burden of the infant prodigy; it is the common lot of many ado­
lescents, perhaps most. Yet when it is combined with the manifold other 
burdens that are thrust upon the prodigy, it is naturally accentuated.
If a child or a grandchild of mine should be as disturbed as I was, I should 
take him to a psychoanalyst, not with confidence that the treatment would 
be successful in some definitive way, but at least with the hope that there 
might be a certain understanding and a certain measure of relief. But in 
1909 there were no psychoanalysts in America; or at least, if one or two 
venturesome disciples of Freud might have strayed so far, they were isolated 
practitioners. There was no tradition of resorting to them, and they were 
scarcely available to persons of the moderate means of a college professor. 
Moreover, even twenty years later, it would have seemed to my parents a 
blasphemy and a confession of defeat to admit even to themselves that a 
member of the family might need such treatment.
However, these remarks are after the fact. The fact is that it was then pos­
sible to allay neither the agonies of leaving childhood nor the sense of guilt 
almost inseparable from adolescent sexuality. Like many other adolescents, 
I walked in a dark tunnel of which I could not see the issue, nor did I know 
whether there was any. I did not emerge from this tunnel until I was nearly 
nineteen years old and had begun my studies at Cambridge University. 
My depression of the summer of 1909 did not suddenly end; rather it 
petered out.
My relationship with my father was gradually undergoing a change 
which I was only dimly aware of. Tufts had given me a partial release from 
his hitherto unrelaxing authority, for I tried my wings in such fields as biol­
ogy where he could no longer lead me, and where I could hope to excel 
him. Indeed, my study of mathematics had won his approval, and at the 
same time had provided a field for me into whose later development it was 
impossible for him to follow me and break my independence. My study of 
mathematics gave me a consciousness of strength in a difficult field, and 
this was one of its great attractions. My mathematical ability at this time 
was a sword with which I could storm the gates of success. This was not a 
pretty or a moral attitude, but it was real, and it was justifiable.
From the time that I started to Tufts, my father used to tell me of the 
philological work that he was doing. Some of it concerned the early history 

96 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
of the Gypsies; some of it was devoted to moot points of philology, such as 
the origin of the Italian word andare and of the French word aller, some of it 
to Hecate worship and its influence in medieval Europe, some of it to Arabic 
influences on European languages. There was also a great deal of interest­
ing research on the grand outlines of the relations between the established 
groups of languages such as the Indo-European, the Semitic, the Dravidian, 
et cetera; and later this comparative study was extended to the languages of 
the Americas and to the problem of African influence on these languages.
In all these investigations, my father combined a rare extent of linguis­
tic information, an almost unexampled philological-historical sense, and a 
very modern mistrust of purely formal phonetic philology in favor of the 
more historical and empirical point of view which has come into ascen­
dancy in the present generation. Father was a great admirer of Jespersen 
and his work; and when the time shall come to make an objective and judi­
cial inquiry into the sources of modern philological ideas, I myself have no 
doubt that his name will stand beside that of Jespersen among the greatest 
in linguistic science.
Nevertheless, Father’s intuition, although it was supported by an almost 
superhuman industry of reading and research, worked too fast for his for­
mal logical processes. Philology was for him a piece of deductive work, a 
magnificent crossword puzzle; but I am afraid that he often gave up the 
writing of the words when he had still about a quarter of the paper left to 
cover. To a very considerable extent he knew what the remaining words 
were, but was simply too contemptuous of the powers of his readers to dot 
every i and cross every t. Nevertheless, I am convinced that (in a not appre­
ciable and important fraction of the cases) he was not sure in his own mind 
of the last refinement of his work.
Now Father had come to philology with a thorough linguistic training, 
but without the sponsorship of any of the craftsmen of that guild. He was a 
man who liked popularity and acclaim, but he was essentially a lonely fig­
ure. The great foreign names in philology regarded him as an intruder, and 
his very ability made him at once dangerous and unpopular. At Harvard, 
the Slavic department formed a little autonomous enclave in the Division 
of Modern Languages, and although Father was consulted by everyone, he 
belonged to no one. Concealed behind his personal popularity, which was 
great, there was the inevitable distrust of the plodder for the genius. We all 
know that German aphorism credited to Ludwig Bӧrne: when Pythagoras 
discovered the theorem of the right triangle, he sacrificed a hundred oxen; 
since then, whenever a new truth is unveiled, all oxen tremble.

9: Neither Child not Youth 
97
Under these circumstances—a hermit in the midst of a great city—it was 
not unnatural that my father should turn to me for intellectual compan­
ionship and support. I was profoundly interested in his work, but I was 
not always convinced by every detail of his argument. When I showed my 
little faith by asking a question, Father was indignant. It was treason for 
me to question his slightest word. Indeed, I was not entitled to an opinion 
on most of the questions which he put to me, but I could only answer by 
the light of what little judgment was in me, and Father’s whole precept 
and example were against saying yes where I could give no real assent. I 
should have realized, of course, that in much of Father’s conversation with 
me I was merely a lay figure to represent the scientific public in a dialogue 
which Father was merely holding with his own doubts. Nevertheless, and 
despite all my protests that I did not know enough of the subject of which 
he was talking to give a reasonable opinion, my father would often demand 
of me a direct answer to a specific question. Then I might well find myself 
between a lying assent and an unwilling defiance. I preferred the defiance; 
but my father would certainly have seen through the falsity of the assent 
and would have berated me for my half-heartedness. It was unfair and I 
knew it was unfair; but I also knew that my father brought these issues to 
me out of a compelling inner necessity and that he was not a happy man.
Notes
1.  Loc. cit.
2.  Katherine Dolbear, “Precocious Children,” Pedagogical Seminary, Vol. 19, p. 463.


10  The Square Peg
Harvard, 1909–1910
Ex-Prodigy: 
My 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
10: 
The 
Square 
Peg
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
In the fall of 1909 President Eliot retired from Harvard and was succeeded 
by Abbott Lawrence Lowell. I went from Winthrop to view this ceremony 
at which several honorary degrees were conferred in the open air in front of 
University Hall, and I enjoyed the academic pageantry.
I was not aware, and indeed few of us were at the time, that the depar­
ture of Eliot coincided with the end of a great age and the beginning of an 
age of smaller things. Eliot may have had the temperamental limitations of 
a New Englander, but he had the outlook of a scholar and man of the world. 
Lowell was dedicated to a Harvard that should be the private preserve of a 
ruling class.
The reign of Lowell soon began to contribute much to the prosperity of 
the members of the faculty, and my father was among those who had good 
cause to be financially grateful to the president. Yet this gratitude could 
never be untainted. If Lowell made the professors rich, it was because he 
wished them to be allies of the rich. He wished them to eschew the com­
panionship of the common man, and to find their comrades in the circles 
of big business and big industry.
My parents were not originally aware that the cornucopia extended to 
the faculty by President Lowell had a razor blade concealed in it. Many years 
later when my father received at his retirement a letter nearly as peremp­
tory as that which one gives to an unsatisfactory kitchen maid, President 
Lowell, this paragon of all virtues, became in the eyes of my father and 
mother a monster of iniquity. But he was neither a paragon nor a mon­
ster. He was essentially a superficially polished and rather ordinary man of 
conformist loyalties, who was loyal to his social class and to very little else.
In the early days of his presidency I used to attend the rather stiff and 
formal parties for college students at the President’s House on Quincy 
Street. We learned to balance tea cups on our knees, and to hear tales of 
Mrs. Lowell’s memories of the great frost that had tied up Boston harbor 

100 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
one remote winter in the past. The president would utter obiter dicta run­
ning from one end of the field of government and administration to the 
other, and would trot out his favorite idea, that while the government 
should make use of experts, they should be heard and not seen. He sang the 
praises of the amateur in politics, of the man who could judge everything 
well but who did not need to carry in his mind any particular content of 
information.
Term at Harvard began a few days before we moved into our new house 
in Cambridge. I was nearly fifteen years old, and I had decided to make my 
try for the doctor’s degree in biology.
My first memories of my Harvard work are of collecting for my histology 
course a number of leeches from a small pond on the Fresh Pond reserva­
tion in Cambridge. My histology course began as a muddle and continued 
as a failure. I had neither the manual skill for the fine manipulation of 
delicate tissues nor the sense of order which is necessary for the proper 
performance of any intricate routine. I broke glass, bungled my section cut­
ting, and could not follow the meticulous order of killing and fixing, stain­
ing, soaking and sectioning, which a competent histologist must master. I 
became a nuisance to my classmates and to myself.
My clumsiness and ineptness were due to a mixture of several factors. 
Probably there was a considerable amount of primary muscular lack of dex­
terity in my make-up, but this was not the whole show by any means. My 
eyes were another major factor; and though my eyesight was well corrected 
by efficient glasses and was at that time almost untiring, there are certain 
secondary disadvantages of the myope which are not immediately obvious 
to the average man. Muscular dexterity is neither a completely muscular 
nor a completely visual matter. It depends on the whole chain which starts 
in the eye, goes through to muscular action, and there continues in the 
scanning by the eye of the results of this muscular action. It is not only 
necessary for the muscular arc and the visual arc to be perfect, each by itself, 
but it is equally necessary that the relations between the two be precise and 
constant.
Now a boy wearing thick glasses has the visual images displaced through 
a considerable angle by a small displacement in the position of the glasses 
upon the nose. This means that the relation between visual position and 
muscular position is subject to a continual readjustment, and anything like 
an absolute correlation between these is not possible. Here we have a source 
of clumsiness which is important but which is not immediately obvious.
A further source of my awkwardness was psychic rather than physi­
cal. I was socially not yet adjusted to my environment and I was often 

10: The Square Peg 
101
inconsiderate, largely through an insufficient awareness of the exact conse­
quences of my action. For example, I asked the other boys the time instead 
of getting a watch myself, and finally they gave me one. It is a little easier to 
understand this inconsiderateness if one realizes that although my personal 
expenses were taken care of very generously by my parents, I had not become 
accustomed to the complete control of any regular weekly allowance at all. 
A further psychic hurdle which I had to overcome was impatience. This 
impatience was largely the result of a combination of my mental quick­
ness and physical slowness. I would see the end to be accomplished long 
before I could labor through the manipulative stages that were to bring me 
there. When scientific work consists in meticulously careful and precise 
manipulation which is always to be accompanied by a neat record of pro­
gress, both written and graphical, impatience is a very real handicap. How 
much of a handicap this syndrome of clumsiness was I could not know 
until I had tried. I had moved into biology, not because it corresponded 
with what I knew I could do, but because it corresponded with what I 
wanted to do.
It was inevitable that those about me discouraged me from further work 
in zoology and all other sciences of experiment and observation. Neverthe­
less, I have subsequently done effective work together with physiologists 
and other laboratory scientists who are better experimenters than I, and I 
have made some definite contributions to modern physiological work.
There are many ways of being a scientist. All science originates in obser­
vation and experiment, and it is true that no man can achieve success who 
does not understand the fundamental methods and mores of observation 
and experiment. But it is not absolutely necessary to be a good observer 
with one’s own eyes or to be a good experimenter with one’s own hands. 
There is much more to observation and experiment than the mere collec­
tion of data. These data must be organized into a logical structure, and 
the experiments and observations by which they are obtained must be so 
framed that they will represent an adequate way of questioning nature.
The ideal scientist is without doubt the man who can both frame the 
question and carry out the questioning. There is no scarcity of those who 
can carry out with the utmost efficiency a program of this sort, even though 
they may lack the perspicacity to frame it: there are more good hands in sci­
ence than there are good brains to direct them. Thus, although the clumsy, 
careless scientist is not the type to do the greater part of the work of science, 
there is other work for him in science if he is a man of understanding and 
good judgment.

102 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
It is not very difficult to recognize the all-round scientist of whose call­
ing there is no doubt. It is the mark of the good teacher to recognize both 
the laboratory man who may do splendid work carrying out the strategies 
of others, and the manually clumsy intellectual whose ideas may be a guide 
and help to the former. When I was a graduate student at Harvard, my 
teachers did not recognize that despite all my grievous faults, I might still 
have a contribution to make to biology.
The late Professor Ronald Thaxter was, however, an exception. I took 
his course in cryptogamic botany. The lectures were elaborate and detailed 
accounts of the anatomy and phylogeny of algae and fungi, mosses, and 
the ferns and their allies. This normally involved the student in the taking 
of elaborate notes and the copying of diagrams which the professor had 
drawn on the board. The laboratory work consisted of the inspection and 
the drawing of living plants and sections of cryptogamic tissues. My labora­
tory work was worse than terrible: it was hopeless. Yet I got a B-plus in the 
course without having retained in my possession a single note.
Taking notes is the student’s craft, and I did not master it. I think that 
there is a definite conflict between the use of a student’s attention for the 
writing down of the best possible set of notes, and the use of his atten­
tion for the understanding of the speaker as he proceeds. The student must 
choose to do one or the other, and each has its advantages. If, like me, he is 
so clumsy of eye and hand that his notes are bound to be incomplete and 
only partly legible, he falls between two stools. If he decides to take notes 
at all, he has already destroyed much of his ability to grasp the argument 
in flight, and at the end of the course has nothing but a mass of illegible 
scribbles. Yet if his memory is as good as mine is, it is far better to give up 
the idea of taking notes and to organize in his mind the material as it comes 
to him from the speaker.
My comparative anatomy course went along in a manner intermediate 
between that of my histology course and that of my course in botany. My 
drawings were execrable, but I had a good understanding of the facts. My 
great tendency, as it had been with Kingsley, was to hurry the work rather 
than go into the fine points. This, indeed, has been my tendency through­
out life. It is not difficult for me to explain. I have a rather quick insight 
into ideas, and an extreme lack of manual dexterity. It has always been dif­
ficult for me to hurry my manual efforts into a pace corresponding to the 
flow of my ideas, or to marshal my ideas into a sequence sufficiently slow 
to conform to the demands of my physical resources.
I found my physical recreation in the gymnasium. I joined a calisthen­
ics class in which the usual setting-up exercises were combined with some 

10: The Square Peg 
103
mild folk dancing. I tried to join in the scrub basketball games that were 
being played in the basement of the gymnasium, but glasses were not to be 
thought of in the rough and tumble of the sport, and without glasses I was 
wholly useless.
I spent many happy hours in the library of the Harvard Union. It had 
recently been founded by the benevolent authorities as a “club des sans 
club” in protest against the exclusiveness of the Harvard clubs. It did not 
thrive under the new Lowell regime. A new anti-Semitism was the order of 
the day, and the authorities began to think in terms of a numerus clausus. 
Whispers gradually appeared out of nowhere to the effect that the Union 
had become the headquarters of Jews and similar undesirables. These 
rumors received a sympathetic ear in my home. My mother questioned 
me about the Jewish character of the Union, and began to indicate to me 
that it might be a little better if I were not seen there so much. As I had no 
other place to go for my social life, these questions distressed me greatly. 
However, there was no way to sidetrack them.
In one particular aspect, the year 1909 was an annus mirabilis at Harvard. 
I was one of five infant prodigies enrolled as students. The others were W. J. 
Sidis, A. A. Berle, and Cedric Wing Houghton. Roger Sessions, the musician, 
entered Harvard the next year at fourteen. I was nearly fifteen at the time, 
and a first-year graduate student. W. J. Sidis entered college as a freshman. 
He was the son of a psychiatrist, Boris Sidis, who, together with his wife had 
opened a private mental hospital in Portsmouth, New Hampshire. Like my 
father, Boris Sidis was a Russian Jew, and also like my father he had strongly 
developed opinions concerning the education of children.
Young Sidis, who was then eleven, was obviously a brilliant and inter­
esting child. His interest was primarily in mathematics. I well remember 
the day at the Harvard Mathematics Club in which G. C. Evans, now 
the retired head of the department of mathematics of the University of 
California and Sidis’s lifelong friend, sponsored the boy in a talk on the 
four-dimensional regular figures. The talk would have done credit to a first- 
or second-year graduate student of any age, although all the material it 
contained was known elsewhere and was available in the literature. The 
theme had been made familiar to me by E. Q. Adams, a companion of my 
Tufts days. I am convinced that Sidis had no access to existing sources, 
and that the talk represented the triumph of the unaided efforts of a very 
brilliant child.
There was likewise no question that Sidis was a child who was consid­
erably behind the majority of children of his age in social development 
and social adaptability. I was certainly no model of the social graces; but 

104 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
it was clear to me that no other child of his age would have gone down 
Brattle Street wildly swinging a pigskin bag, without either order or cleanli­
ness. He was an infant with a full share of the infractuosities of a grown-up 
Dr. Johnson.
In his childhood, Sidis had received more than his share of publicity. 
The papers had a field day when, after one or two years of limited success 
at Harvard, Sidis received a job at the new Rice Institute in Houston, Texas, 
under the sponsorship of his friend Evans. He failed to show the maturity 
and tact needed to make good at this impossible task. Later on, when he 
carried a banner in some radical procession and was locked up for it, the 
papers were even more delighted.
Sidis broke down after this episode. He developed a resentment against 
his family so bitter that he would not even attend the funeral of his father, 
and a resentment against all mathematics, science, and learning. Indeed, 
he developed a hatred for anything that might put him in a position of 
responsibility and give him the need to make decisions.
I saw him many years afterward, when he used to haunt the halls of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. His intellectual career was behind 
him. He asked for nothing more than a job at which he might earn his 
bread and butter as a routine computer, and the chance to indulge his sim­
ple amusement of collecting streetcar transfers from all over the world. He 
avoided publicity as he would the plague.
By this time, the Second World War was approaching, and there was 
much computing work to be done at the Massachusetts Institute of Tech­
nology. It was not difficult to find Sidis a job, although it was always hard 
to avoid giving him a better and more responsible job than he was willing 
to undertake. The reports on his work never varied. Within the limitations 
that he imposed upon himself, he was an exceptionally rapid and compe­
tent computer. He had even managed to acquire a certain minimum degree 
of neatness in his personal appearance, and was a quiet, inoffensive worker 
to have around. He had a limited security in his work with us; we all knew 
his story and respected his privacy.
I have no doubt that even at the time I knew him at Harvard, competent 
psychoanalytic help of the sort that is readily available today could have 
saved young Sidis for a more useful and a happier career. I am equally sure 
that his father, precisely because he was a psychiatrist, and was busy read­
ing the fine print of the psychological map, was unable to see the inscrip­
tion written on it in the largest characters, stretching from one corner to 
the other. It was perfectly clear that the later collapse of Sidis was in large 
measure his father’s making.

10: The Square Peg 
105
Without condoning the follies of the older Sidis, it is at least necessary to 
understand them. Picture a Jew, fresh from the persecutions of Russia, and 
a denizen of a land that has not yet fully made up its mind to want him. 
Picture his successes, exceeding what he could have hoped for as a child 
but still falling short of his wishes. Picture the brilliant child, destined for a 
still greater success, beyond the possibilities open to the parents. Picture the 
Jewish tradition of Talmudic learning which, from the times of Mendels­
sohn, has been transferred to the secular learning open to the whole world, 
and picture the ambition of the orthodox Jewish family to have among 
their sons at least one great rabbi—and the universal sacrifice which such a 
family will make to achieve this end.
I am loath to add my name to those who join in an excessive stream of 
condemnation of Boris Sidis. I have in my possession a letter from a writer 
who, after spending a day looking over the published accounts of the case, 
was sure that the father was guilty of a capital crime, and that this crime 
was the result of the attitude of the scientist who is so devoted to science 
that he is willing to commit an act of spiritual vivisection on his own child. 
I think such judgments are premature and are wanting in the sympathy 
and compassion that mark the really great writer.
I find it appropriate to discuss Sidis in some detail as his life formed 
the object of a cruel and quite uncalled-for article in The New Yorker. Some 
years ago, when Sidis was leading a broken but independent life around the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, an enterprising journalist got hold 
of his saga. I believe he won Sidis’s confidence. Sidis, who through his later 
life was a defeated—and honorably defeated—combatant in the battle for 
existence, was pilloried like a side-show freak for fools to gape at.
He had ceased to be news for nearly a quarter of a century. If any man 
had done wrong, it was his father, who was long dead, and the article could 
right no wrong done the son. The question of the infant prodigy was not a 
live issue, even in the public press, and had not been for some time, until 
The New Yorker made it so. In view of all this, I do not see how the author 
of the article and the editors of the magazine can support their conduct by 
the claim that the actions of people in the public eye are the object of fair 
newspaper comment.
I suspect certain members of The New Yorker staff of muddled thinking. 
In many literary circles, anti-intellectualism is the order of the day. There 
are sensitive souls who blame the evils of the times on modern science and 
who welcome the chance to castigate its sins. Furthermore, the very exis­
tence of an infant prodigy is taken as an affront by some. What, then, could 
constitute a better spiritual carminative than an article digging up the old 

106 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
Sidis affair, at the same time casting dishonor on the prodigy and showing 
up the iniquity of the scientist-prodigy-maker? The gentlemen who were 
responsible for this article overlooked the fact that W. J. Sidis was alive and 
could be hurt very deeply.
Sidis sued The New Yorker for damages. It is not my object to criticize the 
courts, and I do not know enough law to describe the case fairly. I believe, 
however, that the main issue was the fact that to obtain damages in a libel 
suit where the specific allegations are undisputed and where they concern 
only the tone of ridicule of the article, it is necessary to prove specific dam­
age which will hamper the injured party in the carrying out of his profes­
sional work. Now Sidis had no profession, and the proof of such damages 
was impossible. He was only a day worker, and it is a fact that no criticism 
of this sort would have closed his employment or led to a decrease in his 
wages. This was not the sort of libel case in which personal agony was a 
legal issue. Thus The New Yorker won its case.
When Sidis died some years later, I remember how shocked we were. We 
tried to obtain from the hospital some indication of the disease that had 
killed him. We were not kinsmen, and the hospital authorities were quite 
properly reticent. I do not know to this day what the cause of his death was.
The issue was raised again by an article published in This Week Magazine 
of the Boston Sunday Herald in March, 1952. It was entitled “You Can Make 
Your Child a Genius,” and was based on an interview with the mother of 
William James Sidis. As a piece of reporting, it is an ordinary journalistic 
hack job, neither better nor worse than a thousand others that appear in 
the Sunday supplements and the slicks. As a human document, it scarcely 
merits consideration.
Sidis’s failure was in large measure the failure of his parents. But it is one 
thing to have compassion for an honest human weakness, and it is another 
thing to brandish before the public the wreck of a human adventure as if it 
had been a success. So you can make your child a genius, can you? Yes, as 
you can make a blank canvas into a painting by Leonardo or a ream of clean 
paper into a play by Shakespeare. My father could give me only what my 
father had: his sincerity, his brilliance, his learning, and his passion. These 
qualities are not to be picked up on every street corner.
Galatea needs a Pygmalion. What does the sculptor do except remove 
the surplus marble from the block, and make the figure come to life with 
his own brain and out of his own love? And yet, if the stone be spaulded 
and flawed, the statue will crumble under the mallet and chisel of the artist. 
Let those who choose to carve a human soul to their own measure be sure 
that they have a worthy image after which to carve it, and let them know 

10: The Square Peg 
107
that the power of molding an emerging intellect is a power of death as well 
as a power of life. A strong drug is a strong poison. The physician who ven­
tures to use it must first be sure he knows the dosage.
The striking thing to many about the group of precocious children who 
were studying at Harvard in 1909–10 is that we were not an isolated group 
at all: in some ways we were alike and in some ways different. At least three 
came from homes of very ambitious fathers, but the fathers were not alike 
in the slightest degree, nor would their ambition take the same form. My 
own father was primarily a scholar, and his ambition was for me to excel 
in scholarship. He took his duty in this matter very seriously, and spent a 
large if not excessive amount of time in my education. Berle’s father wanted 
his son to be a successful lawyer and a statesman. He took a large share in 
Berle’s early education, but I do not believe that he continued it over the 
period in which Berle was at Harvard. Sidis’s father was a psychologist and 
a psychiatrist by profession. I have said that he had wished his son to excel 
in scholarship, although I cannot find in what I remember of young Sidis 
the same degree of continued participation in his son’s education that my 
father had exhibited in mine. I have no doubt that in Sidis’s earlier child­
hood he had received intense paternal discipline. But during the period in 
which I first met him when he was about eleven years old, he was left alone 
in a roominghouse for the greater part of the year in a Cambridge in which 
he had few personal friends and even fewer intimates.
I know nothing about the relations of either Houghton or Sessions with 
their families. I presume that part of the reason is that there was less to know 
and that the families did not participate as intimately and overwhelmingly 
in their education as did the families of the other three of us. I believe that 
these boys were left more to their own resources and that consequently 
they were not subject to the same pressure to which we were subject.
I remember the fourteen-year-old Berle as he first visited me, point-
device, carrying his little kid gloves and presenting a formal visiting card. 
This was a phenomenon new to me, for my academic precocity had pre­
vented neither me nor my parents from being quite aware that after all I 
was a boy not yet fifteen. Yet I was a physically precocious child, well past 
the beginning of puberty, while this youngster, although practically of the 
same age, was in every bodily respect at least five years my junior. To find 
this poise and sense of social protocol in a half-grown boy was a shock to 
my sensibilities.
Sidis had his collection of streetcar transfers to amuse him, and Berle had 
a fad almost as individual. He was interested in the various underground 

108 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
passages of Boston, such as the subways and the sewers and various forgot­
ten bolt holes; and in particular he introduced us to that romantic pas­
sageway dating from early colonial times, which still passed in those days 
under the site of the old Province House. The bricks dated back more than 
two and a half centuries, and we both showed our essential boyishness by 
joining in plans for a literary hoax by which we should discover a Shake­
spearean document buried behind the wall.
I have had no contact with Berle since his graduation from college. He 
became one of that group of young lawyers and statesmen sponsored by 
Felix Frankfurter, a group that has been a fertile source of talent. Berle’s 
rise has been quick and sure and in no way surprising, for his ambition 
was matched by his talents. The New Yorker handled him a bit roughly in a 
profile. But I cannot feel any such indignation at the rough profilement of 
Berle as I did in the case of Sidis. Berle has been a public figure and he has 
held a great deal of power. So long as certain canons of journalistic decency 
were adhered to (and I could not say that they were violated by The New 
Yorker), his acts and personality were of legitimate public interest and the 
subject of fair comment. Sidis was out of public life and it was an act of the 
utmost cruelty to summon him back.
We five boys, varying in ages between eleven and fifteen, would not 
naturally have sought one another’s companionship if it had not been for 
the special circumstances in which we were placed. I have said that Berle 
and I did not find our first contact particularly stimulating to either of us, 
and that after our formal introduction to one another we found very little 
to talk over. Later on we used to bowl together in the bowling alley in 
the basement of the gymnasium, and once or twice we walked to Boston 
together. Berle told me something of his interest in the underground pas­
sages of Boston, and as I have said, we planned to participate in a joint liter­
ary hoax. But our acquaintanceship did not last for it had no roots.
Sidis was too young to be a companion for me, and much too eccentric, 
although we were in one class together in postulate theory and I respected 
the work that he did. Houghton was a very good friend of mine and I got to 
know him the best of the lot. I used to visit from time to time in his rooms 
in Divinity Hall, and he impressed me as a thoroughly agreeable person. 
He appeared to have a promising future, which was tragically cut off by a 
premature death caused by appendicitis at about the time he expected to 
graduate.
As to Sessions, I met him only once or twice, and the great divergence in 
our interests prevented us from developing a common vocabulary.

10: The Square Peg 
109
Thus there was little acquaintance and attraction between us as a group. 
I tried at one time to unite the five of us into a sort of prodigy club, but the 
attempt was ridiculous for we did not possess a sufficient element of coher­
ence to make a joint social life desirable. We associated with students older 
than ourselves for intellectual purposes, and with the brighter boys of our 
own age but of normal advancement in school for the sake of our needs as 
children and adolescents. In all of our cases, our social relations were better 
taken care of elsewhere than by a close social contact with those of our own 
kind. We were not cut from the same piece of cloth, and in general there 
was nothing except an early development of intelligence that characterized 
us as a group. And this was no more a basis for social unity than the wearing 
of glasses or the possession of false teeth. Louise Baker, in her witty book 
Out on a Limb, shows that there is no necessary bond of companionship 
between one one-legged little girl and another one-legged little girl, and 
my experience leads me to believe that the sharing of a precocious school 
career is no sounder a basis for one’s companionship than the sharing of a 
mutilation.
By the end of my first term at Harvard, it had already become more than 
doubtful whether a career awaited me in biology. As usual, the decision was 
made by my father. He decided that such success as I had made as an under­
graduate at Tufts in philosophy indicated the true bent of my career. I was 
to become a philosopher and to apply for a scholarship at the Sage School 
of Philosophy at Cornell University, where my father’s old friend of Mis­
souri days, Professor Frank Thilly, filled the chair of ethics. I can understand 
that with our limited family means and the needs of the other children 
coming to the front, it was not possible to allow me the chance to make 
serious errors, but this deprivation of the right to judge for myself and to 
stand the consequences of my own decision stood me in ill stead for many 
years to come. It delayed my social and moral maturity, and represents a 
handicap I have only partly discarded in middle age.
I was, however, not reluctant to leave Harvard. I had felt myself to be a 
misfit there from the first. Harvard impressed me as being overwhelmingly 
right-thinking. In such an atmosphere, a prodigy is likely to be regarded as 
insolence toward the gods. My father’s publicly announced attitude toward 
my education had aroused hostility among his colleagues which made my 
lot no easier.
I had hoped to find a free intellectual life among my fellow students. 
Some, indeed, I found who were willing to discuss intellectual matters 
and to fight dialectically for their convictions. But in the Harvard order 
of things, a gentlemanly indifference, a studious coldness, an intellectual 

110 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
imperturbability joined with the graces of society made the ideal Harvard 
man. Thirty years later, I have been shocked rather than surprised by the 
dry emotional and intellectual sterility into which some of these men have 
settled.
At the close of the academic year, my father made one decision for which 
I shall eternally thank him. He rented Tamarack Cottage in the township 
of Sandwich, New Hampshire, as our home for that summer. Sandwich has 
remained my summer home for much of the time until the present day, 
and has a special place in my heart for the loveliness of its scenery, for 
the walks and climbs afforded by its mountains, and for the sober dignity, 
reserve, and friendliness of its country people. Some of my walks were short 
trips to Tamworth or to Sandwich Center, on which I stopped at the back­
doors of my neighbors for a chat or a glass of milk or water; some were 
climbs which my father took with my older sister and me over the trails of 
Whiteface and Passaconaway. There was one long trip of nearly a week dur­
ing which my father, my sister, Harold King, and I packed a pup-tent and 
our duffle bags into the Passaconaway valley, up the logging railways to the 
remains of Camp Six in the Livermore Wilderness, down by the lumber vil­
lage of Livermore, to the Notch Road and up the Crawford Trail to the top 
of Mt. Washington. From there we came down over the heights of Boot’s 
Spur to Tuckerman’s Ravine and to the Pinkham Notch, Jackson, Inter­
vale, and Tamworth. We afterward heard that we had passed the home of 
William James on the day of his death.
Nowadays I spend all of my normal year in New England, my winters in 
Belmont, Massachusetts, and my summers in Sandwich, New Hampshire, 
when I am not globe-trotting. Yet, although I spend the greater part of 
my time in the city, it is my country home to which I feel I most deeply 
belong. The New Englander is reticent whether he comes from the country 
or the city; but the reticence of a countryman is most humble and proud. 
The New Hampshire farmer has a sense of living with his ancestors which 
he derives from tilling the same land, dwelling in the same house, and 
often from using the same tools. Yet this sense of historical continuity is 
too personal and too private to flaunt in the face of the visitor. For the city 
New Englander, the family is often an asset to the individual; but for the 
countryman, the individual is but a passing phase in the continuity of the 
family. If the countryman is reticent it is because he thinks that, impor­
tant as his affairs may be to himself, it is your own affairs which are most 
important to you, and he waits for some sign that he is welcome before he 
intrudes upon you. He waits to look you over, but he also waits to give you 
a chance to look him over. And even in the meantime, he regards you as a 

10: The Square Peg 
111
whole individual rather than such an abstract half-man as an employer or a 
customer. He will not start business with you before he has given you five or 
ten minutes’ gossip, as his right and your own, as two human beings who 
have more important relationships with one another than that of buying 
and selling. He will accept a gift but not a tip, a cigar but not a dollar bill. 
In short, whether you can love him or not, and very often you can, you can 
and must respect him because he respects himself.
We had many friends in the mountains. One eccentric and interesting 
neighbor was Professor Hyslop, famous for his work on psychic research. 
We spent many an interesting hour before the fire in his cottage, a struc­
ture which had originally been built for a henhouse, and listened to his 
weird tales of ghouls and ghosts and mystical noises and mediums. His 
house belonged to a Mr. Hoag of Philadelphia whose family still inhabits 
the region into the third generation. The Hoag boys, young Hyslop, and I 
belonged to a very informal baseball team which also comprised the son of 
Professor Dugald Jackson of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, two 
sons of the late President Grover Cleveland, and one or two of the Finlay 
boys from New York. I do not remember the names of the other players. 
We used to practice on a none-too horizontal field near the Finlay home, 
and the practice always meant for me a five-mile walk there and back. We 
played no more than two games, both of which we lost ignominiously. I 
was a substitute on the team. I think nothing can express better my exact 
status as an athlete.


11  Disinherited
Cornell, 1910–1911
Ex-Prodigy: 
My 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
11: 
Disinherited
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
I had won a scholarship at Cornell. Father was to accompany me to Ithaca, 
and at the end of the summer we had to decide how to get there. This was 
still in the days before the interurban trolley had been superseded by the 
bus and the coach. Father and I decided on a romantic trolley jaunt to 
central New York and Ithaca. There we called on Professor Thilly and made 
plans for the ensuing academic year. It was decided that I was to have the 
free run of the Thilly house, and to confide my youthful troubles and per­
plexities to Professor Thilly and his wife.
My father and Professor Thilly had a long evening talk together about the 
old days at the University of Missouri and about many other matters. In the 
course of the rather miscellaneous discussion, Thilly casually mentioned to 
Father that he remembered an allusion many years ago to a much earlier 
philosopher in the family, Maimonides. Father admitted hearing of rumors, 
perhaps not authentic but depending on old documents that my grandfa­
ther had lost, to the effect that we were descended from Maimonides.
I had not previously heard of the tradition, nor even of the name of 
Maimonides. Naturally I did not delay long before I had recourse to the 
encyclopedia. I found there that Maimonides, or Rabbi Moses ben Maimon, 
known as Rambam according to the conventional Jewish use of initials, 
was a native of Cordova domiciled in Cairo, and the body physician to 
the vizier of the Sultan Saladin. I learned that he was the head of the Jew­
ish community of Egypt and a great Aristotelian and that his most famous 
book is known as Moreh Nebukim, or the Guide of the Perplexed.
I was naturally interested to have such an important figure on which to 
hang our family pride, but the implications of the legend came to me with 
a profound shock. For the first time, I knew that I was Jewish, at least on my 
father’s side. You may ask how it was possible for an intelligent boy like me 
to have any doubts about this when my grandmother Wiener as far back as 
I could remember had received a newspaper printed in what I knew to be 

114 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
Hebrew characters. I can only answer that the world is complex, with rami­
fications not very understandable to an adolescent, and that it still seemed 
possible to me that there might be non-Jewish people in eastern Europe 
who used the Jewish characters. Furthermore, my cousin Olga had once 
told me that we were Jews; but my mother had contradicted this at a time 
when I had not yet learned to question the word of my parents.
At that time the social disadvantage of belonging to the Jewish group 
was considerably greater than it is now and there was definitely something 
to be said for allowing children to grow up through their early lives without 
consciousness of the social stigma of belonging to an unfavored group. I do 
not say categorically that this was the right thing to do; I merely say that it 
was a defensible thing to do and could be motivated—in fact, it was actu­
ally motivated—by a desire for the protection of the children. The moral 
responsibility of a policy like this is great. It is done nobly or it is done 
basely.
To put the best possible light on this course of action, it would be neces­
sary that the children brought up in ignorance of the fact that they histori­
cally originated from the Jewish group be also brought up with an attitude 
of understanding. They should be made to see that the disadvantage on 
the part of others of belonging to such an unfavored minority group is an 
unmerited burden which they should at least abstain from intensifying. 
Such an attitude should be carried throughout the whole of life and should 
be directed equally against the unjust stigmatization of Jews, of Irishmen, 
of recent immigrants, and of Negroes, et cetera. Of course, the best thing 
and indeed the only one that would be thoroughly justifiable from a moral 
point of view would be to excite in the child a resistance, if not hostility, 
to all forms of belittling prejudice, no matter what the objects might be. 
However, short of this, every word by which the child’s prejudice may be 
excited or intensified is a blow against his moral integrity, and ultimately 
a blow against his confidence and belief in himself when he should come 
to know, as he inevitably must, the truth of his own origin. The burden of 
the consciousness of Original Sin is hard enough to bear in any form; but 
a particularly insidious form of it is the knowledge that one belongs to a 
group that he has been taught to depreciate and to despise.
The responsibility for keeping the fact of my Jewishness secret was 
largely my mother’s. My father was involved in all this only secondarily 
and by implication. I believe that he had originally intended not to burden 
us by the consciousness of belonging to an undervalued group, while at the 
same time he wished to preserve intact our respect for that group and our 
potential self-respect. He had written a number of articles on Jewish themes 

11: Disinherited 
115
as well as a History of Yiddish Literature. He was also the first person to bring 
the name of Moritz Rosenfeld to the attention of the non-Jewish public. 
Father had been engaged in various negotiations with the Jewish Publi­
cation Society and with other similar Jewish organizations, and I gather 
these had involved considerable friction. Later I found that Father always 
claimed that the friction was the result of an arrogant insistence on the 
part of the Jewish organizations that a Jew was a Jew before he was a man, 
and that he owed inalienable allegiance to his own group before human­
ity itself. My father was always an individual, and was the last man in the 
world to stand pressure of this kind.
My mother’s attitude toward the Jews and all unpopular groups was dif­
ferent. Scarcely a day went by in which we did not hear some remark about 
the gluttony of the Jews or the bigotry of the Irish or the laziness of the 
Negroes. It is easy enough to understand how these sops to the prevailing 
narrowmindedness of that epoch were thrown out by one who had expe­
rienced the disadvantages of belonging to an unfavored group; but though 
one can understand the motives leading to this conformist spurning of 
one’s own origins, and can even forgive it in the sense in which the reli­
gious man hopes that his sin will be forgiven him, one cannot help regret­
ting it and being ashamed of it. He who asks for equity must do equity, and 
it is not good for the children of a Jewish family, whether they know they 
are Jewish or not, to hear another Jewish family spoken of contemptuously 
for making the same efforts to pass over that their own parents have been 
making.
The maintenance of a family silence such as that which my parents 
maintained, even if it might be considered advisable, is much more difficult 
than it appears at first glance. If there is agreement that such a silence shall 
be maintained, what can one partner do when the other makes disparaging 
remarks about the race before the children? He can either terminate the 
secret, or he can be a silent and unwilling observer of a course of conduct 
that can lead to nothing but delayed emotional catastrophe on the part of 
the child. The vital danger of even the whitest of lies is that if it is to be 
maintained it must lead to a whole policy of disingenuousness of which 
the end is not to be seen. The wounds inflicted by the truth are likely to be 
clean cuts which heal easily, but the bludgeoned wounds of a lie draw and 
fester.
In offering the maximum apology which I can for the course of conduct 
adopted by my parents, I do not wish to justify it as a whole or to condemn 
it. I do mean to affirm that it had serious consequences for me. I was led 
very quickly into a rebellion against my parents and to an acceptance of 

116 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
their disfavor. Who was I, simply because I was the son of my mother and 
father, to take advantage of a license to pass myself off as a Gentile, which 
was not granted to other people whom I knew? If being a Jew was some­
thing to invite a shrug of the shoulders and a contemptuous sniff, then I 
must either despise myself, or despise the attitude by which I was invited to 
weigh myself with one balance and the rest of the world with another. My 
protection may have been well intentioned, but it was a protection that I 
could not accept if I were to keep my integrity.
If the maintenance of my identity as a Jew had not been forced on me 
as an act of integrity, and if the fact that I was of Jewish origin had been 
known to me, but surrounded by no family-imposed aura of emotional 
conflict, I could and would have accepted it as a normal fact of my exis­
tence, of no exceptional importance either to myself or to anyone else. 
Probably some conflict would have been excited by the actual external anti-
Semitism which I found to belong to the times, and which would sooner or 
later have hit me one way or another. Nevertheless, unless there had been 
an ambiguity in the family attitude, this would not have hit me where it 
really hurt, in the matter of my own internal spiritual security. Thus the 
effect of an injudicious attempt to conceal from me my factual Jewish ori­
gin, combined with the wounds which I suffered from Jewish anti-Semitism 
within the family, contributed to make the Jewish issue more rather than 
less important in my life.
I say these things with the very clear and explicit intent to help pre­
vent those who may be tempted to repeat this mistake of starting the child 
into the hurly-burly of life with this unnecessary sense of frustration and 
damnation.
Thus, when I became aware of my Jewish origin, I was shocked. Later, 
when I looked up my mother’s maiden name and found that Kahn is merely 
a variant of Cohen, I was doubly shocked. I was not able to defend myself 
by the divided personality which allowed my mother’s family to weigh 
strangers and their own kinsmen with different weights. As I reasoned it out 
to myself, I was a Jew, and if the Jews were marked by those characteristics 
which my mother found so hateful, why I must have those characteristics 
myself, and share them with all those dear to me. I looked in the mirror and 
there was no mistake: the bulging myopic eyes, the slightly everted nostrils, 
the dark, wavy hair, the thick lips. They were all there, the marks of the 
Armenoid type. I looked at my sister’s photograph, and although she was 
a pretty girl in my eyes, she most certainly looked like a pretty Jewish girl. 
She had features not unlike those of a Jewish boy who happened to be my 
fellow lodger in my Cornell boardinghouse. He was a member of a recent 

11: Disinherited 
117
immigrant family and appeared very foreign against the background of his 
Anglo-Saxon classmates. My snobbishness prevented me from accepting 
him fully as a friend, and the meaning of this was clear to me: I could not 
accept myself as a person of any value.
In this emotional and intellectual dilemma, I did what most young­
sters do—I accepted the worst of both sides. It humiliates me to think of it 
even at the present day, but I alternated between a phase of cowardly self-
abasement and a phase of cowardly assertion, in which I was even more 
anti-Semitic than my mother. Add this to the problems of an undeveloped 
and socially inept boy, spending his first long visit away from home, to 
the release from the immediate educational pressure of my father before I 
had developed independent working habits, and you have the material of 
which misery is made.
For I was miserable. I had no proper idea of personal cleanliness and 
personal neatness, and I myself never knew when I was to blurt out some 
unpardonable rudeness or double entendre. I was ill at ease with my associ­
ates in the middle twenties, and there were no youngsters of my own age 
to replace them. The habits of vegetarianism inculcated in me by my father 
had increased the difficulty of a social life away from home, and together 
with other people. Yet I was greatly under his spell, and because of my 
upbringing, even the remote threat of his powers made me loath to aban­
don these habits as my sisters were later to do.
My studies at home had always been under the close inspection of my 
father. This made it hard for me to develop good independent habits of 
study. I know that Father claimed to have always been in favor of my intel­
lectual independence, and to have wished me to stand firmly on my own 
feet; yet whatever he purported to wish, the pattern of our life together 
worked in exactly the opposite direction. I had grown to depend on his sup­
port, and even on the support of his severity. To pass from this shelter to the 
full responsibility of a man among men was too much for me.
I took a rather divers series of courses my year at Cornell. I read Plato’s 
Republic in Greek with Hammond and found that I had not lost too much 
of my Greek fluency in my Harvard year. I also attended the psychological 
laboratory and took a course with Albee on the English classical philoso­
phers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Albee’s course was dry 
but instructive, and I believe that there is an element still in my literary 
style which I owe to the rapid perusal of a large amount of seventeenth-
century material.
I tried to take a mathematical course under Hutchinson on the theory 
of functions of a complex variable, but I found that it was beyond me. Part 

118 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
of the difficulty came from my own immaturity, but another part—to my 
way of thinking—from the fact that the course did not cover an adequate 
approach to the real logical difficulties of the subject. It was only later at 
Cambridge, when I found these difficulties faced boldly by Hardy instead of 
left to the student with an attitude of “Proceed and faith will come,” that I 
began to find myself at home in function theory.
I did not fall down so badly in the Plato course, for this was but the 
continuation of my father’s teaching under another preceptor. In my meta­
physical and ethical courses I suffered from a new and vague adolescent 
religiosity (which did not last very long), and it needed a sharp logic to keep 
me from diffuse sentimentality.
I had to write essays for Albee on the seventeenth- and eighteenth-
century philosophers. I was cramped by a boyish style, together with a 
physical awkwardness with the pen. My essays wound up in compact knots 
of words, so at variance with the norms of the English language that I was 
more than once asked whether my first language had not been German.
Cornell University had a philosophical periodical of its own, and one 
of the duties of the Sage Fellows was to write brief abstracts of articles in 
other philosophical journals to be included in a special section devoted to 
the purpose. The original languages were English, French, and German; 
and the exercise of translation familiarized us both with the philosophical 
vocabulary of these languages and with the ideas current in the world. I 
cannot vouch for the quality of our translations, but I have a very profound 
impression of the intellectual value of the work to ourselves.
There were some reliefs in this black year of my life. Although I could 
not fully share the companionship of my fellow students, the picnics up 
a neighboring creek and the winter sleigh rides which took place there 
after the fall of the snow were very pleasant indeed. There were one or 
two undergraduates in my boardinghouse with whom I had good times 
and bull sessions, and they used to play childish pranks on me and on one 
another. The scenery of the campus was gorgeous and later, when spring 
came around, the plantations of flowering quince were beautiful beyond 
anything I had seen on the Tufts College campus or elsewhere. There were 
sailboat rides on Cayuga Lake and tramps to neighboring waterfalls, where 
we swam and bathed under the plunging masses of water.
I have carried down to the present day the friendship of more than one 
of my fellow students. Christian Ruckmich, a gaunt, Lincoln-like figure, 
was my partner in many of my walks and in the psychological laboratory. I 
have heard from him from Abyssinia within the last few years. He has been 

11: Disinherited 
119
engaged there in reforming the educational system of the country, and his 
boy has taken up aviation.
There was also Tsanoff, the Bulgarian, whom I have seen within the 
last year or two at the Rice Institute, still teaching philosophy. There was 
a delightful couple by the name of Schaub with whom I often lunched. 
Schaub taught a course on comparative religion, and his discussion of the 
Old Testament fitted in very well with the philological interest which I had 
acquired from my father, from Professor Wade at Tufts, and from browsing 
around our library.
As the year went on, it began to appear that I had not earned a renewal 
of the fellowship which had taken me to Ithaca, or at any rate if I were to 
receive it again, it would be by special grace. I felt oppressed, not only by 
my indifferent success in my courses, but by that sense of adolescent guilt 
that accompanies the internal sexual development of almost every normal 
young person. My sense of guilt led me to avoid the Thillys, and this alien­
ation ended in a quarrel between my father and Professor Thilly. It was 
almost impossible to make my father believe that one of his family could 
be at fault. It was even more impossible for me to stand up to the wither­
ing stream of invective which a discussion was bound to bring down upon 
my head.
Before the end of the year there was other news from home. I had a new 
brother, a sickly child, who scarcely lived out the year. With the bad news 
from Cornell, my father snatched me out of the Sage School and forced 
me to transfer to the department of philosophy of the Harvard Graduate 
School. I know that the responsibility of my family made it difficult for my 
father to back a doubtful bet, but I nevertheless wish that as a young man 
I had received the opportunity to redeem an error in the place in which I 
had made it. The result of Father’s policy of transferring me was to increase 
my lack of self-confidence, which was already great enough. My blunders 
became a menacing sequence of dead years never to be undone. Meanwhile 
I did not have the opportunity to learn the arts and techniques of indepen­
dence, and the future was for me a turbid and depressing pool.
I had time after I came home to take stock of my moral situation. My 
achievement of independence during the year at Cornell had been incalcu­
lably retarded by the confused mass of feelings of resentment, despair, and 
rejection which had followed early in the year upon the discovery of my 
Jewishness.
Some of my friends have asked me to render more specific the discussion 
of the shock which I experienced and the subsequent adjustment which 
it was necessary for me to go through in order to be reasonably at peace 

120 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
with myself. Manifestly to be at once a Jew and to have had inculcated in 
me by certain of my mentors hostile or depreciating attitudes to the Jews 
was a morally impossible position. It might have led me into a continued 
Jewish anti-Semitism or, on the other hand, to a flight into Abraham’s 
bosom.
In fact, neither of these escapes was possible for me. I had received too 
strong a lesson in intellectual and moral integrity from my father to be 
willing to accept one brand of justice for myself and my near kinsfolk and 
another brand of justice for the outer world. I had heard enough harsh 
remarks at home concerning other university families of Jewish origin who 
had tried to escape from Judaism to realize that there were those close to 
me who weighed the Wiener family with one scale and the rest of the world 
with a very different one. Quite crassly, even if I myself and some of my 
immediate family had been willing to deny my Jewish origin, this denial 
would not pass current one foot beyond our doorstep.
In short, I had neither the possibility nor the wish to live a lie. Any anti-
Semitism on my part must be self-hatred, nothing less. A man who hates 
himself has an enemy whom he can never escape. This way there lay only 
discouragement, disillusionment, and in the end madness.
Yet it was equally impossible for me to come into the fold of Judaism. I 
had never been there, and in my entire earlier education I had seen the Jew­
ish community only from the outside and had the very vaguest idea of its 
rites and customs, its permissions and obligations. The break with orthodox 
Judaism had indeed begun in my grandfather’s time; in pursuit of his desire 
to Germanize the eastern Jews and to replace Yiddish by High German, my 
father had been sent in part at least to a Lutheran school. Thus a return to 
Judaism on my own part would not be a true return, but a fresh conversion 
and conviction. For better or worse, I do not regard conversions of any sort 
with very favorable eyes, nor did my father. There is something against the 
grain in the attitude of abnegation and of denial of personal judgment in 
the wholesale acceptance of any creed, whether in religion, in science, or 
in politics. The attitude of the scholar is to reserve the right to change his 
opinion at any time on the basis of evidence produced, and I was born and 
bred to the scholar’s trade.
This training of mine went very deep into my nature. I have never had 
the impulse to gregariousness in my thinking and feeling despite all my 
very deep respect for man as man, whether he be a scholar or not. It was 
emotionally impossible for me to hide myself in the great majority as a fugi­
tive from Judaism; but it was equally impossible for me to hide myself and 
be consoled in a restrictedly Jewish community. I could not believe in the 

11: Disinherited 
121
old-line New Englanders as a Chosen People: but not even the vast weight 
of the Jewish tradition could persuade me to believe in Israel as a Chosen 
People. The one thing that I had known about my father’s relation to Juda­
ism was that he had been an assimilationist, rather than Zionist, and that 
he had had many arguments with Zangwill and others on this issue. This 
was a position which I approved not only because he was my father but also 
because I thought he had seized the stick by the right end.
Thus I was powerfully moved by the discovery of my Jewishness, but 
I could see no way out in anti-Semitism or in ultra-Judaism. What, then, 
could I do?
I cannot tell when I arrived at an answer to my problems, for the solu­
tion occurred step by step and was not reasonably complete until after my 
marriage. Yet one thing became clear very early: that anti-Jewish prejudice 
was not alone in the world but stood among the many forms in which a 
group in power sought, whether consciously or unconsciously, to keep the 
good things of the world for itself and to push down those other people 
who desired the same good things. I had read enough of Kipling to know 
the English imperialist attitude, and I already had enough Hindu friends to 
realize how bitterly this attitude was resented. My Chinese friends spoke 
with me very frankly concerning the aggressions of the Western nations in 
China, and I had only to use my eyes and ears to know something of the 
situation of the Negro in this country, particularly if he aspires to be some­
thing more than a farm hand or an unskilled worker. I was quite adequately 
informed concerning the mutual bitterness between the old Bostonian and 
the rising Irish group which demanded its own share of power in the com­
munity and took a very liberal view of what that share should be when 
other immigrants and minor groups came into question.
The net result was that I could only feel at peace with myself if I hated 
anti-Jewish prejudice as prejudice without having the first emphasis on the 
fact that it was directed against the group to which I belonged. I felt any­
thing less than this as a demand for special privilege by myself and by those 
about me. But in resisting prejudice against the Oriental, prejudice against 
the Catholic, prejudice against the immigrant, prejudice against the Negro, 
I felt that I had a sound basis on which to resist prejudice against the Jew as 
well. For a long time I had been interested in my fellow students from the 
Orient and from other foreign countries, and I now saw their problems as 
parallel to my own and, in many cases, far deeper and more difficult.
Moreover, when I heard of our reputed descent from Maimonides, I real­
ized that even deeper than our simple Jewishness, in a sense the Orient 
was part of our own family tradition. Who was I, a man whose proudest 

122 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
ancestor had led a life in a Moslem community, to identify myself exclu­
sively with the West against the East? Thus I came to study and to observe 
parallelisms between the intellectual development of the Jews, especially 
in that interesting period of transition which began with Moses Mendels­
sohn and led to the integration of Jewish learning with European learning 
in general, with similar phenomena taking place before my eyes among the 
non-European men of learning. This came to an even sharper focus later on 
when I spent part of a year assisting Professor Hattori, a Japanese professor 
at Harvard, in the routine work of his course on Chinese philosophy.
This covers the intimate personal side of my reaction to my discovery 
that I was of Jewish origin. It may be well, however, to add a few facts 
concerning anti-Semitic prejudice and its history in those communities in 
which I have lived since my childhood. It is fairly clear from the history of 
those Jewish families who came to the United States before the middle of 
the last century that anti-Semitic prejudice was not a considerable factor 
in their lives. As a matter of fact, the dominating Protestants in the United 
States were more than ready to acknowledge the extent to which they had 
drawn upon the Old Testament in their writings and thought and to see in 
the Jewish immigrant a reflection of their own traditions. I have been told 
that even the “Know Nothing Movement” was not particularly anti-Semitic 
and, further, that some of the leaders of this unsavory episode in our his­
tory were drawn from the Jews themselves. Be that as it may, the beginning 
of the twentieth century saw the blunting of our national resistance to anti-
Semitism as it saw the blunting of New England’s traditional friendship 
for the Negro and of many other of the broader attitudes of earlier days. 
The Gilded Age had already come to an end and had left as its heir the 
Varnished Age.

12  Problems and Confusions
Summer, 1911
Ex-Prodigy: 
My 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
12: 
Problems 
and 
Confusions
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
That summer we spent at a farmhouse not far from Bridgewater, New Hamp­
shire. There was only one small mountain in the immediate neighborhood, 
and it was too rough and trailless for my father to permit me to climb it. 
I tramped the roads of the neighboring countryside in search of summer 
camps where I might earn a little money as a teacher, and find a little com­
panionship in the bargain, but my services were not in demand. I pitched 
hay in a local field and fell desperately ill under an allergy to haydust. I 
read back numbers of Harper’s and Scribner’s Magazines and the Century, and 
I longed for the beginning of term to relieve me from the boredom which 
came from a family living too close together and driven in upon itself.
My father’s revolutionary theories of education were confirmed in his 
eyes by the success which, with all my shortcomings, I had already found in 
intellectual work. It soon became clear that my sisters, although very clever 
girls by any ordinary standard, were not responding to my father’s training 
as I had. And in part, my father did not expect as much of them. This was 
laid to their being girls, unable to stand up to the severe discipline to which 
I had been subjected.
Our family portioned out the fates of the family members in advance. 
The expectation that my sister Constance was to be the artistic one made 
my parents assign music, painting, and literature to be her field. To prevent 
any contretemps, they were to be strictly eschewed by the rest of us.
Thus Constance, and, in a similar way but later, my sister Bertha too, was 
removed from the sphere of intellectual competition into which I had been 
initiated. Occasionally I indulged in a certain envy of their easier fates, and 
there were times when I would have considered it a privilege to be born a 
girl and to be faced no longer with a need for the hard work of intellectual 
effort, and the ultimate requirement of standing alone in a world I felt to 
be hostile.

124 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
The case of my brother Fritz was of course a very different matter from 
that of my sisters. It was not until I was a graduate student at Harvard that 
he had reached the age where his education severely impinged upon us. 
He was destined by my parents for the same career of scholarship as I. This 
time there was no question of weaker demands on the weaker sex, and 
my father’s educational theories had to be faced in their full significance. 
My father had reiterated that my success, if indeed I had had any genuine 
success, was not so much a result of any superior ability on my part as 
of his training. This opinion he had expressed in print in various articles 
and interviews.1 He claimed that I was a most average boy who had been 
brought to a high level of accomplishment by the merit of his teaching and 
by that merit alone. When this was written down in ineffaceable printer’s 
ink, it had a devastating effect on me. It declared to the public that my fail­
ures were my own but my successes were my father’s.
Now that my brother had come of school age, there was a second Wiener 
candidate for fame and distinction, and for the upholding of the judgment 
of my father. It was inevitable, and it had been made publicly inevitable, 
that my father should try to duplicate with his younger boy what he had 
already accomplished with me. It became almost as inevitable that the 
anticipation of Fritz’s success was to be thrown in my face in order to deflate 
me and to exalt the authority of my father.
I never agreed with Father in his estimate of me as a boy of average 
abilities, which I always felt had been adopted to curb my self-conceit and 
cut me down to family size. It was not fair to expect a priori that Fritz 
could do what I had done. Furthermore, Father did not take into consider­
ation the fact that although I was a nervous and difficult youngster, I had 
plenty of stamina, and could absorb without utter destruction a punish­
ment far greater than that which the average child could take. Thus when 
my brother turned out to be a somewhat frail child, endowed with what I 
believe to be good average ability but without any exceptional powers, the 
scene was set for trouble.
The bickering about Fritz’s education lasted for well over twenty years. I 
resented as unfair the extra weight which my parents threw into the scales 
to equalize the balance between my brother and me. I was also very much 
displeased with the role that I was given at sixteen as my younger brother’s 
mentor and nursemaid, taking him to primary school every morning before 
beginning a full day’s work. I was expected to display to him a companion­
ship rarely to be shown by a lumbering adolescent to a mere child eleven 
years younger. This age difference was critical. When I was sixteen, he was 
five; when I was twenty-five, he was still only fourteen.

12: Problems and Confusions 
125
In defense of my parents’ expectations of my relationship with Fritz, it 
is necessary to remember that the world was changing even during that 
period before the First World War when I was growing up. When I and 
my older sister had been young children, not even the relative poverty of 
the family had kept my mother from having the assistance of at least two 
servants, one of whom had been a cook and the other generally an excel­
lent nursemaid. The changes of the century had already begun to dry up 
the stream of immigrant household labor, and wages had risen sharply. Not 
even our greater prosperity could make up for the new conditions and re-
create a class of labor that had almost ceased to exist. Thus the care of the 
younger child fell on the older one.
Looking back on the matter from my present point of view, I cannot 
blame my parents for passing on to me a responsibility which they had 
taken so readily in the care of the elder children, yet the circumstances of 
my responsibility were not fair to me. My duty to Fritz was a deputized one, 
completely unaccompanied by authority. Fritz was tiresome under my tute­
lage, and if I took any measure, no matter how mild, to make him behave, 
he had only to complain to our parents. Whatever step I might have taken 
was inexcusable to them. Furthermore, I was a confused, socially inept ado­
lescent, who by any reasonable standard had been overworked for years 
and who needed every available moment to develop his social contacts and 
his social poise.
It will be no surprise that my companions, whether boys and girls, 
whether men and women, were judged more critically by my parents 
according to whether they accepted or did not accept Fritz than on any 
other point whatsoever. This, too, was unfair to me. It is too much to ask 
young people to take as a friend another youngster who always has an 
infant brother toddling after him, particularly when he has no authority 
over his brother and the child knows this. Thus there is plenty of explana­
tion, if not excuse, for the fact that I was often harsh if not cruel to my 
brother. Irony and sarcasm are the weapons for those who have no other 
weapons; and these I did not spare. The difficult situation grew even more 
difficult.
To a certain extent, too, I was given the responsibility but not the 
authority for Fritz’s education. Fritz rapidly developed a vocabulary of 
the intellectual, far beyond his understanding. In the competition within 
the family, he tried to hold his own by asking questions of a learned sort, 
with answers he did not fully understand and in which he had no deep 
interest. I was told that I was to answer these questions in detail, even 
when they had ceased to have an interest to Fritz and when his mind was 

126 
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth
wandering elsewhere. When the family went to the theater together, I was 
supposed to offer a commentary on whatever features of the show had 
excited my brother’s desire to display his intelligence, and I did not have 
a decent opportunity for the reflections on it which belonged to me for 
myself and for discussions with my true intellectual contemporaries.
Of course, in all this I am going well beyond the period of my history 
that I have made the subject of this chapter and I am giving an account of 
a festering sore which continued to infect our family life. During a con­
siderable part of this period I was living at home, either as a minor or as 
an adult paying his contributions to the family fund. It may be asked why 
I did not leave the family to take lodging somewhere for myself, perhaps 
even in Cambridge. Many times I was on the point of doing so, and many 
times my parents indicated that if I continued my course of conduct, this 
would be the inevitable result. However, it was made dear, particularly by 
my mother, that the separation would be held against me for all eternity, 
as a sign of my ultimate failure, and would mean the complete and final 
collapse of family relations.
During the earlier period of my life at home, I was made aware that I 
was completely dependent on the family bounty, and that such sums as I 
gained by scholarships were only a partial offset against this. Later, when 
I had acquired the ability to earn my own living, I had still not acquired 
any circle of friends outside the family. Thus, while separation from the 
family might have been desirable, exile from the family was exile into outer 
darkness.
Those who read further in this book will see that my summers were 
marked by long mountain excursions for many years before my marriage. 
Later on, these excursions were replaced to some extent by trips to Europe, 
often together with my sisters. These gave some alleviation of the pressure 
of family life, and in particular of my forced custodianship of my brother, 
and were absolutely essential to my well-being. However, my parents made 
every attempt to compel me to accept Fritz as a companion on my moun­
tain hikes. This was inequitable, and represented a demand that I could not 
accept. This had not been the first time that the rather patriarchal structure 
of the family had disturbed me. Once, in my youth, my father had planned 
to join with me in making a museum collection of the fauna and flora of 
the Old Mill Farm neighborhood and had proposed that we spend a large 
part of our spare time in maintaining this collection. Once he had spoken 
of his intention, when Constance and I had grown up, to devote the rest 
of his life to the conducting of a children’s school on his own principles, 
in which my sister and I were to be teachers. More than once he had talked 

12: Problems and Confusions 
127
of returning to the romantic adventure of his youth, and of crossing the 
continent with us in a covered wagon. All these projects were admirable 
as indications of his youthful spirit, and would have been most charming 
suggestions of paternal love and family interest in a household less strictly 
under parental control. As things were, they represented another turn of 
the screw.
The summer always found us raising a garden, and I was relegated to the 
tasks of weeding, thinning asparagus, picking peaches, and the like. These 
were light tasks, and would have been most agreeable if they had not repre­
sented a simple outdoor extension of the regime of my filial servitude. I was 
clumsy and I was inefficient and I was lazy; and I had to hear these faults 
ding-donged into me hour after hour as I worked by my father’s side in the 
fields. I was quite as unsatisfactory a farmhand as my father indicated, and 
I certainly developed a repugnance for work in the fields. This has lasted 
to the present day, and has hampered me at a time when my diminishing 
stock of muscular vigor would otherwise make me welcome light garden 
work as a still admissible form of bodily activity. Nevertheless, so long as 
my father’s mentorship continued to dictate my way of life all winter, it 
was intolerable that the summer, which I needed badly for recuperation 
and the formation of new social contacts, should merely be an extension 
of the winter regime.
Indeed, at a later period after the First World War, when father had sold 
the Sparks Street house as too large for a family no longer needing grow­
ing space, he put the money not only into a smaller and older house on 
Buckingham Street, but into an apple farm in the town of Groton, Mas­
sachusetts. He had hoped that the whole family would co-operate in this 
work, at least during the apple-picking season, and that the place would 
furnish in return a cool summer for the married children and the expected 
grandchildren. The scheme was bound to fail from the beginning. Young 
people in their early twenties have to consider the pressing necessity of 
their own social life, and cannot long be denied the opportunity for seeking 
and meeting their prospective mates.
Note
1.  An article entitled “New Ideas in Child Training” by H. Addington Bruce, published 
in The American Magazine in July, 1911, quoted my father directly:
I am convinced that it is the training to which we must attribute the results secured with them. 
It is nonsense to say, as some people do, that Norbert and Constance and Bertha are unusually 
gifted children. They are nothing of the sort. If they know more than other children of their age, 
it is because they have been trained differently.


13  A Philosopher Despite Himself
Harvard, 1911–1913
Ex-Prodigy: 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
13: 
A 
Philosopher 
Despite 
Himself
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
I returned to Harvard as a candidate for a Ph.D. in Philosophy in Septem­
ber, 1911, when I was nearly seventeen years old. The period between 1911 
and the completion of my doctorate was the period of great names in the 
Harvard philosophy department, and although William James was dead, 
Royce, Palmer, Münsterberg, and Santayana were alive and active.
In my first year I took a course with Santayana. I remember very little 
of its content but a considerable amount of its atmosphere. The feeling of 
a continuity with an old culture and the feeling that philosophy was an 
intrinsic part of life, or art, and of the spirit, gave me a great deal of satisfac­
tion; and yet, after the passage of all these years, I cannot put my finger on 
any definite idea which that course has given me.
Palmer’s courses mean as little to me in retrospect. They were reading 
courses, and as far as I remember, they covered the traditional philosophy 
of the English school. What I do recollect of Palmer was his grave, sweet-
tempered personality, a little bowed down by the weight of years, but still 
eager to encourage the ideas and to allay the natural timidity of the young 
student.
Ralph Barton Perry was among the chief of those to welcome me on 
my father’s behalf as a student. He and Holt, the psychologist, were two 
among the five or six authors of a then popular manifesto known as the 
“new realism.” It contained the combined echoes of James’s pragmatism 
with a certain analogy with the work of Bertrand Russell and G. E. Moore 
in England, and represented a protest against that idealism that dissolves 
all things into mind and the phenomena of mind. It made a rather plau­
sible case for itself, yet I remember that its chief impression on me was of 
an intolerable shoddiness and brashness. One of the authors went so far as 
to try to base his ideas on a mathematical logic in which every other word 
represented a confusion of misunderstood terms. The literary style of the 
composition was sophomoric. Nevertheless, I remember Holt as a brilliant 

130 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
and charming personality, as a fluent dialectician within the frame of his 
seminar, while Perry has remained one of the great and dignified figures of 
American liberalism.
I had two different sorts of contact with Josiah Royce. One was in his 
course on mathematical logic. Although I did not regard his own contribu­
tions to mathematical logic as of major character, he introduced me to the 
subject. Royce was a many-sided man, coming at a critical period in the 
intellectual world when the old religious springs of philosophical thought 
were drying up and new scientific impulses were bursting into life. His 
mathematical logic bore the signs that almost always indicate a brilliant 
man who has come too late into a new field to obtain perfect mastery of it.
This position of facing both the past and the future was also clear in 
Royce’s seminar on scientific method, which I attended for two years, and 
which gave me some of the most valuable training I have ever had. Royce 
welcomed into this little group every sort of intellectual who was carrying 
out a reasonable program of work and who was articulate concerning the 
methods by which he had come to his own ideas and concerning the philo­
sophical significance thereof.
The group was heterogeneous to say the least. Among us was a Hawaiian 
expert on volcanos. He has left on my memory only the impression of the 
two words pahoehoe and aa, which I understand to be the designation of 
two types of lava. Among us was also Frederic Adams Woods, the author of 
Heredity in Royalty, a eugenicist of a snobbish cast of mind and a pregenetic 
point of view. Percy Bridgman, who was even then beginning to be skepti­
cal about the elements contained in experiment and in observation, and 
who understood the influence on physics of James’s pragmatism, was defi­
nitely veering toward the operational position which he later assumed. The 
first head of Boston’s Psychopathic Hospital, Southard, spoke interestingly 
on the problems of psychiatric method. There was also Professor Lawrence 
J. Henderson, the physiologist, who combined some really brilliant ideas 
about the fitness of the environment with what seemed to me a distressing 
inability to place them in any philosophical structure, and whose pompos­
ity of manner was not diminished by the article of faith that led him to 
place a great business administrator in the scheme of things about halfway 
between a pure scholar like himself and the Creator. Incidentally, I found 
that those who undervalue their own profession of learning are rarely those 
who rise to the greatest heights in it.
I believe that it was in this seminar that I first met F. C. Rattray, an Eng­
lishman, later to become a Unitarian clergyman and to occupy the pulpit of 
a church in the English Cambridge. At that time it was Rattray more than 

13: A Philosopher Despite Himself 
131
any of my official teachers who showed me what good dialectic was, and to 
what fineness the art of class discussion could be carried.
I have never seen a man as able to prick a bubble in the froth that often 
attends such arguments. Nevertheless, I could not help feeling that his 
devotion to Samuel Butler and his life force, after the fashion of Bernard 
Shaw, was more a matter of personal emotion adroitly defended by a keen 
wit than something susceptible to rigorous argument. Rattray and I often 
used to join forces in the seminars in which we participated, and I am afraid 
that I became an apt pupil of his and a thorn in the flesh of my mentors.
I also attended Münsterberg’s seminars. He was a most puzzling person­
ality. How much of his arrogance was a covert contempt for the America 
in which he was teaching, and the result of comparison of it with the Ger­
many in which he had failed to find permanent lodgment, we shall never 
know. His transpontine personality was curiously modeled after that of 
the German Kaiser, and in my opinion was not a little expressive of the 
unsureness and brusque assertiveness which went as a false streak through 
many different social layers of the powerful and able Second Reich. What­
ever his private opinion of the America which he adopted and which had 
adopted him, he had become the master of one of its best rewarded arts: 
that of personal publicity. His portentous interviews were given a much 
more intriguing tone by the heavy foreign accent and the slightly foreign 
phraseology in which they were presented, and Münsterberg became the 
joy of the reporters.
I learned the mathematical aspect of my philosophy from Professor E. 
V. Huntington. He was an old friend of my father, and had visited us when 
we were living in Old Mill Farm in the town of Harvard. I remember that 
at that period, before I had been graduated from high school, Huntington 
had tried me out with a little analytical geometry, and had shown me the 
theory of the nine-point circle.
Huntington was a magnificent teacher and a very kind man. His exer­
cises in postulate theory were all educational gems. He would take a simple 
mathematical structure and write a series of postulates for it for which we 
were to find not only examples satisfying the complete list, but other exam­
ples failing to satisfy it in just one place or in several specified places. We 
were also encouraged to draw up sets of postulates of our own. Both Sidis 
and I were in this class, and it was here that I first became aware of the boy’s 
real ability and of how great a loss mathematics suffered in his premature 
breakdown.
Huntington’s career has always remained a mystery to me. With 
his keenness and his inventiveness I should have expected some great 

132 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
mathematical contribution from his pen. Nevertheless, all his pieces of 
work, no matter how much they may contain of ideas, have remained min­
iatures and vignettes. I do remember one larger piece of work of his in 
which he attempted to give a basis to plane and solid geometry; but on the 
one hand, the work did not go greatly beyond the slightly earlier efforts of 
Hilbert, and on the other, some of his chief ideas had already found a rep­
resentation in the work of Whitehead. The valuable and honorable career 
of Huntington seems to me to bear the lesson that one of the most serious 
possible lacks in mathematical productivity is the lack of ambition, that 
Huntington simply set his sights too low.
Let me say a word or two about my amusements during these years. 
During my long mountain tramp with my father in 1910, I had become 
acquainted with the excellent work done by the Appalachian Mountain 
Club in the maintenance of trails in the White Mountains. I joined the club 
in the fall of 1912, and I got a large part of my exercise in its Saturday walks. 
A group of us, distributed in age and sex, but all of us devoted trampers, 
were in the habit of foregathering at one of Boston’s railroad stations for a 
suburban train trip and an afternoon’s brisk walk in the country.
In 1912 I had obtained my M.A. It did not represent any particular stage 
in the voyage leading to the Ph.D. but it was convenient to have in case I 
should meet any obstacle the next year. I had also passed, as I have said, 
the preliminary examinations on a variety of topics, and they threw me 
into somewhat closer contacts with my fellow students than I had found 
already.
Among other things, this was the year of the Titanic. It represented a 
shock to our emotional security which was a fitting introduction for the 
great shocks to follow. It was perhaps this event rather than the beginning 
of the First World War two years later that awakened us children of the long 
peace that had so long protected Europe and America to the fact that we 
were not the favored darlings of a beneficent universe.
Besides my usual reading from Dumas and Kipling, who were the delights 
of an adolescent boy, I added to the list of the books that I particularly 
enjoyed. Swift is no favorite of the very young, even through the veil of 
bowdlerization which surrounds the carefully expurgated editions to which 
they have access. But as a boy grows up, he finds the bitter draft of satire 
a strong and manly tonic, and I came to enjoy Swift, even though I shud­
dered as I read him. I also came to enjoy the milder but still vigorous vein 
of Thackeray, and to forgive or even to delight in his long-windedness. But 
above all satirists, I came to love the heart-rending cries of Heine, in which 
not one word is missing or in excess to obscure his love and his venom. I 

13: A Philosopher Despite Himself 
133
know, as did my father, almost every word of his Hebraische Melodien, and 
there are no poems that can move the Jew in me to greater pride or agony.
These books I read, not once, but many times over, lying face down on 
my bed, and sucking the last savor out of the phrases I had scanned many 
times before. I have never been a great reader of new things; but what I have 
read and loved, I have taken into my memory, so that it has become a part 
of me, never to be discarded.
In the same way, I relearned my Latin and my Greek. The lapidary poetry 
of Horace is not merely something buried between the pages of my school­
books: it is engraved on the tablets of my memory. The sweep and grandeur 
of Homer are recollections which I can never forget. I may not be much of 
a classicist in the technical, competitive sense, but the roots of a classical 
education are firm in me.
At this time, my sister received a copy of Ruskin’s Modern Painters. I read 
it avidly, and I thoroughly enjoyed Ruskin’s rather academic drawings and 
the magnificent poetry of his language. Although I found his ventures into 
what might be called quasi-science dogmatic and incorrect, I could not help 
paying tribute to his superb talents as an observer. The book was my intro­
duction to an appreciation of painting, sculpture, and architecture, but my 
later experience has taught me that though it is a brilliant commentary on 
the arts, there is a certain willfulness in Ruskin’s prejudices, and that his 
study needs to be supplemented with a direct acquaintance with the great 
works of art and by a more catholic attitude toward the arts of the non-
European countries.
The summer of 1912 we returned to the town of Sandwich and, to our 
delight, settled in the little interior valley at the foot of Flat Mountain and 
Sandwich Dome. The house we rented was known as the Tappan Place. 
Our next-door neighbors were the happy-go-lucky family of a Cambridge 
banker, ranging in ages from less than ten to the middle twenties. With 
one exception they were girls. They were great trampers, and with my own 
newly excited interest in climbing, we shared many quick jaunts up and 
down Sandwich Dome and Whiteface. I found the girls attractive, and was 
particularly taken by the one who was nearest my own age. Although I do 
not believe that I ever avowed my own admiration for her, there is probably 
still standing behind our house more than one beech tree that bears the 
marks of my jackknife.
I continued to tramp the woods with my father, but it was already 
clear that as my vigor increased, his had commenced to wane. The mixed 
pleasures of a heavy pack and a night on a balsam bed were no longer 
for him.

134 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
I had decided to work with Royce for my Ph.D. the next year in the field 
of mathematical logic. However, Royce’s health had broken down, and Pro­
fessor Karl Schmidt of Tufts College consented to take his place. Schmidt, 
who, I later learned, was a summer neighbor of ours in New Hampshire, was 
then a young man, vigorously interested in mathematical logic rather than 
the religious philosophy which later became his field during his tenure of 
office at Carlton College. Schmidt set me as a possible topic a comparison 
between the algebra of relatives of Schroeder and that of Whitehead and 
Russell. There was a lot of formal work to be done on this topic which I 
found easy; though later, when I came to study under Bertrand Russell in 
England, I learned that I had missed almost every issue of true philosophi­
cal significance. However, my material made an acceptable thesis, and it 
ultimately led me to the doctor’s degree.
Schmidt was a patient and understanding teacher with Huntington’s 
quality of being able to bring a young man to intellectual productivity by 
easy stages. If I had not had gentle handling that year, I do not believe that 
I could have come through it unmarked, for besides my dissertation, there 
were two ranks of dragons awaiting me.
The first mild fire-dragons were my topical examinations, which were 
written. Behind these loomed the fiercer dragons of my oral examina­
tions. I passed through my topical examinations with my head bloody but 
unbowed. One incident in connection with them does not redound to my 
credit. All of us who had taken the examinations were very curious about 
our grades, and we found a compliant janitor who had access to the pro­
fessors’ rooms and the papers on which the grades lay. I regret to say that 
I teased him into telling me what these grades were, and I let at least one 
other candidate into the secret. It was a mere gesture of misjudged curios­
ity and misjudged good will, and bribery took no part in it, though I was 
accused of such a bribery later on.
I dreaded the oral examinations far more than the topicals. I went 
around to the houses of my various professors to take them. In every case 
the professor was kind and obliging, and in every case I went through the 
examination in a sort of trance scarcely understanding the words said to 
me. With Professor Woods, who examined me in Greek Philosophy, I found 
that I had forgotten almost every word of Greek that I had ever known, and 
was scarcely able to construe the simplest passage of Plato’s Republic.
I must give my father every credit of seeing me through the great ordeal 
of the oral examinations. Every morning he went for a walk with me to 
keep up my physical condition and to reinforce my courage. Together we 
walked over many parts of Cambridge which were as yet unknown to me. 

13: A Philosopher Despite Himself 
135
He would ask me questions concerning the examinations that were ahead 
and would see to it that I had a fair idea as to how to answer them.
Nevertheless, at my own valuation, I should have failed every exami­
nation; but examining professors for the doctorate are likely to be more 
human and sympathetic with the student than the student is with himself, 
and to give him the benefit of every doubt. The terror of the student is 
familiar to all examining professors and is a part of the normal environ­
ment of the examination for which they automatically compensate, so that 
no doctoral examination is taken at its full face value but is always inter­
preted in the light of such other data as the professor may have concerning 
the student’s ability.
I have often been an examining professor myself in the course of my 
duties at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. I have learned that ter­
ror deserves sympathy and is pardonable and indeed normal; and although 
the attempt to exert ingenuity on the spot and to lift oneself out of a diffi­
culty while standing before the examiner is commendable, bluff is inexcus­
able. It is not the timid student but the glib yet ununderstanding student 
who has the most to fear.
After my oral examinations on specific subjects, I proceeded to the last 
part of the gantlet that I was to run, which consisted of my examination on 
my doctoral dissertation before the entire group of Harvard philosophers. 
This examination is theoretically the most critical stage in the ordeal of 
the candidate for the doctor’s degree. But in fact no well-regulated depart­
ment will permit a candidate to proceed so far unless it is substantially 
sure that he is going to pass. Furthermore, the candidate has now the tre­
mendous advantage of reporting on a subject in which he is theoretically 
better informed than any of his examiners, so that there is no excuse for 
an honest man to be terrified, except by being tongue-tied and timid; and 
this, as I have said, is what his professors are most ready to condone. In 
fact, the oral examination for the doctorate is much more an examination 
in the student’s conduct before a class than in anything else, and exerts a 
considerable amount of influence in the selection of those students who are 
going on to preferred academic positions. Here I do not believe that I did 
particularly well.
In the period between my examination and the last date duly allowed 
by Harvard statutes, I copied my dissertation on the typewriter in such a 
form that I might with decency embalm it in the Harvard archives. Some 
of this work was done at home, and some under the gaze of the portraits of 
former Harvard worthies in University Hall. Harvard did not at that time 
require the publication of a doctoral thesis. I am convinced that the Harvard 

136 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
attitude was sound, for it is unjust to accept the judgments of periodical 
editors as the criterion by which to give a university degree. Moreover, the 
forced private publication of such theses as do not meet the requirements 
of the editors of scientific journals places a heavy tax on the pocket of the 
student without doing any corresponding good to the profession at large. 
Privately published, these are universally inaccessible and, in general, little 
read. I am glad that the requirement of publication of the thesis is gradually 
disappearing.
It is often supposed that a man’s doctoral thesis should be one of the best 
things he ever does, and should give the full measure of the man. I do not 
believe in this. A doctor’s thesis is nothing but a specific piece of work by 
which a journeyman qualifies himself to become a master of his craft; and 
if he does not exceed this level a dozen times in the course of his career, he 
is a very poor master indeed. I know that many believe that the dissertation 
should stand out for years above a candidate’s subsequent work, but this 
demand is often ignored in practice. It is only when a man has his disser­
tation behind him and is not pestered with the prospect of future formal 
requirements to fulfill that he can do his best work as a free man, with his 
task itself as the goal and not the spurious goal of a certain academic and 
social position. The thesis should be good, but if the scholar’s work does 
not soon exceed the level of the thesis, the candidate is well on his way to 
becoming one of those desiccated homunculi you find in faculty meetings 
of our third-rank colleges.
If my own dissertation had been the only piece of scientific work I have 
ever produced, it would have been a most unsatisfactory ticket of entry to a 
career of learning. However, as the facts have developed, it did give me the 
training in the organization of scientific material which led me in the next 
two years to a series of papers that I should much prefer to represent my 
induction into a scholarly career.
I have known more than one student who has waited to present a thesis 
for his doctorate, even after he has produced a number of acceptable papers, 
until he can write that one paper that will allow him to break into print in 
the learned world with a maximum of impetus and élan. It is of course a 
fine thing if a youngster can establish himself as an important figure with 
his first work. Nevertheless, I feel that many a student has placed too much 
emphasis on this point, and has wasted years waiting for the great idea to 
come to him, which he might have devoted to experience in publishing 
and in receiving the public criticism of his printed work. It is altogether too 
much to expect to become a great man on the first try; and if the course of 
one’s late work contains such material as need not be a matter of shame, 

13: A Philosopher Despite Himself 
137
it makes very little difference whether the first paper is excellent or barely 
conforms to the necessary standards for the doctorate.
Time hung heavy on my hands toward the end of the spring of 1913, 
after I had passed my doctoral examinations and while I was still waiting 
for Commencement and the apotheosis of hearing President Lowell declare 
that I was duly admitted to the society of learned men.
The year 1912–1913 was that of the demolition of the old Harvard 
library and preparation for the construction of the new building given by 
Widener. The old building had only been adapted for library purposes by 
a continuous series of improvisations and interior reconstructions, so that 
although it was probably one of the most authentic specimens of early 
American academic Gothic, its time was over and it had to go. There was a 
certain Roman holiday pleasure in seeing its pinnacles and vaults demol­
ished by a great swinging iron ball; and indeed, the original workmen must 
have done the work so honestly that at times even this sort of violence 
made very little headway. The noise was intolerable, and our philosophical 
classes in Emerson Hall were conducted to an obligato of donkey engines 
and crumbling walls.
Yet with all the progress that the destruction of the old building signi­
fied, we felt that it marked the passing of an age. Nevermore would the 
library convey to us its anachronistic suggestions of medievalism, and 
the ample lawns about it were to be cut up forever by the crowding bulk 
of the Widener Library. My father always felt in view of his familiarity with 
the stacks, and the work that he did there, that the d in Widener might well 
be dispensed with. Be that as it may, the great convenience of the Widener 
Library as a storehouse for books never seemed to me to be matched by any 
particularly endearing qualities in its architecture. It was a cold and forbid­
ding building, and later on during the war years the great stairway was 
decorated with two cold and forbidding paintings of the military might of 
America. They were Sargents, but they certainly weren’t top Sargents.
At that time one of the places where I was most often to be found was the 
Harvard Philosophical Library. It was a pleasant place, and the librarian, Dr. 
Rand, was the exact Harvard equivalent of the slightly desiccated English 
don. He was an excellent historian and bibliographer, so that it was always 
interesting to search through the bookcases for something new and excit­
ing. For example, we found that a number of the books which had been 
left to the library by William James were full of autographic marginal nota­
tions by James himself, which were rather less decorous than they would 
have been if they had originally been intended for public scrutiny. The 
James copies of the books of Royce and Bertrand Russell were particularly 

138 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
amusing. When Rand found out that the books were really priceless trea­
sures, he locked them up in his private case and removed them from free 
public inspection.
Even after this there were many treasures which we found interesting 
reading. The English philosopher, F. C. S. Schiller, notwithstanding the lack 
of any great profundity on his part, had a pretty satirical vein which was 
always amusing to us. Then too, one never knew what was to be found 
among the newly arrived books and periodicals. Thus a casual leafing 
through these was part of our weekly routine.
During the course of the spring, I began to look at a number of edu­
cational periodicals in order to satisfy my curiosity about their treatment 
of the infant prodigy. This curiosity received a sharp punishment when I 
found, in a journal edited by G. Stanley Hall of Clark University, an article 
by a Miss Katherine Dolbear, the daughter of the late distinguished physi­
cist of Tufts College.1 This article was devoted to a discussion of Berle, Sidis, 
and me, case by case and name by name. Miss Dolbear was obviously not 
impressed by our record. She had presented with meticulous precision, not 
merely our official records at our several schools, but everything that she 
had been able to gather as to the opinion held of us by our undergraduate 
companions.
In no aspect was it a gratifying document. I had long been aware that 
my social development was far behind my intellectual progress, but I was 
mortified to find how much of a bore, boor, and nuisance Miss Dolbear’s 
record made me out to be. I had thought that I was well on the way to 
the solution of my problems. Miss Dolbear’s article made me feel like the 
player of parchesi whom an unfortunate cast of the dice has sent back to 
the beginning of the board.
I showed the article to my father, who was as furious as I had been 
humiliated. Father sent a letter of protest to be published in the next num­
ber of the Pedagogical Seminary, although this did not serve any particular 
end. Our family lawyer was unable to give us much satisfaction in the mat­
ter. An attempt to seek a legal remedy would have subjected me to public­
ity far more dangerous and vicious than anything to which I had yet been 
exposed. Even in theory American law does not take great cognizance of 
the right of an individual to privacy, and a libel action, in order to be suc­
cessful, must allege some specific damage as the result of the libel. Thus it 
is very dangerous to call a lawyer a shyster or a doctor a quack because such 
allegations do contribute very definitely to the injury of the professional 
standing of their object. However, I had as yet no profession; and although 
I hoped to have one in the future, damage to this would have been hard to 

13: A Philosopher Despite Himself 
139
prove and impossible to assess. This was the precise point that was raised 
later by the lawyers for The New Yorker in their defense of the suit instituted 
against them by W. J. Sidis; and the success of this defense confirms our 
judgment in not pushing the matter.
I regard this attitude toward libel eminently unjust. In the first place, to 
cast serious suspicions on a budding career seems to me an offense more 
serious than to interrupt one that is well under way. Secondly, an assault 
on the self-esteem of a person who is already in a difficult and questionable 
position is quite as great an injury as any physical assault could be. I think 
that a reasonable moral standard in such matters is exhibited by the prac­
tice of the medical journals, which I consider to be so well established that 
it would not be very difficult to give it the force of law. It is in the public 
interest that medical cases be reported precisely and freely in the profes­
sional journals. However, it is regarded as a grave offense to give the name 
of the patient or any data that could serve to identify him, at least without 
his voluntary and expressed consent. When a photograph of him is shown 
as part of the necessary documentation of the case, it is the custom, if the 
eyes and face do not show some essential part of the symptoms of the 
disease, to obliterate them in the print. I see no reason why a pedagogical 
journal, or indeed a journal without any scientific pretensions, should be 
given more latitude in such a matter. This is not a question of the freedom 
of the press, but it is eminently a question of the necessary correlate of such 
freedom: the responsibility of the press.
During my last year at Harvard I had applied for a traveling fellowship. 
Of course I was greatly excited when the news came that I had won it. Two 
places suggested themselves as alternate destinations: Cambridge, where 
Russell was then at the peak of his powers, and Turin, which was famous 
for the name of Peano. I learned that Peano’s best days were over, and that 
Cambridge was the most suitable place for a training in mathematical logic. 
I then wrote to Russell, for it was necessary to obtain the permission of my 
teacher before I set out on my studies.
Note
1.  Katherine Dolbear, Pedagogical Seminary, Vol. 19, “Precocious Children,” p. 463.


14  Emancipation
Cambridge, June, 1913–April, 1914
Ex-Prodigy: 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
14: 
Emancipation
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
We returned to New Hampshire that summer and I had a good chance 
to rest up for the year to come and to acquaint myself further with the 
mountain region. The mountains were an eternal delight to me. They are 
beautiful even now, but in those days before the war and the threat of 
war, before the extensive lumbering which the two World Wars called into 
being, before the motorcar and its reduction of distances to nothing and 
much of the roadside to a rural slum, the country was beautiful indeed. As 
one whose physical activity is somewhat limited by his increasing years 
and the vicissitudes of an active life, I look back with a certain sadness to 
a time when the mountainsides were as nothing to my efforts, and when 
twenty minutes of rapid striding would carry me to a bank of lacy wood 
sorrel. From this bank I could look up to the boles of mighty trees, each fit 
to be a mast of a king’s ship. I felt a sense of romantic union with the hills 
and the forest.
One of my chief domestic tasks was to fetch the mail and the milk. Every 
day I tramped two miles to the little post office at Whiteface village and two 
miles back again, part of it with the milk pail digging into the palms of my 
hands. I was eager to go for the mail because the key to adventure awaited 
me there: my letter of acceptance from Russell.
Professor Huntington had recommended to me two mathematical books 
for summer reading before starting my work with Russell. They were Bôch­
er’s Modern Algebra and Veblen and Young’s Projective Geometry. The first 
book did not impress me so much then, although I have reread it many 
times and found it most useful as an introduction to matrix theory. The 
second book I took to my heart as the most consistent exposition of the 
postulational standpoint that I had found anywhere. I worked out almost 
all the problems of the first volume, which was the only one existing at the 
time. While the book had two authors, Young of Dartmouth was already 
somewhat invalided, and the personality of the book was chiefly that of 

142 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
Professor Oswald Veblen of Princeton. He was the founder of the great 
mathematical school of Princeton as well as the scientific founder of the 
Institute for Advanced Study, also at Princeton. He is without doubt one of 
the fathers of American mathematics.
The entire family was to go abroad for the winter. We had been tempted 
to go earlier, and had even gone so far as to make some negotiations for 
tickets, but this had been at the time of the Balkan Wars, and my father had 
considered the political heavens too stormy to risk it. Now, however, we 
really did embark. We had picked a boat of the Leyland Line, a small twig 
of the great I.M.M. combine, which ran cattle boats and carried a few pas­
sengers between Boston and Liverpool. I can remember that in those lucky 
days it was possible for fifty dollars to book a cabin for oneself and to have 
the run of the boat.
We left Cambridge by the subway and the East Boston Tunnel for that 
desolate region of slums and docks known as East Boston. Here our ship 
was tied up. I remember that it hurt me to run across a maze of railroad 
tracks with heavy baggage in my hands, under the conflicting and self-
contradictory orders of my father.
It was a heavenly relief to go aboard. The white-jacketed stewards served 
us biscuits and beef tea even before we had left the harbor. While we were 
still in the old familiar Boston harbor, with the Bunker Hill monument 
showing plain, we were already in a foreign territory: the manners of the 
stewards, the customs of eating and drinking, the very language that people 
spoke, were all new and strange to us.
My parents had maintained an almost instinctive position that the Eng­
lish they spoke and had learned was the only proper English language, and 
that all other forms of the speech had something illegitimate about them. I 
daresay Father would have made the adjustment to Basque or Tibetan more 
readily than to the change between the English of the American Boston and 
the English of London or of Lancashire.
For it was the English of Lancashire that predominated on the boat. It is 
a language that I have heard many times since; and although it is perhaps 
not the most beautiful of all forms of English, it has something of the win­
ning quality of good bread and good cheese.
The passengers were few, and the radio bulletins of news of the world 
were not obviously obtrusive. The trip was long, uncrowded, and peaceful. 
The food was adequate but stodgy. There was nothing to watch except mar­
bling waves, or the casual flirtation of an old sea captain’s daughter with 
the wireless officer. With a little shuffleboard and a little chess, we made the 

14: Emancipation 
143
trip very comfortably. And one morning we found ourselves tied up at the 
landing stage in the Mersey.
The formalities of landing were simple. It was a Sunday morning, and 
after we had bought our tickets for London, we had a meal of bread and 
cheese at a pub, and took off. I looked out of the train window, and renewed 
the impressions of the English countryside I had seen before as a child. In 
particular, I recalled the ivy, the smaller farms and fields, the brick and stone 
buildings, the less wooded landscape, and the seemingly smaller trees.
From Euston Station we made our way to Bloomsbury, which was then 
even more than now the natural barracks of the academic visitor of moder­
ate means. We put up at a hotel at Southampton Row, which I recognized 
many years later as the scene of one of Graham Greene’s more dismal tales 
of refugees and espionage. With the aid of our Baedeker, we found one or 
two possible vegetarian restaurants. We looked up father’s old friend, Israel 
Zangwill in his lodgings in the Temple, and made plans for my stay in 
Cambridge. The rest of the family was to go to Munich for the winter. 
Constance was to study art and Bertha was to go to a private school for 
teen-age girls.
Father went up with me to Cambridge. We looked up Bertrand Russell in 
his rooms at Trinity, and he helped us to orient ourselves. While we were 
in Russell’s rooms a young man came in whom my father took to be an 
undergraduate and who excited no particular attention in us. It was G. H. 
Hardy, the mathematician who was to have the greatest influence on me 
in later years.
It appeared that it was not necessary for me to matriculate inasmuch as 
Harvard and Cambridge had certain agreements concerning the privileges 
of advanced students. I therefore could not expect to live in college and it 
was necessary to find a landlady for me in town. My father did not spend 
much effort in placing me in lodgings. In one place he asked me in the 
presence of the landlady what I thought of the place. I was caught. I was 
forced to tell him on leaving that it seemed to me one of the most miser­
able, dirty, and inconvenient lodgings I had seen. Instead of canceling the 
word-of-mouth agreement that we had made, Father trusted to the improb­
ability of my ever meeting the landlady again, and left matters to take care 
of themselves. He was in a hurry to catch the train back to London. Finally 
I was left faute de mieux with another slovenly little landlady in New Square. 
She had made some agreement to furnish me at the minimum price with 
the vegetables and cheese necessary for my vegetarian life.
It was at that time impossible for the American boy with anything like 
a normal bringing up to be completely free from a certain Anglophobia. 

144 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
The wars between the two countries, including the undeclared hostilities 
of our Civil War, were united with a certain latent enmity of tone in some 
of the English reviews in such a way as to comb a Yankee’s hair the wrong 
way. More than all of these influences, the efforts of a few ardent American 
Anglophiles had the effect of making the American boy brandish the flag 
and let the eagle shriek.
Yet later, when I came back from England, I had learned that there was 
a very close and permanent bond between myself and England, and more 
especially between myself and Cambridge. I had learned that the English 
were very different from the Anglophiles in that, once one had penetrated 
the protective layer which they assumed against Americans and other for­
eigners, they were quite willing to admit that there were aspects of England 
in which God was not in his Heaven and something was definitely wrong 
with the world. I found that the English were as distrustful as I was of the 
Anglophiles’ cure-all, which was to import English institutions to America, 
cut up into numbered pieces and wrapped in straw, as if they were Tudor 
manor houses. In short, I found that the England of the Anglophiles was 
a cloud-cuckoo-land existing neither on one side of the ocean nor on the 
other, but merely in the souls of the elect.
I came to find that among the institutions in which I had lived those 
which were most similar to English life and cast the most light upon it were 
in many cases the most specifically American institutions of my childhood. 
The country life of Ayer and Harvard, although it was a country life with 
neither squire nor established vicar, was a country life with very English 
roots. My New Hampshire farmer friends would probably have damned 
their opposite numbers in the Lake Country from here to Kingdom Come, 
and would have been received with similar objurgations; but despite the 
mutual hostile reserve and the difference in the dialects, the attitude would 
have been much the same on both sides. It would have taken only a few 
weeks of mutual contact for the one and the other to become aware that 
there was not terribly much difference between their attitudes or their 
presuppositions.
The England that I first saw was one which had not yet been shocked 
by World Wars and indeed which had remained at peace since the times of 
Napoleon, except for colonial wars and the major conflicts in the Crimea 
and South Africa. It was an England that was heaven for the rich and very 
close to hell for the poor. It was an England in which it was harder for 
a working man to become a scholar than it now is for a Mexican peon. 
This stratification and the snobbishness attendant on it—which was even 
more a masochism on the part of the poor than a sadism on the part of 

14: Emancipation 
145
the rich—is something which, while some elements of it may remain, has 
passed out of the picture as completely as the France of the ci-devants did at 
the time of the French Revolution.
My landlady gave me my first introduction to the sort of English snob­
bishness and subservience that was then rife but which has since become 
much less common. She, a slovenly, mean little woman, did not approve of 
our neighbor two doors away. She said, “Ow, ’e’s only a tridesman’s son,” 
even though the rank of tradesman was something vastly higher than any 
to which she could ever lay claim.
The university men of 1913 were young sprouts of the aristocracy, or at 
least of a well-established middle class. Since then I have seen the rise of the 
subsidized undergraduate. The working class boy, stunted by undernour­
ishment in his early childhood and in the womb of his mother, with bad 
teeth and horny hands, wearing a hand-me-down suit and big clumping 
boots, has come to be supported by exhibitions and scholarships through 
his primary and secondary schools and his university. These are the men I 
now know as young dons; accepted because of their ability and character, 
but often cursed with a social awkwardness which they have had to unlearn 
with a very genuine and conscious effort. More than one of them has con­
fided to me the pains which he had to take at the beginning to develop a 
good line of high-table back-chat.
The phenomenon of which I speak is spread far beyond the cloistered 
courts of England’s university. It is a relief to me now to be able to sit on a 
park bench and talk with an English workingman who will neither resent 
me as a “toff” nor whine for some advantage. Indeed, to the present gen­
eration of Englishmen who read this book it may seem that I am accusing 
their predecessors of vices that are so far from their own make-up that the 
newer Englishman is unable to conceive them. But I can say that as I have 
revisited England year by year, I have seen servility decline and a universal 
manliness and comradeship come to the front.
So much for my reminiscent view of Cambridge. At the time of my first 
arrival, after spending a few days learning the lay of the land, I was hope­
lessly and utterly lonely. Term had not yet begun, so that there was no 
chance for me to make new acquaintances. I wandered about the colleges 
and in the Backs, and the utter beauty of the buildings and the foliage 
was more than a little solace to my nostalgia. Meanwhile I met one or two 
undergraduates: a Hindu who lodged in the same house as I and a young 
Englishman two houses away. They both belonged to St. Catherine’s Col­
lege, and they invited me to participate in the meetings of a discussion club 
belonging to that college.

146 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
I have no specific recollection of what was said and done at that club 
at St. Catherine’s. I remember that I was asked to read a paper and to say a 
few words. I did so, and I have a dim memory that I covered myself with 
shame and confusion. I certainly spent the first few weeks in Cambridge in 
learning the English point of view, and in sloughing off some of the most 
impermissible of my many awkwardnesses. I know that my callow nation­
alism got me into more than one childish quarrel.
Nevertheless, I feel that this was a critical period in my formation, 
and that I owe a great deal of gratitude both to my teachers and to my 
undergraduate friends of those days. I found in them a receptiveness and a 
tolerance of ideas which had not been characteristic of Harvard, and a chal­
lenging dialectical skill in presenting them.
Although I had very good times with several of the young undergradu­
ates in their clubs and social groups and “squashes” and at tea in their 
rooms, there was a group of slightly older men on the boundary between 
the undergraduate and the don who were particularly kind and helpful to 
me. One of them was F. C. Bartlett, now Sir Frederic Bartlett, and a pro­
fessor of psychology at Cambridge University. My impression is that he 
had come from one of the more modern English universities, and that at 
that time his prospects for a career were not particularly bright. I found his 
steady quietness and his refusal to be stampeded by any argument a healthy 
tonic for my own impulsiveness. His criticism was always fair and not to be 
bribed by friendliness. I am glad that our relations have been kept up over 
these many decades, and that the basis for them has not changed in any 
essential way.
Bernard Muscio was another one of my seniors who was very kind to me 
and who helped me to grow up. He was born in Australia, where he had 
obtained his first degree. His alertness and quickness of reaction made him 
an important figure in the Moral Science Club, better known as the Moral 
Stinks Club, and more than once we joined forces in a dialectic assault on 
those with whom we did not agree.
Two of my early associates of a very different kind were C. K. Ogden and 
I. A. Richards. Ogden, who had succeeded in prolonging an undergraduate 
career over an unheard-of period of years, then lived above a gateway in 
Petty Cury, where his rooms were adorned with photographs of practically 
every important man in intellectual England. Among the manifold facets of 
his being, he was a journalist and he solicited from me an article which he 
published in the Cambridge Magazine, and whose nature I have entirely for­
gotten in the course of these many years. Richards and he were close com­
panions, and I believe that during my stay in Cambridge the collaboration 

14: Emancipation 
147
which later led to the publication of The Meaning of Meaning had already 
begun. At any rate, their interest in semantics was manifest.
One of the things that most impressed me at Cambridge was the rather 
too cloistered atmosphere of the English university scholar. He had come 
from a school devoted to the needs of adolescence, which constituted the 
most essential and characteristic part of his education, to a university built 
according to a scheme closely paralleling that of his adolescence. If he were 
successful, a career was open for him for his whole life under much the 
same auspices.
The English universities, although they were no longer exclusively the 
celibate, clerical institutions which they had been in the earlier nineteenth 
century, still retained much of their monkish character. Thus the young 
man going into mathematics carried into his valuation of mathematical 
work a great deal of the adolescent “play-the-game” attitude which he had 
learned on the cricket field. This, although it contained much of good, and 
led to a devotion to scholarship difficult to find in our more worldly life, 
was not conducive to a fully mature attitude toward his own work.
When G. H. Hardy—as the reader may easily find in his book, A Math­
ematician’s Apology—values number theory precisely for its lack of practical 
application, he is not fully facing the moral problem of the mathematician. 
It takes courage indeed to defy the demands of the world and to give up 
the fleshpots of Egypt for the intellectual asceticism of the pure mathemati­
cian, who will have no truck with the military and commercial assessment 
of mathematics by the world at large. Nevertheless, this is pure escapism 
in a generation in which mathematics has become a strong drug for the 
changing of science and the world we live in rather than a mild narcotic to 
be indulged by lotus eaters.
When I returned to Cambridge as a mature mathematician after work­
ing with engineers for many years, Hardy used to claim that the engineer­
ing phraseology of much of my mathematical work was a humbug, and 
that I had employed it to curry favor with my engineering friends at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He thought that I was really a pure 
mathematician in disguise, and that these other aspects of my work were 
superficial. This, in fact, has not been the case. The very same ideas that 
may be employed in that Limbo of the Sages known as number theory are 
potent tools in the study of the telegraph and the telephone and the radio. 
No matter how innocent he may be in his inner soul and in his motivation, 
the effective mathematician is likely to be a powerful factor in changing the 
face of society. Thus he is really dangerous as a potential armorer of the new 

148 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
scientific war of the future. He may hate this, but he does less than his full 
duty if he does not face these facts.
In laying out my course, Russell had suggested to me the quite reason­
able idea that a man who was going to specialize in mathematical logic and 
in the philosophy of mathematics might just as well know something of 
mathematics. Accordingly, I took at various times a number of mathemati­
cal courses, including one by Baker, one by Hardy, one by Littlewood, and 
one by Mercer. I did not continue Baker’s course long, as I was ill prepared 
for it. Hardy’s course, however, was a revelation to me. He proceeded from 
the first principles of mathematical logic, by way of the theory of assem­
blages, the theory of the Lebesgue integral, and the general theory of func­
tions of a real variable, to the theorem of Cauchy and to an acceptable 
logical basis for the theory of functions of a complex variable. In content it 
covered much the same ground that I had already covered with Hutchinson 
of Cornell, but with an attention to rigor which left me none of the doubts 
that had hindered my understanding of the earlier courses. In all my years 
of listening to lectures in mathematics, I have never heard the equal of 
Hardy for clarity, for interest, or for intellectual power. If I am to claim any 
man as my master in my mathematical training, it must be G. H. Hardy.
It was while I sat in this course that I wrote the first mathematical paper 
which I saw in print. Looking back on this paper, I do not think it was par­
ticularly good. It was on a reordering of the positive integers in well-ordered 
series of large ordinal numbers. Still, it gave me my first taste of printer’s 
ink, and this is a powerful stimulant for a rising young scholar. It appeared 
in the Messenger of Mathematics, which was published in Cambridge, and I 
had the satisfaction of seeing it through press on the spot.
I attended two courses of Bertrand Russell. One was an extremely elegant 
presentation of his views on sense data, and the other a reading course on 
the Principia Mathematica. In the first course I could not find myself able to 
accept his views on the ultimate nature of sense data as the raw material for 
experience. I have always considered sense data as constructs, negative con­
structs, indeed, in a direction diametrically opposite to that of the Platonic 
ideas, but equally constructs that are far removed from unworked-on raw 
sense experience. Apart from our disagreement on this particular matter, I 
found the course new and tremendously stimulating. In particular, I found 
myself introduced to Einstein’s relativity, and to the new emphasis on the 
observer which had already revolutionized physics in Einstein’s hands and 
which was to revolutionize it even more completely in the hands of Heisen­
berg, Bohr, and Schrödinger.

14: Emancipation 
149
There were only three of us in Russell’s reading course, so that we made 
rapid progress. For the first time I became fully conscious of the logical 
theory of types and of the deep philosophical considerations which it rep­
resented. I became shamefully aware of the shortcomings of my own doc­
toral thesis. Nevertheless, in connection with the course I did one little 
piece of work which I later published; and although it excited neither any 
particular approval on the part of Russell nor any great interest at the time, 
the paper which I wrote on the reduction of the theory of relations to the 
theory of classes has come to occupy a certain modest permanent position 
in mathematical logic. It was published soon after I was nineteen in the 
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, and this paper represents 
my true introduction into mathematical thinking and writing.
It is not very easy for me even at this distance to write of my contact 
with Bertrand Russell and of the work I did under him. My New England 
puritanism clashed with his philosophical defense of libertinism. There is 
a great deal in common between the libertine who feels the philosophic 
compulsion to grin and be polite while another libertine is making away 
with the affections of his wife and the Spartan boy who concealed the sto­
len fox under his cloak and had to keep a straight face when the fox was 
biting him. This does not endear the philosophical libertine to me. The 
old-fashioned rake had at least the fun of don’t-care; the puritan is work­
ing within a code of known restrictions which tends to keep him out of 
trouble. The philosophical rake is as bound as the puritan, and has to steer 
a course in as narrow a channel; but it is a channel which is poorly lighted 
and poorly buoyed. I expressed myself very freely in this matter, and I am 
quite certain that Russell heard my comments to a friend one dark night 
when we met on the street as we were returning to his quarters. Though he 
never gave a sign of hearing me, this experience rendered me particularly 
apprehensive of his criticism.
I know that Russell regarded my Harvard thesis as inadequate, in that 
I did not enter sufficiently into the problem of logical types and into the 
paradoxes that mark the difficulties of establishing a fundamental pos­
tulational system for logic, as opposed to a derived postulational system 
for a specific construction with a recognized logic. As for myself, I already 
then felt that an attempt to state all the assumptions of a logical system, 
including the assumptions by which these could be put together to pro­
duce new conclusions, was bound to be incomplete. It appeared to me that 
any attempt to form a complete logic had to fall back on unstated but real 
human habits of manipulation. To attempt to embalm such a system in a 
completely adequate phraseology seemed to me to raise the paradoxes of 

150 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
type in their worst possible form. I believe I said something to this effect in 
a philosophical paper which later appeared in the Journal of Philosophy, Psy­
chology and Scientific Method. Bertrand Russell and the other philosophers of 
the time used to term this journal “the Whited Sepulchre,” an allusion to 
the simple white paper cover in which it appeared.
My heresies of that time have been confirmed by the later work of Gödel, 
who has shown that within any system of logical postulates there are ques­
tions that cannot receive a positive answer through these postulates. That 
is, if one answer to these is consistent with the original postulates, it can 
be proved that the opposite answer is equally consistent with them. This 
treatment of the problem of decision has rendered obsolete a consider­
able part of the task undertaken by Whitehead and Russell in the Principia 
Mathematica.
Thus logic has had to pull in its horns. The limited logic which remains 
has become more nearly a natural history of what is in fact necessary for 
the consistent working of a system of deduction than a normative account 
of how it should be worked. Now, the step from a system of deduction to 
a deductive machine is short. The calculus ratiocinator of Leibnitz merely 
needs to have an engine put into it to become a machina ratiocinatrix. The 
first step in this direction is to proceed from the calculus to a system of 
ideal reasoning machines, and this was taken several years ago by Turing. 
Mr. Turing is now occupied in the actual construction of computing and 
logical machines, and has thus completed a further step in the direction of 
the machina ratiocinatrix. The remarkable thing is that I myself, quite inde­
pendently of him, have recently also taken the step from my early logical 
work to the study of the logic of machines, and have thus again met the 
ideas of Mr. Turing.
To go back to my student days with Russell, although there were many 
points of disagreement and even of friction, I benefited enormously by 
them. His presentation of the Principia was delightfully clear; and our small 
class was able to get the most out of it. His general lectures on philosophy 
were also masterpieces of their kind. Besides his consciousness of Einstein’s 
importance, Russell also saw the present and future significance of electron 
theory, and he urged me to study it, even though it was very difficult for 
me at that time, in view of my inadequate preparation in physics. I do not 
recall, however, that he was quite as explicit and accurate in his valuation 
of the coming importance of quantum theory. It must be remembered that 
the epoch-making work of Nils Bohr was very new at the time, and that in 
its original form, it did not lend itself particularly to a philosophical inter­
pretation. It was only some twelve years later, in 1925, that the conflicting 

14: Emancipation 
151
currents aroused by the earlier work by Bohr began to be resolved and that 
the ideas of De Broglie, Born, Heisenberg, and Schrödinger showed that 
quantum theory was to mark as great a revolution in the philosophical 
presuppositions of physics as had the work of Einstein.
On the social side, the most distinctive aspect of my contact with 
Bertrand Russell lay in his Thursday evening parties, or as they were called 
in view of the number of guests, his “squashes.” A very distinguished 
group of men foregathered there. There was Hardy, the mathematician. 
There was Lowes Dickinson, the author of Letters from John Chinaman and 
A Modern Symposium, and the bulwark of the liberal political opinion of 
the time. There was Santayana, who had left Harvard for good to take 
up his residence in Europe. Besides these, Russell himself was always an 
interesting talker. We heard much of his friends, Joseph Conrad and John 
Galsworthy.
Three of the most important moral science dons with whom I came in 
contact, all fellows of Trinity, were known as the Mad Tea Party of Trin­
ity. Their identities were unmistakable. It is impossible to describe Bertrand 
Russell except by saying that he looks like the Mad Hatter. He has always 
been a very distinguished, aristocratic Mad Hatter, and he now is a white­
haired Mad Hatter. But the caricature of Tenniel almost argues an anticipa­
tion on the part of the artist, even though I am told that the original of 
Lewis Carroll’s description and Tenniel’s caricature was an actual hatter at 
Oxford, and that his “Anglo-Saxon Attitudes” were really the effect of an 
industrial mercury poisoning. McTaggart, a Hegelian and the Dr. Codger of 
Wells’s New Machiavelli, with his pudgy hands, his innocent, sleepy air, and 
his sidelong walk, could only be the Dormouse.
The third, Dr. G. E. Moore, was a perfect March Hare. His gown was 
always covered with chalk, his cap was in rags or missing, and his hair was 
a tangle which had never known the brush within man’s memory. Its order 
and repose were not improved by an irascible habit of running his hand 
through it. He would go across town to his class, with no more formal foot­
wear than his bedroom slippers, and the space between these and his trou­
sers (which were several inches too short) was filled with wrinkled white 
socks. He had the peculiar habit of emphasizing his words on the black­
board by running them through with chalk-marks instead of underlining 
them. He used to make the most withering remarks in philosophical discus­
sion, in a breathless but smiling and unperturbed manner. “Now really,” he 
would say, “you can't expect any sane person to hold a view like that!” On 
at least one occasion at a meeting of the Moral Science Club, he brought to 
a state of tears Miss E. E. C. Jones, the Mistress of Girton, lovingly known as 

152 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
“Mammy Jones” to the unregenerate. Yet when I came to know him and to 
depend on his criticism of my work, I found him kind and friendly.
There is among the dons a premium on individuality which often 
becomes a premium on eccentricity. I have been told by some of my Cam­
bridge friends that they thought that certain of my less conventional habits 
had been adopted with a view of acquiring acclaim. At any rate, the fact 
is there; and while I do not think that Russell’s mannerisms (which were 
very slight) were any more than a genuine manifestation of his aristocratic 
background, I am quite certain that the untidiness of G. E. Moore and the 
academic unpracticalness of McTaggart had been cultivated very carefully. 
They had the flavor of a crusty old port—a flavor that does not reach its full 
perfection without the expert intervention of the cellarman.
During the term I made quite a number of acquaintances, and my man­
telpiece was adorned with the cards of discussion clubs. I had an invitation 
to visit some friends of Mr. Zangwill, who lived about fifteen miles out in 
the country; and I turned up there, dusty and bedraggled, after walking the 
entire distance. In general, by the end of the term I was finding my social 
place in Cambridge. I had even begun to have a certain fondness for my 
new environment.
Yet most of the time I was desperately uncomfortable in a physical sense. 
My landlady had been paid little enough; and yet that could hardly excuse 
the raw carrots and inedible Brussels sprouts which she gave me in lieu of 
proper vegetarian meals. I eked out my diet with occasional penny bars of 
chocolate and the like, but the net result was that I was half starved.
In my leisure hours, and I had many of them, the Union and its library 
were my salvation. My membership in the Harvard Union had enabled me 
to make use of the facilities of its Cambridge counterpart, and I even took 
part in one or two of the famous undergraduate debates. Moreover, some 
of my friends occasionally asked me to dine at the Union, so that I learned 
something of the amenities of an English club.
I found the Cambridge environment far more sympathetic to me than 
I had found that of Harvard. Cambridge was devoted to the intellect. The 
pretense of a lack of interest in intellectual matters which had been a sine 
qua non of the life of the respectable Harvard scholar was only a convention 
and an interesting game at Cambridge, where the point was to work as hard 
as you could in private while pretending to exhibit a superior indifference. 
Furthermore, Harvard has always hated the eccentric and the individual, 
while, as I have said, in Cambridge eccentricity is so highly valued that 
those who do not really possess it are forced to assume it for the sake of 
appearances.

14: Emancipation 
153
Thus when the beginning of December came and I left to spend the 
Christmas holiday with my family in Munich, I was both happier and more 
of a man than I had ever been. The trip was a lark. I crossed to the Conti­
nent by the Harwich route, and did not have a bad passage. I was up well 
before dawn to see the lights of the Hook of Holland, and I was pleasantly 
bewildered by hearing the Dutch speech of the porters. I breakfasted in 
the big, empty, echoing railway station, and dawn saw me well on the way 
toward Rotterdam. I don’t know by what use of English, bad German, and 
gestures I persuaded a porter to take my trunks across town in a barrow to 
another station, but I soon found myself bound for Cologne, uncomfort­
ably seated in a third-class compartment, all windows hermetically sealed, 
in an atmosphere that seemed to be made partly of commercial travelers 
and partly of tobacco smoke.
I arrived in Cologne in the early afternoon and found quarters for myself 
in a very cheap hotel, which I now believe to have been nothing more than 
a Kellnerheim. There was no way to get to Munich that day, so I took a walk 
about the town and tried to correlate my impressions with my memories of 
my childhood trip more than eleven years earlier. I found that in fact there 
was a good deal that I did remember: for example, the station, the bridge, 
and the cathedral.
I went to Munich the next day in a through carriage. I was delighted 
with everything that I saw on the way, from the forests with touches of 
snow on them to the villages and stations which looked to me like the illus­
trations accompanying the set of Anker building blocks I had played with 
as a child. My German was as yet insufficient to enable me to communicate 
with my fellow travelers, so I spent most of my attention on the landscape 
outside. The scenery along the Rhine was a reawakening of my memories 
of the former trip of my boyhood, and the wooded mountains of Franconia 
had not a little suggestion for me of the White Mountains.
My family met me at the Munich station and took me to the old-
fashioned but centrally placed apartment that they had rented. Although 
the apartment house had long been invading America, I had never lived 
in one up to that time, and the apartment-house mode of life was to my 
parents something altogether undesirable. Indeed, I had been brought up 
to regard the city life of the apartment as a deprivation and a misfortune 
for the people who had to resort to it. The fact that our landlady spoke no 
English, and that my mother was not confident of her German, did not 
ease matters.
My father spent his time working at the Bavarian Court and National 
Library. Away from the Harvard library (where by long experience he could 

154 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
put his hand on every book he wanted), and under the usual restriction 
of exclusion from the stacks and the eternal pinpricks of the abominable 
system of cataloguing which was then standard outside the United States, 
his work languished. Moreover he was disappointed that his name was less 
well known by his European colleagues than he had expected, and that 
he had few personal contacts with them or none at all. To some extent 
this was only to have been expected, for my father had a very individual 
way of working, and he had no hesitation in contradicting flatly the pre­
suppositions of the scholars of his time and in writing in a blunt manner 
which was an affront to their sense of self-importance. Germany was then 
a hierarchical form of society, from the workingman at the bottom to the 
Kaiser on top; and within the greater frame the university people were a 
lesser hierarchy. For a mere foreigner with no place in this system to beard 
a whole school of learned German Geheimrats was a scandal beyond words. 
My father, who was a most sensitive man, could not fail to be aware of the 
atmosphere about him.
Until that time, my father had always been a great admirer of German 
culture and German education. Although he had resented the militarism 
and officialism that had developed since his own youth, he was fundamen­
tally a German liberal of the middle of the last century. His Russian Tol­
stoyism was an influence that ran parallel to the German influences in his 
development and did not contradict them. He had for a long time looked 
forward to the period when he should return to Germany and be accepted 
as a great scholar within the German frame of things. When this did not 
occur, and he found himself rejected, or perhaps merely not accepted, this 
emotional longing turned to a hate which was as bitter as only a hate for a 
lost love can be.
My sisters had been properly placed in the appropriate schools. I do not 
remember through what vicissitudes of attempts at musical and artistic 
training my sister Constance had gone before she decided to work at the 
Kunstgewerbeschule, or school for industrial art. Bertha was placed at a 
fashionable and respectable girls’ school, the Institut Savaète, where she 
made good progress in her general education and her understanding of 
things German. I do not remember quite how we disposed of Fritz’s school 
time.
By now I had become sufficiently grown up to be a fairly acceptable 
comrade for my father. We went together to various lectures and beer-
hall meetings where interesting subjects were being discussed. I remember 
one such meeting on international peace and understanding at which the 
speaker was David Starr Jordan, the famous ichthyologist and president of 

14: Emancipation 
155
Stanford University. I remember drinking my glass of beer and feeling very 
much the man among the German students.
My parents took me occasionally on their outings to the Plätzl and other 
cabarets; and I often went with my sisters to the movies, which were just 
beginning to give signs of their later development. There was also a small 
amount of visiting fairs and historical museums. However, my chief delight 
was the Deutsches Museum: a museum of science, engineering, and indus­
try. Part of the exhibits were historical and old-fashioned; but the museum 
led the world in its demonstration of the technique of scientific experi­
ments, which the visitor could actually work for himself behind the pro­
tecting glass cases by pulling strings or by turning knobs. There were some 
delightful old attendants there who were ready to put themselves at the ser­
vice of the interested visitor, and to show him particular tidbits not always 
brought to the attention of the general public. I remember one in particular 
who put himself out to be nice to me; he possessed a few words of English 
and a most delightful Bavarian brogue.
The Deutsches Museum had an extremely modern scientific library; 
there I read assiduously the various works that Russell had assigned to me. 
I remember among them the original papers of Einstein. I have said that 
Russell was among the first philosophers to recognize the overwhelming 
importance of Einstein’s work in that annus mirabilis 1905, in which he 
had originated the theory of relativity, solved the problem of the Brownian 
motion, and developed the quantum theory of photoelectricity.
Another delight of that vacation was the Englischer Garten, even in its 
snow-covered winter state. I remember the skaters on the pond near the 
Chinese Pagoda. I was not aware at the time that the Englischer Garten was 
laid out after the plans of a New England Yankee from Woburn, Massachu­
setts, the great and disagreeable Benjamin Thompson, Count Rumford, and 
paymaster for Benedict Arnold.
I returned to Cambridge in January. I felt myself already much more at 
home in the town, and much less lonely. I continued to distribute my time 
between philosophy and mathematics, and began a second paper for the 
Cambridge Philosophical Society. This time I tried to use the language of 
the Principia Mathematica to describe series of qualities, such as those found 
in the color pyramid, which escaped from a treatment of series given by 
Whitehead and Russell because they were not infinitely extensible in both 
directions. What I found necessary was a logical treatment of systems of 
measurement in the presence of thresholds between observations whose 
differences were barely noticeable. In the paper I used certain ideas related 
to those of Professor Whitehead, who was then at the University of London 

156 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
and who had recently employed a new method of defining logical entities 
as constructs from entities of a primitive system possessing no particular 
specific properties rather than as the objects of a system of postulates. I 
wrote to Professor Whitehead for an appointment and visited him in his 
house in Chelsea, where I met the whole family. Little did I think at that 
time that Professor Whitehead was to end his long and useful career as my 
neighbor at Harvard University, and that as a very inept pupil of his daugh­
ter I was later to learn some of the rudiments of the art of rock-climbing in 
the crags of the Blue Hills and in the Quincy quarries.
I had intended to complete the year in Cambridge, but I found that Rus­
sell had been invited to Harvard for the second semester and that therefore 
I would be marking time in Cambridge during the May term. At Russell’s 
own advice, I decided to finish the year at Göttingen, studying mathemat­
ics with Hilbert and Landau and philosophy with Husserl. I returned to 
Munich for the vacation between the last two terms. My father had already 
left for the United States, where he was consoled in his loneliness by the 
companionship of some younger colleagues in the German department, 
but my mother and the rest of the family were still in Munich.
During the year I had read that Harvard offered a number of prizes for 
essays by students, both undergraduate and graduate. I found that I was 
eligible to compete for one of the Bowdoin Prizes and submitted a rather 
skeptical essay, which I called “The Highest Good.” It was intended as refu­
tation, or at any rate as a denial, of all absolute ethical standards. Bartlett 
did not think much of it, either as a composition or as a philosophical 
essay, but at any rate it won one of the prizes. I am quite sure that Sir Fred­
eric still regards this as a shortcoming of Harvard rather than as a success 
of my own.
My departure from England was marred by a very unpleasant experi­
ence with my landlady. When my father had made the arrangements with 
her, he had thought that he was committing me for a single term or less. 
However, by the custom of Cambridge the term is of a certain specified 
length, which is longer than the period known as full term, during which 
the students are supposed to be in residence, and all lodgings contracts are 
or were made for the longer period. As the second term drew to the end, I 
found my landlady insisting on this contract. From being demanding she 
became pressing, and from being pressing she became insulting. I retorted 
in kind, which made the matter worse. Some of my undergraduate friends 
with whom I consulted suggested a minor riot at my landlady’s expense; 
but although I was foolish, I was not quite so foolish as that. When I tried 
to take one of my trunks out of the house on my own back, the landlady 

14: Emancipation 
157
impounded the other; and when I asked the police to help me in getting 
back my own property, they told me that it was a civil matter and that they 
could have nothing to do with it.
I had been living on an absolutely minimal sum, so that when I paid the 
landlady the sum necessary to redeem my trunk, I found that I did not have 
enough money left to get to Munich. I borrowed a small sum from the hall 
porter of the Union. Out of shame I borrowed too small an amount. The 
result was that when on the train down to Munich, I had to decide whether 
to have a cheese sandwich for breakfast and go hungry for lunch, or vice 
versa. I do not remember which way I decided it. The upshot of it all was 
that I landed in Munich with not a single coin in my pocket. Luckily the 
check room charges were paid on reclaiming the baggage, so I left my bag­
gage at the station and walked over to our apartment.
I found matters rather in a crisis at the apartment. The smoldering fric­
tion between the landlady and my mother had burst into flame, now that 
my father was no longer there to help with his German. Mother went 
house-hunting, and after much effort we managed to find an apartment 
in the suburbs, well out toward the northern end of the Englischer Garten, 
and almost abutting on it. Here we were completely at peace.


15  A Traveling Scholar in Wartime
1914–1915
Ex-Prodigy: 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
15: 
A 
Traveling 
Scholar 
in 
Wartime
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
After staying in Munich a few weeks, I went on to Göttingen before the 
beginning of term, to take part in a psychological congress which was being 
held there and to see my old friend Elliott, the Harvard psychologist, who 
had come there to participate in it. I have not much recollection of the 
congress, but I found the town a delightful medieval gem, with the circuit 
of its old walls almost complete.
For what seemed to me a ridiculously small sum, I immatriculated at the 
university and began to search for a lodging and for a vegetarian restaurant 
at which to eat my meals. I found my lodging just outside the walls at the 
house of a Fräulein Büschen. It was a half-timbered villa in Swiss style, and 
my room, though dark, was adequate. Fräulein Büschen, who had been a 
music teacher, attended to the business side of the establishment. She man­
aged this very competently, and left the matter of our breakfast and other 
domestic needs to her sister, who did not aspire to the social distinction 
claimed by the music teacher. Somewhere around the establishment there 
was an obscure brother, who had been trained as a dentist but who did not 
seem to practice that art.
I remember at least one party the Büschens gave for their student lodg­
ers, which was attended by some nice girls from the neighborhood. I partic­
ularly remember the shock to my 1914 New England susceptibilities when 
I found that the whole company, both men and women, were smoking 
cigarettes and were not averse to drinking to the point of becoming slightly 
tipsy.
I found my vegetarian restaurant in the Theaterstrasse, in the home 
of a Frau Bauer. She was a widow with a considerable number of daugh­
ters of varying ages, who assisted her and the cook. The girls waited bare­
foot at the table, for vegetarianism was not the only respect in which the 
Bauers departed from the norm. They were clothes-reform people, youth-
movement people, health faddists, and anti-Semites as well. It was in their 

160 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
restaurant that I first saw that vile sheet Hammer, which even at that epoch 
already contained all the lies and blasphemies that Hitler and Goebbels dis­
seminated so disastrously at a later period.
Bigoted as they were, the Bauers were not entirely bad. Their food was 
good and cheap, and they were personally amiable enough. They served an 
oatmeal preparation with the uninviting name of Haferschleimsuppe, or “oat 
slime soup.” It was inexpensive and filling.
I often wonder whether the poor Bauers ever realized what serpents they 
had taken to their bosom in the person of myself and a young Scottish 
mathematical physicist by the name of Hyman Levy. Levy, who is now 
a distinguished professor at the Imperial College of Science and Technol­
ogy in London, notwithstanding his impeccable Glasgow accent, was, like 
myself, just what his name purported him to be; and yet we two Jewish 
sons of perdition defied the wrath of the anti-Semitic periodicals about us 
and ate, nay even enjoyed, the cheap and savory meals prepared for us. 
When I think that in addition to his Jewishness, Professor Levy has become 
a bulwark of the Left in English politics, I imagine that old mother Bauer, if 
indeed she be dead, is turning cartwheels in her grave.
Service was very slow in the Bauer restaurant. We used to take our plates 
out to the cook in the kitchen and have her fill them for us from the pots 
on the stove. This informality was possible because we were a happy-go-
lucky, impecunious mixture of Germans and Americans, Britons and Rus­
sians, and the low prices attracted many of us who had no fads or dietary 
interest at all. We used to read our papers there.
The Kneipen or drinking bouts of the German students are well known. 
We too—the English and the Americans—had our Kneipen at the meet­
ings of two separate but commensal societies known as the British and the 
American Colonies. The heads of these two colonies were called the Patri­
archs, and Levy was the British Patriarch. The two clubs occupied a room 
above the Franziskaner Restaurant. The beer supply was steady and unfail­
ing, and the floor was on such a slant that navigation was difficult, even 
without a cargo of beer. We shared a piano, a Kommersbuch, or German 
students’ song book, and a Scottish Students’ Song Book, which was Levy’s 
personal property. Our meetings were long, moist, and harmonious. We 
paid our respects to the land that had welcomed us as well as to the lands 
that had fostered us by singing indiscriminately in English and in German. 
We were the rowdiest Kneipe in town and had been compelled to leave two 
or three former quarters by the protest of the proprietor or of the police.
There was one member whose name I shall not mention out of respect 
to such of his kinsmen as may be alive, though no contemporary Göttinger 

15: A Traveling Scholar in Wartime 
161
can ever forget him. It was not Early, though that is what I shall call him. 
Early was the son of an American publisher of hymn books, and he seemed 
determined to live down his family’s good name. He was married, and his 
wife and young daughter had the full sympathy of the united colonies. 
Early had looked around the world for a soft spot to settle, and he had 
picked Göttingen. In some vague way he had managed to immatriculate at 
the university, where he had been a student for about ten years, though I 
had never heard of his taking or attending a course. When any of the Amer­
ican students made a pilgrimage to a nearby city for questionable purposes, 
it was Early who was their guide, friend, and philosopher.
These activities, I must confess, were only minor manifestations of his 
personality. The serious purpose of his life was drink. Never did a meeting 
of the united colonies come to an end but he was drunk as a coot, and some 
one of us had to see him safely home. I believe he was courteously apolo­
getic on these occasions; and indeed there were about him some curious 
remnants of a man of breeding.
When I next went to Göttingen in 1925, Early was gone, though his 
fame had not vanished. I am told that he stayed on well into the First World 
War but that before we entered that conflict his family had been able to 
bring him home. In view of his age at that time and of his manner of life, he 
must long be dead by now. Yet his type will never die; and wherever schol­
ars come together and there is a comfortable life, there will be the blight of 
the perpetual student. I write this chapter in a room in a hotel just off the 
Boulevard St. Germain in Paris. Around the corner at this moment dozens 
of Earlys at the Cafés Flore and Deux Magots are sipping their apéritifs and 
trying to turn the more serious young people into their own likenesses.
I had a varied range of acquaintances in Göttingen. I remember a stu­
dent who had come from the imperial Russian police and who was study­
ing psychology in connection with his professional career. Another of my 
philosophical acquaintances was a very bright Russian Jewish boy. On one 
occasion several of us were at a small party at the house of the landlord 
of the latter fellow—a retired chief forester with the bluntness that one 
naturally associates with this profession. I don’t remember all the things 
we discussed, but my philosophic friend asked me to say something about 
the work of Bertrand Russell. After I had spoken my little piece, my fellow 
student brought out: “But he doesn’t belong to any school.”
This was a serious shock to me: that a philosopher should be judged not 
by the internal implications of his own work but by the company he keeps. 
It was not, in fact, the first time I had heard of this intellectual gregarious­
ness, which was common in Germany of those times but not confined to it, 

162 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
but I had never really run up against a first-class example of that sort of ped­
antry. I had, it is true, encountered the collective manifesto of the American 
New Realists. But the weakness of this group was so apparent that it seemed 
to me their solidarity and mutual mental support resembled that of a group 
of college students returning home after an exciting evening following a 
great football game: they literally could not stand up alone.
However, when I now saw a similar phenomenon in Germany, it claimed 
to be more than a protective huddle. The implication was that the privilege 
of a man to think depended on his having the right friends. Later, when 
I was to come back to the United States, I found that I myself had the 
wrong friends. I had studied with great men but they were not the men 
on the American scene. The Harvard department of mathematics would 
have none of me because I had learned the greater part of my mathemat­
ics at Cambridge and at Göttingen. When the new Princeton department 
recruited its men after the war, I was already too much of a lone wolf to be 
welcomed there. It is true that these two universities (together with Chi­
cago) never reached the extremes of some of the German universities in 
their corporate isolationism, but they have made a good try at it.
I attended a course on group theory given by Professor Landau and a 
course on differential equations under the great Hilbert. At a later period, 
when I had become more familiar both with the literature of mathemat­
ics and with the techniques of mathematical research, I came to a clearer 
understanding of these two men. Hilbert was the one really universal 
genius of mathematics whom I have met. His excursions from number 
theory to algebra and from integral equations to the foundations of math­
ematics covered the greater part of known mathematics. There was in his 
work a complete grasp of tools and techniques; however, he never put into 
the background the fundamental ideas behind these. He was not so much 
the manipulative expert as the great mind of mathematics, and his work 
was comprehensive because his vision was comprehensive. He almost never 
depended on a mere trick.
Landau, on the other hand, was the chess player manqué. He believed in 
presenting mathematics as a sequence of propositions analogous to moves 
on a chessboard, and he did not believe in the nonsymbolically express­
ible part of mathematics that constitutes the ideas and strategy behind the 
moves. He did not believe in mathematical style, and as a consequence his 
books, effective as they are, read like a Sears-Roebuck catalog.
It is interesting to contrast them with the work of Hardy, of Littlewood, 
or Harald Bohr, all of whom wrote in the manner of cultivated and mature 

15: A Traveling Scholar in Wartime 
163
men. Landau, on the other hand, had intelligence, but he had neither taste 
nor judgment nor philosophical reflection.
It is impossible to mention the Göttingen of those times without refer­
ring to Felix Klein, but for one reason or another I did not meet him the 
semester I was there. I rather believe that he was out of town or in ill health. 
When I later met him in 1925, I found him very much of an invalid indeed: 
a grave, bearded man with a blanket over his knees, who sat in his mag­
nificent study and discussed the mathematics of the past as if he were the 
Muse of mathematical history herself. He was a great mathematician, but 
by this time in his career he had become rather the Geheimrat, the elder 
statesman of mathematics, than the producer of mathematical ideas. There 
was something kingly about him which suggested to the career men of 
American mathematics that they, too, might be kings if they followed in 
his footsteps, and they treasured his little mannerisms (such as the way he 
speared his cigar with a penknife) as if by a careful observation of this ritual 
they might charm their way to greatness. Many years later I became aware 
that two generations of Harvard mathematicians had learned this trick 
from him.
Besides these mathematical courses, I sat in Professor Husserl’s course on 
Kant and his seminar on phenomenonology. The philosophical courses left 
very little impression on me, as my German was inadequate for the subtle­
ties of the philosophical language. I got something at the time from the 
mathematics courses, but much more by that sort of intellectual doubletake 
that allows one to realize at a later date the importance of what one has 
already heard but not understood.
Even more important for my intellectual training than the courses were 
the mathematical reading room and the Mathematical Society. The reading 
room contained not only what was probably the most complete collec­
tion of mathematical books in the world but also the reprints that Felix 
Klein had been receiving over the years. It was a great experience to browse 
among the books and the reprints.
The Mathematical Society used to meet in a seminar room, where the 
tables were covered with the latest numbers of all the mathematical peri­
odicals of the world. Hilbert would preside, and professors and advanced 
students sat together. Papers were read by students and professors alike, and 
the discussion was free and incisive.
After the meeting we would traipse across the town to Rohn’s café in a 
beautiful park at the top of a hill overlooking the town. There we would 
have a mild glass of beer or coffee, and would discuss all sorts of math­
ematical ideas, both our own and those we had learned in the literature. 

164 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
There I came to know the younger men, such as Felix Bernstein, who had 
done some remarkable work in Cantor theory, and little Otto Szasz, with his 
high-heeled shoes and his bristling red mustache. Szasz was my particular 
crony and protector, and I am very happy that later when the Hitler regime 
came in, I was able to help place him in the United States.
The combination of science and social life in the Nachsitzungen at Rohn’s 
café up the hill was particularly attractive to me. The meetings had a cer­
tain resemblance to those of the Harvard Mathematical Society, but the 
older mathematicians were greater, the younger men were abler and more 
enthusiastic, and the contacts were freer. The Harvard Mathematical Soci­
ety meetings were to the Göttingen meetings as near beer is to a deep draft 
of Münchener.
About this time I had my first experience of the concentrated passion­
ate work that is necessary for new research. I had the idea that a method I 
had already used to obtain a series of higher logical type from an unspeci­
fied system could be used to establish something to replace the postula­
tional treatment for a wide class of systems. The idea occurred to me to 
generalize the notions of transitivity and permutability, which had already 
been employed in the theory of series, to systems of a larger number of 
dimensions. I lived with this idea for a week, leaving my work only for 
an occasional bite of black bread and Tilsiter cheese, which I bought at a 
delicatessen store. I soon became aware that I had something good; but the 
unresolved ideas were a positive torture to me until I had finally written 
them down and got them out of my system. The resulting paper, which I 
entitled Studies in Synthetic Logic, was one of the best early pieces of research 
which I had done. It appeared later in the Proceedings of the Cambridge Philo­
sophical Society and served as the basis for the Docent Lectures which I gave 
at Harvard about a year afterward.
Mathematics is too arduous and uninviting a field to appeal to those to 
whom it does not give great rewards. These rewards are of exactly the same 
character as those of the artist. To see a difficult, uncompromising material 
take living shape and meaning is to be Pygmalion, whether the material 
is stone or hard, stonelike logic. To see meaning and understanding come 
where there has been no meaning and no understanding is to share the 
work of a demiurge. No amount of technical correctness and no amount of 
labor can replace this creative moment, whether in the life of a mathemati­
cian or in that of a painter or musician. Bound up with it is a judgment of 
values, quite parallel to the judgment of values that belongs to the painter 
or the musician. Neither the artist nor the mathematician may be able to 
tell you what constitutes the difference between a significant piece of work 

15: A Traveling Scholar in Wartime 
165
and an inflated trifle; but if he is never able to recognize this in his own 
heart, he is no artist and no mathematician.
Granted an urge to create, one creates with what one has. With me, the 
particular assets that I have found useful are a memory of a rather wide 
scope and great permanence and a free-flowing, kaleidoscope-like train of 
imagination which more or less by itself gives me a consecutive view of the 
possibilities of a fairly complicated intellectual situation. The great strain 
on the memory in mathematical work is for me not so much the retention 
of a vast mass of fact in the literature as of the simultaneous aspects of the 
particular problem on which I have been working and of the conversion 
of my fleeting impressions into something permanent enough to have a 
place in memory. For I have found that if I have been able to cram all my 
past ideas of what the problem really involves into a single comprehensive 
impression, the problem is more than half solved. What remains to be done 
is very often the casting aside of those aspects of the group of ideas that are 
not germane to the solution of the problem. This rejection of the irrelevant 
and purification of the relevant I can do best at moments in which I have a 
minimum of outside impressions. Very often these moments seem to arise 
on waking up; but probably this really means that sometime during the 
night I have undergone the process of deconfusion which is necessary to 
establish my ideas. I am quite certain that at least a part of this process can 
take place during what one would ordinarily describe as sleep, and in the 
form of a dream. It is probably more usual for it to take place in the so-called 
hypnoidal state in which one is awaiting sleep, and it is closely associated 
with those hypnagogic images which have some of the sensory solidity of 
hallucinations but which, unlike hallucinations, may be manipulated more 
or less at the will of the subject. The usefulness of these images is that in a 
situation in which the main ideas are not yet sufficiently differentiated to 
make recourse to symbolism easy and natural, they furnish a sort of impro­
vised symbolism which may carry one through the stages until an ordinary 
symbolism becomes possible and appropriate. Indeed, I have found that 
there are other mental elements that may readily lend themselves for pre­
liminary symbolic use in the solidification of ideas in mathematics. On one 
occasion during a bout with pneumonia, I was delirious and in considerable 
pain. But the hallucinations of my delirium and the vague reactions of pain 
became associated in my mind with some of the difficulties yet hounding 
me in an incompletely solved problem. I identified my suffering with the 
very real malaise that one feels when a group of ideas should fit together 
and yet cannot be brought together. However, this very identification gave 

166 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
me sufficient markers for my problem to enable me to make some real pro­
gress in it during my illness.
But life in Göttingen was not all research for me. I needed outdoor 
exercise, and I took my tramps with my English and American colleagues 
in the woods south of Göttingen and in the region of Hanover-Münden. 
My favorite lunch tidbit may seem rather indigestible, but it was cool and 
delightful: a Tilsiter cheese sandwich, a dill pickle, a glass of lager beer, and 
a raspberry ice.
There were many interesting things to see in Göttingen. There was a fair 
on the Walkenmühlenwiese, near our favorite swimminghole in the river 
Leine; and we were delighted to see the side shows and to hear the barkers 
of just the sort I had known at a New England carnival, against this unfa­
miliar background. I remember the different sorts of beer which I furtively 
tasted at the local Automat, and the bathhouse with its different classes of 
baths and its ample towels of the more expensive grades. I remember the 
two-hour classes, and the little buffet at which we bought sandwiches and 
Leibnitz-Keks in the fifteen-minute interval between the two halves.
The summer term was drawing toward a close, and the coming storm of 
the First World War made itself known in the papers by the heat lightning 
of the assassination at Sarajevo. The diplomatic ineptitudes that followed 
did not relieve the tension. Luckily, I had planned to return to America, 
and I had already secured my third-class passage on a Hamburg-American 
steamer.
I derived many lasting benefits from Göttingen. My contact with the 
philosophers was not very satisfactory. I do not have the type of philosoph­
ical mind that feels at home in abstractions unless a ready bridge is made 
from these to the concrete observations or computations of some field of 
science. From the mathematicians I also got relatively little in the formal 
courses. Landau’s group theory course was a hard-driving plunge through a 
mass of detail with which I was not fully prepared to cope. I was able to fol­
low Hilbert’s course in differential equations only in parts, but these parts 
left on me a tremendous impression of their scientific power and intelli­
gence. It was much more the meetings of the Mathematische Gesellaschaft 
which taught me that mathematics was not only a subject to be done in the 
study but one to be discussed and lived with.
Besides this, at Göttingen I learned to meet people both like me and 
different and to get on with them. This marked an important step ahead 
in my social development. The net result was that I left Germany much 
more a citizen of the world than when I first went there. I can say this 
very truly, even though I had not been fond of all aspects of the Göttingen 

15: A Traveling Scholar in Wartime 
167
environment and although in the war that immediately followed, I passed 
through a definitely anti-German phase. Yet when I went back to Germany 
during the confused years between 1919 and Hitler, for all the alienation I 
may have felt on political issues, there was a large intellectual element in 
Germany with which I had a sufficient common basis of past experience to 
feel myself a part.
My year at Cornell and my two years of graduate study in philosophy 
at Harvard had represented the continuance of my adolescence and my 
gradual introduction to independent research. They were satisfactory as far 
as my purely intellectual progress went, but they did not see me clearly 
out of the Slough of Despond. I was quite as aware as those about me that 
the way of the infant prodigy is beset with traps and snares, and while 
I knew perfectly well that my purely intellectual powers were above the 
average I knew equally well that I was to be judged by standards according 
to which a moderate degree of success would take on the appearance of 
failure. Thus I did not escape the floundering that generally goes with ado­
lescence; and although this floundering was at a far higher intellectual level 
than that of the majority of teenagers, it represented a more than usually 
severe and doubtful struggle with the forces of uncertainty and of my own 
inadequacy.
It was the year in Cambridge and in Göttingen, however, that gave me 
my emancipation. For the first time I was able to compare myself intellec­
tually with those who were not too much above me in age and who repre­
sented in fact the cream of the intellectual crop of Europe and even of the 
world. I was also subject to the inspection of first-rate men like Hardy and 
Russell and Moore, who could see me without the glamour of my precocity 
and without the condemnation which belonged to my epoch of confusion. 
I do not know whether I was outstandingly brilliant in their eyes, but at 
least they (or some of them) regarded my career as a reasonable bet. I was 
not under the immediate tutelage of my father and did not have to weigh 
myself in his somewhat loaded scales. In short, I had been initiated into the 
great world of international science, and it did not seem utterly hopeless 
that I should accomplish something there.
I was learning all the time how to comport myself as a social being and 
what the requirements were for living among those of other traditions and 
customs. My study in Germany represented an even greater break with my 
childhood, and an even greater necessity for me to adapt myself to foreign 
standards or at least not to come into a head-on collision with them.
The Sarajevo pot gradually went from a simmer to a boil. By the time I 
had got to Hamburg, there were posters on the street, calling on all Austrians 

168 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
subject to military service to return to their country. The city was full, and 
the Christliches Hospiz at which I stayed could only put me in a bathroom 
in the waiters’ home which was their annex. I heard singing in the street at 
night and thought the war had come; but it had not, and I spent the time 
before dawn walking around the outer Alster basin.
I took the train for Cuxhafen, where I embarked on the Cincinnati of 
the Hamburg America Line. A day and a half later I saw the mobilization 
of the British fleet in Spithead, and about two days afterward we received 
the news that Germany and England were at war and that the radio station 
was closed. While we were bound for Boston, we did not know whether 
we should be able to make it, and at one time there was some talk that we 
might be sailing for the Azores. However, the sun showed that this was not 
the case, and we made Boston as intended. This ship was then laid up at a 
Boston dock until the United States entered the war, when it was taken over 
as an American transport and later torpedoed by the Germans.
My father met me at the boat, much relieved to find me safe and sound. 
We took the train together up to New Hampshire. I noticed that Father 
treated me with more respect than he had ever done: more as a grown man. 
We talked about the war during the train trip. I was surprised to find how 
definitely my father’s opinion and the university opinion he represented 
had crystallized against Germany.
The war news was bad. We had hoped for a quick ending of the war, but 
the German line bit deeper and deeper into Flanders and France, and even 
when it was held by the taxicab army of Marshal Joffre, it was clear that we 
were in for a long, desperate, and uncertain war of positions. It was then the 
children of my generation knew that we had been born too late or—barely 
possibly—too soon. Santa Claus died in 1914. We surmised that life was to 
be such a nightmare as Kafka has since described, from which one awakes 
only to become aware that the nightmare is real, or from which one awakes 
into an even worse nightmare.
I had written to Bertrand Russell to inquire whether it was advisable to 
return to Cambridge on the new and augmented traveling fellowship which 
Harvard had granted me for the academic year 1914–15. He wrote that it 
would be safe and desirable, and I booked passage from New York on an old 
ship of the American Line. It dated from the days of auxiliary sail, and had 
a yacht bow and a bowsprit. It seemed enormously romantic to me.
My two aunts, who had by now risen in the clothing trade world and 
spent much of their time in Paris, saw me off at New York. The trip was slow 
but agreeable. There were young people aboard with me who tried to for­
get the war. We played a version of golf with shuffleboard sticks and disks, 

15: A Traveling Scholar in Wartime 
169
chalking the holes on the deck, and using ventilators, cleats, and deck­
houses as hazards. There was an elderly couple from Australia who watched 
our antics benignly. They ran a sort of agricultural school when they were 
at home. I was later to see them in the grim London of the war, where their 
cordiality was a great consolation to me.
Thus I arrived in wartime Cambridge. The air was heavily overlaid with 
gloom. Part of the Backs had been turned into an improvised hospital for 
wounded soldiers. In all the vacant spaces of the university, ugly shacks 
were springing up, of a temporariness more devastatingly permanent than 
any intended permanency.
In the Union there were lists of casualties, and distressed fathers and 
brothers were reading them in the hope that they might not contain the 
names of their own kinsfolk, yet with the expectation that sooner or later 
these kinsfolk would appear on them. Blackwood’s Magazine contained 
monthly installments of Ian Hay Beith’s book The First Hundred Thousand, 
which brought to us a sense of the immediacy of the war and of a certain 
participation in it.
The news continued black and ominous. My friends and colleagues were 
scarcely able to take their intellectual work with full seriousness, and the 
blacked-out streets and the white painted curbs added to a general feel­
ing of gloom and doom. Finally, we began to hear suggestions that the 
Germans were soon to undertake a great unrestricted submarine campaign 
against merchant and passenger ships.
It was embarrassing for me to meet the soldiers everywhere, in the mov­
ies, in the streets, and even in the classrooms of the university, and to think 
that as a foreigner I was immune to the universal sacrifice. Several times I 
thought of enlisting, but was deterred by the fact that after all it was not yet 
my war and that to go into it before my parents were ready to accept the 
situation would be in some sense a very serious disloyalty to them. Then 
too, with my poor eyesight, I was not exactly the best soldier material; nor 
did I desire to sacrifice my life for a cause concerning the merits of which I 
was not yet fully convinced. Though I definitely preferred the English and 
French side of the war, I had not yet been excited to that righteous pitch of 
indignation to which my father had been carried by a complex of emotions 
which I have already described.
I was impressed with that freemasonry which exists among the British 
ruling class, whatever their political opinions, which makes it possible to 
share the intimate knowledge of many secrets carefully concealed from the 
press and the public. My attention was called to this very forcibly during 
this second stay in Cambridge. I was in the habit of receiving from my 

170 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
parents copies of the old Boston Transcript, that former fount of ultrare­
spectability and of reasonably accurate news. In one number I read of the 
sinking of the British cruiser Audacious. I had not seen a word about the 
matter in my British newspaper. I went to Russell with the news, and he 
told me that it had been common knowledge since it occurred, and that 
the Illustrated London News had published a photograph of the ship with the 
caption, “An Audacious Picture!” and no explanation of the audacity.
Furthermore, Russell seemed to be well informed about every other 
detail of the war which had been concealed from the public at large. Yet, 
at this time, Russell was an extremely unpopular figure with the officials of 
the British government. He was a conscientious objector and a pronounced 
pacifist; and when later America entered the war, he expressed himself con­
cerning the American government in such hostile terms that he was sent to 
jail and ultimately deprived of his position at Cambridge.
To me this combination of being officially on the black books of the 
government and still personally in a position to receive from his official 
opponents information that was refused to the public at large seemed a 
remarkable tribute both to the stability of England and to the assured posi­
tion of its ruling class at that time.
By Christmas I could stand the gloom of Cambridge no more and I went 
down to London. I found rooms in a melancholy turning off Holborn and 
spent much of my time reading my landlady’s books about old London 
and checking up the places mentioned as they were to be found at the 
present time. I found my Australian friends in a Bloomsbury hotel. I looked 
up another Harvard fellow in philosophy, T. S. Eliot, who, I believe, had 
taken Oxford to himself as I had taken Cambridge to myself. I found him 
in a Bloomsbury lodging, and we had a not too hilarious Christmas dinner 
together in one of the larger Lyons restaurants. I also looked up the White­
heads, and found that war bereavement had already struck them.
Some time after I returned I received a telegram from my parents telling 
me that the submarine threat was growing worse, and that I should come 
home on the first possible boat. Actually, Cambridge had almost closed 
down, and there was very little point in my staying any longer. I decided 
to finish my year at Columbia, so I booked a passage from Liverpool to 
New York and ultimately made a gloomy train journey to Liverpool under 
depressing war conditions. My companions in the compartment were a 
group of soldiers absent without leave who jumped off the train at the 
first stop before we arrived at Lime Street and into the arms of the military 
police.

15: A Traveling Scholar in Wartime 
171
I have been on winter trips across the Atlantic which have been as calm 
and as agreeable as any trip in the full summer time, but this March voyage 
was not one of them. The old ship took it green up to the bridge, and noth­
ing but a youthful resiliency kept me from being sick all the way. Among 
my fellow passengers the most interesting were a family of Belgian refugees 
who were leaving a temporary asylum at Cambridge, England, for a more 
permanent one at Harvard University in the American Cambridge. Profes­
sor Dupriez was a distinguished professor of Roman Law at Lovain, and a 
charming gentleman, but he was also an impractical little scholar of the 
European type. The practical brains of the family and its energy belonged 
to his wife, a queenly and downright Flemish lady. There were also four 
children, two boys and two girls, who were too young to have completely 
lost the adventurous pleasure of the journey in the depression of defeat and 
exile. We were to see much of this family in the next few years.
The boat arrived in New York, and I was met by my New York kinsfolk. 
I went to Boston for a few days to pick up the continuity of our family life, 
and then I returned to New York to finish my year’s fellowship at Columbia 
University.
I found the skyscraper dormitories of Columbia depressing after Cam­
bridge and Göttingen. I also found the life of the place unsatisfactory in its 
lack of coherence and unity. Almost the only bond between the professors, 
who lived widely scattered in University Heights apartment houses or in 
suburban bungalows, was an almost universal antagonism toward Nicholas 
Murray Butler and everything that he stood for.
I did not get along too well with the other men in the dormitories. There 
was no intellectual bond between us, and I seem to have been completely 
lacking in tact. I insisted on criticizing my seniors intellectually in a way 
not becoming a boy of the age of a college sophomore. I threw my weight 
about giving bits of information which were not welcome to the men about 
me who were predominantly graduate students. It is true that I did not 
always know that these bits of information were particularly recondite and 
unwelcome. I intruded upon bridge games between an established set of 
cronies without making sure that I was welcome. I should have been far 
more sensitive to the response that my conduct evoked. They used to pester 
me by setting fire to the newspaper I was reading, and by other such feats 
of heavy-handed buffoonery.
Following the advice of Bertrand Russell, I studied with John Dewey. I 
also took courses with some of the other philosophers. In particular, I lis­
tened to lectures by one of the New Realists, but I was only able to confirm 

172 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
my impression of an undigested mass of the verbiage of mathematical 
logic, completely uncombined with any knowledge of what it was all about.
My term at Columbia was a makeshift at best and although I began 
to develop the intellectual consequences of my own ideas, I did not get 
much help from my professors. Indeed, the only one of them who was a 
great name comparable to those I had learned to appreciate at Cambridge 
and Göttingen was John Dewey; and I do not think I got the best of John 
Dewey. He was always word-minded rather than science-minded: that is, 
his social dicta did not translate easily into the precise scientific terms and 
mathematical symbolism into which I had been inducted in England and 
Germany. As a very young man I appreciated the help and discipline of a 
rigid logic and a mathematical symbolism.
About the time that I returned to America, I was told that the philoso­
phy department at Harvard would look out for me for the next year with 
an assistant’s position, and that I would be allowed to give a free series of 
Docent Lectures which were the prerogative at that time of every Harvard 
Ph.D. Hence I began to prepare for my Harvard Docent Lectures.
My research in New York was devoted to an attempt to establish a pos­
tulational and constructive treatment of analysis situs within the ideational 
and terminological frame of Russell’s and Whitehead’s Principia Mathemat­
ica. This was in 1915, many years before Alexander, Lefschetz, Veblen, and 
others had succeeded in doing very much the same sort of thing that I then 
tried to do. I had pages and pages covered with formulae, and I made a cer­
tain very real progress, but I was disappointed because I considered the bulk 
of results which I obtained distressingly small in view of the large struc­
ture of presuppositions which I had set up to obtain them; consequently 
I never carried my investigations sufficiently far to put them into publish­
able form. In neglecting to do so I may very well have lost the chance to be 
one of the founders of what has become a most fashionable mathematical 
subject. However, my early start in mathematical logic, a subject at which 
many mathematicians arrived only after a mature consideration of other 
fields, rather cloyed me with abstraction for abstraction’s sake, and gave 
me a somewhat exacting sense of the need for a proper balance between 
mathematical apparatus and the results obtained before I have been able to 
consider a mathematical theory as intellectually satisfying. This has led me 
more than once to discard a preoccupation with a theory which I myself 
had at least partly originated, and which, because of the ease with which 
it has furnished doctoral theses, has become a fashionable field of studies. 
Here I refer in particular to the study of Banach’s spaces, which I discovered 

15: A Traveling Scholar in Wartime 
173
independently of Banach in the summer of 1920, only a few months after 
his own original work and before its publication.
In this connection, let me say that the fact that I came from a field of the 
most abstract theory has always led me to put a great value on richness of 
intellectual structure and on the applicability of mathematical ideas to sci­
entific and engineering problems. I have always had, and I still have, great 
suspicions and reservations in regard to work that is thin and facile; and 
until we had the correcting influence of the sense for application required 
by war work, I cannot deny that a large part of specifically American work 
and not a little of that found abroad have suffered from a certain thinness 
of texture.
I used to explore on foot the whole of Manhattan Island, even as far as the 
Battery. I went for walks on the Palisades near the Jersey side of the river 
with Professor Kasner of the mathematics department. He then lived in a 
part of Harlem at the foot of University Heights, before Harlem had come 
to have its present significance. Kasner would tell me much of his ideas 
on differential geometry, and he was a pleasant walking companion, who 
knew a much wilder Palisades region than can be found at the present time.
My stay in New York also marked my introduction to the American 
Mathematical Society, and my first visual acquaintance with most of the 
elder scholars of the group. At that time the hotel headquarters was that 
pile of Gay Nineties respectability, the old Murray Hill Hotel. The society 
was then more of a New York institution than it is at the present time, for 
it had indeed been founded by a New York group, and had been known for 
some years as the New York Mathematical Society. There attached to it a lit­
tle of a beer-hall flavor, which has evaporated with time and the increased 
prosperity and respectability of the scientist.
I spent Sunday and sometimes Saturday with my grandmother and 
other New York relatives somewhere up in the Spuyten Duyvil region of 
Manhattan. My relatives were very kind to me but I found the gefüllte-fish 
atmosphere of a north Manhattan apartment house a little stifling. On one 
occasion I ventured to accept the invitation of my cousin Olga to take a 
walk in the country with her and to visit a few friends. I should have given 
my grandmother this time, as she was old and diabetic and not likely to live 
longer than about a year. However, the indignation with which my mother 
received the news of my dereliction from duty was only in part due to her 
affection for my grandmother. It was at least in part due to her fear of my 
acceptance of Jewish environment in the more threatening form provided 
by Olga and the younger generation.

174 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
My mother’s father died while I was at Columbia, and I saw my mother 
on the hurried trip through New York to Baltimore. Not long after that I 
received a telegram from my father summoning me home for an immedi­
ate conference. Short of money as I was always at that time, I rushed to the 
train and sat the night out in a coach. When I came home the awful news 
was broken to me. One of my former fellow students, who was an instruc­
tor at Harvard, had told the authorities of the philosophy department, who 
were considering my future career, that just before obtaining the doctor’s 
degree I had bribed the janitor to show me the results of some of the exami­
nations. I have already mentioned this incident and although my conduct 
was certainly not justifiable, bribery played no part in it. My father took 
me immediately to Professor Perry’s office to confront me with my accuser, 
and I had the pleasure for once in my life to hear my father’s magnificent 
repertory of invective applied, not to me, but to an enemy. The incident 
ended in my formal acquittal, but it did no good to me in my later search 
for a permanent job.
My stay at Columbia had not represented any part of my original plans 
for that year, and had been forced on me by the exigencies of the war and 
of my parental fears. It probably represents the low point of my academic 
career between the summit of my European trips and the gradual ascent 
by which I climbed to a position as a teacher and an independent research 
man. Here, if it appears thin, it is because it was in fact thin. Still, it taught 
me something about New York and something about academic life at a 
large city university. I had done a piece of my own scientific work which 
would have been important if I had at that time possessed the courage to 
see its originality and to bet upon it in the face of a general lack of interest 
in the new Analysis Situs.

16  Trial Run: Teaching at Harvard and the University 
of Maine
1915–1917
Ex-Prodigy: 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
16: 
Trial 
Run: 
Teaching 
at 
Harvard 
and 
the 
University 
of 
Maine
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
We returned to New Hampshire for that summer. Raphael Demos, whom 
I had already known as a student in the Harvard philosophy department, 
and two other young Greeks, Aristides Evangelos Phoutrides of the Har­
vard classics department and Bouyoucos of the School of Agriculture at the 
University of Michigan, met me there in midsummer, and we set out on a 
mountain-climbing excursion.
It was a long, wilderness trip, the first that I had undertaken without 
the guidance of my father. Besides the beauty of the landscape and the 
pleasure of now being taken on a tramping trip by my contemporaries, the 
trip was enlivened by the personality of Phoutrides, who was a poet in his 
own right and a reader of much of the best in modern Greek poetry. It was 
a great revelation to see our own White Mountains through the eyes of a 
man who had formed his mountaineering skills on Parnassus and Olympus, 
and associated his pleasure in the sport of it with the genuine tradition of 
the classics.
Not long after this, we returned to the city and to the duties of term time. 
I acted as a section instructor in a large freshman course in philosophy, as 
well as instructor in my own right in a course in logic. In my undergradu­
ate teaching I had to keep a record of attendance, read papers for one or 
two professors, and conduct a section at Harvard and a section at Radcliffe 
on elementary philosophy. I was in fact about the same age as most of my 
students in these two sections. I don’t think I had very much stage fright 
in teaching, but it took a certain amount of courage to stand up before a 
crowd, particularly a crowd of girls about my own age, and hold the discus­
sion to a progressive and orderly course. I don’t know how I got away with 
it, because, as is natural with insecure beginners, I was far more pontifical 
then at the age of twenty-one than I am now at the age of fifty-eight. Still, 
Harvard and Radcliffe classes are traditionally tractable and I was interested 
in my subject and always ready for a dialectical fight.

176 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
I was grateful for the gift of gab. It is easier to prune a youthful loquacity 
and excessiveness than to cultivate the art of saying something when the 
words won’t come. Besides, I was protected by my very inexperience from 
the awareness of what a show I was making of myself. This awareness came 
later, the next year, when I left the amenities of Cambridge for contact 
with the raw facts of life in the woods at Orono, Maine. Then I was to pay 
severely for my ineptitudes in classes that delighted to show up my power­
lessness at discipline.
In addition to teaching, I had somewhat special duties. Professor Hattori 
of Tokyo was giving a series of courses on Chinese and Japanese culture and 
philosophy, and he needed the help of a young American in the routine 
work of taking attendance and of grading. I took on the job and found that 
it stimulated my interest in the civilization of the Orient, to which I had 
already been led in dealing with the problem of my Jewish origin through 
my interest in the general problem of undervalued peoples. This interest 
in the Orient was reinforced by the fact that my particular crony of that 
year, with whom I used to go tramping in the Middlesex Fells and the Blue 
Hills, was Chao Yuen Ren, a brilliant young Chinese, who had left graduate 
study in physics at Cornell to study philosophy at Harvard and who was 
equally versed in phonetics and in the study of Chinese music. Chao has 
continued to be my close friend all these years, and in the periods in which 
I have been unable to see him, I have received the Green Letters by which he 
solved the problem of his very extensive correspondence. These are printed 
documents of considerable length and merit by which he keeps his friends 
au fait with his affairs.
I may say in passing that Chao Yuen Ren has become perhaps the greatest 
philologist of Chinese and one of the two leading reformers of the Chinese 
language. He was Bertrand Russell’s interpreter in China; and he married 
a charming Chinese woman doctor who is also the greatest interpreter of 
Chinese cookery to the West. They have four daughters, of whom the old­
est two were born in the United States and are now married, and who aided 
their father during the late war in teaching Chinese at Harvard.
These friendships made me very conscious of the role of the non-
European scholar at American universities. I was living through a period in 
which great changes were taking place in the relative and the absolute role 
of America in world science. Properly speaking, these changes were only 
a part of the general process by which countries have come up and gone 
down in their creative activities. This has since been evidenced by the way 
in which the overwhelming primacy of Germany had been reduced by emi­
gration, war, and hardship. What I then found and still find more striking 

16: Trial Run: Teaching at Harvard and the University of Maine 
177
and significant were the changes in lands previously foreign to European 
culture, such as China, Japan, and India, and in the new colonial countries. 
Many of these have come within my lifetime to take a major share in the 
Western intellectual world.
Besides my regular courses, I also gave what was called a Docent course 
in constructive logic. For a number of years, Harvard granted to every Har­
vard Ph.D. the right to carry on a series of lectures in his chosen field with­
out pay and without authority for the students to count them for a degree. 
Otherwise, the lectures were officially recognized by Harvard University. 
I have already mentioned that it was my intention to supplement postu­
lational methods by a process according to which the entities of math­
ematics should be constructions of higher logical type, formed in such a 
manner that they should automatically have certain desired logical and 
structural properties. The idea had an element of soundness, but there were 
certain difficulties that I had not foreseen and evaluated, which depended 
on the fundamental finiteness of scope of our experience. My work was 
closely connected with Bertrand Russell’s notion of perspectives, and I sus­
pect that both pieces of work shared many of the same advantages and 
disadvantages.
At that time a star of the first magnitude had appeared on the firma­
ment of the Harvard mathematics department. It was G. D. Birkhoff. In 
1912 Birkhoff, then twenty-eight, had astonished the mathematical world 
by solving an important problem in dynamical topology which had been 
put—but never solved—by Poincaré. What was even more remarkable was 
that Birkhoff had done his work in the United States without the bene­
fit of any foreign training whatever. Before 1912 it had been considered 
indispensable for any young American mathematician of promise to com­
plete his training abroad. Birkhoff marks the beginning of the autonomous 
maturity of American mathematics.
He had continued his work on dynamics of the sort that Poincaré had 
previously discussed, and was giving a course on the problem of three bod­
ies. I enrolled in the course, but whether it was due to my insufficient prep­
aration or to Birkhoff’s rather difficult expository style, or in all probability 
to both, I made heavy weather of it and was unable to continue.
Both Birkhoff and Münsterberg were among the auditors of my Docent 
course. As the war went on, Münsterberg found his position at Harvard 
more and more difficult. He took the German side, whereas most of his 
colleagues, including my father, took the Allied side. Finally, Münsterberg 
wrote to my father a letter which my parents took to be insulting, and there 
followed an active quarrel in which Münsterberg alluded to his interest in 

178 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
my work and to his attendance at my course and his support of it. Natu­
rally, the situation could not have been more embarrassing to me, and I 
showed more loyalty than tact in taking up the cause of my father.
While I had occasionally attended the Harvard Mathematical Society 
during my previous stays at Harvard, I now began for the first time to 
attend it regularly. It was an institution formalized in the typical Harvard 
way. The professors sat in the front row and condescended to the students 
in a graciously Olympian manner. Perhaps the most conspicuous figure was 
W. F. Osgood, with his bald oval head and his bushy divaricating beard, 
spearing his cigar with his knife after the pattern of Felix Klein, and holding 
it with a pose of conscious preciosity.
Osgood typified Harvard mathematics in my mind. Like so many Ameri­
can scholars who had visited Germany at the beginning of the century, he 
had come home with a German wife and German mores. Let me add that 
there is much to be said for marrying German wives—I am happy to have 
done so myself. In Osgood’s time this New England pseudo-Germanism 
had been the fashion of the day. His admiration of all things German led 
him to write his book on the theory of functions in an almost correct Ger­
man. There was no question that he had been impressed with the status 
of the German Geheimrat, and that he had longed to model academic 
life in America into such a form that he could imagine himself in such 
a position. He had done able work in analysis, against the resistance of 
those inhibitions that perpetually drive a certain type of New Englander 
from the original into the derivative and the conventional. Some of his 
ideas should have led him to the discovery of the Lebesgue integral, but 
he had not brought himself to the final step which might have led him 
to accept the striking consequences of his own conception. He must have 
had some rankling awareness of how he had missed the boat, for in his 
later years he would never allow any student of his to make use of the 
Lebesgue methods.
Another representative of the German period of American mathemati­
cal education was Professor Maxime Bôcher. He was the son of a former 
teacher of French, but he had been educated in Germany and had married 
a German wife. As in the case of Osgood, German was the language of his 
house; but in other ways he departed from the Osgood pattern. His work 
was more original and on a broader basis, and his personality was free from 
easily traceable mannerisms.
Of the other professors of mathematics perhaps the two that impressed 
me most were Professors Edward Vermilye Huntington and Julian Lowell 
Coolidge. I have already spoken of Huntington, whose very originality had 

16: Trial Run: Teaching at Harvard and the University of Maine 
179
collided with his Harvard career. He had been relegated to the Lawrence 
Scientific School and to the teaching of engineers, although his ability was 
greater in the direction of pure mathematics and logical ingenuity. He has 
lived to see his heresy become an orthodoxy, and today the postulational 
method attracts even more than its due share of Ph.D. candidates. He was 
an excellent, inspiring, and patient teacher.
Under the Lowell regimen, a kinsman of Lowell himself and a descen­
dant of Jefferson, such as Julian Lowell Coolidge, was bound to be among 
the favored. Coolidge had been educated in England and in Germany. His 
work was in geometry, in which he had shown great diligence and industry. 
With his wit, he had managed to synthesize an amusing personality, and he 
had succeeded in turning an inability to pronounce the letter r into a rather 
attractive individual trait.
To give a paper before the Mathematics Club constituted a real train­
ing in skill of presentation and in logic. Originality and power were not 
at a premium. Power in mathematics consists in possessing tools, conven­
tional or otherwise, which enable one to solve a large part of the previously 
unsolved problems which one encounters in the course of one’s work. It 
is the ability to create or to develop methods to match the demands of 
the problem—and it was not in high esteem in that environment. There 
was at that time no place where the interests of the advanced scholar 
beyond the early graduate-student stage were paramount, although such 
an organization has developed since in the form of the Mathematical Col­
loquium, which now has taken over a large part of the functions of the 
Mathematics Club.
For my physical exercise I combined hiking with a certain amount 
of wrestling in the gymnasium. Wrestling is one of the sports in which 
a myope may participate without unduly serious physical disadvantage. I 
never was really good at wrestling, but I was heavy and strong, and par­
ticularly strong about the shoulders, so that I gave better wrestlers a certain 
amount of exercise in banging me about. For a while I was a mass of boils 
and mat burns, in the best tradition of the sport.
When I returned from Cambridge and Columbia, I returned to an atmo­
sphere of authority in family discipline which was not much less intense 
and all-pervading than it had been in my student days. Still there was one 
difference: I was no longer my father’s pupil in any subject. The old idea of 
the family structure remained, but this time it hinged on the fact that I was 
now a breadwinner in the full sense and that I had begun to have a certain 
stature in my own right. Yet it was not until much later after my marriage 

180 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
that I can say I ceased to be in my father’s eyes fundamentally the child 
from whom obedience was demanded.
From the time I returned from Europe, my parents had been accustomed 
to having Sunday teas for my father’s students. My own students were also 
invited as well as the fellow students of my sisters. The Sunday teas of the 
professor with adolescent and postadolescent children is indeed a hoary 
tradition; nor has it changed its original intention. When I read in Thac­
keray of the Professor of Phlebotomy at Cambridge and of his attempts to 
introduce his daughters to promising undergraduates, it strikes an echo in 
my own memory. Nevertheless, I should be the last person in the world to 
poke fun at these teas, for they did in fact furnish me with the basis for a 
social life when other bases were scant, and my sisters as well as I first met 
our future spouses on these occasions. I learned much about how to handle 
myself socially, and I began to develop friends and acquaintances.
My father was Professor of Russian at Harvard, and it fell to his lot to 
extend courtesies to Russian visitors. During the war there were a great 
number of them, first on missions of varying importance involving the 
Russian government and later the refugees from the threatening storm of 
revolution or from the revolution itself. These were men and women of 
varying caliber. Some of them were on serious missions, such as winding 
up a purchasing campaign made on behalf of the Tsarist government. Some 
were there for the sake of their own hides and very little else, and these 
young elegants came to our teas, played Russian songs on our piano, and 
philandered all over our house. Even among these, there were some who 
had sufficient serious ability to make good in the new land; but there were 
also those whose connection with life was about as tenuous as that of froth 
with beer. For a while my mother and father were charmed with the social 
position of being hosts for this group of aristocrats, and my parents would 
compare their courtesy, sophistication, and savoir-faire with my own gau­
cherie, much to my disadvantage; but I was perfectly conscious all the time 
that our home was nothing but a backdrop to the amorous ballet of these 
delicate souls, and that they regarded us with utter indifference if not with 
contempt. In particular I knew that if I had for a moment imitated these 
refugees in their backstage conduct as well as in their frontstage elegance, 
and if my parents had got even a suspicion of it, I should have been rel­
egated to outer darkness. Finally my parents became aware that there was 
something a trifle contemptuous of ourselves in the Chekhov garden party 
behavior of these exotics, and their visits became rarer and rarer and then 
ceased altogether.

16: Trial Run: Teaching at Harvard and the University of Maine 
181
My father had been desperately opposed to the Communists from the 
beginning. At least part of this was because his intimate connections with 
Russia were with such men as Milyukov, who was a Menshevik and associ­
ated with the unsuccessful Kerensky regime. The ideal thing for my father 
to do would have been to retain sufficient contact with the new Russia, 
whether he liked it or not, to enable him to understand the detail of what 
was happening, and even to offer warning to the Government of the United 
States of whatever might have been the new dangers. At any rate, from the 
time of the revolution on, not only did my father’s researches drift further 
and further away from Russia, but thread after thread of his personal con­
tact with that country was broken. He published a book on Russia and how 
it might be seen from the American point of view, but it was based exclu­
sively on water that had long since run under the bridge. In short, Father’s 
alienation from Russia led to an alienation from his own Harvard respon­
sibility vis-à-vis Russia, and I have no doubt that his defection from Slavic 
researches was a factor that later led Lowell to view unsympathetically any 
request of my father to continue his Harvard connection well beyond the 
normal age of retirement.
Public opinion was turning even more toward the Allies, and it had become 
most likely that we should enter the war on their side. In the second term, 
there was founded an officers’ training organization known as the Har­
vard Regiment, which I promptly joined. In the depth of winter, we would 
trudge through the snow in sleazy summer uniforms to the baseball cage 
on Soldiers’ Field, where we were initiated into the School of the Soldier 
and the School of the Squad. When spring came, we continued our exer­
cises out of doors behind the Harvard Stadium, and made several routine 
marches and other excursions. We also marched out to the State Rifle Range 
in Wakefield, where for several days we were trained in the art of musketry. 
Despite my poor eyesight, I made for once in my life the grade of sharp­
shooter. This does not redound to my credit but rather to the credit of my 
instructor, a Mr. Fuller, a Boston broker.
The Harvard Regiment left us hanging in the air, but I had plans to go to 
Plattsburg in the summer and train for a commission in the reserve. All this 
was, of course, dependent on my finding a job for the ensuing year. I met 
various deans and heads of departments looking for new staff candidates, 
but none of them seemed particularly interested in me, and I was assured 
by Professor Perry that I was not good enough to merit much of a recom­
mendation. I was not a very promising bet at that time, but I cannot help 
believing that some part of my department’s coolness was based on my 

182 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
lack of years and on a conservative unwillingness to experiment with the 
unknown.
Yet my difficulties were in part a consequence of my development. A 
year earlier, my assistantship had come easily, since it did not imply any 
competition with older and more approved Harvard men for anything they 
really wanted. Now, at the end of my year, matters were different. I was 
asking for an instructorship, and with it an entrée to a career in the field 
where desirable jobs were few and far between. This was more than Harvard 
teachers were willing to bestow on someone hard to manage and without a 
clear pattern for his future.
Finally, under pressure of my father, I decided to look for a job in math­
ematics rather than in philosophy and in a way I considered rather humili­
ating: by registering my name with a number of teachers’ agencies. It is a 
procedure akin to fishing, in which the nibbles are much more frequent 
than the bites. Finally, I did get a bite, and I agreed that I should spend the 
next year as an instructor of mathematics at the University of Maine in 
Orono, Maine. We returned to The Top of the World, our summer home in 
Sandwich Township, for the summer.
We had another visit from Raphael Demos, and from Jim Mursell, a 
young Australian student from the Harvard philosophy department. Mur­
sell, Demos, and I went on another tramping expedition north to Mount 
Washington by way of the Webster train. When that was over, I went to the 
Officers’ Training Camp at Plattsburg, New York, to try for the commission 
in the Army that would be so desirable when the United States should enter 
the war.
I took the autostage from Sandwich Lower Corner. On the lake steamer 
across Lake Champlain I found a youthful school fellow, the unregenerate 
scoundrel from Walker Street who had chased another boy with an ax, and 
who had become one of the most promising young swindlers in Massachu­
setts. He tried to palm off on me as an officer a cavalry private with whom 
he happened to be traveling, but I had become sufficiently acquainted 
with army insignia not to be completely misled by the resemblance of the 
yellow hat-cord of the cavalryman with the gold-and-black hat-cord of 
the officer.
The Harvard Regiment had prepared me in some measure for the army 
camp. But I was still somewhat shocked by the bottle-drinking and foul-
mouthedness of even those gentleman sham-soldiers. There were only one 
or two men in my company with whom it interested me to talk, although 
more than one New York society buck was present. The company mate who 
attracted me most was a member of a missionary family from Burma, who 

16: Trial Run: Teaching at Harvard and the University of Maine 
183
represented a continuation of the great missionary tradition of Adoniram 
Judson.
My mountain hikes had put me in good training, and I was in reason­
ably hard condition to stand the route-marches and sham battles. I was 
astonished to observe, even in myself, the difference in our conduct caused 
by the fact that we were members of a large, similarly directed group. For 
example, I would normally never think of bathing naked by the side of a 
traveled highway. However, when there are a hundred naked bodies already 
in the river, one cannot perceive in one’s own nakedness any particular 
additional insult to public decency.
Again, one day when striking across the company street of pup-tents, I 
accidentally crushed a man’s glasses. My normal instinct would have been 
to make myself known to him and to pay for them; but in the presence of 
so many uniformed and not very responsible youngsters, I am afraid that 
I hit and ran.
I was rather miserable during the part of our training devoted to mus­
ketry. Without the special coaching that I had received from Mr. Fuller 
when I was in the Harvard Regiment, my eyesight did not permit me to 
hit a barn out of a flock of barns. When I explained my shortcomings 
to the musketry officer and went back to my tent, my tentmates began to 
accuse me of malingering. They had already learned how easily they could 
make me squirm by their obscenity, and I was completely miserable. I was 
so angry that I laid my hand on one of the rifles stacked in the tent, with 
no intent whatever to use it as a rifle and very little intention of using it 
as a club, but more as a gesture of anger and despair than anything else. 
Of course, they disarmed me without any trouble, but I was unspeakably 
shocked when I saw clearly for the first time the murderous construction 
that could be put on my actions.
I finished the camp without being recommended for a commission, and 
with no particular feeling of accomplishment. I returned to the mountains 
for a week or so, and then made my way to Orono, and to my new job at 
the University of Maine.
I found Orono a rather raw and less inviting copy of the New England 
towns to which I had been accustomed. I made arrangements for board at 
the Orono Inn, which was a sort of commons for junior faculty members, 
and took lodgings in a rather attractive white New England house owned 
by the university librarian.
Although it was a great satisfaction for me to have a job beyond the 
immediate supervision of my father, I was not happy at Maine. The older, 

184 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
permanent professors were for the most part broken men, who had long 
given up any hope of intellectual accomplishment or of advancement in 
their career. A few of them still showed ragged traces of cultural ambitions, 
but the greater part were resigned to their failure. The younger men were 
almost all transients like myself, who had been bought wholesale at teach­
ers’ agencies after the cream of the crop had been skimmed off through the 
special efforts of their professors. The men who remained, the traveling 
guests of the university, had no interest whatever in the place, and had as 
their sole ambition to leave it as soon as possible, before their employment 
there should fix on them too definitely the stigma of unemployableness at 
more desirable institutions. Few and far between are the individuals who do 
not perish of intellectual atrophy at such places.
The president was an importation from the Middle West, and well aware 
of his authority. The students in those days were largely a strapping lot of 
young farmers and lumberjacks, who managed to be quite as idle and col­
legiate as the students of universities of the Ivy League, but at one-third 
the expense. Their sole interests were in football and in nagging the lives 
out of their professors. As I was young, nervous, and responsive, I was their 
chosen victim. Most of my courses were dull routine to them, and many is 
the penny which I heard dropped in class to annoy me.
Examination cribbing and the copying of homework had been reduced 
to a system. I soon found that to report such irregularities, as I had been 
told was my duty, reflected much more seriously on me than on the mis­
creants. I also found that some of my colleagues, within and without the 
department, resented my ignorance of and indifference to the very rigorous 
social protocol of the small college, my precocity, and what they considered 
my intellectual pretensions.
I tried to get back to mathematical research work. Dr. Sheffer of Harvard 
had recently suggested to me a way in which mathematical logic could be 
based on one single fundamental operation. I followed out his suggestion 
in a somewhat modified form, and published a paper in my name only. I 
think I gave credit to Dr. Sheffer in the paper, but I do not think that I did 
so adequately. I now see that my modification of Sheffer’s work was scarcely 
sufficient to have merited publication as a separate paper, and that I should 
have waited until he had staked his claim in a more definite form. It is not 
only medicine and law that have a rather rigid code of ethics, and all the 
good will in the world will not make such a code come to one as a habit 
until he has at least a certain modicum of experience of the customs in the 
matter. Luckily, neither Dr. Sheffer nor my other colleagues in mathemat­
ics held my offense against me, but it worried me deeply when I came to 

16: Trial Run: Teaching at Harvard and the University of Maine 
185
realize what I had done, and it has been on my conscience to some extent 
to this day.
My parents were very much discontented with the generally gloomy 
tone of my letters from Orono. However, I must say that they put them­
selves out to give me a good time during my brief absences on ticket-of-
leave. It was during these times that I learned the beer-and-sauerkraut 
pleasures of Jacob Wirth’s restaurant in Boston and the delights of the new 
theatrical repertory company which had just been established at the Copley 
Theater. I also saw more of the rather primitive movies of the time than 
I had ever seen before, and was now and then allowed to meet some of 
the Radcliffe fellow students of my sister Constance. But even in the midst 
of my Boston amusements, there was the dread of my impending return 
to Orono.
Ultimately I was accepted as a member of a small research group at 
Orono and the neighborhood. The chief spirit of the group was the statisti­
cian, Raymond Pearl, who later had a distinguished career in the medical 
school of Johns Hopkins University. In his little house by the trolley line 
which ran between the village and the university, the chosen guests could 
hear good talk and a proper valuation of ideas. In those days when the 
English Cambridge seemed infinitely far behind me and the prospect of a 
civilized career infinitely far ahead, those visits to Dr. Pearl’s house made 
me feel alive again.
Another of the few scholars of the University of Maine was Miss Boring. 
She was a zoologist and a sister of the psychologist Boring who had been 
my fellow graduate-student at Cornell. I was again to meet Miss Boring 
many years afterward in China, when she was teaching at Yenching Univer­
sity and I was teaching at the neighboring Tsing Hua University.
There were also a few doctors of the Bangor General Hospital in our 
group. I remember some very interesting lectures on pulmonary cancer, 
which were given long before this mimic of tuberculosis had been generally 
recognized as a clinical entity.
The meetings of this group did not constitute the only occasion for my 
going down to Bangor on the trolley. Bangor was no longer the riproaring 
town where the returning lumberjacks first tasted the pleasures of women 
and bootleg liquor, but the bad old days had put a blight on it and it lacked 
the charm of more favored New England cities. What called me there was a 
military drill corps whose meetings in a gymnasium were attended by good 
portly Bangor citizens much older than I.
The winter trolley ride to Bangor and the train trips to the city had a 
charm of their own. The whole landscape was blanketed with deep white 

186 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
snow, which was so cold that it creaked when you stepped on it. The air 
shocked the lungs like a cold fire. The time had not yet come when the auto 
roads should be kept open all the winter, and the sound of sleighbells was 
in the thin air.
There was a Norwegian student living in the same lodging house who 
was specializing in paper manufacture. The University of Maine was a cen­
ter of instruction in this subject, and indeed the air reeked of the sulfu­
rous fumes of the local paper mill. The Penobscot backwater opposite our 
house was divided by the cribs and booms which held back a supply of 
pulpwood floated down from the north. My Norwegian friend used to ski 
to school, and to make many ski trips across the snow-filled marshes and 
woods. The rest of us, students and professors alike, had still to learn this 
Nordic sport, and went to our classes on the snowshoes manufactured by 
the Indians in Oldtown nearby. There was always a forest of snowshoes 
stuck tail down in the snowbanks outside the doors of the college build­
ings, and the students, boys and girls alike, wore to their classes the woollen 
stockings and the Barker boots or pac-moccasins which mark the northern 
woodsman.
Time hung heavy on our hands. I remember reading through the whole 
of the writings of O. Henry and Mark Twain in a dark corner of the uni­
versity library stacks, but unfortunately the present vogue of the detective 
story had not yet developed. I was greatly distressed during the winter both 
by the coming participation of America in the war and by the news of the 
death of my friend Everett King. He had been my companion in much boy­
ish experimentation, and I am certain that if he had lived he would have 
become an important figure in American science.
Spring began to break with the wet suddenness which is characteristic 
of spring in northern New England. There were one or two new faces to 
be seen about the campus. I remember one pleasant newly arrived young 
American married to a French wife. He endeared himself to me by letting 
me accompany him on fishing excursions to the edge of the vast wilderness 
on the other side of the Penobscot.
There was little question that we were soon to enter the war. The existing 
officers’ training corps was much enlarged, and every possible drillmaster 
was pressed into service. In view of my experience in the Harvard Regiment 
and at Plattsburg, I too was pressed into service; but I proved to be both 
too unskilled and too peremptory in my commands, and I did not make 
much of a success of it. When the war finally came, I asked to be released 
from my teaching responsibilities to enter some branch of the service, for 

16: Trial Run: Teaching at Harvard and the University of Maine 
187
I was no less eager to leave Maine than the university was to see the last 
of me.
I passed some sort of preliminary physical examination with the friendly 
connivance of a Bangor doctor, and left on the steamer for Boston to try 
my fortunes with the services. On the way it occurred to me almost for 
the first time that I might be taking a real risk both of life and of limb, 
and I was distressed. However, I reasoned with myself that I had a good 
chance of coming out of the war with some sort of usable body attached to 
my soul.
When I arrived in Boston, I made the rounds of the harbor forts and the 
enlistment bureaus, in the hope that I could enter one of the services, if not 
as an officer, at least as an enlisted man. My eyes were against me every­
where. Finally my parents decided, with my acquiescence, that I should try 
for an army commission in the R.O.T.C. which had just been established 
officially at Harvard.
With the coming of the war, the new Officers’ Training Corps became 
a much more systematic outfit than the old Harvard Regiment. We were 
quartered in President Lowell’s new freshman dormitories, which were later 
to become the units of the Harvard house system.
We received some special lectures from a group of academically trained 
French Army officers, one of whom, Major Morize, remained for many years 
as professor of French at Harvard. During the summer, we entrained for 
Barre Plains, where we encamped and held maneuvers. I remember some 
of our trench-digging, mock fighting, and bayonet instruction. I was there 
only part of the time because examinations for commissions in the artil­
lery were being held in the new buildings of the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. I knew that this was about my last chance to obtain an artillery 
commission for the war. Naturally, I did rather well in my mathematical 
examinations, but I could not show any particular military aptitude. I failed 
dismally in my physical examinations and in an examination on horseback 
riding at the state armory. I came totally unprepared for this, and I fell off 
an old nag which was as steady as a gymnasium horse.
As to my physical examination, my eyes would have damned me 
anyhow, but I also showed a blood pressure which was high for my age, 
although my continued survival proves to my satisfaction that it was not 
within any dangerous limits. The Army doctors probably took it quite cor­
rectly as showing that I was of too labile a temperament to be good army 
material. What chances I might have had for a commission were damned 
by the fact that, in accordance with the pseudonoble mores of the time, 

188 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
I tried to bluff and argue one of the doctors into giving me a favorable 
medical report, so that he frog-marched me ignominiously out of the room.
I graduated from the R.O.T.C. with a document that was eminently not 
negotiable for a commission. The end of the summer was near, and I spent 
what was left of it at Silver Lake in New Hampshire. I did some reading on 
the algebraic theory of numbers, which I had begun to study while I was in 
Maine, and I made a few attempts to extend Birkhoff’s results on the four-
color problem.
This, together with Fermat’s last theorem and the demonstration of Rie­
mann’s hypothesis concerning the Zeta function, is one of the perennial 
puzzlers of mathematics. Every mathematician who is worth his salt has 
broken a lance on at least one of them. I have tried to solve all three, and 
each time my supposed proof has crumbled into fool’s gold in my hands. I 
do not regret my attempts, for it is only by trying problems that exceed his 
powers that the mathematician can ever learn to use these powers to their 
full extent.
We lived near Professor Osgood’s summer home that summer, and I saw 
a great deal of him. He was a much more genial personality in a New Hamp­
shire summer cottage than he had seemed to be in the full glory of his Har­
vard position. I also did a bit of mountain climbing, and it is the proudest 
exploit of my youth that together with my sister Constance and a friend, 
I covered thirty-four miles in one day in a tramp over Mt. Passaconaway, 
Whiteface Mountain, and back. Of course, I was exhausted and feverish the 
next day; but one is resilient in one’s twenties, and the effort seemed to do 
us no harm.

17  Monkey Wrench, Paste Pot, and the Slide Rule War
1917–1919
Ex-Prodigy: 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
17: 
Monkey 
Wrench, 
Paste 
Pot, 
and 
the 
Slide 
Rule 
War
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
When we returned to the city, it was obvious that I should have to look for 
some civilian form of war work. My search for nonacademic employment 
was precipitated by the war and by the nearly total suspension of normal 
university life which it involved. I felt that my mathematical training was 
the most useful thing I had to offer, so I took the trolley out to the Fall River 
Shipyard in Quincy to see if I might not learn to be of use in ship-propeller 
design. Nothing came of this, so I made a similar trip to the General Elec­
tric factory in Lynn. One of the engineers there was a Russian friend of my 
father, and another had been one of the instructors in my physics course 
at Harvard. I naturally met with a more favorable reception. I was told that 
I could be of no use immediately; but if I were willing, they would take 
me on as a paid apprentice in their program of engineering training. This 
meant that I took on the moral responsibility of staying for two years. I 
accepted, and started to work in the turbine department. I helped run some 
steam-consumption tests, and used a little mathematics in some thermo­
dynamic problems. When I returned home each day, I was tired but happy, 
and hopelessly begrimed by that grease which belongs to an engineering 
factory and which no soap seems able to remove. I took this as the badge 
of the honest workman.
However, my father was convinced that with my clumsiness I could 
never really make good at engineering, and began to look around for other 
work for me. He had written an article or two for the Encyclopedia Ameri­
cana, then located in Albany. He secured from Mr. Rhines, the managing 
editor, an invitation for me to join them as a staff writer. Though I felt mor­
ally obligated to stay on at the General Electric Company, I was too depen­
dent on my father to dare to contravene his orders, so I had to present my 
shamefaced resignation to the engineers who had given me my chance in 
Lynn. I was told that I never could come back to a job there, but with my 

190 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
helplessness and lack of independent experience, there was precisely noth­
ing that I could do about it but to follow orders.
Father accompanied me to Albany and saw me placed with a rather 
pleasant landlady in an old high brick house not far from the State House. 
He also accompanied me to Mr. Rhines’s office. This was situated sev­
eral flights up a freight elevator in a dismal business building facing on a 
cabbage-strewn market of the European type. Mr. Rhines was a bearded old 
gentleman, efficient and strict but kindly.
Albany appealed to me from the beginning. In many ways the down­
town part resembled a European city, or Boston’s Back Bay. I found good 
restaurants at which to eat, a good vaudeville theater, and good movies at 
which to pass the time. I also found a gymnasium at the local Y.M.C.A. at 
which I could keep myself fit.
My Encyclopedia work consisted in the compilation of some of the less 
important short articles; and I believe that it was paid on a piece basis. I 
soon found that I was working in a not too uncomfortable Grub Street, with 
a group of cheaply paid colleagues who were either on their way up or on 
their way down. Among us was an elderly English businessman who had 
failed once and was now too old to start on a new business career. He prided 
himself on his knowledge of the Gilbert and Sullivan operas and his ability 
to write both words and music in the same style. Another of our writers 
had risen from engine-driver on a British railway to become librarian (or 
keeper of the morgue) for the London Times. He had a portfolio full of proof 
sheets of obituary notices of famous men still alive, written at the time of 
their illness, or (if they were sufficiently important) permanent documents 
in case of their sudden death. He had lost his position through drink, but 
had still enough ability left to make himself very useful on the Encyclope­
dia. His fund of stories was mostly improper, but generally improper in an 
amusing way.
We had also an Irish ex-seminarian, belonging to the Dublin of James 
Joyce, who sported that delightful literary English of the educated Dub­
liner, with just the hint of the possibility of a brogue. There was a young 
American lexicographer who used to play tennis with me and later became 
chief editor of the Encyclopedia.
There was a young girl graduate of Cornell among us. She was the 
daughter of a Russian-Jewish Albany fur merchant. I found her very attrac­
tive and intellectually stimulating. We used to take walks in the country 
about Albany, and I would call on her at home and take her to the vis­
iting theatrical shows. She and I were two members of the group young 
enough to be definitely on the up-grade. We enjoyed the eccentricities and 

17: Monkey Wrench, Paste Pot, and the Slide Rule War 
191
the friendliness of the older people who had found a refuge in this queer 
but agreeable faubourg of Bohemia. Nevertheless, as approximate contem­
poraries there were many minor amusements of the town which we shared 
with one another rather than with others of the Encyclopedia group. Even 
when I found that she was engaged to a young doctor who was in the 
Army in France, I continued to take her out from sheer hunger for female 
companionship.
We used to alternate our work between the office and the New York State 
Library in the Educational Building near the Capitol. This building held a 
real fascination for me. Besides being a really good library, and, I believe, 
the headquarters of the State Board of Regents, it contained the New York 
State Museum with its mixture of geographical, geological, anthropological, 
paleontological, botanical, zoological, and petrographical-mineralogical-
crystallographic collections. I used to spend much of my spare time in the 
museum, and perhaps a good deal of time that should not have been so 
spared. I made the acquaintance of one of the curators, who was a specialist 
in crystallography and in gems, and burrowed into the article on crystal­
lography in my beloved Encyclopaedia Britannica. I also saw a good deal of 
one of the state paleontologists. These contacts rearoused my interest in 
the origin of the vertebrates, and I reread Gaskell and Patton to see if there 
was any possible way of making sense of the arachnid theory of vertebrate 
origins.
I found that the hack work of compiling an encyclopedia has a peculiar 
ethics of its own. A compiler should be exactly what the word implies. It 
is permissible to use information from other existing encyclopedias, if it is 
carefully collated with outside sources. If you must crib, crib from foreign-
language encyclopedias, and do not favor any single source excessively. Be 
very careful before you give any article a by line. In general, eschew your 
own original ideas.
It took me some time to become so familiar with the rules that they were 
at last instinctive; and more than once I succumbed to the boyish urge to 
cut corners. I reinforced my habit of reading encyclopedias by the habit 
of writing them, and the considerable scope of my existing information 
was useful. In one or two articles, such as a part of the one on “Aesthet­
ics,” I deviated into individual philosophical writing, and the material still 
looks fresh to me at the present day. I toyed with the idea of collecting 
into a small book a number of such articles and of my previous writings 
on philosophical topics. Besides such reasonably original and good articles, 
however, I ventured to write on a number of subjects on which I was not 

192 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
adequately prepared. Some of the articles I submitted on ballistics were the 
most utter balderdash. I hope that Mr. Rhines did not let them get through.
With all the shortcomings and unpleasant sides of hack writing, it was a 
wonderful training for me. I learned to write quickly, accurately, and with 
a minimum of effort, on any subject of which I had a modicum of knowl­
edge. In revising my material, I learned the marks and the technique of the 
proofreader.
The problems of literary style are curiously related to the problems of 
speaking a foreign language. The experience which one acquires in hack 
work is quite parallel to the experience of being immersed in a foreign 
milieu and having to speak the language day after day. For it cannot be 
denied that literary English as it should be written, although it has deep 
roots in colloquial English and can only depart too far from the colloquial 
at its peril, is in many ways a distinct language. For example, the richness 
of metaphor and of term of speech appropriate to an effective literary style 
would be heavy and “donnish” in spoken English. Thus the problem of 
writing for a man who already can speak with reasonable effectiveness is 
to develop the same freedom in this sophisticated milieu that he already 
has in his daily speech. If I am to speak Spanish effectively, I must think in 
Spanish and I cannot be tempted to translate out of an English phrase book. 
I must say the sort of things that a Spanish-speaking person would say, 
and these are never precisely the same as those which an English-speaking 
person would say. Similarly, if I am to write a poem or a novel or a schol­
arly essay with any ease, I must have had sufficient practice in expressing 
myself in the suitable form of the language so that my written or dictated 
words come out in what is already effective poetic English or the effective 
language of the novelist or that of the philosophical essayist. My metaphors 
and terms of speech should find themselves without having been looked 
for, not indeed in their final polished form but in a form not too remotely 
different from that. I do not deny the virtues of revision and of the progres­
sive weeding out of weaknesses and faulty expressions. Nor indeed do I 
wish to prescribe to other writers what is of necessity an intensely individ­
ual expression of their own thinking. But at least as far as I am concerned, 
whether I work in mathematics or in writing, I cannot arrive at the fullest 
expression of my own consciousness until I have already penetrated consid­
erably below the level of consciousness.
I was happy in Albany. I liked my co-workers and employers, I liked the 
work, and I liked my new sense of independence. In view of the difference 
in the nature of my new work from that of my father, I was even less under 
parental pressure and criticism than I had been at the University of Maine. I 

17: Monkey Wrench, Paste Pot, and the Slide Rule War 
193
was also older and more fit to stand on my own feet. Compared with Orono 
or Bangor, Albany was a paradise of neatness, tradition, and civilization.
Behind my new-found happiness and content, there was always the hol­
low echo of the war. The R.O.T.C. experience had proved to me my essential 
unfitness for a commission, but I had still some hopes of being admitted 
for limited service as a private under the new draft. For the time being, 
I joined the New York State Guard. This was the organization that occu­
pied the armories when the National Guard went out to fight, and it had 
the duty of patrolling water supplies and powerhouses. I was not called on 
for such semiactive duty, but my earlier training in drill stood me in good 
stead inside the armory. When spring came, we used to spend Saturdays 
and sometimes even Sundays on an island in the Hudson where there was 
a rifle range.
I used to return to Cambridge for short vacations from time to time. My 
sister Constance made some effort to take me into the social life of her Rad­
cliffe friends, and I remember that there was an Australian girl with whom I 
went out occasionally. I spent a short summer vacation in New Hampshire, 
then returned to my work on the Encyclopedia. But it was by now apparent 
that this sort of work, while very acceptable as an instructive effort and a 
way station on my career, would be very unsatisfactory as a terminus.
I was not distressed to find myself engaged in work that was enjoyable 
even though it led to a dead end. Such work was in many ways in confor­
mity with my actual age. From the standpoint of the dramatic movement 
of my life, this may seem to be a retrogression but, in fact, I do not think 
that it was.
In the life of the individual, neither the standard success story of the 
slicks nor the Greek tragedy is the normal and the significant outcome. 
That the individual dies in the end is clear, but what is also clear is that this 
fact of the physical termination of one’s life is not its significant outcome. 
In the course of the voyage from the nothingness before conception to the 
nothingness of death lies everything that is really important in life, and 
this voyage is generally neither a dramatic steering into the maelstrom nor 
a triumphant ascent from success to success, without some intervening set­
backs and some periods of calm cruising.
It may seem a step down to follow years of precocity and early academic 
degrees by the somewhat routine tasks of a shopworker, a hackwriter, a 
computer, and a journalist. Yet these were for me the equivalents of experi­
ences in the world about me which many a boy obtains much younger as 
a prosaic part of his normal development. Just because I did not have these 
experiences at an earlier period, and just because this contact with the world 

194 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
about him is essentially part of the education of everyone, these everyday 
experiences had for me a glamour and a novelty which they would not 
have had for a boy of more usual bringing up. Thus a description of these 
periods, and of their reaction on me, is as essential to this book as all its 
other and perhaps more exciting parts.
When I started to look for a job again, I heard of a vacancy in mathemat­
ics at the University of Puerto Rico. I sent in my name as a candidate, but I 
did not get even a nibble at my trial balloon. A few days later, I received an 
urgent telegram from Professor Oswald Veblen at the new Proving Ground 
at Aberdeen, Maryland. He asked me to join their ballistic staff as a civilian. 
This was my chance to do real war work. The demand was immediate, so I 
saw Mr. Rhines and terminated my connection with the Encyclopedia. I took 
the next train to New York, where I changed for Aberdeen.
Aberdeen, Maryland, was then a minor country town of no particular 
distinction. A little branch railroad line, operated by the Government, ran 
from the village to a place on the line as yet without a railroad station, 
where I got off. I found a collection of temporary wooden huts and quag­
mire streets, which has since become a very pretty little Government sta­
tion. In those days a tractor was always kept ready to pull the squelching 
trucks out of the streets.
The establishment of Aberdeen Proving Ground constitutes a very 
important epoch, both in the scientific history of the United States and 
in the private careers of the scientists who were stationed there. Although 
American scientific work had long been important in astronomy, geology, 
chemistry, and some other fields, most of our best men had been trained 
in Europe, or even imported from Europe. Mathematics was well behind 
these other sciences in its American recognition. As I have said before, Birk­
hoff was the first really great American mathematician to come to the top 
without European training. It was now only six years since he had taken his 
degree in 1912. Thus we American mathematicians were a feeble race, and 
the country at large regarded us as so many useless fumblers with symbols. 
It was scarcely possible to believe that we could play any useful part in the 
national war effort.
The war with Germany involved the design of many new types of artil­
lery and of ammunition. For each type of artillery, and each type of ammu­
nition used in it, it was necessary to construct a complete new range table, 
and to put it in the hands of the men in the field. These range tables con­
sisted of lists of the ranges to be expected from the gun and the ammuni­
tion for each angle of elevation, together with corrections for tilt of the 
trunnions, unit change in the angle of elevation, for unit excess of powder 

17: Monkey Wrench, Paste Pot, and the Slide Rule War 
195
charge or ammunition weight, for wind, for air pressure aloft, and so on. 
The tables also contained estimates of the probable errors of all the primary 
data. The old-fashioned methods of computing range tables had proved 
both too slow and too inaccurate for modern needs, and had broken down 
completely in the new and very exacting field of antiaircraft fire. Thus there 
was urgent need for every available man with mathematical training to 
operate a computing machine, and civilians like myself were pressed into 
service, drafted mathematicians were transferred to the Ordnance Corps 
and to Aberdeen, and even officers were recalled from the front to sit at a 
desk and to work a slide rule.
Professor Oswald Veblen of Princeton was made a major in the Ord­
nance Corps and put in charge of this motley group. His right-hand men 
were Captain F. W. Loomis and First Lieutenant Philip Alger, later Captain, 
whose father had been the great ballistic expert of the Navy. As for the rest 
of us, we lived in a queer sort of environment, where office rank, army 
rank, and academic rank all played a role, and a lieutenant might address a 
private under him as “Doctor,” or take orders from a sergeant.
One thing is clear, however: we accomplished the task expected of us. It 
was a period in which all the armies of the world were making the transi­
tion between the rough old formal ballistics to the point-by-point solu­
tion of differential equations, and we Americans were behind neither our 
enemies nor our allies. In fact, in the matter of interpolation and the com­
putation of the corrections of the primary ballistics tables, Professor Bliss 
of Chicago made a brilliant use of the new theory of functionals. Thus the 
public became aware for the first time that we mathematicians had a func­
tion to perform in the world. We still did not count in its eyes as magicians 
comparable with the chemist and engineer.
We were fortunate in this respect, for while our newly won prestige con­
tributed appreciably to our salaries and our ease of finding employment, 
the authorities did not yet consider us sufficiently important to be worth 
the trouble of interference and annexation. Emerson did not tell the whole 
truth about the fate of the man who devises a better mousetrap. Not only 
does the public beat a path to his door, but one day there arrives in his dese­
crated front yard a prosperous representative of Mousetraps, Inc., who buys 
him out for a sum that enables him to retire from the mousetrap business, 
and then proceeds to put on the market a standardized mousetrap, perhaps 
embodying some of the inventor’s improvements, but in the cheapest and 
most perfunctory form which the public will swallow. Again, the individual 
and often delicious product of the old small cheese factory is now sold 
to the great cheese manufacturers, who proceed to grind it up with the 

196 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
products of a hundred other factories into an unpleasant sort of vulcanized 
protein plastic.
In the Second World War and the days that have followed it, the very 
success of the American scientist has driven him the way of American 
cheese. This war saw every chemist, every physicist, every mathematician, 
dragooned into Government service, where he had to put on the blinders 
attendant on working on classified material, and to confine his efforts to 
some minute sector of a problem of whose larger implications he was held 
deliberately ignorant. Although the excuse given for this procedure was 
that it kept secrets out of the hands of the enemy, and this was undoubtedly 
part of its real intention, it was not and is not entirely unconnected with 
the American lust for standardization, and the distrust of the individual 
of superior abilities. This, in turn, is related to our love for Government 
projects or private laboratories with budgets running into the millions of 
dollars which put a premium on the traditional Edisonian search through 
all possible materials, at the expense of erratic and unpredictable use of 
reason and intellect.
However, in the early days of Aberdeen Proving Ground, the King Log of 
indifference was already dead, and the King Stork of regimentation had not 
yet ascended to the throne. It was a period of nascent energy in American 
mathematics. For many years after the First World War, the overwhelming 
majority of significant American mathematicians was to be found among 
those who had gone through the discipline of the Proving Ground. I am 
speaking of such names as Veblen, Bliss, Gronwall, Alexander, Ritt, and 
Bennet.
It was the young men who particularly interested me. I found Hubert 
Bray there, whom I had last seen when I was graduated from Tufts College. 
Bray has been associated with Rice Institute for many years and is now 
head of the mathematics department there. For a while we lodged together. 
Later I shared a roughly boarded compartment in the civilian barracks with 
Phillip Franklin, now my brother-in-law and colleague at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, and with Gill of the College of the City of New 
York. I also had as companions for a shorter period Poritzky, who later gave 
up pure mathematics and academic work for applied mathematics and a 
job with the General Electric Company, and Widder, now of the Harvard 
mathematics department.
This list is far from complete. Graustein, who had left Harvard for the 
Proving Ground and finally left the Proving Ground for an officer’s com­
mission, was a leading mathematician at Harvard for many years before 
his untimely death. I have also left out the names of a large number of 

17: Monkey Wrench, Paste Pot, and the Slide Rule War 
197
astronomers, engineers, and secondary school teachers, with whom I have 
come rather less in contact in recent years.
Franklin and Gill, nineteen and thus considerably younger than I, were 
my particular cronies. When we were not working on the noisy hand-
computing machines which we knew as “crashers,” we were playing bridge 
together after hours using the same computing machines to record our 
scores. Sometimes we played chess or a newly devised three-handed vari­
ant of it on a board made of a piece of jump-screen, or risked the dangers 
of burning smokeless powder or TNT. We went swimming together in the 
tepid, brackish waters of Chesapeake Bay, or took walks in the woods amid 
a flora that was too southern to be familiar to us. I remember the pawpaws 
and their exotic tropical manner of growing their fruits directly from the 
tree trunk.
Whatever we did, we always talked mathematics. Much of our talk led to 
no immediate research. I remember some half-baked ideas about the geom­
etry of Pfaffians, in which I had become interested through Gabriel Marcus 
Green of Harvard. I cannot remember all the other subjects we discussed, 
but I am sure that this opportunity to live for a protracted period with 
mathematics and mathematicians greatly contributed to the devotion of 
all of us to our science. Curiously enough, it furnished a certain equivalent 
to that cloistered but enthusiastic intellectual life which I had previously 
experienced at the English Cambridge, but at no American university.
I made several trips home on furlough. I saw a lot of G. M. Green on 
these trips. He had become very much devoted to my sister Constance, who 
had become a budding mathematician herself. On one of these trips I talked 
over with my parents a plan which had long been in mind, which con­
sisted of using my contact with the Proving Ground as a means for enlisting 
or being drafted into the Army for limited service. Finally, in October of 
1918, the opportunity came, and with Major Veblen’s co-operation I went 
to a neighboring market town and county seat to receive my enlistment 
papers.
I was sent to the recruit depot at Fort Slocum on an island off the coast 
of Westchester County, New York. It had by now become clear that the war 
was drawing to an end. I was appalled by the irretrievability of the step I 
had taken. I felt as if I had been sentenced to the penitentiary. The crowd­
ing of the recruits and their incompatible simultaneous attitudes of scared 
boys and of tough swaggering young soldiers were far from congenial to 
me. The one alleviation of my life on the island was the presence of another 
equally unmilitary recruit, Dr. Harry Wolfson of the Harvard department 
of Semitic languages. My uniform was strained by my corpulence, but 

198 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
Wolfson’s reached nearly twice around him. Not even these uniforms could 
conceal the college professor in us as we walked around the seawall, discuss­
ing Aristotle and medieval Jewish and Arabic philosophy.
At length a group of us were shipped back to Aberdeen Proving Ground. 
We rode around Manhattan in a tugboat and entrained for Philadelphia 
from one of the stations on the Jersey shore. In Philadelphia we heard the 
blowing of steam whistles to celebrate the first false reports of the armistice 
with Germany and saw the showers of paper floating down from office 
windows. About two days later, when we were already assigned to our com­
panies at the Proving Ground, we were assembled early in the morning and 
told that the true armistice had been signed.
The military setup at the Proving Ground was most peculiar. Besides 
the administrative groups, the ballistic group, and a few other technical 
groups of the same sort, there was the powder-bag-sewing group and a large 
group of laborers to do the necessary digging and construction work. The 
latter were largely men who were not sent to the front because of venereal 
disease. All the different groups were mixed together indifferently in the 
companies and in the barracks. I do not need to expatiate on the continual 
shock of the impact of this foul-mouthed crew on a man who was not yet 
fully adjusted to the brutal frankness of army life.
I did two turns of guard duty. I got off easily on one of them, carrying a 
watchman’s clock throughout the night in the building which housed the 
chronoscopes and the scientific library. Between my rounds I found plenty 
of interesting material to read. The other time I was an ordinary sentinel 
out of doors, carrying a rifle with a fixed bayonet. I found it hard not to 
drowse off and to keep sufficiently alert to challenge the Officer of the Day. 
In the small hours of the morning I had a little rest on the bare bedsprings 
of a cot in the guard room; and although I felt like a waffle when I woke up, 
the relief of the big cup of steaming coffee which was passed around with 
some cheese sandwiches more than made up for it.
Besides such military duties and my work in the office, I did a certain 
amount of work at the firing “front,” collecting range-data for antiaircraft 
fire. We had a special telephone line connecting the gun station and two 
or three observing stations, where observers looked through peep sights at 
the reflections of the shell bursts in flat horizontal mirrors covered by co-
ordinate gratings. In view of my inferior eyesight, I was the gun telephone 
operator; and I lay upon an earth bank, unpleasantly near to the noise and 
the blast of the gun-muzzle, and gave the observers the time of the fir­
ing of the gun, the burst of the shell, and five-second intervals thereafter. 
These later intervals enabled the men at the mirrors to synchronize their 

17: Monkey Wrench, Paste Pot, and the Slide Rule War 
199
observations of the drift of the smoke downwind, and thus to compute the 
wind aloft. I also notified the gun crew when the observers were ready.
The observers rode out to their stations in an old Ford beach wagon, and 
sometimes they had to cross a range where firing was going on. Theoreti­
cally, the safety officer should have interrupted the firing to let them go by; 
but even safety officers grow careless with time, and this precaution was 
not always observed. I remember one time when the observers at a tower 
down the range complained that shrapnel was coming through the roof. 
“All right,” said the safety officer, “we’ll just fire another couple of rounds 
and call it quits.”
As long as we had felt that we were doing work necessary to win the war, 
our morale had remained high. After the armistice, we all felt that we were 
marking time; and in particular those of us who had enlisted at the last 
moment considered ourselves a pack of fools. The civilians began to leave 
at the first opportunity, while the rest of us were going through the motions 
of military service until we could be sent to a camp where we should be 
discharged from the Army.
Even with a temperament not suited for a regimented life and a more 
than average desire to see what I was doing and to know what it meant, I 
had found a few months of army life a haven at a time when I had been 
very tired for years from making my own decisions. It has been said many 
times that the motives of the soldier and the monk are curiously similar. 
The love of a regimented life and the fear of personal choice and responsi­
bility make some men feel secure in the uniform as well as in the monk’s 
hood.
I was very deeply curious as to how the war was to end and what the 
new postwar life was to be. Meanwhile, I marked time. This emotional stag­
nation affected me both before my induction into the service when I was 
already leading much of the life of an army camp, and afterward; but its 
main impact began to fade out with the temporary letdown of the armistice 
and the hope that things could get back into their civilian channels.
While waiting for my orders to Camp Devens at Ayer, Massachusetts, for 
my final discharge, the influenza epidemic hit us. At the beginning we did 
not take it seriously, but soon it became a commonplace to ask about a sol­
dier and to find that he had died the day before. We all wore flu masks, and 
the elephantine Professor Haskins of Dartmouth smoked his pipe through 
his. One very honest and conscientious soldier, an M.I.T. graduate who had 
been put to work unloading a freight car, complained that he was unwell. 
The doctor sent him back to his work, and he died of pneumonia the 
next day.

200 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
It was a gloomy experience to see the rough pine coffins piled high 
on the station platform, and to wonder where the next blow would fall. 
I received a telegram from my father, telling me that my friend Dr. G. M. 
Green of the Harvard mathematics department, and betrothed to my sister 
Constance, had just died as the result of the epidemic. This news hit me 
hard. It came just before I left for Camp Devens.
I found Ayer superficially the town of my youth, but much changed in 
every important way. With the tendency of the railroad to lengthen the 
locomotive runs and the blight that had already begun to fall on the branch 
lines, Ayer was no longer the important railroad center it had once been. 
On the other hand, Camp Devens, which was a newcomer since the begin­
ning of the war, was considerably larger than the town itself, and the mer­
chants fattened on the soldier trade.
There was not much to do while waiting for one’s discharge.
There were medical examinations to take and papers to sign. I put in 
one day working on the coal pile of the power station. I spent much of my 
time at the various post libraries, reading the writings of G. K. Chesterton. 
At length the day of my release came, and after a brief visit to my friends at 
Brown’s drugstore, I took the train home.

18  The Return to Mathematics
Ex-Prodigy: 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
18: 
The 
Return 
to 
Mathematics
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
The end of the war brought a keen sense of loss to all my family in G. M. 
Green’s death. Green had been a charming and unassuming young man, 
deeply attached to my sister Constance, and of great sincerity and tender­
ness of disposition. He was a very severe loss to modern science, too, as 
he had developed a peculiarly individual vein of work in geometry, and it 
seemed that he was likely to furnish an element that was otherwise missing 
in the Harvard mathematical scheme of affairs. The death of a young man 
at the peak of his career is perhaps the greatest tragedy there can be, and it 
was hard for my sister, my parents, and me to realize that our good friend 
was gone.
Green’s parents gave his mathematical books to Constance as the one 
who had shared most in that phase of his life and the one to whom they 
could do the most good. Constance went to Chicago in the hope of forget­
ting her bereavement in new work, as far as that might be possible. Hence I 
had the chance to look at these books and to read them over. They came to 
me at just the right time in my career.
For the first time, I began to have a really good understanding of modern 
mathematics. The books included Volterra’s Théorie des equations integrales, 
a similarly entitled book by Fréchet, another book by Fréchet on the theory 
of functionals, Osgood’s Funktionentheorie, Lebesgue’s book on the theory 
of integration (to which I devoted particular attention), and I believe a Ger­
man book on the theory of integral equations as well.
However, reading mathematical books would not pay my parents for 
my room and board, nor would it of itself advance me in my career. Again 
I began to look for a job. I sent my name to various teachers’ agencies, but 
it was only February and no academic job was likely to start until the next 
September. At Silver Lake, Mr. O’Brien of the Boston Herald had been a 
summer neighbor of my parents, and they sent me to him to see if he could 
find a place for me on his paper. My encyclopedia experience spoke in my 

202 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
behalf, though I could not see eye-to-eye with Mr. O’Brien’s intention to 
make use of my mathematical ability by training me for a job as financial 
editor. For this, of course, I had neither the gift nor the inclination.
The confusion between the craft of the accountant and that of the math­
ematician is very common. The difference between imaginative mathemat­
ics and accounting is obvious, but it is equally real between accounting and 
computing. The accountant works to the last cent. His duty is to eliminate 
discrepancies which might offer someone a chance to embezzle undetected. 
The mathematician works to a certain number of decimal places of accu­
racy. His maximum permissible error is not an absolute quantity, such as 
a cent, but a stated fraction of the smallest quantity with which he deals. 
The computer who turns accountant is likely to leave appreciable sums of 
money unaccounted for, whereas the accountant turned computer often 
works to just two places beyond the decimal point, where the logic of the 
problem may call for four or five, or in another case, for none. Unless a man 
is reasonably young and flexible it is disastrous to shift from one of these 
seemingly so similar tasks to the other.
Luckily, I escaped from this assignment and was put instead to straight 
journalistic tasks. In the Boston Herald, I was a feature writer, and began 
to make myself acquainted with the paper litter and the printer’s ink, the 
noise of typewriters and linotypes, and the general sense of hurry and bus­
tle which constitutes the normal background of the city newspaper. I tried 
writing a few editorials. I learned very soon the extreme care which the edi­
torial writer must take to verify his facts, and to avoid unnecessary treading 
on toes. Then I was put on Sunday feature writing.
The textile industry of Lawrence was passing through one of its periodic 
strikes, and I was sent down with carte blanche to cover the larger features 
of the situation. I was less liberal then than I have become since. Happen­
ing to meet one of the senior Lawrence labor union leaders on the train, 
I was almost prepared to find that he had horns and hooves. On the con­
trary, he was a fine, sympathetic old Lancashire man, who had left England 
when the shadow of the industrial revolution was still at its darkest. He had 
seen the philanthropy of the early New England manufacturers give way to 
absentee ownership and the English weavers of the early days supplanted 
by French Canadians, Belgians, Italians, and Greeks. He had continued to 
exert his authority over the younger generation, although he had found 
that they needed rather different handling than their predecessors; and 
they had begun to develop their own labor leaders under his tutelage.
He told me to keep an eye on the living conditions in Lawrence, and on 
the way in which the Americanization work was handled. He also gave me 

18: The Return to Mathematics 
203
a list of priests and labor union leaders in order to help me feel the pulse of 
the various foreign elements in Lawrence. I appreciated the sturdy honesty 
of the man and found his advice sound and helpful.
Lawrence was a sick town. The mills were already suffering from an 
overcapitalization in obsolete equipment and from the competition of the 
South, as yet uninhibited by any standards of employment, and favored by 
the lower wages made possible by a less severe climate. The owners of the 
Lawrence mills often had never set foot in Lawrence, and had left the prob­
lems of management and employment to their badgered agents, ground 
between the employers’ demands for profits and the workers’ demands for 
higher wages and better working conditions. The housing conditions were 
atrocious, and although the employers defended them by the hoary argu­
ment that the class of labor they employed would rapidly ruin better quar­
ters, one might as readily reply that the foul quarters made it impossible 
to employ a better class of labor. I took part in one of the Americanization 
classes at the Y.M.C.A. and was appalled by what I saw. Not only were the 
teachers utterly ignorant of the language of the men they taught, which 
happened to be Italian in the class which I attended, but they were com­
pletely out of touch with the educated elements in the immigrant commu­
nities. The contents of the textbook in use exhorted the workers to love and 
to honor the boss, and to obey the foreman as if he were Jehovah himself. 
It was the sort of humiliating tripe which was bound to alienate any work­
man with a trace of character and independence.
I published my reports of things as I saw them, and they excited some 
opposition but, on the whole, less than I had expected. I should like to 
think that my articles had some influence on public opinion, making it 
more conscious of the importance of the housing question, and that they 
may thus have had some small effect on the later establishment in the 
Lawrence region of garden cities, such as Shawsheen Village.
After this job, O’Brien put me on a political undertaking which was very 
much nearer his heart. This was to build up General Edwards, former com­
mander of the Yankee Division, as a possible candidate for the Presidency 
of the United States. As far as I could see after meeting the man, Edwards 
was an amiable enough old gentleman of no particular distinction. I found 
that I did not relish my assignment at all. I visited in due course his friends 
and relatives in Cleveland, Ohio, and at Niagara Falls, and I looked up ex-
President Taft and other notables in Washington who had known him in 
the Philippines.
With all my experience of hack writing on the encyclopedia, I had not 
learned to write with enthusiasm of a cause in which I did not believe. I 

204 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
was fired from the Herald, and the Edwards series was put in the hands of 
a more responsible wheel horse. I was not unready to leave the paper, but 
I am thankful for the experience in writing which it gave me as well as the 
knowledge of the American scene.
I came away from my second experience of writing for my living with a 
new sense of the dignity of hack writing. In general, our courses in English 
at our colleges are as far from teaching us to write English as our courses in 
foreign languages are from giving us a real mastery of any foreign language. 
This applies primarily to the introductory courses. They do not in general 
make sufficient demands on the student to bring him to the stage at which 
he has to write a critically acceptable thousand words every day or be pun­
ished for it severely by going without eating. They introduce him to the 
English language as one might be introduced to a delightful young lady at 
a cocktail party: the student has not quite caught her name and would not 
know her again. After I left the Encyclopedia, and especially after I left the 
Herald, I was reasonably confident that if it should ever be my duty to say 
anything in print, I could say it fairly correctly and forcefully the first time 
I should write it down.
Thus, I am glad that I had an easy test of Grub Street between my years 
of wandering and my years as master in my own shop. In addition to this 
benefit, my experience as a journeyman gave me the satisfaction of inde­
pendence which I could achieve in no other way. Not only was I earning 
my own living, but I was doing it in a fashion that made no demands what­
ever on my father; and to a large extent, I was doing it away from home and 
parental tutelage. In short, I was growing up.
I had two mathematical papers under way to which I devoted my temporary 
unemployment. They both concerned the extension to ordinary algebra of 
Sheffer’s idea of a set of postulates with a single fundamental operation. I 
wrote them in the stacks of the Harvard Library, near my father’s office. 
They were published in the following year. Although they represent direc­
tions of work which as far as I know have not been followed up, they were 
by far the best pieces of mathematical work that I had yet written. However, 
I soon afterward gave up algebra and postulate-theory for analysis, which 
seemed to me to have a richer and firmer intellectual body. Thus it is hard 
for me to evaluate these papers at the present time, or even to remember 
exactly what they contained.
I had been trying for some years to find a publisher for my Harvard 
Docent Lectures. While they were in no sense a finished piece of work, I do 
not think that I am completely unfair in seeing in the idea of constructive 

18: The Return to Mathematics 
205
logic which I there developed a certain approach to the ideas by which 
Gödel was able to demonstrate that in every system of logical postulates, 
there are theorems whose truth or falsity cannot be decided on the basis of 
those postulates. I finally sent the manuscript to P. E. B. Jourdain, a remark­
able English logician who lived near Cambridge, and with whom I had 
already been in correspondence. While I was at Cambridge I had asked if I 
could meet him in his house, but we had not been able to make arrange­
ments. I had not realized at the time, nor indeed until well after I had sent 
him my manuscript, that he was a hopeless cripple, scarcely able to move 
a finger. He had known very well that he had suffered from Friedrich’s 
ataxia, a congenital nervous disorder which always ends in paralysis and 
early death. Notwithstanding this fatal ailment, he had married and had 
become editor of that important philosophical magazine, The Monist. He 
had written a very humorous and critical book concerning Bertrand Rus­
sell’s philosophy, in which each chapter was introduced by an appropriate 
text from Lewis Carroll.
My manuscript reached Jourdain only a few months before his death. 
If I had known how ill he was, I would of course not have embarrassed 
Jourdain by sending him my manuscript. However, it was published in the 
periodical, and I had The Monist bind together in book form the reprints of 
my article, which had run in three numbers. It pleased me then to imagine 
to myself that this constituted the publication of a book.
The articles found a limited echo. Professor Broad of Cambridge referred 
to them; but in those days, work in mathematical logic was equally unhelp­
ful in getting jobs in either mathematics or philosophy. Today mathemati­
cal logic constitutes a recognized career. As in some other fields, it is a career 
for epigonoi, not for pioneers. There are tables where guests are served only 
after the silver and the china have been set. The best careers are reserved for 
the students who do exactly what was timely in the youth of their profes­
sors, and the tin gods tolerate no hybris.
In the spring of 1919, I heard of two teaching openings which seemed 
to me almost equally attractive. I heard of one through a teachers’ agency 
at the Case School of Science in Cleveland; the other, which was called to 
my attention by Professor Osgood of Harvard, was at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. I do not think that Professor Osgood had a particu­
larly high opinion either of me or of the job, for the previous contributions 
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to mathematical research 
had been scant, and the department was then almost exclusively a service 
department to prepare the students for their later mathematical require­
ments in engineering. However, the postwar rush was absorbing every man 

206 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
who could possibly be considered as a mathematician. Indeed, I had had 
some hopes that Professor Veblen would take me, as he took Franklin and 
many others, as a member of the Proving Ground group out of which he 
was to build the justly famous Princeton department of mathematics; but 
there were many good candidates, and I was not among his selections.
I called on Professor Tyler, the head of the department of mathematics at 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He was a small, bearded, bright-
eyed man, not a research mathematician, but sagacious and eager for the 
welfare and the reputation of his department. He appointed me as one of 
the instructors to handle the new overload, with a possibility of working 
into a more permanent position if I should make good, but with no prom­
ises. He suggested that I should devote myself to applied mathematics. My 
immediate research in the department happened to be in pure mathemat­
ics, but my present happy thirty-three-year association with the Massachu­
setts Institute of Technology Department of Mathematics and my contact 
with engineers and engineering problems have given my pure mathemati­
cal researches an applied coloring, so that I may be said in some measure to 
have obeyed the injunction that Professor Tyler laid on me.
At this time, Harvard was involved in a great dispute concerning a 
Jewish numerus clausus. In order to conserve President Lowell’s idea of 
Harvard as a non-sectional institution and the cradle of the ruling class, 
he proposed to set a certain percentage restriction on the number of Jews 
admitted. It was understood that it was an administration measure, so 
that anyone who opposed it risked burning his fingers. My father took an 
uncompromising attitude against the numerical restriction of the Jewish 
students, and I am proud to say that when this specific piece of injustice 
and depreciation came into question, my mother’s opinion supported that 
of my father without any hesitation. All this was happening during the 
period in which I myself had to look for the firm foundation of my aca­
demic career. My sense of belonging to a group which was treated unjustly 
killed the last bonds of my friendship and affection for Harvard.
I had not been aware at all of anti-Semitic prejudice in my childhood. 
My parents had many friends who liked and admired them at a certain 
distance, but they had very few people with whom they felt at liberty to 
pay unannounced visits, or whom they would have expected to pay unan­
nounced visits to them. I do not believe that this was due to any genuine 
rejection of my family by the greater part of their Harvard colleagues but 
much more to a timidity which kept my parents from running the chances 
of such a rejection.

18: The Return to Mathematics 
207
This was extended to us children. There were very few of the other Har­
vard children whom I would have been allowed to visit unless such a visit 
had been organized in advance with the proper amount of interfamily pro­
tocol. Thus I was thrown very largely on nonuniversity families for my 
companionship, and in the end I think this was good.
As to the origin of the family timidity, I think it must have been very 
mixed. Probably the element contributed by our specifically Jewish race 
was slight compared with our being new Americans among old Americans, 
and Westerners among New Englanders. At any rate, it represented a certain 
degree of aggravation of the relatively isolated position in which we chil­
dren found ourselves. But all of this is an unimportant element compared 
with the other features of my situation as a child.
However, by the end of the First World War, I was fully aware of the 
existence of anti-Semitic prejudice of a most vicious sort. This was a period 
when it became customary for the friends and faculty advisors of Jewish 
boys to warn them that their chances of establishing themselves in an aca­
demic career were pretty slim. It represents a point of view which lasted 
for a considerable period but which seems to have gone under in the reas­
sessment of racial attitudes that took place during and after the Second 
World War.
I have been gratified to see a considerable change of attitude not only 
toward Jewish scholars in the universities but by Jewish scholars in the 
universities. With the decline of anti-Semitism, there has been a decline 
of resentment and fear on the part of the Jewish scholars themselves and a 
greatly increased possibility for them to participate actively in the problems 
of the community at large. That this change and maturing has taken place 
within the circles which I see about me day by day is a matter which is clear 
to me by the use of my own eyes; and I hope and believe that it is but the 
counterpart of a phenomenon taking place on a much larger scale.
On the whole, Lowell won the bout in favor of the numerus clausus, at 
least for the period of his own rule. He was defeated, but set up an adminis­
trative scheme that enabled him to keep a pretty close watch on the num­
bers of all Jews not of outstanding talent. I believe that the issue is pretty 
much dead now after the horrifying example of Nazism and after our more 
enlightened attitude concerning the right of each individual to employ­
ment and to the best education he can manage to get. During the Lowell 
period, however, those who opposed the president in a matter so close to 
his heart ran the risk of permanently alienating his good will. After the 
faculty meetings on the numerus clausus, my father was no more able to 
feel himself in President Lowell’s good graces. He felt this keenly sometime 

208 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
later when he hoped for a period of employment by Harvard beyond the 
statutory age of retirement. He was ultimately denied the privilege and was 
refused in language that took no cognizance of his long and faithful service 
to Harvard.
After another New Hampshire summer, but before term began, I found two 
matters of importance to occupy my attention. I received a call from Bar­
nett, a young mathematician from the University of Cincinnati. As Barnett 
was working in functional analysis, which was a field in which I aspired to 
work, I asked him if he could suggest to me a good problem of research. His 
reply has had a considerable influence on my later scientific career. He sug­
gested the problem of integration in function space. During my first year 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, I found a formal solution of 
the problem, which employs some ideas already worked out by the English 
mathematician, P. J. Daniell, then teaching at the Rice Institute in Texas. 
However, my first adaptation of the Daniell ideas seemed to me rather lack­
ing in content; so I set out to look for some physical theory that would 
embody a similar logical structure. I found this in the theory of the Brown­
ian motion. A somewhat similar theory of integration had been discussed 
by Gâteaux, a young French mathematician who died in the First World 
War; but his work could not be directly subsumed under that of Daniell 
and Lebesgue.
Most of my later work in mathematics goes back in one way or another 
to my study of the Brownian motion. In the first place, this study intro­
duced me to the theory of probability. Moreover, it led me very directly to 
the periodogram, and to the study of forms of harmonic analysis more gen­
eral than the classical Fourier series and Fourier integral. All these concepts 
have combined with the engineering preoccupations of a professor of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology to lead me to make both theoretical 
and practical advances in the theory of communication, and ultimately 
to found the discipline of Cybernetics, which is in essence a statistical 
approach to the theory of communication. Thus, varied as my scientific 
interests seem to be, there has been a single thread connecting them all 
from my first mature work to the present.
The other piece of business which I found awaiting me on my arrival 
in Boston was of a much more worldly nature. The housing and pay of 
the Boston police force had long been notoriously inadequate, and certain 
members of the force had stuck their necks out in an effort to have these 
conditions improved. This led to a threatened police strike. Now there had 
been a number of such abortive strikes elsewhere at about the same time, 

18: The Return to Mathematics 
209
and conservative public opinion had begun to be terrified of the possibili­
ties, and to consolidate itself in opposition to the asserted right to strike 
on the part of those performing vital public functions. Thus there was no 
difficulty in recruiting a volunteer police force to serve in case the regular 
police should make their threat good. A friend from the Harvard mathemat­
ics department had sent his name in as a candidate for this volunteer police 
force, and in a moment of misguided patriotism, I followed.
What happened is history, and it made a spurious reputation for Cal­
vin Coolidge, who was Governor of Massachusetts at the time. The regular 
police struck. Instead of calling out the volunteers to take over the police 
stations as the regulars left, Coolidge let the city taste twenty-four hours 
of anarchy and looting before he did anything. This may have been mere 
indecision or it may have been political sagacity; but whatever it was, it was 
hard on the shopkeepers whose windows were smashed, and on the nerves 
and pocketbooks of the public at large. We volunteers received badges and 
revolvers, and were sent out in pairs to patrol our beats. I was attached to 
the Joy Street station. The first night I was on duty, there were crowds mill­
ing up and down Cambridge Street and Scollay Square and Hanover Street, 
but we experienced no violence on my beat although a man was killed 
on a neighboring beat. Later on, I was sent to patrol various streets of the 
West End. Nothing very exciting happened to me, although I was sent with 
another recruit to help arrest a wifebeater in a slum near the North Station. 
I drew my revolver, but it was trembling like the tail of a friendly dog, and 
I must bless my guardian angel that it did not go off. On another occa­
sion, as I was walking up and down a quiet Jewish slum street, I saw a boy 
discussing with his comrades some difficulties in an algebra lesson. I inter­
rupted him and put him right, and continued to walk my beat. Sometime 
afterward, this boy attended the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and 
became one of my first advanced students in mathematics. I saw him last 
a couple of years ago at the Carnegie Institute of Technology in Pittsburgh, 
where he is now a professor.
The net result of the police strike was to make Calvin Coolidge Presi­
dent, to secure the firing of the striking policemen, and to bring in a new 
police force which was granted most of the demands for which the men of 
the old police force had sacrificed their careers. As for myself, I was left 
with nothing but the shame of having acted as the Governor’s dupe and 
strikebreaker.
My arrival at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology meant that I had 
come safely into port in the sense that I was no longer to be rushed by the 

210 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
problems of finding a job and knowing what to do with myself. When 
I arrived there, I was one of the large crop of new instructors needed to 
handle the increased teaching loads which followed in the wake of the First 
World War. There was no understanding of permanence in my appoint­
ment, although I had as good a chance as anyone else to make it permanent 
if I should prove to be intellectually and emotionally able to make good as 
a teacher.
The M.I.T. mathematics department itself was then going through a 
period of transition. Although it was primarily viewed as a service depart­
ment, there was nonetheless a small nucleus of mathematicians with 
great scientific enthusiasm who had more or less recently come into the 
department, and who looked forward to the day when our group might 
be known as much for its original research and for its training of men 
capable of carrying out original research as for running interference for the 
engineering backs.
Among the older men of the department, F. H. Woods had already 
shown an interest in pure analysis; and E. B. Wilson, who had recently left 
the department for physics and was destined to leave physics for biosta­
tistical work in the Harvard School of Public Health, represented the great 
Yale intellectual tradition of Willard Gibbs. Lipka and Hitchcock had been 
producing for years a certain amount of highly individual mathematical 
research; this, however, had been off the beaten track, and had a some­
what slender relationship to the type of research favored at other American 
mathematical schools. The two staunchest supporters of a new policy of 
research, and the two men who really envisaged what the school might 
become, were C. L. E. Moore and H. B. Phillips.
Moore was a tall, powerfully built man whose eyesight had only just 
emerged from a half-blindness because of a displacement of his lenses, 
and who was to succumb after a few years to a half-blindness resulting 
from glaucoma. He was kind, intensely loyal to scientific research, and 
free from any taint of sham. He had studied in Italy before the First World 
War and had met there an atmosphere of kindness and sincerity which 
reinforced his own. Italy was then the great home of geometry, and he 
was accordingly a geometer. Though his field of work was different from 
mine, he encouraged me with a fatherly interest in my possibilities, which 
was just what a diffident and awkward young man needed to bring him 
out. He backed me in the founding of a local M.I.T. mathematical journal, 
which made it somewhat easier for me to publish my early unorthodox 
mathematical work.

18: The Return to Mathematics 
211
Professor Phillips, who has officially retired but has not fully withdrawn 
from teaching, has always seemed to me an utterly timeless figure in the 
mathematical background of M.I.T. He did not look particularly young 
when he was young, and he scarcely looks older at the age of seventy. He is 
a long, loose-jointed Southerner, born in a South where the memory of the 
Civil War and reconstruction had overshadowed everything else, and he 
had thus become a skeptic and a bit of a pessimist in a most optimistic and 
forward-looking way. He was intensely an individual and as fundamentally 
kind as Moore.
What Moore and Phillips did for me was to discuss their own work with 
me and to let me discuss mine with them. It must have been very boring 
for them to receive my ideas in a half-baked form and to suffer under my 
immature presentation of personal and scientific difficulties. But the great 
thing was that they listened to me, and that for the first time I had my 
hopes of becoming a real mathematician reinforced by the confidence of 
others. Between us we discussed long plans for the future of our depart­
ment and indeed for the growth of mathematics in the United States. It 
made me feel more like a man to receive the confidences and the hopes of 
these men whom I respected, and I became more of a man. Even Professor 
Moore, who died in 1932, lived to see our department far more than a ser­
vice department, and indeed one of the constructive research departments 
of the Institute. Professor Phillips was head of the department for many 
years after it had assumed its modern functions. What both of these men 
saw went beyond the wildest dreams they had formed by the end of the 
First World War.
Within three or four years of my appointment to M.I.T., I began to have 
accumulated a very considerable body of recognized work. I came to be 
interested in potential theory, in which I received many suggestions from 
Professor Kellogg, who was at Harvard at that time. Gradually it began to be 
clear to me that in the unsolvable cases of the problem of fitting a poten­
tial to certain boundary values, there was still a unique potential function 
fitting these boundary values in a looser sense than that demanded in the 
literature. Then the question arose, How can one be sure in a particular 
case that the solution of the generalized Dirichlet problem, as the prob­
lem of potential fitting is called, will satisfy the conditions of continuity 
demanded in classical potential theory?
About that time, a series of papers had appeared by the great mathemati­
cian Borel on a different but remotely related subject called quasi-analytic 
functions. The innovation of Borel’s work at that time was that he brought 
the problem to depend, not on the size of a number, but on the convergence 

212 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
or divergence of a series. It struck me that my problem of singular points 
on the boundary of a potential function might well receive its answer in 
that form instead of in the form of the determination of some particular 
number, as had been suggested in most of the earlier attempts to solve the 
problem. At any rate, I sweated the answer through, and my conjecture was 
correct. With the aid of my Mexican student, Manuel Sandoval Vallarta, 
who later became a professor at M.I.T. and has since become one of the 
brightest stars in the firmament of Mexican science, I translated my article 
into French and sent it to Professor Henri Lebesgue for publication in the 
Comptes Rendus of the French Academy of Science. I followed this course 
because I had recently seen a series of articles by Lebesgue and a young 
mathematician named Bouligand, which were getting uncomfortably near 
to the complete solution of the problem in which I was interested, and 
which would eliminate the problem from the literature.
It turned out that after I had mailed my article, but before it had been 
received, Bouligand had submitted a sealed envelope containing a very sim­
ilar result, to be held by Lebesgue to preserve Bouligand’s claim to priority 
in the field. It was a dead heat between Bouligand and me, and when my 
article came in, Lebesgue advised Bouligand to let his envelope be opened. 
The two papers appeared side by side in the Comptes Rendus. The results 
were substantially the same, although I like to think my formulation of the 
problem was logically a little more complete.
This incident was the start of a friendship between Bouligand and myself 
which has lasted to the present day; and when, some time afterward, I went 
to visit him at Poitiers, he made himself known to me on the station plat­
form by exhibiting a copy of my reprint on the subject.
There was a mathematical congress at Strasbourg in the summer of 1920. 
Although this congress was in some ways unfortunately limited in that Ger­
mans were not admitted, I attended it. This was my first opportunity to 
participate in international mathematics. I worked with Fréchet, who was 
then professor at Strasbourg, and spent part of my summer vacation at a 
hotel in the Vosges near where he was staying.
As the result of my work, I participated in two papers of research 
which were destined to have a certain effect later on. I converted my 
rather awkward and formal work on integration and function space into a 
study of the Brownian motion, thus uniting it with the ideas of Einstein 
and Smoluchowski. This work was an intrinsic stage in developing my 
later techniques which I have applied in communication theory and 
in Cybernetics.

18: The Return to Mathematics 
213
The other idea which I developed in my discussions with Fréchet was 
that of a certain generalized vector space, for which I gave a set of postu­
lates. I soon found out that I had missed the boat by the very narrow mar­
gin of a few months, as the theory of the same space had been developed 
and studied by Banach in Poland. Although we had run almost an even 
race, I gave up the field later, and left it completely for Banach to open 
up, as its degree of abstractness struck me as rendering it rather remote 
from that tighter texture of mathematics which I had found to give me 
the highest esthetic satisfaction. I do not regret having followed my own 
judgment in the matter, as there is only a certain amount of work that a 
mathematician can do in a given time, however he distributes his efforts. It 
is best for him to do this work in a field that will give him the greatest inner 
satisfaction.
When I returned to M.I.T. I found that the electrical engineers were 
beginning to count on me for resolving the very serious logical doubts 
which were attached to the new and powerful communication techniques 
of Oliver Heaviside. I was able to make a good deal of progress in this direc­
tion, and in the course of this work, I found it necessary to expand the 
theory of Fourier series and integrals into a more general trigonometric the­
ory covering both. Thus when Harald Bohr of Copenhagen developed his 
theory of almost periodic functions, I found it to be a field in which I had 
already developed adequate techniques, and I developed two or three sig­
nificant alternative approaches to this new subject. The relations between 
Bohr and myself were and always remained friendly until his death a year 
and a half ago.
From the beginning of my relationship with M.I.T., I have received loyal 
backing from it and an understanding of my needs, limitations, and possi­
bilities. I had the opportunity very early to do graduate teaching, and from 
those early days on, I have collaborated with my younger colleagues and 
have tried to bring out their intellectual powers. I did not find myself par­
ticularly adapted to the niche of the undergraduate teacher. However, the 
important thing is that I did find that there was a niche in university teach­
ing in which I could function effectively, and this lent me the self-esteem 
necessary to a successful career.
My undergraduate teaching experience differed so greatly from that at 
the University of Maine that it was a relief. Perhaps the Maine boys had 
wanted to play; the Tech boys certainly wanted to work. While there were 
occasional classroom pranks, they were rare; and the spirit underlying the 
relations of the professor and the student was one of mutual respect. There 
were now and then sporadic problems of discipline, but these were so few 

214 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
that they did not form an important part of my relations with my students. 
Moreover, I could be confident that I would have the backing of the author­
ities of the Institute in any matter involving my reasonable authority.
At the same time, I learned many lessons. I learned to curb my naturally 
rapid pace of teaching and to adjust it to students not too much above an 
average level of performance. I learned that in classroom discipline, the 
sharp tongue is such an advantage to the professor but such a weapon that it 
is the part of magnanimity and good sense to use it very sparingly. I learned 
the trick of handling myself before a student audience, and I sloughed for 
good all stage fright before a class or, for that matter, before any other audi­
ence with serious intellectual purposes.
The year I started teaching at M.I.T. at the age of twenty-five, one of the 
young ladies who came to our family teas particularly attracted my atten­
tion. She was of French background and specialized in French at Radcliffe. 
She had been brought up before and during the World War in Paris, and was 
beautiful in a pre-Raphaelite way, with that static beauty which dominates 
over the beauty of motion in the paintings of Rossetti.
I was greatly attracted to her and spent a great deal of time visiting 
her and taking her out. She did not like the eternal presence of my much 
younger brother, and as a result my parents and my sisters took a great dis­
like to her. I was pursued by them with ridicule, and family ridicule was a 
weapon against which I had no defenses. I do not know how our interest in 
one another would have proceeded if it had been left alone. But regardless 
of that, in the second year of my acquaintanceship with her, she told me 
she was engaged to another man. I did not take this with good grace, but it 
was not a graceful situation.
After this, I looked more and more to the Appalachian Club walks for 
outdoor exercise and social amusements It had been nearly eight years 
since I had gone on these walks, and now I found myself more suited in 
age and in social maturity to those about me. I met several young people 
and had the chance to discuss many things of interest to us so that I made 
a definite step ahead in my social development. Nevertheless, I still needed 
more social contacts and I found these in my parents’ teas as before.
About the time that I had met the young woman of whom I have just 
spoken, I met another young woman who attracted me very much, and if 
I had not at the time been in the middle of a courtship, I would have had 
no hesitation in paying court to her. After the breakdown of the other affair 
and the period that was necessary to rebuild my self-esteem, I began to see 
her and finally to hope that she might become my wife.

18: The Return to Mathematics 
215
Her name was Margaret Engemann, and she has been my wife now for 
more than a quarter of a century. My attention was called to her by seeing 
the same family name in the list of my own students, who were also invited 
to these teas, and in the list of my father’s students in Russian literature. We 
learned that Margaret and my student, Herbert Engemann, were sister and 
brother, and that they had been born in Silesia in Germany but had lived 
in several parts of our Far West. One line of their ancestors went back to 
Bavaria, and although they looked much alike, Herbert’s hair was fair and 
Margaret’s so dark that it was nearly black. They had come to Cambridge 
from Utah, where they had been students at Utah State College. They were 
both serious, vigorous young people, to whom I was greatly attracted, and 
when I later came to know their mother (their father had died many years 
earlier in Germany), I recognized her as an active and interesting woman of 
the pioneer type. Margaret shared her mother’s definite character, though 
with a more feminine touch.
On one occasion during the winter of 1921, my family went to their 
new country place, a farm in Groton, for a little skiing. My parents invited 
the Engemanns to come along with us. I had taken Margaret out once or 
twice before this and had enjoyed our companionship very much. My par­
ents considered her an excellent match for me, and were not silent in their 
approval of my interest in her. However, I felt greatly embarrassed by their 
obvious reaction in her favor, and my response was to keep away from 
Margaret for the time being. A courtship that might end in marriage could 
be only my own and could not represent a decision imposed on me by 
parental authority. Thus it was not easy for me to show my attentions to 
Margaret. She has since told me that her reactions to my parents’ obvious 
hints were exactly the same as mine.
On our return from Groton, I began to feel very ill, and it was not long 
before I came down with an attack of bronchial pneumonia. I was deliri­
ous for some days, and during my delirium and convalescence, I expressed 
the desire to see Margaret again and to talk over our future together. I now 
felt that she was the wife for me. Yet our courtship and the steps leading 
up to our marriage did not proceed quickly. I was still confused by my par­
ents’ overactive participation in my own affairs. Furthermore, Margaret was 
soon to leave Boston to take a position as a teacher of French and German 
at Juniata College in Pennsylvania. Her four years of contact with Juniata 
have made her a permanent and beloved tradition there.
Margaret shares with me deep emotional roots both in Europe and in 
America. She was born in Silesia, where she had her early school train­
ing; but she came to America with her mother and brothers at the age of 

216 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
fourteen, to share with them memories of that vital part of America, the 
frontier. Thus she has always combined deep understanding of her mother 
country and her foster country, and a sincere loyalty to the true interests 
of both.
From the beginning when Margaret and I have discussed our problems 
together, she has insisted firmly that I should recognize with honesty what 
I am, and that I accept my Jewishness with neither boastfulness nor apol­
ogy. I believe that when I was contemplating marriage, my family had sup­
posed that Margaret would fit rather easily into the somewhat patriarchal 
pattern of the Wieners, and would serve as a ready instrument for holding 
me in line. While my parents seemed to have hoped this, I was delighted to 
find that in fact this was never a possibility. Yet until we were both clear on 
the matter, we had to wait.
I think that the possibility of marriage had long been in the back of 
Margaret’s mind as well as of mine. We met once at the house of one of 
Margaret’s friends, about halfway between her college and Boston, but on 
that occasion we were both too involved in our immediate futures to come 
to an agreement. Yet as time went on it became more and more obvious 
that we were strongly attracted to one another. I gradually came to see what 
was never subject to any real doubt: that my parents had taken a great deal 
too much for granted if they supposed that my marriage with Margaret 
would mean an indefinite prolongation of my family captivity.
During the years that followed my trip to the Strasbourg mathematical 
congress in 1920, I visited Europe several times with my sisters and alone, 
doing a bit of desultory mountain climbing together with some American 
mathematical friends, and visiting the University of Göttingen in Germany. 
In 1925, Professor Max Born of Göttingen came to M.I.T. to lecture on phys­
ics. It began to seem as if there might be enough interest in my work for me 
to receive an invitation to lecture at Göttingen. The money was furnished 
by the newly formed Guggenheim Foundation, which has done so much to 
help American scholars and artists in all fields. I decided to go to Göttingen 
in the spring.
With this ahead of me, I felt that I was for the first time in a position to 
marry at once. Margaret and I had met again at my parents’ Cambridge house 
at Christmas and had decided to marry. There was, however, the difficulty 
that Margaret’s teaching obligations did not end until June, by which time I 
should be on the other side of the ocean. We tried to see whether there was 
any possibility of our marrying in Germany at the United States Embassy, 
but we finally came to the conclusion that this would cause us more effort 
than it was worth. Finally, we decided to be married in Philadelphia a few 

18: The Return to Mathematics 
217
days before my departure for Europe, and then to go about our respective 
jobs until Margaret could come to Germany at the end of term. We spent a 
few pleasant days of our interrupted honeymoon at Atlantic City, and then 
parted in New York in a gloom caused to some extent by the fact that we 
had taken a room in that ancient mausoleum, the old Murray Hill Hotel, 
and in part by the fact that the play we had chosen to see together was one 
of Ibsen’s gloomiest.
However, the period of our separation came to an end, although it 
seemed it never would, and we met again for the beginning of our Euro­
pean honeymoon at Cherbourg. This was twenty-six years ago, and we were 
thirty-one. I cannot express how my life these twenty-six years has been 
strengthened and stabilized by the love and understanding of my partner.


19  Epilogue
Ex-Prodigy: 
Childhood 
and 
Youth
19: 
Epilogue
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
This, then, concludes the account of my life from my birth in 1894 until 
1926, when I was married at the age of thirty-one. I had joined the staff 
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and there I have remained 
ever since.
The present book, apart from its interest to those who have had some 
continued contact with me and my work, will be read primarily by those 
who are interested in what is unusual in my career, and the fact that I have 
been what is known as a child prodigy. There will be many who read it from 
curiosity, to learn what such a fabulous monster is, and how it views itself. 
Others will want to find some lessons that they can apply to the education 
of their own children, or of such other children as may be entrusted to their 
care. They will ask themselves, and will ask me, some serious questions: Has 
my career as an infant prodigy been more beneficial or more harmful to 
me? Would I repeat it if I had the chance? Have I tried to bring up my own 
children on the same basis, and if I have not, do I wish that I had?
These questions are easier to ask than to answer; in fact, one has only 
one life to live, and the experiment of that life can scarcely have an accu­
rate control. It might be theoretically possible to carry out a controlled 
experiment with those curious moieties of human beings known as identi­
cal twins, but to carry such an experiment out to the bitter end would pre­
suppose a supreme indifference to the development and the happiness of 
the individual. My father was no such indifferent tyrant. His was anything 
but a cold nature, and he was firmly convinced that he was doing his best 
for me. Thus, in the nature of the case, the answer to these questions must 
be an emotional guess rather than the precise considered verdict of the 
scientist.
I have tried not to make this volume a cri du coeur. It will nevertheless be 
manifest to the most casual reader that my boyhood life was not all cakes 
and ale. I worked unconscionably hard, under a pressure which, though 

220 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
loving, was unconscionably severe. With a heredity which of itself would 
tend to lead to emotional tenseness, I was put through a course of training 
that was bound to exaggerate this trait, under the impact of another tense 
personality. I was naturally awkward, both physically and socially; and my 
training did nothing to alleviate this awkwardness and probably increased 
it. Moreover, I was intensely conscious of my shortcomings and of the great 
demands on me. These gave me an unmitigated sense of difference, which 
did not make it easy for me to believe in my own success.
I was endowed with what was obviously a very real precocity, and with 
an insatiable curiosity which had driven me at a very early age to unlimited 
reading. Thus the question of what was to be done with me was one that 
could not be put off indefinitely. I myself have met more than one able 
mind which has come to nothing because the ease with which it has learned 
has insulated it from the discipline of the ordinary school and nothing has 
been given with which to replace this discipline. It is precisely this rigorous 
discipline and training which I received from my father, though perhaps 
in rather excessive portions. I learned my algebra and geometry at so early 
an age that they have grown into a part of me. My Latin, my Greek, my 
German, and my English became a library impressed on my memory. Wher­
ever I may be, I can call on them for use. These great benefits I acquired 
at an age when most boys are learning trivialities. Thus my energies were 
released for later serious work at a time when others were learning the very 
grammar of their professions.
Moreover, I had the chance to sit under a very great man, and to see the 
inner operations of his mind. It is neither family conceit nor filial loyalty 
which makes me say this. I have lived the life of an active scholar for a third 
of a century, and I know very well the intellectual mettle of those with 
whom I have come into contact. My father’s work was marred by flights of 
fancy to which he was unable to give full logical support, and more than 
one of his ideas has failed to stand the test of later criticism. To be a pioneer 
in a subject which, like philology, has a very attenuated inner discipline, is 
to run this risk. My father was a rather isolated worker, an enthusiast, and 
a man who had come from a different early career. This made his short­
comings almost inevitable; yet his influence in philology is comparable 
with that of Jespersen, and was an anticipation of the modern school of 
philologists who see in the cultural history of a language a stronger stream 
of continuity than in its merely formal phonetic and grammatical develop­
ment. Both the phoneticists and the semanticists of the present day have 
come to a position closer to that of my father than to that of most of his 
contemporaries.

19: Epilogue 
221
My work with my father may seem to have been an almost unbroken 
series of clashes, and indeed the clashes were not few. He was a sensitive 
man, who felt the lack of the general recognition which he conceived to be 
his due. He sought for me to be not only his disciple but his friendly critic 
and perhaps his continuator. These were impossible roles for even a mature 
trained philologist to hold simultaneously; and they were absolutely out 
of the question for a half-grown boy. When I expressed any doubts of his 
logic, and I had some sincere doubts, I was berated as an impudent, unfilial 
child. Yet I could perceive at the same time the agony of my father and his 
need for approval. I knew that he sought for approval in what he felt was 
the one quarter in which he could expect it. Thus my self-protective anger 
and resentment were not unmixed with pity.
Father was disappointed that his work did not achieve what he consid­
ered and what I consider adequate early recognition. He was not by any 
means a failure, nor did he think he was a failure, either in his intellectual 
contribution or in the general frame of academic success. As to the latter, 
Father reached and held the rank of full professor at Harvard, and was with­
out any doubt esteemed very highly as a linguist and philologist of most 
individual genius. Yet among the very colleagues who esteemed him, I think 
there were few who realized that the position he was taking in the philolog­
ical world was revolutionary. Neither do I think that, notwithstanding his 
respect for his Harvard colleagues, many of them represented to him a stage 
of philological learning and sophistication which could constitute a code 
whose judgment had any great meaning for him. Before he had repudiated 
Germany and Germany had repudiated him, his heart had been set on a 
German recognition which was unattainable in the closed German philo­
logical world of that epoch. Even after his break with all things German, 
I think he still looked toward Europe and hoped that in some miraculous 
way, a dove would appear from nowhere with an olive branch in its beak. I 
think he could never have looked forward, except as a dream, to the present 
state of affairs in which European scholarship is largely concentrated in 
America and in which his own point of view, instead of being regarded as a 
vision of a brilliant eccentric, is accepted and accredited.
Yet the fact that a posthumous success was awaiting him so little as fif­
teen years after his death can scarcely have mitigated the essential tragedy 
of his position. And it is possible to be a tragic figure even with an honored 
position at a great university and a considerable degree of regard among 
one’s colleagues. This position Father had attained, and my mother must 
be given great credit for taking a brilliant and unworldly man and leading 
him to that degree of personal success at which he eventually arrived. It was 

222 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
a great success and he knew it. But it was not the position of a re-founder 
of a science which he deserved and to which he aspired. He had aspired to 
be Prometheus bringing light, and he suffered in his own eyes the fate of a 
Prometheus.
From him I learned the standards of scholarship which belong to the 
real scholar, and the degree of manliness, devotion, and honesty which a 
scholarly career requires. I learned that scholarship is a calling and a con­
secration, not a job. I learned a fierce hatred of all bluff and intellectual 
pretense, as well as a pride in not being baffled by any problem which 
I could possibly solve. These are worth a price in suffering, yet I would 
ask this price to be exacted of no man who has not the strength to stand 
up to it physically and morally. This price cannot be paid by a weakling, 
and it can kill. That I was a boy not only endowed with a certain intellec­
tual vigor, but also physically strong, made it possible for me to bear the 
wounds of this Spartan nurture. Before I should even think of subjecting 
any child, boy or girl, to such a training I should have to be convinced not 
only of the intelligence of the child, but of its physical, mental, and moral 
stamina.
Even if we take this stamina for granted, it is a special treatment only 
to be employed where no ordinary treatment is adequate to the needs of 
the case. With my own children, indications of the need for such a highly 
specialized procedure have not occurred. At no time have I tried to subject 
them to a similar training. I cannot say what I should have done if I had 
found myself faced by the problem that faced my father.
Nevertheless, to confine one’s interest only to that part of my develop­
ment in which my father participated most directly would be to misread 
the lesson of this book. By the time I had obtained my doctor’s degree at 
Harvard I had completed the usual formal education of the American boy 
who goes into scholarship. But neither in age nor in sophistication was I 
ready to take my place in the scholarly world and to earn my living. It is 
important for me to tell not only how I fell into the rather specialized and 
stagy-looking life of the infant prodigy, but how I fell out of it and returned 
to a possible norm. For it is my opinion that this is of interest and impor­
tance equal to that of the departure from this norm.
Before I could take my full place as a mature scholar in the world it was 
necessary for some of the special conditioning which made me to a certain 
extent an object of show to be replaced by a basis of general experience 
which must ultimately come to every boy in his teens. I had to learn to 
study away from the example of my dominating father, and to regulate 
my affairs among people to whom my record as an infant prodigy meant 

19: Epilogue 
223
exactly nothing. I had to become a reasonably competent teacher and to 
know my assets and limitations in that field. I had to get my hands black 
in an industrial laboratory and to acquire the satisfaction of working with 
tools as a member of an active team of men. I had to find out that writing 
for a living is not done by fits and starts but is a disciplined act which must 
be repeated for so many hours each day. It was necessary that I should come 
to see that mathematics was something that dealt with actual numbers and 
measurements found by observation, and that the results of this mathemat­
ics were subject to a critical scrutiny for their accuracy and applicability. 
And, because I came to maturity in a generation of war, I had to have the 
knowledge in my own person of what it meant to be a soldier, if not a 
warrior.
In the career of the average scholar, many of these lessons are learned 
in the teens and are followed by a period in the twenties when quite as 
rapid progress is made as I made at an earlier age. This is the more normal 
procedure and there is much to be said for it. But I hesitate to pronounce 
dogmatically whether it is better or worse than the alternative procedure 
which I followed. On the one hand, there have been social difficulties in 
my nature which not even my belated professional career has eliminated. 
On the other hand, in this varied period of manifold experiences, my eyes 
were already open so that I could see and classify and organize in terms 
of some central principles the mass of individual items that came to my 
attention. I could come very near the boast that not one of these seem­
ingly desultory years of finding myself was wasted, and that I have inte­
grated them all into a later career centering about a few highly organized 
principles.
Yet from a contemporary point of view, it must have seemed that I had 
stepped down from the brilliant glow of publicity belonging to a career 
of a Wunderkind into the half-light of a slightly alleviated failure. I think 
this interpretation of my career, which would have looked very plausible at 
about the time I came to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is not 
the true one. I have chosen for the work of my later years the study of com­
munication and communication apparatus. This is a subject with linguistic 
and philological sides which I have learned from my father, with engineer­
ing techniques to which I received my apprenticeship in the General Elec­
tric laboratories and at the computing table at Aberdeen Proving Ground, 
with mathematical techniques stemming from my days at Cambridge and 
Göttingen, and with the compelling need for a competent vehicle of lit­
erary expression which has proceeded from my work on the Encyclopedia 
and the Boston Herald. My routine task of assisting a Japanese professor 

224 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
has borne fruit in my teaching in the Orient and my contact with Oriental 
scholars. Even my exile at the University of Maine, which was a chastise­
ment for me, has proved in the long run to be a salutary chastisement and 
a true discipline for a man who was to make his living as a teacher and who 
had the necessity of making his mistakes early when they were of no great 
seriousness.
This did not result from any particular plan on my part or on the part of 
my father. The man who wants to work in diverse branches of science must 
be prepared to take his ideas where he finds them and to use them where 
they become applicable. Everything is grist to his mill. Indeed, the peculiar 
advantage of the ex-infant prodigy in science—if he has any advantage and 
has managed to come through his discipline without major trauma—is that 
he has had a chance to absorb something of the richness of many fields of 
scientific effort before he has become definitely committed to any one or 
two of these. Leibnitz was an infant prodigy, and in fact the work of Leib­
nitz is precisely the sort of work for which the training of the infant prodigy 
is peculiarly suitable. The scientist must remember and he must reflect and 
he must correlate. It does not change the situation in any fundamental way 
that the field of science has so grown that the scholar of the present day 
must perforce be nothing more than a half-Leibnitz. The task of scientists 
is even more essential than it was in Leibnitz’s time; and if it cannot be 
fulfilled with the completeness which seemed possible in the seventeenth 
century, that part of it which can be carried out is more demanding and 
less avoidable.
All of this represents a view backward from my later years and not a 
view forward from my childhood. I began my work early, but my accom­
plishments did not begin to take their full form until my middle twenties. 
There was much trial and I went up many false alleyways in going through 
the maze of life. Yet I doubt that a more single-purposed and unmistaking 
career would have been better for me in the long run. I do not think that 
a scientist is at his best until he has learned to draw success from confu­
sion and failure and to improvise new and effective ideas on the basis of 
procedures which he has begun fortuitously and without purpose. The man 
who is always right has not learned the great virtue of failure. Intellectual 
achievement involves a calculated risk and in many cases even an uncal­
culated risk; but one thing is sure: where nothing is ventured, nothing is 
gained.
This I should like to say to the administrators of research and education 
within and without our universities. Theirs is the task of judging the prom­
ise and performance of gifted and struggling young men and women, and 

19: Epilogue 
225
their decisions may profoundly affect the careers of these young people. 
The youngsters whom they have to judge must perforce do much of their 
work in fields in which there do not yet exist any accepted criteria of per­
formance. All true research is a gamble, and the payoff is anything but 
prompt. A fellowship is a long-term investment in a man, not a sight draft 
nor a paper collectible twelve months from issue. Creativity cannot be hur­
ried, and Clio takes her time in handing out the awards.
As to the problems of my earlier life which are associated with the fact of 
my Jewish origin and my discovery of it, these have evaporated with time. 
I have found in my wife’s attitude support for a definite course of conduct 
and security in that course of conduct. As I have said, this is to sublimate 
the problem of prejudice directed against a group to which I belong into 
the problem of prejudice against undervalued groups in general. In addi­
tion, whatever temporary recrudescences anti-Semitism may show, it has 
ceased to be a really important factor in the environment in which I live, 
and to a large extent in the country as a whole. Among those places at 
which anti-Semitism is at a low level and has ceased to be an important 
factor in our daily lives, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology stands 
at the top.
This decided lessening of anti-Semitism is the result of many factors. The 
shame of Hitler’s anti-Semitism has cut deep into the spirit of most Ameri­
cans and it is no longer fashionable or even tolerable to adopt such a dis­
credited spirit. Furthermore, the Jews, like many other immigrant groups, 
have developed a new generation which has grown up with American 
speech and American mores and which no longer combines the prejudice-
forming factors of different dress, language, and background with the prej­
udice against religious differences and the Jewish group in particular. The 
struggle for emancipation from the ghetto does not have any very great 
emotional content for those to whom this emancipation is an old story. Yet 
the battle against prejudice is never won, and it must be fought on every 
front where it appears.
All in all, it has come out pretty even in the end. The question of one’s 
social awkwardness looks pretty small after one has gone through the vicis­
situdes of fifty-eight years of life and has found oneself reasonably able to 
cope with them. The early start I have had does not appear to me to have 
impeded me from showing a period of productivity continuing reasonably 
late, and has greatly increased the level at which I started this productivity. 
Thus it has added years to my useful life.

226 
Ex-Prodigy: Childhood and Youth
I certainly do not look back upon my career as one blighted by my earlier 
experiences, nor do I feel any particular self-pity for having been “deprived 
of my childhood,” as the jargon goes. That I have arrived at this degree 
of equanimity is due in particular to the love, advice, and criticism of my 
wife. Alone, I should have found it difficult and probably impossible of 
accomplishment. Yet it has been achieved. And now, with increasing age, I 
find that the image of myself as an infant prodigy has been obliterated in 
the minds of my acquaintances as well as in my own mind. The question of 
the success or failure of my adolescence and postadolescence has become 
unimportant to me as to everybody else through the larger issues developed 
during my career as a working scholar.

II  I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy


To the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which has given me the encourage­
ment to work and the freedom to think.


Preface to I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
P
r
e
f
a
c
e
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
I have just finished dictating the last word of this book. It represents that 
part of my autobiography which dates roughly from my arrival at M.I.T. in 
1919, when I was twenty-four years old. The earlier part of my autobiogra­
phy, under the title Ex-Prodigy, concerned my childhood and adolescence, 
while the present book is occupied with my mature personal and scientific 
career.
It deals with my work, my travel, and my personal experiences, and I 
hope that it will give a fair account of my intellectual development. My 
problem has been to explain to a public that is generally not too deeply 
interested in science, and which is certainly not possessed of a technical 
acquaintance with it, the development of ideas which are fundamentally 
scientific. I have had as far as possible to eschew the technical vocabulary 
of science and to translate my concepts into everyday language. This is a 
splendid discipline for an author, but it also is a discipline which runs the 
risk of falling short of full success. While the use of scientific terms often 
results in jargon, to express any significant part of scientific ideas without 
the compact denotation and connotation which the history of science has 
given these terms is most difficult and is much less likely to be completely 
successful than the specifically literary critic may be aware.
Thus, I have had two years discipline at a piece of work in which, by the 
nature of things, I must wait for the judgment of the public in order to be 
sure that I have achieved a measure of success. Why did I assume this unin­
viting labor, which at the best can add little to my stature as a working sci­
entist and at the worst must offer new opportunities for those who may be 
inclined to criticize me? All in all, I don’t know. There certainly have been 
motives of literary vanity and the desire to show that, both as an individual 
and as a scientist I have been able to accomplish a task off my regular beat.
Admitting this freely, there are other, more important motives. As in the 
first volume of my autobiography, so here, too, I wish to think out to myself 

232 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
what my career has meant and to come to that emotional peace which only 
a thorough consideration and understanding of one’s own past can bring. 
I have also wished to make this understanding available to young men 
coming up through similar careers in mathematics and the other sciences. 
I have felt that the scientist, his mode of life, and the demands on him are 
not sufficiently known to the larger intellectual public, and I believe that 
here I have the duty of exegesis. Then, finally, I have not had any previous 
opportunity to write up many ideas—treated singly in my existing liter­
ary work—in the form of a consistent historical account of how I came 
by them.
I should like to mention, among the colleagues with whom I have dis­
cussed this undertaking, Professor Karl Deutsch of the M.I.T. Department 
of Humanities; Professor Armand Siegel of Boston University; Dr. Dana L. 
Farnsworth, formerly of the Medical Department at M.I.T. and now profes­
sor of hygiene at Harvard University; and Dr. Morris Chafetz. In addition, I 
wish to give my thanks to the several members of the sequence of secretar­
ies who have taken my dictation, who have expressed their criticism of my 
ideas, and who have helped put my work into printable form.
Norbert Wiener
Cambridge, Massachusetts
Washington’s Birthday, 1955

20  My Start as a Mathematician
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
20: 
My 
Start 
as 
a 
Mathematician
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
This book is the second volume of my autobiography. The first volume, 
entitled Ex-Prodigy, was devoted to my early education, to my relations with 
my father, and to the unusual experience of being an infant prodigy. The 
present book is devoted to my career as a working mathematician.
For purposes of organization, I must begin this volume at some definite 
period, and the natural time to begin it is in 1919, when I first came to 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. I was then twenty-four years 
old: too old to be an infant prodigy any longer but not too old to have the 
marks of having been one firmly impressed upon me.
I do not intend to go back to my childhood, which was the subject of my 
earlier book, to explain the origins of these marks, but I must report certain 
features of my adolescence which in the previous volume represented the 
last stages in the life of a child but here are rather to be interpreted as the 
first stages in the life of a man.
Of all the influences which operated on me during my childhood and 
adolescence, the most important was my father, Leo Wiener, professor of 
Slavic languages and literatures at Harvard University—a small, vigorous 
man, of emotions both deep and quick, sudden in his movements and his 
gestures, ready to approve and to condemn, a scholar rather by nature than 
by any specific training. In him were joined the best traditions of German 
thought, Jewish intellect, and American spirit. He was given to overriding 
the wills of those about him by the sheer intensity of his emotion rather 
than by any particular desire to master other people.
Having been more than twenty years in the shadow of such a man, with 
the knowledge that I was flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone, I myself 
was cast into a mold sharply different from that of most of those about me. 
I became a scholar partly because it was my father’s will but equally because 
it was my internal destiny. From my earliest years I had been interested in 
the world about me and very inquisitive into its nature. I had learned to 

234 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
read by the time I was four, and almost from then on I plunged into sci­
entific reading of the most varied character. By the time I was seven, my 
reading had come to range from Darwin and Kingsley’s Natural History to 
the psychiatric writings of Charcot and Janet and others of the school of 
the Salpétrière. This miscellaneous collection of learning had been assem­
bled in those remarkable and diversified volumes of small and blunt print 
known as the Humboldt Library.
My own free curiosity was matched by my father’s insistence that my 
training be disciplined. I learned my science for myself; my father intro­
duced me to languages, both ancient and modern, and to mathematics. All 
these subjects had a certain interest for me, but no casual interest could sat­
isfy my father’s demands for precise and ready knowledge. These demands 
were severe and painful, but they were made tolerable by my complete 
awareness of my father’s integrity and intellectual power.
The arduous course of training to which I was put tended to isolate me 
from the world and to give me a certain aggressive, unlovable naïveté. I 
played a good deal with other boys, but I was not greatly welcomed by 
them. When I entered high school, at the age of nine, the few companions 
that I found were not among the high-school boys but among children of 
my own age.
The special nature of my position was aggravated by a nearsightedness 
which at one time seemed to threaten my vision altogether. While this had 
no direct effect on my physical vigor, it cut me out of that whole sector of 
boyish life which depends on skill at games. It also tended to accentuate my 
very marked physical clumsiness. This clumsiness was serious enough on its 
own merits, but it was further brought out by the way in which my father 
harped on it and used to humiliate me concerning it. He himself was no 
prodigy of manual skill, but he was interested in farming, gardening, and 
an outdoor life, and he used his limited skills to the best possible advantage. 
His discomfiture at my shortcomings was real.
With the inevitable isolation which my father’s training gave me, I was 
a very self-conscious hobbledehoy, subject to alternate moods of conceit 
when I became aware of my abilities and of great disappointment when I 
accepted at their face value my father’s strictures on my shortcomings, or 
when I contemplated the long and uncertain road to achievement to which 
my highly eccentric bringing-up had condemned me. Moreover, I had my 
father perpetually before me as an example of a certain admissible aggres­
siveness, although its naturalness and to some extent its justifiability made 
it less devastating to me than it would otherwise have been.

20: My Start as a Mathematician 
235
Superimposed upon this was another source of unsureness which con­
tinued to haunt me for a large part of my life. My mother, like my father, 
was a Jew. Unlike my father, she resented being a Jew. My father and mother 
concurred, it is true, in assimilationism and in a desire to identify them­
selves and their children with the general American environment. But 
while this desire took a defensible form with my father, whose many inter­
ests allowed him to view this fact of our origin in something like a proper 
perspective, anti-Semitism became, in all its starkness, the chief subject of 
my mother’s concern.
On the one hand, we children were brought up not only in ignorance 
of our origins but under a directly false impression of them. On the other 
hand, we could at no time fully fail to realize that there was some unex­
plained Jewish element in our environment. My mother made many 
uncomplimentary remarks concerning the Jews, which went far to impress 
on me that she considered her Jewish origin, and consequently our own 
Jewishness, a source of shame. When, later—at the age of fifteen—I learned 
from my father that we were unquestionably Jewish, remembered remarks 
of my mother forced on me a sense of inferiority which contributed greatly 
to my insecurity so that it was a matter of many years before I could acquire 
a decent measure of self-confidence. Thus, I was subject to an alternation 
of awareness of my powers and doubts as to my value; and these made me 
continue to oscillate between an unlovely conceit and an equally unlovely 
abjectness.
There were, however, certain important factors in my makeup which 
made for success in general and for intellectual success in particular. My 
father’s independence had been reflected in both my nature and my habits. 
His power did not consist merely in a high level of intellectual ability but in 
a willingness to supplement this ability by hard and unceasing work. I had 
seen my father bring himself to a breakdown by the herculean task of trans­
lating twenty-four volumes of Tolstoy in two years. What Father expected 
of himself he expected of me as well, and from childhood on I have known 
no period when I was content to rest on past accomplishments.
From high school I proceeded to Tufts College, near Boston, and later 
to graduate work at Harvard and at Cornell. I took my bachelor’s degree 
at Tufts at the age of fourteen and my doctor’s degree in philosophy at 
Harvard at eighteen. As I gradually acquired a limited amount—a very lim­
ited amount—of independence from my father, I found that the dawning 
freedom of approaching manhood was largely a freedom to make mistakes 
and to know failure. Yet even this joyful freedom was limited by my father’s 

236 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
proneness to make sudden decisions affecting my whole future which 
bound me as much as if these decisions had been my own.
After obtaining my Ph.D. I was appointed by Harvard University to a 
traveling fellowship which I spent at Cambridge, England, and later at Göt­
tingen, in Germany. Although I had been away from home before, this was 
the first time that I had come to be really competent to live alone and could 
learn something about the freedom of an independent worker. My chief 
teacher and mentor was Bertrand Russell, with whom I studied mathemati­
cal logic and a good many more general matters concerning the philosophy 
of science and mathematics. Russell, who looked then, as he does now, 
like the Mad Hatter, gave beautifully finished discussions largely devoted 
to Einstein’s new theory of relativity. I studied Russell’s own mathematical-
logic writings with a small group of students who met in his rooms, and I 
followed other courses which he recommended to me. The chief of these 
was a higher-mathematics course under G. H. Hardy, later to become a pro­
fessor both at Oxford and at Cambridge and perhaps the greatest figure of 
his mathematical generation in England.
My doctor’s thesis at Harvard had been on the philosophy of mathemat­
ics. Russell impressed upon me that to do competent work in the philoso­
phy of mathematics I should know more than I did about mathematics 
itself.
Hardy, to whom I turned, was an ideal mentor and model for an ambi­
tious young mathematician. I had first seen him in Russell’s rooms when 
my father took me to Cambridge and left me in an absent-minded way to 
sink or swim there. At that time, Father and I both took Hardy to be an 
undergraduate, a shy, self-effacing young man who, as I came to learn later, 
was an excellent athlete and an authority on every game played with a ball. 
In his later years he was to become a rather dried-up, wizened figure, in the 
inevitable unpressed jacket and bags of a Cambridge don: kindly and help­
ful but detached and desperately afraid of women, and it is in this way that 
I remember him best.
His course was a delight to me. My previous adventures into higher 
mathematics had not been completely satisfying, because I sensed gaps 
in many of the proofs which I was unwilling to disregard—and correctly 
too, as it later turned out, for the gaps were really there and they should 
have disturbed not only me but my earlier teachers. Hardy, however, led 
me through the complicated logic of higher mathematics with such clarity 
and in such detail that he resolved these difficulties as we came to them and 
gave me a real sense of what is necessary for a mathematical proof. He also 

20: My Start as a Mathematician 
237
introduced me to the Lebesgue integral, which was to lead directly to the 
main achievements of my early career.
The Lebesgue integral is not an easy conception for the layman to grasp, 
but since an awareness of it is fundamental to this book, I shall try to sug­
gest, if not its full complexity, at least its main theme. It is easy enough to 
measure the length of an interval along a line or the area inside a circle or 
other smooth, closed curve. Yet when one tries to measure sets of points 
which are scattered over an infinity of segments or curve-bound areas, or 
sets of points so irregularly distributed that even this complicated descrip­
tion is not adequate for them, the very simplest notions of area and volume 
demand high-grade thinking for their definition. The Lebesgue integral is a 
tool for measuring such complex phenomena.
The measurement of highly irregular regions is indispensable to the 
theories of probability and statistics; and these two closely related theories 
seemed to me, even in those remote days before the war, to be on the point 
of taking over large areas of physics. They stood approximately in the mid­
dle ground where physics and mathematics meet, and this middle ground 
was just where I was eventually to do my best work, for such work seemed 
to be in harmony with a basic aspect of my own personality.
Even more, they anticipated the main tendencies of modern mathe­
matics, grounded in physics and dependent on the ideas of measure and 
probability expounded in the statistical mechanics of that great American 
scientist, Josiah Willard Gibbs. The development of problems surrounding 
the application of mathematical ideas into problems that arise in the phys­
ical world constitutes one of the main themes of this volume.
The theory of the Lebesgue integral leads the student from the measure 
of intervals to the measure of more complex phenomena obtained by com­
bining sequences of intervals, and then to sets which can be approached 
by such sequences, while the sets of points excluded from them can be 
approached in a similar manner. There is nothing in it which can be 
explained satisfactorily to the layman, but neither is there anything which 
involves an excessive complication of logic and manipulation. It enabled 
Lebesgue to extend the notion of length or measure from the single interval 
to the extreme significant limits at which measure is possible.
Hardy died some years ago, but his younger colleague and research 
partner, J. E. Littlewood, with whom I also worked, is still alive. At that 
time, Littlewood seemed to me merely a bright young man among other 
bright young men, but, as I got to know him later, I learned that he was 
a great rock climber as well as a mathematician. He had the small, mus­
cular, compact build of the true rock climber, and both as a rock climber 

238 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
and a mathematician he showed an unlimited power and an impeccable 
technique.
In their long partnership, Hardy and Littlewood occupied easily distin­
guishable roles, for whereas Hardy was the man of clarity and original ideas, 
Littlewood was the man of power and indomitable persistence. Curiously 
enough, Littlewood was the more self-effacing of the two. Later on, when 
he visited Edmund Landau at Göttingen, that irrepressible, spoiled child 
of mathematics said to him, “So you do exist! I thought you were merely a 
name used by Hardy for those papers which he didn't think were quite good 
enough to publish under his own name.”
Landau and David Hilbert became my teachers later the same academic 
year, when I studied in Göttingen in the spring term of 1914, just as the 
First World War was about to break out. Landau came from a rich Jew­
ish banking family and had been something of a prodigy himself. He had 
been brought up with every luxury which his wealthy parents were able 
to provide. A small, cherubic figure with a bristling little mustache and a 
completely undisciplined conceit, he always seemed a bit out of place in 
the real world. When people asked where to find his house in Göttingen he 
would say quite naïvely, “You will have no difficulty in finding it. It is the 
finest house in the town.”
Hilbert, with whom I also studied, was a very different sort of person, a 
quiet, peasantlike man from East Prussia. He was conscious of his strength 
but genuinely modest. He used to say about his son, who certainly lacked 
the powers of his father, “He has his mathematical ability from his mother, 
everything else from me.”
Hilbert himself had taken up, in succession, most of the difficult prob­
lems in every field of modern mathematics, and in each field he had made 
a major killing. He represented the grand tradition in the mathematics of 
the beginning of the century. For me as a young man he became the sort of 
mathematician whom I would have liked to become, combining tremen­
dous abstract power with a down-to-earth sense of physical reality.
At Cambridge, Russell had impressed on me not only the importance of 
mathematics but the need for a physical sense, and he had suggested that 
I study the new developments of Rutherford and others concerning the 
theory of the electron and the nature of matter. At that time I did not make 
much headway in these subjects, but at least I was given a preview of that 
theory of the atomic nucleus which has since given rise to the transmuta­
tion of the elements and the construction of the atomic bomb. This theory 
has come to occupy a position alongside Einstein’s theory of relativity, the 

20: My Start as a Mathematician 
239
importance of which I also learned from Russell. I found Russell’s respect 
for physics reinforced in the scientific atmosphere of Göttingen.
After Göttingen I came back to New Hampshire for the summer just as 
World War I was breaking out. I returned to England for the next academic 
year at Cambridge, but in that atmosphere of calamity and doom I did 
not find many people with a heart to do serious scientific thinking nor 
was I myself able to carry on to any very good effect. In the late winter of 
1914–1915 the German submarine campaign became threatening, and I 
was summoned home by my father.
The war took some years to come to America, but it was never out of my 
thoughts. The present generation, which has been brought up with crisis 
as its daily associate, can scarcely be aware of the shock with which the war 
impinged on my contemporaries. We had been brought up to consider the 
long Victorian peace as normal, and we had hoped for a continued and 
slow evolution toward better conditions. Not even now, forty years after, 
have we really been able to accept the prolonged succession of catastrophes 
about us as normal. I am afraid that we all have from time to time a sneak­
ing hope that we shall wake and find ourselves again in the dull, mild days 
of the beginning of the century.
During the early period of the First World War I carried on a number of 
activities, scientific and personal, in a desultory way. I had a certain idea at 
the back of my mind that the war would be over some day fairly soon and 
that then we could return to our old settled habits of living and make long 
plans. I finished the incomplete academic year of 1914–15 at Columbia, lis­
tening impatiently and impolitely to various professors who did not impress 
me after my experience with Hardy and the Harvard philosophers. I was a 
pest to the older men in the graduate dormitory with my self-assertiveness 
and bad bridge-playing, and I filled in my abundant but lonely leisure with 
long walks from Columbia University to the Battery, with an overdose of 
films and theater in between.
My mathematical work was active but abortive. I made some attempts 
to apply the abstract way of thought which I had learned from Russell to 
topology, that strange branch of mathematics dealing with knots and other 
geometric shapes whose fundamental relations are not changed even by a 
thorough kneading of space so long as nothing is cut and no two remote 
points of space are joined. Topology includes the study of such things as the 
familiar one-sided Möbius’s sheet of paper, which you get when you take a 
long, flat strip, rotate one end of it through half a revolution, and glue the 
ends. It makes an excellent parlor trick to ask a layman what will happen to 
such a strip if you start cutting it down the middle until the ends of the cut 

240 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
meet. If you try this, you will find that even after the cut is complete the 
strip will remain in one piece but will now make a full revolution instead of 
half a revolution as you proceed around it.
Not many years later topology became the fashionable branch of math­
ematics, particularly in America, under the guidance of Oswald Veblen and 
J. W. Alexander. But by this time I had grown disappointed in the slowness 
in which my work led to positive results and had destroyed or lost the 
manuscript on topology which I had worked on at Columbia.
In the academic year 1915–16 I returned to Harvard as docent lecturer 
and assistant, and I gave a series of lectures in accordance with the pecu­
liar clause in the University statutes which conveys to every Ph.D. the 
privilege of giving such lectures strictly on his own responsibility. The 
subject I chose had to do with the work of Alfred North Whitehead, and 
my lectures were devoted to showing how mathematics might be based 
on processes of logical construction. Whitehead had shown by examples 
how such methods might secure for various mathematical concepts those 
properties which another mathematical school, that of the postulational­
ists, had sought as the consequences of rather arbitrary formal assumptions. 
For example, it was Whitehead who had thought of representing a point 
as the set of all areas which, according to more usual mathematical lan­
guage, would be said to contain this point. But my lectures ran into certain 
logical difficulties which were clearly pointed out to me by Professor G. D. 
Birkhoff of Harvard, to whom I shall have many occasions to refer later in 
this book.
He was a lean, tall, Michigan Dutchman, with the drawn face and tight 
mouth of a rigid Calvinist, and the first important American mathemati­
cian to have had all his training in America. He had written a brilliant 
dissertation on certain branches of dynamics, concerning in particular the 
mechanics of the planets, a field which had been outlined in France by 
Henri Poincaré. Birkhoff was fully conscious of his really great powers and 
was determined to become and to remain the first American mathemati­
cian in those classical branches of mathematics known as analysis, which 
constitute the extension and the elaboration of Newton’s calculus and 
physics.
He was, as I was later to learn, intolerant of possible rivals, and even 
more intolerant of possible Jewish rivals. He considered that the supposed 
early maturity of the Jews gave them an unfair advantage at the stage at 
which young mathematicians were looking for jobs, and he further consid­
ered that this advantage was particularly unfair, as he believed that the Jews 
lacked staying power. At the beginning I was too unimportant a youngster 

20: My Start as a Mathematician 
241
to attract much of his attention, but later on, as I developed more strength 
and achievement, I became his special antipathy, both as a Jew and, ulti­
mately, as a possible rival.
At the time at which I had first felt Birkhoff’s hostility I had not been 
fully aware of all the forces contributing to it and lying within me and my 
immediate environment. I have suggested that I was not a very amiable 
young man. Frankly it was scarcely to have been expected that I should 
have been amiable. I have spoken at length about the fact of my having 
been a prodigy, and I need not say much about the distaste which estab­
lished people felt when they were confronted with a youngster whom they 
did not know how to place. A career devoted to scientific achievement from 
the years of childhood leaves very little time for the cultivation of the social 
graces.
Even with all these things taken into account, I was an aggressive young­
ster. I felt at the bottom of my consciousness that it would take all the 
aggressiveness I might have to force success from the very ambiguous situ­
ation in which I found myself. Moreover, my father—who, notwithstand­
ing all the elements of conflict between us, was my ideal and my closest 
mentor—was himself a very aggressive personality.
I had heard many echoes of the somewhat trivial disagreements which 
my father had had with his colleagues, but I was not fully aware of the fact 
that in addition to these individual instances he had been regarded as an 
essentially quarrelsome man. Part of this reputation of his was justified, 
but an even more important part was due to a misunderstanding of his 
mercurial temperament by less mobile personalities. Many years after the 
event, I have come to learn that a not inappreciable element in Birkhoff’s 
antagonism toward me was due to his misunderstanding of my father and 
to the distaste with which he received my father’s somewhat uninhibited 
boastings concerning myself.
The next year found me at the University of Maine, where I had secured 
a job through a teachers’ agency. I felt humiliated that I could not get a 
job directly on the prestige of my academic record. The tribulations of this 
period of what I considered an exile belong to my previous volume and 
have been discussed there.
At the end of the academic year the United States entered the war. I 
tried unsuccessfully to join one of the services but was rejected everywhere 
because of my poor eyesight. I worked for a brief period at the General Elec­
tric works at Lynn, from which job I was withdrawn by my father for what 
he considered the better offer which I received: that of a hack writer on the 
Encyclopedia Americana at Albany.

242 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
I left this job to work, together with a mixed bag of civilian and military 
mathematicians, at the Aberdeen Proving Ground in Maryland. The work 
concerned problems of the design of range tables for artillery weapons. Here 
I spent more than half a year, first as a civilian and then as a soldier, where 
I fared rather poorly since the fact of having been an infant prodigy led 
me to commit many blunders which were not intended in a vicious spirit 
but which may have left a disagreeable impression of my whole personal­
ity. I was desperately unhappy under barracks conditions and did nothing 
to endear myself to my companions. I was honorably discharged from the 
service in February 1919.
After several months of newspaper hack writing, I composed a couple 
of scientific articles on algebra which were good enough in their own way, 
but which have remained completely off the beaten track. Then Professor 
W. F. Osgood of Harvard secured me an appointment as instructor in the 
department of mathematics of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Osgood was a friend of my father’s, and his sons had been to some slight 
extent my playmates years before. He was perhaps the chief representative 
of the German tradition in American mathematics, having studied at Göt­
tingen, where he married a German girl, and brought back the determina­
tion to live in America the life of a German professor. Perhaps I should 
say the life of a German privy councilor, because his model in all things 
was Felix Klein, who had been for years the pope of German mathematics 
and had enjoyed the exalted title of Geheimrat. Osgood was a sturdy man 
of ruddy complexion, already getting very bald, with a spreading spade 
beard after the European manner. He used to pontificate at the meetings of 
the Harvard Mathematics Club, where he smoked his cigar after a fashion 
which he had obviously learned from someone else, and which we later 
found he had got from Felix Klein himself. He would spear it with his pen­
knife and smoke the stub to the bitter end.
He wrote some of his books in a German of a very tolerable quality and 
had strong quasi-moralistic ideas of what was right and what was wrong in 
mathematics quite apart from any question of simple logical correctness. 
Those who worked under him found that he considered them bound by 
these ideas.
I have perhaps been insufficiently grateful to Professor Osgood for the 
really good turn he did me in securing me the call to the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology—or M.I.T., as it is more frequently known. There 
were, however, certain offsets to this act of kindness. For one thing, I never 
felt that I had earned any real esteem from him, nor did I feel that he had 
made me welcome at Harvard. Furthermore, jobs were plentiful with the 

20: My Start as a Mathematician 
243
resumption of normal life after the war. M.I.T. needed a large number of 
men for routine teaching. As far as the higher administration of M.I.T. was 
concerned at the time, routine teaching and nothing but routine teaching 
was the function of the mathematics department.
There were, it is true, a few devoted spirits in the M.I.T. mathematics 
department who hoped against hope that the day was to come when M.I.T. 
would take its place beside Harvard and Princeton as a great center of cre­
ative American mathematics. These mathematicians kept bravely defying 
an unfavorable environment, for M.I.T. was then simply an engineering 
school, and mathematics was regarded as only a tool to implement engi­
neering training. Nonetheless, they found a certain tolerant sympathy even 
if not much active co-operation from Professor H. W. Tyler, the head of the 
department. Professor Tyler, a small, active, bearded man, was not himself 
a research scholar and was originally quite content with his department 
as a service department: that is, as one contributing to the education of 
people whose real interests were in engineering fields. But, like every good 
administrator, he was ready to seize any opportunity for the advancement 
of his department, and later, when the chance for a certain research prestige 
came, he stood behind us.
Many of my colleagues were friendly, but the one who did the most to 
encourage me was C. L. E. Moore. He had the human gift of affection and 
a love for mathematics that stimulated others to reach a level to which he 
could never aspire himself. I wish to pay tribute here to the selflessness and 
the integrity of this tall, slightly awkward, humorous, and kindly man.
During my first years at M.I.T. I lived at home. My older sister, Con­
stance, had been through Radcliffe and was engaged in graduate study in 
mathematics at Chicago. The accounts she gave of her rather orthodox 
mathematical training excited my ambition but left me very much in 
doubt as to whether I was really aimed toward any large success. My younger 
sister, Bertha, was studying chemistry, first at Radcliffe and then later 
at M.I.T.
I tried to develop a certain social life at the time through the Sunday 
teas which my parents held at their house and among my sisters’ friends. 
In this life I remained clumsy and was still subject to the peremptory 
demands of my parents. They tried hard to pick my friends for me and to 
reject those whom they did not find suitable. In fact, they exercised a com­
plete right of veto over the young women to whom I was paying attention. 
This veto was governed more by what my parents conceived to be the girls’ 
reaction to the rest of the family than by any factor directly concerning me. 
It left me frustrated and confused and always more determined to make 

244 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
use of my summer vacations to get out from under the burden of family 
dominance.
The Institute of Technology was at least one place where family pressure 
could not easily follow me. I taught a heavy schedule, more than twenty 
hours a week, but I still found time not only to study mathematics but to 
create it. In the strength of my youth I spent the whole day at M.I.T., from 
nine in the morning to five in the evening, and even then I could find no 
greater delight than to pass my Sundays (Saturdays were working days) in 
my deserted office, my thoughts undisturbed by anyone. One fifth of what 
I did then would be too much for me now.
As to my amusements, besides the movies and the repertory company 
at the old Copley Theater, I went for walks in the Blue Hills or the Middle­
sex fells and undertook the construction of a crude toboggan with which 
to glide down the slopes behind the Mount Auburn cemetery. I had a few 
friends among my younger colleagues and the graduate students at Har­
vard. In the winter I used to walk on the ice to M.I.T. and to Boston from 
our home on Sparks Street, and in the spring and the autumn I engaged in 
a little mild and very incompetent tennis.
It was at M.I.T. too that my ever-growing interest in the physical aspects 
of mathematics began to take definite shape. The school buildings overlook 
the River Charles and command a never changing skyline of much beauty. 
The moods of the waters of the river were always delightful to watch. To me, 
as a mathematician and a physicist, they had another meaning as well. How 
could one bring to a mathematical regularity the study of the mass of ever 
shifting ripples and waves, for was not the highest destiny of mathematics 
the discovery of order among disorder? At one time the waves ran high, 
flecked with patches of foam, while at another they were barely noticeable 
ripples. Sometimes the lengths of the waves were to be measured in inches, 
and again they might be many yards long. What descriptive language could 
I use that would portray these clearly visible facts without involving me in 
the inextricable complexity of a complete description of the water surface? 
This problem of the waves was clearly one for averaging and statistics, and 
in this way was closely related to the Lebesgue integral, which I was study­
ing at the time. Thus, I came to see that the mathematical tool for which I 
was seeking was one suitable to the description of nature, and I grew ever 
more aware that it was within nature itself that I must seek the language 
and the problems of my mathematical investigations.
Of my many older colleagues at M.I.T., one in particular helped me to 
become aware of the physical side of mathematics. Henry Bayard Phillips, 
whose active days are not over yet, is a long, lean, ageless Carolinian who 

20: My Start as a Mathematician 
245
grew up during a period when the bad days after the Civil War were no 
remote memory. He was and is the complete individualist, with more inter­
est in doing new things than in publishing them. It was from Phillips, more 
than from anyone else, that I learned the importance to the pure mathema­
tician, of a physical attitude and that I became aware of the great work of 
Willard Gibbs on statistical mechanics. This was an intellectual landmark 
in my life.
Willard Gibbs, America’s greatest scientist, had himself worked in this 
middle ground and indeed had pioneered in it. He had lived a quiet, retired 
life at Yale, where he died in 1903, almost unknown to his students and col­
leagues. He made many contributions, both to physics and to mathematics, 
but the part of his work which has always been of the most interest to me 
was his statistical mechanics. And it is with respect to his work in this area 
that he exercised such a profound influence on my own career.
The great physical tradition of Newton had necessarily been one of 
determinism, where a perfect knowledge of the universe at one instant is 
understood to involve a perfect knowledge of its history throughout all 
time. It would have been Newton’s assumption that to give the present 
positions and speeds of the particles in a wave moving across the surface of 
the Charles would allow us to plot the movement of all this wave forever. 
Unfortunately, no perfect knowledge of the present is available to us with 
our limited measuring instruments, and the problem that faces the work­
ing physicist is to find out how far he can go with the imperfect knowledge 
available to him.
For this he must work not with a single, fixed universe but with many 
different universes simultaneously, each having some preassigned probabil­
ity. He cannot tell you what will always happen but what may happen at 
certain times, given certain conditions. This new physics of probability had 
been in the course of development for a considerable period, but it was 
toward its final clear formulation that the work of Gibbs was unquestion­
ably tending.
When I came to M.I.T., I was intellectually prepared to be influenced 
by the work of Gibbs. Just before my term work had started, Dr. I. Barnett, 
of Cincinnati, had turned up in Cambridge and had talked various math­
ematical and personal matters over with me. As this was the first time that 
I had taken on a really mature job in mathematics, I was curious as to what 
problem should form the center of my new work. I asked Barnett to suggest 
a new and lively problem, and he mentioned to me that a lot was being 
done on the generalization of the concept of probability to cover probabili­
ties where the various occurrences being studied were not to be represented 

246 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
by points or dots in a plane or in a space but by something of the nature of 
path curves in space.
For example, a one-point probability problem might concern the distri­
butions of bullet holes in a target and ask what we can say in advance about 
the way they will bunch in the bull’s eye. On the other hand, a curve prob­
ability problem will come up if we are asked to characterize the flight of a 
bee or, even better, the walk of a man who is so drunk that there is no rela­
tion at all between the direction of his previous step and his present step. If 
we put such a man in the center of a square field of given dimensions, how 
long will it take on the average for him to get out of that field?
This new concern with the probable outcome of irregular behavior has a 
certain historical significance. The early part of the twentieth century had 
seen a change in mathematics toward a more complicated world view. The 
great interest of the nineteenth century had been the study of points and 
of quantities depending on points. The new concern tried to do for curves 
what the older analysis had done for points.
The roots of this new emphasis were firm in the work of the nineteenth 
or even of the eighteenth century, which were concerned with the calcu­
lus of variations. The straightforward differential calculus of Newton and 
Leibnitz had discussed such maximum and minimum problems as those of 
the summit of a hill or the bottom of a bowl, or the related problem of the 
shape of a mountain pass. The calculus of variations discussed such prob­
lems as that of the quickest way of going from one point to another by a 
curve through a region in which the possible velocity of travel varies from 
point to point.
Yet, although the origins of a mathematics of maxima and minima for 
curves were very old, the full development of the subject was not so old. 
The world of curves has a richer texture than the world of points. It has 
been left for the twentieth century to penetrate into this full richness.
As a result of Barnett’s suggestions, I spent my first year at the Massachu­
setts Institute of Technology investigating various extensions of Lebesgue 
integration to systems more complicated than those discussed by Lebesgue 
himself. There was a paper already written in this field by a young French­
man named Gâteaux, who had been killed in the war. But this was only a 
fragment; and when I investigated it further it seemed to me to lead in the 
wrong direction.
There were also a number of papers that hinted at the subject by the Eng­
lish scholar P. J. Daniell, who was at that time teaching at the Rice Institute 
in Houston, Texas. Daniell’s work was to me far more satisfying than that 
of Gâteaux, and I used it as my own model. It did not, however, specifically 

20: My Start as a Mathematician 
247
concern families of curves, and the work in which I followed it up to cover 
this new field seemed to me at the time artificial and unsatisfying.
I was an avid reader of the journals, and in particular of the Proceedings 
of the London Mathematical Society. There I saw a paper by G. I. Taylor, later 
to become Sir Geoffrey Taylor, concerning the theory of turbulence. This is 
a field of essential importance for aerodynamics and aviation, and Sir Geof­
frey has for many years been a mainstay of British work in these subjects. 
The paper was allied to my own interests, inasmuch as the paths of air 
particles in turbulence are curves and the physical results of Taylor’s papers 
involve averaging or integration over families of such curves.
I may remark that in my later visits to England I got to know Taylor very 
well. He represents a peculiarly English type in science: the amateur with a 
professional competence. He is a famous yachtsman and has the open-air 
appearance which belongs to a yachtsman. Indeed, one of the accomplish­
ments of which he is most proud is that of the invention of a new type of 
anchor for yachts.
With Taylor’s paper behind me, I came to think more and more of the 
physical possibilities of a theory for averages over curves. The problem 
of turbulence was too complicated for immediate attack, but there was a 
related problem which I found to be just right for the theoretical consider­
ations of the field which I had chosen for myself. This was the problem of 
the Brownian motion, and it was to provide the subject of my first major 
mathematical work.
To understand the Brownian motion, let us imagine a pushball in a field 
in which a crowd is milling around. Various people in the crowd will run 
into the pushball and will move it about. Some will push in one direc­
tion and some in another, and the balance of pushes is likely to be toler­
ably even. Nevertheless, notwithstanding these balanced pushes, the fact 
remains that they are pushes by individual people and that their balance 
will be only approximate. Thus, in the course of time, the ball will wander 
about the field like the drunken man whom we have already mentioned 
and we shall have a certain irregular motion in which what happens in the 
future will have very little to do with what has happened in the past.
Now consider the molecules of a fluid, whether gas or liquid. These mol­
ecules will not be at rest but will have a random irregular motion like that 
of the people in the crowd. This motion will become more active as the 
temperature goes up. Let us suppose that we have introduced into this fluid 
a small sphere which can be pushed about by the molecules in much the 
way that the pushball is agitated by the crowd. If this sphere is extremely 
small we cannot see it, and if it is extremely large and suspended in a fluid, 

248 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
the collisions of the particles of the fluid with the sphere will average out 
sufficiently well so that no motion is observable. There is an intermediate 
range in which the sphere is large enough to be visible and small enough to 
appear under the microscope in a constant irregular motion. This agitation, 
which indicates the irregular movement of the molecules is known as the 
Brownian motion. It had first been observed by the microscopists of the 
eighteenth century as a universal agitation of all sufficiently small particles 
in the microscopic field.
Here I had a situation in which particles describe not only curves but 
statistical assemblages of curves. It was an ideal proving ground for my 
ideas concerning the Lebesgue integral in a space of curves, and it had the 
abundantly physical texture of the work of Gibbs. It was to this field that 
I had decided to apply the work that I had already done along the lines of 
integration theory. I met with a considerable degree of success.
The Brownian motion was nothing new as an object of study by physi­
cists. There were fundamental papers by Einstein and Smoluchowski that 
covered it, but whereas these papers concerned what was happening to any 
given particle at a specific time, or the long-time statistics of many particles, 
they did not concern themselves with the mathematical properties of the 
curve followed by a single particle.
Here the literature was very scant, but it did include a telling comment 
by the French physicist Perrin in his book Les Atomes, where he said in 
effect that the very irregular curves followed by particles in the Brown­
ian motion led one to think of the supposed continuous non-differentiable 
curves of the mathematicians. He called the motion continuous because 
the particles never jump over a gap and non-differentiable because at no 
time do they seem to have a well-defined direction of movement.
In the physical Brownian motion, it is of course true that the particle is 
not subject to an absolutely perpetual influence resulting from the collision 
of the molecules but that there are short intervals of time between one col­
lision and the next. These, however, are far too short to be observed by any 
ordinary methods. It therefore becomes natural to idealize the Brownian 
motion as if the molecules were infinitesimal in size and the collisions con­
tinuously described. It was this idealized Brownian motion which I studied, 
and which I found to be an excellent surrogate for the cruder properties of 
the true Brownian motion.
To my surprise and delight I found that the Brownian motion as thus 
conceived had a formal theory of a high degree of perfection and elegance. 
Under this theory I was able to confirm the conjecture of Perrin and to show 

20: My Start as a Mathematician 
249
that, except for a set of cases of probability o, all the Brownian motions 
were continuous non-differentiable curves.
The papers which I wrote on this subject were, I believe, the first to 
disclose anything very new—combining the Lebesgue technique of inte­
gration with the physical ideas of Gibbs. They did not solve certain of the 
problems that were implicit in the technical justification of Gibbs’s work, 
which were later to receive a solution in the sense of Lebesgue at the hands 
of Bernard Koopman, J. von Neumann, and G. D. Birkhoff. This, however, 
took place in 1930, when the idea that Gibbs and Lebesgue had something 
in common was no longer a complete novelty.
While I actually wrote my first papers on the Brownian motion, there 
was another phenomenon which was then coming into view, and which 
my work could equally be considered to describe. This was the so-called 
shot effect, which concerns the conduction of electric currents along a wire 
or through a vacuum tube in the form of a stream of discrete electrons. 
There is no way to create a discrete stream which will not at times lump the 
electrons and at other times leave the stream a little sparse. These irregu­
larities, the shot effect, are very small, but they can be amplified to audible 
proportions by the use of vacuum-tube amplifiers. This tube noise or con­
ductor noise is an important limiting effect in the use of electrical apparatus 
when heavily loaded.
In 1920 very little electrical apparatus was loaded to the point at which 
the shot effect becomes critical. However, the later development—first of 
broadcasting and then of radar and television—brought the shot effect to 
the point where it became the immediate concern of every communica­
tions engineer. This shot effect not only was similar in its origin to the 
Brownian motion, for it was a result of the discreteness of the universe, but 
had essentially the same mathematical theory.
Thus, my work on the Brownian motion became some twenty years later 
a vital tool for the electrical engineer. However, for a considerable period 
my work was as if stillborn. When at last I came to write my earliest papers 
on the Brownian motion—during my summer in Strasbourg, of which I 
shall speak in the next chapter—I did not make any great stir in the world 
of mathematics.
The stir that a paper makes depends not only on its inner merits but on 
the interests of the other workers in the field. As far as American mathemat­
ics went, Veblen and Birkhoff were the great names in the period immedi­
ately following World War I. Veblen was interested in topology, of which 
I have already spoken, and believed that it was his destiny to introduce 
this abstract field as a new American mathematics, in contrast to what he 

250 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
considered the effete and dying European mathematics of analysis, of the 
differential and integral calculus. He contributed to the birth of a valu­
able mathematical subject, but his concern with the health of analysis has 
proved to be at least premature. At any rate, I was too committed to this 
field to accept the mandates of the new fashion.
Birkhoff was an analyst. As I have said, he had become the unquestioned 
leader of American analysis and was determined to keep this position. He 
had persuaded himself that true analysis meant primarily those fields of 
dynamics in which Poincaré had worked and to which Birkhoff himself had 
made major contributions. For him, everything else was to be relegated to 
the limbo of “special problems.”
Thus there was no scope for my work in the eyes of the leaders of Ameri­
can mathematics until many years later, when a new generation had arisen, 
and when the pressing needs of industry and of the war had shown that the 
problems which I had solved or on which I had thrown light really merited 
attention.
My reception in Europe was much better than it was here. Maurice 
Fréchet, with whom I was to spend the summer of 1920, took a mild inter­
est in my work, which in many ways was in the spirit of his own. His 
younger colleague Paul Lévy had already begun to pursue related directions 
of thought. Taylor in England was receptive to my ideas.
My old teacher Hardy was kind to one who had been his student and 
offered me great encouragement at a time when it was not easy to come by 
that commodity. Even so, I was regarded in Europe as well as in the United 
States as a young man of a certain peripheral ability rather than as one of 
the mainstays of the coming generation.
Be that as it may, I was fully convinced of the importance of my new 
ideas, all the more as they organized themselves quite rapidly into a subject 
with a neat little formalism of its own. The stuff felt right, and even at that 
time it would not have surprised me to learn that it would have a consider­
able future. In order to understand the ramifications of my work, I had to 
study much more than I had already known concerning waves and vibra­
tions or, in mathematical terms, Fourier series, the Fourier integral, and 
the like. I began to make myself thoroughly familiar with those branches 
of mathematics which had already proved to be of physical significance. 
All this dovetailed into the desire of my colleagues at M.I.T. that I interest 
myself in applied mathematics. From this time on, my work was never ran­
dom and desultory but had a definite direction in which I could naturally 
proceed.

20: My Start as a Mathematician 
251
Mathematics is very largely a young man’s game. It is the athleticism 
of the intellect, making demands which can be satisfied to the full only 
when there is youth and strength. After one or two promising papers, many 
young mathematicians who have shown signs of ability sink into that very 
same limbo which surrounds yesterday’s sports heroes.
Yet it is not bearable to contemplate a brief distinction and burgeoning 
of activity which is to be followed by a lifetime of boredom. If the career 
of a mathematician is to be anything but an anti-climactic one, he must 
devote this brief springtime of top creative ability to the discovery of new 
fields and new problems, of such richness and compelling character that he 
can scarcely exhaust them in his lifetime. It has been my good fortune that 
the problems which excited me as a youth, and which I did a considerable 
amount to initiate, still do not seem to have lost their power to make maxi­
mum demands on me in my sixtieth year.
Do not think for a moment that my new success made a hero of me in 
my own home. My father was gratified by my industry and my apparent 
ability to produce work which at least pleased myself; but at that time my 
own self-laudatory claims did not receive much of an echo from his col­
leagues. My father was no longer sufficiently active and interested in math­
ematics to judge my work on its own merits.


21  The International Mathematical Congress of 1920 at 
Strasbourg
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
21: 
The 
International 
Mathematical 
Congress 
of 
1920 
at 
Strasbourg
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
In the present chapter as well as in those to come I shall have occasion to 
write about my various visits abroad. These visits represent an essential part 
of both my personal and my scientific life. They have not by any means 
been mere junkets, or interludes which have concerned me solely for my 
amusement, although they have in fact been very gratifying to me. Let me 
explain something of what they have meant to me, and in particular what 
was the significance of my 1920 trip.
In this, as well as in all other matters concerning my history, it is neces­
sary to go back to my father. My father’s formal education had been entirely 
European, and although he had gone to the Gymnasium and for a brief 
period to a medical school in Russian Poland, he was quite aware that his 
chief educational affiliations had been German. The high level of the Ger­
man Gymnasium, or classical secondary school, had led to its dominance 
throughout central and eastern Europe. All educated eastern Europeans had 
something of a German education.
But in addition, Father had a particular connection with German educa­
tion. His own father had been a journalist with the Yiddish press but was a 
great enthusiast for the pure German language, which he vastly preferred to 
Yiddish. One day he decided to change the language of his journal, which 
was published in Byelostok, from Yiddish to High German. Naturally this 
cost him almost all his subscribers, and from that time on my grandfather’s 
career had been uniformly unsuccessful.
Owing to these circumstances, my father had been brought up with lit­
erary German as his home language. Later on, he went to Berlin for a few 
months of engineering training at the old Berlin Institute of Technology, 
at a time at which this school had not yet moved from the center of Berlin 
to its famous later site in Charlottenburg. Father’s academic training there 
was brief and stormy. He ultimately left Germany (of which country he was 

254 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
a subject) to engage in a nebulous scheme for founding a humanitarian 
vegetarian colony somewhere in Central America.
The scheme was never well conceived. The other young man who was to 
come over with Father soon found that he had no stomach for the adven­
ture. Father was stranded, penniless, in New Orleans, and never got to Cen­
tral America at all. For some years he led a Huckleberry Finn existence in 
the West and in the South.
Finally he found it possible to return by a roundabout path to the 
career for which he was most fitted: that of linguistics. He taught for a period 
at the Kansas City Central High School and later at the University of 
Missouri, from which he came on a venture to Harvard and attracted the 
attention of Professor Francis Child, the editor of Scottish Ballads. This led to an 
instructorship at Harvard and finally, after many years, to the chair of Slavic 
Languages and Literatures.
Father was an enthusiastic scholar, with interests spreading well beyond 
the field of Slavic languages. He had fancied himself as a great scholar after 
the German pattern. This caused a considerable ambivalence in him.
On the one hand, he was essentially a German liberal of a type well 
known in the middle and later nineteenth century, fully in sympathy with 
the German intellectual tradition as it had come down from the time when 
Goethe had been a truer symbol of German aspirations than the Emperor 
Wilhelm II ever was to become. Separated as my father was from Germany, 
largely self-educated, and outside the orthodox German academic tradi­
tion, he still hoped for many years that by sheer intellectual strength and 
integrity he could win from Germany the recognition accorded to a great 
German scholar.
In this expectation Father had never been completely realistic. He was 
too innocently honest a man to be worldly-wise. It took him many years to 
learn how the great German intellectual tradition had come to be subservi­
ent to a group of vested interests in learning. The really great advances of 
the German Empire after the Franco-Prussian War had brought with them 
a not inconsiderable degree of the spirit of the climber and the worshiper 
of material success. I must admit there were many men in the German uni­
versities who were willing to accept new ideas from any source whatever. 
For all this, as the years went on, the entry to the inner circles of German 
intellectual life became more and more difficult for the outsider to achieve. 
This was particularly true in fields like philology and linguistics, in which a 
definite decision as to the merit of new work is difficult or impossible. The 
doors of complete recognition were closed to my father.

21: The International Mathematical Congress of 1920 at Strasbourg 
255
When Father visited Germany about the beginning of the century, and 
again later in 1914, he found himself far more of an outsider than he had 
expected or even feared. This hurt him. He came to resent and indeed to 
hate Germany, with the sort of hatred which one reserves for those kins­
men who, one feels, have let one down unjustly.
This hatred was reinforced by the political and social changes he had 
observed in the new Germany.
In addition to that, he did not like what he had seen of German milita­
rism just before the First World War. He came to be one of the chief Ameri­
can supporters of the point of view of the Allies—of France and England. 
Together with Professor Bierwirth of the German department of Harvard, 
another ardent anti-militarist, he would walk down Brattle Street every 
morning berating Germany in the German language. The very intensity 
of his emotion marked a personal involvement in European matters which 
was entirely different from the potential isolationism of the average Ameri­
can and even of the average American scholar.
My father was a great enthusiast for America and for most of what was 
American, but at the same time an enthusiast from outside. He was deeply 
critical of much in America, and in particular of the shallowness of a great 
part of American education. The explicit intensity of his love for America 
and the specific character of that love were perhaps the least American 
things about him. He loved America, that is, as if it had been his personal 
discovery, rather than a background so close to him that he could take it 
for granted.
We had been in the habit of entertaining at our house a number of Euro­
pean scholars, who were largely liberal and disaffected toward the actual 
state of affairs in Europe. Some of them were among the great reformers 
of the beginning of the twentieth century. We had as house guests, for 
instance, Thomas Masaryk, later to become president of Czechoslova­
kia and the greatest elder statesman of Europe; Paul Milyukov, historian, 
economist, member of the Russian Duma and finally associate of Keren­
sky; Father Palmieri of the Propaganda, the chief Catholic authority on the 
Eastern Church and its various Uniat churches which had drifted into the 
orbit of Catholicism; and, during the World War itself, Michael Yatsevich, 
the Siberian engineer to whose lot it had fallen to draw up many contracts 
for Imperial Russia and to secure the moneys arising from them against the 
claims of the Communists, for some future non-Communistic and possibly 
democratic Russia.
Thus it was a familiar part of our life to hear foreign languages spoken in 
the household. My father, indeed, could speak some forty of them. He was 

256 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
so proficient in linguistic matters that his insistence as a teacher on accu­
racy and fluency had the somewhat surprising effect of almost completely 
inhibiting the efforts of my mother and of us children to speak more than 
one language.
With this background it was inevitable that I should develop a great 
curiosity about Europe and a profound thirst for the springs of European 
scholarship. These factors were supplemented by others pertaining more 
directly to myself and to my own interests. My years in England and, to 
a slighter extent, my term at Gӧttingen had constituted almost the first 
true relief I had found from the intensity of our home life and my parental 
pressure. My earlier research training had been primarily English and, to a 
lesser extent, German. The friendly recognition which I had already begun 
to find in Europe contrasted sharply with the sense of rejection which I had 
experienced around Harvard.
At the English universities, it is true, there is a certain gentleman’s pre­
tense that one is an amateur and not too deeply concerned in the hard and 
grinding work of scholarship. This was generally understood to be a pose. It 
did not require any great insight to see that those very men who conformed 
to the convention of the pococurante were tremendously excited about 
ideas and more than eager to talk about them. At Harvard, on the other 
hand, the pose of a lack of interest in creative scholarly work was more 
than a convention. The typical Harvard man considered it bad taste to talk 
too much and to think too much about science. The effort of trying to be a 
gentleman was enough of a strain on his resources.
It is thus easy to understand how the end of the war found me starved 
for European contacts and only too eager to return to the relative freedom 
of a European trip. Here the strong hand of the family could scarcely reach 
me. But there was still another reason why the trip tempted me: the coming 
International Mathematical Congress at Strasbourg.
Normally, in all fields of science, it has been the custom, say every four 
years, for those working together in a major subject like mathematics or 
physics or chemistry to foregather in some central place, read papers, and 
talk over the problems of their work. The first great war (alas!) interrupted 
these indications of the universal humanity of science, and the present 
alignment of the world into two hostile camps has tended to frustrate these 
meetings still further.
The last International Mathematical Congress before the war had taken 
place in England in 1912, at Cambridge. The congress which was to have 
taken place in 1916 was clearly impossible and was allowed to go by 
the board. The next one, in 1920, did not find any adequate machinery 

21: The International Mathematical Congress of 1920 at Strasbourg 
257
established for its organization. France decided to step into the gap and 
celebrate an international congress in the newly re-Gallicized city of Stras­
bourg and at its university, now French. This had become the second uni­
versity of France and the only provincial university with a great tradition 
of its own.
In many ways this was an unfortunate decision. It was one which later 
led me to regret my little share in sanctioning the meeting by my presence. 
The Germans were excluded as a sort of punitive measure. In my mature, 
considered opinion, punitive measures are out of place in international sci­
entific relations. Perhaps it would have been impossible to hold a truly 
international meeting for another couple of years, but this delay would 
have been preferable to what actually did take place, the nationalization of 
a truly international institution. All that I can say for myself is that I was 
young and that I did not feel myself in a position of direct personal respon­
sibility for the course taken by international science. I was avid to seize the 
opportunity to revisit Europe with a certain small scientific status.
I hoped that I would be able to use the period before the opening of 
the Congress in September in working with some European scholar in 
whose field I was interested. The scholar I chose was Maurice Fréchet. It 
was Fréchet more than anyone else who had seen what was implied in 
the new mathematics of curves rather than of points, the field of which I 
have spoken in the last chapter. At that time we all had great expectations 
that his work was to mark the next great step toward the mathematics of 
the future.
Let me say that at the present time Fréchet’s work has proved to be very 
important but less central than we had expected. It is written in a spirit of 
abstract formalism which is fundamentally hostile to any deep physical 
application. However, hindsight is easier than foresight, and it would have 
been somewhat difficult when we were at Strasbourg to predict that Fréchet 
was not to be the absolute leader of the mathematicians of his generation.
One of the specific things which attracted me to Fréchet was that the 
spirit of his work was closely akin to the work I had tried to do at Colum­
bia on topology. My training with Russell and my later contact with the 
work of Whitehead had sensitized me to the use of formal logical tools 
in mathematics, and there was much in Fréchet’s work which was suited 
from the very beginning to be embodied in the peculiar and highly original 
mathematico-logical language which Whitehead and Russell had devised 
for the Principia Mathematica.
But in order for me to describe the main events at Strasbourg in 1920 
I must first write in some detail about the terms “postulationalism” and 

258 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
“constructionalism.” This dichotomy of method is one of the central issues 
of modern mathematics and was of great concern to me at the Strasbourg 
conference.
The geometry of the Greeks went back to certain initial assumptions, 
known variously as axioms or postulates, which were conceived to be 
unbreakable rules of logical and geometrical thought. Some of these were 
of a predominantly formal and logical character, such as the axiom that 
quantities equal to the same quantity must be equal to each other. Another, 
with a more purely spatial content, was that known as the parallel axiom, 
which asserts that if we have a plane containing a line l and a point P 
not on that line, then through P and in that plane one and only one line 
can be drawn that will not intersect l. This will, of course, be the line 
parallel to l.
This postulate does not have the simple obviousness of the purely logi­
cal postulates of mathematics. And generations of mathematicians have 
sought exceptions to it. In the eighteenth century the Italian mathemati­
cian Saccheri spent a considerable amount of effort to ring the changes 
on the parallel postulate with the hope that any denial of this assumption 
would have to lead sooner or later to a logical contradiction. He did a bril­
liant job with the various modifications of the axiom, but his effort was 
unsuccessful. In fact, the more he tried to draw a contradiction out of the 
denial of the postulate, the larger was the body of doctrine which he was 
able to derive from this denial. In fact, this body of doctrine amounted 
to a geometry which was essentially different from the usual geometry of 
Euclid, but which was rather grotesque than self-contradictory.
Finally, in the beginning of the nineteenth century, a group of math­
ematicians including John Bolyai, in Hungary; Lobachevski, in Russia; and 
ultimately the great Gauss, in Germany, came to the bold conclusion that 
there was no contradiction in denying the parallel postulate, but merely 
a new and different, non-Euclidean geometry. From that time on it came 
to be more and more clearly understood that the so-called postulates of 
geometry, and indeed of other mathematical sciences, were not undeniable 
truths. They came to be regarded as assumptions which we could make or 
refuse to make concerning the particular mathematical systems which we 
wished to study further.
This tentative attitude in mathematics, in which the postulates became 
suppositions made for the sake of further work rather than fundamental 
principles of thought, gradually began to be the standard point of view of 
mathematicians in all countries. In America one of its earlier exponents, 
and perhaps its chief early exponent, was Edward Vermilye Huntington, of 

21: The International Mathematical Congress of 1920 at Strasbourg 
259
Harvard, with whom I had studied in 1912, and who had exerted a great 
influence on my ways of thought.
Whitehead had been perhaps the chief English postulationalist, but he 
supplemented a pure postulationalism with the view that the objects of 
mathematics were logical constructions rather than simply the original 
concepts described in the postulates. For example, at times he regarded a 
point as the set of all convex regions which in our ordinary language might 
be considered to contain this point. As a matter of fact, Huntington has for­
mulated very similar ideas quite independently, and an important essay in 
this direction had been made by the philosopher Josiah Royce several years 
earlier. But the classical example of constructionalism in mathematics is the 
definition of the whole numbers which occurs in the Principia Mathematica 
of Whitehead and Russell.
The distinction between the postulationalist treatment of numbers 
and the constructionalist treatment described by Whitehead and Russell 
is that in postulationalism the numbers are undefined objects which are 
connected by a set of assumed formal relations and specific things which 
can be built up out of our experience by definite modes of combination of 
even more elementary experience. A postulationalist treatment of numbers 
makes them simply objects to be arranged in a before-and-after relation so 
that if a is before b and b is before c, a is before c, and every number other 
than o has another number immediately before it, and so on. These are 
some of the postulates in such a treatment of the number system.
In the constructionalist treatment of numbers, a unit set is taken as a 
set of entities all of which are the same. The number 1 then becomes the set 
of all unit sets. A diad is a set of entities which is not a unit set but which 
becomes a unit set on the removal of any one of its component entities. 
Two is now the set of all diads. A triad is a set of entities which is neither 
a unit set nor a diad but which becomes a diad when any one entity is 
removed. Three is the set of all triads. In this way, and by the process known 
as mathematical induction, the complete set of all the natural numbers can 
be built up.
To the layman all of this will perhaps sound rather like empty logic 
chopping. Have we not in fact used the numbers 1, 2, and 3 in only a 
slightly obscured form when we built up these definitions of the earlier 
whole numbers? But to the logician this objection does not seem cogent 
for the greater precision of thought given to these definitions furnishes 
him with a firm ground on which to stand and from which to advance to 
further mathematical ideas.

260 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
The trick of building up more and more complicated mathematical 
objects as sets of sets and relations between relations had become familiar 
to me both from the work of Huntington and from that of Russell. I had 
indeed already written two or three essays in the application of this tech­
nique to the construction of certain elementary mathematical situations.
Postulationalism and constructionalism, as I have so far described them, 
do not represent movements only in mathematics. Postulationalism in par­
ticular is shared by physics. The relativity of Einstein and the new quantum 
mechanics both constitute regions in which physics has burst the frame of 
classical Euclidean geometry and assumed new definitions which are given 
rather as sets of explicit axioms than as a rigid and irreplaceable spatial 
intuition, as the older Kantian theory of space demanded.
It is true of course that the tendency to postulate for the sake of postulat­
ing and to write papers for the sake of writing papers characterizes a con­
siderable amount of the newer mathematics. Nevertheless, the cold, hard 
medium of logic, like the cold hard medium of marble, imposes a certain 
internal discipline on all but the most vacuous and trivial mathematicians, 
even when they favor the newer mode of freedom.
As I have said, I was brought up in the postulationalist tradition and 
shared in the early years of the constructionalist tradition which arose 
therefrom. When I looked for a French scholar with whom to study, I 
looked for one whose work might embody one or both of these two direc­
tions of thought. As far as these demands were concerned, Fréchet had no 
rival among French mathematicians.
So far I have spoken of the new direction of thought largely from the 
Anglo-American point of view. In Germany, too, there had been some early 
exponents both of postulationalism and of constructionalism, and here 
the leading and most original names were those of G. Frege and Schrӧder. 
France, on the other hand, was rather late to adopt these newer habits of 
thought, but, as far as France had gone in postulationalism, Fréchet was 
the unquestioned leader. I myself had made one or two not completely 
unsuccessful attempts to supplement Fréchet’s postulationalism as a tool 
for the study of new and more complicated spaces of curves by means of a 
constructionalist attitude. This new effort was, however, outside the inner 
frame of Fréchet’s own work.
I wrote to Fréchet to find out if he was willing to take me on as a dis­
ciple during the summer vacation preceding the Strasbourg congress, and I 
received in return a cordial letter of invitation from him. His first plans had 
been to spend his holidays in Béarn, on the Spanish border. Later, however, 
he changed his mind and invited me to come and work with him, first in 

21: The International Mathematical Congress of 1920 at Strasbourg 
261
Strasbourg, and then in a little country village in Lorraine which has the 
German name of Dagsburg and the French name of Dabo.
Early in July, I embarked for France in the French Line steamer La 
Touraine with some family acquaintances who had promised my parents 
to keep an eye on me during the voyage. However, the gin-soaked twen­
ties were already upon us, and I found that my friends’ ideas of what was 
becoming on an ocean voyage were incompatible with my rather puritani­
cal personal habits.
I had never been a teetotaler. I enjoyed the wine we had with our meals 
on the boat, which I diluted plentifully with water. On the other hand, I 
did not like distilled liquors, and I protested vigorously against the conven­
tion under which my acquaintances pressed me to drink. I find this habit of 
urging drink upon a person who manifestly does not want it, quite as much 
an infringement of personal liberty as any blue-nosed prohibitionism can 
be. Thus, I was not happy on the boat and I made no friends. I was eager to 
land and to get away from my companions of the voyage.
But before we landed we had an interesting and not altogether pleas­
ant experience of another sort. It had been an overcast voyage, and we 
were unable to shoot the sun for several days. We were going full speed 
ahead by dead reckoning, for these were the days in which wireless was sim­
ply a means of communication rather than an aid to navigation through 
an accurate system of cross bearings. We were due to make our landfall at 
Bishop Rock when suddenly we saw rocks looming from the fog all about 
us. The engines were set full speed astern, but not before we got into dif­
ficult waters.
While backing out we ripped a considerable hole in our stem. Water 
came in to the steerage compartment. I am told that there were the begin­
nings of a panic. This was controlled by the ship’s officers together with a 
French prize-fighter passenger whose prestige was enough to keep order.
We were all sent down to our quarters to put on our life belts. It was not 
pleasant coming up on deck again in the midst of the milling crowd. I felt 
that I would like to be on deck as quickly as possible, but I also felt that any 
attempt to rush the matter or to get ahead of other people would not only 
be an act of cowardice but an act of treason to our common welfare. I forced 
myself to make way for others and to go up at a measured pace.
When we came on deck we still did not know what awaited us. The 
ship was taking in water, and the bulkheads threatened to give way. The 
ship’s carpenter did yeoman work reinforcing them so that they did in 
fact hold throughout our trip across the channel to Le Havre. But still we 
were ordered to spend the night on deck, sleeping in our life belts by our 

262 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
boat stations. I remember that somebody dropped a bottle by my head 
as I slept.
We disembarked at Le Havre on the next morning without further inci­
dent, but the boat had been damaged far beyond our knowledge and was 
taken out of service for many months. There was mail awaiting me on shore. 
I learned that Fréchet was not quite ready to receive me yet, so after a few 
hours I recrossed the Channel to Southampton and went up to Cambridge.
At Cambridge I found some old friends waiting for me. I stayed with 
Dr. and Mrs. Bernard Muscio, a couple of Australian psychologists. I had 
known them in my student days at Cambridge, and they had visited Boston 
a few years before on an English war mission. I looked up a number of other 
acquaintances, including Hardy, who was about to leave Cambridge for a 
chair at Oxford.
In general I found that I had not been forgotten at Cambridge and that 
my colleagues were glad to give me that cordial reception which I had never 
received at Harvard. I had not been matriculated at Cambridge, as I had 
gone there on the basis of a special arrangement with Harvard University, 
permitting me to take courses without that formality. Years afterward I 
asked Jessie Whitehead, the daughter of Alfred North Whitehead, whether 
I could consider myself a Cambridge man. Under the circumstances, she 
said, the best that I could call myself was an illegitimate son of Alma Mater. 
At any rate, I have found Alma Mater more than ready to accept her by-
blow into the family.
After a few days I left for Paris, where I stayed in a cheap hotel with unbe­
lievably bad sanitary accommodations near the Louvre. I did not find my 
vegetarianism much in my way in France, for there was a wealth of cheap 
restaurants with good and appetizing vegetable dishes. I had no friends in 
Paris, nor was my French at that time more than barely usable. Moreover, 
the Paris café and street life shocked my youthful puritanism, and I was 
profoundly homesick and unhappy.
It seemed to me as if the house doors of a great city were a serried wall 
of fortifications, impregnable to the foreigner. I spent my abundant lei­
sure walking the streets of the city and visiting the museums, particularly 
one tidbit to which a French-trained friend in America had alerted me: the 
Museum of the Ecole Centrale des Arts-et-Métiers, in which the remains of 
the inventions of the nineteenth century and the apparatus used for great 
scientific experiments were conserved in a peculiarly French sort of dusty 
disorder.
Fréchet had made an appointment with me, first at a lycée on the Boule­
vard Saint-Michel, where he was grading examinations, and later for lunch 

21: The International Mathematical Congress of 1920 at Strasbourg 
263
at an Alsatian brasserie on the same boulevard. He was a mustached, sinewy, 
athletic man of medium height. He had served in the French army as an 
interpreter for the British, and he was as enthusiastic for walks and tours as 
I was. We hit it off well together. He was, however, still not ready to receive 
me at once in Strasbourg, so I made a little detour into Belgium to visit 
some friends before I should settle down for work with Fréchet. I found my 
friends in their fine old house in Louvain, which had just been restored 
from the disorder and filth in which it had been left by the German officers 
who occupied it during the war, but my trip was badly timed, as it coin­
cided with a visit of President A. L. Lowell of Harvard and his wife. Thus 
my entertainment was largely a matter for the children, and in particular 
for a young son of the family who had just completed a year at the Harvard 
Law School. He took me about the burned and ruined town and showed 
me the remains of the library, the town hall, and the nave of the church, 
half blocked with scaffolding. He also took me on various walks about the 
countryside and gave me his confidences.
Now that he was free of the Harvard atmosphere, he felt at liberty to 
protest against certain matters of English and American legal education. He 
did not like the case system and greatly preferred the a priori way in which 
those countries deriving their jurisprudence from Roman law search for 
legal principles rather than for legal precedents.
A few days later I traveled to Strasbourg by way of Luxembourg and the 
iron country. It was a relief for me to find myself in a region where German 
was spoken more freely than French, for German was a language at which 
I was decidedly more proficient. I settled in a boarding house in a new part 
of the city. Every day or every other day at the least I had a few hours’ con­
sultation with Fréchet in the garden of his little house beside the Ill–Rhine 
Canal.
There were two or three points in Fréchet’s work which I tried to extend. 
Fréchet’s treatment of more generalized spaces had made no use of what 
we know as co-ordinates: that is, he had made no attempt to represent his 
points by sets of numbers. In the co-ordinate representation of space, any 
two points at the ends of a line interval are measured by the difference 
between corresponding numbers at one terminus and at the other. In ordi­
nary geometry of two or of three dimensions, this method of representing a 
line segment is known as its vector representation. For example, given one 
point in three-dimensional space, I can locate another with respect to it by 
saying how far I have to go north from the first point, how far east, and 
how far up, to get to the second point.

264 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
The theory of vectors is not new in mathematics. For well over a century 
and a half it has been known that an ordinary space of three dimensions 
contains in itself directed quantities like arrows, which can be added to 
one another, as for example by traversing the step indicated by one arrow 
and then the subsequent step indicated by another and by considering this 
double step as if it were a single step. It is beside the point here to go into 
the many operations which can be conducted with these directed steps, but 
it has long been known that similar geometries exist in spaces of more than 
three dimensions and, in fact, in spaces of an infinity of dimensions.
Fréchet’s generalized theory of limits and of differentials applies to many 
sorts of spaces, including vector spaces, but is not necessarily confined to 
those spaces in which the elements may be regarded as steps. On the other 
hand, this geometry of steps constitutes a very important part of Fréchet’s 
general theory and was worth solidifying with an appropriate set of pos­
tulates. Fréchet had not done this, nor did he consider these particular 
vector systems as peculiarly important among those which he had con­
sidered. This was the task which I had performed. It was very closely allied 
to the theory of the combination of successive transformations which is 
known as group theory, and in fact it constitutes a significant chapter of 
that theory.
However, I gave a full set of axioms for vector spaces. Fréchet liked it, but 
did not seem particularly struck with the result. But then, a few weeks later, 
he became quite excited when he saw an article published by Stefan Banach 
in a Polish mathematical journal which contained results practically identi­
cal with those I had given, neither more nor less general. Banach’s concep­
tion of his ideas and his publication of them were both a few months earlier 
than my own. There had, however, been no chance for communication 
between us, and the degree of originality of the two papers was identical.
Thus the two pieces of work, Banach’s and my own, came for a time to be 
known as the theory of Banach-Wiener spaces. For thirty-four years it has 
remained a popular direction of work. Although many papers have been 
written on it, only now is it beginning to develop its full effectiveness as a 
scientific method.
For a short while I kept publishing a paper or two on this topic, but I 
gradually left the field. At present these spaces are quite justly named after 
Banach alone.
There were several motives which led me to abandon this brain child, 
of whom I was at least one of the parents. The first was that I did not like 
to be hurried or to watch the literature day by day in order to be sure 
that neither Banach nor one of his Polish followers had published some 

21: The International Mathematical Congress of 1920 at Strasbourg 
265
important result before me. All mathematical work is done under sufficient 
pressure, and its increase by such a fortuitous competitive element is intol­
erable to me.
But the important reasons for my accepting or rejecting any specific piece 
of work have to do with the much-neglected field of mathematical aesthet­
ics. To ask exactly what I mean by this poses a peculiarly difficult prob­
lem, for I must convey to the non-mathematician not only the substance 
and the texture of the mathematical work I have done but my emotional 
responses to it. I shall have to tell him my reasons for rejecting certain 
problems which have proved interesting to other people for a considerable 
number of years but do not seem to me to offer the same opportunities for 
my own vein of work and for the display of my own mathematical taste and 
for my particular individual powers.
This leads to a problem which must be faced in one form or other by any 
autobiographer who has done significant work in a difficult and private 
field like mathematics. A composer cannot avoid paying a certain amount 
of attention to the techniques of composition, and to aspects of harmony 
and counterpoint which are the very substance of his work but which can 
be appreciated only in a very limited degree even by the devoted concert­
goer who has not himself faced the task of musical composition. The writer 
or the painter is no less involved in this problem if he goes in for autobi­
ography. He may seem to address himself to the educated layman who can 
appreciate the results of his creative work. However, he has not completely 
performed the task of the autobiographer unless at the same time he has 
managed to express himself concerning those tasks of writing and of paint­
ing which can be fully appreciated only by the man who himself has faced 
them on a high professional level.
But the creative artist and even the creative musician are better able to 
attract the attention of the lay reader than the mathematician. The layman 
is easily convinced that, whether he is himself immersed in these creative 
tasks or not, a degree of information concerning the nature of their cre­
ativity belongs to his status as a cultured man. He is further aided by the 
fact that, even for the reader who makes no claim to the understanding of 
the full technical means by which a specific emotional effect is reached, 
there is a direct appreciation of the emotional effects of the arts, sufficient 
to lead the layman to a sincere effort to understand how the artist arrives 
in detail at beauties which the appreciative observer may see only as an 
accomplished whole.
The specific difficulty of the mathematician when he undertakes auto­
biography is that the layman does not conceive it to be any part of his 

266 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
aesthetic and cultural duty to understand the least thing about mathemat­
ics. For him, mathematics is likely to be a dull, dry, and formal subject. If 
the general public ever thinks of mathematics, it sees it at best as a tool for 
the physicist and the statistician and at worst as something closely akin 
to the work of the accountant. Hardly any non-mathematician will admit 
that mathematics has a cultural and aesthetic appeal, that it has anything 
to do with beauty or power or emotion.
I categorically deny this cold and rigid concept of mathematics. A piece 
of mathematics may have the virtues of logic and rigor yet, in the technical 
opinion of the trained observer, it may be insensitive and purely formal. 
To other mathematicians, the task of the mathematician is to use a rigid 
and demanding medium to express a new and significant vision of some 
aspect of the universe; to express aperçus which reveal something new and 
something exciting. If his medium is strict and confining, so are in fact 
the media of all creative artists. The counterpoint of the musician does not 
interfere with his perceptivity, nor is a poet less free because his language 
has a grammar or his sonnets a form. To be free to do anything whatever is 
to be free to do nothing.
What differentiates the appeal of the artist-mathematician from the 
artist-sculptor and the artist-musician is not the unemotionality of his 
public but the strict discipline necessary to become a connoisseur of math­
ematics. It is quite possible to imagine a community of musical composers 
whose primary satisfaction will arise from the interchange of the musical 
scores they have composed. They might well be relatively indifferent to 
the performance of these scores at concerts attended by those capable of 
understanding them only through the vaguer channels of receptive emo­
tional feeling.
That the mathematician displays this aloofness from his public is indeed 
due not so much to an intellectual-aesthetic snobbery as to the very high 
degree of training at which it is necessary for the amateur to arrive in order 
to acquire even an appreciative relation to the content which is presented 
him and to the fact that, short of this technical appreciation, there seems 
to be no channel through which the layman can get to feel anything at all, 
even passively.
This limitation is not as absolute as it may seem at first sight. There is 
actually a considerable and growing public of trained engineers and natural 
scientists who, while their first interest may have originally been in the 
use and application of mathematics to purely utilitarian ends, have nev­
ertheless acquired a sufficient background to appreciate a powerful theory 
or a clever and elegant proof. At least part of my motive in writing this 

21: The International Mathematical Congress of 1920 at Strasbourg 
267
book is to call the attention of the public at large to the existence of this 
more limited public of amateur mathematicians. I also mean to give to the 
reader outside this small circle at least a hint of the thrill of mathematical 
creation.
It is thus in an aesthetic rather than in any strictly logical sense that, in 
those years after Strasbourg, Banach space did not seem to have the phys­
ical and mathematical texture I wanted for a theory on which I was to 
stake a large part of my future reputation. Nowadays it seems to me that 
some aspects of the theory of Banach space are taking on a sufficiently rich 
texture and have been endowed with a sufficiently unobvious body of 
theorems to come closer to satisfying me in these respects.
At that time, however, the theory seemed to me to contain for the imme­
diate future nothing but some decades of rather formal and thin work. By 
this I do not mean to reproach the work of Banach himself but rather that 
of the many inferior writers, hungry for easy doctors’ theses, who were 
drawn to it. As I foresaw, it was this class of writers that was first attracted 
to the theory of Banach spaces.
The chief factor which led me to abandon the theory of Banach spaces, 
after a few desultory papers, was that my work on the Brownian motion 
was now coming to a head. Differential space, the space of the Brownian 
motion, is itself in fact a sort of vector space, very close to the Banach 
spaces, and it presented itself as a successful rival for my attentions because 
it had a physical character most gratifying to me. In addition, it was wholly 
mine in its purely mathematical aspects, whereas I was only a junior part­
ner in the theory of Banach spaces.
I do not believe that Fréchet appreciated the importance of differential 
space when I first mentioned the theory to him. However, he got me in 
touch with Paul Lévy, of the Ecole Polytechnique, then the most promis­
ing young probability-theory man in France, whose work and mine have 
exerted a mutual influence on each other up to the present time. It cost me 
a little effort to persuade Lévy that my work was essentially different from 
that of Gâteaux, but he soon saw the point. He was to become one of my 
closest friends and supporters.
Curiously enough, another colleague whose work has always been in 
the closest relation with Lévy’s and mine was the Swedish mathematician 
Cramer, whom I had met during my stay in England as another house guest 
at the Muscios’ that summer.
For some time my mathematical interests made me oblivious to my per­
sonal comfort. When I came to sufficiently to think of my environment, 
I found that I was lonely at my boardinghouse. There was an American 

268 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
there who had come over with me on the same boat and who had no high 
opinion of me. A young English composer at the same boardinghouse was 
a friend of his. I wanted this composer to like me, but I had started off on 
the wrong foot. My fellow passenger of La Touraine certainly did nothing to 
help my standing in our little community.
The musician regarded me as heavy-handed and Philistine. This was 
partly because of my actual social ineptitude and bad manners, but it was 
also due to the fact that he considered that mathematics by its own nature 
stood in direct opposition to the arts. On the other hand, I maintained the 
thesis of this book: that mathematics is essentially one of the arts; and I 
ding-donged on this theme far too much for the patience of a man initially 
disposed to hate mathematics for its own sake. Later on we got into an 
explicit quarrel, in which we really said the unpleasant things we thought 
of one another, and this finally cleared up into a certain degree of under­
standing and even of a limited friendship.
The time came when I was to accompany the Fréchet family to Dabo. 
They stayed at the best hotel, and I naturally went to the other inn, in order 
not to infringe upon their privacy. I had ample opportunity for lonely walks 
over the countryside, climbing up the red sandstone hills of the Vosges and 
dipping down into the steep valleys, their streams drained for irrigation.
The landlord and landlady of my inn were very considerate of me. I did 
occasional jobs of wood chopping and the like for them. I felt at home in 
the countryside, among the crowing of the cocks and the lowing of the 
cattle. I enjoyed the sound of the water trickling down the village street to 
the place where the women washed their clothes, and the rhythmic beat of 
the flails on the threshing floor.
When finally we returned to Strasbourg, the International Congress was 
near. I had time in plenty to waste, exploring the quaint streets about the 
cathedral and following the circle of inner canals that surrounds the center 
of the city.
Three young American friends of mine came for the meeting. We put 
them up in my boardinghouse, two to a room. One was Forrest Murray of 
Harvard, vague and amiable, with whom I had often played tennis, and 
who had been a friend of our family for many years. Joe Walsh accompa­
nied him. Joe, who was about my age, is still a professor in the Harvard 
mathematics department. He is tall and genial, and in those days his blond 
hair stood almost erect on his high forehead. He seemed to enjoy his visit to 
France thoroughly. He intended to stay in France for a year of postdoctoral 
study. His deep, booming voice was agreeable to hear, and it was pleasant, 
too, to participate in his eagerness for new experiences.

21: The International Mathematical Congress of 1920 at Strasbourg 
269
The fourth of our group was James S. Taylor, then like myself a new 
postwar section man at M.I.T., and now for many years professor at the 
University of Pittsburgh. Taylor was a kinsman of Phineas T. Barnum and 
was himself an enthusiastic showman of parlor tricks. The four of us have 
gone very different ways since, but at that time we were all united by youth, 
and we were tasting this youth to the full.
The congress guests began to roll in. From America there came Eisenhart 
from Princeton, with his beautiful young wife; Leonard Eugene Dickson, 
the number theorist of Chicago, famous as an enthusiast for France and the 
French, and a past master at bridge; and Solomon Lefschetz of Kansas, who 
had conquered the effects of a terrible industrial accident which he had suf­
fered as engineer with the Westinghouse Company at Pittsburgh and had 
entered upon the new career in mathematics which was to take him to the 
leadership of the mathematics department at Princeton University and to 
the presidency of the American Mathematical Society.
There were several of the older people at the meeting whom we felt 
as links connecting us with the great past of mathematics. Sturdy old Sir 
George Greenhill represented Woolwich. Camille Jordan, who for all his 
ninety years accompanied us on our pedestrian excursions, was like a mem­
ory from the days of Louis Philippe. His recollections dated back to the great 
days when Cauchy was lording it over French mathematics and forcing all 
the younger men to pay tribute. When Jordan died, two years later, we all 
felt his death as a break in the continuity of the mathematical tradition.
Professor Jacques Hadamard, of Paris, played a great part at the congress. 
He was then only in his middle fifties, but his reputation had been well 
established before the end of the nineteenth century, and to us fledglings 
he was a great historical landmark. Small, bearded, very Jewish-looking in 
the fin French way, he occupied a unique position in the affections of his 
younger colleagues.
English mathematics belongs to Oxford and Cambridge, where there 
are ample bonds between the undergraduate and the don; while German 
mathematics is characterized by the amenity of the Nachsitzung. The official 
discussion of a scientific paper is followed by a procession across the univer­
sity town to a beer garden, where the great and the little alike talk over the 
latest results in mathematics as well as the trivial pleasures of life. French 
mathematics, however, has followed a largely official course, and when the 
professor has retired to his little office and has signed the daybook which 
gives a record of the lecture he has just finished, it is customary for him to 
vanish from the lives of his students and younger colleagues.

270 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
To this withdrawn existence, Hadamard forms an exception, for he is 
genuinely interested in his students and has always been accessible to them. 
He has considered it an important part of his duty to promote their careers. 
Under his personal influence, the present generation of French mathemati­
cians, for all the tradition of a barrier between the younger and the older 
men, has gone far to break down this barrier.
I myself benefited from Hadamard’s largeness of outlook. There was no 
reason why Hadamard should have paid any particular attention to a young 
barbarian from across the Atlantic, just at the beginning of his career. That 
is, there was no reason except Hadamard’s good nature and his desire to 
uncover mathematical ability wherever he could find a hint of it.
Many years later, when I was to meet him again at various mathematical 
congresses and as a fellow lecturer in China, I was surprised and gratified 
to find that he still remembered me and had an accurate idea of the entire 
development of my work. Thus one very positive result of the Strasbourg 
meeting was to bring me together with the long succession of French math­
ematicians who owe their recognition and their careers to Hadamard.
We congressionists made a number of interesting excursions around the 
sights of Strasbourg—to Saverne and the great ruined keep of Haut-Barr, to 
the quaint old city of Colmar, and to a sector of a battlefield of World War 
I. The French soldiers took us there in army trucks, but on the way back 
the trucks broke down and we had a long and tedious wait. Thus, when we 
came to the little wine-growing village of Turckheim, where the meal that 
had long been waiting for us had got cold and been abandoned, the mayor 
presented each of us with two glasses of the wine of the country, one old 
and one new. We had to sip these as a matter of courtesy. I will not deny 
that the wine was excellent, but two glasses on an empty stomach represent 
a severe ordeal, and new wine has a potency of its own. As we continued to 
Strasbourg by truck and by train, some staid souls were a bit less inhibited 
than was their wont.
Soon the meeting was over and the four of us went back to Paris. Tay­
lor was to return to America with me, but my other two American friends 
had decided to spend a year studying in Paris. They were eager to immerse 
themselves in a thoroughly French environment, and they made it quite 
clear that we should confer on them no favor by continuing to forgather 
with them.
The remaining two of us found ourselves without return accommoda­
tions. La Touraine, on which I had come to France and on which we had 
intended to return, had not yet recovered from its near shipwreck, so all 
through a very autumnal September and part of October we waited in vain 

21: The International Mathematical Congress of 1920 at Strasbourg 
271
for the resumption of service, believing to the very last that we should be 
back for the beginning of the M.I.T. term. This however was impossible.
We began to worry what the school might be thinking of our tardiness. 
Nonetheless, we enjoyed ourselves in Paris and walked over large areas of 
the town for lack of anything else to do. We haunted the shipping agencies 
and finally heard of a new American boat just about to be put into trans­
atlantic service. The passenger list was small and interesting and consisted 
largely of old globe-trotters. The travelers Osa Johnson and her husband 
were on board, together with a tame orangutan that they had brought from 
Indonesia. This orangutan contrasted pleasantly in its cultured behavior 
with a demon child who insisted on scattering the chessmen with which 
we were playing in the smoking room.
I came back from Europe with renewed and enlarged inspiration. For 
all of the defects of my French, I had lived in France and had for the first 
time established a contact with my French colleagues. Both in France and 
in England I had found that I occupied a more important position than at 
home, and I had work pending which seemed (at least to myself, if to few 
others), the promising beginning of a career in mathematics.
I had indeed seen the physical devastation of war, both in Belgium and 
along the former fighting line in Alsace. I had, however, become aware 
that the European spirit had greater possibilities of recuperation than I had 
previously assumed. Notwithstanding the war in the West, the defection of 
Russia from the European camp, and the news of battles in Poland, it was 
still possible to hope that World War I was merely an interlude and would 
be succeeded by another period of peace as long as the great peace of the 
nineteenth century.
As to Russia and the incipient iron curtain, the great body of Russians 
of the time were not merely prerevolutionary but prewar. It was not absurd 
to hope that a return to some sort of equilibrium with the West might still 
take place, in a manner similar to the return to normal life in France after 
the Terror and the Napoleonic Wars.
In one way or another, my taste for European contacts had grown with 
its own satisfaction. I was eagerly awaiting my next opportunity to see 
something more of the mother continent of our civilization.


22  1920–1925. Years of Consolidation
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
22: 
1920–1925. 
Years 
of 
Consolidation
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
When I came back from Strasbourg, I found my work well cut out for me. 
The Brownian motion papers were still in what we call a heuristic stage, 
which is to say that the general lines of organization of the subject and of 
the proofs of my theorems were already clear but that much work remained 
to be done before they could be considered complete. I showed my results 
to Professor E. B. Wilson, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and 
at his advice I sent them at once to The Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences.
Professor Wilson, who is now retired from teaching but still active in 
scientific administration, had been a pupil of Gibbs at Yale and had taught 
mathematics for some years at M.I.T. There he was teaching physics in 
1920, and ultimately he came to be the mathematical specialist at the 
Harvard School of Public Health. He has always been alert for what was new 
in the exact sciences, and for many years my enthusiasms have received his 
staunch support.
Another direction from which I received much encouragement was 
that of the department of electrical engineering, where Professor Dugald C. 
Jackson was head. I had known Professor Jackson and his son as neighbors 
when both of us had spent the summer of 1910 in New Hampshire. Jackson 
had been looking for some years for an engineer with mathematical sense, 
or for a mathematician with engineering sense, to resolve some of the prob­
lems impeding the theoretical electrical engineering of the time the state of 
which requires some explanation. Electrical engineering is divided into two 
more or less clearly separable fields, known in English as power engineering 
and communication engineering and in German by names which when 
translated into English become, respectively, “the technique of strong cur­
rents” and “the technique of weak currents.”
Of these two fields of activity, power engineering had become fairly 
stabilized by 1920. Most of the types of electrical generators, motors, and 

274 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
transformers which now exist were already thoroughly understood by that 
date; and the present trend toward the fractional horsepower motor and 
the separately motored machine were well under way. What progress has 
been made in power engineering since 1920 belongs not to the tactics of 
the subject so much as to the strategy of large systems and electric supply. 
The great power nets in the United States and other countries have been 
increased, interconnected, and stabilized.
As to communication engineering, the situation was stabilized much 
later. Wireless had been an established art for twenty years, but for the 
most part this was wireless in the limited original sense in which Marconi 
had conceived it. Broadcasting was yet to come on a national scale, and 
the few preliminary attempts at radiotelephony were of more interest to 
curious young boy scientists and to hams in general than to the public. 
The electronic valve had indeed arrived, but there was scarcely a suspicion 
of the extent to which it was to modify our entire life. Television was not 
a new concept, for people had talked of television even before the begin­
ning of the century, but it was just emerging from the stage in which it was 
conceived in terms of the selenium cell into that of practicable and rapid 
photoelectric apparatus.
The telephone, indeed, was triumphant everywhere, and was extend­
ing around the world the tentacles of a tight communication net. In the 
United States the A.T.&T., the master telephone company, was unrivaled 
throughout the whole scope of business in its financial magnitude and in 
its enlightened research policy. Thus, it was a natural time for a forward-
looking electrical engineer like Jackson to devote a large part of his atten­
tion to problems in communication theory.
The logical basis of communication theory at that time was far from 
satisfying, and it appeared to be much less satisfying than it really was. It 
was of course understood that speech is carried on a telephone line by a 
fluctuating current whose fluctuations map those of the voice input. The 
great problem was to understand the full implications of the theory of 
fluctuating currents and voltages.
For several decades, the theory of fluctuating currents and voltages had 
dominated not only communication engineering but power engineering 
as well, in the form of the theory of the alternating current. The ordinary 
direct, continuous current is rather intractable. There are no simple means 
to step its voltage up or down, and when high-voltage direct-current lines 
have been used (as in France for instance), it has been necessary to run a 
number of generators in series against formidable problems of insulation 
and control.

22: 1920–1925. Years of Consolidation 
275
The man who perhaps contributed more than anyone else to a solution 
of the problems of generating and using alternating current was Nikola 
Tesla. This brilliant and eccentric Yugoslav engineer worked for the West­
inghouse people and converted them to the policy of generating current 
not in a continuous stream but as a series of surges back and forth, say at 
the rate of sixty per second. With the aid of the transformer, this alternat­
ing current can be stepped up and down in voltage with the greatest ease, 
while it can be produced in generators free from many of the other annoy­
ing problems associated with direct current. It can be used in various types 
of motors, including certain sorts of induction motors entirely free from 
sliding electrical contacts. The only connection between the fixed winding 
of the motor, which is fed from the outside lines, and the moving wind­
ing, which is a part of the rotating apparatus, is the electromagnetic one 
which also exists between the windings of a transformer. As a matter of fact, 
in certain forms of the induction motor there is no electrical connection 
between the fixed winding and the winding of the rotor, or moving part. 
The electrical current which magnetizes the iron of the rotor is produced 
by the simultaneous action of the rotor and the fixed part, or stator, as an 
electromagnetic transformer. Such a piece of apparatus has the great advan­
tage of not having any moving contacts whatever and is simpler, safer, and 
more troubleproof.
In the early days of the alternating current, there was a battle royal 
between the Westinghouse people, who owned the alternating current 
inventions, and the General Electric and Edison people, who had invested 
heavily in direct-current engineering. This quarrel had as one of its con­
sequences the fact that New York State decided to execute criminals by 
alternating current. This was the result of a deal put through the legisla­
ture in order to give a bad name to the supposedly more dangerous alter­
nating current and to make people unwilling to have this introduced into 
their houses. Before long, however, the quarrels between the two schools 
of electrical engineering were patched up, for alternating current became 
available to the General Electric interests as well as to the Westinghouse 
Company.
It was in fact at General Electric that the theory of alternating current 
and alternating-current networks became organized and consolidated by 
Charles P. Steinmetz. This brilliant little man made great use of the mathe­
matical theory of imaginary or complex numbers (which are quite as genu­
ine and actual as real numbers) to describe alternating currents and voltages 
and the apparatus operating on them. The reason for introducing complex 
numbers into the engineering of alternating currents is that each complex 

276 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
number really consists of a pair of real numbers—the so-called real and 
imaginary parts—while an alternating current of given frequency is also 
determined by two real numbers, one of which gives its intensity and the 
other the phase or time at which it passes through zero.
For many years the theory of alternating-current engineering has been 
pretty complete, at least as far as concerns currents and voltages of fixed 
frequency, such as sixty-cycle currents and voltages. In telephone and other 
communication engineering we also deal with a sort of alternating current, 
but this alternating current is far more complicated because its frequency 
in oscillations per second is not fixed and because at any given time we 
must deal with many simultaneous sorts of oscillation. A telephone line 
carries at the same time frequencies of something like twenty per second 
and frequencies of three thousand. It is precisely this variability and mul­
tiplicity of frequency which makes the telephone line an effective vehicle 
of information. The line must be able to carry everything from a groan to 
a squeak.
Here we are concerned with one of the most ancient branches of math­
ematics, the theory of the vibrating string, which has its roots in the ideas 
of the Greek mathematician Pythagoras. He and his disciples knew very 
well that the vibrations of strings produce sounds and that there is a con­
nection between the pitch of the sound generated, the length of the string, 
and its density and tension. To what extent the Greeks were aware that a 
single string can vibrate in several modes at the same time I do not know; 
but this fact was thoroughly familiar to the early modem scholars of the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
The fundamental notion in all this is what we call the sinusoid, and to 
explain this let us suppose that we have a drum of smoked paper turning 
around and let us further suppose that we have a tuning fork vibrating 
parallel to the axis of the drum, and that to the end of this tuning fork is 
attached a straw which will make a white mark on the smoked paper. As 
the drum revolves at constant speed, the straw will leave an extended mark 
which we call a sinusoid.
Let us now consider more complicated curves, made up by adding sinu­
soids. It is possible to add curves to one another by adding their displace­
ments, that is to say, by combining two tuning forks of different rates of 
oscillation so that they both act on the same straw as it traces its path along 
a drum of smoked paper. In this motion we can observe two or more rates 
of oscillation in the same curve at the same time. The study of how to break 
up various sorts of curves into such sums of sinusoids is called harmonic 
analysis.

22: 1920–1925. Years of Consolidation 
277
There is a fundamental theorem that says that if we have a curve which 
repeats the same form indefinitely it can be broken up into an infinite 
number of separate sinusoids which repeat themselves at different rates. 
While results of this sort were known in the eighteenth century, the name 
generally connected with this theorem is that of Fourier, a member of the 
French Academy of Sciences who accompanied Napoleon on his expedition 
to Egypt.
Fourier’s name is also connected with other ways of adding together 
sinusoids in which the number of sinusoids to be added is too great to be 
represented by a first curve, a second curve, a third curve and so on. We 
may indeed have to add a mass of sinusoids which is entirely too dense to 
be arranged in one-two-three order.
Two parts of harmonic analysis concern themselves respectively with the 
analysis of periodic processes, which is given by what is known as Fourier 
series, and the analysis of processes which come up from zero in the course 
of time and which go down to zero again. In both cases the mathematician 
is forced to use the sophisticated methods of adding quantities to which we 
have already referred under the name of Lebesgue integration.
The really satisfactory theories of the Fourier series and integral were too 
new in 1920 to have trickled down to the working electrical engineer. More­
over, the sort of phenomenon in which the engineer is chiefly interested 
had almost entirely escaped the treatment of the pure mathematicians. The 
Fourier series, which the pure mathematicians had treated, was useful only 
for the study of those phenomena which repeat themselves after a fixed 
time. The standard form of the theory of the Fourier integral, as developed 
by Plancherel and others, concerns curves which are small in the remote 
past and are destined to become small in the remote future. In other words, 
the standard theory of the Fourier integral deals with phenomena which in 
some sense or other both begin and end, and do not keep running indefi­
nitely at about the same scale. The sort of continuing phenomenon that 
we find in a noise or a beam of light had been completely neglected by 
the professional mathematician, and had been left to such mathematically-
minded physicists as Sir Arthur Schuster of Manchester.
I came to understand that the various demands made on me by Profes­
sor Jackson concerning the proper foundation of communication theory 
were to be fulfilled by a further study of harmonic analysis but that this 
could not be done solely on the basis of harmonic analysis as it existed 
at the time. What the communication engineers actually did was to use a 
formal calculus of communication theory which had been developed some 
twenty years before by Oliver Heaviside. This Heaviside calculus had not 

278 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
as yet been given a thoroughly rigorous justification, but it had worked for 
Heaviside and for those of his followers who had absorbed the spirit of his 
theory sufficiently to use it intelligently.
For several years the chief demand made on me at M.I.T. by the electrical-
engineering department was to put the Heaviside calculus on a proper logi­
cal foundation. Other people were doing the same thing at the same time in 
other countries, although I do not think that any of these treatments were 
more satisfactory than the one which I ultimately gave. In performing this 
task; I had to study harmonic analysis on an extremely general basis, and I 
found out that Heaviside’s work could be translated word for word into the 
language of this generalized harmonic analysis.
In all this there was an interplay between what I was doing on the Heavi­
side theory and what I had done on the Brownian motion. Previous to 
my work there had been no thoroughly satisfactory example given of the 
sort of motion that would correspond to sound or light with a continu­
ous spectrum—that is, with energy distributed continuously in frequency 
instead of being lumped in isolated spectrum lines. The harmonic analysis 
which had already been given corresponded more closely to what one sees 
when one examines the light of sodium vapor than what one sees when 
one examines sunlight. (The light of sodium vapor is concentrated in a 
number of bright lines, whereas sunlight has a continuous distribution in 
color and consequently in frequency.)
In the chapter entitled “My Start as a Mathematician” I pointed out my 
work on the mathematics and physics of the discrete, and in particular of 
the Brownian motion, in which we study the succession of impacts which 
a particle in a gas receives from the moving molecules—the shot effect, 
which is due to the manner in which electric currents are conveyed by a 
stream of individual electrons. I found that it was possible to generate con­
tinuous spectra by means of the Brownian motion or the shot effect and 
that if a shot-effect generator were allowed to feed into a circuit that could 
vibrate, the output would be of that continuous character. In other words, I 
already began to detect a statistical element in the theory of the continuous 
spectrum and, through that, in communication theory. Now, almost thirty 
years later, communication theory is thoroughly statistical, and this can be 
traced directly back to my work of that time.
My interest in harmonic analysis did not exhaust my mathematical 
activity. There were other problems which occupied me, some intensively 
and some in a more or less desultory way. The combined-research group of 
our department had begun to achieve a bulk of publication which made 
a journal of our own desirable, and we had already embarked upon this 

22: 1920–1925. Years of Consolidation 
279
project.1 I was the first acting editor, but the responsibility was soon taken 
over by Philip Franklin, who had recently come to us from Harvard, and 
who had been my friend and associate of Aberdeen Proving Ground days.
I used to talk occasionally with Professor O. D. Kellogg of Harvard con­
cerning problems of possible interest on which I might do research. I did 
not realize at that time how carefully many professors conserve problems 
for their own graduate students and how sharply they regard proprietary 
rights in new problems. I had been used to the freer atmosphere of England 
and to the lavish manner in which my father had scattered the seeds of his 
ideas before all who would listen. My active and assertive curiosity did me 
no good in the opinions of those who might have benefited me by their 
esteem. I was not officially a student of Kellogg’s. He was very helpful to 
me, but I consumed too much of his time, and I think that he considered 
me as something of a nuisance.
I learned from Kellogg that the old problem of potential distribution 
was attracting renewed interest. It would be of no point to state the prob­
lem here explicitly, but it is quite possible to tell the layman what sort of a 
problem it is. There are many physical questions which involve measurable 
quantities that vary over a plane or over space. The temperature in a room 
is such a quantity, and there are certain other similar quantities related to 
the flow of a liquid or the diffusion of a gas, which I can measure with a 
voltmeter, which gives the various electromotive forces between points in a 
room and the ground or between one point and another in a conductor in 
which an electric current is flowing.
Here I can dispense with a complete definition of electromotive force; 
for it is necessary to know only that electromotive force is what we measure 
in volts. The mathematics of all quantities varying over space and time lies 
in the field of partial differential equations, which is a mathematician’s way 
of saying that we have various relations among the rates at which these 
quantities fall off in different directions and the rates at which they change 
in time. Ever since the time of Leibnitz it has been well known that there 
are quantities distributed both in time and in space; and that they have 
space rates of change as well as time rates of change. The temperature may 
change at so many degrees per hour; but it may also change at so many 
degrees per hundred miles we go north or at so many degrees per hundred 
miles we go east. Again, if water is flowing downhill, the steeper the hill, 
the faster the water flows.
Many quantities thus distributed in space and in time are of great engi­
neering importance. It is the rate at which the local electromotive force falls 
off as we leave a transmission line which determines whether the line is 

280 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
going to conduct electricity without substantial leaks or will glow at night 
with a corona effect which represents many dollars out of the pocket of the 
electric company and its subscribers. The study of the heat-insulating pow­
ers of a house wall depends on relations among the flow of heat, the rate of 
fall-off of temperature, and so on.
Much of the mathematics of these quantities (which are known as 
potentials) is clear and direct. In that part of a room which is away from 
the walls, or from any other conductors, the problem of the distribution 
of electromotive force is relatively simple. However, when we come to the 
immediate neighborhood of regions of the room with very special electric 
properties, we get into trouble. Near these regions, which are known as 
boundaries, the problem of electrostatic potential reaches a new order of 
complication. Similar difficulties arise in the related theories of temperature 
and of fluid flow.
In the case of the electrostatic potential, one particular boundary phe­
nomenon is exhibited by the sharp-pointed conductor, such as the light­
ning rod. Around such a sharply-pointed conductor projecting into a region 
in which there are electric charges, the rate at which the electromotive force 
drops off becomes enormous or even infinite. The electric field will not 
hold such rates of dropping off of potential, or potential gradients as they 
are called. Around such a sharp point the air is continually breaking down 
as an insulator, and if the field is large, a distinct corona effect will be seen 
in the dark. Many sailors have observed the curious effect known as the 
corposant, where nails and other pointed objects glow with a ghastly light 
in the electrified atmosphere of a thunderstorm. It is through something 
like this corona effect that a lightning rod relaxes the potential gradient of 
the charged atmosphere about it, by a gradual and unspectacular process, 
before the tensions build up to such a point that they may cause a disas­
trous stroke.
At places at which the voltage changes rapidly in space, certain media 
will be strained and will break down as the air does when a stroke of light­
ning passes or as a piece of glass when a stroke of lightning bursts through 
a window. The ability to stand up to these stresses is known as the dielectric 
strength.
So far I have been stating the problem of the pointed conductor in a 
physical way, depending on the specific dielectric strengths of the different 
media into which the conductor may be pointed. There are however closely 
related problems of a more formal and purely mathematical character.
We here come to one of those mathematical situations in which there 
is a close relation between mathematical and physical ideas but in which 

22: 1920–1925. Years of Consolidation 
281
the correspondence between the two is not precise. All physically pointed 
objects are like the point of a needle that is very slightly rounded off at 
the end. It is possible, however, to imagine a still sharper point—such as 
one we might obtain by revolving about its middle line the cross section 
of an infinitely sharp hollow-ground razor—in which the two profiles are 
tangent to each other. Impossible as it is to realize such a figure physically, 
its conception offers no mathematical difficulty whatsoever. It is even pos­
sible to consider an electrical potential distributed about such a re-entrant 
spike and to ask how such a potential would behave near the very point of 
the spike.
It will be found that there are cases where the mathematical behavior 
of potential around this ideal spike will be strongly suggested by the actual 
behavior of potential about a very sharp physical spike. In the physical case 
the strains become so great that the matter in the field breaks down. In 
the mathematical case there need be no matter in the field to break down, 
but the field itself may become discontinuous. If this is so, the potential 
at the point of the spike becomes indeterminate and assumes one value 
if we reach the point of the spike by one path and another if we reach it 
by another path. It was this phenomenon which I started to investigate at 
Kellogg’s suggestion. My object was to determine for what spikes this dis­
continuity could occur.
A Polish mathematician by the name of Zaremba had obtained here cer­
tain results which gave some hypotheses of sharpness that were enough 
to ensure the indeterminacy of the potential, and some other hypotheses 
of bluntness which were enough to ensure that the potential would not 
become indeterminate; but these conditions left between them a gap in 
which our knowledge was incomplete. In this intermediate field Professor 
Kellogg had done vitally important work, and two of his young friends 
were writing doctoral dissertations on the subject at Princeton. When Kel­
logg informed me of the work that was being done in this corner of poten­
tial theory, I immediately began to reflect how I myself should attack the 
problem.
I very soon found that I could make quick headway in this subject and 
that in fact, within a matter of days, I had got even further than the two 
Princeton doctoral candidates. When I showed Professor Kellogg my math­
ematical results, there was a sudden change in his attitude. At the begin­
ning I had found him rather pleased with my interest in potential theory. 
Now, however, he was chiefly concerned with the effect that my pursuit of 
the subject might have on the acceptance of the doctoral dissertations of 
the other two young men.

282 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
There is an understanding at many schools which was at that time a gen­
eral convention—that the publication of a doctoral dissertation is an indis­
pensable condition of its acceptance. It is clearly more difficult to publish 
a paper which has been anticipated than to publish one when the results 
are known to be completely new. This I felt to be unjust, and I considered 
that the only sane criterion of originality from the standpoint of a doctor’s 
degree should be whether the paper was new as compared with the litera­
ture reasonably available at the time of its submission. Here, by “reasonably 
available,” I mean reasonably available in view of the actual opportunities 
of the author.
I am afraid I did not accept with any grace Professor Kellogg’s dictum 
that I was to erase from my mind the work I had already done on the poten­
tial problem and to clear the tracks for the two doctoral candidates. I had 
been aware through Dr. Kellogg’s leak, and only through Dr. Kellogg’s leak, 
that other people were working on the problem, but I had no information 
as to their methods and tools, and my result was genuinely original.
Furthermore, I did not accept with alacrity Kellogg’s suggestion that 
I was now an established mathematician, who did not need these papers 
and who ought to give them up as a charity to youth and inexperience. 
Both of the candidates were older than myself, and both of them enjoyed 
the secure position of being the pupils of men with influence in American 
mathematics. I had never received favors from those in power, and it was 
only when it was to my disadvantage that any Harvard man thought of 
treating me as an established mathematician.
If I had had my full, undivided attention to devote to my scientific work 
and my scientific position, the situation would have been difficult enough. 
However, the scientist is at the same time a human being, and his human 
needs will not wait indefinitely on his scientific career. I was by now in my 
late twenties and I had begun to look forward to the fuller life of a married 
man. I was already beginning to pay attention to the young lady who is 
now my wife.
This young lady who so interested and attracted me was Margaret Enge­
mann. She came from a family in Germany that was close to the land, and 
which had been gradually emerging from the status of small farmers to that 
of renters and stewards of great estates, to the clergy, and to professional 
life in general. Her mother had come over to America after the death of her 
husband and had lived an active, romantic, outdoor life in the new West. 
It was the directness, genuineness, and sincerity of the mother that I saw 
reflected in the daughter, and which gave to me first the promise and then 
the certainty that this was the girl for me.

22: 1920–1925. Years of Consolidation 
283
I had visited her and her family at about the time of my run-in with Kel­
logg on a raw and bleak December day. In waiting for the streetcar home, 
I had got thoroughly soaked and had developed the beginnings of a bad 
cold. When I talked over the problem of the publication of my paper with 
Kellogg when we met at a local meeting of the American Mathematical 
Society, I was already sick and half-delirious with what later turned out to 
be pneumonia. Instead of acquiescing in his point of view, I felt that it was 
an unfair assertion of solidarity among the insiders against the outsider 
and asserted my intention of securing quick publication for my results in 
our new mathematical journal. This started a storm of antagonism against 
me, and both Kellogg and Birkhoff thundered at me from an exalted moral 
elevation.
I felt thoroughly sick and discredited. The next day I commenced a 
chilly weekend of winter sports at the Groton farm which my parents had 
bought for their ultimate retirement. I returned home and went immedi­
ately to bed, where I found that I was down with a first-rate case of bron­
chopneumonia. All through the pneumonia, my delirium assumed the 
form of a peculiar mixture of depression and worry concerning my row 
with the Harvard mathematicians and of an anxiety about the logical status 
of my mathematical work. It was impossible for me to distinguish among 
my pain and difficulty in breathing, the flapping of the window curtain, 
and certain as yet unresolved parts of the potential problem on which I 
was working.
I cannot say merely that the pain revealed itself as a mathematical ten­
sion, or that the mathematical tension symbolized itself as a pain: for the 
two were united too closely to make such a separation significant. However, 
when I reflected on this matter later, I became aware of the possibility that 
almost any experience may act as a temporary symbol for a mathematical 
situation which has not yet been organized and cleared up. I also came to 
see more definitely than I had before that one of the chief motives driving 
me to mathematics was the discomfort or even the pain of an unresolved 
mathematical discord. I became more and more conscious of the need to 
reduce such a discord to semipermanent and recognizable terms before I 
could release it and pass on to something else.
Indeed, if there is any one quality which marks the competent math­
ematician more than any other, I think it is the power to operate with tem­
porary emotional symbols and to organize out of them a semipermanent, 
recallable language. If one is not able to do this, one is likely to find that 
his ideas evaporate from the sheer difficulty of preserving them in an as yet 
unformulated shape.

284 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
It was at the period of my illness that I became really aware of how much 
I needed the young lady who was later to become my wife. I will not say 
that from this time on my courtship followed a direct path, or that I became 
immediately sure that I wanted marriage; but at any rate I had embarked on 
the series of emotional changes and ups and downs which ultimately lead 
to our marriage. I have told the story of this in my earlier book, Ex-Prodigy. 
I shall return to it here only insofar as it is directly relevant to the incidents 
of my career as a scientist.
It is as a scientist that I am exhibiting myself to the public in the present 
book, and I shall deliberately play down even those emotional events of 
my own life and of our later life together which have been most important 
to us. I wish no reader to draw the conclusion that my emotional life has 
been restricted to my scientific career, or that I could live with any satisfac­
tion without the loyalty, affection, and continued support of my lifelong 
companion. What is inhibiting me here is the intensely personal quality 
of the enduring love and companionship between man and wife. I cannot 
convey this to my readers without what I feel to be an infringement of 
what belongs to us two alone and of what, because of its very reality, depth, 
and lasting endurance, is too free from casual vicissitudes to contain much 
that we care to impart to anyone but ourselves. My science belongs to the 
world, my home life and affections to no one but to those dear to me, and 
to myself.
Let me return to the general question of competitiveness among math­
ematicians and of the ethics which governs it. I have already said that I 
was more or less repelled by the high pressure of work which was bound to 
be competitive from the start, yet I knew very well that I was competitive 
beyond the run of younger mathematicians, and I knew equally that this 
was not a very pretty attitude. However, it was not an attitude which I was 
free to assume or to reject. I was quite aware that I was an out among ins 
and that I would get no shred of recognition that I did not force. If I was not 
to be welcomed, well then, let me be too dangerous to be ignored.
I was not alone in my competitiveness. At least one of the greatest Amer­
ican mathematicians, a man whose disapproval was the highest hurdle I 
should have to leap, was even more intensely competitive than myself. I 
have always taken in ideas easily and given them out freely, and, although 
emulation has been a part of my nature, I have not sought to work in the 
profoundest secrecy and to spring my new results on a world which has 
not even known that I have been working on them. In this I offer a strong 
contrast to certain older colleagues, who may have shown less naïve joy in 
the immediate results of their scientific conquests, and I have never tried 

22: 1920–1925. Years of Consolidation 
285
to steer other investigators away from my own work so that I could be 
the beneficiary of the surprise effect of a new paper carefully guarded until 
I could present it with a maximum impact. I have not been more com­
petitive than many of those about me, but I have been less meticulous in 
presenting the appearance of lacking competitiveness and I have not been 
careful to mend my fences.
Note
1.  I was lucky to have a journal at my disposal in which I could secure quick 
publication.


23  The Period of My Travels Abroad—Max Born and 
Quantum Theory
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
23: The Period of My Travels Abroad—Max Born and Quantum Theory
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
It was only two years after my trip to Strasbourg that I began to resume my 
visits to Europe. Part of my eagerness was due to my desire to drink deep at 
the fountain of European mathematics, of which I had already tasted, but 
another part came from family considerations.
Soon after the end of the war my parents had bought a farm house and 
apple orchard in the town of Groton, Massachusetts, with the hope that 
they might live there after my father’s retirement. This farm was indeed 
at the disposal of the entire family for our recreation; but it would have 
taken the full efforts of the family to run it, and even in our vacations we 
were no longer a group of unoccupied youngsters. We needed our free time 
to recuperate from the very hard work of making our way in our profes­
sional careers. It was scarcely reasonable to expect that we should turn our 
well-earned holidays over to the job of raising vegetables and clearing our 
wood lot.
My sister Constance was teaching mathematics at Smith during much of 
the time, and my sister Bertha was studying chemistry at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. Constance, a small, vigorous, self-confident young 
woman, was the mainstay of my parents and was supposed to be the one 
of us with the most savoir faire. In those matters in which my point of view 
came to differ more and more from that of my mother, Constance leaned 
heavily to my mother’s side.
Bertha, seven years younger than I, was perhaps the most independent 
member of the family. She had been too young to undergo the full edu­
cational pressure to which I had been subject or even the more diluted 
form of it which Constance had experienced. During her secondary-school 
career, moreover, the education of my younger brother Fritz had been the 
chief family problem; and Bertha more than the other two of us had been 
left to her own devices. Thus Bertha has always been able to see the family 

288 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
problems from a somewhat more objective point of view than either Con­
stance or I myself, in my early days at any rate.
I was eager to pass on to my sisters some of the pleasures of my European 
travels, and they were only too pleased to share these with me. I will not 
go into the chronology of the successive voyages which I made alone and 
with my sisters, but the summers of 1922, 1924, and 1925 found me abroad 
again, looking up friends of the family and various colleagues. I saw more 
and more of Lévy on these trips and I developed important new contacts 
not only in England and France but in Germany as well. I witnessed the 
great inflation in Germany during the summer of 1922 and found it a really 
terrifying experience.
My work on potential theory continued in two directions. First, I arrived 
at a new concept of the relations between the electromagnetic potential in 
the interior of a region and that on the boundaries. As I have already sug­
gested, the earlier concept of the electromagnetic potential in the interior 
of a region was that it should completely fit the values given on the bound­
aries. However, I followed out notions akin to those of generalized integra­
tion, which I had already studied, and noticed that the interior potential 
of a region could be regarded as determined by an additive combination of 
potentials around the boundaries, even when this definition might fail to 
yield a continuous function as we approach the boundary point. This was 
a radically new idea, and it led me to significant extensions of many of the 
notions of potential theory, including those of charge and capacity. In this 
work I was motivated by concepts which belonged to the generalized theory 
of integration of P. J. Daniell, of which I have already written. The novelty 
was that I conceived the relation of the potential of an interior point to the 
boundary values as a sort of generalized integration rather than as a limit­
ing process by which the internal potentials should be united with those 
at the boundary point. This was something of an inversion of the existing 
point of view on boundary problems. Like so many inversions of points of 
view in mathematics, the reformulation of the problems of potential theory 
let a breath of fresh air into a situation which had been deadened for years 
by too conventional a statement.
My old friend and mentor, Professor H. B. Phillips of M.I.T., had already 
studied quantities analogous to potential on square nets like screens and on 
cubical structures representing generalizations of these square nets. With 
the aid of my new generalized concepts in potential theory, I was able to 
make Professor Phillips’s work an important step toward a universal theory 
of potential.

23: The Period of My Travels Abroad—Max Born and Quantum Theory 
289
In this manner I added a considerable number of new and sharply defin­
able concepts to the armament of potential theory. When I applied these to 
the old problem of Zaremba, which still had not reached a final solution, 
I found that they fitted. This was at about the time at which the Comptes 
Rendus of the French Academy of Sciences began to be filled with papers on 
the theme of the Zaremba theory. These were written by Lebesgue himself 
and by a young pupil of his, G. Bouligand.
In many scientific subjects there comes a time when the sharpness and 
definiteness of the new papers indicate that an important goal is about to 
be achieved. So it was with the work of Lebesgue and Bouligand. I knew 
that if I did not put forth a maximum effort, the whole topic was soon to 
be crossed off the account books of mathematics as one finally resolved. 
Accordingly, I put forth a maximum effort, employing those new tools 
which I had made my own, and I was delighted to find that I had achieved 
what was from the standpoint of research at that time a complete solution 
of the problem.
I was aware that I must hurry. I went to a Mexican student of mine, 
Manuel Sandoval Vallarta, who was much more proficient in French than 
I was, and got him to help me to rewrite my ideas in acceptable French. I 
mailed a brief note to Lebesgue for publication in the Comptes Rendus and 
awaited the outcome.
What followed is a coincidence of a sort much commoner in the history 
of discovery and invention than one might suppose. While my letter was 
crossing the ocean, Bouligand obtained some extremely important results 
which he had not yet had time to polish up. He took council with Leb­
esgue, who advised him to submit these results to the academy in a sealed 
envelope, after a custom sanctioned by centuries of academy tradition. 
The very next day, my paper came in and Bouligand’s sealed envelope was 
opened. The two papers appeared side by side in the next number of the 
Comptes Rendus, with a preface by Lebesgue covering both of them. While 
they were expressed in different mathematical language, the main idea of 
the two was identical. However, the logic of Bouligand’s paper was not as 
complete as mine, owing to the fact that what he had sent in was only a 
preliminary communication for purposes of record, and not a polished and 
finished job.
This was even more of a dead heat than my previous double discovery of 
Banach space. Both the Banach space competition and that with Bouligand 
turned out to be extremely friendly. Bouligand was even more ready than I 
was to admit the somewhat greater completeness of my paper, and we made 
arrangements to meet when I should come to France on a visit.

290 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
A piece of work which started out under less competitive pressure but 
which also ended in a friendly way was stimulated by the research of the 
Danish mathematician Harald Bohr on what he called “almost periodic 
functions.” These represent curves which do not quite repeat themselves 
after the fashion of a pattern on wall paper but come close to doing so. 
Their discovery represented an important extension of harmonic analysis. 
I myself, as I have said, was working on extensions of harmonic analysis 
to which I had been led through an attempt to justify Heaviside’s formal 
calculus. Again there was nothing for me to do but put on steam and see 
if I could consolidate my ideas in the field. I did succeed in doing so, and 
I obtained an adequate theory which covered not only those spectra of 
light which can be represented as sharp lines, such as we find in parts of 
the spectra of the elements, but also those where the power is distributed 
continuously. Bohr’s theory was valid only for line spectra. With the aid 
of one or two tricks, from my own theory I was able to deduce not only 
the Bohr theory but a much wider range of results concerning continuous 
spectra as well.
In this I had to use ideas very closely akin to those which I had used 
in the study of the Brownian motion. In particular I had to make use of 
curves which are continuous but which are so crinkly that they can not 
properly be said to have a direction. I have already pointed out in my dis­
cussion of the Brownian motion that these curves had been more or less 
the stepchildren of mathematics and had been regarded as rather unnatu­
ral museum pieces, derived by the mathematician from abstract consid­
erations, and with no true representation in physics. Here I found myself 
establishing an essentially physical theory in which such curves played an 
indispensable role.
There was another contact with European mathematics which I made at 
this time in quite an unanticipated way, though in a personal rather than 
a scientific matter. I had seen a good deal of the work of Leon Lichtenstein, 
a German mathematician who had been studying the theory of fluid flow, 
and who was the editor of what was then the chief international review 
journal for mathematicians. Father had known of a cousin Leon who had 
gone to the same institute of technology at Berlin at which he himself had 
studied, and who had found the atmosphere of industrial research not too 
agreeable. Father was also aware that Leon had left industry for academic 
work in applied mathematics but was unaware either of his degree of suc­
cess or where he was now working.
We received a letter from an aunt of mine in New York, telling us that 
cousin Leon had turned out to be rather more successful in mathematics 

23: The Period of My Travels Abroad—Max Born and Quantum Theory 
291
than we had anticipated. The letter gave us his full name, which was Leon 
Lichtenstein. I put two and two together and thought it highly likely 
that cousin Leon and the famous mathematician were the same person. 
I wrote to Lichtenstein, asking him directly if he was our cousin, and I 
received a very friendly reply. He was indeed the Lichtenstein of whom 
Aunt Charlotte had written, and he was quite aware of my existence and 
my work. He invited me to look him up the next time I should find myself 
in Europe. He still lived in Berlin, but his teaching was at the Univer­
sity of Leipzig. Here, as I afterwards learned, he was dean of the Faculty 
of Sciences.
The summer after I had made my contacts with Bouligand and Lichten­
stein I was in Europe with my sister Bertha. I ran down to Poitiers to see 
Bouligand. He was waiting for me at the station with a copy of one of my 
articles held up so that I could identify him. He proved to be an unpreten­
tious young Breton, and he took me into his family for the visit. There was 
much to see in Poitiers, which is a charming, romantic town with most 
interesting architectural monuments. Bouligand introduced me to a friend 
of his who was professor at the lyceé and an authority on local antiquities, 
and between them they showed me all the tidbits of interest.
I also went to Germany that summer to see cousin Leon. Like Bouligand, 
he had to identify himself to me, and I had to identify myself to him, 
because we never had even seen pictures of each other. He met me at the 
station, holding up a sheet of paper on which he had written, in my honor, 
the chief formula in potential theory.
Leon Lichtenstein was bald and bearded and did not have much facial 
resemblance to my father, but like him he was a short, vigorous man, with 
brisk motions and strong opinions. He was very anti-American in many 
of his attitudes, although cordial to me personally. Bertha and Mrs. Lich­
tenstein, who was the balance wheel of the Lichtenstein family, had con­
siderable difficulty in keeping the arguments between Leon and me from 
degenerating into quarrels.
Here I ran into one of the minor problems of life in Germany. At our 
first meeting, Leon had asked me to use du, the familiar form of German 
address, with him. Mrs. Lichtenstein, on the other hand, had made no such 
suggestion to me, although she was quite as cordial as her husband. Under 
these circumstances I did not feel that I was entitled to the same degree of 
familiarity with her as with my cousin, and I stuck to Sie, the formal mode 
of address.
I visited Göttingen in 1924 for old times’ sake and found that my new 
ideas had begun to interest the Göttingers. In 1925, after a little mountain 

292 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
climbing with Alexander, of Princeton, I again visited Göttingen, where 
my work on generalized harmonic analysis was beginning to attract real 
attention.
The new head of all Göttingen mathematics was Richard Courant, an 
industrious, active little man, who was eager to keep all the strings of math­
ematical administration in his hands. Courant suggested to me that I might 
find some American sources of funds for a year’s study in Göttingen, and 
for research under continued contact with my Göttingen colleagues. The 
John Simon Guggenheim Foundation had just been established in New 
York, and Courant pointed out to me that that was an appropriate benefac­
tor to which I might turn for funds. He promised me the full co-operation 
of my Göttingen colleagues in making my trip agreeable and in providing 
me with an assistant to help organize my papers and to take care of my 
lapses in German.
He sent me over to pay my respects to Felix Klein, who shared with 
Hilbert the prestige of being one of the two leading Göttingen mathema­
ticians. Klein was in poor health and, as a matter of fact, had only a few 
months of life ahead of him. I welcomed this opportunity to establish yet 
another connection with the august past of mathematics.
I began my visit to Klein by a social blunder. When the elderly house­
keeper appeared at the door, I asked in my best German, “Ist der Herr Pro­
fessor zu Hause?” She replied in a tone of rebuke, “Der Herr Geheimrat ist 
zu Hause,” thus reproaching me for addressing a privy councilor by the 
lower title of professor. In German science, I may say, the social position of 
a Geheimrat was like that of a scientist in England who had been knighted; 
but I have never seen so much fuss made about a knighthood in England, 
as was made in Germany about the title of Geheimrat.
I went upstairs and found Felix Klein in his great study, a pleasant, high, 
airy room lined with bookcases and with a large table in the middle cov­
ered with an orderly disorder of books and open periodicals. The great man 
sat in an arm chair behind the table, with a rug about his knees. He was 
bearded, had a fine, chiseled face, and carried about him an aura of the wis­
dom of the ages. He spoke with a noble condescension, as if he were a king; 
and as he spoke the great names of the past ceased to be the mere shadowy 
authors of papers and became real human beings. There was a timelessness 
about him which became a man to whom time no longer had a meaning. 
After I had listened respectfully for a few minutes, I found that I was given 
my congé as I might have been given it at a court.
The talk which I gave the Göttingen people on my work on general har­
monic analysis was very well received. Hilbert, in particular, showed great 

23: The Period of My Travels Abroad—Max Born and Quantum Theory 
293
interest in the subject, but what I did not realize at that time was that my 
talk was closely keyed to the new ideas of physics which were about to burst 
into bloom at Göttingen in the form of what is now known as quantum 
mechanics.1
Quantum mechanics was a subject in mathematical physics which had 
originated in 1900 in the work of Max Planck on the equilibrium of radia­
tion in a cavity. In plain language, the subject matter of quantum theory 
is the study of such light as we find inside of a hot furnace after light and 
hot matter have come to equilibrium so that if we look into a cavity with 
heated walls, such as a blast furnace, the light coming from inside the fur­
nace changes in character as the temperature changes. This is a readily 
observable effect which we all know from the difference between a red-
hot piece of metal and a white-hot piece of metal. The spectrum of the 
light coming from the red-hot furnace ceases somewhere in the red or yel­
low, but the light coming from the white-hot furnace may go far into the 
ultraviolet.
The nub of the difficulty in explaining this relation between light and 
heat, which Planck solved by a brutal new hypothesis, was that the tradi­
tional representations of light as a continuous phenomenon was not sat­
isfactory. In light as in matter, he argued, there is a granular rather than 
continuous texture.
The earlier physics had not been able to conceive any mechanism by 
which the color distribution of light in a furnace could be determined 
by the furnace’s temperature. Planck’s eventual explanation of this easily 
observable phenomenon was, however, not simple. It was associated with 
ideas concerning mathematics and thought in general which go back to the 
end of the seventeenth century, during a period when an important intel-
lectual battle was being fought between the atomists, who believed in the 
discreteness of matter, and those who believed that matter is continuous. 
There were various philosophical considerations which made this debate 
especially critical.
It was not, however, so much the general philosophical climate of the 
time as a technical innovation which brought the dispute to a head. This 
innovation was the discovery of the microscope by the Dutchman Leeu­
wenhoek, who had perfected his device to the point at which he could see 
something of the teeming life in a drop of stagnant water.
The discovery of a new instrument often leads immediately to a new 
insight. Before Leeuwenhoek, the study of living organisms had been lim­
ited to what could be seen by the naked eye or, at best, with a primitive 
hand lens. Thus, scientists, while they might have had the Democritean 

294 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
idea that the world exists of extremely small particles or atoms, had made 
no considerable progress in seeing phenomena smaller than, say, a grain 
of sand.
Leeuwenhoek’s microscope showed by direct observation that a drop of 
pond water was a teeming mass of life suggestive of a crowded city. The 
new power lent to the eye engendered a new range of imagination, and 
everyone’s thoughts turned to the fine structure of the world and to the 
philosophical implications suggested by the process of magnification. One 
result of this experience, perhaps, was Swift’s famous jingle:
So, naturalists observe, a flea
Hath smaller fleas that on him prey;
And these have smaller still to bite 'em;
And so proceed ad infinitum.
The background of this little jingle is more interesting than the jingle 
itself may seem to us at this late date, for among the objects that Leeuwen­
hoek studied with his new microscope were the spermatozoa of man and 
the animals, which Leeuwenhoek quite reasonably interpreted as playing 
a part in conception. Through the imperfect microscopes of Leeuwenhoek 
and his followers, however, it was easy to imagine that the spermatozoon 
contained a small, rolled-up fetus. This theory gave a plausible interpre­
tation to the act of conception, for it was believed conception consisted 
merely in the implantation of the spermatozoon in the womb, in which 
environment it could grow in size till it became an embryo of the sort 
which was already familiar to the doctors. The idea that the spermatozoon 
was the sole antecedent of the embryo led to some very interesting biologi­
cal speculations.
If the spermatozoon was itself an early stage of the fetus, it was natural 
to think that it was a human being in miniature, with all the organs of the 
human being on a smaller scale, distorted but still essentially there. By this 
token, it should contain smaller spermatozoa, much as Swift’s flea carried 
lesser fleas on a scale far smaller than the microscope of the day could show. 
These in turn could be thought to contain still smaller spermatozoa, and so 
on ad infinitum, so that the whole future of the human race actually lies 
preformed within the bodies of those now existing. This preformationism 
argued for an infinite subdivisibility of matter, and the philosophical conse­
quences of this were eagerly studied, particularly by the great philosopher, 
Leibniz.2
Leibniz conceived the world after the analogy of the drop of water and 
the similarly teeming drop of blood as a plenum. That is, he conceived 

23: The Period of My Travels Abroad—Max Born and Quantum Theory 
295
that all the apparent spaces between living beings and within living beings 
are themselves filled with living beings on a smaller scale. This theory led 
Leibniz to postulate the infinite subdivisibility of life and, consequently, 
the continuity of matter.
This opinion, which was generated as we have seen by the microscopic 
observations of his day as well as by the inner workings of his own phi­
losophy, led Leibniz eventually to a new interpretation of mathematics. He 
was, we must remember, one of the co-inventors of the calculus, and he 
originated the notation which we use even now. For him not only are time 
and space infinitely subdivisible, but quantities distributed in time and 
space may have rates of change in all their dimensions. For example, one 
quantity distributed in time and space is temperature. When I say that the 
thermometer is dropping at the rate of ten degrees an hour, I am speaking 
of its time rate of change. When I say that it is dropping at the rate of three 
degrees per mile as I go west, I am giving one of its space rates of change. In 
discussing quantities which have a distribution both in time and in space, a 
natural mathematical law is the partial differential equation in which time 
rates of change and space rates of change are related to one another in a 
system where time and space are both infinitely subdivisible. Thus, Leibniz, 
in arguing for the continuity of the physical world, became the spokesman 
for a view in direct contradiction to atomism.
The development of physics since his time has brought both atomism 
and the continuistic theory to a perfection and to a sharpness of opposi­
tion which they did not possess in his day. The molecule has been all but 
seen, and the chemical evidence for the existence of the discrete atom is 
clear. Beyond the atom, new vistas of atomicity have been discovered in the 
electron, the proton, and the many new fundamental particles discovered 
in the atomic nucleus; while in the meantime the continuum theory has 
become a useful and almost indispensable tool for the study of the dynam­
ics of gases, liquids, and solids and for the theory of light and electricity. 
That these two great directions of thought have come into head-on colli­
sion with one another has led to some of the chief problems of modern 
physics.
This collision began to take shape about a hundred years ago, when Clerk 
Maxwell developed what is now known as the kinetic theory of gases. A gas 
consists of particles called molecules which can move in several indepen­
dent ways. A molecule can move up and down, to the right and to the left, 
and to and fro as a whole, besides which it can rotate about a vertical axis 
and two horizontal axes. All these motions belong to it as a rigid body, but 
it is often more than a rigid body and may have internal vibrations which 

296 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
appertain to it as an elastic system. We can count the number of modes of 
motion, or, as a physicist calls them, degrees of freedom, of a single particle. 
By adding up the number of the modes of motion of the different particles 
forming a gas, we can determine the number of modes of motion or degrees 
of freedom of the gas as a whole. Maxwell remarked that when a gas has 
settled down to an internal statistical equilibrium, each mode of motion 
will have on the average a certain energy and this average energy will be 
the same for all modes of motion. This is a most important theorem in con­
necting temperature with the other properties of a gas.
It results at once that the ability of a given volume of a gas to absorb 
energy depends on the number of degrees of freedom per unit volume. The 
measure of this ability is called the specific heat. It enables us to ascertain 
how much energy a body in heat equilibrium will contain at a given tem­
perature. If the number of degrees of freedom per unit volume is infinite, 
the body will be able to take up an infinite amount of energy with a finite 
increase in temperature; or what is the same, a finite accretion to its energy 
will not make it any hotter. If we apply a similar argument to a continuous 
medium, which will naturally have an infinite number of degrees of free­
dom per unit volume, then this too will have infinite specific heat, and the 
notion of temperature will not be applicable to it.
Now, Clerk Maxwell was not only the originator of this theory we have 
just indicated, which is known as the kinetic theory of gases, but also of the 
theory that light and electricity are transmitted as oscillations of a continu­
ous medium known as the luminiferous ether. This means that the ether 
can be heated indefinitely without getting any hotter. Since the motions 
of the luminiferous ether are known as radiation, taking the form of light, 
X rays, radiant heat, etc., the Maxwell theory of the ether is inconsistent 
with the existence of any temperature to radiation. Maxwell’s theory of 
light, satisfactory as it is for free radiation in the absence of matter, makes 
it impossible for light to come to equilibrium with matter in temperature as 
it is actually known to do in a furnace. Something more and different from 
the Maxwell theory was needed for the study of the radiation of light, and 
this something more was suggested by Planck.
Planck observed not only that there is a temperature to radiation, but 
that the relation between this temperature and the character of the radia­
tion follows a definite law, which is known by Planck’s name. In order to 
justify this law, he supposed that radiation was emitted according to certain 
small atomic quantities which he called quanta, and this work of his is the 
first form of the quantum theory of modern physics.

23: The Period of My Travels Abroad—Max Born and Quantum Theory 
297
In general, 1900 represents a critical period in scientific thinking. It had 
not been many years since the most advanced scientists considered that 
future centuries would be devoted to determining already existing physi­
cal theory to further and further decimal places of accuracy. About 1900, 
however, the quantum theory was beginning to destroy some of the ideas 
of continuity in the field of radiation. The Gibbsian statistical mechanics 
was already well on the way to replacing determinism by a qualified inde­
terminism, and the optical experiment of Michelson and Morley, which 
showed the impossibility of measuring the velocity of the earth through 
the ether, had recently become an essential part of the chain of ideas which 
was to lead to Einstein’s relativity.
Einstein’s theory of relativity was formulated in 1905, and in the same 
year he made a critical contribution to quantum theory. He showed that 
certain of the constants involved in the photoelectric effect, which con­
nects light absorption or emission and electricity, were numerically and 
dimensionally the same as a famous constant used by Planck in quantum 
theory. Seven years later, in 1912, Niels Bohr, of Copenhagen, discovered 
the same constant in the theory of the radiation of the hydrogen atom.
The theory of radiation which was put forward by Bohr was brilliantly 
although not perfectly successful. It was a curious hybrid in which features 
of a discontinuous theory were somewhat unnaturally grafted on to a con­
tinuous theory like that of planetary orbits. This quantized mechanics had 
important numerical successes and rather incomplete theoretical unity. 
By 1925, the year of my talk in Göttingen, the world was clamoring for 
a theory of quantum effects which would be a unified whole and not a 
patchwork.
Without being aware of the way in which interest in Göttingen was 
already concentrating about the difficulties of the quantum theory, my 
talk in Göttingen, like quantum theory, dealt with a field in which the 
laws of ordinary magnitudes do not continue down into the range of the 
very small. As I have said, my talk concerned harmonic analysis—in other 
words, the breaking up of complicated motions into sums of simple oscil­
lations. Harmonic analysis, for all its many modern ramifications, has a 
history going back to Pythagoras and his interest in music and the vibra­
tions of the strings of the lyre. There are many ways in which a string can 
vibrate, but the most elementary and simplest of all is known as the simple 
harmonic oscillation. The motion of the string of a musical instrument, if 
indeed it is not simply harmonic, is well known to be the most elementary 
sort of combination of simple harmonic motions. In fact, for a first very 
crude approximation, we can treat such a motion as simply harmonic.

298 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
Now, let us see what musical notation really is. The position of a note 
vertically on the staff gives its pitch or frequency, while the horizontal 
notation of music divides this pitch in accordance with the time. The time 
notation contains the indication of the rate of the metronome, the subdivi­
sion of sound into whole notes, half notes, quarter notes, etc., the various 
rests, and much else besides. Thus musical notation at first sight seems to 
deal with a system in which vibrations can be characterized in two inde­
pendent ways, namely, according to frequency, and according to duration 
in time.
A finer assumption of the nature of musical notation was that things are 
not as simple as all this. The number of oscillations per second involved 
in a note, while it is a statement concerning frequency, is also a statement 
concerning something distributed in time. In fact, the frequency of a note 
and its timing interact in a very complicated manner.
Ideally, a simple harmonic motion is something that extends unaltered 
in time from the remote past to the remote future. In a certain sense it exists 
sub specie aeternitatis. To start and to stop a note involves an alteration of its 
frequency composition which may be small, but which is very real. A note 
lasting only over a finite time is to be analyzed as a band of simple har­
monic motions, no one of which can be taken as the only simple harmonic 
motion present. Precision in time means a certain vagueness in pitch, just 
as precision in pitch involves an indifference to time.
The considerations are not only theoretically important but correspond 
to a real limitation of what the musician can do. You can’t play a jig on the 
lowest register of the organ. If you take a note oscillating at a rate of sixteen 
times a second, and continue it only for one twentieth of a second, what 
you will get is essentially a single push of air without any marked or even 
noticeable periodic character. It will not sound to the ear like a note but 
rather like a blow on the eardrum. Actually, the complicated mechanism of 
the reflection of impulses which is necessary to make an organ pipe speak 
in a musical manner will not have a fair chance to get started. A fast jig on 
the lowest register of the organ is, in fact, not so much bad music as no 
music at all.
It was this paradox of harmonic analysis which formed an important ele­
ment of my talk at Göttingen in 1925. At that time, I had clearly in mind 
the possibility that the laws of physics are like musical notation, things that 
are real and important provided that we do not take them too seriously and 
push the time scale down beyond a certain level. In other words, I meant 
to emphasize that, just as in quantum theory, there is in music a difference 
of behavior between those things belonging to very small intervals of time 

23: The Period of My Travels Abroad—Max Born and Quantum Theory 
299
(or space) and what we accept on the normal scale of every day, and that 
the infinite divisibility of the universe is a concept which modern physics 
cannot any longer accept without serious qualification.
To see the relevance of my ideas to the actual development of quan­
tum theory, we must step ahead a few years, to the time when Werner 
Heisenberg formulated his principle of duality or indeterminism. The clas­
sical physics of Newton is one in which a particle may have at the same 
time a position and a momentum—or, what is not very different, a position 
and a velocity. Heisenberg eventually observed that under the conditions 
under which a position can be measured with high precision, a momen­
tum or velocity can be measured only with low precision, and vice versa. 
This duality is of exactly the same nature as the duality between pitch and 
time in music, and in fact Heisenberg came to explain it through the same 
harmonic analysis which I had already presented to the Göttingers at least 
five years before.
The two main figures of the early days of quantum mechanics in Göt­
tingen were Max Born and Heisenberg. Max Born was much the older of 
the two; and, although it is unquestionably his line of thought which led 
to the origination of the new quantum mechanics, the actual initiation of 
the theory as a separate entity belongs to his younger colleague. Born has 
always been a calm, gentle, musical soul, whose chief enthusiasm in life has 
been to play two-piano music with his wife. He has been the most modest 
of scholars, and it was only in 1954, after grooming other scholars for work 
which led them to the Nobel Prize, that he himself was awarded it.
Heisenberg, who was at that time in his early twenties, had a less retiring 
personality than Born and was able to taste success at the very beginning 
of his life. It must have been a great disappointment for Born to find that 
his favorite student was drifting off in the direction of German national­
ism. The tragedy was made more acute because Born himself was of Jewish 
origin and Heisenberg ultimately joined the Nazis. This was enough of a 
tragedy for any one normal life, but we must add to it that later, when 
Born had retired to Great Britain after the war, his most brilliant student 
was—Klaus Fuchs.
As I have said before, my Göttingen paper had attracted a certain amount 
of attention, and hints were dropped to me, emanating from Hilbert, Cou­
rant, and Born, that I might be the recipient of an invitation to work at Göt­
tingen some time the next year. In the meantime, Born was coming over to 
lecture at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and I prepared myself 
to work with him through the intervening months.

300 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
When Professor Born came to the United States he was enormously 
excited about the new basis Heisenberg had just given for the quantum 
theory of the atom. This theory was an essentially discrete one, and the 
tools for its study consisted in certain square arrays of numbers known 
as matrices. The separateness of the lines and columns of these matrices 
was associated with the separateness of the radiation lines in the spectrum 
of an atom. However, not all parts of the spectrum of an atom are made 
of discrete lines, and Born wanted a theory which would generalize these 
matrices or grids of numbers into something with a continuity comparable 
to that of the continuous part of the spectrum. The job was a highly techni­
cal one, and he counted on me for aid.
There is no point in my going into the technique of a piece of work 
which not only is highly abstract but was to a certain extent a transitory 
stage of quantum theory. Suffice it to say that I had the generalization of 
matrices already at hand in the form of what is known as operators. Born 
had a good many qualms about the soundness of my method and kept 
wondering if Hilbert would approve of my mathematics. Hilbert did, in 
fact, approve of it, and operators have since remained an essential part 
of quantum theory. They were introduced about the same time by the 
independent work of Paul Dirac in England. Moreover, they turned out 
to be useful in tying up another form of quantum mechanics just being 
invented in Vienna by Erwin Schrödinger with the Heisenberg form of the 
theory.
From this time on, quantum mechanics went into an active phase of 
growth in which young men like Heisenberg himself, Dirac, Wolfgang 
Pauli, and John von Neumann were making new discoveries almost every 
day. This feverish atmosphere is not one in which I function well, nor did 
I feel the need of intervening in a subject which was already so compe­
tently handled. I did have an idea that the philosophy behind my old paper 
on Brownian motion could be exploited in quantum mechanics; but the 
type of difficulty which bothered me and the type of problem where my 
method was useful were not to become actual for another twenty years. I 
have returned to this field in the last decade, together with Armand Siegel 
of Boston University, and I am hopeful that now at last I shall have some­
thing useful to say which has not been said by other people.
In all this work, past and to come, I must remember—and the reader 
must remember—that the task of physics at the present day is not that 
of carrying out into further and further refinements an existing theory 
where essentials are well understood. Physics is at present a mass of partial 

23: The Period of My Travels Abroad—Max Born and Quantum Theory 
301
theories which no man has yet been able to render truly and clearly consis­
tent. It has been well said that the modern physicist is a quantum theorist 
on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday and a student of gravitational relativ­
ity theory on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday. On Sunday the physicist is 
neither but is praying to his God that someone, preferably himself, will find 
the reconciliation between these two views.
Notes
1.  In this chapter I must face the problem of trying to explain in nontechnical lan­
guage what the technical meaning of some very difficult work has been. The reader 
who is not interested in a detailed documentation of my work at this time is advised 
to skip over the technical passages.
2.  The step from Leibniz to Swift involves certain aspects of the history of the early 
eighteenth century which deserve comment. Leibniz was a great philosopher and 
physicist by avocation, but his official position had been that of archivist to the 
court of Hanover. In this position he showed himself to be not only a librarian but a 
diplomat of the first rank, eager for the welfare and the aggrandizement of his ruler. 
There is much to be said for the conjecture that he was active in the negotiations 
which put the house of Hanover on the throne of England. Since it was the Whig 
party in England which desired the coming of the Hanoverians, in order to termi­
nate the reign of the unpopular Stuarts, Leibniz became identified with the Whig 
intrigues. His contact with England was greatly facilitated by his membership and 
his active share in the Royal Society.
Swift, on the other hand, was a Tory supporter of the Stuarts, and he took an 
active share in the attempted coup d'état which tried to put the Old Pretender on the 
throne after the death of Queen Anne. Thus, Leibniz and Swift were key figures, 
respectively, of the two conflicting parties in the English politics of the day. It is no 
wonder that a great antagonism grew up between them.
This antagonism is shown in the third of the four books of Gulliver’s Travels, the 
voyage to Laputa. Many people have wondered at the virulence with which Swift 
lashes scientists, these impractical projectors who measure a man with a sextant to 
fit him with a suit of clothes, who extract sunbeams from cucumbers, and who 
attempt to attain all the learning of the ages by a process equivalent to Eddington’s 
monkeys and typewriters. In fact, they represent nothing but the Royal Society and 
in particular the Leibnizian influence in the Royal Society. It is thus not astonishing 
that one of the targets of Swift’s wit should be the essentially Leibnizian situation of 
the fleas upon the fleas and so on ad infinitum.
This was not the only place at which Swift showed himself fascinated with the 
problem of the variable scale of nature and of what would happen to the world and 
the individuals in it under a contraction or an expansion. It is likewise the theme of 

302 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
the first two books of Gulliver’s Travels, the voyage to Lilliput, where the inhabitants 
are one twelfth the height of a normal man, and the voyage to Brobdingnag, where 
the inhabitants are giants seventy feet tall.
In both cases, Swift’s imagination concerning the effect of change of size is keen 
but limited. It applies to the physical dimensions but not to their powers of motion. 
He is not aware that the Lilliputians, if they were made of human flesh and blood, 
should be able to jump a height several times greater than their own, nor of the 
similar fact that his Brobdingnagians would be so slothful and earth-bound that 
they would be scarcely able to stand up.

24  To Europe as a Guggenheim Fellow with My Bride
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
24: 
To 
Europe 
as 
a 
Guggenheim 
Fellow 
with 
My 
Bride
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
For the last few years, the meetings between Margaret and me had been a 
bit too intermittent to suit us. Her teaching and her continued obligations 
to her own family kept her fully occupied. For my part, my position was 
not yet sufficiently secure for me to take on the obligations of a married 
man. Yet the recognition I was receiving from Germany, together with an 
improved economic status at M.I.T. consequent upon it, now for the first 
time made it possible for me to look the responsibilities of marriage in the 
face. Margaret came down to see me at Christmas. I proposed again and 
was accepted, and we decided to get married and to take the European trip 
together as our honeymoon.
However, there were difficulties of detail. It was planned that I should 
arrive in Göttingen in April for the summer semester, at which time Marga­
ret would still be teaching modern languages at Juniata College, in Pennsyl­
vania. She did not wish to resign from the job two months before the end 
of the school year. For a while we thought of getting married in Europe, but 
we found that the red tape attendant upon this made it practically impos­
sible. We played with the idea of an embassy marriage or of a marriage at 
sea by the captain of an American ship. These courses of action also ran 
into serious difficulties. Finally, we had to admit that the practical and sen­
sible thing was to get married in the United States just before my trip, for 
Margaret to go back to her teaching work, and for her to join me in Europe 
during the summer.
Margaret left Boston again for her work at Juniata. In the meantime I 
found myself very busy and hardly able to think of the new problems of 
marriage and of the trip. I had an active social life at the time, and on one 
occasion soon after Christmas the Borns invited a group of us to their apart­
ment to show off a new electric train they had bought for their children in 
Germany. There was quite a group of scientists and electrical engineers pre­
sent to witness this occasion—Vannevar Bush, now head of the Carnegie 

304 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
Institution of Washington; Manuel Sandoval Vallarta—the young man who 
had helped me to translate my article into French—at present vice-minister 
of education in Mexico, formerly professor of physics at M.I.T., and many 
others whose names have become household words among those dealing 
with electricity. When the train was assembled for display and the switch 
was thrown, the transformer flashed and burned out. It was a considerable 
time before our combined engineering talents were able to diagnose the 
trouble. That part of Boston was on direct current, on which no transformer 
could function.
I was closely associated with Vannevar Bush in my work during this 
time. Bush was already developing some of the various forms of electrical 
computing machines which were later to make him famous. From time 
to time he would call on me for advice, and I tried to do what I could in 
designing computational apparatus on my own account.
I have already spoken of my work on harmonic analysis, which even at 
that time seemed to me to be pointed directly toward important practical 
realizations. Since then these applied realizations have been made; and, as 
I shall show later, generalized harmonic analysis is an important part of my 
work even to the present day.
One time when I was visiting the show at the old Copley Theater, an idea 
came into my mind which simply distracted all my attention from the per­
formance. It was the notion of an optical computing machine for harmonic 
analysis. I had already learned not to disregard these stray ideas, no matter 
when they came to my attention, and I promptly left the theater to work 
out some of the details of my new plan. The next day I consulted Bush.
The idea was valid, and we made a couple of attempts to put it into work­
ing form. In these, my contribution was wholly intellectual, for I am among 
the clumsiest of men and it is utterly beyond me even to put two wires 
together so they will make a satisfactory contact. Bush is, among other 
things, one of the greatest apparatus men that America has ever seen, and 
he thinks with his hands as well as with his brain. Thus, our attempts in a 
new sort of harmonic analyzer were quite reasonably successful, and since 
then they have led to work even more successful.
Ultimately the spring came, and I was about to leave for Germany. I was 
in a very exulted mood at what I conceived to be the first wholehearted 
recognition that had come my way, and I am afraid that I talked more of 
it to the newspapers than was strictly becoming. I felt that I had now got 
from under the pressure and the indifference of Birkhoff and Veblen. I was 
more eager to begin the duties of my new position, and I must have been 
an insufferable young man in my boasting and gloating.

24: To Europe as a Guggenheim Fellow with My Bride 
305
Margaret and I were married in the parish house of a Lutheran Church in 
Philadelphia. We left at once for a few days’ advance honeymoon in Atlan­
tic City, to separate again for the months until Margaret should have dis­
charged her duties at Juniata. She saw me off at the boat in New York. The 
hotel to which I took her in New York was the old Murray Hill Hotel, which 
had been for many years the special headquarters of the meetings of the 
American Mathematical Society, and which was a gloomy old-fashioned 
marble and porphyry mausoleum inhabited almost exclusively by elderly 
ladies, around whom flitted the spirits of the not-so-gay nineties.
After this depressing incident I took Margaret to the theater. As luck 
would have it, we went to see Ibsen’s Ghosts, the gloomiest of all plays by 
that most gloomy playwright. These things would not have mattered much 
if they had only been incidents in a prolonged honeymoon, but as a pre­
lude to a separation of many months they must have been devastating to 
Margaret’s peace of mind.
I arrived in England to see the Devonshire spring already established and 
the primroses in full bloom. After visiting Hardy at Oxford, where he had 
now become professor, I went to Göttingen and took up quarters with the 
landlady of my student days.
I have already mentioned Richard Courant, the young mathematician 
on whom the administrative mantle of Felix Klein had fallen, as the pope 
of Göttingen. Courant, who had been amiable on my last Göttingen visit, 
now turned out to be somewhat hostile. The list of Guggenheim fellows 
had appeared in the American newspapers, and, as I have said, I had been 
a bit loquacious concerning my prospective trip. I gave an interview which 
came to the attention of the all-seeing eye of the Amerika-Institut in Ber­
lin, which went on to dig up the fact of my father’s bitter opposition to 
Germany in the First World War.
While Nazism did not become official in Germany until 1932, there was 
a strong and bitter nationalist element which had already assumed great 
power, and which had begun to terrify the more liberal elements in the 
universities. These universities were of course government institutions, and 
thus subject to nationalistic pressure. This was also the precise moment at 
which Courant wanted very much to gain the good will of the United States. 
The Rockefeller Foundation was deeply interested in European reconstruc­
tion. As far as mathematics was concerned, it had picked out the University 
of Göttingen as the first object of its benefactions. This was entirely natu­
ral and right, because Göttingen at that time held an unquestioned first 
rank as the great center of world mathematics. Later on that year, as I then 

306 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
learned, Birkhoff was to visit Göttingen and to make a detailed report on 
the project for an improved and enlarged mathematical institute.
I do not envy Courant his difficult position between the upper and the 
nether millstones. However, it was myself rather than Courant who felt 
them grind the hardest. Courant’s attitude to me became quite cold, and 
the favors which had been promised me were either denied or granted in 
such a grudging way that they were not acceptable.
Courant scolded me for my newspaper publicity and was disposed to 
deny me the assistant and the complete official recognition which he had 
promised me. Nevertheless, he allowed me to continue in Göttingen in an 
unofficial way, and after some persuasion found an able young mathemati­
cian to aid in the preparation of my lectures, provided I should pay him out 
of my own pocket.
I was left at Göttingen with a position that belonged neither to flesh, 
to fowl, nor to good red herring. The humiliation brought me to the edge 
of a nervous breakdown. Partly as a consequence of this, my lectures were 
less successful than I could have wished, both as examples of mathemati­
cal research and as lectures in the German language. I have no doubt that I 
would have broken down if it had not been for the loyalty of a few Ameri­
can and English friends, who cheered me up in my blues, went for long 
walks with me, and attended my classes at a time at which almost all the 
German students and docents had given them up as a bad job.
Chief among the Americans was J. R. Kline, a Pennsylvania German who 
was many years later to become the secretary of the American Mathemati­
cal Society and the head of the mathematics department at the University 
of Pennsylvania. He was there with his wife and little boy, and they took 
me in almost as a member of the family until Margaret came over and light­
ened their burden for them.
Of my English friends the chief was A. E. Ingham, then a don at the 
University of Leeds and later a fellow of King’s College, Cambridge. Ingham 
was a shy, almost timid man who had already begun to do distinguished 
work in the theory of numbers. It is to Ingham that I owe a scientific lead 
which has carried me to much of my best work.
There were places in my theory of generalized harmonic analysis which 
I was nearly but not quite able to bring to a definite close. I needed certain 
theorems, and I found myself proving similar but not identical ones. Ing­
ham pointed out that many similar problems had been solved by Hardy 
and Littlewood by what they called the method of Tauberian theorems. The 
study of these is a job belonging to the technique of the mathematician 

24: To Europe as a Guggenheim Fellow with My Bride 
307
rather than to his repertory of ideas, and I do not intend to try to expound 
it to the layman. It is enough to say that I made a new attack on this field 
which was thoroughly successful, and that I not only closed the gap in my 
earlier work but was able to go on to the simplification of large areas in the 
theory of whole numbers.
With Ingham and Kline as my friends, I turned my attention to a pre­
mature idea of reviving the two old Göttingen clubs, the American and the 
British Colony which had been the center of my life there in my student 
days. Kline and I had hoped to improve German-American relations by re-
establishing the American colony. Accordingly, we turned for aid to one of 
the subadministrators of the university.
This subadministrator, who turned out to be a very questionable charac­
ter, backed us to the limit. He introduced us to a group of young German 
students, whom I later found to have all the marks of the Nazi about them. 
Our administrator friend saw to it that our plans got a certain publicity in 
a local newspaper.
This came to Courant’s attention, and he was furious. He squelched 
the subadministrator with all the fund of contempt which the German pro­
fessor has for the underlings of the university office. We ourselves got the 
backlash of his anger, and my very weak position at Göttingen became even 
weaker.
I had expected that my Göttingen recognition would be a way of getting 
out from under the continued hostile pressure of Birkhoff in the United 
States, but now Birkhoff had himself come to Göttingen. He represented 
the American whose support Courant most wanted.
Courant approached me as an avenue through which he might win Birk­
hoff’s good will. I told him that I had no influence whatever with Birkhoff 
and that Birkhoff’s entire reaction to me was hostile. I kept away from Birk­
hoff on his visit. I felt that the relations between Birkhoff and Courant were 
their own business.
Soon after school had closed in the United States, Margaret came over 
to join me in Göttingen. I fetched her from the boat at Le Havre, and 
after a few days together in Paris and a short trip to Holland we arrived in 
Göttingen. It was a pretty sorry and confused state of things into which I 
introduced her, and it must have been a great shock for a newly wedded 
wife as yet imperfectly acquainted with her husband. Besides consoling me, 
she had serious work to do in bringing my landlady to a proper sense of her 
responsibilities and to a halfway fair treatment of our business relations. 
The difficult situation in which I found myself as far as my relations with 

308 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
Courant were concerned had gone too far for any repair, but Margaret did 
her best to help me mend my fences.
Soon after our arrival we threw a belated wedding party for our friends 
at a well-known Göttingen wine restaurant, where the wine steward did 
everything in his power to see that the wines we ordered were adequate 
without being overly expensive. He pointed out that after the first bottle 
our guests would no longer be interested in the superlative excellence of 
the wines we ordered and suggested that we order a cheaper wine for the 
succeeding bottles. Our guests brought us as a wedding present a beautiful 
tablecloth and set of napkins.
It was not long after that that my parents decided to visit Europe, partly 
to share in my supposed success and partly to keep a supervising eye over 
the newly-married couple. This more than doubled my already unsolvable 
problems. Was I to tell my parents of the rebuff I had received and of the 
reason for it? As I have said, this lay partly in my father’s opinions and in 
a confusion which the Germans had made of the two of us. It has always 
been harder for me to be safely wise than to blurt things out, and I told my 
father what had happened. Naturally, he was much more interested in his 
personal rebuff than in extricating me from my impossible situation. It was 
not a very happy week that we spent together in Göttingen, nor was it pos­
sible to keep my father and mother from going over my head and attempt­
ing to deal directly with the Göttingen people and the German educational 
authorities.
Margaret and I decided to spend our summer vacation in Switzerland. 
We went to Bönigen, a suburb of Interlaken, to a little hotel which my 
sister Bertha and I had already visited on an earlier trip to Europe. Later on 
the Klines came down from Göttingen to join us at the same hotel. Part of 
the time we wandered over the foothills of the Alps and some of the time I 
would play chess with the proprietor, a friendly wine merchant with whom 
we were on the best of terms. But, suddenly, our stay in Bönigen was termi­
nated by a peremptory summons from my parents, who were passing their 
holidays in Innsbruck, in Tyrol.
Margaret and I needed this time for those adjustments in marriage 
which consist primarily in getting acquainted with one another, and which 
are rendered infinitely more difficult by any attempt at surveillance. On the 
other hand, through the course of the years, I had become too emotionally 
dependent on my parents to ignore their summons.
We found Innsbruck delightful, with its walks, its little theater, and its 
scenery, but my parents were in an irreconcilable mood. Father insisted 
on my writing an immediate and unconditional protest to the Prussian 

24: To Europe as a Guggenheim Fellow with My Bride 
309
minister of education. This I knew to be futile, for it was perfectly clear 
that the minister of education was the real source of all my difficulties. It 
was foolish and weak of me to submit, but the habits of years are not easily 
overcome. It took a long time, even after that, for Margaret to build up in 
me a certain degree of independence from my parents as an individual and 
as the head of a family in my own right.
Finally we went to Italy for three weeks of a real honeymoon. We first 
spent a little time in Bolzano, which had but recently been ltalianized from 
its previous South Tyrolean status as Bozen, and which was not happy 
under the change. Then came a brief stay among the dust-covered olive 
groves of the Lago di Carda.
There followed a visit to the magic city of Venice, with its fabulous 
watery streets, its treasures of architecture, and the delightful Lido. This 
Venetian visit would have been pure fairyland if it had not been for the 
black depression caused by my Göttingen experience.
It was no pleasant experience for Margaret to become involved with the 
problems of a neurotic husband at his very lowest emotional level. I had 
become even more of a problem, because my parents had made a policy of 
glossing over my emotional difficulties, instead of confronting Margaret 
with the real task she had undertaken in marrying me.
From Venice we went on to Florence and to Rome. Florence in particular 
seemed to us a city of unbelievable beauty and distinction, which we could 
appreciate even through the veil of our emotional confusion.
However, the time came when we had to decide what to do with my 
remaining half-year abroad. For the immediate future, the meeting of 
the German Association for the Advancement of Science, in Düsseldorf, 
awaited us. After that, we felt that we had had our fill of Göttingen, and we 
decided to spend our remaining time in Europe, until January 1927, in the 
more genial atmosphere of Copenhagen. I had received Harald Bohr’s per­
mission to work with him, and I was determined to make up for the blight 
of my Göttingen visit.
We made a hurried and fatiguing journey to Düsseldorf by way of Swit­
zerland and the Rhine. In Düsseldorf I gave a paper, and I made many new 
and agreeable contacts with German scientists. In particular, I met a young 
mathematician named Robert Schmidt, who was an instructor at the Uni­
versity of Kiel. Schmidt had done some important work on Tauberian theo­
rems which, as I saw, was closely related to my own new ideas. We decided 
to pool our efforts. He pointed out to me in particular that a Tauberian 
theorem of the comprehensive character, the kind that I had some hope of 
proving, would be most valuable in number theory, and in particular in the 

310 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
problem of the distribution of prime numbers: such numbers as 2, 3, 5, 7, 
11, which have no other factor besides one and themselves.
In the late nineties, two great mathematicians, Hadamard and De La 
Vallée Poussin, of Louvain, succeeded in proving that the number of primes 
less than a larger number n was approximately 
n
n
log . Their proofs were thor­
oughly rigorous and satisfying, but somewhat complicated. Their theorem 
had been on the point of being proved for many years before they had suc­
ceeded in demonstrating it, and the great German mathematician Riemann 
had come near to establishing it in the third quarter of the nineteenth cen­
tury. Riemann had made a certain conjecture which he had not been able 
to establish, but which, if it was true, would lead to a much finer estimate 
of the distribution of the primes.
To make a long story short, I found my way clear to using my meth­
ods to give a much simpler proof of the prime-number theorem and 
ultimately several much simpler proofs. It was Schmidt who directed 
my efforts toward this problem, and Schmidt also suggested to me that I 
might be able to establish or refute the Riemann hypothesis. In this more 
difficult problem, however, I have always found my efforts completely 
inadequate.
During my later stay in Copenhagen I made a couple of visits to Schmidt 
at Kiel. At first he was enthusiastic about my new method, but he gradually 
began to lose confidence in what I was doing. He threw the work entirely 
back on my own hands. There were, in fact, some gaps in my proof at that 
early stage; but they were the sort of gaps which were easily filled up. The 
repudiation of my work by Schmidt proved a blessing in disguise, for it gave 
back to me the full control of a piece of research which, if it was not the 
best that I was ever to do, was certainly close to my best, and which gave 
me a reputation incomparably greater than that which any of my earlier 
work had given me.
Courant was at the Düsseldorf meeting, and he tried to get me back again 
for another term in Göttingen. I told him that a further visit to him would 
have no point. Margaret and I made a brief trip to nearby Belgium, from 
which we took an unbelievably fatiguing train voyage to Copenhagen.
To go to Copenhagen by train one had then to take the ferry from 
Warnemünde to Gjedser. We traveled third class and spent an unhappy 
night in the red-painted, roughly-beamed, third-class dining saloon on the 
train ferry. It is a place to make one contemplate all one’s past sins and 
all one’s wasted opportunities. The passengers were huddled against one 
another in an uneasy sleep, and the swinging lanterns cast their oscillating 

24: To Europe as a Guggenheim Fellow with My Bride 
311
shadows on the floor to the tune of the rocking of the boat and the creak­
ing of the timbers.
When we got to Copenhagen we were nearly dead, and we slept for a 
whole day. Then I looked up Harald Bohr and prepared for some months of 
research. We saw a good deal of the brothers Bohr. I remember that at the 
apartment of one of them, I believe it was Niels, there was a plaque of the 
two as children which gave them an undeniable peasantlike appearance, 
which they had lost in the course of the years. One of the other guests, a 
lady who was professor of classics at the University of Copenhagen, and 
who smoked big black cigars incessantly, told us that some friend had com­
miserated with their mother for having two such dull boys for children. 
In view of the fact that Niels Bohr has become the national hero of Den­
mark because of his scientific work and lives in a palace donated by one of 
the great Copenhagen breweries and that Harald was certainly the greatest 
mathematician ever to live in Denmark, this story now seems more than a 
little ridiculous.
Copenhagen was a delightful city which combined the intellectual ame­
nities of a world capital with the hominess of a small town. In the intellec­
tual world everyone knew everyone else, and there was an atmosphere of 
friendliness pervading the whole of life.
The Bohrs were charming to us, as was their colleague, Professor 
Nørlund, whom I had already met in Strasbourg. Nørlund was a tall, hand­
some, bearded man, who had gone from pure mathematical work to the 
headship of the Geodetic Survey of Greenland, and whose house was fre­
quented by bluff Arctic sea captains. Mrs. Nørlund retained the beauty 
which had so impressed me at Strasbourg. She was most cordial to us. We 
had already decided to learn Danish, and were taking Danish lessons with 
a high-school teacher who had spent some time in the United States. Mrs. 
Nørlund supplemented our Danish instruction by reading with us Ander­
sen’s Fairy Tales in the original. The beauty of these fairy tales in the sweet, 
intimate Danish language was brought out to the full by the charming way 
in which she read them.
Besides my work on Tauberian theorems and number theory, I made one 
or two new starts in Copenhagen on important points in harmonic analy­
sis. Copenhagen was a rest and a refuge after the turmoil of Göttingen.
I have said that we left Copenhagen for a brief trip to Germany, where 
my wife visited her relatives and I worked with Robert Schmidt. After 
that we returned to the extended festivities of the Danish Christmas and 
New Year season. Two weeks are devoted to nothing but parties, and the 

312 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
crowds take delight in milling up and down the narrow business street 
of Strøget.
The time had now come to go back to the States. We returned by way of 
England. Margaret and I took over the room of some American friends of 
hers who had been studying in London. I found the mild winter a fine occa­
sion to talk over my work with Hardy and take advantage of his criticisms. 
Then we returned to the States after a calm winter voyage and spent a day 
or two with my sister Constance before we started house hunting.

25  1927–1931. Years of Growth and Progress
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
25: 
1927–1931. 
Years 
of 
Growth 
and 
Progress
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
We stayed a few days with my sister on Pleasant Street, in Belmont, where 
there had been a blizzard just before we arrived. I remember how sooth­
ing to me was the muted sound of the slapping of heavy chains on the 
snow. Then we started house hunting. We found an apartment just across 
the Arlington line. I began to try to adapt myself to a life of handyman 
domesticity, for which I had no particular qualifications. I made good after 
a fashion as a furnace tender and furniture varnisher, but this was never 
my métier.
Dirk Jan Struik, a Dutch mathematician whom I had met at Göttingen 
and who was now a new appointee at M.I.T., had already come over some 
months before and was immersed in his work. He fitted into the familylike 
environment of our department very well, and I began to study his field of 
differential geometry. We started work together on an attempt to apply his 
ideas to differential equations and, in particular, to the Schrӧdinger equa­
tion of quantum theory. We were off the main line of progress, but we did 
obtain some interesting theorems. Our work was not the sort which makes 
a big splash in the literature, but it was the sort which is rediscovered years 
later, and which has a permanent but limited interest.
The Struiks and ourselves spent the summer in our beloved town of 
Sandwich, in New Hampshire. We used as our headquarters a boarding 
house which had long been known to us. Margaret was pregnant and terri­
bly uncomfortable with poison ivy rash, so she could not accompany Struik 
and me on our hikes. The two of us, however, ranged the nearby mountains 
and made a larger expedition together to the Presidentials. From this we 
returned bearded like the pard. Struik promptly shaved off his beard, which 
had made him look as if he had been painted by Rembrandt, and Margaret 
started to trim mine down by degrees, until it attained the exiguous propor­
tions of the beard which I continue to wear to the present day.

314 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
We had many friends among our country neighbors. These included 
Clare George, a well-to-do, eccentric, mannish spinster, who affected trou­
sers at a period when these were not yet in vogue for women, and who used 
to puff a furtive cigarette when she was alone with my wife. We saw her 
often at the home of our friends, the Corlisses. Louis Corliss is a Cornell 
engineer who had worked for the Sperry Gyroscope people in the early 
days, until a series of deaths in the family and ill health due to overwork 
had led him to choose the life of a farmer on his family farm rather than the 
confusion of modem engineering and industrial life. He was a widower, liv­
ing with his grandmother and his mother. The whole family was charming 
to us and has continued to be among our close friends. Grandma Corliss 
died some twenty years ago, and Corliss married the nurse who attended to 
her in her last days. Their daughter, Janet Corliss, has become my trusted 
secretary during the summer months and has assisted me with the prepara­
tion of this manuscript.
Clare George and Louis Corliss’s mother were well aware that I loved 
the Sandwich region and that Margaret was coming to love it. We felt that 
we wanted our prospective children to have the advantages of country life 
that had been granted in one way or another to each of us. Our friends 
made themselves busy scouring the neighborhood for a suitable summer 
home. They found one on a knoll on the Bear Camp Pond road. The house 
was uninhabited. It had been only recently inhabited, however, and was in 
good condition. When Margaret and I made the circuit of its weed-grown 
lawns and peered through its cobweb-covered windows into its graciously 
proportioned rooms, we knew we had found what we wanted.
We sought out the names of the caretaker and of the lawyer who was 
entrusted with the property. The region had been going downhill from the 
Civil War to that time, and real estate prices were at a dead bottom. The 
price named, if not within our immediate reach, was not outside what we 
could hope to pay within a few years. We agreed that it was the summer 
place for us.
Soon after that, my parents came up to visit us at our boarding house. 
We showed them the country place we were thinking of buying, and they 
were enthusiastic about it and helped us to purchase it. Ever since, our vaca­
tions in the White Mountains have meant for us the relaxation we need 
from the strenuous life of M.I.T., and also a chance to give our children the 
experience of the country and the freedom of living which we feel to be the 
birthright of every child.
As a matter of fact, Margaret and I needed the place as much as we hoped 
our prospective children would need it. Teaching at a university is a very 

25: 1927–1931. Years of Growth and Progress 
315
strenuous job, but teaching combined with research is a full load for any 
man. Much of my research depended on free exchange of ideas with other 
men; but there always comes a time when this preliminary work is done 
and when I have had to spend my main attention on writing up the work in 
compact and acceptable form. This writing can be done best when there are 
no distractions and when my life is a simple alternation between concen­
trated intellectual effort and the completely non-intellectual pleasures of 
roaming the countryside, meeting my non-professional friends, and swim­
ming and basking on the beach.
There are many people who believe that the summer vacation of a col­
lege professor is a very special sort of junket, a pleasure granted to the intel­
lectual in return for his smaller salary and his unexalted position in the 
American scale of social values. Nothing could be further from the case. 
Severe work of a research nature drains one dry, and without an ample 
opportunity to rest as intensely as one has worked the quality of ones’ 
research must go down and down.
I do not mean to make the claim that only intellectuals need long vaca­
tions. I am quite certain that the continuous pressure of industrial work 
and the fragmentary vacations given as a surcease for this work are respon­
sible for the early aging of many of our best minds in industry. This con­
dition has become particularly acute since the war, for we have acted on 
the hypothesis that in times of stress it is a sort of treason to relax. I am 
convinced that our policy of continued tension is foolish and that it fails to 
serve the end of the best use of our human resources.
My older daughter, Barbara, was born during the next academic year, 
1927–28, and I began as a very clumsy pupil in the art of baby sitting and 
of hanging out a long signal hoist of diapers.
The next summer, we settled on our new estate with our new baby. My 
father had given me his superannuated Model T beach wagon, and he had 
made several trips with me to bring up the necessary furniture. In those 
days we were without a telephone, without electricity, and even without 
a stove. We prepared Barbara’s formula in the fireplace and did our rudi­
mentary cooking there until such a time as we could get a second-hand 
two-burner oil stove. To the present day we remain without running water, 
although we have found a very satisfactory substitute for this in the form 
of a force pump and gravity tank.
We used to take the baby down to the beach of Bear Camp Pond, where 
she, like our second daughter, Peggy, practically grew up in the water. The 
beach was semipublic and was frequented by a large number of neighbors 
with children of all ages. I initiated these children into the habit of taking 

316 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
long mountain hikes, and now when I go to the beach, I see there the chil­
dren of these children.
We had the Klines as our guests that summer. They were charmed by 
the region, and ultimately decided first to rent and then to buy a summer 
cottage there. I have said that the region was about at its lowest economic 
point at the time that we bought our house. From the agricultural stand­
point, it has perhaps lost further ground, but it has become a popular sum­
mer home for a very congenial middle-class group, among them a number 
of university people. Some of these, indeed, have since retired, and spend 
a large part of the year in those restful surroundings. At present it would 
be easy to recruit the faculty of a very fair university from our neighbors 
without bringing anyone in especially for the purpose.
The improvement in my scientific status went on apace. My new person­
ality as a married man made it possible to allay some part of the hostility 
with which I had been received in mathematical circles. Nevertheless, the 
many barriers against me were still up. Birkhoff had made his prejudice a 
matter of principle, and saw to it that many academic offers which oth­
erwise might have been open to me were diverted elsewhere. As this was 
the period during which the status of the college professor was improved 
greatly over the country as a whole, and in which most of my colleagues 
were preparing to save for their old age, this deprivation was serious for me. 
Tech indeed kept on advancing me steadily, notwithstanding the absence 
of outside offers, but it is an unquestioned fact that the existence of such 
outside offers would have improved my position in one way or another.
In default of American offers for an improved position coming through 
the normal channels, I began to look around and to see if I could not do 
something for myself elsewhere. The British universities and the universi­
ties of the British colonies operate under the legal provision that if any 
vacancy occurs it must be advertised and the applications of all candidates 
must be considered at least in a formal way. This requirement is not taken 
too seriously, and in many cases a decision has already been made for all 
practical purposes at the time the vacancy has been advertised. These adver­
tisements appear on the back pages of Nature and other British intellectual 
publications. I sent in my name for one vacancy at Kings College in London 
and for one in Australia, but of course nothing happened. Nevertheless, 
the practical evidence that I was trying to better myself was of considerable 
benefit to me as far as my M.I.T. advancement went.
It was about this time that there was a summer meeting of the American 
Mathematical Society at Amherst. Margaret went with me, and we both 
thoroughly enjoyed the occasion. The important matter for me was that 

25: 1927–1931. Years of Growth and Progress 
317
I saw there a great deal of my friend, J. D. Tamarkin, another Gottingen 
acquaintance, and that he seemed favorably impressed with my research. 
He became my enthusiastic and sincere backer, and it was more through 
him than through anyone else that my American recognition began to take 
serious proportions.
Tamarkin was a brilliant mathematician whose origins were in those 
days before the First World War, when life in Russia was very good for 
those above middle-class standing. In America he attempted to carry out 
the open-handed lavish hospitality which belonged to prewar Russia. He 
had escaped from Russia at the risk of his life and had won an enthusiastic 
reception from Professor R. G. D. Richardson, of Brown University. Tam­
arkin’s mathematical standards were of the highest, and he welcomed my 
work at a time when those of a purely American tradition did not think 
very much of it.
During these years, Hardy made a series of visits to the United States. He 
also thought well of my work, and between him and Tamarkin I began to 
be heard of in this country, but I was never able to forget that the people 
to whom I owed the greatest part of my recognition were not Americans.
The years after I came back from my trip of 1926 and before my trip 
of 1931–32, were of course the years of Coolidge prosperity and of the 
depression. Even in our relatively protected academic life we felt the strong 
impact of both phases of national and world existence. As I have said, Har­
vard salaries had been raised during the boom years to a very considerable 
extent; and although Tech salaries lagged, there was still the expectation on 
the part of many that they might gradually climb, if not to Harvard levels, 
to a reasonable imitation thereof. As a consequence, many of my colleagues 
at both institutions were talking stock market and behaving like capitalists. 
You could not get a group of five college professors together without hear­
ing a comparative evaluation of the popular stocks of the day. One or two 
of my younger colleagues devoted more attention to the course of their 
investments than to their academic work.
I never fully believed in the boom, though I was quite well aware of 
its consequences on our lives. Too many of the values were paper values 
which, as I even then saw, could vanish over night. The farmers went in 
for those silver-fox farms which even the slightest slump would deprive 
of a market. Some of my colleagues tried to supplement their incomes by 
breeding fancy kinds of dogs and Siamese cats, and these were subject to 
a similar disadvantage. In the same category of will-o’-the-wisp prosperity 
were the land boom in Florida and the vogue of Steuben glass and antique 
furniture. We never had enough money to go in for any of these things, 

318 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
and, frankly, I never felt the temptation. Thus, I was prepared for the boom 
to end in a crash in which the loss of a set of paper values was bound to 
bring as a consequence the loss of an entire structure, which had flourished 
like the green bay tree.
The paper values of a monetary nature involved a whole series of paper 
moral values. I was astonished and shocked at the way in which a great 
national magazine gave its columns over to a panegyric of the Swedish 
match king, Ivar Kreuger. What I was less prepared for was the acceptance 
of the same moral values in academic circles. I hoped and prayed that the 
slump would come early before it could build up into the complete fail­
ure that generally follows the burst of a promotional bubble. I talked this 
over with my good friend Phillips and was surprised to find that, for all 
his native skepticism and personal shrewdness, he was hopeful that the 
boom was here to stay. Behind this feeling on his part was a long experi­
ence as a youth in the ruined South after the Civil War and a fear that we 
might be heading for another such period. To a large extent, his optimism 
was a whistling to allay his own fears, but at any rate he did not share 
with me the hope that a mild depression might turn us away from the 
fleshpots of Egypt and to a greater evaluation of moral and intellectual 
matters. When the slump came, I saw that he had been justified in his fear 
that a collapse would not only destroy commercial values, but moral values 
as well.
The slump was bound to affect everyone, but we academic people had 
the best of it, for a while. To some extent, prices went down, and while our 
expectation of rapid advances in salaries blew up in our faces, many of us, 
like myself, had tenure; and those of us who did not have it had a moral 
expectation of it which was not easily canceled. At any rate, we did not 
suffer from the epidemic of suicides which took place among businessmen, 
and a high window was no particular moral hazard for us.
A college professor who is really interested in his work is considerably 
insulated from the vicissitudes of the world about him. At the present day, 
when science is an object of general attack, and when many of us have seri­
ous doubts whether our civilization really is viable, the protection of our 
isolated position has largely vanished.
In those days—the late twenties and early thirties—however, while we 
may have doubted many things, we did not have fundamental doubts of 
the long-time recovery possibilities of the world in which we lived. Thus 
the Sacco-Vanzetti case, the phony boom, and the almost equally phony 
depression that followed it, drove us more and more into ourselves and into 
our real function, academic work.

25: 1927–1931. Years of Growth and Progress 
319
My work, as I found it at this time, was research and the initiation of 
research students into their proper activity. As my work and reputation 
developed, I began to get graduate students. There was an M.I.T. professor 
whose son was doing research in the Harvard mathematics department for 
the doctor’s degree and who wanted to work with me. We found it possible 
to make an arrangement between the two departments by which his degree 
should be at Harvard while I should be the director of his thesis.
My first M.I.T. doctoral candidate was a young man by the name of Carl 
Muckenhoupt. I gave him a thesis topic in Harald Bohr’s theory of almost-
periodic functions. These functions had been studied by Bohr as purely 
abstract mathematical entities, but I saw how they could be used as effec­
tive tools in the qualitative and even the computational study of vibration 
problems. The Muckenhoupt thesis represented another link in the syn­
thesis between pure and applied mathematics which I conceived it was my 
function to make.
Important as the Muckenhoupt work was in my development, there 
were two pieces of work that came along slightly later which turned out to 
be even more important. These represent doctoral theses which, by a pecu­
liar coincidence, were done under my supervision by two students from the 
Far East. Their names were Yuk Wing Lee, from China, and Shikao Ikehara, 
from Japan.
The way in which I came across Lee is interesting. My Dutch friend, 
Struik, had found some summer work with the Bell Telephone Laboratories 
in connection with the analysis of electrical circuits. This immediately led 
me to consider whether I might not have a different approach to the same 
field by the use of Fourier series. My idea continued to look good to me 
under further examination, and I asked Vannevar Bush whether he could 
lend me a good student in electrical engineering to do a thesis under me. 
He was only too glad to do so, and suggested Lee, who was then living at 
the parish house of one of the Boston churches. Lee readily accepted the 
offer and we went to work together.
Lee and I have been scientific colleagues now for about a quarter of a 
century. From the beginning, his steadiness and judgment have furnished 
exactly the balance wheel I have needed. My first idea of an adjustable 
corrective network would have worked, but at the cost of a great wasteful­
ness of parts. It was Lee who saw how the same part could be used to per­
form several simultaneous functions and who in that way reduced a great, 
sprawling piece of apparatus into a well-designed, economical network.
It was also Lee who found a possible purchaser for our invention, in the 
form of a research corporation allied to the moving picture industry. It was 

320 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
Lee, above all, who went down to Long Island City and spent many months 
of patient work in developing our apparatus, computing the size of the 
parts, constructing a good working model which functioned the first time 
up to the degree to which we had predicted its functioning, and selling the 
idea to our clients.
Unquestionably those were thin times for the electrical end of the 
moving-picture industry, which recently had been created to take care of 
the problems of the talking film. Our rights reverted to ourselves, and we 
had to look for a permanent purchaser. It was Lee who found such a pur­
chaser in the Bell Telephone Laboratories and who saw the work through 
the tedious stages of patenting.
Here I must remark that the public that is interested in inventions but 
has had no direct experience of the Patent Office can have no adequate idea 
of the utter boredom of seeing an invention through the necessary stages 
of search and documentation. In the first place, it means nothing merely to 
patent an invention. Any teeth that the patent may have—and they are few 
enough when the patent is held by a private individual with no means—
depend on a detailed legalism of the phrasing of claims and specifications, 
which have very little to do with the actual merits of the invention. Here 
the patent lawyer can be of great help, but he can be of very limited help 
unless he is backed by the peculiar understanding of the invention which 
only the inventor himself may be expected to have.
The result is that the inventor proceeds without any transitional stages 
from a game of ideas to a game of words. The more he loves his invention 
for its own sake and the more that he wishes to develop it, the more he 
finds himself frustrated by the unreal world of the Patent Office, in which 
he is forced to live for a term of months or years.
At the end of these months or years, Lee and I found ourselves possessed 
of a salable invention—indeed, of an invention which we had actually sold 
before the final stages of its patenting were completed. But then we met 
the further frustration that all this effort we had made went into a paper 
patent—that is, into a patent which the Bell people never intended to use 
but simply to hold in terrorem against competitors.
The Bell people never did use our invention, from the time it was on 
the books of the Patent Office to the time its patent expired. Nevertheless, 
as our document was near the end of the seventeen years, which are to a 
patent what seventy years are to a man, we found that certain radio and 
television firms began to show a great curiosity concerning the new inven­
tion, as if in fact they were about to incorporate it into the sets they made. 
Since our rights have expired, we have never shown the curiosity to find 

25: 1927–1931. Years of Growth and Progress 
321
out whether these engineers have in fact followed our ideas to the point of 
execution or our baby was stillborn. This does not prevent us from having a 
shrewd idea that, whether or not the invention was ever made for purposes 
of sale in the form in which we wrote it up, it is still exercising an influence 
on the philosophy of the art.
I made every effort to place Dr. Lee in the American electrical-engineering 
industry, where he would have been a valuable man. At that time, the engi­
neer from Eastern countries did already exist in the United States, but he 
was a much rarer bird than he is today. The sales resistance I had to meet 
was more than we could overcome, and Lee went back to China to seek a 
job, first in industry and then in academic life. I shall have much more to 
say about him in later chapters.
At the same time at which one Oriental student, Lee, was developing 
the consequences of some of my engineering ideas, another, Ikehara, was 
perfecting my methods in prime-number theory. Landau, the chief Ger­
man exponent of prime-number theory, was at first hesitant to accept our 
results, but ultimately he and his colleague, Heilbronn, wrote papers taking 
this work still further. The result was to remove a difficult branch of math­
ematics from the latter years of graduate work and to make it available even 
in an advanced undergraduate course. In recent years, the Scandinavian 
school of mathemations has gone even beyond where we left our work 
and has made prime number theory elementary in a certain very technical 
sense.
I have already mentioned Vannevar Bush as a great inventor of electro­
mechanical devices, and his chief work was along the line of the develop­
ment of high-speed computing machines for solving problems in the field 
known as technique of differential equations. Differential equations are 
concerned with the relations between various measurable physical quanti­
ties and their rates of change in time and space. These physical quantities 
can be currents or voltages or the angles of rotation of shafts or quantities 
of still different sorts. Bush’s device now tried one set of quantities as their 
bases and now another, but the form to which his apparatus gravitated was 
a sort of meccano set, the differential analyzer, in which various quantities 
could be represented, let us say, by the rotation of a shaft, and in which 
these quantities could be added, multiplied, divided, and operated on in 
still other ways. Above all, where the total sum of a quantity was wanted, 
these quantities could be read off by the device known as an integrating 
disk.
None of the individual parts of the Bush machine were completely new 
in conception, but the technique by which they could be combined, and 

322 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
in particular by which the power to move the apparatus could be put in 
locally in such a way that the machine would not stick, represented an 
improvement in technique going far beyond anything conceived before. 
Bush’s machine was successful where Babbage’s earlier machine had failed, 
precisely because of a brilliant use of engineering facilities and engineering 
ideas not accessible at the time of Babbage.
In Bush’s machine numbers were represented as measured quantities 
rather than as sequences of digits. This is what we mean by calling the Bush 
machine an analogy machine and not a digital machine. The former mea­
sures. The latter counts. The physical quantities involved in the problems 
which the machine was to solve were replaced in the machine by other 
physical quantities of a different nature but with the same quantitative 
interrelations.
At that time the digital machine, which is an improved and automatized 
abacus, was confined to various forms of the desk computing machine.
It was an essential part of Bush’s machine that the variable in which all 
changes were to take place was time. This became exceedingly significant 
when Bush asked me for advice on how to make his machine take care of 
partial-differential equations, in which time rates of change and the space 
rates of change are united by equations.
When Bush asked me this question, I realized that the main problem of 
the partial differential equation was that of the representation of quantities 
varying in two or more space dimensions, such as, for example, the density 
of a photographic negative, which varies up and down and right and left.
Once the problem of representation of functions of several variables 
was clearly stated, it became desirable to represent these too as something 
changing in time rather than in space. Here it appeared to me that the new 
and developing art of television gave the necessary clue. In television, a 
picture is conveyed not by pieces of silver of various opacities placed simul­
taneously on a film but rather by a dot of light running over the various 
rows of a grid point by point, and the whole grid row by row. This process, 
called scanning, is now familiar to anyone who has the least curiosity as to 
how his home television set works.
In fact, I was convinced that the scanning technique would prove 
socially more important in computing machines and their close relatives 
than in the television industry itself. The future development of comput­
ing machines and control machines has, I believe, borne me out in this 
opinion.
In representing a quantity as a single locus in a television screen, we may 
follow two different techniques, one derived from the analogy machine 

25: 1927–1931. Years of Growth and Progress 
323
and one from the digital machine. Each spot on the television screen may 
determine either a quantity of light which is measured by its intensity or 
a sequence of digits such as we use in writing down a number. The com­
bination of these quantities to represent the situation present in a partial-
differential equation may accordingly be either a combination of intensities 
or a combination of the digits of several numbers. It seemed to me even at 
that time that the latter method of representation would be more suitable 
for partial-differential-equation machines, because of the fact that, with 
electronic apparatus, digits may be combined more accurately and more 
expeditiously than amounts of light. I need only say that the actual devel­
opment of the computing-machine technique has proved the correctness 
of my surmise and that the high-speed computing machines of the present 
day follow very closely along the lines which I then suggested to Bush.
The emphasis which I then put and still put on speed in mechanical or 
electrical computers has fully justified itself. We can put more distinguish­
able numbers on a square grid than we can on any one line of the grid, 
and the number of operations through which we must go to represent the 
process of solving a partial-differential equation is simply enormous. With­
out stepping up the speed to a tremendous extent, the partial-differential 
equation machine would have been so slow that it would have become 
useless. In general, the computing machine is a competitor of the human 
computer; and when all is said and done, its advantage over the human 
computer lies primarily in its speed. This subject, to which I shall revert 
later in the present book, represents the first step toward the origin of the 
extremely high-speed computing machine of today as well as toward the 
closely related machines of the automatic factory.
At about the same time, Bush was engaged in the writing of a book on 
electrical-circuit theory. Here some of the work which I had done on gener­
alized harmonic analysis became of considerable practical value. He called 
me into consultation for advice concerning many of the chapters and also 
asked for a supplementary chapter on Fourier methods. We enjoyed the col­
laboration greatly, and both of us have spoken often of the fun we had in 
working together. Bush soon left his theoretical work for an administrative 
career. This was a step in the formation of a new academic setup which had 
long been overdue.
When I arrived at M.I.T., in 1919, Richard McLaurin was president. His 
was a name to conjure with, and he had added enormously to the position 
of the Institute at home as well as overseas. However, he died within a term 
of my arrival and left incomplete much of what we had hoped he would 
achieve. In particular, the science departments, including mathematics, 

324 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
and the cultural departments, such as those of English and history, were 
still conceived as service departments for the main center of life in the 
Institute, which was engineering.
After McLaurin’s death we went into the doldrums for eleven years. For 
part of that time we were ruled by committees of the faculty, which could 
do very little because of their avowed temporary character, and for another 
part by President Ernest Nichols, who, however, was already in ill health 
when he came, and who retired and died before he could leave much of his 
impress on the school.
Finally, President Wesley Stratton was appointed, on the strength of 
the good works he had done as the head of the Bureau of Standards. Like 
Nichols, however, he came at a period when his best work was over, and he 
did very little but prolong the interregnum. Until 1930, there was no ruler 
of the Institute with a sure touch, a clear policy, and an unquestioned vigor 
and understanding.
Then Karl Taylor Compton was appointed president. He had been a dis­
tinguished professor of physics at Princeton, and he combined complete 
integrity, a long view for the future of the Institute, and a still untapped 
health and strength. He inspected the physics department on behalf of the 
Corporation and saw clearly what none of his predecessors had had the 
opportunity to realize, that a strong engineering school must be at the same 
time a great school of science.
The role of mathematics at the Institute had changed greatly since the 
days after the First World War, when I came to M.I.T. At that time, math­
ematics was something which was chiefly needed to educate our students 
up to the point where they could handle the engineering which was their 
main object in life. Physics and chemistry, too, had not yet emerged com­
pletely from their status as service departments, whose main purpose was 
ancillary to the chief task of the Institute, which was to train engineers. 
When a branch of physics or chemistry had reached a sufficient impor­
tance in its own right for a specific course in it to be made a new branch of 
engineering, this course was set up as an independent engineering course. 
This had been the history of our electrical-engineering department and of 
our chemical-engineering department. Now for the first time the Institute 
had begun to be aware that direct research in mathematics and the sciences 
was of engineering importance in its own right and that we should devote 
ourselves explicitly to the training of scientists in these fields as well as to 
the training of engineers.
In the mathematics department in particular, this removed a great blight 
under which we had been suffering. Our research began to be recognized 

25: 1927–1931. Years of Growth and Progress 
325
as an essential part of our function at the Institute rather than merely as 
a way to keep us on our toes so that our routine teaching could be fresher 
and more authoritative. The Institute began to follow the example of the 
great universities in recognizing us as mathematicians rather than solely as 
mathematical-routine teachers. This does not mean that we gave up or that 
we could give up the service work so necessary at an engineering school, 
but it did mean that we had begun to come into our own, on a status com­
parable with that of the members of the engineering departments.
President Compton was accessible, modest, sincere, and lovable. With 
his appointment, the Institute was once more in strong hands, and the 
line of progress, which had been interrupted by McLaurin’s death, was 
resumed.
Bush’s advancement was part of the same movement that brought 
Compton to the Institute. He was a splendid administrator, taking as his 
particular field the laboratories of the Institute rather than the personnel. 
He relieved Compton from much of the detail inseparable from the run­
ning of a great school.
One part of Compton’s policies was to bring faculty salaries to a level 
comparable with those already reached at Harvard, Princeton, and the 
other major universities. Later on, the war and the vicissitudes of the post-
war period prevented us from catching up as completely as we might have 
wished with other schools of the same level. However, the intention was 
there, and much was done to realize it.
I was a personal beneficiary of the new regime, both as far as salary was 
concerned and as far as the opportunity to see my hopes for a research 
mathematics department come into being. I received my promotion to the 
rank of associate professor, and from that time on my status was assured.
It was thus at the time of M.I.T.’s new impetus of life and Bush’s great­
est development as an electrical engineer that he had offered me Lee as a 
graduate student. This was one of the finest things Bush has ever done for 
me, and I am eternally grateful that he turned Lee in my direction.
About this time we began to find ourselves pleasantly occupied with the 
visits of a number of scientific colleagues from Europe. In connection with 
circuit analysis and the electrical-engineering aspects of my work, I saw a 
good deal of Richard Cauer and his wife, who had come over from Berlin. 
However, the scientist with whom I had the most interesting and profitable 
contacts was Eberhard Hopf. He had come over from Germany to Harvard, 
largely to study with G. D. Birkhoff.
Hopf’s interests had been in celestial mechanics, and the new work of 
Birkhoff. The ergodic theorem, which finally gave the proper form to the 

326 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
ideas of Willard Gibbs, was exactly along the line of Hopf’s interests. This 
piece of work, by the way, was a remarkable tour de force, as Birkhoff had 
gone into the subject cold, with no particular previous knowledge or inter­
est in the Lebesgue integral. However, he had managed, by his own powers, 
to extract one of the leading theorems which has dominated the theory of 
Lebesgue integration ever since.
I was much interested in Lebesgue integration and probability theory, 
so Hopf and I had a great deal to talk about. However, the best of the work 
which he and I undertook together concerned a differential equation occur­
ring in the study of the radiation equilibrium of the stars. Inside a star there 
is a region where electrons and atomic nuclei coexist with light quanta, 
the material of which radiation is made. Outside the star we have radiation 
alone, or at least radiation accompanied by a much more diluted form of 
matter. The various types of particles which form light and matter exist in 
a sort of balance with one another, which changes abruptly when we pass 
beyond the surface of the star. It is easy to set up the equations for this 
equilibrium, but it is not easy to find a general method for the solution of 
these equations.
The equations for radiation equilibrium in the stars belong to a type now 
known by Eberhard Hopf’s name and mine. They are closely related to other 
equations which arise when two different physical regimes are joined across 
a sharp edge or a boundary, as for example in the atomic bomb, which is 
essentially the model of a star in which the surface of the bomb marks the 
change between an inner regime and an outer regime; and, accordingly, 
various important problems concerning the bomb receive their natural 
expression in Hopf-Wiener equations. The question of the bursting size of 
the bomb turns out to be one of these.
From my point of view, the most striking use of Hopf-Wiener equations 
is to be found where the boundary between the two regimes is in time and 
not in space. One regime represents the state of the world up to a given 
time and the other regime the state after that time. This is the precisely 
appropriate tool for certain aspects of the theory of prediction, in which 
a knowledge of the past is used to determine the future. There are how­
ever many more general problems of instrumentation which can be solved 
by the same technique operating in time. Among these is the wave-filter 
problem, which consists in taking a message which has been corrupted by 
a simultaneous noise and reconstructing the pure message to the best of 
our ability.
Both prediction problems and filtering problems were of importance in 
the last war and remain of importance in the new technology which has 

25: 1927–1931. Years of Growth and Progress 
327
followed it. Prediction problems came up in the control of anti-aircraft fire, 
for an anti-aircraft gunner must shoot ahead of his plane as does a duck 
shooter. Filter problems were of repeated use in radar design, and both filter 
and prediction problems are important in the modern statistical techniques 
of meteorology.
In the fall of 1929, I received an invitation to lecture on my own research 
at Brown University. Dean Richardson invited me, but the spirit behind the 
invitation was Tamarkin whom I have already mentioned. Richardson was 
a dry, friendly Scotsman from the Maritime Provinces who gave Tamarkin 
a home in the United States, much to the advantage of Brown University. I 
traveled once a week to Brown, where I had found a most cordial reception. 
Tamarkin, together with Mrs. Tamarkin, who had by now come to join her 
husband, was my principal host.
The Tamarkins had carried their expansive style of living into an America 
where the habits of the country and the difficulties of the servant problem 
made this sort of a life almost impossible. Mrs. Tamarkin struggled coura­
geously in the restrictive environment of Providence to feed her husband’s 
habitual need for good food and drink, but in the course of this effort she 
wrecked her health by overwork while her husband continued to overload 
his damaged heart. Mrs. Tamarkin died ultimately of an attack of phlebitis, 
but her husband attributed it to overwork and reproached himself. Before 
her death he had been the soul of jollity and good cheer, and he contin­
ued to offer unstintingly to the younger mathematicians from the store of 
his great knowledge and sympathy. Yet he never was quite the same man 
again, and a few years later he too succumbed to the strains which he had 
imposed on his heart.
Peggy, my second and last child, was born in that year, and I went 
directly from my vigil at the hospital to my Brown lecture. With two babies 
in the family, I became much more of a family man and Margaret much 
more occupied with family duties.
I was frightfully busy at the time working up my definitive paper on gen­
eralized harmonic analysis. This appeared in Acta Mathematica, a Swedish 
journal of great international prestige.
The paper was practically a small book It was Tamarkin who urged me 
to write up this work in definitive form, and it was he who criticized every 
stage of my manuscript and proof, to its great advantage. I think my papers 
satisfied Tamarkin to some degree, and it was certainly as a result of his 
backing that I soon received an invitation to write for the American jour­
nal, Annals of Mathematics, a paper of similar comprehensiveness concern­
ing Tauberian theorems.

328 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
These papers assumed the proportions of small books. As to the Annals 
of Mathematics paper, it was actually published as a separate memoir. In my 
later writing I have often wished that I had the continued advantage of 
Tamarkin’s selfless criticism.
My research at this time received a ready reception in Russia and was 
in close relation with the work of some of the Russian mathematicians. 
I had long had a peculiar sort of contact with the leading Russian math­
ematicians, although I had never met any of them nor, I believe, ever been 
in correspondence with them. Khintchine and Kolmogoroff, the two chief 
Russian exponents of the theory of probability, have long been involved in 
the same field in which I was working. For more than twenty years, we have 
been on one another’s heels; either they had proved a theorem which I was 
about to prove, or I had been ahead of them by the narrowest of margins. 
This contact between our work came not from any definite program on my 
part nor, I believe, from any on theirs but was due to the fact that we had 
come into our greatest activity at about the same time, with about the same 
intellectual equipment.
Four and a half years without travel abroad had put me in a mood for 
renewed foreign contacts. Since the International Mathematical Congress 
at Strasbourg, two more Congresses had passed in which I had not partici­
pated. The Congress of 1924 took place at Toronto, but, as I have said, I had 
devoted that summer to my trip abroad with my sister Bertha. That of 1928 
occurred too soon after my Gӧttingen trip to make my attendance possible, 
particularly as it was the year of the birth of my elder daughter, Barbara.
By 1932 I found the urge to attend another Congress too strong to resist. 
I planned to spend the academic year of 1931–32 studying at Cambridge 
and to participate in the Zurich Congress the following summer. I received 
generous assistance, in the matters of both leave and finances, from the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, so that Margaret and I found it pos­
sible to venture a European trip together with our young family of two.

26  An Unofficial Cambridge Don
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
26: 
An 
Unofficial 
Cambridge 
Don
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
We spent the summer as usual, resting and hiking. I took rather longer 
walks with the children of the valley than I had before, since they were now 
old enough to stand the severe trip over the Presidential Range. Shortly 
before we left to take the boat at Montreal, I went with a few of my young 
friends for a quick trip to Mount Chocorua, where one of them had the mis­
fortune to turn his ankle. The problem of getting him down was consider­
able, since he had to stand behind me and rest his weight on my shoulders 
for two grueling hours. The result was that I was tired and had a bad cold 
coming on when the time came for us to make the trip.
This was not the worst of it. Peggy, who was about one and a half years 
old at this time, had managed to develop a slight fever; and although the 
local doctor thought that a sea trip would quickly put her in shape, we were 
none too confident. Thus, we were rather under the weather when we took 
the train at Meredith for Montreal and our embarkation.
After a difficult night at a hotel, we just managed to embark in the morn­
ing. Then our illnesses really gripped us. Fortunately, the Canadian Pacific 
boat on which we traveled had an excellent doctor, who had himself taken 
to the sea to recover from a complicated and crippling illness, as well as a 
first-rate Scottish trained nurse and a couple of ex-N.C.O.’s of the Royal 
Army Medical Corps. Peggy and I went immediately to bed, and while the 
nurse took care of her in our cabin, I went through a bout of septic sore 
throat under the care of one of the medical stewards.
When I had recovered enough to drag myself around the deck, I found 
that Peggy was still no better. The doctor came and listened to her lungs 
with the stethoscope. As soon as I saw that he had settled down to the 
detailed examination of a particular spot on her chest I knew we were in 
for trouble. It was bronchopneumonia all right, and for about half of the 
voyage we were not at all certain of Peggy’s recovery.

330 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
The doctor consulted with another doctor who was aboard as a passen­
ger, and between them they hit on a course of treatment. By the time the 
voyage was half over the worst was passed. We wirelessed ahead for an 
ambulance to meet the boat at Tilbury docks to take Peggy to the local 
hospital, and settled down to enjoy the remainder of the trip as much as we 
could with a considerable burden of worry still on our minds.
In due course we landed, and Peggy was taken to the hospital, where it 
was considered advisable for her morale and for that of the hospital that 
we should see as little as possible of her until we had found quarters at 
Cambridge and were prepared to take her back with us.
We stayed for a few days at an excellent hotel run by the Port of London 
Authority, where I had the pleasure of meeting the personal representa­
tive of that body—the captain of the port and harbourmaster of London. 
He was much interested in engineering, and especially meteorology. He 
told me what a lonely profession his was, with a small group of perhaps 
less than ten men in the whole world with a comparable job; and how 
badly he had felt during World War I to have been shut off from his oppo­
site numbers at Hamburg and at Antwerp. He said that, in fact, under nor­
mal conditions, London, Antwerp, Rotterdam, Hamburg, and Bremen all 
constituted one great port which had to be governed by the closest co-
operative work of all the harbor masters concerned. This was largely due to 
the unbalanced import trade of London, which so greatly exceeds its export 
trade that ships leaving their cargoes at London have to pick up cargoes 
elsewhere.
I made one or two visits to London and to my friends there before Mar­
garet, Barbara, and I went up to Cambridge. We stayed at a delightful hotel 
near the river and immediately began to inquire of my friends to find out 
the proper way to get ourselves housed for the winter. Finally, with the 
aid of an estate agent, we were able to rent a typical English middle-class 
cottage in New Chesterton, to the northeast of Cambridge proper and not 
more than a block from where the housing developments began to peter 
out into open country and farms.
We found a nursery school for Barbara, and thus we were to some extent 
free from the burden which had been heavy on my wife on the ship—
nursing a very sick child and at the same time keeping a very well and lively 
child in some sort of discipline. Peggy had recovered from her acute illness 
but was still in delicate health. We secured a Yorkshire woman who had 
worked at our hotel to take care of the house and hired a car for the long 
cross-country journey to Tilbury and back.

26: An Unofficial Cambridge Don 
331
This was my first auto trip of any length in England, and I marveled at 
the abrupt turns of the narrow roads and the way that the main street of 
each village seemed unfailingly to be on the route taken by our car.
In a few weeks Peggy had recovered most of her strength. There was, 
however, a stubborn low-grade infection of the middle ear with which we 
still had to contend, and indeed it was years before Peggy again showed the 
full vigor which she had had before the trip. Now that they are both grown 
women, it is still a little surprising to us to see that Peggy is the really vig­
orous one, having thrown off all her youthful difficulties, while Barbara is 
somewhat slighter and frailer.
The Yorkshire nurse soon gave Peggy the native accent, no trace of 
which, happily, remains, though Peggy used to say to me, “Ah coom to 
Daddy,” in the best manner of the West Riding.
Our house had a long narrow garden, with a garden house at the back 
that could be turned to suit the direction of the sun and the rain. The very 
friendly lady who rented us the furnished house, and who lived only a door 
or two from us, secured us the services of a gardener.
Not only was this lady most cordial, but the neighbors in general began 
to drop in on us from the very first day, with a quicker and readier cordial­
ity than that which I had found in any Boston suburb. This certainly belied 
the legend of British unapproachability, but perhaps our peculiar position 
in the community had something to do with it. Most of our neighbors 
were university people. Not only was I a university man, but I had been at 
Cambridge many years before and had a certain connection with the place. 
As Jessie Whitehead has said to me, I must wear the arms of Trinity College 
with the difference of a bar sinister. Yet, although I am a Cambridge man 
only on the left hand, the Cambridge family has at least acknowledged 
me. At any rate, the reader in Italian, who lived two doors from us, and the 
lecturer in tropical agriculture, who lived next door, visited us at the earli­
est possible moment and had us over repeatedly to informal teas. This was 
precisely the easy hospitality which was most to our taste.
Later on we made the acquaintance of the reader in Hebrew, who lived 
a few hundred yards down the street, and who was official rabbi simultane­
ously for Oxford, Cambridge, and one of His Majesty’s jails. He was a fellow 
of Queen’s College, where he had grown up together with a covey of High 
Church parsons. He was indeed very much the Jewish equivalent of a High 
Church parson. He was a ritualist to the last degree, and the door posts of 
his house had the traditional Hebrew texts fastened to them.
Like so many High Church parsons, he was extremely liberal in his opin­
ions. When it was necessary to raise funds for the repair of the old Norman 

332 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
round church, it was on his lawn that the garden party was held. He had a 
most interesting collection of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century prints 
of synagogues and Jewish ceremonies in Holland, among both the Ashke­
nazic and the Sephardic groups. His particular hobby was to find some of 
the sources of the Gregorian chants and of Christian ritual in Jewish music 
and rites.
During my stay in Cambridge, I would run down to London to try to 
sell the English rights to the filter inventions which Lee and I had made. 
However, it was no go, largely because a communication engineering 
did not then seem to be a truly indigenous British industry but rather 
the reflection of more active interests in the United States and Germany. 
Furthermore, it became clear to me on a little investigation that a British 
patent—or, for that matter, almost any sort of European patent—was not 
something to be taken out as lightheartedly as an American patent (which 
is in effect nothing but a license to litigation) but involves a considerably 
greater amount of research and conveys a much greater expectation that 
the courts will uphold it. It guarantees greater rights and is proportionally 
more expensive to obtain. In most countries, the laws are less favorable to 
paper patents than they are in the United States and make very explicit 
demands that a valid patent be exploited in industry in order for it to 
remain alive.
While I was in London I met Miss Cartwright, who has since become 
Mistress of Girton College. She was then, as she is now, a delightfully sin­
cere and unpretentious mathematician in the first rank of English math­
ematicians, men or women. She invited me to tea to meet a young Trinity 
don named Paley, of whom I was to see much in the future.
Soon after I arrived in Cambridge, I made the acquaintance of the Youngs, 
brother and sister. Young was then a don at Peterhouse, I believe, and had 
done some interesting work which we continued to develop together. Miss 
Young, a Girton don, was particularly kind to my daughters and she invited 
all four of us to tea in her rooms.
But of all my scientific contacts in Cambridge, the most important 
remained my teacher Hardy and his other self, Professor Littlewood. By 
now, Hardy had become an aged and shriveled replica of the young man 
whom I had met in Russell’s rooms in my student days. Yet he contin­
ued to be a redoubtable tennis player and an enthusiast for cricket who 
knew every finesse of the game. Later on, during his many visits to the 
United States, he developed an almost equal interest in baseball, and 
Babe Ruth became a name as familiar in his mouth as that of the cricketer 
Hobbs.

26: An Unofficial Cambridge Don 
333
Littlewood was near the peak of his rock-climbing career. He used to 
invite me to his rooms at Trinity and demonstrate some interesting rock 
climbing maneuvers by taking traverses about the base of the pillars in Nev­
ille’s Court. Hardy and Littlewood took me to see a cricket match. They also 
showed me a rugger game, in which the players on the two sides managed 
to pile themselves into unbelievable heaps after a scrummage. I am afraid I 
did not understand the finer points of either game.
Hardy was lecturing on the elementary theory of numbers, but I did not 
follow any of Littlewood’s lectures. However, I did go occasionally to the 
mathematical seminar which he held in his rooms.
Unlike Hardy, who had a hatred for the applications of mathematics, 
particularly those to engineering and warfare, Littlewood has a very consid­
erable physical sense, and played an important part among the mathemati­
cal advisers to the military of both the First and Second World Wars. In the 
First World War he discovered a very brilliant way of computing trajectories 
of missiles and in particular of making use of a few computed trajectories 
to obtain a whole range table by interpolation. In the Second World War he 
and Miss Cartwright left their own chosen field of abstract mathematics for 
a very useful study of differential equations.
I was invited almost every week to dine at high table either at Trinity or 
at some other college, and indeed Trinity treated me almost like a supernu­
merary don. I found the table talk most interesting and less a formal game 
of high-pressure wit than I had been led to expect. Indeed, when I later 
visited my academic friends at Oxford, it became clear to me that there was 
a great gulf between the two schools and that the high-pressure wit which 
had not been too greatly in evidence in Cambridge was in fact the order of 
the day at Oxford.
One of the delightful experiences which I had at Cambridge was to go 
out after the port and a cigar in the Trinity common room following high 
table and participate with the dons in a game of bowls. I was as poor at 
this as in all sports of skill, but it was a pleasure to relax with my friends 
in this cozy and almost secret little garden as the long English dusk came 
on. It was bowls and not bowling for these two sports must be carefully 
distinguished. The English sport, which dates back far beyond the time at 
which Drake played it on the Hoe at Plymouth while waiting for the Span­
ish Armada, has nothing to do with bowling alleys or tenpins. It is a much 
closer relative of curling, which, in fact, is nothing but a variety of bowls 
played on the ice.
The make-up both of the undergraduate body and of the dons at the two 
universities had greatly changed since the war. No longer were universities 

334 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
the privileged property of the ruling classes. They were now full of brilliant 
young men who would not have been there at all if they had not been 
subsidized. Indeed, most of the honors men were subsidized, and the 
undergraduate who came up for a pass degree was no longer looked on 
with favor.
Some of these subsidized students came from very poor families and 
bore the marks of earlier poverty and malnutrition in their stunted forms 
and poor teeth. Many of them, in addition, had a social hurdle to over­
come, which in most cases was more in their own consciousness than in 
the minds of those about them. I have had young friends from the two 
universities—and especially from Oxford—tell me how carefully they 
worked to learn to play the conversational game at the high table. The 
background of this problem will be clear to all who know D. H. Lawrence 
and his work, for on the literary side he represents the precise analogue of 
many of the young mathematicians whom I met in England and, later, as 
Commonwealth Fellows in America.
The year I was at Cambridge was a great one in the annals of physics, for 
Cockcroft and Walton had just split the atom for the first time. I saw their 
apparatus—a pile of glass cylinders and glass plates with holes cut through 
them, joined together with De Kautinisky cement, which is a glorified form 
of lowvapor-pressure sealing wax. I was impressed then and I am impressed 
now with the way in which the English physicists, and indeed European 
physicists in general, instead of waiting (as do so many American scientists 
of the present day) for an enormous appropriation, use the material at their 
disposal and make ingenuity do what one might have thought only money 
could accomplish.
Yet there was one laboratory at Cambridge which involved great expen­
ditures. This was the magnetic laboratory of the Russian physicist, P. L. 
Kapitza, who designed powerful generators to be short-circuited and thus 
put enormous currents through great leads which threshed around like 
angry snakes under the tremendous magnetic fields thus created. Later on 
Kapitza was to go back on a visit to Soviet Russia, which has kept a tight 
hold on him ever since—whether with or without his consent no one will 
know. At any rate, the Russians sent to England for the whole equipment 
of the laboratory. He became the pioneer in Russia of that large-scale, fac­
torylike type of laboratory which had first been employed by Kammer­
lingh Onnes in the Netherlands for low temperature research, and which is 
now the standard means of exploring the nucleus and of designing atomic 
bombs. Thus, I felt sure, as soon as I heard of the atomic bomb and of our 
use of it, that with Kapitza to train the Russians in the technique of this sort 

26: An Unofficial Cambridge Don 
335
of laboratory it would not be many years before they would have mastered 
for themselves the principles and technique of nuclear research, whether 
or not they might capture our secrets by means of espionage or persuade a 
group of malcontents to serve their purposes.
I found a couple of American friends at Cambridge. One of them was a 
young lady who had done a thesis under me on coherency matrices and 
was taking a year off from her academic job to combine research with lei­
sure at Cambridge. The other had been an instructor in the Mathematics 
Department the second year I was at M.I.T. Later on he had gone to study at 
Munich, where he had managed to get himself embroiled in a challenge to 
a duel with an army officer while helping an American lady onto a streetcar. 
He escaped the duel by the ingenious device of using his right to name the 
weapons. He proposed that these should be bows and arrows and then had 
his friends let it out that he was an archer of great prowess. Some of us at 
Tech had seen the story in the Paris edition of the New York Times and had 
written to him a letter purporting to come from some archery association 
and offering him the highest honor it had the capacity to bestow. He had 
always been a bit gullible, and he swallowed the bait hook, line, and sinker. 
But we could not help admiring the genuine courage of the man, and I 
think his honest and sincere letter turned the laugh rather against us. At 
any rate, we found him in Cambridge as a great deal of a companion and 
a little of a butt.
I tried to walk my young American friend down on a hiking expedition 
around Cambridge. This time, though, the joke was on me, for he walked 
me down instead. In fact, he spread the tale of my injudicious challenge 
to his ability so far and wide that later, when another American went for a 
hike with me in the Lake Country, I was hard put to it to keep up with his 
challenge.
As the autumn term drew to a close, Professor Hardy broached two 
matters to me. One concerned the possibility of my having a book on the 
Fourier integral accepted by the Cambridge University Press, another the 
curious Cambridge custom by which a professor may give his lectures by 
deputy. Professor Hardy had the right to authorize any person to give a 
course of lectures on his behalf, and these lectures were to be regarded 
by his College, the University, and the Board of Studies exactly as if he 
had given them himself. Thus, I was to be a quasi don at Cambridge and 
to lecture during the second term on my own work on the Fourier inte­
gral, even as I had many years before been a quasi undergraduate and 
attended courses without immatriculation, on the basis of my Harvard 
connections.

336 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
As the term drew to an end and the Christmas holidays came near, I 
began to receive invitations from my Continental colleagues to lecture at 
their universities, some of which were still in session. Professor Wilhelm 
Blaschke invited me to speak at Hamburg; Professor Karl Menger, of Vienna, 
offered to put me up for a couple of weeks in his rooms; and Professor 
Philipp Frank, of the German University at Prague, asked me to come there 
for a few lectures.
Merely to think of these names brings to my mind the vicissitudes which 
these men have suffered since. Blaschke became, during the Second World 
War, if not an ardent Nazi, at least an ardent supporter of the Nazis, and 
he wrote articles in ridicule of American mathematics. In particular, he 
showed his contempt for the mathematical school of Princeton, which he 
called “a little Negro village.” Menger later on came to the United States as 
a refugee. I helped him find a position at Notre Dame. I believe he is now in 
the Illinois Institute of Technology. Frank also came over as a refugee from 
Hitler and has recently retired from Harvard.
Many of the other mathematicians whom we met on this Continental 
trip—in fact, most of them—are in the United States or have died since. 
Hahn, of Vienna, is dead; Artin, of Hamburg, is a professor at Princeton; 
Gödel, who was Menger’s assistant in Vienna, is also at Princeton, where 
he has done much of his great work on the basis of mathematical logic. 
Von Mises, of Berlin, whom I met later on the trip, was another Harvard 
professor until his recent death. In fact, the mathematical schools that were 
then dominating the Continent have either been transferred bodily across 
the seas or have gone out of existence completely, and only a very small 
proportion of the younger men remain to take on the desperate task of 
rebuilding.
We had a delightful time at Hamburg, where we were taken into the life 
of the Mathematical Institute. Margaret, the children, and I then entrained 
for Berlin. There Margaret left me and took the children to see her kinsfolk 
in Breslau while I continued alone to Vienna.
I had earlier decided to give a few lectures at Prague, and in the course of 
my travels I wrote to President Masaryk, my father’s old friend, hoping to 
visit him while I was in his country. I therefore took the liberty of writing to 
him, identifying myself as the small boy whom he had so often seen when 
he visited my father’s house and saying that I was soon to be in Prague. I 
received a prompt answer inviting Margaret and me to call on him in his 
palace at Lana. We crossed the Giant Mountains at exactly the best skiing 
season, and I wished as we passed through that we might visit them in 
some future winter.

26: An Unofficial Cambridge Don 
337
Our friends met us in Prague, saw to it that we found a suitable hotel, 
and extended to us every cordial hospitality. I was much touched when 
some of the faculty of the Czech university forgot their traditional feud 
with the faculty of the German university and came to my lecture.
Finally the day came when we were to drive out to Lana. A state auto­
mobile called for us at our hotel and drove us to the palace, through some 
very bad roads across what seemed quite prosperous farming country. There 
Masaryk’s daughter was waiting for us in a cheerful room with a tall Christ­
mas tree and a blazing fire, until her father should come back from the 
horseback ride that was part of his daily regimen. It was clear from the 
informality of our reception that we were being received not as guests of 
state but as family friends.
The hearty, bearded, old President came in in his riding clothes. He 
remembered very well his visits to our house on Medford Hillside and cau­
tioned me that I was getting too fat and that I should take more exercise; 
that I should go in for horseback riding like himself. He expressed great 
worry at the advances of the Nazis and showed very little hope for the 
future of Europe. Then he left to take his rest; and after a few minutes’ more 
conversation with his half-American daughter, we left too.
Margaret soon returned to Breslau, and I took the train to Leipzig for 
a brief visit to Cousin Leon and a talk or two at the University. I think 
that this was the time I met Koebe, a ponderous, pompous man–“the great 
expert in the theory of functions,” as he was said to have been called by 
the passers-by in his native town in Brandenburg. There were many tales 
current about him. On one occasion, when he had visited Da Vinci’s hor­
ribly mutilated painting of the Last Supper, he is supposed to have said: 
“How sad! This painting will pass away, while my theorem concerning the 
uniformization of analytic functions will endure forever!”
Shortly thereafter, we took the train for Holland and the cross-channel 
boat. By now the children were quite well, but we were exhausted. Luckily, 
they slept through the crossing, which was as rough as only a winter cross­
ing of the North Sea can be, but we two parents spent the night groveling 
on the floor of the cabin in an agony of seasickness.
We arrived in Cambridge the next day to find that the frost had burst the 
plumbing in our bathroom, and we went through two days of annoyance 
until the plumbers could repair it. However, during this time I had to get 
my course started, Barbara had to go back to school, and we had to make 
the best of things.
My course and my book went on very well, and the term continued to 
follow the pattern of the previous one. I did a large part of my reading in 

338 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
the Philosophical Library, the library of the Cambridge Philosophical Soci­
ety, in the publications of which some of my earliest work had appeared. It 
was in this library that I made one of my closest friendships.
I used to read a lot of popular stuff for recreation: particularly detective 
stories, and the English popular periodicals such as The Strand and Pearson’s. 
One day I saw in The Strand a first-rate thriller called “The Gold-Makers.” 
It was science fiction, with some very plausible science and economics in 
it, and it had an excellent plot, with conspiracy, pursuit, and escape. It was 
written by Professor J. B. S. Haldane, of Trinity College, Cambridge. There 
on the cover stood the photograph of a tall, powerfully built, beetle-browed 
man, whom I had repeatedly seen in the Philosophical Library.
The next time I saw Haldane at the library, I summoned up my courage 
to speak to him, to introduce myself, and to express my appreciation of his 
story. There was one little point in his story, however, which I called to his 
attention. He had used a Danish name for a character supposed to be an 
Icelander.
Haldane welcomed this impertinent suggestion of mine, and in a few 
weeks he invited us to his charming house in Old Chesterton. He first 
appeared at our house, however, during the Easter vacation, when I was 
away with an American friend on a hiking-plus-bus trip to the Lake Coun­
try. Margaret had never seen Haldane, and he was a little too shy to make 
clear who he was. However, she recognized him from my description. Hal­
dane invited Margaret to his house to meet Mrs. Haldane. She happened to 
have gone to London by car and was rather late in returning through the 
traffic. Hour by hour went on, and still no Mrs. Haldane. Haldane began to 
be embarrassed, but Margaret was not, and at a late hour Charlotte Haldane 
turned up. She was very grateful to Margaret for taking the situation with 
savoir-faire.
She was a brilliant young Jewish journalist and novelist, and very charm­
ing to Margaret. It was agreed that as soon as I was back from the North, the 
two families would have a get-together.
Meanwhile, I was hiking over a region which both reminded me of my 
beloved New Hampshire and contrasted with it. Windermere made me 
think of Winnipesaukee, but is narrower and less irregular in shape; and the 
hills behind it are lower, more barren, and more rugged than those behind 
our New England lakes. There are groves and woods; but the general picture 
is one of woods surrounded by moor and farmland rather than one of clear­
ings surrounded by woods. There was snow on the higher ground—not as 
much as there would be in New Hampshire so early in April but still enough 
to give an atmosphere of bleakness. The houses are of rough stone instead 

26: An Unofficial Cambridge Don 
339
of the wood to which I had been accustomed; the stone walls between the 
fields are higher and a bit neater than those at home; and the weather, 
when I went up Scafell, for instance, was cold, wet, and stormy.
When we came back from the trip, much refreshed, Margaret took 
me over to visit the Haldanes. I remember that we played a lot of bridge 
with them—family against family, men against women, or Jews against 
Gentiles. We also had a chance to converse a good deal, and I have never 
met a man with better conversation or more varied knowledge than J. B. S. 
Haldane.
It was not long after I came back from my hike in the Lake Country than 
I began one day to feel rather ill. The doctor came over and diagnosed my 
case as scarlet fever. We were terribly grieved to have exposed our friends, 
the Bisonettes, with whom we had spent the previous day, to this infection, 
and particularly their young boy. However, there was nothing to be done 
about it, and the ambulance came to take me to the Cambridge Hospital for 
Contagious Diseases on the outskirts of the city.
I had a pleasant room opening onto a veranda and warmed by a stove, 
which was necessary as the weather was still occasionally raw and inclem­
ent, though it was well along in May. The partitions between the different 
rooms were of glass, and as soon as I began to be on the mend, which was 
in a very few days, I found the chance of playing a non-contagious game 
of five-in-a-row with the occupant of the next room on a piece of paper 
pressed against this glass partition. I also had plenty of visitors from the 
university—my friend Paley came particularly often—and it was not impos­
sible for me to do a little work and to correct a little proof. What I missed 
most was that I could not participate in the jollities and gaieties of the May 
Week, which came early in June (when I was already a convalescent), but 
some of the nurses furnished me with the complete gossip and scandals of 
the town.
When I got out of the hospital, Term was already over and life in Cam­
bridge had the usual dull flavor of life in any academic town during the 
summer vacation. However, we continued to see a lot of the Haldanes, and 
I used to go swimming with him in a stretch of the River Cam, which 
passed by his lawn. Haldane used to take his pipe in swimming. Following 
his example, I smoked a cigar and, as has always been my habit, wore my 
glasses. We must have appeared to boaters on the river like a couple of great 
water animals, a long and a short walrus, let us say, bobbing up and down 
in the stream.
Later in the summer I was to participate in the Zurich Mathematical 
Congress, so Margaret, the girls, and I left for Switzerland. We returned to 

340 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
the Hotel Belle-Rive at Bönigen. Our good friends, the proprietors, were still 
running the place, although it was about to fold up.
We found a local farm girl who agreed to come with us to Zurich as 
nursemaid, to take care of the children while we were busy at the meet­
ing. Even while we were on the train to Lucerne and eventually to Zurich, 
we found the clan of mathematicians beginning to gather. Our old friend 
Emmy Noether—probably the best woman mathematician there has ever 
been—whom we had known in our Göttingen days, was on the train, look­
ing as always like an energetic and very nearsighted washerwoman. She 
was, however, a very warm personality, and her many students flocked 
around her like a clutch of ducklings about a kind, motherly hen.
We took an inexpensive lodging at a Christliches Hospiz on the hills 
behind Zurich. This was the Swiss equivalent of a YWCA or YMCA hotel. The 
place was a bit sanctimonious, but the meals were good, the surroundings 
delightful, and best of all there was a little zoo in the neighborhood where 
the children could amuse themselves among a collection primarily of baby 
animals of all sorts.
As is usual at such congresses, we had a very active scientific and social 
life, with excursions and entertainments, public and private, at which the 
university and the Federal Institute of Technology put themselves out in a 
pleasant competition to do their best by us. The place was full of our old 
friends, as well as of those who were to become our new friends. By this 
time I had acquired sufficient prestige to be asked to preside at one of the 
polyglot section meetings. It was not an easy problem to judge a dispute 
between a quarrelsome Italian speaking very bad French and an equally 
quarrelsome German with almost no French at all.
On one of the excursions—I believe it was a steamer trip up the lake—a 
couple of the Italian mathematicians broached to me the subject of an invi­
tation to lecture in Italy. I had no sympathy with Fascism and resented the 
completely Fascist and official auspices of this invitation. I talked the mat­
ter over with Leon Lichtenstein, who was also a participant in the meeting, 
and he told me to forget the politics and accept the offer. However, I heard 
nothing more of the offer, and they must have come to the conclusion that 
my opinions would not go well in Fascist Italy.
Paley was at the meeting, and he told me that he had made arrange­
ments to come to the United States in the fall and work with me. I was a 
little alarmed, however, at the way in which he radiated British superiority 
and railed at the shortcomings of the unfortunate Swiss. I took this oppor­
tunity to take him down a peg or two, for I felt that it was easier to criticize 

26: An Unofficial Cambridge Don 
341
his excessive boyish nationalism here, on ground, where we were both for­
eigners, than it would be later in the United States, where I should owe him 
the courtesy of a host.
At the end of the congress, tired and let down, we took the train across 
Germany to Hamburg, where we embarked in a North German Lloyd boat. 
We were eager to get back from what had been a holiday, if not a vacation, 
and to resume a reasonably routine life.


27  Back Home
1932–1933
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
27: 
Back 
Home
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
We came back to Boston well and happy. Margaret busied herself in finding 
a new house, but even before we had a chance to get settled there, I had a 
hurried call from my parents. I was used to these unexplained summonses, 
but I frankly could not see anything in my recent conduct to account for 
the emergency nature of the call and the tension that my parents’ voices 
expressed.
I found them in a high dudgeon. Father had received a very insulting 
letter from a philologist colleague in Germany with whom he had tried 
to correspond, and both my parents considered that my contacts with 
German mathematicians, who had not the slightest connection with this 
philologist, must be interpreted as disloyalty to the family.
My father’s feelings for Germany were, of course, ambivalent. He had 
come to hate the tradition in which he grew up and felt personally rebuffed 
by the very sources from which he would most have welcomed approval. 
With my mother, the feeling was partly a transference of my father’s emo­
tions and partly a desire to assert her solidarity with the prevailing opinions 
of the Harvard academic group and thus to underline her ultra-Americanism.
Margaret and I had no real idea of what we might have done to merit 
the stream of invective which bore down upon us. Moreover, it was not 
the usual more or less good-natured invective to which we had been accus­
tomed; it had in it a certain ominous stridency which suggested that Father 
was in a critical state. Something was wrong, something more than a mere 
ordinary fit of anger.
My parents went out for the evening, leaving us alone in the house. 
They soon returned in a state of deep alarm. We learned that Father, while 
crossing the street, had been knocked down by an automobile. He did not 
seem to be injured seriously, and although one leg was put out of action, 
it appeared to be more the pain of the bruise that bothered him than any 
deeper injury. We called the family doctor—an elderly gentleman who 

344 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
belonged to my parents’ generation and had the courtly manners which 
meant so much more to them than the brusque efficiency of the doctors 
of my own generation. He decided to leave Father at home for the night.
The next day found Father no better, and some twenty-four hours after 
the accident he was sent to the X-ray room of the Mount Auburn Hospital. 
There was a fracture of the neck of the femur, and we all knew that Father 
was in for a bad time. Before much of a surgical nature could be done, it 
was necessary to allay the pain and to calm his excitement and forebodings 
of doom.
The drug chosen was paraldehyde, which is generally one of the more 
innocent sedatives, but in Father’s case it proved to have most undesirable 
reactions. Much of the time he was in delirium. Excited patients are not 
welcomed in general hospitals, and it was necessary to send my father to 
a special institution for cases of this sort. By this time, however, a surgeon 
had set the hip.
Thus, at the very beginning of my return, I was faced by the need of 
daily visits to my father at the hospital and of further visits to a second 
hospital to take him out in our car for an airing in the country. Gradually 
his hip healed and his state of confusion faded away. I took him back to 
his apartment, from which he ultimately emerged each day to continue his 
researches at the Harvard Library, but the almost boyish exuberance which 
had characterized him before the accident was gone, never to return.
It was during this very trying time that I learned that my English col­
league, Paley, was arriving to take up a year of work with me on a Common­
wealth Fellowship. I crossed the dismal wastes of East Boston to meet him 
at the pier. There he was, with a couple of big bags which only as sturdy a 
man as Paley could carry with ease and with another great bundle of skiing 
equipment.
The ensuing few weeks were for me an alternation between visits to my 
father and the most active possible joint scientific work with Paley.
Paley had an unlimited admiration for Littlewood, and I imagine that 
this had been greatly increased by Littlewood’s accomplishments as an 
Alpinist. It was from Littlewood as well as from his own impetuous, untam­
able nature that he drew the élan which enabled him to drive through any 
problem that he could not turn. He was the leader of the young generation 
of British mathematicians, and if he had not come to an untimely end he 
would be the mainstay of British mathematics at the present moment.
Paley and I used to work together on the great blackboard of a dusty, 
half-lighted, abandoned classroom which had been turned into the lumber 
room of the M.I.T. Mathematics Department. We decided to continue some 

27: Back Home 
345
work that I had already been doing on the design of electric circuits, and 
we attacked the problem with every tool in our joint repertory. My role was 
primarily that of suggesting problems and the broad lines on which they 
might be attacked, and it was generally left to Paley to draw the strings 
tight.
He brought me a superb mastery of mathematics as a game and a vast 
number of tricks that added up to an armament by which almost any 
problem could be attacked, yet he had almost no sense of the orientation 
of mathematics among the other sciences. In many problems which we 
undertook, I saw, as was my habit, a physical and even an engineering 
application, and my sense of this often determined the images I formed 
and the tools by which I sought to solve my problems. Paley was eager to 
learn my ways, as I was eager to learn his, but my applied point of view did 
not come easily to him, nor I think, did he regard it as fully sportsmanlike. 
I must have shocked him and my other English friends by my willingness 
to shoot a mathematical fox if I could not follow it with the hunt.
One interesting problem which we attacked together was that of the 
conditions restricting the Fourier transform of a function vanishing on 
the half line. This is a sound mathematical problem on its own merits, 
and Paley attacked it with vigor, but what helped me and did not help 
Paley was that it is essentially a problem in electrical engineering. It had 
been known for many years that there is a certain limitation on the sharp­
ness with which an electric wave filter cuts a frequency band off, but the 
physicists and engineers had been quite unaware of the deep mathematical 
grounds for these limitations. In solving what was for Paley a beautiful and 
difficult chess problem, completely contained within itself, I showed at the 
same time that the limitations under which the electrical engineers were 
working were precisely those which prevent the future from influencing 
the past.
The difference between Paley and me was essentially the same as the 
difference between a great but traditional English classical scholar and my 
father. I loved my father, and, for all his severity, I knew his softer sides; but 
he was no Mr. Chips. What was for a Mr. Chips a subtle and difficult game 
was for my father a struggle in dead earnest to use one’s ideas as tools in the 
world of life outside. I respect and I understand English scholarship, but my 
roots are Continental.
Paley was a skiing enthusiast but not a particularly skillful skier. He had 
the habit of going deliberately over forbidden slopes, and he would stamp 
his heavy weight on his great long skis in a way that would make the local 
ski master cock his eye in alarm. In fact, Paley’s whole policy of life was to 

346 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
live dangerously. For him, any concession to danger and to self-preserva­
tion was a confession of weakness which he dared not make in view of his 
desire for the integrity of a sportsman.
Paley visited us in New Hampshire. He showed a remarkable lack of 
understanding of the life there and of the way to get things done. After 
my experience of his tactlessness in Switzerland, I was not surprised at this. 
When his car gave him some difficulty on the way up to New Hampshire he 
had tried to pay the passers-by who had helped us to get going again, even 
though I told him that these were our neighbors, who were helping us out 
of friendliness, and who would bitterly resent any attempt to pay them off.
Yet for all this, as he came to learn what life was really like in America 
and in the American countryside, he began to respect our people for their 
friendliness and independence. The fact is, Paley remained a schoolboy 
until his death, and he would have remained a schoolboy still if he had 
lived to be eighty.
We were to learn later that the front of boldness and danger seeking 
which Paley put on was part of a true death impulse. At any rate two cous­
ins met as violent ends as Paley himself was later to do. One of them died 
in a motor smash and the other in a rock climbing accident.
During the Christmas vacation, Paley did a little skiing in the Adiron­
dacks with an Irish friend who, I think, was another Commonwealth Fel­
low, and after the skiing was over they continued to Montreal. I believe 
they almost wrecked their car in the Adirondacks, and they got entangled 
with a group of New York gangsters who had moved to Montreal during 
prohibition. Paley came home to Boston rather thrilled than chastened. 
At that time I already knew that the best thing that could happen to him 
would be some really dangerous and scaring experience—some accident 
short of death.
In April he went with some Boston friends for a skiing party in the Cana­
dian Rockies. There were safe and interesting ski slopes near where the party 
was encamped, but the ski master had put some neighboring slopes out of 
bounds as too likely to have avalanches. To forbid a thing to Paley was to 
make quite sure that he would do it.
I shortly received a telegram from his companions that he had been 
killed in a ski accident. He had gone across one of these forbidden slopes 
at an angle. Apparently he had stamped with his heavy skiis at a place 
where an avalanche was just ready to start. His body was found a day or 
two later three thousand feet down the mountain, with one leg torn off. He 
was buried at Banff, and it was my sad duty to inform his mother and his 
English friends. It took me some time to come back to a mental equilibrium 

27: Back Home 
347
sufficient to permit my further work and my proper attention to the envi­
ronment about me.
After this, I turned to the group of my friends centering about the 
Mexican physicist Manuel Sandoval Vallarta. He introduced me to a 
Mexican physiologist named Arturo Rosenblueth, the right-hand man of 
the great Harvard physiologist, Walter Cannon, whom I remembered meet­
ing when I was a boy of about eight. They had worked together in many 
fields of physiology, in particular neurophysiology. By that time, it was 
already clear that whatever Arturo’s academic fate at Harvard might be, it 
was his scientific destiny to carry on the great Cannon tradition.
Arturo is a burly, vigorous man of middle height, quick in his actions 
and in his speech, who paces rapidly up and down the room when he is 
thinking. No one who sees him in the Mexican environment can doubt 
that he is a true Mexican, though the greater part of his genetic heritage 
comes from other countries, particularly Hungary.
Arturo and I hit it off well together from the very beginning, though 
to hit it off well with Arturo means not that one has no disagreements 
with him, but rather that one enjoys these disagreements. One point that 
we shared in common was an intense interest in scientific methodology; 
another, that we believed that the divisions between the sciences were con­
venient administrative lines for the apportionment of money and effort, 
which each working scientist should be willing to cross whenever his stud­
ies should appear to demand it. Science, we both felt, should be a collabora­
tive effort.
Arturo carried out at least part of his ideas of what science should be 
by running a private seminar on scientific method at the Harvard Medical 
School. Not all those who attended were medical men, however. Manuel 
Vallarta as well as some other people from M.I.T., including myself, became 
regular attendants. A few from the branches of Harvard on the Cambridge 
side of the river also frequently sat in on the meetings. Naturally, it was 
Arturo who was the chief host in these feasts, which belonged specifi­
cally to him, but if there was any other person who took the reins into his 
hands, I think that by general recognition that person was myself. Thus, 
the seminar represented some years of our preliminary cooperation before 
the final and definitive co-operation which has taken place within the last 
twenty years.
While our seminar was at no time a part of the official teaching of the 
Harvard Medical School or of any other institution, its many alumni will 
give it the credit of founding in them a wide interest in the philosophy 
of science and even of initiating them in quite specific lines of thought 

348 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
and research. Since Arturo has left the Harvard Medical School for Mexico, 
the two of us, either jointly or singly, have continued similar meetings in 
Mexico City or at M.I.T. We have managed to recreate much of the atmo­
sphere of those earlier gatherings, although it has perhaps not been possible 
for us to bring back the full flavor of active enthusiasm which belonged to 
our earlier days, when our main successes were ahead of us. In its later days, 
the seminar established a scientific reputation which may have tempted 
certain eager beavers to try to take over the prestige of the group for their 
own advantage.
Ultimately the theme of the many discussions which Rosenblueth and I 
had privately and in our seminar came to be the application of mathemat­
ics, and in particular of communication theory, to physiological method. 
We laid out a policy of joint effort in these fields for a future when we might 
work closer together.

28  Voices Prophesying War
1933–1935
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
28: 
Voices 
Prophesying 
War
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
During my stay in the English Cambridge, the depression had reached 
its height. When we had come back we found that it had entered a new 
phase, and that the dangerous possibilities already implicit in it were well 
on the way to being realized. England had devalued gold at about the time 
Paley arrived, and he assured me that this was a move of extreme cleverness 
which would ultimately give England a decisive economic advantage. He 
told me quite correctly that it was a move that we should be forced to follow 
ourselves, but that the first nation to act gained an advantage thereby that 
could never be made up by those who followed suit. It was clear that the 
world was going to be subjected to shocks which the patched-up economic 
system that came into being after the First World War, and the patched-up 
social system that went with it, might not be able to sustain.
When I had at last been in contact with Leon Lichtenstein, at Zurich, I 
had found him in a depressed mood, owing to the political ground that had 
been gained by Adolf Hitler and the Nazi party in Germany. He knew that 
the Putsch meant trouble, and trouble was not long in coming. We read in 
the papers of the anti-Jewish measures, and even as these appeared in the 
foreign news bulletins Leon sent us a pathetic and desperate letter. He had 
not waited for the Putsch to flee Germany for Poland. He wrote me from a 
hotel in Zakopane in the High Tatra to find a job for him in the States.
I set out at once to look over the ground, but before I could get started we 
received another communication—I think from Lichtenstein’s wife—that 
Leon was dead of heart failure. Then I knew that the work of us American 
mathematicians was cut out for us and that we should have to get together 
and make a systematic effort to find jobs and a possibility of life for many 
a displaced scholar.
About this time I received a very tragic letter from Mrs. Szász, the wife 
of a lovable little Hungarian who had taken me under his wing in my stu­
dent days in Göttingen. Luckily there was a Mathematical Society meeting 

350 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
not far off, and I had a chance to talk with a Cincinnati colleague, Irving 
Barnett, the very same man who had introduced me to the theory of gen­
eralized integration. Barnett offered to place Szász in Cincinnati in the 
future, but the Massachusetts Institute of Technology was ready to accept 
him for a year or two until he could become more proficient in the English 
language.
Soon Szász turned up, and later he brought his daughter and his brother 
over to this country. He had a career of some twenty years in America, 
where he ultimately received recognition more appropriate to his really 
very considerable talents than he had found in Germany.
Szász was but the first of a great stream of émigrés, some of whom went 
through my hands. I had at least some share in finding positions for Radem­
acher, Pólya, Szegö, and many others.
Rademacher, of Breslau, was invited to the University of Pennsylvania 
by Professor J. R. Kline. His field in the analytic theory of numbers was one 
which had not been too strongly represented in the United States before his 
arrival; but he formed a school here, and much of his best work has been 
done in the United States.
Pólya and Szegö are two Hungarians who are particularly strong in the 
classical field of analysis. Between them they had already written a very 
interesting sort of textbook which consists in a large repertory of research 
problems at just about the level at which the novice in research can under­
take them with profit. Both of them were received by Leland Stanford Uni­
versity, and Pólya has just retired there.
Emmy Noether, the greatest woman mathematician whom the world 
has ever seen, was cordially received by Bryn Mawr. Unfortunately, after all 
too few years she died there from causes presumably unconnected with the 
Nazi regime.
Menger wrote to me from Vienna to see if he could find a refuge in the 
States before the Austrian crash came, and we secured him an invitation 
from Notre Dame University. He has since moved on to the Illinois Institute 
of Technology.
Von Neumann, who was something of an infant prodigy, received 
a cordial welcome at Princeton, together with Einstein and Hermann 
Weyl—who is without doubt the greatest German mathematician since Hil­
bert. They all later moved to the new Institute for Advanced Study, founded 
at Princeton with the advice and under the administration of Veblen. 
Veblen and Kline were perhaps the two chief American almoners for the 
European refugees, but I am proud to believe that I did at least my share in 
the matter.

28: Voices Prophesying War 
351
From the very beginning of the problem, I tried to get in contact with 
Jewish charities and individual Jewish sources of funds for the tremendous 
task of salvaging as much as possible out of the Nazi mess. Here I found a 
mixed reception. The Jewish sources of charity had very frequently decided 
that Jewish displaced scholars were in most cases too far from Judaism to be 
their special responsibility. Furthermore, it was the time of the height of the 
Zionist movement, and the Zionists considered that part of their charitable 
bounty to be spent abroad or on foreigners should go in the first instance 
to Zionist undertakings, and only in the second instance—if there was a 
second instance—to other causes.
Even so, we found a considerable amount of Jewish money at our 
disposal, but I think that at least half of the funds we needed came directly 
from our already overloaded universities, and from our large scientific 
fund sources such as the Rockefeller Foundation and the Guggenheim 
Foundation.
It was about the time of the émigré influx that I received an invitation 
to join the National Academy of Sciences. This is the organization which 
was entrusted during the Civil War with the task of putting the services 
of the scientists of the United States at the command of the American 
government. In the course of the years, its governmental importance had 
gradually given way to the secondary function of naming those American 
scientists who might be considered to have arrived. There has always been a 
great deal of internal politics about science, and this has been distasteful to 
me. The building of the National Academy was for me a fit symbol of smug 
pretentiousness, of scholarship in shapely frock coat and striped trousers. 
After a brief period, during which my inquisitiveness concerning the nature 
of the high brass of science was amply satisfied, I got out.
It was during the period after my visit to England and before my visit to 
China that I was perhaps the most active as a participant in Mathematical 
Society meetings. The very young man cannot afford to go to too many of 
these. The older man, as I now regretfully find myself to be, does not have 
the energy to go through too much of the excitement of the meetings and 
cannot, in fact, attend them without finding claims made on him to act as 
a presiding officer or to take some part or other in the councils of the group. 
Moreover, his prestige enables him to let others come to him without the 
necessity of his going out to meet them. It is therefore the middle period of 
a man’s life which is the most suitable for extensive meeting going.
Among the most delightful meetings were those that usually took place 
during the spring holidays in the South. To leave half-wintry Boston and 
cross the cold stretches of Massachusetts and Connecticut, where the merest 

352 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
haze of green foliage was beginning to decorate the bare trees, and to meet 
in Pennsylvania and Maryland the white of the dogwood and the purple of 
the Judas tree, was a pleasure indeed. We generally took one of the children 
along with us, and I think they enjoyed the trips as much as we did.
It was not at one of these delightful spring meetings, but on a bitter 
Cambridge winter day when the temperature went down to eighteen below 
and the inadequate steam hissed futilely into the chilly Radcliffe class­
room where we held our meeting, that Professor Morse, of the Institute for 
Advanced Study, and I received the Bôcher prize in analysis together. It was 
a pleasant thing to be recognized, and even more pleasant to receive this 
recognition from the mathematician whose opinion I valued above that of 
all others: Hermann Weyl.
One of the honors that normally comes to the successful American 
mathematician is a request to write a book for the so-called Colloquium 
Series. As far as the personal satisfaction of this invitation goes, it is quite 
equivalent to the award of a prize. The possibility of an invitation of this 
sort had been hovering about me for some years, and Tamarkin was my 
most enthusiastic supporter. The invitation came after Paley’s death. If he 
had lived, we would have divided our joint efforts to the writing of this 
book; and now that he was dead, I felt it to be a work of piety to incorporate 
into one book the various pieces of research we had done together and the 
other investigations I had made along similar lines.
The title of the Colloquium was Fourier Transforms in the Complex Domain, 
and it appeared with the two of us as joint authors. I presented the material 
of the book at the summer meeting of 1933, which was held in the very 
delightful college town of Williamstown.
At about this time in the academic year of 1933–34 an interesting group 
of young undergraduates was coming up in the mathematics department 
at M.I.T. Claude E. Shannon was a very striking member of this group. He 
hit on an idea which even then showed a profound originality and which 
has since been justified by the vast amount of work on switching devices, 
computing machines, and information theory to which it has led.
Let me point out the content of this idea, whose implications are of 
major importance in current scientific work. All of you are familiar with the 
wall switches which turn on and off the lights in a room. In their simplest 
application, each switch operates one light alone. However, more compli­
cated arrangements occur in almost every house. For example, you can turn 
the hall light on from the foot of the stairs and turn it out from the head. It 
is possible to find arrangements by which the same light can be turned on 
and off from four or five different wall switches. It was Shannon’s discovery 

28: Voices Prophesying War 
353
that the mode of designing these switching circuits with greatest economy 
is in fact a branch of the algebra of logic.
Switching circuits lie at the heart of automatic telephone central 
exchanges, and Shannon’s special talents proved to be exactly what the 
Bell Telephone Laboratories needed. Shannon has gone on from triumph 
to triumph as an employee of those laboratories. His interests have come to 
embrace the general measure of information, the electrical mouse, which 
can learn its way around a maze; the automatic chess player; the problem 
of coding and decoding messages; and in fact the entire scope of modern 
information theory. In all of this he has been true to his first intellectual 
love for problems of a sharp yes-and-no nature, such as those of the wall 
switch, in preference to problems which seem to suggest the continuous or 
roughly continuous flow of electricity.
Thus, Shannon is one of the major spirits behind the present age of the 
electronic computer and the automatic factory. Moreover, it is through his 
work that a training in symbolic logic, that most formal of all disciplines, 
has come to be one recognized mode of introduction into the great com­
plex of scientific work of the Bell Telephone Laboratories.
While Shannon was an M.I.T. man, and while Bush was among the first 
of our staff to understand him and to value him, Shannon and I had rela­
tively little contact during his stay here as a student. Since then, the two of 
us have developed along parallel if different directions, and our scientific 
relations have greatly broadened and deepened.
Two younger men who made their appearance in our department dur­
ing the early thirties were W. T. Martin and Robert Cameron. Martin left us 
to head the mathematics department at Syracuse, and his splendid work 
in building up that department led to our calling him back as head of the 
M.I.T. mathematics department. His sincerity and understanding friend­
ship with the other members of the staff have been an enormous asset in 
bringing our department up to its present status. He and Cameron did a 
good deal of work together along the lines of my Brownian-motion papers, 
and they organized the field into a generally recognized branch of math­
ematical work. Cameron has since left us for the University of Minnesota, 
but for many years he has continued to work together from time to time 
with Martin.
There were three young men studying mathematics at that time who 
became more definitely attached to my line of work. These were Norman 
Levinson, Henry Malin, and Samuel Saslaw. They were Jewish boys who 
had felt, in differing degrees, the frustration of prejudice without being so 
deeply wounded by it as to be completely ruined.

354 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
Saslaw was the oldest of the three and acted as a good-natured older 
brother to the group. Levinson was decidedly the strongest mathematician, 
and he has been one of my successors as a recipient of the Bôcher prize. He 
is now at M.I.T. and he is a mainstay of the middle generation of research 
men. Malin filled a very useful part in encouraging the esprit de corps which 
such a group of young men needs to carry it through the difficult work of 
mathematical research.
Levinson had done research for me at a very early age, and, even before 
he had completed his bachelor’s work, he had taken a job of mine which 
was already an extension of Fourier Series theory and pushed it to the 
extreme limit. I felt that the boy had obtained about everything he could 
from me at that time and that he needed the broadening of contact with 
other scholars new to him. Hardy was willing to accept him at Cambridge, 
and we secured for him a Redfield Proctor scholarship from M.I.T. This was 
in 1934, Levinson’s performance at Cambridge was eminently satisfactory, 
and it was on the basis of the impression that he left that future American 
mathematicians in Cambridge have been judged and assessed.
By the time at which these young men had come to work with me, Lee, 
my Chinese friend, and Ikehara, my friend from Japan, were already gone. I 
have told in an earlier chapter how we learned of Ikehara’s desperate straits 
and had returned him to his own country.
Lee also had gone back to China, on his own initiative, to seek a job 
there. He had tried both government and commercial work but had found 
that in neither was it possible for a man to live up to the demands of his 
own probity. Luckily he had been appointed a professor of electrical engi­
neering at Tsing Hua University, which was just developing from a receiv­
ing institution for those boys destined to be Boxer Indemnity scholars in 
the United States into a full-fledged and autonomous university. Here he 
was finally in a congenial environment.
Lee had not forgotten me. In the course of the academic year 1934–35 I 
received an invitation from Tsing Hua to come there for a year and lecture 
on mathematics and electrical engineering. The invitation came, of course, 
from the Tsing Hua authorities, and particularly from President Mei and 
Dean Ku, who was later to become vice-minister of education in China. 
But the invitation had certainly been inspired by Lee. After a fair amount 
of negotiation, during which I was always eager to go but had certain 
qualms about the possibility of going and the stability of affairs in China, I 
accepted. By then my two daughters were seven and five years old, and we 
decided to take them along, even though we were somewhat worried about 
the safety of the trip and its effect on their health.

28: Voices Prophesying War 
355
My prospective trip to China filled me with great enthusiasm. Not only 
have I always loved travel for its own sake, but my father had brought me 
up to consider the intellectual world a whole and each country, however 
exalted its position might be, as a mere province in that world. I had actu­
ally been a witness and a participant in the rise of American science from 
a provincial reflection of that of Europe into a relatively important and 
autonomous position, and I was sure that what had happened here could 
happen in any country, or at least in any country which had already shown 
in action an aptitude for intellectual and cultural innovation. I have never 
felt the advantage of European culture over any of the great cultures of 
the Orient as anything more than a temporary episode in history, and I 
was eager to see these extra-European countries with my own eyes and to 
observe their modes of life and thought by direct inspection. In this I was 
thoroughly seconded by my wife, to whom national and racial prejudice 
have always been as foreign as they have been to me. Even my daughters, 
small children as they were, had been brought up outside of the usual run 
of prejudices.
We spent the beginning of the summer as usual in our home in Sand­
wich, and I participated in hikes with my young friends, who were now 
beginning to grow up. We took the train from Meredith, our usual jumping-
off place, and went north by way of Montreal to Chicago. We left for 
California, where I had accepted invitations from Stanford University for a 
few lectures. There we saw our friends the Szegös and the Pólyas, together 
with other even older acquaintances. We left for Japan by a boat of the 
Dollar line.


29  China and Around the World
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
29: 
China 
and 
Around 
the 
World
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
On the boat for Japan we found ourselves in the company of a mixed 
group of returning missionaries, Japanese army officers, and conducted 
tourists, but with two young children with us we led a very self-centered 
life on board.
At Yokohama we were met by our friend Ikehara, who was teaching at 
the University of Osaka, and he served as our mentor for the two weeks we 
were to spend in Japan.
Rooms were waiting for us at the Imperial Hotel in Tokyo, that fantastic 
structure of the American architect Frank Lloyd Wright, and Ikehara had 
made arrangements that a Japanese lady who had been in America should 
invite our children. Lo and behold! This lady had lived in Boston, where 
we had known her well, for her daughter had been a friend of Barbara’s at 
kindergarten. Thus, my children got along splendidly with their hostess, 
and we had no difficulties at all in this respect.
The hotel was excellent and the food very good, but in those days the 
guests were subject to a continuous surveillance. For all we knew, the Amer­
ican lady who sold dolls and souvenirs might have been under orders to 
report our every word or attitude to the management and eventually to 
the police. Perhaps the waiters were a little more than waiters. Still, we had 
a very good time, and Margaret enjoyed shopping for Japanese souvenirs.
During the next few days, in hot August weather, I met the Tokyo uni­
versity people and gave a few talks. I found the academic standard at the 
universities quite high, but I also felt that Tokyo in those days had begun 
to be affected by the rigidity that so often taints a university which is sure 
of its position as the first in the land. The Tokyo professors looked slightly 
down their noses at their associates at the lesser universities.
Ikehara accompanied us to Osaka, which was even muggier than Tokyo. 
I found the mathematics club at Osaka University very much to my liking. 
It is from this group that many of the best Japanese mathematicians have 

358 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
come, such as Yoshida and Kakutani, who stand among the best mathema­
ticians anywhere.
We visited the great keep of Osaka. There is no European building more 
suggestive of strength and military impregnability than this cyclopean 
structure. The battered-back massive stone walls could even now hold an 
army at bay. It seemed to us a comment in stone on the old Japan of the 
bushi and ronin.
We left Kobe for the China coast by a small Japanese steamer. It was a sail 
of several days through the beautiful inland sea of Japan and then past the 
forbidding and bare hills of Korea, to the starboard, and Shantung, to the 
port. The food was dull and inferior, and the company more interesting as 
types than as companions.
After a few days we saw fishing boats which had put out from the low 
muddy coast, and soon we docked at the pier by the railway station at 
Tangku. We were surprised to see how much taller the Chinese porters on 
the shore were than the run of the Japanese we had met, even though we 
had seen a few tall and even burly Japanese here and there.
Soon the Chinese custom house officer came on board, inquired courte­
ously for us, and told us that Dr. Lee was waiting for us on shore. Within a 
few minutes Lee met us and we were sitting together in the great, empty, 
waiting room of the railway station, which was adorned with pictures of 
the summer resort at Pehtaiho. Lee told us that he was married, but he 
would not tell us from what part of China his wife came. He immediately 
started discussing with me both the work we had already done and our 
prospects of work to come.
Soon the train came in, and we entered a second-class compartment 
for Peiping. The train had cars which looked American from the outside, 
although they followed the European compartment system. Instead of a 
water cooler there was a little stove at one end of the car, where the atten­
dant kept a pot of tea always on the boil for the passengers. Indeed, we 
found that boiling tea is as much a necessity of life in China as cold water 
is with us.
We traveled through flat country reminiscent of the cornfields of Kansas, 
where we saw corn as well as the tall Chinese sorghum. The farm houses 
were of adobe with somewhat less curved roofs than we had been led to 
expect from the pictures we had seen of southern China. Soon the barren 
Western Hills came into sight, and before we knew it we were at the main 
railway station of Peiping. A seven-miles taxi trip took us to the South Com­
pound. This was a large aggregation of modern bungalows which, however, 

29: China and Around the World 
359
instead of facing one another along streets of the Western type, all faced to 
the south and looked into one another’s kitchen compounds.
There we found Mrs. Lee, who was not a Chinese lady at all but a tall 
beautiful Canadian, who had been working in New York for the same firm 
as Dr. Lee himself, and for whom Dr. Lee had sent once he was established 
in a permanent position. She was in charge of the Lee household of ser­
vants, who all appeared at our house to enable us to get started, and who 
had a delicious meal ready for us.
It took us a few days to get used to Tsing Hua and our new life. It was a 
bilingual place, where much of the teaching both in the Western humani­
ties and in science was in English. Although there were some Western pro­
fessors on the faculty, the majority were Chinese, trained for the most part 
in the United States but some of them in England, Germany, and France, 
as well.
It was interesting to see how this foreign training had reacted on the 
members of the faculty. There was a Chinese lady who had studied in Paris 
and whose walk looked French even at the distance of a couple of blocks. 
There was an assertive little German-trained professor—nothing but minor 
details of complexion distinguished his appearance from that of the perfect 
Nazi. Many of the professors were as American as my colleagues at home, 
and there was a tweedy professor of English who had Oxford written all 
over him, and inside his soul as well.
Professor Hiong, the head of the mathematics department at Tsing Hua, 
whom I had already met in France, was as much at home in Paris as on 
the edge of the Western Hills, and his eleven-year-old boy was an artist 
in the Western style. The boy was able to write with ease a French com­
position for a lycée in Paris or a discussion of Confucian virtue in classical 
Chinese.
The first things we had to attend to concerned the bread-and-butter 
necessities of life. The Lees found for us an establishment of servants. There 
was an elderly butler, or number-one boy, who had worked for people 
at the French Embassy. He was supposed to know a little French, which 
consisted mostly of the word oui. There was an amah, or maid; an elderly 
Mohammedan rickshaw boy to take our children to the American school at 
Yenching University; and a cook (or “great expert,” to translate the Chinese 
expression). He did not live up to his name, but he certainly could produce 
acceptable meals.
One of the most important things to find was a Chinese teacher to come 
to our house and instruct us in the language. Lee found for us a tall, digni­
fied, elderly gentlemen in a long gown, who knew little English and spoke 

360 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
none with his charges, but who brought with him a textbook in English 
with the aid of which he could supplement his oral lessons. We did not 
find progress too slow, and both my wife and I took a great deal of interest 
in learning a language so new and unfamiliar to us. Our teacher proved to 
be more than a teacher, for he was the vehicle of all the local gossip both 
to and from our house. We always knew if one neighbor had an extra big 
banquet on for the night, or if another neighbor had servant troubles, or if 
the Christian congregation was to meet that Sunday in the home of a third.
We sent the children to an elementary school carried on under the aus­
pices of nearby Yenching University. Before school had started, they had 
managed to make friends with the Ni children, who lived nearby and whose 
mother was American. The two broods raided the neighbors’ vegetable gar­
dens, invaded the privacy of the neighbors’ houses, and, in short, got into 
all the sorts of trouble into which active children can get.
The American school at Yenching was a one-room structure containing 
all grades from the first up to the high school. The teachers came mostly 
from the faculty of Yenching University. All the children except mine were 
so fluent in Chinese that my own made very little effort to bridge the gap 
between their attainments and those of their schoolmates.
Occasionally my children would be greeted with abusive cries from the 
village children, with the result that my daughters learned Chinese abuse 
with an alacrity with which we could have well dispensed. They hurled 
back the cries of the village children without understanding what they 
meant. When my daughter asked the meaning of one of these phrases, the 
Chinese teacher stood her in a corner.
The school was very good for my children. The informal arrangement 
made it possible for Peggy to advance far more quickly than in any graded 
school. She was the only beginner, but before the year was half over she had 
really started to read.
It was quite early in our stay at Tsing Hua that Mr. and Mrs. Hiong were 
hosts to the whole mathematics department for a picnic on the grounds 
of the New Summer Palace. This was a rococo assemblage of passageways 
and temples. At every turn there were windows of fantastic shape in the 
form of vases, lutes, hearts, or lozenges. There were long winding walks 
and gingko trees, and staircase upon staircase running up the hills to little 
summerhouses.
Mrs. Hiong had prepared a collection of tidbits in Chinese style. The 
mathematics department servant carried the basket and participated as an 
equal in the feast. The Hiong boys made sketches of passers-by in which 
they showed a sense of humor at once Chinese and Western.

29: China and Around the World 
361
Everybody could talk English, and all but ourselves talked Chinese. The 
atmosphere was one of democracy and free interplay of personality with 
personality. The servants were neither actively snubbed nor tacitly left out 
of the conversation.
We had later invitations to the Hiongs’ house, which was almost a 
museum of delightful paintings in the modern Chinese style. There were 
many panels covered with delicate and deft representations of fish and 
shrimps and crabs and all the other little animals of the water. The Chi­
nese, like their pupils, the Japanese, show a tenderness and taste which is 
never cloyed with the sentimentalism that spoils so many Western nature 
paintings. To the Buddhist, God is not separate from nature but is manifest 
in all nature. Thus, nature contains God himself as a part of its very being 
and not as part of a quasi-human personality imposed on the world from 
without.
To go from Chinese painting to Chinese banquets is a short step, for 
cookery is quite as much a Chinese art as painting. For me, a vegetarian, 
there was a wealth of dishes—and indeed an entire school of cookery—
especially concocted for the vegetarian Chinese Buddhist monks. Yet even 
my taste for Chinese food scarcely mitigated for us the feasts of twenty or 
thirty courses. I am afraid that the cookery we asked for at home shocked 
the professional sensibilities of our “great expert,” for we preferred plebeian 
food to the dainties which gave him a chance to display his skill.
My lectures at Tsing Hua were in English, which all the students could 
easily understand. More than one of these students later turned to pure 
mathematics or to electrical engineering. They are now scattered around 
the universities of China, and of the United States as well. In my spare 
hours around the classroom building I used to sip the tea that always was 
kept prepared by the department servant and play innumerable games of 
chess or five-in-a-row or go with my colleagues. I never mastered the game 
of go, however, and would now prove a mere child at Princeton among the 
experts of Fine and Fuld Halls.
I continued to work with Dr. Lee on problems of electric-circuit design. 
We attempted to do some laboratory work, which came to nothing because 
it involved technical problems which we were not then in a position to 
handle adequately.
What Lee and I had really tried to do was to follow in the footsteps of 
Bush in making an analogy-computing machine, but to gear it to the high 
speed of electrical circuits instead of to the much lower one of mechanical 
shafts and integrators. The principle was sound enough, and in fact has 
been followed out by other people later. What was lacking in our work was 

362 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
a thorough understanding of the problems of designing an apparatus in 
which part of the output motion is fed back again to the beginning of the 
process as a new input. This sort of apparatus we shall know here and later 
as a feedback mechanism.
Feedback mechanisms were already used by Bush in his computing 
machines, but they have certain serious dangers of their own. Too intense a 
feedback will make a machine oscillate so that it cannot come into equilib­
rium. It is not too difficult to avoid this with the relatively light feedbacks 
used in the machine of the Bush type, but with the heavier feedbacks of 
the purely electrical machines this difficulty is hard to overcome. What 
I should have done was to attack the problem from the beginning and 
develop on my own initiative a fairly comprehensive theory of feedback 
mechanisms. I did not do this at the time, and failure was the consequence.
My main work, however, was lecturing on generalized harmonic analy­
sis and on the material Paley and I had included in our book. I also was 
engaged in new pure-mathematics research on the so-called problem of 
quasi-analytic functions.
In the last hundred and fifty years, analysis, which represents the mod­
ern extension of the infinitesimal calculus, has split into two main parts. 
On the one hand we have what is known as the series of functions of a com­
plex variable, which is a continuation of the eighteenth-century theory of 
series proceeding in the powers of a variable such as 1, x, x2, etc. This theory 
is particularly applicable to quantities which change smoothly and gradu­
ally. At one time it was supposed that all important mathematical quanti­
ties changed smoothly and gradually; but toward the end of the eighteenth 
century, the study of harmonic analysis, which is analysis of vibrating sys­
tems, showed that curves pieced together out of parts which had nothing to 
do with one another were subject to an analysis of their own. This point of 
view first led to the theory of Fourier series and then to the general branch 
of study known as the theory of functions of a real variable.
The theory of functions of a real variable and the theory of functions of 
a complex variable thus represent two separate but related subjects, which 
do not succeed one another like a freshman and a sophomore course but 
represent radically different insights into the nature of quantity and of the 
dependency of quantities upon one another. They have had a great deal 
of interplay in the course of the last hundred and fifty years. However, it 
is only recently that it has come to the attention of mathematicians that 
there are certain intermediate fields of work which share the methodology 
of both. There are certain curves which are smooth enough so that the 
whole course of these curves is known from any one part, but which are 

29: China and Around the World 
363
not smooth enough to be treated by the classical theory of the functions 
of a complex variable. The study of these curves is known as the theory of 
quasi-analytic functions. The French school of mathematicians has contrib­
uted greatly to this field, and here some of the best work is that of Szolem 
Mandelbrojt. However, the book by Paley and myself in this field has also 
led to results which I was pursuing during my stay in China.
I had hoped to meet Mandelbrojt sometime soon—as, for example, at 
the scientific congress to take place in Oslo in 1936. When I heard that 
Hadamard, Mandelbrojt’s patron, was also coming to Tsing Hua University, 
I hoped that he could arrange for a meeting between us in France while I 
was on my way to the congress.
I have already pointed out that my work with Paley had direct applica­
tions to the study of electric circuits. These were related to the same issues 
which also came up in the theory of quasi-analytic functions. Thus, here 
again, as so often in my work, the motivation which has led me to the 
study of a practical problem has also induced me to go into one of the most 
abstract branches of pure mathematics.
This represents an attitude of mine which is in harmony with the greater 
part of the work of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and which 
since then has found its representation in the writings of Hilbert and Poin­
caré. It is not the prevailing attitude at the present time either in America or 
elsewhere. The two mathematicians now or recently active in America who 
have adopted a similar point of view areand I believe not by coincidence—
two of the greatest forces in modern mathematics, namely, Hermann Weyl 
and John von Neumann.
This mathematical work on quasi-analytic functions was, of course, not 
the whole of my life in Peiping but was interspersed with periods when my 
chief interest was to behold the rich and unfamiliar panorama of the life 
about me.
We used to go to the city quite often by bus or taxi or even rickshaw. 
Leaving for the city and returning by rickshaw was an interesting process, 
though one felt ashamed at being pulled along by the strength of another 
man. At the northwest gate of the city there was a teahouse which was a 
rickshaw man’s exchange. The guild of rickshaw pullers outside the walls 
was separate from that functioning within the walls, and no man from 
inside the city was permitted to ply his trade further out than this teahouse. 
Thus the rickshaw boy who took you to the teahouse in either direction 
made a bargain with his opposite number from the other guild and was 
paid by the new man for the work he had already done. Later on the pas­
senger payed the new rickshaw man what was owing to both.

364 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
When we first went into the city we were beset by a gang of rickshaw 
men, who almost tore us to pieces in their eagerness to make us their 
employers. Acting on Lee’s advice, Margaret and I each picked one, and 
we had no further difficulty in this respect. Our steady rickshaw man was 
almost always ready for us when we came in and got off the bus, and if 
he was not there he would have assigned somebody else to take his place. 
These bargains were generally respected by the whole guild.
When we dined in town, my wife would send what was left on the serv­
ing dishes down to the rickshaw man for his meal. My rickshaw man was 
a Moslem and would not accept non-Moslem food, so I would pay him off 
with a small extra sum for his lunch. Both our rickshaw men were extremely 
loyal to us, particularly after Margaret’s man had damaged his eye in a fight 
with another rickshaw man and she had sent him a sum of money to help 
him take care of himself while convalescing. When we finally left Peiping 
he gave my children Chinese hats to wear, and my rickshaw man gave us a 
can of fine tea scented with jasmine.
My rickshaw man was both intelligent and enterprising. He read his 
newspaper, and later in the year when Professor Hadamard came to Tsing 
Hua University, my puller asked me whether it was true that Ha-Ta-Ma 
Hsien-Sheng was as great a mathematician as the newspaper said he was. I 
have no doubt that part of my rickshaw boy’s interest lay in trying to get 
a permanent job with Hadamard, but at least he was both as enterprising 
and as well-informed as one would expect a very intelligent cab driver to 
be in the States.
In town, Margaret would shop at the Clock Shop, the Big Bell Shop, 
and at many other such places. In these higher-class Chinese shops the 
service was often excellent and even modem, but the décor and the cos­
tumes were thoroughly Chinese. The subordinate clerks wore the cotton 
gown of their class, and the proprietor and his immediate underlings were 
dressed in gowns of gray or blue silk damask. The language of the shops was 
either good English or good Chinese. Pidgin English was almost unknown 
in Peiping. There was a great deal of snobbery and mutual belittlement 
between Shanghai, the New York, and Peiping, the Boston of China. The 
Shanghai ladies were quite as eager to keep in the latest style as the ladies of 
New York, and their Chinese-cut gowns often showed bold and attractive 
adaptations of Western fashions. The Peiping ladies, on the other hand, 
dressed with some of the aristocratic intellectual dowdiness which I have 
seen on the banks of the Charles.
Peiping was an ancient capital with a long tradition of art and cul­
ture. Here and there one would see simple farmers of Manchu blood, the 

29: China and Around the World 
365
descendants of the courtiers of the Ching dynasty, who spoke the beautiful 
Chinese of the palace.
The city was a mixture of glamor and squalor. It was intriguing to walk 
down ill-paved alleys which seemed to lead from one slum to another, but 
where the vermilion moon-gates often opened into a little gem of a court­
yard and garden surrounded by pavilions of taste and beauty.
My friends were both American and Chinese. So far as concerned the 
serious intellectuals on both sides, the relations between the two groups 
were excellent. On the other hand, the rag, tag, and bobtail of Englishmen 
abroad, which Thackeray knew so well in the Paris of the Restoration, were 
to be found in 1935 throughout the treaty ports of China.
The Japanese were moving in. They had already taken over the adminis­
tration of most of Pei-ho Province, either directly or by satellites. The town 
was full of Japanese soldiers whose drill would carry them brutally into the 
midst of a Chinese crowd.
I went down with Lee to Tientsin to collect part of the pay for our inven­
tions from an agent of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company. 
Tientsin was interesting. With its several foreign concessions, one would go 
in one block from Russia to France, and in another from France to England. 
There was something unreal in this finely subdivided macédoine of differ­
ent nationalities.
The student life was greatly disorganized. The students put on a strike 
that lasted for months. They marched into the city to protest the coming 
of the Japanese and the supineness of the Chinese. When the students were 
not allowed in at the railroad gate, a little wisp of a girl rolled under it and 
opened it. Inside the city, the police force used clubs and fire hoses on the 
students, and the hospitals and jails were full. However, many of the stu­
dents came from the leading Peiping families, so their parents found a way 
to compromise.
All this time Lee and I spent in work. We would sit over the drafting 
board in Lee’s den while our wives would talk and read in the next room. 
After they thought we had had a sufficient dose of work, they would call us 
out for a snack and a cup of tea, and finally we would finish the day with 
a game of bridge.
One of our big problems was to get our patent application through 
the American Patent Office. For this we had only one course to follow: to 
work together with the consular secretary of the American Embassy. In his 
book of instructions, there were directions as to how to take care of the 
proper documents and drawings, but our diplomatic friend knew nothing 

366 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
of engineering or of patent requirements, and Dr. Lee and I had to interpret 
his own books to him.
We learned to know the embassy people very well and were genuinely 
pleased by the quality of the attachés we found there. The requirement 
of knowing something specific and difficult, such as an oriental language, 
definitely weeds out the playboys and the incompetents in the diplomatic 
service. Indeed, I think that this service has always been at its best on its 
periphery.
For a long time, the frost held off, but at last the ponds and ditches froze. 
Notwithstanding the short winter, there were days quite as severe as any in 
Boston. It was too dry for snow, and the favorite sport of the good Peiping 
citizen was to go skating on Japanese-made skates on the ponds in the For­
bidden City. It was quite a sight to see a sparsely-bearded elderly gentleman 
in a long fur-lined gown glide over the lake, doing a figure or two.
Of course, the working people, both men and women, wore the short 
gown and trousers, thin in summer and wadded in winter. The poor stu­
dents and people of sedentary life but of humble status wore the long blue 
or gray cotton gown. The modern men of the university wore European 
costume in spring and in autumn, but in the summer they preferred the 
greater coolness of the thin silk gown, often worn over European trousers 
and shoes. In the winter, the chillness of the corridors and classrooms made 
the fur-lined gown almost a necessity.
My daughter Peggy had another attack of the middle-ear infection which 
had so often made her a victim in her childhood. There was nothing to do 
but to send her to the American hospital in town and leave her there with a 
very competent Chinese ear doctor and excellent Chinese nurses.
Meanwhile we had a chance to appraise the faithfulness of our number-
one boy. It was Chinese New Year’s, and of course we had given all of the 
servants the day off, as one would at Christmas at home. The number-one 
boy refused to take the day off because a member of the household was sick, 
even though that member was under adequate care seven miles away and 
he could do nothing about it. I think he liked us, but I think it was even 
more a sense of honor and professional duty which constrained him to this 
course. He was very angry at the maid for taking the day off and never quite 
forgave her, which caused an eruption of the quarrel, traditional in China, 
between butlers and maids.
Among my Chinese friends were scientific skeptics in the modern sense. 
Some were Christians, but almost none were Taoists or Buddhists of any 
devoutness. Yet there was common to almost all that love of the whole 
world rather than of any specific humanity, which is so characteristic of 

29: China and Around the World 
367
Buddhism. Equally characteristic of China is the light, epicurean play of 
thought which has attached itself to the rather quaint and formless body 
of Taoist legends.
All the good Chinese I have known carried on the Confucian traditions, 
and they were not the less Confucians when they were Christians; for the 
Chinese have a religious tradition of syncretism, and for them the appre­
ciation of one religion does not mean the rejection of others. Behind all 
Chinese who respect any religious tradition whatever is the Confucian con­
cept of the gentleman-scholar-statesman: of a rather austere and courteous 
personality, tempered by a sense of humor, with the welfare of the commu­
nity as his goal and dignified scholarship as his means.
There are many ways to be evil, but there are also many sources from 
which a good life may spring. The Confucian character is a very interest­
ing and tempting source of the good life, and few of the more sensitive 
and intelligent missionaries have been able to return from China without 
a deep understanding and participation in the Confucian point of view. 
China converts its converters.
Even those Christian Chinese who are fully aware of the fineness of the 
better missionary and of the manifold things he has done for education, 
medical help, and social improvement do not welcome the missionary 
as an institution. Their ideas of a Christian church in China is that of a 
Chinese Christian church, rooted in the people, with a Chinese clergy. They 
resent the protected extraterritorial position which the missionary has held 
until recently, and they resent equally the tendency of the conventional 
missionary as an institution to talk down from above.
I think that Yenching was one of the finest monuments of an enlight­
ened missionary movement, which was already departing from the purely 
missionary standpoint and taking on that of a native Chinese Christianity.
There was a broad and durable companionship between many of the 
Westerners and many of the Chinese. Yet the Chinese all felt strongly that 
they should be masters in their own house and that this transfer of author­
ity should involve no avoidable delay.
Even those Westerners who loved China and wished to help it were 
appalled by the impossibility of raising the Chinese standard of living to a 
Western level without making its price beyond anything which a bankrupt 
country could afford. Studies made at the Peiping Union Medical College 
had shown that the pitifully inadequate diet of the Chinese peasant, which 
was shown in the lean stomachs and the spiderlike limbs of the rickshaw 
boys and the peasants, could not be improved into something more nour­
ishing at any price which the peasants could pay.

368 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
Corruption and graft, which seemed an irremovable part of Chinese life, 
were not to be put aside by any arrangement which appeared practicable 
during the time of transition. If you destroyed the customs by which the 
Chinese favored his family and his clan against the demands of political 
and business honesty, millions of people would have been doomed to 
starve before any new order could come to replace the old. It is quite under­
standable why the Chinese should look longingly toward any shortcut to 
modernization, industrialization, and a higher standard of living which 
might be offered them.
We went on immersing ourselves deeper and deeper in the life in China, 
and sometimes were a little eager for variation in the small circle of our com­
panions. My friend Professor Hadamard, of Paris, came at the beginning of 
the second term. He was installed near us in the Old South Compound, but 
he soon moved to an apartment in the city in or near the legation quarter. 
The Hadamards were much happier in this livelier environment. Profes­
sor Hadamard was already well along in years, and the discomforts of the 
isolated life on the grounds of the university rather terrified him. It was a 
pleasure to see him again. He was a great mine of reminiscence of the good 
old days of French mathematics. His wife was also a mine of anecdotes 
concerning French academic life, and she had known Pasteur when she 
was a child.
Hadamard told us a delightful story about his own youth, when he felt 
a certain fear of disfavor from his more conservative colleagues because of 
his kinship with the wife of Colonel Dreyfus. With the Dreyfus affair excit­
ing all France to great emotional heights, everyone was either an ardent 
Dreyfusard or an ardent anti-Dreyfusard. Among the latter was the great 
mathematician Hermite, who was to examine the young Hadamard for his 
doctorate. Hadamard approached this occasion with fear and trembling, 
and this embarrassment was not relieved when the old gentleman said to 
him, “M. Hadamard, you are a traitor!” Hadamard mumbled something in 
confusion, and Hermite went on to say, “You have deserted geometry for 
analysis.”
We used to go to town to visit the Hadamards and sometimes Margaret 
and I, or Lee and the two of us, used to go down into the tangled, squalid 
streets of the so-called Chinese city (as opposed to the rectangular Tatar 
city) to rummage in the antique shops. There we would often come across 
ancestor portraits which show dignified Chinese gentlemen or ladies, in stiff 
poses, with hands on the knees, dressed in marvelous silken gowns, which 
for the men were robes of office, civil or military. For all their pomp and 

29: China and Around the World 
369
stiffness, it was common for the faces in these pictures to be of a remarkable 
fineness, humor, and sensitivity.
We found one such ancestor portrait which was so like Professor Had­
amard himself, with his somewhat sparse, stringy beard, his hooked nose, 
and his fine, sensitive features, that it would have been completely adequate 
to identify him and to pick him out of a large assembly of people. There 
was, it is true, a very slight slant to the eyes, and a very slight sallowness of 
complexion, but not enough to confuse the identification. We bought this 
picture and gave it to its likeness. He appreciated it very much, but I don’t 
think that Mme. Hadamard cared for it. She did not wish to think of her 
husband as a magot: the conventional nodding figure of a mandarin which 
one finds in French tea shops, and which occupies a conspicuous position 
as the emblem of the famous Café des Deux Magots.
At any rate, in their later wanderings the Hadamards managed to lose or 
to misplace this portrait, and thus my more recent visits to the Hadamards 
in New York and in Paris have not enabled me to verify again from direct 
observation the resemblance between Hadamard and the Chinese picture.
As I have said earlier, I had long wished to meet Mandelbrojt face to face 
and to discuss with him the relation of our researches. Hadamard told me 
that he too was eager to talk these matters over with me. This was all the 
more important as he had taken an active part in the organization of the 
International Mathematical Congress at Oslo, which I was to attend that 
summer. Hadamard wrote to Mandelbrojt and made arrangements for me 
to visit him on my trip to Oslo and possibly put in a few days of joint work 
with him.
This habit of joint work is almost the peculiar property of mathemati­
cians and mathematical physicists. Most other scientists are hampered by 
the fact that they are dependent not only on a laboratory but on a very 
special laboratory with their own materials and equipment. Historical and 
philological workers usually find themselves in so controversial a field that 
a joint paper would scarcely be possible, unless by an extraordinary acci­
dent they should happen to share not merely the same general views but 
even the same detailed opinions. In the arts such as literature and music 
there is not enough common ground to enable a group of artists to achieve 
together that unity of personal point of view which is essential for true 
creative work. Mathematics, however, for all the real, personal individual­
ity of point of view which characterizes the aesthetic side of that discipline, 
is sufficiently factual for collaboration to be possible and for differences of 
opinion to be judged and dissolved on a non-personal basis.

370 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
Eventually the time began to draw near for us to leave China, and we 
began to consider how we should do so. My main motive for going home 
by way of Europe was that I wished to participate in the Congress in Oslo. 
We had thought of going by the Trans-Siberian Railroad. I took council with 
the officials of the Soviet Embassy to see if it would be possible. They said 
it was, but Margaret and I eventually came to the conclusion that the two 
weeks’ trip on a train would be too hard on the children and we decided 
to take the longer sea trip by the Indian Ocean. We found a Japanese boat 
which was nominally first class but actually second and was not too expen­
sive. We made plans to embark in Shanghai.
We took the train from Peiping, accompanied by Dean Ku, of the Tsing-
Hua Engineering School, and a Chinese friend of his. The fact that the cars 
were divided up in European fashion made it much easier to take care of the 
children. The dining car offered us a choice of two styles of meals, Western 
and Chinese, and we unhesitatingly chose to eat Chinese. The next eve­
ning we arrived at the train ferry on the north bank of the river opposite 
Nanking.
Ku and I left my family on the train and took the swifter passenger ferry 
to the city, where we drove over to the house of my old friend Y. R. Chao 
and found not only a family party but a number of interesting officials from 
the university and some officials of the government. The two American-
born Chao girls were now making their appearance as individuals, and 
there were two younger daughters, who had been born in China.
In a few days our boat was in—the Haruna Maru of the Nippon Yusen 
Kaisha. The captain was a very amiable gentleman who spoke excellent 
English and who, I believe, had spent some time in America. He was very 
solicitous for our interest. Indeed, although the ship was small and crowded 
and not particularly well equipped for the tropical service in which it found 
itself, the spirit on board was very pleasant and we rather enjoyed the trip. 
We found ourselves immersed for six weeks in a world of which we had 
heard only through the writings of Somerset Maugham.
One new passenger of great interest came aboard at Hong Kong. It was 
Father Renou, a French Lazarist missionary priest from the interior of Yun­
nan, who was on his way back to the headquarters of his order in France 
to report at first hand on the needs of the China service. We found him a 
charming and intelligent companion. He felt that there had been sent out 
too many priests who were French peasant boys full of good will and sanc­
tity but ill-trained to compete with even the fragmentary scientific learning 
of the Chinese village school teacher or to fulfill the magistrative duties 
which the treaties had conferred upon them.

29: China and Around the World 
371
Politically, Renou was a liberal who had very little sympathy with the 
Fascist reaction which had become so strong in Italy and had met with a 
certain sympathy among a sector of the clergy. He was a historian, and was 
greatly interested in the way the Church had lost a magnificent opportunity 
to embrace the whole of China toward the end of the seventeenth century. 
This was, he told me, the Affair of the Rites, when a great many Chinese 
would have agreed to embrace Catholicism if only a Christian interpreta­
tion could have been found for their traditional ceremonies.
Professor Fujiwara, of Sendai, was on the boat, bound as we were for the 
International Congress at Oslo. There was also a Chinese lady on her way 
to marry her fiancé, at the embassy at London. The Chinese lady was very 
shy and almost a myth to us on board, but Father Renou tried to help her 
in her loneliness by having Margaret come down and talk Chinese with her. 
Apparently the lady had received instructions not to confide in anybody 
until the boat landed, and all my wife’s overtures were in vain. However, 
after I had left the boat at Marseille and they had passed Gibraltar, the lady 
had to come on deck to fill out the documents necessary for landing. There 
she attached herself to Margaret and remained close by her side until the 
boat landed and her betrothed appeared to take her off.
We played a great deal of bridge on board, and I showed myself to be 
a habitual overbidder, thus incurring the wrath of some of the crustier 
experts. I also played some chess. Here I initiated into European chess one 
of the Japanese officers who was manifestly an expert at the very different 
chess of his own country, in which the pieces are wedge-shaped and their 
direction rather than their color indicates the side to which they belong. 
It is worth noticing that in Japanese chess, captured pieces may be used by 
the captor—a fact which may not be without importance in considering 
the Korean War. How else can we interpret the use of the Korean prisoners 
of war as pieces still in action against us, or as our prisoners of war as pieces 
to be turned to the disadvantage of our enemies? At any rate, my Japa­
nese friend learned Western chess in two or three sittings and proceeded to 
demolish me with an absolute consistency.
Beside these amusements, I made a first attempt at writing a novel, based 
on some of my own experiences in the academic world and on some char­
acters I had known. The novel was very amateurish, but it helped fill in the 
interstices of boredom in the long trip. In addition, I got the practice of at 
least trying to write on fictional and human material, and this practice has 
stood me in good stead ever since.
While the boat was tied up in the Suez Canal, Margaret and I made a 
brief trip to Cairo. In a few hours after our return to Port Said, we were 

372 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
drinking in the cool breezes of the Mediterranean. The next day we passed 
through the Strait of Messina, between Sicily and the mainland of Italy, the 
home of the magic Fata Morgana.
We emerged into the Tyrrhenian Sea, and soon the active volcano of 
Stromboli loomed before us. This was the captain’s first trip to the Mediter­
ranean and he was as interested as any of us at seeing the sights, so he had 
the kindness to swing the ship all around the mountainous island before 
continuing on his course to Marseille.
I debarked at Marseille alone, leaving the family to continue the boat 
trip by way of Gibraltar and the Bay of Biscay to London. I took the night 
train to Clermont-Ferrand. Mandelbrojt met me at five in the morning.
He was exceedingly friendly and cordial, even though this was our first 
meeting. He was a Polish Jew who had come to study and live in Paris and 
had attracted the attention of dear old Hadamard. Hadamard’s accolade 
was enough to make a young mathematician, and Mandelbrojt was well 
launched on a fine career. We put in four days of hard work on a joint paper 
which we were later to present at the Oslo congress.
There was a general strike in France at the time, and Mandelbrojt was, 
on the whole, sympathetic with the strikers. Nothing happened to molest 
us. I lived at a small hotel but passed the day in Mandelbrojt’s house, work­
ing with him and dining with his family. Mandelbrojt took me around to 
see the sights. Finally I left for England a few days ahead of the arrival of 
my family.
In London I looked up the Haldanes, who were now living in an inter­
esting quarter of town near Regent’s Park and the Zoological Gardens, in 
which Haldane took a great interest. Mrs. Haldane welcomed me cordially, 
but I could not see the family that evening as they were giving a party for 
H. G. Wells. However, the next day I visited them, and Haldane showed me 
some of the particularly interesting specimens at the zoo which were not 
generally shown to the public.
In a couple of days I went down to the docks to pick up my family. We 
began at once to plan how we should settle the children for the duration of 
our visit to Oslo. We found a sort of vacation school at Bexhill, on the south 
coast, where we left them in good hands for a few weeks.
Margaret and I took the rough and fatiguing North Sea trip to Denmark 
and spent a day or two in Copenhagen visiting friends. The city had become 
much more a place of rush and of automobiles than we had found it on our 
last visit, and its quaint and homelike flavor, though it still remained, was 
now considerably diluted. We took the train for Oslo, crossing the sound 
by train ferry from beside the jutting castle of Elsinore to the Swedish city 

29: China and Around the World 
373
of Hälsingborg. We found many American and European mathematical 
friends on the train.
The southern part of Sweden, through which the train ran, made me 
think very much of the Maine coast. Even the houses were wooden. The 
rocks themselves had the familiar rounded, glaciated appearance we so well 
knew at home, and we felt as familiar with the country as if we had been 
there before.
Our Danish stood us in good stead and enabled us to converse even with 
our Swedish fellow passengers. When we crossed into Norway the language 
difference was still smaller, and at no period did we feel the helplessness of 
the tongue-tied monoglot.
The meeting was delightfully arranged, and as exciting and overstimu­
lating as such meetings always are. We found ourselves among a host of 
friends of all nationalities. We joined up particularly with our colleagues 
the Vallartas (for Vallarta had married since our early days, and Mrs. Val­
larta became a good friend of my wife). Canon Lemaître, of Louvain, also 
belonged to our group. He had worked for years at the Harvard Observa­
tory. We found him in Oslo, as we had known him before, a delightful 
friend and table companion. We would go with him on excursions and 
walks during the twilit midnight of an Oslo summer.
Margaret left after the congress to see her kinsfolk in Germany. I went 
back to England, for I had planned to spend a couple of weeks with the 
Haldanes in the charming county of Wiltshire. The Haldanes had found 
a delightful old stone house among the rounded hills and steep valleys 
of that region. Haldane had ascertained that his wife loved the downs of 
Sussex, but the downs of Sussex had become too expensive for a university 
professor. He took the geographical map of England and followed the chalk 
formation of these downs around until he came to a somewhat less popular 
region where he could count on a similar landscape. The rest was easy, and 
the Haldanes had settled in a country of delightful walks and views.
Both Haldane and myself were grieved and depressed at the new blow 
to freedom in Spain. Later on, Haldane offered his services to the Spanish 
republic and left to fight there. In Spain he was appalled by the bumbling 
inefficiency which accompanied the good will of most of the anti-Franco 
parties, and more and more he began to lean toward the Communists. 
According to him, they at least had a purpose and a policy.
The English Communists soon recognized in him one of their greatest 
assets. He continued to have an editorial post on the Daily Worker until his 
break with Communism on the basis of the dogmatic biology of Lysenko 
and the Czechoslovak trials.

374 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
However, this political rapprochement with Communism was yet to be. 
For the most part our talks on our long tramps about the bare-topped hills 
were scientific or literary. I showed him the fragment of the novel that I 
had already begun to write, and he showed me the manuscript of a series 
of children’s stories which he was soon to publish under the title My Friend 
Mr. Leakey.
Looking back on my China trip and on the European visits which 
ensued, I see now how much progress I had made since my earlier years at 
M.I.T. I had a successful family life even if I was not the easiest of husbands 
and fathers, and Margaret and I now had a large stock of common experi­
ences to enjoy together. My children were more than babies and had begun 
to be companions. They were starting their lives with the enormous moral 
advantage of seeing the world as a whole and not merely as an interplay of 
master races and servant races. My scientific career had reached the point 
where my accomplishments were unquestioned even if they were not yet 
welcomed in certain quarters near home. I had begun to see the fruition of 
my work not merely in a number of important independent papers but as a 
standpoint and as a body of learning which could no longer be ignored. If 
I were to take any specific boundary point in my career as a journeyman in 
science and as in some degree an independent master of the craft, I should 
pick out 1935, the year of my China trip, as that point.

30  The Days before the War
1936–1939
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
30: 
The 
Days 
before 
the 
War
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
During my last few days in England, while I was visiting the Haldanes in the 
West Country, Margaret was still over in Germany. When she returned, we 
picked up the children at the south-coast summer resort where they were 
staying and left for home. One year’s absence had made it necessary for us 
to take up anew many old threads in our M.I.T. life.
I came back to find the situation in the mathematics department rather 
confused. Besides Eberhard Hopf, who had been a member of the math­
ematics department for several years, we had another young man, Jesse 
Douglas, working with us. Douglas had just completed a brilliant piece of 
work on the form of minimal surfaces such as are generated by soap films. 
This is a classical problem and Douglas had so advanced it that he had won 
the Bôcher prize, which I had previously received for my work on Tauberian 
theorems.
It must be borne in mind that the depression had frustrated some of 
President Compton’s attempts to raise M.I.T. salaries to the level of those of 
the greatest universities. We were thus faced by a dilemma. Either we could 
stay within our means and obtain mediocre mathematicians for mediocre 
salaries, or we could deliberately seek for those undervalued in the general 
market, with the hope that as economic conditions improved, and after 
Compton’s program gathered momentum, we could ultimately bring their 
salaries up to a proper sum.
As a matter of fact, it was not many years before salaries began to go up 
again, and those of us who had confidence in the bounty of M.I.T. have not 
been disappointed. Still there was a period when those brilliant men who 
were undervalued in the general market and had been obtained by us at a 
discount felt exploited.
Thus, it was no surprise that our two brilliant young men felt aggrieved. 
So long as I was about, I could talk frankly on the matter and help build up 
hope for a better future. Once I was away in China, the two of them worked 

376 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
on one another’s nerves. The scholar tends to have the sensitivity and, with 
that, the excitability of the artist. By the time I returned from China both 
Hopf and Douglas were so far set in their emotional attitudes that they were 
permanently lost to M.I.T.
It is Hopf’s case that was the most interesting. He was a German of 
sufficiently correct racial origin to be acceptable even in Nazi Germany. 
Originally he was hostile to Hitler, or at least sympathetic to those on 
whom Hitler had wreaked his ill will. However, there were strong family 
influences pulling him toward the Nazi side.
When my cousin, Leon Lichtenstein, had died as an indirect result of 
the coming of Hitler, the Germans looked around for a successor. At that 
time good mathematicians were leaving Germany en masse, and a succes­
sor was not easy to find. Finally Hopf’s name came up, and he was offered 
the position.
It must be borne in mind that a university position in the Germany of 
the good old days had a prestige both social and intellectual beyond any 
comparison with that of a similar position in America. A full professor at a 
German university was socially superior to the most successful industrialist. 
What the Nazis offered Hopf, if it could have been taken at its face value, 
was financially out of the class of anything we could hope to do in the 
immediate future and considerably greater in prestige than anything we 
ever could offer in the remote future.
I will say that Hopf consulted with a number of German refugees from 
Hitlerism and that they did not oppose his acceptance of the offer as vehe­
mently as one might have expected. In the first place, while they were 
irreconcilably opposed to Nazism, Hopf was obviously willing to temporize 
with the movement, and they could not argue with him as if he had had 
any very strong feeling in the matter. Moreover, it was certainly better for 
Germany to have a man who, although not a vehement anti-Nazi, was 
at least not a vehement pro-Nazi. Many of the German refugees believed 
that Germany would either be defeated or by an intrinsic revulsion would 
sooner or later cast off Nazism, and all their opposition to Nazism had not 
affected their pride in Germany as such. Hopf would form part of an ele­
ment in the new Germany which would be at least a possible basis for the 
re-establishment of academic sanity after the war.
The authorities at M.I.T. did not like to have a pistol presented to their 
heads in the form of Hopf’s claims to an immediate promotion over the 
heads of older men. If the German offer was to be taken at its face value, 
and if all moral issues were to be ignored, Hopf was right to accept it. Of 
course, all of us hoped for an ultimate defeat of Germany, and we were 

30: The Days before the War 
377
more than suspicious that in that defeat the whole academic system and 
Hopf himself would go down in ruin. That was a matter for Hopf to decide 
and for no one else.
Hopf accepted the German offer. In his delight at his sudden rise, he was 
most condescending to his colleagues at M.I.T. To me he expressed his feel­
ings that I was not getting my full deserts, and he wished that I could find 
such an advancement as he had found in Germany. I need not say that this 
condescension was not welcomed.
It is interesting to note that the refugee scientists who stayed in America 
have made great contributions to American science both for war purposes 
and for peace. More than half of the leading figures in nuclear science came 
from within the Axis. Here I need only mention Einstein, Fermi, Szilard, 
and von Neumann. Von Mises also came over later and made important 
contributions to statistical theory, as Courant and several members of his 
school did toward the introduction of the prevailing European techniques 
of applied mathematics.
My former student, Norman Levinson, was back from England where 
he had gone on a National Research Fellowship. I did everything I could to 
secure him for the department, but I found very mixed support for him in 
high quarters. There were those who helped me to the limit in backing up 
my judgment, but there were others who felt very definitely that we had 
enough Jews already. Among these was at least one Jewish colleague, who 
believed that the welcome he had received in the department might be 
damaged if more Jews came in, and who treated this welcome as if it were 
his personal property. As to myself, while I was quite willing to recognize 
that it might be good policy to distribute people rather widely by racial and 
cultural origin, I believed then as I believe now, that all such considerations 
are purely matters of convenience and should be subordinated whenever 
one has the chance to get a man outstanding on his own merits. Good men 
are too rare to allow a school to pick and choose on the basis of secondary 
considerations.
The Harvard tercentenary occurred in 1936, and a good many schol­
ars gathered from all the world for the occasion. Hardy was there from 
England, and I appealed to him to back Levinson. His effort was success­
ful, though his task was not easy. Levinson has remained a member of the 
department ever since, and continues to be a tower of strength there.
Thus this was a period in which I was subject to a great number of sepa­
rate emotional strains. The fact that Nazism threatened to dominate the 
world was a continual nightmare to every man of liberal feelings, and in 
particular to every liberal scientist. I was able to take part of my internal 

378 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
storm out in active measures to help the refugees, but this was not enough 
to give me anything like peace of mind.
The old strains and stresses of my education as a prodigy came back 
to bedevil me. For all my love for my father, those near to me were not 
slow in reminding me that I was after all nothing more than my father’s 
son. The fact that I was a Jew rendered my emotional situation somewhat 
ambivalent. In America there was a reaction in our favor from the atrocity 
and terror of the German situation, but this did not completely compensate 
for the knowledge that somewhere in the world we were being threatened 
with extermination, and that Nazi anti-Semitism had provoked an echoed 
anti-Semitism in some American quarters.
I had not only to suffer the direct stresses and strains of my origin and 
of my early education but the subsidiary strains as well, which originated 
from my entering academic life from a rather unusual angle, without suf­
ficient social maturity to know just what I was and where I was going. 
These strains had been much eased in the course of time by my marriage to 
Margaret, but I am afraid that I had merely transferred to her the impact of 
the conflicts already implicit in my own nature.
As the years went on, some of my difficulties decreased, for people will 
forgive in an older man what they will not tolerate in a youngster. Never­
theless, the epoch which would naturally have been the time of my emo­
tional release was complicated by the strains of the depression, of Nazism, 
and of the threat of war, so that there was no period during which I could 
recover in peace from my earlier conflicts, and in which I could taste a few 
years of true serenity.
What with the Jesse Douglas problem, the Eberhard Hopf problem, and 
the problem of securing for Levinson his just deserts, all added to the tense­
ness and suspense of the prewar period, I was in a state of confusion. When 
I came back from China I was forty-two years old, and I had already begun 
to feel that I was no longer a youngster. The burden of many years of hard 
life had started to tell on me. Following the advice of my wife, I consulted 
a doctor friend who had gone from internal medicine to psychoanalysis.
Under the circumstances it is scarcely astonishing that I needed psy­
choanalytic help. Indeed, notwithstanding a deep skepticism concern­
ing the intellectual organization of psychoanalysis, I would have sought 
this long before—if I had known the right quarter to which I could turn. 
I made some abortive attempts to undergo psychoanalysis during my 
stay in China. Even then, however, I began to learn that the more indi­
vidual a man’s background is, the harder it is for him to find the right 
practitioner.

30: The Days before the War 
379
Even as a child I had read on psychiatric topics, and I was familiar with 
some of the writings of Charcot and Janet. Moreover, my own experience 
had convinced me long before I had heard of Freud that there were dark 
lacunae and concealed urges in my soul that offered a deep resistance to 
being brought to light. My studies in philosophy had made the notion of 
the unconscious no novelty to me, and I was aware of the cruel and almost 
unspeakable impulses which this unconscious hides as well as of the nearly 
irresistible tendency to gloss over them and to bury them beneath a layer 
of rationalisation.
Thus, when I learned about Freud and his ideas, I was quite prepared 
to see in them a new revelation with a real measure of validity. Never­
theless, I was repelled by the internal rationalizations of the psychiatrists 
themselves. Their answers to all human problems and to me were too glib 
and too pat. Without denying in any way the therapeutic validity of much 
that they did, it did not seem to me that the intellectual roots of psycho­
analysis had yet reached that degree of convincingness and scientific orga­
nization which carries with it full conviction. Furthermore, the maxims 
of the need for submission and for financial sacrifice on the part of the 
subject of psychoanalysis appeared to have too much in them that is pro­
fessionally and financially advantageous to the psychoanalyst to seem fully 
objective.
Freud himself had obviously carried out on his own soul a large degree 
of psychoanalysis, without putting himself in that classical passive attitude 
which he himself later defined, and I had seen in my own person the begin­
nings of a psychoanalytical consciousness which was not imposed from the 
outside. I therefore was hardly ready to throw myself in the recommended 
state of full submission.
Neither was I ready to accept without question the orthodox psycho­
analyst’s valuation of personality, and the goals set by him as a result of a 
successful psychoanalysis. I never have valued contentment and even hap­
piness as the prime objects of my life, and I began to fear that one of the 
aims of the conventional psychoanalyst was to remake his patient into a 
contented cow.
I performed the usual analytical reporting on the psychiatric couch and 
tried to supplement it by all that my insight could furnish concerning my 
own motivations and my internal set of values. I let the analyst know how 
deep I found the impulse to creative work and how much the satisfaction 
of success in this work was of an aesthetic nature. I also told him what 
my tastes in literature were, particularly in poetry. There are passages from 
Heine, especially in his Disputation and his Prinzessin Sabbath, that relate 

380 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
and express the religious exaltation of the Jew, which I cannot recite with­
out tears. I told him, moreover, how the sudden shift in Heine’s attitude 
between awareness of the degradation and baseness in daily life and the 
exaltation of declaring the glory of God and the dignity of the despised Jew, 
create in me a deep sense of awe.
All these things my psychoanalyst rejected as not coming from the true 
depths of my subconscious. For him they represented merely the things 
that I had learned at conscious levels and were of no importance in com­
parison with the slightest tag of a hint got from a half-remembered dream. 
Conscious they may have been, but their ability to move me did not come 
from any superficial level of my consciousness.
My analyst regarded them as a sort of contraband which had not paid 
the duty of a psychoanalyst’s couch. He refused to consider them to any 
extent, and he left me with a deep feeling of having been misunderstood 
and misrepresented. He accused me of that cardinal sin of the psychiatric 
patient known as resistance. I certainly did resist, but the very fact of this 
resistance was a clue to much that I had experienced, and to much that was 
at the bottom of my spiritual make-up. Finally we parted, after a most futile 
half year of trying to get something from a man who, as I am convinced, 
did not have very much of a notion of what made me tick.
Later on, I have turned to other psychoanalysts who did not go so much 
by the dream book, and who made a far greater effort to get in rapport with 
me as a human being. These more sophisticated and sympathetic friends 
do not make so much of a fetish of the ritual of the couch. They do not 
omit to record my dreams and contradictions. However, they treat me far 
more as an individual than do their ritually orthodox Freudian colleagues. 
For them the psychoanalyst’s couch is not a bed of Procrustes. They accept 
such differences of opinion as I have with them without labeling them at 
once with the damning epithet of resistance.
Naturally I was not in a position to confine my attention to my inner 
problems and reserve all my efforts for the baring of my soul. I still had a 
certain responsibility left in the matter of placing refugee scientists. How­
ever, this responsibility had become less arduous with the years, and their 
problems were assuming a new nature.
More countries, such as Finland and even China, were furnishing their 
quota to American science. The early arrivals were gradually depending less 
and less on their native language, which was generally German, and were 
taking up the American way of life as something normal. The older peo­
ple were bringing up their children within the American tradition, and it 
was obvious that whatever might come, few of them would return to their 

30: The Days before the War 
381
homes in Europe on anything but a temporary basis. The younger immi­
grants were marrying into American families.
The final result of the great immigration of Hitler times is not yet to 
be seen, but it is certain that the contribution to our mathematical life of 
new individuals and new stock will prove to be comparable to that of the 
Germans in 1848, or to that of the Huguenots who migrated to England, 
to Holland, and to America at the time of the revocation of the Edict of 
Nantes.
Naturally, with so many first-rate scientists added to the American com­
munity, I collaborated with several of them in research projects. Aurel 
Wintner had come over to America, if I am not mistaken, before the great 
rush of immigrants, on the basis of a recommendation from his teacher, 
my cousin Leon Lichtenstein. One summer Wintner and his family took a 
cottage in New Hampshire some twenty miles from us. In that part of New 
Hampshire, to be twenty miles away is to be a next-door neighbor.
Professor Wintner is a very alert, enthusiastic scientist, quick in his 
motions and his thoughts, and highly original in his ideas. Mrs. Wintner 
is the daughter of the well-known German mathematician Hölder. These 
marriages of mathematicians to the daughters of their professors are so typ­
ical of the academic world, both in Europe and here, that there has come 
to be a saying that the genetics of mathematical ability is peculiar—it is not 
inherited from father to son, but from father-in-law to son-in-law.
Ultimately Wintner came to be a more or less permanent summer visi­
tor to our part of New Hampshire. We began to undertake work together 
concerning a variety of topics in his own field. Some of these dealt with the 
extension of certain of my ideas concerning generalized harmonic analysis 
to the orbit problem and the perturbation problem in celestial mechanics. 
These represent a modern approach to old eighteenth-century problems of 
Laplace and Lagrange.
Another piece of joint work dealt with a modern probabilistic approach 
to Maxwell’s kinetic theory of gases, treating a gas as a set of moving parti­
cles acting under mutual forces. I had already done some earlier research in 
this field tying up with the work of two physical chemists, then at Colum­
bia and now at Chicago.
A third line of work which Wintner and I followed out together was 
the tightening and simplification of the proofs of the ergodic theorems 
of Koopman, von Neumann, and Birkhoff. These theorems, which I have 
mentioned already, had furnished the missing step in Willard Gibbs’s work 
and allowed a rigorous carrying through of his idea of time averages with 
averages over all possible worlds. In this latter work we benefited much by 

382 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
discussions with the young Dutch mathematician, E. R. Van Kampen, who 
was our companion on various hikes through the White Mountains. Poor 
Van Kampen, who seemed to have a most promising career ahead of him, 
died a year or two later of a brain tumor.
Over all this period I had hoped that a return to lecturing in China would 
not be many years away. This hope was, of course, completely destroyed by 
the events of the next few years. In 1937, my colleague, K. S. Wildes, of the 
electrical engineering department was my successor in China. He returned 
just about the time of the battle between the Chinese and the Japanese at 
the Marco Polo Bridge.
Besides its world consequences, this battle had personal consequences 
which I felt very deeply. At the time of the Marco Polo Bridge incident, Lee 
and Mrs. Lee were visiting friends in Shanghai. The ensuing war between 
China and Japan caught them away from home, preventing them from 
returning to Peiping. For part of this period Lee was able to find teaching 
employment in Shanghai, but for much of the time the Lees were left to 
live on their own resources and on Lee’s knowledgeability in matters of 
Chinese art.
To suffer this interruption of his scientific development at what should 
have been its best and most critical period was a serious loss indeed; and 
the problem of how to handle the situation, when any handling should 
become possible, distressed me greatly. I did everything that I could to bring 
Lee over to the United States, but at this time I had no positive success.
Wildes had been as much interested and attracted by his study in China 
as I had been a year earlier. The two of us were very busy in the ensuing 
years trying to influence American opinion to give increased aid to China. 
We went to President Compton for help in this effort, and he took a leading 
share in the China relief situation. Other high authorities of the Institute 
also participated in this.
While Communism itself never appealed to me, I have not been able 
to feel that right views may not be held on many topics by members of 
a group of which I do not approve. When it was the fashion for Commu­
nism to condemn Nazism and stand up against race prejudice, the fact that 
these admirable opinions were held by Communists was made an excuse 
for rejecting them that only a fool could maintain. That after the defeat of 
Nazism the Communists have become the chief fear of the West and that 
they have behaved with much of the tyranny of the aggressors that they 
have replaced does not change in the least the fact that some of the things 
they stood for in the period between the wars belong to the attitudes of 
every decent man.

30: The Days before the War 
383
The change in Communist attitude and tactics is quite a sufficient reason 
for rejecting them as mentors, and certainly for distrusting their interven­
tion; but it does not in the least alter the fact that in the period of confusion 
when no single party had clean hands, many young men tended to look 
toward Russia. For some of these, the participation in radical movements 
was an important stage in their moral growing up. It taught them not to 
take out their grievances against the world in mere sulking but to try to 
do something of public benefit. This habit of active participation in moral 
issues has long outlived the period when they believed in Communism.
Under these circumstances it is easy to see why I did not shy away 
from a request to help the Chinese cause, even when this cause was 
backed by armies not attached to the interests of the bumbling, inefficient 
Kuomintang.
For some time we felt confident that the help which the United States 
was giving to China was going through the right channels. However, dis­
turbing rumors began to reach us. I gradually began to hear statements 
from informed Chinese and from traveled Americans to the effect that the 
Kuomintang was a broken reed, that it was not using American aid effec­
tively, and that it was diverting large shipments of arms and of medical 
supplies to be resold by the more corrupt members of the party.
About this time, I was approached by a group of people who wanted 
me to sponsor aid for the Communist soldiers in China, who seemed to be 
doing a more competent job in fighting the Japanese than did the soldiers 
of the Kuomintang. I accepted the invitation because I felt it to be to the 
advantage of the United States.
The people who were really running the movement were a sincere but 
undistinguished and inefficient lot, and they seemed to me to be wasting 
more time in grubby social gatherings and in talk than in the effective col­
lection of money. I later found out that the group contained some who 
acted as if they belonged to the more peripheral ramifications of the Com­
munist Party, together with a rather larger group of well-intentioned and 
stable friends of China.
No alert person could have gone through the years from the depression 
to the beginning of the Second World War without some experience of the 
American repercussions of Communism. The young men coming up in aca­
demic life during the depression period were forced to recognize that they 
were stepchildren of the present world order. Security had become a dream 
of the past, and the various hatreds which made up the complex of Fascism, 
Nazism, and Ku-Klux-Klanism were an ever present threat, particularly 
to members of out-groups. They were seeking some movement or some 

384 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
attitude to which they could attach themselves, and they were bound to 
hear among other voices those of their convinced Communist colleagues.
From the very beginning I had been repelled by the totalitarianism of 
the Communists, even as I have always been repelled by the whole appa­
ratus of orthodoxy and conversion in whatever religion it might occur. 
However, my very need for independence made me loath to interfere dog­
matically with the decisions of the young people about me. In an age of 
many bigotries, I certainly could not feel the bigotry of the Communists as 
our greatest immediate threat, nor could I fail to recognize that the appeal 
which Communism had to some of my young friends was an appeal to 
their humanitarian instincts.
In the course of time, almost all of them have seen the power-politics 
side of the movement and the way in which good intentions have been 
turned into tyranny by ambitious men. They are not now Communists, nor 
have they been for many years. However, the effect of the fear of a witch 
hunt against Communism was to make it difficult for them to find an hon­
orable and self-respecting way out and, if anything, tended to delay their 
exit from the Communist milieu.
My attitude toward the Chinese was reinforced by similar American sup­
port of the Spanish Loyalists. Here the moving spirit was Professor Cannon, 
of the Harvard physiology department. He was without any doubt the great 
man of American science at that period, and he had lectured in Spain a few 
years before.
Spain is a country which has not abounded in great scientists in modern 
times, but the one field in which it has done very important work has been 
the physiology of the nervous system in which Cannon himself was, of 
course, greatly concerned. It is no wonder that Cannon felt himself very 
much attracted to this revival of intellectual life in Spain and that he made 
it his duty to rally American support behind the Spanish Loyalists. In this 
he was in no position to reject aid from any quarter, and it is not surprising 
that an appreciable part of his aid came from Communist circles. This led to 
certain whisperings against Cannon, but he was far too sincere and forth­
right a man to be scared away by whisperings. I had joined in with Cannon 
in his support of the Loyalists, and it seemed to me that this policy was a 
valid pattern to follow in connection with the Chinese matter.
The times were also complex and worrisome for me in family matters. 
Father had retired from Harvard a little before the time of his accident. He 
was a disappointed man, and the bluntness with which President Lowell 
had accepted his retirement without the grace of a few kind words added 
to his disappointment. After his partial recovery from his accident, he 

30: The Days before the War 
385
continued to do research work at the Harvard Library, and even to walk 
there from Belmont, but his activity grew less year by year.
Soon after my return from China, he began to go downhill rather rap­
idly, and there was evidence that he had had a stroke. He needed hospital 
care, but this time there was much less sign of recovery than there had been 
on the previous occasion. He lapsed into an agitated state of depression, 
in which his mind was often confused. Yet he was fully aware that he was 
confused and that he was losing his grip on life. His depression often took 
the form of what seemed to me to be really a commentary on the baleful 
world political events of the time.
He would speak indifferently in Russian, German, Spanish, French, and 
English. When he spoke in languages I knew, I could observe in him no 
trace of grammatical confusion and no tendency to mix the words of one 
language with the grammar of another. Even when he could no longer rec­
ognize me as his son, the correctness and vigor of his polyglot speech was 
not in the least affected. Father’s knowledge of language was not merely 
something painted on the surface of his brain but went right through its 
very texture.
I visited Father often, and took him out from time to time for trips in my 
car. However, he was on the way down, and it was scarcely even desirable 
that this half-life, which was all that was left to him, should be drawn out 
indefinitely. Finally, in the first year of the war, he died calmly and peace­
fully in his sleep.
For years Margaret’s mother had made her home with us, except during 
one or two visits to her kinsfolk in Germany. During this period, as I have 
said, German became to a considerable extent the language of the house­
hold. What emphasized the role of German in our life was a little incident 
which occurred at one of our visits to a Boston club, Friends of China.
There was a Radcliffe student there of mixed Chinese and German origin, 
whose father had been a coal-mine operator in Peiping and had married the 
daughter of his landlady during his student days in Germany. Lottie Hu, 
the daughter of this marriage, was studying anthropology in the gradu­
ate school at Radcliffe. The vicissitudes of the war had cut off her income. 
She summoned up her courage to ask Margaret whether she might not live 
with us and earn her room and board and a little pocket money by helping 
with the family. Accordingly we took Lottie into our household, where she 
became the friend and companion of my young daughters.
Lottie was completely trilingual, speaking Mandarin Chinese, English, 
and German with equal fluency. Since German had already become the 
second language of the home, this continued under the new arrangement, 

386 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
and both my daughters made a certain amount of progress in the elements 
of the German language.
My daughters were in junior high school. We had the usual amount of 
friction between parents and children; in particular, the two of them had a 
certain resentment of my intellectual position. Peggy said, on more occa­
sions than one, “I'm tired of being Norbert Wiener's daughter; I want to be 
Peggy Wiener.” I made no attempt to force the children into my frame, but 
the mere fact of being what I am inevitably subjected them to a sort of pres­
sure with which my will had nothing to do.
I was proud of them, but I did not bring them up to be infant prodigies. 
I was particularly proud of Barbara on one occasion when she had read in 
her textbook some comment on the Latin Americans and she said to me, 
“Daddy, the author of this book seems to be very patronizing to the Latin 
Americans. Don't they hate it?” I replied to her, “You're damn tootin', child, 
and how!”
About this time there was a radio program established in Boston on the 
model of “Ask the Children.” Barbara took part in this. I am not at all cer­
tain of my wisdom in having let her participate, but she did well, and she 
learned the elements of the art of handling herself before an audience. I 
have kept a degree of interest in the later destinies of more than one mem­
ber of this children’s panel, and they seemed to have done uniformly well 
and to have suffered no real disadvantage from the adventure.
Thus, like all families, we had our problems to consider and our deci­
sions to make. I am neither certain of the correctness of the policies I have 
adopted nor ashamed of any mistakes I might have made. One has only 
one life to live, and there is not time enough in which to master the art of 
being a parent.
The bringing up of young children is not easy, but it lightened our house­
hold work to a considerable extent to have it shared among three women. 
My wife’s mother was always doing little bits of work around our houses in 
Belmont and in the country, and she had accumulated a remarkable set of 
tools and gadgets for these tasks, which she so enjoyed.
She was a country-bred German woman, with a romantic outlook on life 
which had led her to seek the open spaces of the American West. Here in 
New England our farmhouse was as much a delight to her as to any of us.
It was in the summer of 1939, just before the outbreak of the Second 
World War, that she died quietly in her sleep in her upstairs room in this 
New Hampshire house. We buried her in a little country graveyard open 
to the sweep of the winds blowing across from the Ossipee mountains. 
We chose a tombstone of a pattern traditional in these New Hampshire 

30: The Days before the War 
387
burying grounds, but on it we had carved an inscription suiting both her 
German origin and the massive vigor of her character. It was the beginning 
of Luther’s hymn:
“Ein' feste Burg is unser Gott”—“A Mighty Fortress Is Our God.” I am 
grateful that she was spared the full terror and humiliation of the Second 
World War, which was about to begin.
Even before the arrival of the war itself, the somber train of catastrophes 
had begun. The fall of 1938 was marked both by Munich and by the first of 
the series of West Indian hurricanes which have come to plague Boston of 
recent years. From that time on, all of us expected the world war to break 
on us. It held off until the summer of 1939.
That summer, after the death of my wife’s mother, Margaret and I had 
taken a little trip together into Canada. This trip furnished the precedent 
for a similar motor trip which we make almost every summer. Later on I 
took another trip into Canada alone, this time to participate in the meeting 
of the American Mathematical Society in Madison, Wisconsin. I drove from 
my farm by a route north of the Creak Lakes, arriving in Sault Ste. Marie, 
Michigan, on the evening of the second day.
Here I learned that the war had already come. It was an experience curi­
ously reminiscent of that time twenty-four years before, when the First 
World War had come to me on another trip, as a passenger on a German 
boat in the middle of the North Atlantic. All the fun and jollity of the sum­
mer mathematical meeting was exploded. We had hoped that this meeting 
would serve for the planning of an International Congress to take place in 
the United States during the summer of 1940, but this plan had to be put 
on ice for ten years.
I drove back East with an English colleague, and we had the opportunity 
to take stock of our emotions and expectations while picking grapes for a 
friend in New York State.


31  The War Years
1940–1945
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
31: 
The 
War 
Years
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
I came back to M.I.T. in the fall of 1939 and took stock of the situation. It 
was not hopeful. The passive alliance between Russia and Germany had 
dashed cold water on our wishful thinking that the Nazis were going to 
be held back in the east, and although the two countries finally fought 
each other, we did not at that time expect such luck. Moreover, the good 
will that had been building up for Russia, largely because we could scarcely 
see from what other direction a blow might come which could limit 
the Fascist aggression, was much dampened by Russia’s aggressive policy 
in Finland.
In academic and technical circles, most of us were aware that a world 
war would ultimately engulf the United States as well as all other important 
countries. Therefore we began to turn our thoughts toward finding out in 
what sector of work we might make ourselves of use.
The possibilities of active military service had never been very real to me 
on account of my nearsightedness, and the passing of the years had not 
increased my physical fitness. I have never fancied myself as an administra­
tor, nor, as a matter of fact, has anybody else ever fancied me in that capac­
ity. It seemed obvious that I should have to turn to some sort of scientific 
research work
I had had an apprenticeship in ballistic computation in World War I. Bal­
listic computation consists in the making of tables for artillery and small-
arms fire which give the range of the weapon and various other related 
constants in terms of the angle of elevation of the gun, the powder charge, 
the weight of the missile, and so on. This work had trained me in much 
more than purely ballistic matters, for it had left me with a pretty general 
sophistication in the ways of the computing room. I had also spent much 
time in recent years working with electrical engineers. Therefore I foresaw 
that my destined berth in the war would be some sort of job in which I 
should apply computational techniques to electrical engineering problems. 

390 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
Furthermore, my work with Lee had given me a look-in on problems of 
engineering design.
All this was clear, but what was not clear was the direction from which 
the call would come. As the nerve-wracking wait of the “Sitzkrieg” began 
to give way to a more active and threatening military schedule, most of us 
came to see that the main problem before America would be to keep Eng­
land in the war as an effective combatant until such time as we might enter 
it ourselves. This meant that the submarine and the bomber campaigns 
were the two chief menaces which we should help to conquer.
Luckily, England herself had given us the best possible lead for helping 
her in these fields, in the brilliant invention of radar. M.I.T. was pushing 
this sort of research from the very beginning, even before the start of the 
European war and long before we got into it. But for the time being this 
seemed to be a matter for specialists, and I was not a radar specialist.
The stream of refugees from Germany speeded up for the moment and 
then ceased altogether. These last driblets of immigration did not seem to 
me to consist altogether of persons of the same moral value as some of those 
who had come before. More than one of these last drippings of the wine 
press showed an eagerness to indoctrinate us in the irresistible momentum 
of the Nazi advance. Their zeal could scarcely have been exceeded if they 
had been paid propagandists. At last it became quite clear to us that in 
addition to the great cultural crop of fine, persecuted men and women who 
have enriched our intellectual life, there were those whose main objection 
to Nazism was that they were excluded from it. However, the new summer 
vacation came along in its good time, and we tried to make our life as cheer­
ful as possible, notwithstanding the catastrophe about us. One cannot live 
in a perpetual atmosphere of gloom.
The Inghams, from the English Cambridge, were caught in America by 
the war and became our summer neighbors. They shared with us the plea­
sures of mountain walks and bathing in Bear Camp pond.
We had a curiously interesting visit that summer from the Hungarian 
mathematician Erdös, the Japanese mathematician Kakutani, and the Eng­
lish mathematician Stone. They had just got into trouble on Long Island by 
inadvertently approaching too close to a radio-beacon station. They were 
put in jail overnight as suspicious aliens but were released later when the 
authorities were able to reach their sponsor, Professor Veblen, of Princeton. 
It was just after this contretemps that they drove up to New Hampshire, 
and we had a most pleasant little session on our porch. At present, Kaku­
tani is teaching in the United States, but Stone and Erdös have gone back 
to Europe.

31: The War Years 
391
At the end of the summer, Ingham returned to England as he had 
planned, but his wife and children and their maid stayed again in our val­
ley the next year. Again we went for long walks together, the children now 
participating in them more easily. I have seen the family several times since 
their return to England, where I believe one boy is going to the university 
and the other is an officer in the Air Force. They still retain a real love for 
New Hampshire and our valley.
Wintner remained our summer neighbor. He and I had planned to work 
together during the year 1940–1941, and he came to Cambridge to do so. 
It was unfortunate that my attention was concentrated on war work at the 
time. I feel that I was to a certain extent unjust to Wintner in not living up 
to our informal contract, for he found himself able to ignore the pressures 
of the warlike atmosphere. I could not, and though I was willing to work 
with him with a part of my attention, I was unable to devote to it my full 
interest. Thus we went our two ways, which gradually drifted farther and 
farther apart.
By spring, the catastrophe of Norway had occurred and the catastrophe 
of France was threatening. The emotional solace of our country house, in 
which we had become used to take refuge from the buffets of the outer 
world, was of no avail to us when we were confronted by the imminent loss 
of European civilization.
In August 1940, the summer meeting of the American Mathematical 
Society was at Dartmouth. It was as pleasant as a meeting could be when 
nothing but the war could really command our attention.
The algebra of complex quantities is vital for telephone engineering, and 
the Bell Telephone Company instrument, a numerical computer, was made 
to fill a definite need in such work. Its importance derives from the fact that 
our Arabic notation for numbers gives to the number 10 an artificial posi­
tion justified by custom alone and constituting no part of the real founda­
tions of arithmetic. Instead of writing a number as so many units, so many 
tens, so many hundreds, and so on, we can just as easily write an integer 
as a sum of ones, twos, fours, eights, and so on. In this case, instead of the 
ten digits of our conventional scale of numeration, we need only the two 
digits, zero and one.
The Russian peasants use what amounts to a scale of this sort, known as 
the binary scale, for their addition, multiplication, subtraction, and divi­
sion. It has the great advantage over the scale of ten that the multiplication 
table reduces to the statement that one times one is one.
For obvious reasons, it is easier to mechanize arithmetic on the binary 
scale than on the scale of ten, and the Bell System instrument accordingly 

392 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
employed the binary notation. The sole serious disadvantage in doing all 
arithmetic on the binary scale is simply that we have adopted the decimal 
system and the bulk of existing numerical results are given in this tradition. 
When we have a large amount of new computation to do, it is often worth-
while to ignore this fact and to translate all our initial data to the binary 
scale and all our final results back to the decimal scale.
One place where the binary system of numeration is used is in the 
employment of gauges for the measurement of the thickness of a mechani­
cal part. Suppose that we have one accurate gauge of a thickness of one 
inch; one accurate gauge of a thickness of two inches; one accurate gauge of 
a thickness of four inches; and one of a thickness of eight inches. Then we 
can combine these to give accurate measurements by inches from one inch 
to fifteen inches. The code is the following: we combine our gauges on top 
of one another in these combinations:
1 inch
1 inch gauge
2 in.
2 in. gauge
3 in.
2 in. gauge and 1 in. gauge
4 in.
4 in. gauge
5 in.
4 in. gauge, and 1 in. gauge
6 in.
4 in. gauge and 2 in. gauge
7 in.
4 in. gauge, 2 in. gauge, and 1 in. gauge
8 in.
8 in. gauge
9 in.
8 in. gauge and 1 in. gauge
10 in.
8 in. gauge and 2 in. gauge
11 in.
8 in. gauge, 2 in. gauge, and 1 in. gauge
12 in.
8 in. gauge and 4 in. gauge
13 in.
8 in. gauge, 4 in. gauge, and 1 in. gauge
14 in.
8 in. gauge, 4 in. gauge, and 2 in. gauge
15 in.
8 in. gauge, 4 in. gauge, 2 in. gauge, and 1 in. gauge
This is equivalent to writing the numbers 1 to 15 in the following way: 1, 
10, 11, 100, 101, 110, 111, 1000, 1001, 1010, 1011, 1100, 1101, and 1111.
I do not remember whether it was before or after the Dartmouth meeting 
that Vannevar Bush had sent around to the various members of the M.I.T. 
faculty a questionnaire asking for suggestions concerning the mobilization 
and use of scientists in case of war. This was a matter on which I had very 
definite opinions, and I was strongly in favor of a scientific collaboration 
which would cross the frontiers between one science and another, and 

31: The War Years 
393
which should at the same time be voluntary, thus preserving a large mea­
sure of the scientists’ initiative and individual responsibility. I distrusted all 
plans that might depend on a high degree of subordination of individuals 
to a completely authoritative setup from above, which would assign each 
man the narrow frame within which he was to work. I suggested therefore 
the organization of small mobile teams of scientists from different fields, 
which would make joint attacks on their problems. When they had accom­
plished something, I planned that they should pass their work over to a 
development group and go on in a body to the next problem on the basis 
of the scientific experience and the experience in collaboration which they 
had already acquired.
But nothing resulted. Those who work almost exclusively with gadgets 
tend to develop a love for them, since they lack the unpredictable factors 
which affect the operation of the human being.
Gadgeteering very easily becomes a sort of religion. Luckily, the vicis­
situdes of the last twenty years of gadgeteering have somewhat shaken the 
faith of many men, including Bush, in the unlimited scope of the machine. 
However, there remain many people who have not been as directly 
confronted as Bush with the disadvantages as well as the advantages of 
machines, and these people follow the tendency of the day to favor the big 
laboratory and the big administrator.
On the way back from the meeting, I began to discuss with Levinson, 
who was now a full-fledged colleague, the general problem of computing 
machines, and to wonder whether this might not be the field in which I 
was destined to do my war work. For some time I had been considering 
for Bush the use of machines to solve systems of partial differential equa­
tions and I felt that a sort of television scanning would be the proper basis 
for the mechanization of partial differential equation problems. My new 
experience with the binary machine convinced me that electronic binary 
machines would be precisely the devices required for the high speed of 
computation needed in partial-differential-equation problems.
I saw that for a machine to work properly on partial differential equa­
tions, it would have to go through an almost incredible bulk of work in 
an almost incredibly short time. This suggested to me that the future of 
high-speed computing machines for these particular purposes could not 
lie in Bush’s models, which represented physical quantities by electrical or 
mechanical quantities, but rather in some enormous extension of the ordi­
nary desk computer, working as I have said, on a scale of two rather than 
on a scale of ten.

394 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
Now that I had come to take a serious interest in problems of the speed 
of computation, I was forced to consider the relative merits of two grand 
strategies in computational methods. One of these, which Bush followed, 
was called analogy computation, in which the numerical digits of com­
putation are represented as measurable physical quantities. The other, 
the digital mode of computation—which is that of the desk computing 
machine—represents a number by the sequence of its digits.
The important point in the distinction between the analogy computers 
and digital computers is that the latter do essentially what we ourselves do 
with arithmetical operations on paper. When we represent a number as 
56, we mean that it is a combination of five tens and six units. When we 
multiply this by 38, which is three tens and eight units, we go through the 
operations indicated in the following table:
    56
    38 
    48
  40
  18
15
2128
We never have to go beyond the multiplication table and the simple 
rules of addition, nor do we represent our 56 and our 38 as quantities such 
as 56 degrees or 38 inches.
There are digital multiplying machines in which ten plays no role, 
which operate on the binary scale. This is how they work: Let me consider 
the operation in which 7 × 5 = 35·
7 = 4 + 2 + 1
5 = 4 + 1
In the scale of 2, these statements are equivalent to writing 7 in the form 
111, and 5 in the form 101—meaning that 7 is one 4, one 2, and one 1; 
while 5 is one 4, no 2’s, and one 1. When we multiply these we get the fol­
lowing schedule of operations:
    111
    101
    111
111
11211

31: The War Years 
395
If we remember that, in our scale of notations, 2 = 10, the number 11211 
may be written 12011 or 20011 or 100011. The last representation is the 
truly binary one, which uses no digits other than 0 and 1. Here this means 
32 + 0(16) + 0(8) + 0(4) + 2 + 1 = 35. This method is called the method of 
multiplying on the scale of two. I repeat, it is quite as digital as ordinary 
multiplication on the scale of ten.
In contrast, a particular analogy-computation instrument proceeds as 
follows: In an electrodynamometer, two coils are attracted to one another 
in proportion to the product of the current carried by these two coils, and 
this attraction can be measured by an appropriate sort of scale instrument. 
If, then, one coil is carrying seven units of current and the other five units, 
the scale will read something proportional to thirty-five. This sort of instru­
ment for multiplying is known as an analogy instrument, because we are 
replacing our original situation, in which certain quantities are to be mul­
tiplied, by a new situation, in which we set up two currents in analogy 
to the original quantities and read off the product by a physical situation 
analogous to the original one.
Digital computing machines thus differ from analogical computing 
machines in that they can theoretically be read to the complete degree 
of precision of the numbers introduced, while analogical machines are 
restricted to the degree of accuracy with which the original situation is 
truly analogous to the corresponding situation, which we use to replace it 
in our computation. The Bush machines for solving differential equations 
are strictly analogy machines.
As to the relative merits of these machines, the great flexibility of electri­
cal and other measuring apparatus makes the construction of a fairly good 
analogy machine easier than that of a fairly good digital machine. However, 
when it comes to high speed or high accuracy, the advantage is all with the 
digital machine. There are very few physical measurements which can be 
made with an accuracy greater than one part in ten thousand, and this cor­
responds to a determination of four decimal digits and not quite fourteen 
binary digits.
Moreover, to take a measurement with this degree of accuracy can 
scarcely be a truly instantaneous process. Analogy machines are intrinsi­
cally slower than is needed to fulfill the demands of the very fastest and 
bulkiest computation, so that I felt that they had already reached their 
apogee.
When it came to the matter of digital machines, I was forced to consider 
the real essence of the action of such a machine. The ordinary desk com­
puter determines the position of certain wheels on the basis of the position 

396 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
of certain other wheels. Each such position is a choice between ten alterna-
tives. It is not difficult to represent these ten alternatives by ten projections 
on a metal wheel, but the use of metal wheels involves very disagreeable 
and restrictive problems of inertia and friction.
It seemed to be preferable in every way to replace the mechanical choice 
characteristic of existing digital machines by an electronic choice of digits. 
The two advantages to be expected here were the vastly reduced inertia of a 
stream of electrons as compared with a sequence of mechanical parts, and 
the greater technical ease of canceling quasi-frictional losses—that is, resis­
tance losses—by amplification. As a result of both of these, I was quite cer­
tain that the coming high-speed computing machines would be electronic 
digital machines. I may say that the idea had begun to come up in various 
places in the literature and that, in accepting this approach to computing 
machines, I was simply representing the spirit of the times.
As I have said, a decimal digital machine uses a choice among ten pos­
sibilities as its fundamental decision while a binary machine uses a choice 
between two alternatives. I suppose that the general use of the scale of ten 
came from the ten digits of our two hands. Certain races such as the Mayas 
have apparently counted on fingers and toes together, and use the scale of 
twenty. It is an interesting reflection that if the human race had been con­
structed after the pattern of the Walt Disney cartoons, with four digits on 
each hand, we should probably have adopted the scale of eight, which is 
merely a slight variation of the scale of two, since 2 × 2 × 2 is 8.
However, there is a fortuitous advantage that, while it does not recom­
mend the scale of ten, at least makes it easier to use it than, let us say, the 
scale of thirteen. Computing machines of the decimal type depend on the 
use of wheels with ten equally spaced teeth. To construct them involves 
laying out a decagon—a polygon with ten angles. This is a simple problem 
in plane geometry, while the construction of a regular figure with thirteen 
sides is not.
In the case of an electronic circuit, however, the parts which are equiva­
lent to wheels are not dependent on ordinary plane geometry, nor is ten a 
particularly easy number to represent. The natural choices to be made in an 
electric circuit will be between pairs of alternatives.
There are well-known circuits already existing with two alternative posi­
tions of equilibrium, and these are known as flip-flop circuits. About the 
only easy way of constructing a circuit with ten choices seemed to be by a 
combination of flip-flop circuits. The logic of flip-flop circuits would lead 
to a combination of choices among a number of alternatives—a combi­
nation which was a power of two. Thus, it seems that the only natural 

31: The War Years 
397
way to construct a set of ten alternatives is to construct sixteen and throw 
away six.
In the design of a machine, you pay in effort and in cost not only for 
everything that the machine does but also for everything that the machine 
might be made to do; and to use sixteen alternatives for the purpose of 
selecting ten represents a wastefulness of 37 1/2%. I came to the conclu­
sion that the high-speed computing machine for the solution of partial 
differential equations would be a digital electronic machine on the scale 
of two.
For work on a scale of two, we need to use machines which have only 
two possible alternatives, such as the presence or absence of a punched 
hole in a card. This device was already familiar in the Hollerith machines 
made by the International Business Machines Corporation. This particular 
way of writing a number in the scale of two is, however, unsuitable for a 
thoroughly high-speed machine. Punching a hole in a piece of cardboard 
is a slow process when one considers speed on the scale of millionths of a 
second per operation. Some such scale is needed before we can consider a 
computation as really high-speed, and, moreover, the problem of disposing 
of the used cards and of keeping a sufficiently large stock of new cards soon 
becomes almost astronomical.
The speed of punching the paper might be greatly increased by using 
an electric spark rather than a mechanical punch, but this would leave the 
problem of the bulk of material just as bad as it ever was. Thus, I was natu­
rally driven to the idea of steel tape on which a magnetic mark would be 
made by an electromagnet. One can read such a mark at high speed and 
erase it at high speed, leaving the tape blank and ready for another use.
One of the main problems with such a tape is to make the marks so 
small that as many as possible can be kept clearly distinguishable on a given 
area. This requires extremely small pole pieces for the marking and reading 
magnets. It seemed to me that the smallness of these pole pieces might be 
vitiated by the spread of the magnetic field within the tape, unless the tape 
itself or at least its effective magnetic layer were extremely thin.
I therefore had the idea, partly on my own and partly through conversa­
tion with those of my colleagues who were better acquainted with technical 
developments in this subject than I was, that the best thing to do would 
be to treat separately the two requirements of the tape: to carry magnetiza­
tion and to hold together. We might do this by imposing a thin magnetic 
layer on a non-magnetic material which would have all the strength. I 
had thought of a thin iron layer superimposed on a tape of brass or non-
magnetic metal, but I had also thought—I believe through the suggestion 

398 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
of a colleague—of the device which now dominates the field: of a paper 
tape carrying a thin layer of magnetic oxide of iron.
I have recently talked with a friend at the IBM company concerning 
present practices in high-speed computing machines, and in particu­
lar in those which work according to what is now known as the Monte 
Carlo method, solving partial differential equations by an extremely often 
repeated process of averaging. Apparently the devices I suggested in 1940 
are substantially those which are now employed.
The odds in a gambling house are extremely regular and predictable, and 
the Monte Carlo method consists in setting up a mathematical problem as 
an ideal game, in playing it out a large number of times, and in determining 
the theoretical winnings. The computational device which I suggested in 
1940 had the same non-static character as the Monte Carlo method of the 
present day and also depended on the playing out of an ideal game.
I made a report of my suggestion to Vannevar Bush, but I did not get 
a very favorable reception. Bush recognized that there were possibilities 
in my idea, but he considered them too far in the future to have any rel­
evance to World War II. He encouraged me to think of these ideas after the 
war, and meanwhile to devote my attention to things of more immediate 
practical use.
Later on I found that he had no very high opinion of the apparatus I had 
suggested, especially because I was not an engineer and had never put any 
two parts of it together. His estimate of any work which did not reach the 
level of actual construction was extremely low. The only satisfaction I can 
now get is that I was right something like ten years before the techniques to 
prove my ideas were developed.
Having discarded this as my task in the threatening war, I began to look 
around for other places where I might be more useful. At one time I had 
ideas concerning a mathematical and mechanical method for encoding 
and decoding messages. My ideas would certainly have worked, but in this 
field it is not enough for an idea to work. In fact, for it to have any merit at 
all, it must work considerably better than existing devices, or any devices 
easily invented.
The question of what it means for one decoding-coding device to work 
better than another is not simple. It can be taken for granted that any 
ciphered text which is sufficiently long can be decoded by a possible enemy 
if you give him enough time, and it also must be considered that the prob­
lem of decoding a cipher message is not necessarily trivial even when the 
cipher is known. A good cipher must combine a certain ease of decoding by 

31: The War Years 
399
machine, or by a recipient in the know, with a large measure of difficulty 
for an enemy to decode it without the help of a knowledge of the cipher.
As is usually the case when there are two different requirements for a 
system or an apparatus, this does not lead one to a single apparatus but to 
a number that is large according to the weight one puts on each of the two 
requirements. Thus, there are easy ciphers which will be useful in the field 
for messages which need only an hour’s secrecy, and there will be difficult 
ciphers for messages whose secrecy must be maintained for months. There 
will be a whole spectrum of ciphers in between. For this reason, the design 
of ciphers is not a matter into which one can go cold, without knowledge of 
the existing tradition and of the practical demands for each particular use. 
Again I had to look around for another possible field of usefulness. I found 
this in the design of fire-control apparatus for anti-aircraft guns.
When I was a boy, fire control was conceived primarily from the point of 
view of coastal batteries and of battleships—that is, of gun platforms whose 
motion relative to the target was so slow that there was a chance for a con­
siderable amount of computation by very crude manual devices before the 
target should have passed out of effective range.
Even in the First World War, the airplane had changed all this. The prob­
lem of shooting down an airplane is not, of course, like that of lobbing a 
mortar shell into a fortress but like that of shooting ducks on the wing. The 
duck will not stay still while you are shooting; and if you aim your gun 
where you see the duck, the bird will be considerably ahead of that point 
by the time the shot arrives. You must shoot ahead of your target, and 
you must estimate that amount you shoot ahead quickly and accurately. If 
your estimate is not correct you will probably not have another chance at 
that bird.
The result is that from the very beginning it was necessary to build into 
the control system of the anti-aircraft gun some mechanical equivalent of 
a range table which would automatically allow the gun the necessary lead 
over the plane to make the shell and the plane come to the same place at 
the same time. To some extent this a purely geometrical problem, but in 
its finer developments it involves an improvement of our estimate of the 
future position of the plane itself. This must be estimated from the past 
positions, or at any rate from the observed past positions. The problem of 
predicting the future position of the plane is what the mathematicians call 
a problem of extrapolation.
My previous electrical engineering work had made me familiar with 
the theory of operators. An operator in this sense represents a device which 
will change a certain electric input into a corresponding electric output. 

400 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
Mathematically speaking, the operator may be represented by a transfor­
mation formula, but not all such transformation formulas lead to opera­
tors which are physically realizable. The main condition for physical reality 
which we must impose on an operator is that the output should involve 
only the past and present of the input. It will be seen that the problem of 
shooting ahead of an airplane demands that the realizable operator approx­
imate the future position of the plane which could, in fact, be ascertained 
only by a non-realizable operator. Only a prophet with the knowledge of 
the mind of the aviator could predict the future position of an airplane 
with absolute certainty, but there are often enough, in fact, means which 
will allow one to accomplish the minor task of a quite correct prediction.
The mathematical processes which suggested themselves to me in the 
first instance for prediction were, in fact, impossible of execution, for they 
assumed an already existing knowledge of the future. However, I was able to 
show there was a certain sense in which these processes might be approxi­
mated by processes free from this objection.
I do not wish to lose myself here in technicalities which will be under­
stood only by scientists or engineers. However, I did in fact consider cer­
tain possibilities of approximating to non-realizable operators by realizable 
operators. I suggested these notions to Professor Caldwell, who was nor­
mally in charge of M.I.T. work on Bush computing machines, and who 
was now engaged in applying these machines to war problems. After the 
custom of those times, Caldwell immediately put a classification on my 
ideas, so that thereafter I could no longer speak freely of them to anyone 
with whom I wished to talk.
For a trial setup for my problem, Caldwell and I were tempted to make 
use of Bush’s differential analyzer because of the ease of assembling its parts 
for the simulation of a large range of different problems. In this the differ­
ential analyzer resembled a Meccano set; and in fact, when the English tried 
to follow in Bush’s footsteps and construct a differential analyzer, they used 
ordinary Meccano parts with very creditable success.
We made several experimental runs with different settings of our appa­
ratus, and we found that those which we had considered in advance to be 
better actually were. Our instrument was an assembly of a number of add­
ing devices, multiplying devices, and integrating discs.
At this stage, prediction theory was made a government project, and 
a young engineer, Julian Bigelow, who had worked some time with Inter­
national Business Machines, was assigned to the problem. This was the 
beginning of a long collaboration between us. Bigelow is a quiet, thorough 
New Englander, whose only scientific vice is an excess of scientific virtue. 

31: The War Years 
401
He is a perfectionist, and no work that he has ever done is complete enough 
in his eyes to satisfy him.
He used to be an enthusiastic aviator, but this sport became impossible 
in war time and is, at any rate, too expensive for the average man. Most 
accidents of private flying are not serious, in the sense that the aviator can 
walk away from them unhurt, but there are no minor repairs to an airplane. 
They must be done by certified mechanics and have the O.K. of the Civil 
Aeronautical authorities. Since they generally occur at remote points, they 
constitute a real burden to the pocket. For many years, Bigelow nursed a 
series of old and decrepit cars. For the ordinary automobilist a car is an 
instrument to get somewhere, but for the enthusiastic gadget man it rep­
resents a challenge to his ability to overcome difficulties. Such an engineer 
will never be content with a car that functions normally. He is either trying 
to construct a super car or he is exercising his ingenuity in making run a car 
which, by all the canons of the motorist, should have been consigned to 
the junk heap years ago. If you ride with such a motorist, you will be safe 
from accidents of any consequence, but you will never, never travel with­
out adventure. I remember one occasion when Von Neumann was inter­
ested in consulting with Bigelow as a possible engineer for a computing 
machine project. We telephoned from Princeton to New York, and Bigelow 
agreed to come down in his car. We waited till the appointed hour and no 
Bigelow was there. He hadn’t come an hour later. Just as we were about to 
give up hope, we heard the puffing of a very decrepit vehicle. It was on the 
last possible explosion of a cylinder that he finally turned up with a car that 
would have died months ago in the hands of anything but so competent 
an engineer.
Bigelow and I began to try to ascertain the limitations of our prediction 
method, for it was almost certain that we should find serious limitations. 
This time, instead of trying out our predictor on a smooth curve, we tried it 
on graphs made of two straight lines joining each other at an angle.
It must be understood that the predictor consisted of one member which 
was made to follow a given curve and of another member which, on the 
basis of these past data, was expected to indicate the curve a little further 
in the future. This second member we will term the follower. When we put 
our apparatus to work on a curve which was not smooth, but in which one 
straight segment of a line was succeeded by another segment at an angle 
with the first, the predictor still worked, but in a very peculiar fashion.
What was interesting and exciting, and in fact not unexpected, was that 
the pieces of apparatus designed for best following a smooth curve were 
oversensitive and were driven into violent oscillation by a corner. We tried 

402 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
to test this repeatedly, and we always got the same result. Then the idea 
suggested itself to me: perhaps this difficulty is in the order of things, and 
there is no way in which I can overcome it. Perhaps it belongs to the nature 
of prediction that an accurate apparatus for smooth curves is an excessively 
sensitive apparatus for rough curves. Perhaps we have here the example of 
the same sort of malice of nature which appears in Heisenberg’s principle, 
which forbids us to say precisely and simultaneously both where a particle 
is and how fast it is going.
The more we studied the problem, the more we became convinced that 
we were right and that the difficulty was fundamental. If then we could 
not do what we had wanted but had not really hoped to do (that is, to 
develop a perfect universal predictor), we should have to cut our clothes to 
fit our cloth and develop the best predictor that mathematics allowed us to. 
The only question was: What did we mean by the best predictor? If errors 
of inaccuracy and errors of hypersensitivity always seemed to be in oppo­
site directions, on what basis could we make a compromise between those 
two errors?
The answer was that we could make such a compromise only on a statis­
tical basis. For the actual distribution of curves which we wanted to predict, 
or let us say for the actual distribution of airplanes that we wanted to shoot 
down, we might seek a prediction making some quantity a minimum; and 
the most natural quantity to choose at the start, if we should be guided by 
easy computation, if not military significance, was the mean square error 
of prediction.
This means that we took the square of the error of prediction at each 
time, or in other words, the square of the difference between the predicted 
value and the true value. We then took the average of this over the whole 
time of the running of the apparatus. This average of the square error was 
what we were trying to minimize.
Thus we could set up the prediction problem as a minimization problem 
and give it a definite mathematical form once we made certain assump­
tions concerning the statistics of curves to be predicted. The branch of 
mathematics dealing with the minimization of quantities associated with 
curves is known as the calculus of variations, and it has a very well-known 
and well-recognized technique. In many cases it leads to setting up a cer­
tain differential equation for the function or curve which is to fulfill the 
minimization condition, but there are cases (and this case of ours was one 
of them) where it leads to the related sort of equation known as an integral 
equation.

31: The War Years 
403
This was lucky for me, for integral equations were well within my field of 
interest; but the even luckier thing was that the particular integral equation 
to which the problem leads is a slight extension of the one which had been 
considered by Eberhard Hopf and myself. The result was that not only was I 
able to formulate the prediction problem but also to solve it; and what was 
even luckier was the fact that the solution came out in a simple form. It was 
not hard to devise apparatus to realize in the metal what we had figured out 
on paper. All that we had to do was make a quite simple assembly of electric 
inductances, voltage resistances, and capacities, acting on a small electric 
motor of the sort which you can buy from any instrument company.
We made an apparatus which translated the height of a point above a 
given base line into an electrical voltage. We passed this voltage, which 
varied with the time, through an electrical combination of resistance wires, 
condensers, and magnetic coils. At another point in the system, we took off 
the voltage and measured it continuously by a voltmeter. The actual type of 
voltmeter which we used gave us a continuous graph of the output voltage. 
It was this output which was to serve as a prediction of the voltage a certain 
length of time in the future.
The next problem which I had to take up concerned prediction in the 
case in which the data from which we were to predict were not precisely 
given. This also led to a minimization problem, in which we had to specify 
not only the statistics of the data which we were supplied but also the 
statistics of the errors at the same time. This minimization problem led to 
another Hopf-Wiener equation. This was solvable by the same methods, 
and we obtained a very satisfactory theory.
In scientific work it is not enough to be able to solve one’s problems. 
One must also turn these problems around and find out what problems one 
has solved. It is frequently the case that, in solving a problem, one has auto­
matically given the answer to another, which one has not even considered 
in the same connection.
This proved to be true in the new prediction theory. The concept of pre­
dicting the future of a message with a disturbing noise on the basis of the 
simultaneous statistics of the noise and message turned out to contain in 
itself the whole idea of a new method for separating noises and messages in 
what would be in some sense the best possible way.
This happened at a very opportune time, for the new technique of 
radar had come to meet serious difficulties. In radar too it was important 
to pick out a confused and faint message from the background of noise. 
Noise to the electrical engineer means not only noise that you hear but any 
unwanted electrical disturbance. For example, the flutter and flicker which 

404 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
you see in a badly regulated television set is noise. The messages which 
come in through a piece of radar apparatus and serve to confuse the image 
for which we are looking instead of to define it are known as noise.
The separation of noise from messages is the function of a wave filter. 
Wave filters go back many years in the history of telephone engineering 
and are pieces of apparatus which manage to free a message from part of 
the accompanying noise. Originally they were designed to pass all messages 
over a certain range of frequencies (or pitches) with as little change in their 
intensity as possible and to weaken other immediately adjacent frequencies 
by as much as possible.
When, with the precedent of telephone filters, such filters were built 
for television, and it was found that, after a certain point, the sharper the 
design of the filter, the worse it would function. Why was this the case? 
The answer is that the telephone filter is tailored to the specific character­
istics of the human ear. The human ear is a very accurate instrument for 
perceiving pitch and a fairly accurate one for perceiving loudness, but it is 
a very poor instrument for perceiving what is known as phase; or, in other 
words, the precise time that the oscillation of the air passes through zero. 
An alternating current is represented, as I have said, not by one quantity 
which gives it intensity, but by two, which give it intensity and phase. The 
picture of an alternating current somewhat resembles the teeth of a comb. 
As I move the comb forward and backward along its edge, I change a certain 
quantity known as phase. In sounds, this phase change is not completely 
imperceptible, but it is not particularly important, and the earlier filters for 
telephone work and for other sound work did not pay much attention to 
differences in phase.
Radar, like television, appeals to the eye; and in the sort of message that 
radar or television transmits, the eye is quite as sensitive to phase errors as 
to amplitude errors. Thus, the phase distortion which the old telephone-
type filter generated in radar and television was too high a price to pay for 
the excellent transmission of amplitude over a large range of frequencies. 
To minimize the total error in television and radar, it was necessary to cut 
down the phase distortion, at the cost of permitting a little more ampli­
tude distortion than would by itself be best. In seeking for this balance 
between the two distortions, the method which I had suggested—although 
not ideal—would at least work, and was far better than any which had pre­
viously been used.
I do not mean to say that others had not become aware of the failure of 
the earlier forms of filter design for radar nor that these other people had 
not understood what was in essence the reason for this failure, but simply 

31: The War Years 
405
that my method gave for the first time a simple, compact, and reasonable 
way of attacking the problem on the level of fundamentals.
Bigelow and I started up a little laboratory to explore the possibilities of 
predictors. We had a staff of two men working with us. One was an excel­
lent machinist and electrician, who put our ideas into the metal almost as 
fast as we could conceive them. The other was a computer who had been 
an accountant. Reader, if you ever have to start a computing laboratory, 
be warned by me and do not take as a computer an accountant, no matter 
how honest and efficient. Your computer must work to so and so many 
places of accuracy. This means so and so many significant figures, whether 
the significance of the digits begins six places before or six places after the 
decimal point. Your accountant works to cents, and he will work to cents 
until hell freezes over. Whatever numbers our accountant computed he 
kept at all stages to exactly two places after the decimal point, whether 
they were numbers in the millions, where even the first place to the left of 
the decimal point was of no possible significance, or numbers which begin 
only five places after the decimal point.
This was his conscience, that he should be accurate to the last cent; and 
he simply could not understand that physical quantities are not measured 
in cents but on a sliding scale of values in which the cents of one problem 
might be the dollars of another. In particular, when he had to obtain a 
small number as the difference between two nearly equal large numbers, 
he could never realize that these large numbers would have to be measured 
to a much greater degree of accuracy than that which was to be demanded 
for their difference.
I took my responsibility in this project very seriously. I tried to work 
against time, and that is a thing for which I am completely unsuited. More 
than once I computed all through the night to meet some imaginary dead­
line which wasn’t there. I was not fully aware of the dangers of Benzedrine, 
and I am afraid that I used it to the serious detriment of my health.
Be that as it may, I found one very disagreeable fact, that the burden of 
secrecy in my project weighed heavily on me and that Benzedrine plays 
hob with one’s ability to keep a secret properly. It superimposed on my not 
very secretive nature a garrulity which was completely unfitting at the time. 
I had to give it up and look for a more rational way of strengthening myself 
to bear the burdens of war work.
My work was under the supervision of Dr. Warren Weaver, of the Rock­
efeller Institute. We made several trips, Bigelow and I, to consult with him, 
and to compare our ideas with those of other people working on prediction 
theory and on the smoothing of anti-aircraft data. We traveled south two or 

406 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
three times to Fort Monroe, in Virginia, and to an army camp on the North 
Carolina coast. There we found workers from the Bell Telephone Labora­
tory who were more than eager to exchange ideas with us, and we pooled 
our resources with them and with other workers in the same field. At these 
meetings, after our travel and our hard work, I am afraid that I often went 
to sleep.
When we got back home, we made an experimental setup for gener­
ating the sort of irregular functions which arise in the aircraft-prediction 
problem, and then we designed a prediction apparatus on the basis of the 
statistical observations which we made on this setup. We actually were able 
to construct a predictor which would show the shape of a pattern of voltage 
in time, let us say, half a second before it occurred. This allowed us to check 
on our theory and find the criterion for a piece of apparatus that would give 
us good prediction.
The problem of generating an irregular curve with a statistically control­
lable degree of irregularity was quite interesting. We had reflected on the 
ceiling a spot of light, moving in a more or less periodic course. We tried 
to follow this spot with another, reflected in a mirror which was controlled 
by a certain apparatus. In this apparatus, the actual motion of the spot 
was not proportional to the turning of the crank which regulated it but to 
a rather complicated mixture of derivatives and integrals of this motion. 
Moreover, the crank was attached to a system of weights and springs, which 
was very far from giving the kinesthetic sensations which one would natu­
rally associate with an apparatus of the sort. In other words, the spot had to 
be moved by a control which was complicated to begin with and, further­
more, felt completely wrong. Naturally, each person would respond to the 
apparatus in a somewhat different way; and we based our set of the predic­
tor not merely on the general behavior of the apparatus but on the specific 
ability of an individual person to control the apparatus at a certain specific 
epoch in his training.
We were gratified by our clear and consistent results. On one hand, we 
had made a mechanical setup which threw a great deal of light on the way 
in which we act when we are confronted with an artificial problem and 
on the nature of humanly caused irregular action. On the other hand, we 
had found a way to duplicate in some degree the properties of the type of 
irregular motion of an airplane in flight. Thus we had some hope of the 
theory which could be used for the design of a practical apparatus for bring­
ing down airplanes.
The importance of our ideas in connection with the control of anti-
aircraft fire was double. There are two human elements which must be 

31: The War Years 
407
considered in this control. On the one hand, when the airplane pilot is 
flying and taking evasive action, his pattern of flight has a great deal to do 
with not only the limitations of his plane but those of his nervous system, 
so that his action is not too different from that of the hypothetical human 
action we had designed. On the other hand, the anti-aircraft gunner uses 
a technique in which he cannot follow his target perfectly but in which 
he introduces certain random errors because of the limitations of his sense 
organs and muscles. These two sorts of human elements are combined as 
part of the semimechanical processes by which the anti-aircraft gunner 
brings down his target.
At the beginning of the war the only known method of tracking an air­
plane with an anti-aircraft gun was for the gunner to hold it in his sights 
by a humanly regulated process. Later on in the war, as radar became per­
fected, this process was mechanized. It became possible to couple directly 
to the gun the radar apparatus by which the plane is localized, and thus to 
eliminate the human element in gun pointing.
However, it does not seem even remotely possible to eliminate the 
human element as far as it shows itself in enemy behavior. Therefore, in 
order to obtain as complete a mathematical treatment as possible of the 
over-all control problem, it is necessary to assimilate the different parts of 
the system to a single basis, either human or mechanical. Since our under­
standing of the mechanical elements of gun pointing appeared to us to 
be far ahead of our psychological understanding, we chose to try to find a 
mechanical analogue of the gun pointer and the airplane pilot.
In both these cases, the operators seemed to regulate their conduct by 
observing the errors committed in a certain pattern of behavior and by 
opposing these errors by actions deliberately tending to reduce them. This 
method of control appeared to us not unlike a method already known in 
electric circuits and now being applied in servomechanisms, or systems by 
which we switch in an outside source of power for control purposes, such 
as occurs in the power steering of a truck. We call this negative feedback.
We use negative feedback in controlling the power input to the gun tur­
ret of a ship. When the direction in which the gun is pointing and the 
direction in which our computing apparatus says that the gun ought to 
point are different, this difference is used to regulate a power input to the 
turret, which will be of such a nature as to bring the turret more nearly into 
the desired position.
It is a maxim of the physiologist that the pathology of an organ throws 
a very great light on its normal behavior. We asked ourselves the question: 

408 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
Does a negative-feedback apparatus have a specific recognizable pathology? 
Here we were on firm ground.
To see the general purpose of negative feedback apparatus, let us take 
the case of a gun turret controlled by a handle. If this handle works the 
gun turret directly, then the same pressure on the handle will produce very 
different results if the gun turret is cold and the grease is sticky from what 
it will produce if the gun turret is warm and the grease flows easily. It will 
produce different results if the gun is depressed, thereby increasing the 
moment of inertia of the gun turret, from those which we shall find if the 
gun is elevated and the turret has a small moment of inertia about a verti­
cal axis. The primary purpose of feedback control on the gun turret is to 
make the response of the turret more nearly proportional to the push on 
the lever and thus less dependent on the variable friction, the inertia, and 
other external circumstances.
Not only is a feedback system less dependent on changes of load than a 
system without feedback, but this dependence becomes increasingly less as 
more and more of the motion is fed back—or, in other words, if the feed­
back is put through larger and larger amplification. However, this improve­
ment in behavior does not continue indefinitely, for after a certain stage, 
with a large measure of amplification in the feedback, the apparatus will go 
into spontaneous oscillation and behave in such a wild way that we have 
decreased rather than increased the load independence of the apparatus. 
We expected that if human control also were to depend on feedback, there 
would be certain pathological conditions of very great feedback, under 
which the human system, instead of acting effectively as a control system, 
would go into wilder and wilder oscillations until it should break down 
or at least until its fundamental method of behavior should be greatly 
changed.
This suggestion, which emanated equally from Bigelow and from me, I 
brought to the attention of my neurophysiologist friend, Dr. Rosenblueth. 
He had not yet left for Mexico and was still Dr. Cannon’s colleague at the 
Harvard Medical School. The specific question we put was: Are there any 
known nervous disorders in which the patient shows no tremor at rest, but 
in which the attempt to perform such an act as picking up a glass of water 
makes him swing wider and wider until the performance is frustrated, and 
(for example) the water is spilled?
Dr. Rosenblueth’s answer was that such pathological conditions are well 
known, and are termed intention tremors; and that very often the seat of 
the disorder lies in the cerebellum, which controls our organized muscular 
activity and the level on which it takes place. Thus, our suspicions that 

31: The War Years 
409
feedback plays a large role in human control were confirmed by the well-
established fact that the pathology of feedback bears a close resemblance 
to a recognized form of the pathology of orderly and organized human 
behavior.
Within the last two years I have had an experience which may be 
regarded as a commentary on the ideas I am putting forward here. Sud­
denly my little granddaughter, who was staying with us, developed a pur­
pose tremor of exactly the nature of the one discussed here. We took her at 
once to the hospital and found that she was suffering from some form of 
encephalitis involving the cerebellum. This was a condition with very grim 
possibilities, but she had the splendid luck to make a perfect recovery with­
out any aftereffects. If I were a superstitious man, this experience and many 
others reported by medical. men might make me suppose that a disease has 
a vicious personality and wished nothing more than to revenge itself on the 
scientist who has pursued it.
To go back to the work of our team of three: we wrote up these ideas in 
an article, but what was even more important was that Bigelow and I felt 
that we could safely go ahead with the treatment of the human links in 
the control chain as if they were pieces of feedback apparatus. Accordingly, 
we felt justified in proceeding from our crude experimental setup in the 
direction of the design of a complete apparatus for anti-aircraft control and 
prediction.
Since it was clear that the anti-aircraft control apparatus was in essence 
a feedback loop and contained in its construction many subsidiary feed­
back loops, we had to find out something of the characteristics of these 
loops. These characteristics were not available, so that the over-all appa­
ratus which we designed was essentially crude and of unverifiable behav­
ior. Under the circumstances, it was not considered advisable to proceed 
much further with it, partly as such tentative behavior as we could compute 
mathematically did not suggest an excellent performance.
Our ideas were eagerly taken up by other workers in the field and did 
lead to a very definite improvement in practice, in particular of the part 
that consisted in filtering out experimental errors of observation. We were 
not finally commissioned to perfect our own design, but I was in fact asked 
to write a book on time series, extrapolation, and interpolation. This book 
was reproduced in a photo-lithographed form which, because of the yellow 
paper in which it was bound, came to be known as the “yellow peril,” a 
name previously confined to the yellow books of Springer’s mathematical 
series. My textbook was very freely used, not only during the war by the 
designers of systems of control for the aiming and firing of anti-aircraft 

410 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
guns, but also by servo-engineers and electrical-communication men, both 
then and later. It was reprinted after the war in an amplified and improved 
edition with an appendix by Professor Norman Levinson, who made the 
use of my methods considerably clearer.
The work I did on the statistical treatment of anti-aircraft-fire control 
has led eventually to a general statistical point of view in communication 
engineering. The years that have gone by between then and now have 
secured the general acceptance of this point of view in communication 
engineering, but they have also led to much more. I might almost say that 
the whole of engineering is rapidly assuming a statistical aspect, and that 
this is passing over to less orthodox fields such as meteorology, sociology, 
and economics.
Let me go back to my earlier remarks concerning Willard Gibbs and 
the revolution he and his contemporaries created in physics. The ortho­
dox Newtonian view of physical dynamics provides for certain equations 
involving rates, known as differential equations. With the aid of these equa­
tions and with a knowledge of the initial values, or values at time zero, of 
the variables whose rates are being determined in relation to their numeri­
cal values, we can inch our way along in developing the history of these 
phenomena. At each time we know our values. From these we determine 
their own rates of change, and this gives us an approximation to the same 
values and rates an instant later.
If we choose an instant of time that is sufficiently short, we may progress 
along the history of our phenomena to any point in time which we wish to 
attain. This is the method of the astronomers in calculating the orbits of the 
planets and the method of the ballistics expert for the study of the flight of 
projectiles in determining their paths.
In astronomy, as I have said before, the computation of these orbits is a 
very precise mathematics, and our initial data are very accurately known. 
This is not the case in most ballistic or engineering problems. In firing a 
shell, for example, the angle of elevation is known only to a very limited 
degree of accuracy, as are the weight of the projectile, the charge of powder, 
and the various atmospheric conditions. The result is that we start with 
none of this precisely given but with each set of data given only within 
a certain range. The traditional way of solving the ballistic equation is to 
assume the initial data as given precisely. Then we find the range, the angle 
of impact, the velocity of impact, and other significant quantities, and 
we immediately start to revise these with the aid of methods of interpola­
tion or correction, reckoned by procedure which is entirely distinct from 
the first.

31: The War Years 
411
In this process we waste a good deal of effort, first in making our data 
unrealistically accurate, and second in correcting our imperfectly realistic 
results. There is, however, another method which is now coming into use, 
and which finds its spiritual father in Willard Gibbs.
Gibbs pointed out that when a dynamical system develops according to 
its own laws as, for example, when a top spins freely, something occurs very 
much like the flow of a fluid. To characterize a top, we need a point in a cer­
tain space, but this space is not the same as the familiar three-dimensional 
one of solid geometry. The position of a top requires six co-ordinates—or 
measurable quantities—to give its position and six to give its momenta; 
and these together form a twelve-dimensional array, which we may call by 
analogy a twelve-dimensional space. In this space there is a certain mea­
sure of volume, so that a set of tops which fill a given volume at one time 
will fill an equal volume at any other. This type of invariance of volume 
is to be found in all dynamical systems in which there is no power input 
or output.
This flow may be conceived as a flow of probability, and so it was con­
ceived by Gibbs. The probability that a particle will be at one time in a 
given region of this peculiar space is the same as that at a later time it will 
be in the corresponding region into which the first has flowed.
Thus the typical equation of flow is no longer a general system of what 
is known as ordinary differential equations but a set of integral equations. 
These integral equations relate past distributions to future distributions, in 
such a way that if we superimpose different past distributions we superim­
pose the corresponding future distributions. A system like this, in which 
sums in the output answer to sums in the input, is known as linear, and the 
integral equations of the flow method of treating dynamics may be taken 
as linear.
The method is quite practicable computationally; and if the problem 
to be solved is of any high degree of complexity, this method may well 
be easier than the purely Newtonian method. Certain simplifications of 
methods of this type are now being used extensively by members of the 
mechanical-engineering department at M.I.T.
In addition to purely computational advantages in the more complicated 
cases, this method is also essentially superior to the Newtonian method 
of computation from the logical point of view. The reason is this: what 
we put into our problem not only consists of precise data which we later 
have to ease off in accordance with the inaccuracy of the equations and 
the initial conditions but contains intrinsically the very inaccuracy which 
hinders our work. We are thus not overcomputing and relieving the effect 

412 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
of this overcomputing by an ad hoc study of its errors but putting all our 
cards on the table at the beginning. What we finally get is what we want, 
neither more nor less. This cuts down a lot of unnecessary effort, but it also 
increases the real precision of what we are doing.
No scientific measurement can be expected to be completely accurate, 
nor can the results of any computation with inaccurate data be taken as 
precise. The traditional Newtonian physics takes inaccurate observations, 
gives them an accuracy which does not exist, computes the results to which 
they should lead, and then eases off the precision of these results on the 
basis of the inaccuracy of the original data. The modern attitude in phys­
ics departs from that of Newton in that it works with inaccurate data at 
the exact level of precision with which they will be observed and tries to 
compute the imperfectly accurate results without going through any stage 
at which the data are assumed to be perfectly known.
If we follow in these unprecise problems the sort of computation which 
the astronomer uses in determining the orbits of the planets, we may hap­
pen to choose initial conditions which lead to final results not typical 
of the wider range of initial conditions with which we have operated, and 
this instability of our orbit may drive us to a false reckoning of our ultimate 
error.
As I have said earlier in the description of my work on prediction, the 
more sensitive our instruments become, the more unstable they will be. 
These cause an error of a different sort from that of imprecision, but an 
error equally serious. What I have said of mechanical instruments is true of 
methods of computation. The balance between errors of imprecision and 
errors of instability is something which we can compute only on a statistical 
basis. Why not, then, assume the statistical basis at the very beginning and 
obtain both mean result and error by a unified method of computation?
If this recognition of the statistical nature of all science is already prov­
ing to be valuable in the most Newtonian type of mechanical-engineering 
computation, how much more must it then be the natural method of com­
putation in those fields in which our errors of observation are naturally 
very large!
Let us consider meteorology as one example. We know a good deal about 
the dynamics of the atmosphere; and if our observations of the initial con­
ditions were extremely good, we might expect that we could compute the 
future in a purely Newtonian way, even though this way is very likely to 
involve a great deal of overcomputation. What we actually know about the 
atmosphere, though, is a sampling taken in no more than three or four 
observations per day per hundred thousand cubic miles of the atmosphere.

31: The War Years 
413
Recently, under the influence of John von Neumann, there has been 
an attempt to solve the problem of predicting the weather by treating it 
as something like an astronomical-orbit problem of great complexity. The 
idea is to put all the initial data on a super computing machine and, by a 
use of the laws of motion and the equations of hydrodynamics, to grind out 
the weather for a considerable time in the future.
The catch is that all the observations of the weather bureau give only 
limited information at a very few points, with colossal gaps between them. 
These one can fill up only by some sort of statistical reasoning. Thus, an 
adequate meterological method must partake both of dynamics and statis­
tics. There are clear signs that the statistical element in meterology cannot 
be minimized except at the peril of the entire investigation.
I do not mean to deny the importance of dynamics, but I do mean to 
assert the virtues of that Gibbsian approach in which this dynamics is 
treated as a statistical flow.
Meterology is typical of most of those numerical sciences which have 
come to the fore late in the history of science. In economics, the so-called 
econometric science of economic dynamics suffers under the radical diffi­
culty that the numerical quantities which are put into the dynamics are not 
well defined and must be treated as gross statistical estimates. Who knows 
precisely how to define a demand, and how to measure it in terms which 
will satisfy most other economists? Can any two economists check on the 
amount of unemployment in the United States at a given time?
Econometrics will never get very far until two steps are taken: One of 
these steps is that the observation of the quantities—demands, invento­
ries, and the like—with which econometrics operates must be subject to 
the same criteria of precision and rigor as the dynamics by which they are 
combined. The other is that we should recognize from the beginning the 
statistical and imperfectly precise nature of the quantities with which we 
operate and that we should go over to a Gibbsian treatment of them.
What I have just said about meteorology and econometrics applies 
equally to sociological dynamics, to biometrics and in particular to the very 
complicated study of the nervous system which is itself a sort of cerebral 
meteorology. It belongs to the very grammar of the use of mathematical 
methods in semiprecise sciences. It is the heart of the engineering of the 
future.
This new technique was foreshadowed in my war work on anti-aircraft 
fire-control predictors and was carried further in my development of com­
munication theory. As yet it has penetrated to only a few initiates in the 

414 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
appropriate fields of scientific work, but it is philosophically right, and it 
bids fair to change the entire face of all the precise and semiprecise sciences.
When I first wrote about prediction theory, I was not aware that some of 
the main mathematical ideas had already been introduced in the literature. 
It was not long before I found out that just before the Second World War 
an important little paper on the same subject had been published by the 
Russian mathematician Kolmogoroff in the Comptes Rendus of the French 
Academy of Sciences. In this, Kolmogoroff confined himself to discrete pre­
diction, while I worked on prediction in a continuous time; Kolmogoroff 
did not discuss filters, or indeed anything concerning electrical engineering 
technique; and he had not given any way of realizing his predictors in the 
metal, or of applying them to anti-aircraft-fire control.
Nevertheless, all my really deep ideas were in Kolmogoroff’s work before 
they were in my own, although it took me some time to become aware of 
this. A series of papers by Kolmogoroff and such pupils of his as Krein con­
tinued to appear in the Doklady (Reports of the Russian Academy of Sciences), 
and although these papers still stuck for the most part to the concept of 
prediction previously developed by Kolmogoroff, somewhat narrower than 
my own, I am by no means convinced that Kolmogoroff was not indepen­
dently aware of the possibility of some of the applications I had made. If 
that was so, he must have had to keep them out of general publication 
because of their importance for the military-scientific work of the Soviets. 
A recent paper by Krein, in which he makes an explicit allusion to my own 
work in the field of applications, convinces me of this.
I have never met Kolmogoroff, and indeed I have never been in Russia, 
nor have I been in correspondence with him or with any of his school. 
Thus what I say about him is largely surmise. At an early stage of my work 
for the United States military authorities, before I had seen Kolmogoroff’s 
paper, the question came up whether anybody abroad was likely to be in 
possession of ideas similar to mine. I said that they would unquestionably 
receive no particularly ready reception in Germany; that my own friends 
Cramer, in Sweden, and Lévy, in France, might well have been thinking 
along similar lines; but that if anyone in the world were working on these 
ideas it would most likely be Kolmogoroff in Russia. This I said because 
of my knowledge that for twenty or thirty years hardly had either of us 
ever published a paper on any subject but the other was ready to publish a 
closely related paper on the same theme.
Within the last two or three years I have seen a Russian book on pre­
diction theory, communication theory, and similar topics which makes 
extensive references to both Kolmogoroff’s work and to my own. It gives 

31: The War Years 
415
Kolmogoroff the priority, and although this priority is only partial, I have 
just said that there is good reason for considering him not only as an inde­
pendent discoverer of large parts of the subject but as the first man to write 
on it. The book takes my own work very seriously and treats me much more 
fairly than I would expect in a Soviet book, international relations being 
what they are.
The “yellow peril” book is still playing an important role in American 
research work, both for military purposes and for more general uses. It was 
with the permission of the government that it has been reprinted, and it 
must have been a copy of this book which filtered into Russia and served as 
a basis for the Russian comments of which I have just written.
From this point on, my work, or rather the work of my group, has spread 
out to cover a very wide field of communication theory and practice. In 
the first place, the “yellow peril” is most definitely a statistical treatment of 
problems of communication. When the book was written, almost nobody 
had thought of communication in these terms. I think I am to be pardoned 
for a certain pride in saying that the statistical approach to communication 
theory is now accepted almost everywhere.
I approached information theory from the point of departure of the elec­
tric circuit carrying a continuous current, or at least something which could 
be interpreted as a continuous current. At the same time, Claude Shannon, 
of the Bell Telephone Laboratories, was developing a parallel and largely 
equivalent theory from the point of view of electrical switching systems. 
This represented a direct development of his previous work on the use of 
the algebra of logic in switching problems.
As I have said before, Shannon loves the discrete and eschews the contin­
uum. He considered discrete messages as something like a sequence of yeses 
and noes distributed in time, and he regarded single decisions between yes 
and no as the element of information. In the continuous theory of filtering, 
I had been led to a very similar definition of the unit of information, from 
what was at the beginning a considerably different point of view.
In introducing the Shannon-Wiener definition of quantity of informa­
tion (for it belongs to the two of us equally), we made a radical departure 
from the existing state of the subject. For many years it was believed that 
the carrying power of a communication line per unit time was to be mea­
sured by the band width it could carry.
A band width of 200 cycles was supposed to be able to carry twice as 
much information per second as a band width of 100 cycles. This supposi­
tion ignored the fact that, in the absence of noise, any band width would 
be enough to carry any amount of information in one second. One single 

416 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
voltage measured to an accuracy of one part in ten trillion could convey 
all the information in the Encyclopedia Britannica, if the circuit noise did 
not hold us to an accuracy of measurement of perhaps one part in ten 
thousand.
In the early days of the telephone art, very few lines were burdened with 
messages to the ultimate limit of their message-carrying capacity. As the 
art developed and the new modes of communication like radio and televi­
sion demanded a more complete exploitation of the message space avail­
able, it became clear that the noisiness of the line or air channel is another 
important factor which we must take into consideration. The ether is full 
of disturbances which the radio man terms static, and no conductor, be it 
metallic or gaseous, can carry electricity in smaller lumps than the single 
electron. The irregularity of the stream of electrons is known as the shot 
effect, and it is an important consideration in all modern communication 
design.
It was only shortly before World War II that the load on communication 
channels became heavy enough for this intrinsic noise to become a seri­
ous practical barrier to the use of the lines for even more communication. 
Thus, the statistical point of view in communication theory, which I had 
anticipated so many years before with my generalized harmonic analysis, 
and which Shannon and I had jointly made fundamental at the begin­
ning of World War II, became inevitable and basic shortly after the war 
had begun.
The work we were doing on feedback in connection with the fire-control 
machine and the nervous system introduced another revolution, which, 
like the first, has received universal acceptance in the course of the last few 
years. When I first came to Tech, electrical engineering was divided into 
two fundamental parts, which were known in Germany as the technique 
of weak currents and the technique of strong currents, and in the United 
States as communication engineering and power engineering.
The distinction between these two fields is valid, but the nature of this 
distinction and the place to make it was not understood for a considerable 
period. The generating station for a television sender or a trans-Atlantic 
radio sender may use relatively large quantities of power, but it is directed 
primarily toward communication; while the fractional-horsepower motor 
used in a dentist’s drill may employ relatively small quantities of power. 
Nevertheless, the first piece of apparatus is primarily oriented with respect 
to the message and the second one with respect to the energy consumed.
At a period at which this distinction was not fully appreciated, ser­
vomechanisms for the control of gun turrets and other pieces of heavy 

31: The War Years 
417
apparatus were naturally assumed to belong to power technique rather 
than to communication technique. The whole tradition of power tech­
nique was to consider electric currents and voltages as varying in time, 
while the whole tradition of communication technique, particularly under 
the influence of Heaviside, had led to consideration of a message as a sum 
of a large or infinite number of different frequencies. It was not easy to see 
that the frequency treatment, rather than the time treatment, was just as 
appropriate for the servomechanism as for the telephone, the telegraph, 
and television.
I think that I can claim credit for pointing this fact out and for transfer­
ring the whole theory of the servomechanism bodily to communication 
engineering. My whole point of view in these matters made me regard the 
computing machine as another form of communication apparatus, con­
cerned more with messages than with power. Its nature, as I saw it, was that 
of a series of switching devices, so enchained together that the information 
coming out of a number of stages of these was introduced into a subsequent 
stage as ingoing and regulating information.
It was clear that while these switching devices might be gear wheels and 
the like, they could equally well be mechanical relays or the electrical relays 
which depend on vacuum tubes and other electronic phenomena. I was 
much more disposed, as I have said, to use switching devices which made a 
choice between two alternatives than those which made a choice between 
ten alternatives, and I tried to bring this concept of computing machines to 
the attention of the engineering public.
It was at Harvard, under the supervision of Howard Aiken, that I found 
the first of the newer switching computers dependent on relays. Aiken was 
developing them under a government grant. I was much struck with Aik­
en’s work, which I greatly admired, and which Aiken himself considered as 
the modern carrying-out of the crude computers developed by Babbage in 
England a hundred years ago. Babbage had formed an excellent conception 
of their mathematical possibilities but had almost no understanding of the 
mechanical problems to which they gave rise.
I was surprised to find that Aiken was completely committed to the 
relatively slow mechanical relay as the mechanical computer’s first tool 
and that he did not put any enormous value on the speed which could be 
derived by the use of electronic relays. This limitation of point of view has 
now been discarded by Aiken himself, who has become one of the most 
active and original inventors and designers of electronic computers. But at 
that time he labored under a curious moralistic quirk in accordance with 

418 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
which he considered work with mechanical relays as essentially sound and 
right and work with electronic relays as unnecessary and ethically sloppy.
Here I wish to emphasize again a weakness of attitude joined with a 
great strength in those men who show practical ingenuity in the devising 
of gadgets. It is the desire to fix the technique of a subject forever at the 
precise point to which their ingenuity has carried them and then to offer a 
profound intellectual and moral resistance—a block, in fact, to later work 
which departs from their principles. We mathematicians who operate with 
nothing more expensive than paper and possibly printer’s ink are quite 
reconciled to the fact that, if we are working in a very active field, our 
discoveries will commence to be obsolete at the moment they are written 
down or even at the moment they are conceived. We know that for a long 
time everything we do will be nothing more than the jumping-off point 
for those who have the advantage of already being aware of our ultimate 
results. This is the meaning of the famous apothegm of Newton, when he 
said, “If I have seen further than other men, it is because I have stood on 
the shoulders of giants.”
Yet the commercial possibilities of the invention in the metal tend to 
blind the industrial worker to this fundamental fact and to make him hope 
that he can hold back the stream of progress at the precise stage where he 
had made his own contributions. The patent system and the commercial 
value of an inventor’s idea as something salable tend to push him in this 
direction. This is not realistic. As a practical man, the inventor should have 
the very practical consciousness that for many years his greatest contribu­
tion will not be a single gadget but the furthering of the whole stream of 
thought and ideas concerning an enormous class of gadgets past, present, 
and future. He should come to terms with this streaming of thought and 
realize that, just as he has gone beyond those who were born before him, 
he himself and his work will have to serve rather as a stepping stone to the 
future than as the end to which science and technique must finally arrive.
However, my interest in the development of computing machines car­
ried me far beyond those machines past, present, or to come, which are 
made of brass and copper, glass and steel. The brain and the nervous system 
also share in the main characteristics of computing machines. Parallel to 
the yes and no of a relay is the fact that a nervous fiber can exist in what 
are fundamentally only two states: the state of carrying a message and the 
state of not carrying a message. This is the so-called all-or-none law of the 
nervous system; and, although it may not be as precisely true as its crude, 
cold formulation would suggest, it is sufficiently true to represent a funda­
mental fact of nervous conduction.

31: The War Years 
419
A nerve fiber, it is true, may be stimulated by messages of varying inten­
sity, but the ultimate fate of each of these messages is either to die out and 
fail to reach the end of the fiber or to continue as what the chemists would 
call a self-catalyzing process and start an impulse which will go from one 
end of the fiber to the other. When it has reached the end of the fiber, 
its subsequent history is so nearly independent of the original strength of 
stimulation that this strength may be entirely neglected. Thus, there is a 
certain analogy between a nerve fiber and a flip-flop electric circuit, an elec­
tric circuit with two, and only two, states of equilibrium. This analogy is so 
close that, long before the message reaches the end of the fiber, it carries its 
information in the form of a number of impulses rather than in the form of 
the strength of the impulses.
Not only are nerve fibers switching devices, but they are devices which 
lead into other switching devices. The nerve fibers communicate with one 
another by junction points or junction systems known as synapses, and 
in these the question whether a new message is established in an outgo­
ing fiber depends on the precise set of incoming messages received from 
various fibers. In the simplest cases, the synaptic system has a threshold, 
which means that if more than a certain number of incoming fibers receive 
messages within a certain critical interval of time, the outgoing fiber fires, 
and otherwise not.
We are so used to feedback phenomena in our daily life that we often 
forget the feedback nature of the simplest processes. When we stand erect, 
it is not in the manner in which a statue stands erect, because even the 
most stable statue needs to be fastened to some sort of pedestal or it would 
fall over. Human beings stand erect, however, because they are continu­
ally resisting the tendency to fall down, either forward or backward, and 
manage to offset either tendency by a contraction of muscles pulling them 
in the opposite direction. The equilibrium of the human body, like most 
equilibria which we find in life processes, is not static but results from a 
continuous interplay of processes which resist in an active way any ten­
dency for them to lead to a breakdown. Our standing and our walking are 
thus a continual jujitsu against gravity, as life is a perpetual wrestling match 
with death.
In view of this, I was compelled to regard the nervous system in much 
the same light as a computing machine, and I communicated this idea to 
my friend Rosenblueth and to other neurophysiologists. I managed to get 
a group of neurophysiologists, communication engineers, and computing-
machine men together at Princeton for an informal session, and I found on 
the part of each group a great willingness to learn what the other groups 

420 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
were doing and to make use of their terminology. The result was that very 
shortly we found that people working in all these fields were beginning 
to talk the same language, with a vocabulary containing expressions from 
the communication engineer, the servomechanism man, the computing-
machine man, and the neurophysiologist.
For example, all of them were interested in the storage of information to 
be used later, and all of them found that the word memory (as used by the 
neurophysiologist and the psychologist) was a convenient term to cover 
the whole scope of these different fields. All of them found that the term 
feedback, which had come from the electronics engineer and was extending 
itself to the servomechanism man, was an appropriate way of describing 
phenomena in the living organism as well as in the machine. All of them 
found that it was convenient to measure information in terms of num­
bers of yeses or noes, and sooner or later they decided to term this unit of 
information the bit. This meeting I may consider the birthplace of the new 
science of cybernetics, or the theory of communication and control in the 
machine and in the living organism.
I had hopes that this new science was going to pass through a rapid 
development over a broad front. The subject has developed greatly, and I 
have participated in its later phases. However, the times were not favorable 
for the normal growth of new ideas, and I have had to watch very care­
fully through a period where what I intended as a serious contribution to 
science was interpreted by a considerable public as science fiction and as 
sensationalism.
Science fiction is in vogue, and it is the fashion even among certain seri­
ous scientists to see merit in its writings. I myself as a child was a devotee 
of Jules Verne and H. G. Wells, to whom the present literature of science 
fiction owes its origin, but it is an infinitely slicker and more pernicious 
article. On the one hand, it leads to fantasies of power and of brutality quite 
as devastating as anything in the thud-and-blunder type of gangster story 
or the most uncomic comics. On the other hand, it is helping to create a 
generation of youngsters who believe that they are thinking in scientific 
terms because they are using the language of science fiction. It is a real dif­
ficulty in our schools of science and engineering to have to try to educate 
young men who believe that they have a calling toward science merely 
because they are accustomed to playing with the ideas of destructive forces, 
other planets, and rocket travel.
This vicious daydreaming is largely a product of World War II, which has 
done so much to demoralize the whole generation of science. The period 
of the war was one in which the status of science and that of mathematics 

31: The War Years 
421
were changing rapidly. In the first place, leisure was vanishing in every sec­
tor of life. Before the war, I used to find the M.I.T. boys playing a game or 
two of bridge after lunch in one of the lounges of Walker Memorial. I often 
participated in these games.
I did not regard the time as wasted either by myself or by the students, 
for between games we used to have an occasion for wide-ranging discus­
sions which might be pure bull session or might involve a real play of ideas. 
From the beginning of the war, everyone was in deadly earnest, and all 
chance of intellectual play was restricted. To the present day, it is hard to 
find young men who dare to take enough time off from work to consider 
what their work is about. The hours spent in the fantasy of space books are 
no replacement for a good bull session.
Before the war, and particularly during the depression, positions in 
science were not easy to get. The requirements for these positions had 
become exceedingly high. During the war, this situation had changed in 
two respects. First, there were not enough men to carry out all the scientific 
projects which the war involved. Secondly, in order to carry out these proj­
ects at all, it became necessary to organize the work so as to use those with 
a minimum amount of training, ability, and devotion.
The result was that young men who should have been thinking of pre­
paring themselves in a long-time way for their careers lived in a lighthearted 
way from hand to mouth, confident that the existing boom in scientists 
had come to stay. Such men were in no state to accept the discipline or hard 
work, and they evaluated whatever intellectual promise they might have as 
if it had been already realized in performance. With the older men crying 
out for assistance and manpower, these boys would shop around for those 
masters who would demand least and grant them the most in indulgence 
and flattery.
This was a part of a general breakdown of the decencies in science which 
continues to the present day. In most previous times, the personnel of sci­
ence had been seeded by the austerity of the work and the scantiness of the 
pickings. There is a passage in Tennyson’s “Northern Farmer: New Style” 
which says: “Doänt thou marry for munny, but goä wheer munny is!”
Thus, an ambitious man with slightly anti-social tendencies or, to put 
it more politely, indifferent to spending other people’s money, would 
formerly have avoided a scientific career as if it were the plague itself. From 
the time of the war on, these adventurers, who would have started out as 
stock promoters or lights of the insurance business, have been invading 
science.

422 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
The old assumption which we used to make must be discarded. We all 
knew that the scientist had his vices. There were those among us who were 
pedants; there were those who drank; there were those who were overambi­
tious for their reputations; but in the normal course of events we did not 
expect to meet in our world men who lied or men who intrigued.
When I began to emerge from my sheltered life into the scientific confu­
sion of wartime, I found that among those I was trusting were some who 
could not be held to any trust. I was badly disillusioned more than once, 
and it hurt.
The meeting to consolidate communication theory took place well after 
Pearl Harbor. It may surprise the reader that in all this talk about war work, 
I have not mentioned Pearl Harbor and the actual entry of America into 
the war. The fact is that all of us had long been convinced that the war was 
coming to America in some form or other, and the actual opening of hos­
tilities did not change my work on means of defense.
In the fall of 1941, the tension of the successive defeats experienced by 
the Allies in Scandinavia, Holland, and France, the Battle of Britain, and 
the ambiguous and to-and-fro situation in North Africa, had grown as great 
as one thought one could bear, yet it became complicated by the fairly 
general feeling that something was about to blow off in Japan. While none 
of us was exactly prepared for Pearl Harbor, I do not think that we were 
convinced that a military dictatorship like Japan would play the game of 
war and diplomacy according to the standard rules, particularly when these 
rules were manifestly advantageous to us. Thus, Pearl Harbor came, to me at 
least, as much more of a shame and a humiliation than a surprise.
Pearl Harbor and our subsequent entry into World War II on both sides 
of the globe had a number of direct effects upon me. It is true it could not 
involve me in war research any more than I was already involved, because 
I was fully occupied in this direction and had been for more than a year. 
However, the war wiped out plans which Manuel Sandoval Vallarta and I 
had made to go to South America in the interest of international good will, 
on funds primarily emanating from the State Department (or, in his case, 
from the Mexican Government).
What I felt to be much more important to me was what was going to 
happen to my dear friends the Lees. We had just managed to secure for 
them passage on a liner from Hong Kong. Then Pearl Harbor came and 
prevented the boat from sailing, or at least from sailing with our friends on 
board. Thus, Lee, who had already gone for five years through the Chinese-
Japanese War without any adequate contact with his profession, was sen­
tenced to wait five years more, until after V-J Day, before we could bring 

31: The War Years 
423
him over to the United States. During all that time, an offer which we had 
secured him from the electrical-engineering department of M.I.T. stood 
open, or at least ajar; and when he finally arrived he was able to step into 
an instructorship. This has now been succeeded by an assistant professor­
ship and an associate professorship.
The problem of what professional man is to do when he comes back as 
a sort of Rip Van Winkle who has slept for a decade and wakes to find a 
changed world is very difficult. The obvious thing might appear to be to 
spend a year or two in studying the various developments of the intermedi­
ate period. This must be done to some degree or other, but it is not a com­
pletely adequate way of treating the situation. The very bulk of new material 
tends to produce an intellectual indigestion in the student. He must come 
into competition with the younger generation who have learned the field 
the easy way while it has been developing and who are at home in it. Our 
Rip Van Winkle cannot expect to compete with them.
What made Lee’s situation easier was that I had recently developed a 
considerable part of the statistical theory of communication engineering 
in the “yellow peril.” I pointed out to Lee that the one way to avoid being 
disastrously behind the game was to move deliberately ahead of the game 
and thus secure an advantage of some years while the other people were 
catching up. Lee saw the point.
The situation was made considerably easier by the fact that for years we 
had been so much in the habit of working together that my mental proc­
esses and ways of writing were quite familiar to him. Thus, he took over 
the problem of working out in detail the communication and engineering 
consequences of ideas which I had only sketched in general terms and of 
making himself interpreter to the engineering public of the field which I 
was later to call cybernetics.
Lee has established himself in this program and has been busy for some 
years in carrying it through to a most successful conclusion. He is now writ­
ing a book on communication engineering from the new standpoint, and 
he is showing in it a great patience, thoroughness, and consideration of the 
reader. For me, close as I am to the origin of the subject, such a detached 
treatment would be impossible.
Lee has presented the new ideas to quite a number of government and 
industrial laboratories. He has brought up a whole generation of young 
electrical engineers to do research along statistical lines and to employ my 
point of view as a habitual approach to communication problems. He has 
also organized very successful summer meetings, so that engineers already 

424 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
actively engaged in the communication industry have been able to come to 
M.I.T. for a refresher course on the cybernetic viewpoint.
In these ways the difficulties of ten years’ isolation have been bypassed 
successfully. The head start which Lee has had in the new methods has 
allowed him time to catch up with what has happened between 1936 and 
1946, and, what is more, the work in which he has been engaged has given 
him specific problems to use as a touchstone for his understanding of and 
familiarity with the research of the intermediate period. In other words, we 
have seen in the pay-off of the policy which the two of us began to adopt 
the moment the Lees arrived in Boston’s South Station after the war.
With Lee back at M.I.T., I was greatly encouraged to go on with further 
investigations of servomechanisms and the entire class of topics which I 
was later to give the name of cybernetics. As I have said, Lee is himself now 
finishing a book on the matter. However, not all that the two of us could 
do together on that, nor all that any hundred people could do, would suf­
fice to cover more than a small part of the literature on servomechanisms 
and on the automatic factory, to which our early work has led. The auto­
matic factory bids fair to become the norm rather than the exception, even 
within the lifetime of those who are now in college. It is giving rise to a new 
profession of experts who are able not only to design these factories but to 
set up on them problems of the most varied sort. The modern technique of 
automatic-factory design is well beyond the ambit of a theoretical man like 
me. As I shall show in a later chapter, I have conceived it to be my primary 
function not so much to develop the automatic factory further as to explain 
its nature and its consequences, and to alert both labor and management to 
the need of facing these intelligently.

32  Mexico
1944
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
32: 
Mexico
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
As the war went on, the work left the hands of the pure scientists like 
myself for those of the designers, and I was at loose ends. It was about 
January 1944 that I heard from Vallarta that there was to be a meeting of 
the Mexican Mathematical Society in Guadalajara the following spring and 
that they wished a good attendance from the United States, and my own 
presence in particular.
Almost from the moment I crossed the frontier, I was charmed by the 
pink-and-blue adobe houses, the bright keen air of the desert, by new plants 
and flowers, by the indications of a new way of living with more gusto in 
it than belongs to us inhibited North Americans. The high, cool climate of 
Mexico City, the vivid colors of the jacaranda blossoms and the bougainvil­
laeas, the Mediterranean architecture, all prepared me for something new 
and exciting. The many times I have returned to Mexico have not belied 
these first impressions. It will be a sad day for me when I come to feel that 
I have no further chance to renew my contacts with that country and to 
participate in its life.
The Rosenblueths met me when I arrived and saw that I was put up in 
interns’ quarters at the Instituto Nacional de Cardiología. As soon as I had 
begun to acclimatize myself and to get over the terrible lassitude due to 
the elevation, Arturo and I started to work together on the sort of muscle 
tremor known as clonus: the familiar spasmodic vibration which many peo­
ple experience when they sit cross-legged with one knee under the other. It 
seemed to be an admirable case for studying feedback tremor in the neuro­
muscular system.
I had begun my trip with very little Spanish, what I had being no more 
than a general knowledge of Latin and the Romance languages and two or 
three lessons from a Mexican student at M.I.T.
I brought a Spanish grammar along with me, and I tried to make my very 
inadequate Spanish serve as a medium of communication with my interne 

426 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
companions, most of whom spoke a very tolerable English. I used to dine 
with the interns in the official doctors’ dining room, and I found that I 
gradually developed a taste for the strong pepper sauce, which seemed to be 
the invariable accompaniment to all dishes. They were very friendly to me 
and very courteous at the same time, for both the Spanish language and the 
Mexican tradition permit a rather close combination of courtesy and famil­
iarity. Their term for me was maestro, which is applied both to a teacher and 
to a craftsman such as a carpenter or a mason. As applied to a teacher, it is 
both far more familiar and far more respectful than señor.
I played a lot of chess with the young doctors and occasionally with 
Arturo, although I think his estimate of me as a game player was better 
indicated by the Chinese Checkers which we played continually when I 
visited him. I used to walk uptown and make purchases. For this I had to 
wait until my blood count had risen enough to overcome the functional 
anemia which besets all new visitors to Mexico City.
I learned a great deal more about Arturo during this visit. He had not 
started as a scientist but as a musician, and had earned his living for some 
time by playing classical piano music in a Mexico City restaurant. Arturo 
is also a first-rate chess player and a superb bridge player, so good that in 
neither of these games does he allow me to play with him. He is a great 
enthusiast for the climate and arts of his native land. In this I cannot gain­
say him, although I think that he often tends to underrate the New Eng­
land countryside and, for that matter, the country in general, as opposed to 
the city.
After Mexico, the land of which he speaks with the greatest admiration 
is France, where he did most of his medical studying. He would find quite 
enough pleasant things to say about New England if only he were speak­
ing to a non-New Englander, but there is something puckish in him which 
makes him take a pleasure in teasing.
He is a hard worker, and he makes the greatest demands on the sincer­
ity and industry of those about him, demands which are only exceeded by 
those he makes upon himself. According to my way of looking at things, he 
involves himself too deeply in the expected outcome of a particular piece 
of research, so that if in fact it comes out differently, he will be dispropor­
tionately worried and spend excessive effort at trying to salvage that which 
has already proved itself unsalvageable.
Our work on clonus progressed in a manner which was satisfactory to 
me, but which did not come up to Arturo’s rigid requirements for experi­
mental research. The paper has never been published, although I think that 
many of its ideas have come to be accepted generally.

32: Mexico 
427
Besides our study of clonus, we also did some work on the heart as a 
conductor of rhythmic contractions. This work was later carried to a greater 
degree of perfection by another one of Arturo’s collaborators.
As soon as I could get about freely, I looked up the Vallartas and the 
mathematicians at the university. Manuel and his wife, Maria Luisa, gave us 
a warm welcome to Mexico. They lived with a number of brothers, sisters-
in-law, nieces, and nephews, in the large house of Maria Luisa’s parents, the 
Margains, on Avenida Insurgentes. Father Margain, who died recently, was 
a doctor, and his sons were doctors, architects, and lawyers.
Like a number of Mexicans in their circle, my friends Manuel and Maria 
Luisa were connected with the saga of Maximilian. It had been a great-uncle 
of Maria Luisa, Lieutenant Margain, who at Querétaro had commanded the 
squad which shot Maximilian and his two generals Mejía and Montemar. 
On the other hand, one of her great aunts had been lady-in-waiting to Car­
lota. An ancestor of Manuel had been governor of a province and a political 
mainstay of Maximilian’s antagonist and conqueror, the Indian president 
Benito Juárez. Thus, my visit to Mexico made me feel at once as if I had 
been immersed in the fascinating and violent history of the country.
Another Mexican scientist friend of mine was Nápoles Gándara, who 
is professor of mathematics at the University of Mexico, and who invited 
me to lecture there. He had been up to M.I.T. to study with Dirk Struik. His 
main distinction is not so much the merit of his original research as the way 
in which he has stood up for many years for mathematics and the training 
of mathematicians. He is largely and possibly entirely of Indian blood, and 
he possesses a full share of that modest determination and oneness of pur­
pose which derives from his Indian ancestry.
The Indian element in Mexico and the Spanish differ in many ways. It 
is the Spaniard rather than the Indian who has the romantic élan which we 
associate with the South. On the other hand, the Indian is unsurpassable 
where steadiness, loyalty, and conscientiousness come into consideration. 
Thus, each race furnishes qualities which the country needs. It is a splendid 
thing that the Indian has come to his own and is participating in the devel­
opment of a new middle class, which stands on the tripod of the Spaniard, 
the Indian, and the foreigner.
My Mexican friends came from all of these three elements of society, and 
it was an exciting thing to see how this new middle class of diverse origins 
constituted a cordial, friendly, and well-organized body of people.
My friend Erro, the astronomer, took me to see Torres Bodet, the Minis­
ter of Education, who was doing much for the education of illiterates. One 
expects that when, in a Latin country, the head of a national observatory 

428 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
introduces a foreign scholar to the Minister of Education, it will be an affair 
of frock coats, striped trousers, and great formality. As a matter of fact, Erro 
appeared in riding breeches and a blue-and-white sweatshirt. Mexico has a 
charming combination of Spanish and Latin American formality with the 
free and easy ways of the United States.
I saw a great deal of the medical crowd in Mexico City as well as of the 
mathematicians, physicists, and astronomers. Everywhere I found a new 
and active intellectual life in the making. The Mexicans are quite conscious 
of the distance they must go to come up to the level of the countries older 
in scientific reputation, but they are determined to make up for their late 
arrival in scientific history, and the level of work increases year by year. In 
the meanwhile, there is something peculiarly charming in the friendliness 
and warmth of heart and in the intellectual devotion of these friends of 
mine, and Mexico will never seem to me a truly foreign country.
Among my medical friends I wished to speak particularly of Dr. García 
Ramos, for he in his own personality is a living example of the new Mexico. 
He was born in Querétaro, of parents in quite modest circumstances, and is 
overwhelmingly Otomi Indian in blood. He went into the army as a boy. At 
every stage in which examinations or ability could promote a man’s career, 
he stood out in the first rank. He was sent to the army medical school, from 
which he was graduated with real distinction. Arturo took him on as his 
assistant.
García Ramos is now a well-known physiologist in his own right, having 
received a Guggenheim Fellowship to study in the States. He was a major in 
the army when I first knew him, and he is now a full colonel. He has retired 
from active military service, and is at present the head of the Mexico City 
Nutrition Laboratory. There is no future for a general who does not make 
the army his first consideration, and García Ramos is infinitely more inter­
ested in medical research than in the army. The army has therefore nothing 
further to offer him.
Among Mexican mathematicians the late Professor G. D. Birkhoff of 
Harvard has had a great influence. Some years before, he had developed an 
alternative explanation of certain phenomena which occupy a key position 
in Einstein’s gravitational relativity. Birkhoff’s theory, which is not actually 
relativistic, is meant to account for the displacement of light by the attrac­
tion of the sun for certain anomalies in the orbit of Mercury and for the 
shift of light from the remote corners of the universe toward the red end 
of the spectrum. At the time at which Birkhoff was working, several of the 
Mexicans were up in Cambridge in contact with him. They are now pass­
ing Birkhoff’s influence on to their own students. The new subject became 

32: Mexico 
429
a favorite with the young Mexican school of mathematics, and paper after 
paper was written on Birkhoff’s work. After he died in 1942, the Mexicans 
continued to carry on the work as a tribute of piety.
I could go on from name to name of my friends without finding a 
chance to refer to much more than a small part of them, but there is one 
person whom I must mention in particular, our janitor, Olvera, a tall, gaunt 
peon, who possesses the instinctive culture which one so frequently finds 
in strata of Mexican society which tend to be illiterate. By this I mean in the 
first instance a pride in a correct and elegant speaking use of the Spanish 
language. Indeed, Olvera himself is not illiterate. He has taken full advan­
tage of his situation as an employee of an institution of learning to extend 
his culture in many directions. In particular, together with several of the 
younger doctors and with the stenographers, he has joined an English class 
conducted by Mrs. Rosenblueth. He has been one of her most conspicu­
ously successful pupils. Now he is able to speak in an English which has 
the same chosen quality that belongs to his Spanish, and on one occasion 
he is said to have remarked to two skylarking American boys in the labo­
ratory, “Gentlemen, this conduct is not worthy of an international scien­
tist.” Indeed, Olvera’s choice of words, both in Spanish and in English, is so 
notable that when Arturo and I have any matter of phraseology come up in 
a paper we are writing, we say, “How would Olvera have said it?”
Olvera is utterly devoted to the laboratory and to Arturo, and this devo­
tion may even become embarrassing at times. As a vigorous man, Arturo 
naturally prefers to go like anyone else to the barbershop or the bootblack; 
but no, Olvera will not let him. The barber and the bootblack must come to 
his office at those times when Olvera has decided that the personal appear­
ance of the boss needs a bit of renovating, and Arturo sits embarrassedly 
upon his chair while the door is closed on his humiliation.
The particular pride of the beautiful modern building of the Instituto is 
the pair of mural paintings by Diego Rivera on the history of the medicine 
of the heart. For all Rivera’s personal flamboyancy, these paintings show a 
great depth of serious study and scholarship. The pieces of medical appa­
ratus which appear are all correctly delineated. Whether they are of the 
accepted pattern or not, they all would work. To achieve this, Arturo and 
Rivera consulted with each other many times.
However, the artistic merit of these paintings goes far beyond such tech­
nical details. One of them, which concerns the earlier history of cardiol­
ogy, has a generally red tone, emanating from the pile of fagots at which 
Servetus was burned. It must be remembered that, besides being a heretic 
in the eyes of John Calvin, he was one of the discoverers of the circulation 

430 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
of the blood. Naturally a man like Rivera takes a delight in showing that 
the burning of heretics was as much a misdeed of the Protestants as of 
the Catholics.
The other painting is largely blue in coloring, from the light emanating 
from the Roentgen tube and the other electrical apparatus of the modern 
cardiologist. In both there is a careful depiction not only of the individuals 
who have contributed to the science but of their distinct national types. 
Many single faces or groups are portrayed with great understanding and 
emotion, and in particular there is a splendid piece which shows the con­
sumptive Laënnec using his stethoscope on a dying heartsick patient. You 
see the pose of the sick doctor echoing in every line that of the patient, who 
shows the characteristic Hippocratic face.
The time came for me to go to the mathematical meeting at Guadala­
jara. I will not say that the mathematics at this meeting was either terrifi­
cally novel or very exciting, although it represented a genuine attempt for a 
country which was rather a newcomer to the mathematical field to do work 
on a high level. The meeting itself and the city in which it took place were 
equally charming.
We had quite an American contingent at the meeting, both invited and 
self-invited. One of the invited guests was Professor Murnaghan, of Johns 
Hopkins, who found a not unusual difficulty in adjusting himself to the 
diet of the country. One morning the Rosenblueths came down early, and 
Rosenblueth said in English to nobody in particular, “I feel fine, period!” I 
answered, “Murnaghan feels rotten, colon.”
We made many excursions about Guadalajara and its surroundings. I 
was particularly delighted by the sincere and manly painting of Orozco.
There was a great painting of his in the Governor’s Palace, in which he 
represented the wars between Fascism and Communism in a powerful but 
brutal symbolic fashion. However, the most interesting group of his paint­
ings was in the Hospicio. This was a public orphanage which seemed to me 
more human and far less institutional than most boarding schools. The 
children were not in uniform but played in ordinary dress with an abun­
dance of toys in the shady and tree-filled courtyards. There were two school 
orchestras, one of older and one of younger inmates, and the conductor 
and music teacher, who had achieved remarkable results on a truly profes­
sional level, was an elderly Indian gentleman with the impassive face that 
one has learned to know in the portraits of Juárez.
It was the chapel of this institution that had been decorated by Orozco, 
and although the paintings were not the conventional paintings of the 
Christian tradition, they were most certainly religious paintings, and in the 

32: Mexico 
431
main representations of a new Apocalypse. They had some of the flat red 
and blue colors of El Greco. However, the use of color was not their stron­
gest point, and the drawing was extremely modern. One of them showed 
the wheel crushing the city wall of the Aztecs. The moral of this was that 
the Western civilization of the wheel, which the Aztecs had never known, 
had crushed the indigenous cultures. Other panels carried out the theme 
of the conquest and showed the Spanish soldiers with their swords and the 
monks with their robes. Through the nave of the whole great church of 
centuries ago, these paintings carried a spirit of grim beauty and power, and 
one felt, for all its grimness that it was a worthy background against which 
the children could develop their sense of the nobility of art.
We members of the congress witnessed a dance exhibition by the school 
teachers of Guadalajara, both men and women. They had nothing school­
marmish or schoolmasterish about them. The whole show went off with a 
verve and sincerity which excited our greatest admiration.
When I returned to the States I found that the interest in the sort of 
work that Arturo and I had been doing together, namely the application 
of modern mathematical techniques to the study of the nervous system as 
a problem in communication, had excited a spirited interest. A colleague 
of mine had persuaded the Macy Foundation, in New York, to organize a 
number of meetings devoted to this subject. The series ran for several years. 
Here a group of psychiatrists, sociologists, anthropologists, and the like 
came together with neurophysiologists, mathematicians, communication 
experts, and the designers of computing machines, to see if they couldn’t 
find a common basis of thought.
The discussions were interesting and, in fact, we did learn to speak more 
or less in one another’s language, but there were great obstacles in the way 
of a complete understanding. These semantic difficulties resided in the fact 
that on the whole there is no other language which can give a substitute for 
the precision of mathematics, and that a large part of the vocabulary of the 
social sciences is and must be devoted to the saying of things that we do not 
yet know how to express in mathematical terms.
Indeed, I found then, as I have found on so many other occasions, that 
one of the chief duties of the mathematician in acting as an adviser to sci­
entists in less precise fields is to discourage them from expecting too much 
of mathematics. They must learn that there is no intellectual virtue (and 
that there is, in fact, a severe intellectual vice) in using a number of three 
digits when our available accuracy runs to one digit. Thus, while we were 
quite convinced that the same modes of thought traverse the problems of 
communication—whether they be social, physiological, or mechanical—it 

432 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
was the mathematicians rather than the physiologists and sociologists who 
had most to throw cold water on an overestimation of the detailed possi­
bilities of mathematics in these other fields.
Arturo attended several of these earlier Macy meetings. We wanted to 
continue to work together in the intimate way in which we had already 
started and to secure a backing for this future work that would enable us 
to keep it up together for a number of years. We managed to interest both 
M.I.T. and the Instituto Nacional de Cardiología in the project and to secure 
funds in New York from the Rockefeller Foundation. Here Warren Weaver, 
who had now returned to his normal work from his war duties, was very 
enthusiastic and hopeful about the possibilities that had emanated from 
my research on prediction. He represented in this the natural sciences 
group of the Rockefeller Foundation. Dr. Robert Morison, who represented 
the biological sciences group, was also interested in the proposition. He 
was a close friend of Arturo’s and had been a member of our dinner group 
at the Harvard Medical School. Between him and Weaver, we got the signal 
to go ahead.
M.I.T., the Instituto, and the Rockefeller Foundation came to a decision 
that I should spend half of every other year in Mexico and that, on the 
other hand, Arturo should spend part of the intervening years at M.I.T., for 
a period of five years. With slight modifications we have adhered to this 
program, and there now remains only one half year of the original program 
for Arturo to spend in Boston.
Besides the work Arturo and I did on heart conduction and on clonus, 
there is a group of biological researches, on some of which he and I have 
worked together, and some of which have received my independent atten­
tion. Most of these have not been carried through to a definitive result, but 
they still present features of interest for further work.
One piece of work I did with Rosenblueth concerns an attempt to set up 
and to solve the differential equations of impulse flow along a nerve, and 
in this manner to compute the passing distribution of electricity which 
occurs as an impulse goes by. This is the so-called theory of the nerve spike. 
This sudden rise and sudden drop of potential in the passing of a nerve 
impulse seemed to me to divide itself into at least three separate consecu­
tive phenomena.
Another research which we undertook together had to do with the sta­
tistical theory of the conduction of impulses through a synapse, or a place 
where incoming nerve fibers join with fibers proceeding further in the 
nervous system. This was done during one of Dr. Rosenblueth’s stays in 
Cambridge.

32: Mexico 
433
Two other researches which have not yet matured but which seem to me 
to lead in a promising direction have been undertaken by me in collabora­
tion with workers in the electronics laboratory of M.I.T., in particular with 
Dr. Jerome Wiesner. One of these, in which the leading idea is Wiesner’s, 
concerns an attempt to analyze sounds instrumentally in such a way that 
the pattern of sounds might be conveyed to the skin as a series of local pres­
sures or vibrations. We made promising headway in the matter but did not 
come to a definite choice as to just how to pursue the best path in making 
such apparatus available to the deaf as an alternative mode of registering 
sound by touch.
This represents one phase of my general interest in the philosophy of 
prosthesis. I have believed that much could be done with artificial limbs 
by realizing that the deprivation of the amputee is quite as much sensory 
as motor, and that the amputee’s loss of part of the information which is 
available to the normal person leaves him to assume a condition which 
parallels not merely paralysis but ataxia. Ataxia, which is a loss of steer­
ing impulses, does not prevent a person from moving, but prevents him 
from moving in a purposive way, by depriving him of an awareness of his 
own motions.
Closely related to this concept is the idea of a more adequate iron lung 
for paralytics. The existing iron lung has saved many lives, but it tends to 
make the patient dependent on a rigid process of breathing over which he 
has no control, and it tends to cause him to unlearn the normal process of 
breathing. There seems to me a real possibility to take off electric signals 
from such breathing muscles as are not completely dead and to amplify 
them so that the patient might have the satisfaction of controlling his own 
iron lung, as well as the exercise of making use of what is left of his breath­
ing muscles. This work awaits the organization of a group of physiologists, 
physicians, and engineers to carry out the necessary researches.
Of all the things I have done in physiology, that which seems to me 
most significant is the application to the study of brain waves of the statisti­
cal theory of what are known as time series.
My war work on filtering and prediction of time series had represented 
an extension of my earlier work on generalized harmonic analysis and on 
the Brownian motion as tools for the study of irregular phenomena dis­
tributed in time. For years I had the intention of using these tools in every 
region in which they seemed apt. From the very beginning of the study 
of brain waves, ever since I had contact with some of the original electro­
encephalographers in Arturo’s seminar at the Harvard Medical School, I 
had felt that this field was one in which I could accomplish something; 

434 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
and I have never ceased to importune my neurophysiologist comrades with 
requests that they give a sympathetic hearing to these methods and that 
they try them out if possible on some experimental data.
In the early days of brain-wave work, it was supposed that the stray elec­
tric currents in the brain, as observed through the scalp, would throw a new 
light on the physiology of the brain and the associated mental phenomena. 
Much has in fact been done in the treatment of epilepsy through the study 
of brain waves, but the great expectations of the thirties have not yet been 
realized. The reason is that the brain waves as we see them originally are a 
mixture of very varied phenomena such as we would find if, for example, 
we observed the stray electric currents around a computing machine or a 
control machine. They speak a language of their own, but this language 
is not something that one can observe precisely with the naked eye, by 
merely looking at the ink records of the electroencephalograph. There is 
much information contained in these ink records, but it is like the informa­
tion concerning the Egyptian language which we had in the days before the 
Rosetta Stone, which gave us the clue to the Egyptian script.
Of recent years, I have been a member of a group involving people 
from the various laboratories at M.I.T. and from the Massachusetts General 
Hospital which has been endeavoring to find the Rosetta Stone for the script 
of the brain waves by means of harmonic analysis. We have had a con­
spicuous example of success in this field in the past in the work of the great 
American experimental physicist, Michelson.
Michelson invented an instrument called the interferometer, which was 
the most delicate machine ever invented for the study of the spectrum of 
light, and which enabled him to carry out such a seemingly impossible 
task as the determination of the angles subtended at the earth by some of 
the fixed stars. The principle of this instrument can in fact be realized in 
an instrument for the study of brain waves and other such oscillation. We 
have called this instrument the autocorrelator. Many people at M.I.T., and 
Lee in particular, have reduced the design of autocorrelators to a surprising 
degree of perfection.
When the crude original records of brain waves are transformed by the 
autocorrelator, we obtain a picture of remarkable clarity and significance, 
quite unlike the illegible confusion of the crude records which have gone 
into the machine. We are at the very beginning of our work in this field, but 
we have great hopes of what it will offer for the future; and we should not 
be surprised if the ambitious expectations of the early electroencephalogra­
phers of thirty years ago, of a really legible form of electroencephalograph 
record, will now begin to be realized.

32: Mexico 
435
The analogy between the interferometer and the autocorrelator is deep 
and significant, and the earlier work of Michelson has given us a whole 
language for the reading of the results presented by such machines.
I have in fact done the greater part of my share in this brainwave work 
in the last three years, since the end of my visit to Mexico, but I consider it 
essentially as the consummation of the lines of research which Arturo and 
I had embarked on together.
The autocorrelation study of brain waves is not the only field where my 
mathematical interests and Rosenblueth’s physiological interests have met. 
The original analogy we found between machine and human feedbacks has 
been supplemented again and again by striking new analogies which we 
keep on finding between the nervous system and control or computation 
machines.
From the very beginning, I was struck by the similarities between the 
nervous system and the digital computer. I did not mean to claim that 
these analogies are complete, or that we can exhaust the properties of the 
nervous system by calling it a digital computer. I merely wish to suggest 
that certain aspects of its behavior are close to those of the digital computer.
The nervous system is certainly a complicated net of elements which 
transfer impulses. Fundamentally, if an impulse is strong enough to go from 
the end of one nerve fiber to the other, it reaches the further end as a whole 
without much influence of the strength of the impulse at the nearer end, 
provided that it goes through at all. Thus, the nerve fiber transmits yeses 
or noes. When an impulse reaches the end of a nerve fiber, it combines 
with various other impulses that have reached the same level to determine 
whether the next nerve fiber discharges. In other words, the nerve fiber 
is a logical machine in which a later decision is made on the basis of the 
outcome of a number of earlier decisions. This is essentially the mode of 
operation of an element in a computing machine. Besides this fundamental 
resemblance, we have auxiliary resemblances pertaining to such phenom­
ena as memory, learning, and the like.
There is one other medical matter that has attracted my attention of 
recent years. Walter Cannon, going back to Claude Bernard, emphasized 
that the health and even the very existence of the body depends on what 
are called homeostatic processes, namely, processes which tend to keep 
temperature, blood pressure, and the many other factors of the interior 
environment of a living being so stable that life is possible. That is, the 
apparent equilibrium of life is an active equilibrium, in which each devia­
tion from the norm brings on a reaction in the opposite direction, which is 
of the nature of what we call negative feedback.

436 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
Thus, when the body goes wrong, there must be cases where the failure is 
an intrinsic breakdown of the feedback process, and where the mathemati­
cal description of the manner of failure indicates the nature of the feedback 
process and the nature of its breakdown. A colleague of mine, Paul Hahn, 
and I have applied this sort of discussion to the history of leukemia, and 
we see considerable evidence that in this excessive growth of the white 
blood corpuscles there is a homeostatic process balancing the creation and 
the destruction of the blood cells which is not completely abrogated, but 
which goes on at an incorrect level. I feel that this concept of a disease of 
homeostatis may well prove useful in many fields of medicine.
There has been in the past a great tendency in medicine to think in terms 
of localization. This has been particularly the case in matters concerning 
the brain, where a separate function has been discovered or postulated for 
almost every area of the cortex or surface of the hemispheres. However, the 
tendency of a strong emphasis on localization has been to subordinate gen­
eral questions of organization to localizable atomic phenomena.
It seems to me that our studies of control apparatus are giving us a bet­
ter insight into the way in which these local phenomena are built up into 
large processes extending all over the brain—or, in fact, the whole human 
body. In healthy activity these overall processes must be understood, since 
under pathological conditions they may break down in a manner which 
cannot be assigned to the failure of the individual parts. There are diseases, 
like leukemia, where certain processes such as the formation of white cor­
puscles are apparently running wild. However, even in this diseased activ­
ity there are strong signs that what is at fault is not so much an absence of 
all internal control over the process of corpuscle formation and corpuscle 
destruction but a control working at a false level.
Most of the pieces of research which Arturo and I undertook during my 
various visits to Mexico and his to the United States, have already appeared 
in the technical journals. I shall have more to say of the details of my later 
visits. My wife and I hope to visit Mexico more times in the future, whether 
for my research and writing or just to enjoy the life of a country which has 
been charmingly hospitable to us.

33  Moral Problems of a Scientist. The Atomic Bomb 1942–
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
33: 
Moral 
Problems 
of 
a 
Scientist. 
The 
Atom 
Bomb
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
One day during the Second World War I was called down to Washington 
to see Vannevar Bush. He told me that Harold Urey, of Columbia, wanted 
to see me in connection with a diffusion problem that had to do with 
the separation of uranium isotopes. We were already aware that uranium 
isotopes might play an important part in the transmutation of elements 
and even in the possible construction of an atomic bomb, for the earlier 
stages of this work had come before the war and had not been made in the 
United States.
I went to New York and had a talk with Urey, but I could not find that I 
had any particular qualification for solving the special problem on which 
he requested help. I was also very busy with my own work on predictors. 
I felt that there I had found my niche for the duration of the war. It was a 
place where my own ideas were particularly useful, and where I did not feel 
that anyone else could do quite so good a job without my help.
I therefore showed no particular enthusiasm for Urey’s problem, 
although I did not say in so many words that I would not work on it. Per­
haps I was not cleared for the problem, or perhaps my lack of enthusiasm 
itself was considered as a sufficient reason for not using me, but that was 
the last I heard of the matter. This work was a part of the Manhattan Project 
and the development of the atomic bomb.
Later on, various young people associated with me were put on the 
Manhattan Project. They talked to me and to everyone else with a rather 
disconcerting freedom. At any rate, I gathered that it was their job to 
solve long chains of differential equations and thereby handle the prob­
lem of repeated diffusions. The problem of separating uranium isotopes 
was reduced to a long chain of diffusions of liquids containing uranium, 
each stage of which did a minute amount of separation of the two iso­
topes, ultimately leading in the sum to a fairly complete separation. Such 
repeated diffusions were necessary to separate two substances as similar in 

438 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
their physical and chemical properties as the uranium isotopes. I then had 
a suspicion (which I still have, though I know nothing of the detail of the 
work) that the greater part of this computation was an expensive waste of 
money. It was explained to me that the effects on which one was working 
were so vanishingly small that without the greatest possible precision in 
computation they might have been missed altogether.
This however did not look reasonable to me, because it is exactly under 
these circumstances of the cumulative use of processes which accomplish 
very little each time that the standard approximation to a system of dif­
ferential equations by a single partial differential equation works best. 
In other words, I had and have the greatest doubts, to the effect that in 
this very slow and often repeated diffusion process those phenomena 
which may not be justifiably treated as continuous are of very slight real 
importance.
Be that as it may, while I did not have any detailed knowledge of what 
was being done on Manhattan Project, the time came when neither I nor 
any other active scientist in America could fail to be aware that such a 
project was under way. Even then we did not have any clear idea of how it 
was to be used. We were afraid that the main use to be made of radioactive 
isotopes was as poisons. We feared that here we might well find ourselves 
in the position of having developed a weapon which international morality 
and policy would not permit us to use, even as they had held the Germans 
back from the use of poison gas against cities. Even were the work to result 
in an explosive, we were not at all clear as to the possibilities of the bomb 
nor as to the moral problems which its use would involve. I was very certain 
of at least one thing: that I was most happy to have had no share in the 
responsibility for its development and its later use.
So far the moral problem of warfare had not concerned me directly. How­
ever, in the fall of 1944 a complex of events took place which had a very 
considerable effect on my later career and thought. I had already begun to 
reflect on the relation between the high-speed computing machine and the 
automatic factory, and I had come to the conclusion that as the essence 
of the computing machine lay in its speed and in its programming, or 
determination of the sequence of operations to be performed by means 
of a magnetic tape or punched cards, the automatic factory was not far 
off. I wondered whether I had not got into a moral situation in which my 
first duty might be to speak to others concerning material which could be 
socially harmful.
The automatic factory could not fail to raise new social problems con­
cerning employment, and I was not sure that I had the answers. A vast 

33: Moral Problems of a Scientist. The Atom Bomb 
439
redistribution of labor at different levels would be created. When the human 
being is being used mechanically, simply as an inferior sort of switching or 
decision device, the automatic factory threatens to replace him completely 
by mechanical agencies. On the other hand, it creates a new demand for 
the highly skillful professional man who can organize the order of opera­
tions which will best serve a particular function.
It will also create a demand for trouble-shooters and maintenance crews 
of a particularly well-trained sort. If these changes in the demand for labor 
come upon us in a haphazard and ill-organized way, we may well be in for 
the greatest period of unemployment we have yet seen. It seemed to me 
then quite possible that we could avoid a catastrophe of this sort, but if so, 
it would only be by much thinking, and not by waiting supinely until the 
catastrophe is upon us. I shall say something later in this chapter of my 
present opinion in the matter.
Accordingly, when a colleague wished for some information concerning 
my newer work I answered that I was not by any means certain that this 
work should be communicated to him, or indeed to the public at large. I felt 
all the more strongly about this inasmuch as he had requested the informa­
tion for military purposes, and I did not know whether I should be a party 
to the use of my new ideas for controlled missiles and the like.
I showed the letter to a colleague of mine who happened to have a flair 
for journalism. He immediately suggested that I send my note to the Atlan­
tic Monthly as a basis for what might be a more elaborate article. I followed 
his suggestion and sent it. If I had thought out fully how I was thus subject­
ing myself to a deep moral commitment while he was subjecting himself to 
nothing at all, I might well have hesitated, although I probably would put 
this hesitation behind me as an act of cowardice. The moral consequences 
of my act were soon to follow.
About this time I had agreed to participate in two meetings: the earlier 
one on applied mathematics, called together by Princeton at the end of its 
second hundred years of existence; and a later one organized by Aiken at 
Harvard on the subject of automatic high-speed computing machines. To 
this second meeting, which took place under the joint auspices of Harvard 
University and the Navy Department, I had agreed to give a paper. Mean­
while I reported at the Princeton meeting on my work on prediction theory. 
While my talk covered material which I knew could ultimately be used for 
military purposes, I had counted on the abstractness of my presentation 
and the natural inertia of many of my colleagues to prevent the work from 
being put to immediate and uncontrollable military use.

440 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
However, my hand was forced. A colleague who had previously taught 
at M.I.T. and had gone back to his home University of California, because 
of his earlier associations there and because of the climate, had been push­
ing my name as head of or consultant for a military or semimilitary proj­
ect on mechanical computation, to be located in California. He had not 
consulted me in the matter, but he had assumed that an invitation to 
California would be accepted by me without question.
I have said that the project was semimilitary. It was in fact to be under 
the Bureau of Standards, but it was quite clear that all the facilities engi­
neered by the project if it should be successful would be pre-empted for 
years by the military services. My acquaintance had tried to commit me 
not only to work whose objective was distasteful to me but to work which 
would involve conditions of secrecy, of a police examination of my opin­
ions, and of the confinements of administrative responsibility. These I 
could not accept. They would have bound me to a course of conduct which 
would have broken me down in a very few months. When the invitation 
was passed on to me, I considered my Atlantic Monthly letter, and I had no 
alternative but to say no. I probably would have said no anyway, as I did 
not fancy myself as an administrator.
Then I recalled the military meeting at Harvard at which I had already 
committed myself to speak. There were some two weeks before it would 
come off, so I thought that I had ample time to change my policy. I went 
to Aiken and tried to explain the situation. In particular, I pointed out to 
him that the California offer had made it necessary for me to take a definite 
stand on my war work and that I could not accept one sort of a military 
association and reject another. I therefore asked to be released from my 
promise to give a talk.
I gathered from Aiken that there would be time to take my name off the 
list of speakers for the meeting. However, when the meeting came, I found 
that Aiken had done this by merely running a line through my name on 
the printed programs which had been issued to members of the meeting 
and to the press.
This procedure was extremely embarrassing to me. It was even more 
embarrassing to him. The newspapermen came to me and asked whether 
this striking out of my name had anything to do with the letter that had 
appeared in the Atlantic Monthly. I said that it had, and I tried to explain to 
them the circumstances that had forced my hand. I took full responsibility 
in the matter and said that I acted with Aiken’s consent and that I was not 
taking this step out of pique or personal animosity.

33: Moral Problems of a Scientist. The Atom Bomb 
441
Naturally, they went to Aiken in the matter. Without reflection, he 
assumed that I had been involved in some deep plot to discredit him and 
to turn the meeting into a public scandal. In fact, as I have said, I had con­
sulted him at the very beginning and had understood that there was to be 
no publicity about the affair. The matter would have had no publicity if it 
had not been for the emphasis which he had placed on my participation in 
the meeting by the way he scratched out my name.
All these emotional experiences were nothing to those through which I 
went at the time of the bombing of Hiroshima. At first I was of course star­
tled, but not surprised, as I had been aware of the possibility of the use of 
the new Manhattan Project weapons against an enemy. Frankly, however, 
I had been clinging to the hope that at the last minute something in the 
atomic bomb would fail to work, for I had already reflected considerably on 
the significance of the bomb and on the meaning to society of being com­
pelled to live from that time on under the shadow of the threat of limitless 
destruction.
Of course I was gratified when the Japanese war ended without the 
heavy casualties on our part that a frontal attack on the mainland would 
have involved. Yet even this gratifying news left me in a state of profound 
disquiet. I knew very well the tendency (which is not confined to America, 
though it is extremely strong here) to regard a war in the light of a glorified 
football game, at which at some period the final score is in, and which we 
have to count as either a definite victory or a definite defeat. I knew that 
this attitude of dividing history into separate blocks, each contained within 
itself, is by no means weakest in the Army and Navy.
But to me this episodic view of history seemed completely superficial. 
The most important thing about the atomic bomb was, in my opinion, 
not the termination of a specific war without undue casualties on our part, 
but the fact that we were now confronted with a new world and new possi­
bilities with which we should have to live ever after. To me the most impor­
tant fact about the wars of the past was that, serious as they had been, and 
completely destructive for those involved in them, they had been more or 
less local affairs. One country and one civilization might go under, but the 
malignant process of destruction had so far been localized, and new races 
and peoples might take up the torch which the others had put down.
I did not in the least underrate the will to destructiveness, which was as 
much a part of war with a flint ax and of war with a bow and arrow as it 
is of war with a musket and of war with a machine gun. What came most 
strongly to my attention was that in previous wars the power of destruc­
tion was not commensurate with the will for destruction. Thus, while I 

442 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
realized that as far as the people killed or wounded are concerned, there is 
very little difference between a cannonade or an aerial bombardment with 
explosive bombs of the type already familiar and the use of the atomic 
bomb, there seemed to me to be most important practical differences in the 
consequences to humanity at large.
Up to now no great war, and this includes World War II, had been pos­
sible except by the concerted and prolonged will of the people fighting, 
and consequently no such war could be undertaken without a profoundly 
real share in it by millions of people. Now the new modes of mass destruc­
tion, expensive as they must be in the bulk, have become so inexpensive 
per person killed that they no longer take up an overwhelming share of a 
national budget.
For the first time in history, it has become possible for a limited group of 
a few thousand people to threaten the absolute destruction of millions, and 
this without any highly specific immediate risk to themselves.
War had made the transition between an overwhelming assertion 
of national effort and the push-button declaration of the will of a small 
minority of people. Fundamentally this is true, even if one includes in the 
military effort all the absolutely vast but relatively small sums which have 
been put into the whole body of nuclear research. It is even more devastat­
ingly true if one considers the relatively minimal effort required on the part 
of a few generals and a few aviators to place on a target an atomic bomb 
already made.
Thus, war has been transported, at least as a possibility, from the field of 
national effort to the field of private conspiracy. In view of the fact that the 
great struggle to come threatens to be one between the United States and 
the Soviet Government, and in view of the additional fact that the whole 
atmosphere and administration of the Soviet Government shares with that 
of the Nazis an extremely strong conspiratorial nature, we have taken a step 
which is intrinsically most dangerous for us.
I did not regard with much seriousness the assertions which some of the 
great administrators of science were making, to the effect that the know-
how needed for the construction of the atomic bomb was a purely Ameri­
can thing and could not be duplicated by a possible enemy for many years 
at least, during which we could be counted upon to develop a new and 
even more devastating know-how. In the first place, I was acquainted with 
more than one of these popes and cardinals of applied science, and I knew 
very well how they underrated aliens of all sorts, in particular those not of 
the European race. With my wide acquaintance among scholars of many 
races and many countries, I had not been able to discern that scientific 

33: Moral Problems of a Scientist. The Atom Bomb 
443
ability and moral discipline were the peculiar property of those of blanched 
skin and English speech.
But this was not all. The moment that we had declared both our pos­
session of the bomb and its efficiency by using it against an enemy, we 
had served notice on every country that its continued existence and inde­
pendence of policy were conditioned on its prompt possession of a similar 
weapon. This meant two things: that any country which was our rival or 
potential rival was bound to push nuclear research for the sake of its own 
continued independent existence, with the greatly stimulating knowledge 
that this research was not intrinsically in vain; and that any such country 
would inevitably set up an espionage system to get hold of our secrets.
This is not to say that we Americans would not be bound in self-defense 
to oppose such leaks and such espionage with our full effort for the sake of 
our very national existence; but it does mean that such considerations of 
legality and such demands on the moral responsibility of loyal American 
citizens could not be expected to have the least force beyond our frontiers. 
If the roles of Russia and the United States had been reversed, we should 
have been compelled to do exactly what they did in attempting to discover 
and develop such a vital secret of the other side; and we should regard as a 
national hero any person attached to our interests who performed an act of 
espionage exactly like that of Fuchs or the Rosenbergs.
I then began to evolve in my mind the general problem of secrets; not 
so much as a moral issue, but as a practical issue and a policy which we 
might hope to maintain effectively in the long run. Here I could not help 
considering how soldiers themselves regard secrets in the field. It is well 
recognized that every cipher can be broken if there is sufficient induce­
ment to do it and if it is worthwhile to work long enough; and an army 
in the field has one-hour ciphers, twenty-four-hour ciphers, one-week 
ciphers, perhaps one-year ciphers, but never ciphers which are expected to 
last an eternity.
Under the ordinary circumstances of life, we have not been accustomed 
to think in terms of espionage, cheating, and the like. In particular, such 
ideas are foreign to the nature of the true scientist, who, as Einstein has 
pointed out, has as his antagonist a world which is hard to understand and 
interpret, but which does not maliciously and malignantly resist this inter­
pretation. “The Lord is subtle, but he isn't plain mean.”
With ordinary secrets of limited value, we do not have to live under a 
perpetual fear that somebody is trying to break them. If, however, we estab­
lish a secret of the supreme value and danger of the atomic bomb, it is not 
realistic to suppose that it will never be broken, nor that the general good 

444 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
will among scientists will exclude the existence of one or two who, either 
because of their opinions or their slight resistance to moral pressure, may 
give our secrets over to those who will endanger us.
If we are to play with the edged tools of modern warfare, we are run­
ning not merely the danger of being cut by accident and carelessness but 
the practical certainty that other people will follow where we have already 
gone and that we shall be exposed to the same perils to which we have 
exposed others. Secrecy is thus at once very necessary and, in the long run, 
quite impossible. It is unrealistic to give over our main protection to such 
a fragile defense.
There were other reasons, moreover, which, on much more specific 
grounds, made me feel skeptical of the wisdom of the course we had been 
pursuing. It is true that the atomic bomb had been perfected only after 
Germany had been eliminated from the war, and that Japan was the only 
possible proving ground for the bomb as an actual deadly weapon. Never­
theless, there were many both in Japan and elsewhere in the Orient who 
would think that we had been willing to use a weapon of this terribleness 
against Japan when we might not have been willing to use it against a white 
enemy. I myself could not help wondering whether there might not be a 
certain degree of truth in this charge. In a world in which European colo­
nialism in the Orient was rapidly coming to an end, and in which every ori­
ental country had much reason to be aware of the moral difference which 
certain elements in the West were in the habit of making between white 
people and colored people, this weapon was pure dynamite (an obsolete 
metaphor now that the atomic bomb is here) as far as our future diplomatic 
policy was concerned. What made the situation ten times worse was that 
this was the sort of dynamite which Russia, our greatest potential antago­
nist if not our greatest actual enemy, was in a position to use, and would 
have no hesitation whatever in using.
It is the plainest history that our atomic bomb effort was international 
in the last degree and was made possible by a group of people who could 
not have been got together had it not been for the fact that the threat of 
Nazi Germany was so strongly felt over the world, and particularly by that 
very scholarly group who contributed the most to nuclear theory. I refer 
to such men as Einstein, Szilard, Fermi, and Niels Bohr. To expect in the 
future that a similar group could be got together from all the corners of 
the world to defend our national policy involved the continued expecta­
tion that we should always have the same moral prestige. It was therefore 
doubly unfortunate that we should have used the bomb on an occasion on 

33: Moral Problems of a Scientist. The Atom Bomb 
445
which it might have been thought that we would not have used it against 
white men.
There was another matter which aroused grave suspicion in the minds 
of many of us. While the nuclear program did not itself involve any over­
whelming part of the national military effort, it was still in and for itself an 
extremely expensive business. The people in charge of it had in their hands 
the expenditure of billions of dollars, and sooner or later, after the war, a 
day of reckoning was bound to come, when Congress would ask for a strict 
accounting and for a justification of these enormous expenditures. Under 
these circumstances, the position of the high administrators of nuclear 
research would be much stronger if they could make a legitimate or plau­
sible claim that this research had served a major purpose in terminating 
the war. On the other hand, if they had come back empty-handed—with 
the bomb still on the docket for future wars, or even with the purely sym­
bolic use of the bomb to declare to the Japanese our willingness to use it in 
actual fact if the war were to go on—their position would have been much 
weaker, and they would have been in serious danger of being broken by a 
new administration coming into power on the rebound after the war and 
desirous of showing up the graft and ineptitude of its predecessor.
Thus, the pressure to use the bomb, with its full killing power, was not 
merely great from a patriotic point of view but was quite as great from the 
point of view of the personal fortunes of people involved in its develop­
ment. This pressure might have been unavoidable, but the possibility of 
this pressure, and of our being forced by personal interests into a policy 
that might not be to our best interest, should have been considered more 
seriously from the very beginning.
Of the splendid technical work that was done in the construction of the 
bomb there can be no question. Frankly, I can see no evidence of a similar 
high quality of work in the policymaking which should have accompanied 
this. The period between the experimental explosion at Los Alamos and 
the use of the bomb in deadly earnest was so short as to preclude the pos­
sibility of clear thinking. The qualms of the scientists who knew the most 
about what the bomb could do, and who had the clearest basis to estimate 
the possibilities of future bombs, were utterly ignored, and the suggestion 
to invite Japanese authorities to an experimental exhibition of the bomb 
somewhere in the South Pacific was flatly rejected.
Behind all this I sensed the desires of the gadgeteer to see the wheels go 
round. Moreover, the whole idea of push-button warfare has an enormous 
temptation for those who are confident of their power of invention and 
have a deep distrust of human beings. I have seen such people and have a 

446 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
very good idea of what makes them tick. It is unfortunate in more than one 
way that the war and the subsequent uneasy peace have brought them to 
the front.
All these and yet other ideas passed through my mind on the very day 
of Hiroshima. One of the strong points and at the same time one of the 
burdens of the creative scholar is that he must stand alone. I wished—oh 
how I wished!—that I could be in a position to take what was happening 
passively, with a sincere acceptance of the wisdom of the policy makers and 
with an abdication of all personal judgment. The fact is, however, that I had 
no reason to believe that the judgment of these men on the larger issues 
of the situation was superior to my own, whatever their technical informa­
tion might be. I knew that more than one of the high officials of science 
had not one tenth my contact with the scientists of other countries and of 
other standpoints and was in nowhere nearly as good a position to assess 
the world reaction to the bomb. I knew, moreover, that I had been in the 
habit of considering the history of science and of invention from a more or 
less philosophic point of view, and I did not believe that those who made 
the decisions could do this any better than I might. The sincere scientist 
must back his bets and guesses, even when he is a Cassandra and no one 
believes him. I had behind me many years of lonely work in science where I 
had finally proved to be in the right. This inability to trust the Powers That 
Be was a source of no particular satisfaction to me, but there it was, and it 
had to be faced.
One of my greatest worries was the reaction of the bomb on science 
and on the public’s attitude to the scientist. We had voluntarily accepted 
a measure of secrecy and had given up much of our liberty of action for 
the sake of the war, even though—for that very purpose, as many of us 
thought—more secrecy than the optimum was imposed, and this at times 
had hampered our internal communications more than the information-
gathering service of the enemy. We had hoped that this unfamiliar self-
discipline would be a temporary thing, and we had expected that after this 
war—as, after all, before—we should return to the free spirit of communica­
tion, intranational and international, which is the very life of science. Now 
we found that, whether we wished it or not, we were to be the custodians 
of secrets on which the whole national life might depend. At no time in 
the foreseeable future could we again do our research as free men. Those 
who had gained rank and power over us during the war were most loath 
to relinquish any part of the prestige they had obtained. Since many of 
us possessed secrets which could be captured by the enemy and could be 
used to our national disadvantage, we were obviously doomed to live in an 

33: Moral Problems of a Scientist. The Atom Bomb 
447
atmosphere of suspicion forever after, and the police scrutiny on our politi­
cal opinions which began in the war showed no signs of future remission.
The public liked the atomic bomb as little as we did, and there were 
many who were quick to see the signs of future danger and to develop a 
profound consciousness of guilt. Such a consciousness looks for a scape­
goat. Who could constitute a better scapegoat than the scientists them­
selves? They had unquestionably developed the potentialities which had 
led to the bomb. The man in the street, who knew little of scientists and 
found them a strange and self-contained race, was quick to accuse them of 
a desire for the power of destruction manifested by the bomb. What made 
this both more plausible and more dangerous was the fact that, while the 
working scientists felt very little personal power and had very little desire 
for it, there was a group of administrative gadget workers who were quite 
sensible of the fact that they now had a new ace in the hole in the struggle 
for power.
At any rate, it was perfectly clear to me at the very beginning that we 
scientists were from now on to be faced by an ambivalent attitude. For 
the public, who regarded us as medicine men and magicians, was likely 
to consider us an acceptable sacrifice to the gods as other, more primitive 
publics do. In that very day of the atomic bomb the whole pattern of the 
witch hunt of the last eight years became clear, and what we are living 
through is nothing but the transfer into action of what was then written in 
the heavens.
While I had no share in the atomic bomb itself, I was nevertheless led 
into a very deep searching of soul. I have already explained how my work 
on prediction and on computing machines had led me to the basis of cyber­
netics, as I was later to call it, and to an understanding of the possibilities of 
the automatic factory. From the strictly scientific point of view, this was not 
as revolutionary as the atomic bomb, but its social possibilities for good and 
for evil were enormous. I tried to see where my duties led me, and if by any 
chance I ought to exercise a right of personal secrecy parallel to the right of 
governmental secrecy assumed in high quarters, suppressing my ideas and 
the work I had done.
After toying with the notion for some time, I came to the conclusion 
that this was impossible, for the ideas which I possessed belonged to the 
times rather than to myself. If I had been able to suppress every word of 
what I had done, they were bound to reappear in the work of other people, 
very possibly in a form in which the philosophic significance and the social 
dangers would be stressed less. I could not get off the back of this bronco, 
so there was nothing for me to do but to ride it.

448 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
I thus decided that I would have to turn from a position of the greatest 
secrecy to a position of the greatest publicity, and bring to the attention of 
all the possibilities and dangers of the new developments. I first thought 
of the trade unions as the people who would naturally be most interested 
in the matter. My friends directed me toward two union leaders, one of 
them an intellectual counselor who had himself very little direct authority 
among the union people with whom he was associated, and the other a 
high official of the typographers’ union. In both cases I found a confirma­
tion of what my English friends had told me some years before: The union 
official comes too directly from the workbench, and is too immediately 
concerned with the difficult and highly technical problems of shop stew­
ardship, to be able to entertain any very forwardlooking considerations of 
the future of his own craft.
I found plenty of good will among my union friends but an absolute 
block on their part to communicate my ideas to their union workers. This 
was in the middle forties; since then the situation has changed radically. 
I have been in repeated communication with Mr. Walter Reuther, of the 
United Automobile Workers, and I have found in him both an understand­
ing of my problems and a willingness to give my ideas publicity through 
his union journals. In fact, I have found in Mr. Reuther and the men about 
him exactly that more universal union statesmanship which I had missed 
in my first sporadic attempts to make union contacts.
There is another quarter in which the sort of ideas I have had concern­
ing the automatic factory have made gratifying headway. This is in the 
circles of management itself. In the winter of 1949 I gave a talk to the Soci­
ety for the Advancement of Management concerning the automatic fac­
tory as a technical possibility and the social problems it would introduce, 
and in both matters I was backed up by high management authorities, as, 
for example, an executive of Remington Rand, Inc. In December of 1952 I 
was asked to give a talk on a similar subject as part of a symposium on the 
automatic factory held by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
The progress in the general attitude from the first talk to the second was 
remarkable. Not only was the attending public much larger and my techni­
cal remarks confirmed by automatic-machine men for several industries, 
but the social consciousness of the group as a whole was far beyond what I 
had found three years before.
While there were a good many who were more sanguine than I had been 
as to the possibility of achieving a large measure of industrial automatiza­
tion without catastrophe, there was a general awareness of the interest of 
the public at large in a meeting which was going to affect so profoundly 

33: Moral Problems of a Scientist. The Atom Bomb 
449
their future method of life. In particular, problems of the grade-up of repeti­
tive factory workers into trouble-shooting men (and indeed into a sort of 
junior engineer) occupied a great deal of attention.
Another much-debated problem was that of the new leisure we might 
expect in the future and the use that could and must be made of it. Indeed, I 
heard hard-boiled engineering administrators express views which sounded 
remarkably like the writings of William Morris. Above all, I had everyone 
backing me in cautioning that the new displacement of human beings from 
the repetitive labor of the factory must not be taken as a devaluation of the 
human being and a glorification of the gadget.
The years that have passed since this talk have seen the automatic fac­
tory develop from a remote possibility into a beginning actuality, and we 
can start to assess on a factual basis its probable impact on society. The first 
industrial revolution of the early nineteenth century replaced the individ­
ual by the machine as a source of power. No factory worker of the present 
day is earning any large part of his wages by the horsepower of his output. 
Even if he is doing the hardest sort of physical labor, as for example, if he 
is a steel puddler, his pay is not primarily given him as a prime mover in a 
power process. What he is actually paid for is his experience and knowledge 
of how to exert his strength most effectively in a highly purposeful manu­
facturing process.
However, the strong men of industry such as the steel puddlers are in 
a decided minority. The factory worker finds a small electric motor or a 
pneumatic tool at his elbow, and these will give him the sheer physical 
strength of ten men. His business is to accomplish a certain purpose by 
going through certain motions in a given succession. If, for example, he is 
pasting labels on tin cans, he must see that he has the correct stack of labels 
before him, that he has moistened them correctly, that he has put them in 
the correct position on the can, and that he turns at the proper time from 
one can to the next. This sort of laborer goes through a purely repetitive 
process, making the minimum demands on any but the lowest level of 
judgment and observation.
Of course, there are other forms of factory labor. There are the foremen 
and there are the members of the troubleshooting gangs, who at the very 
lowest level must be skilled craftsmen and, on the higher levels, are assimi­
lated in their function to junior engineers. Leaving out these higher ranks 
of labor, the routine factory worker is often doing so conventional a task 
that every motion of his and the cue for every motion, may be assigned in 
advance. This is the point of such efficiency systems as the motion study of 
Taylor and the Gilbreths.

450 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
I have already indicated that it is this level of work which will be replaced 
by the operations of the automatic factory. Essentially, to my way of see­
ing things, most of the human labor which the automatic factory displaces 
is an inhuman sort of human labor, which has been considered a natural 
task for human beings only since the historical accident of the industrial 
revolution. Nevertheless, any sudden and uncompensated displacement 
of this labor must have catastrophic consequences in the direction of 
unemployment.
Where will this labor have to go? The most obvious answer is that even 
the automatic factory will always require a considerable group of trouble 
shooters, skilled craftsmen, and specialists in programming or in the adap­
tation of the machines to specific problems. During a gradual process of 
automatization, the natural place for unskilled factory labor to go is into 
these higher cadres, by some sort of up-grading. The question of the pos­
sibility of this up-grading thus becomes vital.
There is a considerable amount of evidence that the sources of labor 
which furnished the unskilled factory labor of the past generation are dry­
ing up, because, since soon after the end of the First World War, we have had 
no extensive body of immigrants seeking to establish and settle themselves 
in the country and willing to accept any degree of economic undervaluing. 
It is the children of this last extensive generation of immigrants who fought 
in the Second World War, and the rising generation of the present day con­
sists of their children’s children. These younger generations are unwilling 
to accept the permanent position of economic inferiority belonging to the 
unskilled workers in the old type of factory. Many of them are going into 
the professions, and even those who are not are beginning to demand that 
their work be interesting and not a blind alley.
This is not the first time in our industrial history in which technical 
advances have been conditioned by the decreasing availability of labor of 
a certain type. Automatic telephone switching came in simply because the 
old system of hand switching bade fair to demand the entire population of 
girl high school graduates.
Another matter which may make the stepping up of labor easier than it 
might have seemed a few years ago is the training of a very considerable 
part of the young men in our military services as technicians of a relatively 
high grade. This has been particularly the case in the Air Force. The sort 
of young man who can be trained to direct and to care for a radar instru­
ment is certainly the sort who can easily learn to be a member of a factory 
trouble-shooting gang.

33: Moral Problems of a Scientist. The Atom Bomb 
451
Thus it is quite possible, although it is not certain, that the labor envi­
ronment for the automatic factory has come just at the right time. At any 
rate, the atmosphere into which the automatic factory is coming is one 
where it fits into a definite niche of human activity, and one which has 
been alerted to both the advantages of automatization and the risks.
While this has been the work of many hands, I feel proud that some 
part of the healthy and understanding atmosphere into which automatiza­
tion is coming, and of the collaboration of labor and management in being 
prepared to work out jointly a mode of industrial life which embraces the 
automatic factory, may be due to my early efforts to alert both of these 
elements.


34  Nancy, Cybernetics, Paris, and After
1946–1952
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
34: 
Nancy, 
Cybernetics, 
Paris, 
and 
After
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
In the summer of 1946 there was to take place a private mathematical 
conference on harmonic analysis in France, at the University of Nancy. I 
was invited to participate. As a matter of fact, much of the meeting was to 
deal with my ideas. I traveled to England on a Dutch boat, and before tak­
ing part in the meeting I made my usual visit to England and my English 
friends. I visited University College, London, where J. B. S. Haldane was 
teaching. He had been divorced from his first wife, and he was now married 
to a brilliant young geneticist who had been his assistant during the war in 
physiological experiments they had made concerning the effect on various 
gases under high pressure.
Both of them had repeatedly put on diving suits and descended into 
steel tanks of water, and had been subjected to concentrated atmospheres of 
different gases until the gases had become so poisonous that they had gone 
into convulsions. I believe Haldane had gone into convulsions four times 
and his wife seven times. This was in keeping with the tradition which 
Haldane had followed of subjecting himself as his own guinea pig to every 
extreme physiological condition which he could find; and of his intrepidity 
earlier in the war, which made him specialize in the opening and disarming 
of enemy mines cast ashore.
In general, Haldane is the type of person who deliberately puts himself 
into positions of danger, discomfort, or unpopularity when there is a job 
to be done which he considers important. There is something in him, on 
a more rational level, similar to the reckless drive I had also found in my 
colleague Paley.
While staying with the Haldanes, I had a good time visiting my col­
leagues at the National Physical Laboratories at Teddington, the various 
colleges of the University of London, the University of Manchester, and 
at Cambridge. I found that Manchester was well at the front of the new 
technique of high-speed automatic computing machines. At the National 

454 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
Physical Laboratories, Turing was making the same sort of synthesis 
between mathematical logic and electronics which Shannon had made in 
the United States. In short, I found the British atmosphere entirely ripe for 
the assimilation of the new ideas which I was then developing concerning 
control, communication, and organization.
Actually, the idea of a comprehensive book on these subjects began to 
come to a head when I reached Paris. There an M.I.T. colleague introduced 
me to one of the most interesting men I have ever met, the publisher Frey­
mann, of the firm of Hermann et Cie.
Freymann, who, alas, has just died, was a Mexican, and he first came 
to Paris as a cultural attaché in the Mexican diplomatic service. One of his 
grandfathers was a retired German sea captain, who had made his home in 
the region of Tepic, on the west coast of Mexico. The other grandfather was 
a Huichol Indian chieftain from the same region. My friend’s two grand­
mothers were both of Spanish origin. Freymann, who kept a drab little 
bookshop opposite the Sorbonne, where every now and then one of the 
scientific or other intellectual notables would drop in, delighted in relating 
to me the way each of his two grandfathers tried to capture him from the 
influence of the other, the one telling him always to be European, and the 
other reminding him that he was an Indian.
We talked at length about Mexico, and finally the talk came around 
to my scientific work. Freymann broached the matter which had chiefly 
interested him. Would I write up my ideas concerning communication, the 
automatic factory, and the nervous system as a booklet for his series?
He explained to me that he was the son-in-law of the former publisher 
Hermann, and that he had been the only one of the family to wish to con­
tinue the firm when his father-in-law had died. He told me of the various 
devices by which he had secured the publication contracts for a number of 
societies, and how he had used this to build up a really intellectual publish­
ing house, as nearly free from the motive of profit as any publishing house 
can be.
I had already heard of the singular group of French mathematicians who 
pooled their efforts with the pseudonym “Bourbaki,” the result of a student 
hoax, when the group had started to write under the name of a French 
general of former days. Freymann told me that he was in fact the founder 
of the group and that he wished to extend it by furthering a new fictitious 
university, called the University of Nancago, after the two existing schools 
at Chicago and Nancy.
I felt that it would be fun to get in with so interesting a group. I agreed 
to do a book for Freymann, and we sealed the contract over a cup of cocoa 
in a neighboring patisserie.

34: Nancy, Cybernetics, Paris, and After 
455
During all this time I was in contact with Mandelbrojt, who in fact was 
the organizer of the Nancy congress. We did some mathematical work 
together, and he accompanied me to Nancy in the little high-speed rail car 
that now takes the place of an express between the capital and that city. 
I was put up with the other foreign bigwigs at the beautiful hotel which 
forms a part of the harmonious square of buildings at the Place Stanislaus.
The glory of the square dates back to the eighteenth century, when the 
ex-King of Poland became the Duke of Lorraine. Nancy almost rivaled Paris 
or Versailles as a capital. They say that the etiquette of the court of Nancy 
was even stricter than that of Versailles. In fact, this ultimately led to the 
death of the duke. One day, it is said, while walking on the roof and a bit 
tipsy, he fell down one of the chimneys, and as no person of sufficient 
rank was available to touch the royal person, he had to stay there until he 
suffocated.
The hotel at which I stayed was the headquarters for the foreign visitors. 
There was Harald Bohr, from Denmark; Carleman, from Sweden; Ostrowski, 
from Basel, and dear old Papa Plancherel from the Zurich Federal Institute 
of Technology. Jessen was there from Denmark and Beurling from Sweden, 
both of whom belonged to a younger generation.
Of these, Harald Bohr and Carleman are now dead. Carleman’s death 
was peculiarly tragic, as it so typically followed a Scandinavian pattern 
which is familiar to those who know the plays of Ibsen and Strindberg. He 
died of drink—not the social drinking which leads so often to ruin here—
but the fiery, passionate dipsomania which is a common disease even in the 
very best circles of the Scandinavian countries. During the meeting he was 
often a bit drunk, and afterwards in Paris I saw him come to Mandelbrojt’s 
apartment for an advance on the travel money due him, red-eyed, with a 
three-day beard.
Of all the Nancy people, the one whom I saw most often was Laurent 
Schwartz. His wife was Paul Lévy’s daughter, whom I had met years before 
when I visited her father at Pougues-les-Eaux. Schwartz was active along 
lines very similar to my own. He had generalized still further the field which 
I had already treated in my Acta paper on generalized harmonic analysis. 
He reduced it to that highly abstract basis which is characteristic of all the 
work of the Bourbaki school to which he belonged.
As individuals and as a group, we guests were taken into the small-city 
social life of Nancy. It was a difficult and austere time in France, when wine 
was replaced by grape juice, and the delicious French bread loaded with per­
haps fifty per cent of maize flour; but our hosts outdid one another in their 
hospitality. It was quite clear that if one hostess had three sorts of cakes at 
her party, the next would be constrained to have four, and the next five. At 

456 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
these parties we met M. le Recteur, M. le Maire, M. le Préfet. We were left 
with the conviction that M. le Recteur, M. le Maire, M. le Préfet, together 
with their respective ladies, had been meeting one another week in and 
week out for years. With all the courtesy, culture, and education that this 
life manifests, its stiffness would make a small New England town look like 
a sanctuary of social freedom.
At the time of which I write, the University of Nancy had been less dam­
aged by the centralizing pull of Paris than many others. Schwartz has since 
gone to the capital, after the conventional pattern of French academic 
careers. At the time of my visit, however, Nancy was an excellent center for 
young visiting mathematicians who wished to see French university life at 
its best and who wished to get the full attention of young men still at their 
greatest vigor and on the way up. Now it again shows signs of relapsing into 
some of the French provincial apathy.
The meeting was a highly successful one, and we found it possible to 
integrate our work very well. I returned to Paris. After a few days’ work 
with Bouligand, in which we started a joint paper, and further consulta­
tions with Freymann, I crossed over to England and did a little brief visiting 
before I took the boat from Southampton. I think it was on this second 
trip that I visited Oxford again and that I went even further west to Bristol, 
where I saw Grey Walter, who showed me the exceedingly interesting work 
he was doing on electroencephalography.
Richard Caton had made electroencephalographic studies on animals in 
England in 1875, but a German, Hans Berger, was the first to make observa­
tions concerning certain electrical potentials which displayed themselves 
on the human scalp. These potentials have their origin in the electrochemi­
cal activity of the brain and show a certain relation to various neural and 
mental disorders which is not too clearly decipherable. Originally, there 
were great expectations of these phenomena as a direct mode of access to 
the physiology of the brain, and they have in fact shown certain readable 
characteristics in cases of epilepsy and of threatening epilepsy.
Apart from this, there are certain regularities of brain waves which can 
be observed under the proper conditions. The most conspicuous and con­
sistent of these is the so-called alpha rhythm, which is an oscillation of a 
period of about a tenth of a second.
The art of reading such irregular oscillations is not easy, and there is 
much that they contain which is not accessible to the naked eye. As I have 
said in an earlier chapter concerning my experiences on work in physiology 
jointly with Arturo Rosenblueth, I have recently developed mathematical 
tools which enable the observer to make more nearly definite statements 

34: Nancy, Cybernetics, Paris, and After 
457
concerning brain waves. This work is now under way as a joint undertak­
ing in which scientists from M.I.T. and the Massachusetts General Hospital 
collaborate.
Dr. Grey Walter, although an American by origin, has long lived in 
Europe, and may be considered one of the leaders of the European study of 
brain waves or electroencephalography. He is a man who is full of enthusi­
asm and energy, and he has devised apparatus to give a comprehensive pic­
ture of brain waves in different parts of the brain. This picture is interesting 
and will without any doubt be useful in the study of the normal physiology 
of the brain and the diagnosis of its disorders. It is, however, more synoptic 
and less precise in mathematical detail than the tool which we are using in 
our researches. In fact, Walter’s view of science is closer to that of a graphic 
artist than to that of a mathematician.
At about the same time as I myself, Walter had begun to see the analo­
gies between the feedback machine and the human nervous system and to 
construct mechanisms which would exhibit some of the features of animal 
behavior. I have been working on the “moth” which would automatically 
steer itself into a light. Walter’s automata were called “turtles,” and had a 
more complicated repertory of behavior. This included a mechanism by 
which they might avoid one another in their motions and another mech­
anism by which when they were “hungry”—literally, when their storage 
batteries had been exhausted—they might be directed into something anal­
ogous to a rabbit hutch, where they could feed themselves on electricity 
until their storage battery was recharged.
I returned home from Southampton on a Dutch ship, the same one I 
had taken on the way over. On both voyages a large part of the passenger 
list were Dutch peasants who had immigrated to the United States, many 
of whom had lived in the Michigan region around Grand Rapids. They 
were mostly farmers by origin, and of that intensely religious Calvinistic 
upbringing which one sees so much in Holland. They had been home after 
the war for a first contact with their kinsmen who had suffered greatly in 
the struggle, and they played an important part in the restoration of the 
country. I am afraid that I forfeited much of their esteem by swearing once 
or twice in Dutch, and the shiver that passed over them was of a quality 
that I would not have seen even in the New England countryside.
Nevertheless, when these fine, simple, dignified, respectable people got 
into the smoking room and had a glass or two of Holland gin under their 
belts, they would sing the old Dutch songs and even start to dance in the 
old Dutch manner which is shown in the paintings of Jan Steen, Adriaen 
Brouwer, and the elder Brueghel. The clothes had changed, but the faces of 

458 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
these staid farm women and vigorous, tight-faced farmers had not changed 
at all, and even some of the songs, and I suppose some of the dances, dated 
back to the seventeenth century.
When I got back to the States I found that I had to take up again my 
work in Mexico. My daughter Barbara was a bit undecided what to do that 
summer, and I took her down with me. I started more neurophysiological 
work with Arturo Rosenblueth, and I continued to live among the same 
group and in very much the same manner as on my previous visits. Barbara 
and I, and later Margaret, who joined us, found quarters in an apartment 
house in the real estate development built up on the grounds of the old 
race track, and we shared in the occupation of a roof garden from which we 
could see the snows of Popocatepetl and Iztaccihuatl. There was a young 
American couple occupying another apartment in the same building. The 
husband was also working at the Instituto, and we used to discuss together 
the book on prediction theory and control apparatus which I had promised 
Freymann.
I went to work very hard on this, but the first thing that puzzled me 
was what title to choose for the book and what name for the subject. I 
first looked for a Greek word signifying “messenger,” but the only one 
I knew was angelos. This has in English the specific meaning “angel,” a 
messenger of God. The word was thus pre-empted and would not give me 
the right context. Then I looked for an appropriate word from the field 
of control. The only word I could think of was the Greek word for steers­
man, kubernētēs. I decided that, as the word I was looking for was to be 
used in English, I ought to take advantage of the English pronunciation of 
the Greek, and hit on the name cybernetics. Later on, I found that a corre­
sponding word had been used since the early nineteenth century in France 
by the physicist Ampère, in a sociological sense, but at that time I did 
not know it.
What recommended the term cybernetics to me was that it was the 
best word I could find to express the art and science of control over the 
whole range of fields in which this notion is applicable. Many years before, 
Vannevar Bush had suggested to me that new scientific tools should be 
found to deal with the new theories covering control and organization. 
Ultimately I began to look for these tools in the field of communication. 
My early work on probability theory, as exemplified in my studies of the 
Brownian motion, had convinced me that a significant idea of organiza­
tion cannot be obtained in a world in which everything is necessary and 
nothing is contingent. Such a rigid world is organized only in the sense 
in which a rigidly welded bridge is organized. Everything depends on 

34: Nancy, Cybernetics, Paris, and After 
459
everything else and nothing on one part of the bridge structure rather than 
on another. The result is that in such a bridge there is no way to localize 
the strains, and unless a welded bridge is made of materials which can give 
and readjust their internal strains, the strains are almost certain to be so 
concentrated that at some place or other the bridge will break or tear and 
will collapse.
Thus, a bridge or a building is able to endure only because it is not com­
pletely rigid. Similarly, an organization can exist only if the parts of it can 
give to a greater or less degree in response to the systems of internal stresses. 
Organization we must consider as something in which there is an interde­
pendence between the several organized parts but in which this interde­
pendence has degrees. Certain internal interdependencies must be more 
important than others, which is the same thing as saying that the internal 
interdependence is not complete, and that the determination of certain 
quantities of the system leaves others with the chance to vary. This varia­
tion from case to case is a statistical one, and nothing less than a statisti­
cal theory has enough freedom in it for the notion of organization to be 
significant.
I was driven back on the work of Willard Gibbs, and on the conception 
of the world not as an isolated phenomenon but as one of many possible 
phenomena with an allover probability distribution. I was forced to con­
sider causality as something of which there can be either more or less rather 
than as something which is either there or absent.
The whole background of my ideas on cybernetics lies in the record of 
my earlier work. Because I was interested in the theory of communication, I 
was forced to consider the theory of information and, above all, that partial 
information which our knowledge of one part of a system gives us of the 
rest of it. Because I had studied harmonic analysis and had been aware that 
the problem of continuous spectra drives us back on the consideration of 
functions and curves too irregular to belong to the classical repertory of 
analysis, I formed a new respect for the irregular and a new concept of the 
essential irregularity of the universe. Because I had worked in the closest 
possible way with physicists and engineers, I knew that our data can never 
be precise. Because I had some contact with the complicated mechanism 
of the nervous system, I knew that the world about us is accessible only 
through a nervous system, and that our information concerning it is con­
fined to what limited information the nervous system can transmit.
It is no coincidence that my first childish essay into philosophy, written 
when I was in high school and not yet eleven years old, was called “The 
Theory of Ignorance.” Even at that time I was struck with the impossibility 

460 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
of originating a perfectly tight theory with the aid of so loose a mechanism 
as the human mind. And when I studied with Bertrand Russell, I could not 
bring myself to believe in the existence of a closed set of postulates for all 
logic, leaving no room for any arbitrariness in the system defined by them. 
Here, without the justification of their superb technique, I foresaw some­
thing of the critique of Russell which was later to be carried out by Gödel 
and his followers, who have given real grounds for the denial of the exis­
tence of any single closed logic following in a closed and rigid way from a 
body of stated rules.
To me, logic and learning and all mental activity have always been 
incomprehensible as a complete and closed picture and have been under­
standable only as a process by which man puts himself en rapport with his 
environment. It is the battle for learning which is significant, and not the 
victory. Every victory that is absolute is followed at once by the Twilight of 
the gods, in which the very concept of victory is dissolved in the moment 
of its attainment.
We are swimming upstream against a great torrent of disorganization, 
which tends to reduce everything to the heatdeath of equilibrium and 
sameness described in the second law of thermodynamics. What Maxwell, 
Boltzmann, and Gibbs meant by this heat death in physics has a counter­
part in the ethics of Kierkegaard, who pointed out that we live in a chaotic 
moral universe. In this, our main obligation is to establish arbitrary enclaves 
of order and system. These enclaves will not remain there indefinitely by 
any momentum of their own after we have once established them. Like 
the Red Queen, we cannot stay where we are without running as fast as 
we can.
We are not fighting for a definitive victory in the indefinite future. It is 
the greatest possible victory to be, to continue to be, and to have been. No 
defeat can deprive us of the success of having existed for some moment of 
time in a universe that seems indifferent to us.
This is no defeatism, it is rather a sense of tragedy in a world in which 
necessity is represented by an inevitable disappearance of differentiation. 
The declaration of our own nature and the attempt to build up an enclave 
of organization in the face of nature’s overwhelming tendency to disorder 
is an insolence against the gods and the iron necessity that they impose. 
Here lies tragedy, but here lies glory too.
These were the ideas I wished to synthesize in my book on cybernetics. 
My first goals were rather concrete and limited. I wanted to give an account 
of the new information theory which was being developed by Shannon 
and myself, and of the new prediction theory which had its roots in the 

34: Nancy, Cybernetics, Paris, and After 
461
prewar work of Kolmogoroff and in my researches concerning anti-aircraft 
predictors. I wished to bring to the attention of a larger public than had 
been able to read my “yellow peril” the relations between these ideas and 
show it a new approach to communication engineering which would be 
primarily statistical. I also wished to alert this larger public to the long series 
of analogies between the human nervous system and the computation and 
control machine which had inspired the joint work of Rosenblueth and me. 
However, I could not undertake this multiform task without an intellectual 
inventory of my resources. It became clear to me almost at the very begin­
ning that these new concepts of communication and control involved a 
new interpretation of man, of man’s knowledge of the universe, and of 
society.
Communication is by no means confined to mankind, for it is found in 
different degrees in the mammals, the birds, the ants, and the bees, to say 
the least; but, notwithstanding all the communication involved in the cries 
and nuptial dances of the birds, the dumb play by which a bee indicates 
to its hive mates the direction and distance of sources of honey, and all 
the rest of these modes of communication which we are just beginning to 
understand, man’s language is more developed and more flexible than that 
of the animals and presents problems of a quite different sort.
Beside the obvious multiplicity of tongues and the wide scope of any 
individual language as a mode of expression, the extensive areas of the 
brain which seem to be devoted to the different aspects of speech and 
hearing, and reading and writing, testify to the overwhelming human 
importance of highly developed methods of communication.
To communicate with the outer world means to receive messages 
from it and to send messages to it. On the one hand, it means to observe, 
to experiment, and to learn; and on the other to exert our influence on 
the outer world so that our actions become purposeful and effective. 
Experimentation in fact is one form of a two-way conversation with the 
outer world, in which we use outgoing commands to determine the condi­
tions of incoming observations, and in which, at the same time, we use 
our incoming observations to increase the effectiveness of our outgoing 
commands.
Communication is the cement of society. Society does not consist merely 
in a multiplicity of individuals, meeting only in personal strife and for the 
sake of procreation, but in an intimate interplay of these individuals in a 
larger organism. Society has a memory of its own, far more durable and far 
more varied than the memory of any individual belonging to it. In those 
societies which are fortunate enough to possess a good script, a large part of 

462 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
this communal tradition is in writing, but there are societies which, with­
out writing, have preserved a whole tradition in the form of a technique of 
ritual memorization of tribal chants and histories.
Sociology and anthropology are primarily sciences of communication, 
and therefore fall under the general head of cybernetics. That particular 
branch of sociology which is known as economics and is distinguished by 
possessing rather better numerical measures of its values than the rest of 
sociology is a branch of cybernetics, by virtue of the cybernetic character of 
sociology itself. All these fields share in the general ideology of cybernetics, 
even if many of them are as yet insufficiently precise in their numerical 
techniques to make it worth-while to take advantage of the full mathemati­
cal apparatus of the larger subject.
Besides its function in these already existing sciences, cybernetics is 
bound to affect the philosophy of science itself, particularly in the fields 
of scientific method and epistemology, or the theory of knowledge. In the 
first place, the statistical point of view so manifest in cybernetics and in 
my earlier researches forces us to a new attitude toward order or regularity. 
Perfect information has nothing in it that is measurable, and measurable 
information cannot by that token be perfect. If we can measure degrees of 
causality (and much of my work on information theory has indicated that 
that is a perfectly possible goal), then that can only be because the universe 
is not a perfectly tight structure but one in which small variations are pos­
sible in different regions. We can then observe how much a change in one 
aspect of the universe will bring out changes in others.
Thus, from the point of view of cybernetics, the world is an organism, 
neither so tightly jointed that it cannot be changed in some aspects with­
out losing all of its identity in all aspects nor so loosely jointed that any one 
thing can happen as readily as any other thing. It is a world which lacks 
both the rigidity of the Newtonian model of physics and the detail-less 
flexibility of a state of maximum entropy or heat death, in which nothing 
really new can ever happen. It is a world of Process, not one of a final dead 
equilibrium to which Process leads nor one determined in advance of all 
happenings, by a pre-established harmony such as that of Leibniz.
In such a world, knowledge is in its essence the process of knowing. 
There is no use in seeking for a final knowledge in an asymptotic state of 
the universe at the end of time, for this asymptotic state (if it exists) is in 
all likelihood timeless, knowledgeless, and meaningless. Knowledge is an 
aspect of life which must be interpreted while we are living, if it is to be 
interpreted at all. Life is the continual interplay between the individual and 
his environment rather than a way of existing under the form of eternity.

34: Nancy, Cybernetics, Paris, and After 
463
All this represents the manner in which I believe I have been able to add 
something positive to the pessimism of Kierkegaard and of those writers 
who have taken Kierkegaard as their inspiration. Among these, the most 
important are the existentialists. I have not replaced the gloom of existence 
by a philosophy which is optimistic in any Polyanna sense, but I have at 
least convinced myself of the compatibility of my premises, which are not 
far from those of existentialism, with a positive attitude toward the uni­
verse and toward our life in it.
These are the main ideas which I mulled over in my mind as I was writ­
ing my book on cybernetics. I discussed them with Arturo and with the 
American physiologist who was my neighbor in the same apartment house. 
We all felt hopeful that these ideas might amount to something, although 
none of us, not even I, had any concept of the excitement which they were 
actually to cause when they appeared in print.
I had some qualms about taking so much time away from the work 
Arturo and I had embarked on. This had languished slightly for a cause for 
which neither Arturo nor I was completely responsible. Arturo is an after­
noon and evening worker who does not get steamed up until 3 or 4 P.M., and 
he can keep going until well after midnight. I am a morning worker, at my 
best on waking up, and I begin to lag by two in the afternoon, being totally 
unable to do creative work after dark. The result is that there were many 
gaps in our collaboration, which I could only fill by undertakings initiated 
by myself and which I did fill by the writing of Cybernetics.
In my work on this book, I was spurred on by certain fortuitous circum­
stances which were very threatening at the time and forced me to devote 
my energy to this new undertaking, which has become the basis of all my 
later career. Expenses were piling up on me from various sources, and I had 
no accumulated wealth from which to pay them off. I decided to do what 
many another writer has done; if it was possible, I would write myself out 
of this financial hole. To run ahead a little, this is exactly what I succeeded 
in doing; and though my writing has never tended to make me a rich man, 
Cybernetics represented the beginning of whatever security I enjoy at the 
present.
By now the second term of the M.I.T. academic year was approaching, 
and I was getting ready to return to the States. Very shortly before my 
return, I completed the book and sent it to Freymann, in Paris. There was 
a burden off my soul, and I spent some of the few days which remained to 
me in Mexico in visiting Taxco and in having a good time with my Mexican 
friends.

464 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
For some years I had been developing cataracts, and by this time they 
had advanced in both eyes to the point where they seriously interfered 
with my reading. There was nothing to do but have my lenses out. Natu­
rally, an eye operation is an emotionally alarming thing. However, I was 
lucky enough to have an oculist in whom I had great confidence and who 
knew how to handle me emotionally as well. The result was that I found 
the operation less of an ordeal than I had expected and I was quite ready 
for the operation on the other eye when the time came and for the series of 
minor operations on both eyes which were necessary to give me the largest 
measure of eyesight possible.
To a considerable extent, my nearsightedness and my cataract opera­
tions canceled each other. The final result is that I now have better distance 
sight without glasses than I have ever had and that my reading vision is of a 
tolerable quality. Nevertheless, the operations have left me with eyes which 
are rather sensitive both to excessive light and to long use. They have forced 
me to change my habits of work and in some respects to change them in a 
way very advantageous to myself.
I now do most of my mathematical work on a blackboard rather than 
on paper, and this relieves me from the unpleasant necessity of going from 
near vision to far vision and back again, which I can do only by the use 
of bifocals or trifocals. Even more, it has made me supplant my habits of 
writing either in longhand or on a typewriter by the effective use of very 
efficient secretaries.
The mere act of writing had always been an unwelcome task for a man 
of my physical clumsiness, and my antipathy toward it had tightened my 
style and introduced a general crabbedness into my literary work. Now I 
was free of this, and, since my operations, I have become far more of a liter­
ary man than I ever thought possible before.
I have always been conscious of literature as something at least as much 
for the ear as for the eye. One thing that contributed to this idea was the 
period of six months when, at the age of eight, I had been forbidden to use 
my eyes and all my instruction was by ear. Dictating forces on the author 
a consciousness of sound, and I like it very much. I have a memory con­
siderably better than average, and the absence of notes is no handicap to 
me. When an idea occurs to me which must be pieced into a larger manu­
script, I dictate it to my secretary, and we work together on smoothing 
the joints.
I do all of my dictating directly to a secretary, and I am repelled by the 
impersonality of the dictating machine. No secretary who is not an edu­
cated person and a person of taste could do the work which I require of her, 

34: Nancy, Cybernetics, Paris, and After 
465
and such a person can and should always give a continual criticism of what 
I am dictating by reaction and expression, if in no other manner. There is 
thus established what I should call, in my cybernetic vocabulary, a feedback 
process, which I use to full advantage.
Moreover, in my periods of dictating, there are long moments in which 
I am thinking of the next thing to say, and during which I can scarcely 
remember to stop the accursed cylinder of a dictating machine and then to 
start it up again.
I showed the manuscript of my cybernetics book to the M.I.T. authori­
ties, in particular to the officials of the Technology Press. They were much 
interested. Indeed, they hoped that they might find a way to publish the 
book in America.
From one point of view this was not difficult, as the book was written 
in English, even though it was to appear in a French series. From another 
point of view, since I had already granted Freymann the rights in the book 
(for it was accepted as soon as it was received) there were both legal and 
moral considerations to be settled before we could use his sheets for the 
offset printing of an American edition.
All this was settled at last, and the Technology Press and John Wiley and 
Sons took the book over. By the way, the same collaboration of publishers 
was reprinting my “yellow peril” at the same time.
Freymann had not rated the commercial prospects of Cybernetics very 
highly—nor, as a matter of fact, had anybody on either side of the ocean. 
When it became a scientific bestseller we were all astonished, not least 
myself.
This book at once transformed me from a working scientist with a good 
but limited reputation in my field into something of a public figure. This 
has been gratifying, but it has had its disadvantages, for I have since been 
committed to work with the most varied scientific groups and I have had to 
form part of a movement which has rapidly grown beyond the possibilities 
of my personal control.
Cybernetics was a new exposition of matters about which I had never 
written authoritatively before and, at the same time, a miscellany of my 
ideas. It came out in a rather unsatisfactory form, as the proofreading was 
done at a period at which I could not use my eyes and the young assistants 
who were to have helped did not take their responsibility seriously.
After the publication of the book, which got good reviews and, as I have 
said, a most unexpected sale, I came to be in much demand for the writ­
ing of papers of a more or less popular nature and for public lectures. For a 
time I followed the course of acceding to the blandishments of invitations 

466 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
to write and to speak, which gave me a new and perhaps spurious sense of 
importance.
Since then I have learned that if I want to contribute anything more to 
science, and if I wish to keep in reasonably good health, I must conserve 
my energies. In general, invitations for lecturing do not return to me in 
rewards or in prestige what they take out of me in fatigue. I have also found 
out by bitter experience how much a lecturer must protect himself against 
exploitation.
For very similar reasons, I do not touch requests for engineering consul­
tation. In a field like my own, the consultant is usually far more interested 
in getting my name than in getting any ideas which I may have. Moreover, 
the ordeal of being quizzed by relays of company engineers, of contacting 
and meeting a number of strangers who are primarily interested in draining 
me dry, and of remaining affable under all these exactions, is something 
which the torturers of the Inquisition omitted to add to their repertory.
During all this time my daughters were in their late teens and early 
twenties, and going through college. Barbara remained undecided for some 
years between a scientific career and journalism. She had first spent a year 
at Radcliffe, and then studied at M.I.T. for a time. She did her journalistic 
work at Boston University, but it was not until after her marriage to Gor­
don Raisbeck that she completed these studies at Drew University, near 
her home in Morristown, New Jersey. In the time between, she had done a 
considerable amount of work in scientific journalism for Science Service in 
Washington.
Peggy matriculated at Tufts College, which was the school where I had 
done my undergraduate work. She specialized in biochemistry, and after 
her graduation and a certain amount of graduate study at M.I.T., in Lon­
don, and at Boston University. She worked for a while at the Worcester 
Foundation for Experimental Biology. Peggy married shortly thereafter and 
is now active with a pharmaceutical firm in northern New Jersey.
Both my sons-in-law are engineers in the Bell Telephone Laboratories, 
doing work of a definitely mathematical nature as well as other more 
applied work. Thus, I have in my own family exemplified that peculiar 
genetics of mathematics of which I have already spoken, that mathematical 
ability goes down from father-in-law to son-in-law.
As 1950 came on, I received an invitation to go to France as a Fulbright 
fellow and to lecture at the Collège de France. On the French side, this 
offer emanated from Mandelbrojt. I finally decided that I could not spend 
a whole year on this undertaking, and I did not sail for France until 
December.

34: Nancy, Cybernetics, Paris, and After 
467
My French friends found me a hotel in Savoy where I could rest up 
before my rather arduous duties began. These had become arduous because 
I was also to participate in a congress on high-speed computing machines 
and automatization which was to take place in Paris early in January, 
1951.
After this congress was over, I went to England for a few weeks and 
stayed with the Haldanes. Soon Margaret came over together with Peggy.
Margaret and I left immediately for Paris. We were put up for a few weeks 
in a building belonging to the Paris Observatory and at once found our­
selves taken up into the intellectual and social life of the community.
I enjoyed my teaching at the Collège de France and was treated exactly 
as one of their own men. Every day of my lectures, of which there were 
twenty, I would go to the little office, reflect over my talk for a few minutes, 
sign the daybook, and be conducted into the lecture room by the wooden-
legged appariteur, or university servant. I lectured in French, calling on my 
audience for help when my vocabulary ran out.
The very first day, I found an old friend at my lectures. It was a French 
doctor who had been working at the Instituto Nacional de Cardiologia in 
Mexico, and who had taken care of me on one occasion when I had over­
exerted myself. He saw to my health through our whole stay in France and 
invited my wife and me to many very delightful occasions at his apartment. 
He has visited America several times since, and we have had the chance to 
return his hospitality on our own soil.
The mathematicians took us completely into their family life. I saw a 
lot of dear old Hadamard and his wife, both of whom seemed to us almost 
ageless, although they were in their eighties. Fréchet and Bouligand were 
also our hosts.
I gave several outside lectures, some of them on engineering topics 
before a group from the Ecole Supérieure de Télécommunications. I also 
gave a philosophical lecture in a hall almost under the shadow of the 
home of Existentialism; the apartment of Sartre. We went to a salon at the 
apartment of one of the philosophy professors, where I was lionized in 
the thorough French manner.
I spent much time gossiping with Freymann in his back office, playing 
chess in the Bar Select on Boulevard Montparnasse, and in the other minor 
amusements of the city. We were great frequenters of the movies, and we 
learned to know a little bit about the good restaurants and cafés of Paris.
I had written another book for general consumption the previous year. It 
was a more popular account of cybernetics, with the social elements under­
lined. This was The Human Use of Human Beings, which had been published 

468 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
by Houghton Mifflin and has appeared as a paperback among the Anchor 
Books of Doubleday. I now tried to vend it to a Paris publisher for trans­
lation into French. I finally found such a publisher in M. Dufèze, of the 
Editions des Deux Rives.
Peggy visited us at Easter, and the family went on a trip to Nancy, where 
I gave a talk. Laurent Schwartz and his friends were as cordial as they had 
been on the previous occasion. My wife’s French is better than mine, and 
Peggy found herself quite able to take part in our conversation and in our 
social life.
Later on in the spring, when my lectures in Paris had come to an end, 
Margaret and I went to Madrid. The summer before this last French trip, 
there had been a meeting of the world Mathematical Congress at Cam­
bridge, Massachusetts, in which I had participated. At that time, the Span­
ish were very cordial to me, and I had received an invitation to lecture in 
Madrid. I protested that they might not like my views when they found out 
what they were, but they pooh-poohed the matter.
I accepted their invitation. My host had meanwhile read some of my 
writings and had decided that my views were dangerously liberal for me to 
present in a totalitarian country. Although I speak Spanish as well as I do 
French, he requested me to give my lectures in French; as I am now con­
vinced, so that they should be less generally understood. He enjoined me to 
speak of engineering and mathematics only, and not to speak of anything 
political, philosophical, or biological.
We were put up at an excellent hotel and received the most splendid 
hospitality, but throughout the whole period we felt that we were being iso­
lated from the country and kept in ignorance of what was going on. In view 
of our knowledge of Spanish and our experience as travelers, this ignorance 
could not be maintained, for I used to go out for walks in the nearby park 
and talk with the people there, and Margaret and I made a train trip to the 
Escorial. When our host found out that we had thus eluded his surveillance 
he was very angry, and he was even angrier when another Spanish friend 
offered to take us on a motor trip to Seville.
Thus we were glad to get out of the country and return to the free life 
of France. We spent part of our vacation in the delightful Basque town of 
St.-Juan-de-Luz. There I turned myself in all earnest to a task which I had 
begun in America and continued in Paris and Madrid—the writing of the 
earlier volume of this autobiography, which appeared under the title of 
Ex-Prodigy. It was a tremendous emotional strain to relive the severe experi­
ences of my childhood as an infant prodigy, but the writing of them was 
also the best sort of psychiatric therapy.

34: Nancy, Cybernetics, Paris, and After 
469
We found some difficulties in securing transportation home, and we 
returned to Paris to clear up this matter, together with other questions of 
importance. We settled in a delightful leftbank hotel near the church of St. 
Germain. Then we went back to Savoy to rest until we were ready to return 
to the States.
One of the doctors of the Savoyard town where we stayed, was the father 
of our Paris medical friend. Toward the end of our stay in Savoy, my overex­
ertion in lecturing and in writing sent me to bed with a racking headache, 
and for a while I had to go to the Geneva Canton Hospital. Meanwhile, my 
Paris friend had written to his father suggesting a suitable treatment, and 
with the aid of this I was soon much relieved. Even so, our trip to the boat 
at Genoa was a great deal of torture, and I was handed over to the care of 
the ship’s surgeon. He continued the treatment, and by the time I reached 
home I was a reasonably well man but dead tired.
My wife and I went almost immediately to Mexico, where the university 
was celebrating its four hundredth anniversary. It was a time when honor­
ary degrees were given out, and I received one of them. Mexican festivities 
are lavish in the extreme, and the two weeks of ceremonies, while delight­
ful, exhausted me. I continued my work with Arturo until we returned to 
the States, in January 1952.
Even before this, Indian mathematicians had begun to negotiate with 
me to have me visit India and lecture there. It was not until the Christmas 
holidays of 1953 that I felt that I had any right to go.


35  India
1953
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
35: 
India
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
In December 1953, I started on a seven weeks’ lecture trip in India as a guest 
of the Indian government and a group of government-supported institu­
tions. The occasion for the trip was the All-India Science Congress at Hyder­
abad. A trip of this sort had long been under discussion. It had hung fire 
for some years because it was difficult to make the several demands of the 
Indian Government and my own meet one another precisely, not only in 
time but also in the nature of the trip itself. I was disinclined to take the 
trip alone without the protection and support of my dear wife; but this was 
manifestly impossible to ask for if my stay were to be brief, nor was it really 
practicable at the time for me to suggest a longer stay.
However, it became clear fairly early in 1953 that matters were going to 
break just right for something like a six or seven weeks’ trip to India. My 
health, which had been rather strained by the severe ordeal of my recent 
successes, had recovered sufficiently to make it clear that with a bit of judi­
cious care I should be equal to the trip. Moreover, my daughter Peggy was 
obviously on the point of becoming engaged to a young engineer and col­
lege friend, John Blake. In fact, the engagement was announced early in 
the fall term of 1953. On the one hand, this made it essential that my wife 
remain in the United States to take care of the manifold preparations for 
a wedding. On the other, it caused a lively period of preparations, dur­
ing which I should be for a time more or less of a superfluity in my own 
household. I closed the arrangements and left the United States on the 
nineteenth of December, to return a week before my daughter’s wedding, 
set for the twentieth of February.
As in the case of my earlier experiences in China and Mexico, so in my 
Indian trip my motive was more than restlessness or idle curiosity. More 
and more Indian authors are publishing in our scientific journals, and we 
need the Orient more and more to supplement a West which is showing 
the intellectual and moral enfeeblement following two World Wars. I was 

472 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
glad to have the opportunity to see something of yet another new recruit to 
international scientific life and to get the feel of its atmosphere.
I had, of course, been prepared somewhat for my Indian voyage by my 
earlier trips abroad. My visits to China and Japan had given me a degree of 
insight into the Orient and into the special problems of countries combin­
ing great intellectual ability with great poverty and now just beginning to 
enter upon the stage of a truly international scientific life. On the other 
hand, Mexico, with which I have become thoroughly familiar in the course 
of a decade, combines some of these problems with those belonging to a 
tropical climate. I had known many Indian students and colleagues both 
in the United States and in England. These people, many of whom I was 
to see again in India, had given me a certain picture of specifically Indian 
matters, and in particular of the strong religious attitudes which underlie 
Indian life.
I left Boston for Paris by air on the afternoon of December nineteenth. I 
am not an enthusiast for air travel. The trip is too short to encourage new 
contacts or to permit one to undergo the spiritual preparation for new and 
intense experiences.
There was a strike on at the Paris airports, and we were not sure of our 
destination. In fact, it was not until we had made an unscheduled landing 
at Shannon that we learned that we were to leave the plane at Brussels. I 
finally learned that we would be forwarded to Paris by a chartered bus, and 
not by plane. We drove hour by hour through Belgium and crossed the 
frontier well along in the day. Arriving after dark at the Gare des Invalides, 
in Paris, I found that my further trip by Air India was still unsettled because 
of the strike.
The three days which I spent in Paris as a result were a delightful com­
bination of visits to friends, impromptu lectures, and contacts with my 
publishers and my colleagues. I had the good luck to find that there was a 
small sum waiting for me at Hermann et Cie. in the way of royalties I did 
not even know existed. But poor Freymann, who broke this good news to 
me, died of a stroke soon after my visit.
I found that I would have to leave Paris on the night of the twenty-third 
for Geneva, from which my plane was to leave for India. I spent Christmas 
Eve in Geneva with a neurologist whom I had seen many times before and 
whom the family knew very well.
To step upon a plane of Air India was to enter India in Switzerland. The 
pilots were Indians—largely Parsis—as were the two hostesses. The crew 
contained the extra contingent of servants which one must always expect 
in the Orient, and the meals were specially prepared to suit the religious 

35: India 
473
and dietary demands of the passengers. Since I had announced myself a 
vegetarian, I found that this was an ideal arrangement for me.
We landed in Bombay, where I was rushed through customs and immi­
gration inspection with the help of the secretary of the Indian Atomic 
Energy Commission, who had been deputed to take care of me and the 
other foreign scientific visitors in Bombay who were arriving for the All-
India Science Congress. We hit it off from the beginning, and he took me 
out to the beach at Juhu to have tea with him and his wife under the palm 
trees. The cordial reception which I found upon first putting foot on Indian 
soil continued throughout my whole stay in the country.
After settling down at the Taj Mahal Hotel, which is a fascinating com­
bination of the East and the West, I went the next day to the cornerstone 
laying of the new Atomic Energy Institute on military territory near the har­
bor. There was an interesting group of notables present, including Nehru 
himself, who gave a short and excellent speech. Among the visitors present 
was the Cardinal of India, a tall Goanese gentleman representing the old 
Portuguese religious tradition in India. This Christian tradition, like the old 
Syrian Christian tradition of the South, is often ignored by foreigners or, at 
any rate, not sufficiently emphasized. Actually, the Portuguese are older in 
India than the Mogul emperors. Notwithstanding the fact that Goa is not 
at present in India itself (as of the date of my writing, at least), Goanese are 
found all over India, particularly on the Bombay side. They consider them­
selves a thoroughly Indian element in the population. I had the pleasure 
of meeting Goanese officers both in the Army and in the Navy, and it was 
manifestly clear that they considered themselves, and were regarded by the 
others, as true Indians.
Another thing that struck me was that the cornerstone ceremonies 
were in English. English remains one of the chief languages of India, even 
though there is a deep-seated movement of the politicians to replace it 
by either Hindi or the local languages, and to confine a thoroughly Eng­
lish education in India to the people who, in part at least, are of English 
origin.
These people, the Anglo-Indians, are an older and more important ele­
ment in the population than many might be inclined to expect, and they 
are having rather a thin time under the pressure to accept themselves as 
Indians and to be accepted by other Indians. In fact, there is no doubt that 
this is the only real future for them.
Anglo-Indian ladies, together with Parsis and southern Christians, serve 
as air-line hostesses for the very peculiar reason that this job involves the 

474 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
wearing of European dress, and European dress for women is looked upon 
with very little favor by both Hindus and Moslems.
For all officer ranks in the Army and Air Force, and to a certain extent for 
all ranks in the Navy, English is the only acceptable language. This results 
largely from the technical nature of modern warfare and from the lack of 
adequate technical vocabulary and phraseology in any of the native lan­
guages, which indeed borrow heavily from English in these matters. Eng­
lish remains the language of Indian science in all its branches, and although 
there is an effort to switch over to Hindi for the future, it is still too early to 
say how successfully this move will be.
The English rule in India has lasted about as long as the Mogul rule 
before it, and its effects were not transitory. It is of course fashionable for 
patriotic Indians to play up their own history rather than that of the Eng­
lish, and even to write of the Indian Mutiny as a war for independence. 
Nevertheless, the deep hatred for England which characterized much of 
the first half of this century has largely subsided, and there is probably 
no foreign country that is so well thought of by India as England, now 
that respect for England has ceased to be a sign of subservience to an 
alien rule.
The Englishmen who have helped India through its transition to a full 
independence, and who remain on in India in positions for which no 
adequate Indian replacement has yet been found, are regarded not only 
with respect but also with affection. I am referring to such people as Lord 
and Lady Mountbatten, to the high army officers who have stayed on, on 
loan in technical jobs, and to a certain small group of heads of scientific 
institutions.
What I am saying here goes for all of India, but I was particularly struck 
by the role of the English language in the South. I have been told by Indian 
friends who are not professional Anglophiles that in the city of Madras, 
ninety-five per cent of all classes of the population understand English and 
speak it tolerably. This is probably due to the fact that Tamil is a very dif­
ficult language, and that it does not pass current outside its own region in 
India, and that Hindi is quite as foreign and quite as difficult for a Tamil as 
English can be.
One finds Tamil-speaking men in all parts of India who, because of their 
native ability and intellectual discipline, are more than likely to use English 
as the habitual vehicle of their communication with their north Indian 
friends.
After the laying of the cornerstone, I went to a party at which Nehru 
was the chief guest and had a chance to meet him and to see the enormous 

35: India 
475
respect and even reverence with which he is regarded. He seemed rather 
tired and frail, but I hear that he has great resources of strength. These 
India and he will need; for in the Congress Party, of which he is the 
leader, there appears to be no man of even approximately his stature as a 
second-in-command.
The day after the cornerstone laying I went by plane to Ahmadabad. I 
was sent there to participate in the meeting of the Indian Academy of Sci­
ences. Here the chief figure was Sir C. V. Raman, the physicist and Nobel 
laureate.
I was a house guest of Professor Vikram Sarabhai, the physicist, who 
turned out to be a close friend of my friends the Vallartas. In fact, the Vallar­
tas had been house guests there shortly before me. Mme. Sarabhai is a well-
known dancer in the classical Indian style, and she maintains her troupe 
of dancers and musicians in the house. I had seen her perform with them 
in Mexico at the occasion of the four hundredth anniversary of the 
university.
In view of our having friends in common, the Sarabhais took me literally 
into their family. In fact, I was invited to participate in the weekly dinner of 
the larger family, which took place at the house of Vikram Sarabhai’s father, 
a leader in the textile industry in Ahmadabad.
At the family feast—I should say clan feast, because the Indian family 
is a more comprehensive group than the Western family—I was the only 
non-Hindu present and, as an indulgence to my foreignness, I was granted 
the use of a table at which to eat, while the rest ate off little platforms on 
the floor.
Among the members of the Sarabhai family present, perhaps the most 
interesting was Vikram’s maternal grandfather, an old gentleman who had 
served many native states as a dewan, or prime minister. Slender, ascetic, 
and unbelievably aristocratic-looking, such old men as Vikram’s grand­
father, fill an important role in the development of the new India. The 
Vedic injunctions lay down very precisely the proper course of a man’s life. 
According to my understanding of them, which I am not sure is literally 
authentic, a man should spend twenty years as a youth, twenty years as a 
soldier (or, perhaps more precisely, as an active participant in the struggles 
and controversies of the world), and twenty years as a head of a family—
that is, of the larger family in the Indian sense. After this, it was recom­
mended that he become a sunnyasi, or religious recluse, and that he devote 
the few years left to him to the contemplation of the divine and to the 
attainment of that very Indian sort of salvation which is known as nirvana. 

476 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
In this way, he may interrupt the ordained sequence of reincarnation into 
new animal and human bodies.
The classical type of sunnyasi still exists in India, and the story of one of 
these is given in Kipling’s tale “The Miracle of Purun Bhagat” in the Second 
Jungle Book.
Nevertheless, the purely contemplative life is not enough for an India 
which is mistress of its own fate, and which needs to have so much done to 
interrupt the continued succession of poverty, ignorance, and misery that 
it cannot spare its able and experienced men the luxury of securing their 
own salvation. Thus, the deep and religious impulse of these fine old men 
to the otherworldly has been sublimated into a selfless service of the needs 
of the community, in those matters in which experience and integrity are 
indispensable, and in which there is no personal motive of advantage.
The Indians are not slow to find in their own scriptures a justification 
for this more worldly and practical but equally religious equivalent for the 
life of the sunnyasi. In doing this they are on a perfectly sound basis. No 
country can make adequate use of motives and modes of action which are 
merely passed on to it from the outside, but must find somewhere in its 
own body of tradition and in its own soul the moral sanction for the devel­
opments which are necessary to meet new problems.
Like other modern people, some of these old gentlemen wear Western 
costume, but there are many who cling to the costume and ways of their 
own country. When they do so, they exhibit an astonishing grace and 
beauty. It is remarkable how aristocratic a simple wool shawl can look when 
it falls over the shoulders of a beautiful and gentle old sage, in the lines of 
the garments of a Buddha in one of the temples of Ajanta or Ellora.
At the Sarabhai family dinner, Sir C. V. Raman and Lady Raman were 
present. Raman is both an important individual and a type significant in 
the new development of India. He is a southern Brahmin with a subtlety 
and depth of intellectual power which belong to many southern Brahmins 
as their birthright. However, there is in his character an additional posi­
tiveness and definiteness which show a familiarity with authority and a 
readiness to take an active part in life. Raman is an applied physicist and a 
good experimenter rather than the sort of theoretical physicist one might 
expect in India.
I gave a couple of lectures at Ahmadabad, one on my attempts to do 
something in quantum theory and one on the theory of prediction. I then 
went on to Poona, where I visited the university, which is headed by one 
of these fine old Indian gentlemen of whom I have spoken. I also talked at 
the National Chemical Laboratory. I met students there who were working 

35: India 
477
on diverse and important problems in physical chemistry. The head of this 
laboratory, G. I. Finch, is the great climber of Mt. Everest, who is extremely 
popular among his subordinates and among Indians generally.
India has made a right-about-face in its attitude to the English. It had 
been difficult to make friends across the barrier between the rulers and 
the ruled. The ruler may be a snob, and the subject may fear that he is 
playing the sycophant and identifying himself with authority for his own 
advantage. The separation of India from England has greatly facilitated true 
Anglo-Indian friendship.
The wise and moderate counsel of Gandhi and Nehru has contributed 
much to making England the most popular western country in India. Nor 
must we forget the intelligent policy followed by the Mountbattens, as the 
last viceroy and vicereine, in relinquishing British authority in India and in 
making ready for the new order. I will not say that there does not remain 
much criticism of the British policy in the past, but this is combined with 
the healthy realization that such criticism is a very poor refuge from facing 
the living problems of an old-new country.
After my return to Bombay, a Russian scientific delegation came to 
India to participate in the Indian Science Congress that was to take place 
in Hyderabad. Obviously, one of their purposes was to perform indirect 
propaganda by showing the Indians the cream of Soviet science. On the 
whole, the members of this delegation were well-chosen, for while it con­
tained a few of those who were principally political apologists, it also con­
tained a number of sincere and unpolitical scientists of high rank and fine 
personality.
Throughout my trip I was to be lodged at the same hotels at which the 
Russians were placed. It was necessary for me to define my policy from the 
start. I thought, and I believe rightly so, that any display of personal hostil­
ity was unjustified and would not redound to the good name of America 
among the Indians. I went to several members of the delegation and said, 
“Look here, we're to be together for some weeks, and I don't want to embar­
rass you or myself. Let's be friendly and talk freely over such scientific mat­
ters as have no technical or political implications.” I found a ready response 
to my attitude, and at no time in the trip did the real scientists of the 
delegation embarrass me by anything that could be propaganda, or any 
digging for information.
At the beginning, the Russian group consisted entirely of the people who 
had been picked as scientists. Of course, some of these scientists were in 
the fields of philosophy of economics, which naturally meant that they 
were expected to take an orthodox Marxian point of view. The remaining 

478 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
delegates seemed very much like scientists anywhere else and did not seem 
to be held to any sharp party line on their respective scientific problems.
At this early period, conversation with the Russian group was relatively 
easy. Later on, they accumulated a body of translators and the like from 
the Bombay consulate and from their embassy at Delhi. This body was, 
in fact, of comparable size with the original delegation, and consisted of 
people who did not make on me and on the Indians nearly so favorable 
an impression as the scientific delegates themselves. They appeared rather 
to be policemen whose main purpose was to shepherd their charges away 
from possible western European and American influences and to prevent 
them from saying or hearing anything that might have been injurious to 
their government.
Scientists who had been conversing with me in very usable and effec­
tive English were forced by these channelers to speak almost nothing but 
Russian. Then the entire atmosphere of the meeting became, I shall not say 
hostile, but distinctly less open and friendly. Every time one of us fell into 
conversation with one of the Russian group, there was an interpreter sitting 
on a chair nearby, either translating from the Russian, or at least taking in 
every word that was said in English. Occasionally they seemed to give the 
high sign to their charges that further conversation was out of bounds.
Thus, the Russians tended to withdraw themselves into a compact mass, 
dining together and having very little contact either with the foreign del­
egates or with those Indians who did not manifestly form an organized 
group of Soviet sympathizers. Here I relate what I saw, although I was told 
that toward the end of the meeting the Russians did in fact secure some 
more general and independent contacts.
Shortly after the Russians came, we moved on to Hyderabad, where all 
the foreign delegates were given quarters in the Hill Fort, a rather shabby 
and run-down palace which had formerly belonged to a son of the nizam. 
Here some of the vast rooms were turned into dormitory spaces, and I found 
myself sharing one of these with a couple of elderly and distinguished Eng­
lish scientists. After a certain amount of feeling one another out, we got 
along very well together.
The isolation of the Hill Fort was most suggestive of the setting for an 
Agatha Christie detective story. Here we had together under one roof, and 
dining at the same table, a delegation from Russia and a mixed lot of other 
scientists like myself. Indian scientific notables and cabinet ministers came 
and went every few hours, but except for this we were quite alone, and none 
of us spoke a word of any Indian language. We gradually became a little fed 
up with the schism which divided us into two groups between whom there 

35: India 
479
was a minimum of communication, and we westerners decided that the 
non-Russians should sit in alternate chairs at the table and force the Rus­
sians to take places in between us.
The day came when we non-Russians set out on a chartered plane for 
Aurangabad, from which we took a bus to the marvelous cave temples and 
sculptures of Ajanta and Ellora. Whatever the English have done in India, 
they have conserved its antiquities and historical monuments. The Indians 
are continuing in the good tradition which they found when they came 
to power by continuing to preserve these monuments and by encouraging 
their citizens to learn something about their own great past.
We spent a couple of nights in Aurangabad and left one morning for 
Hyderabad in a plane which we had expected to bring the Russians, who 
also were to visit the caves. There had been a series of mishaps in their 
setting out, and not only did they cancel their flight, but they remained 
plane-shy for the rest of their stay in India. Their decisions to discontinue 
the Ajanta trip were made rather thoughtlessly, for the Indians had put 
themselves out to find the Russians accommodations at Aurangabad.
We teased the Russians more than once, and I must admit they were 
good sports about it. When there was a meeting of Friends of China at 
Hyderabad, they were actively prominent, but I found that none of the Rus­
sians knew a word of Chinese. I displayed my knowledge of Chinese a bit 
ostentatiously, and I ribbed the Russians on their lack of knowledge of such 
an important world language. Furthermore, I asked them why they did not 
break ranks and make closer contact with the people of the country.
I did this with the knowledge that a recommendation from a westerner 
like myself would have a decided negative value for them. In fact it was 
clear that their policy of sending delegates en masse was a weak one. Many 
of the westerners were rich in Indian contacts and could really meet the 
Indians at their homes.
At the end of our stay in Hyderabad, some of us were invited to a series 
of informal parties at which members of the cabinet of Hyderabad were 
present, and to some at which they were hosts. It was most heartening to 
see Moslems and Hindus working together without discrimination of creed 
and to find Hindu ministers at a breakfast table presided over by the wife 
of a Moslem minister.
I took the plane from Hyderabad to Madras, where I was met by my old 
friend, Vijayaraghavan, whom I had known some eighteen years ago in 
England and later in America, where he had visited my family. At the time 
he was a slender young man concealing his Brahminical topknot in a spot­
less white turban, which my two young daughters played with. He left a 

480 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
deep impression on them, and I believe in fact that they named a doll after 
him. He visited us again in 1952, and this time he did not wear a turban, for 
there was no longer any topknot to conceal. My grown daughters regarded 
him with the same affection which they had shown him as children.
In Madras he was my kind friend, host, and counselor; and though I 
stayed at the hotel, not at his house, we spent the entire waking time of my 
stay together and I dined several times at his house. When one realizes that 
I am by Hindu standards a mlechchha an outcast, and that a generation ago 
any Brahmin would have considered himself polluted by my very presence 
at meals, I felt that this was a very considerable favor and token of friend­
ship. We used to go in the hours of dawn for a swim in the magnificent surf 
of the Indian Ocean, and he would bring along his daughter and his little 
grandson.
I gave a scientific lecture at his institute and met his charming group of 
friends. I received a splendid idea of the lively and cordial intellectual life of 
Madras. I lectured to a group of Vijayaraghavan’s friends on the automatic 
factory and its possible effect on the future India. I think I was almost the 
only one there who wore European attire.
Finally, Vijayaraghavan, together with his mother and his daughter, 
went with me to a little cloth shop by a temple in the Mylapore suburb of 
Madras and helped me pick out for my daughter Peggy a splendid saffron 
silk sari with dark-red gold-woven trimmings, together with the material 
for a blouse to go with the sari.
On many occasions during my stay, we talked over many things both 
scientific and personal, and we speculated much on the lives that our 
grandchildren might live and whether they might not find a better world 
in which religious and racial prejudices should have abated and in which 
all the peoples could meet for all purposes in an atmosphere of universal 
humanity.
From Madras I made a brief excursion to the delightful city of Banga­
lore, where I saw more of Raman and I took an active part in lecturing and 
in the intellectual life. Thence I returned for a week as a guest of the Tata 
Institute at Bombay. Bombay was full of first-rate scientists, both Indian 
and foreign, and I found a rich opportunity both to teach and to learn and, 
in particular, to collaborate with and to criticize the work of several young 
mathematicians.
My special crony during this episode was Professor Kosambi, who had 
been a boy at the Cambridge High School during a period when his father, 
a refugee from British India, was working over the rich Sanskrit material of 
the Harvard Library. The son, perhaps owing to his American early training, 

35: India 
481
has been a bit more of a fighter and a bit less of a serene Indian scholar than 
most of his fellow countrymen. However, I found that he was not the only 
Indian to counter my admiration for the serenity of the Indian soul with an 
equal admiration for the drive of the westerner.
Among the other Bombay scientists whom I met were Masani and Chan­
drasekharan. Masani is a Parsi, and I saw a good deal as well of his Parsi 
colleague Bhabha, of the Tata family. I found the Parsis an extremely inter­
esting group, accepting the new India very thoroughly. Yet they were partly 
divided in soul between their patriotism and the quasi-European position, 
almost as westerners, which their small minority of a hundred thousand 
souls had accepted under the English.
My stay in Bombay was one of the most profitable parts of my Indian 
trip, and I shared my very newest work with my Indian colleagues. When 
I went to India I had already been at work on the problem of prediction 
of multiple time series such as, for example, the weather at two or more 
points. This led to a certain formal mathematical problem in factoring what 
are known as matrices. I thought that I had a complete solution of the prob­
lem already, but when I spoke to Masani, he showed me that the question 
should be conceived in a larger way than that in which I had conceived it 
and that there remained much to be done. While in Bombay, I turned my 
maximal effort toward the solution of the problem and was luckily able to 
close the books on it.
I think that the fact that I was engaged in active new creative work in 
India, rather than the mere presentation of work already done, brought 
me much closer to the Indian mathematicians that I otherwise could have 
hoped to come. At any rate, I tried to live up to my opinion that the best 
and indeed the only way of teaching advanced students in science is to 
participate with them in a common enterprise.
I gave a talk to the Bombay Rotary Club on national and racial relations, 
and I met an interesting assembly of former M.I.T. men, who seemed to be 
taking a very active share in the new national development of India. I also 
visited the College of St. Francis Xavier, where the Spanish Jesuit fathers 
seemed a much-beloved group, fraternizing freely with their Hindu, Parsi, 
and Moslem students. Indeed, I found the Church in India a much freer 
and more liberal institution than it had seemed to me in the Spain from 
which these fathers came.
From Bombay I went by airplane to Calcutta, where I had the privilege of 
working for a week at the Indian Institute of Statistics, headed by Professor 
Mahalanobis. The Mahalanobises received me as a house guest, and I was 
admitted to a charming degree of intimacy with the family. I was given a 

482 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
room which had been intended for the old age of their friend, Rabindra­
nath Tagore.
There was a most interesting group of Indian and foreign scientists going 
and coming, and I profited by the wise and understanding criticism which 
Professor Bose, of the University of Calcutta, made of the new physical 
ideas of Armand Siegel and myself. I gave a number of lectures to the staff 
of the Institute, and I kept myself at their disposal for discussions of their 
own research.
I used to go to a nearby temple—the one that forms the scene of some 
episodes in the film The River—to think over my scientific work and I had 
the pleasure of being received cordially by one of the devotees there. He 
was a Post Office official who came every day to worship. He was bearded 
and dressed in a scrupulously neat Indian costume. He invited me to see 
the inner precincts of the temple, which, until recently, had been closed to 
non-Hindus.
The Mahalanobises and the charming company that gathered at their 
house talked over world science and world politics with me with a great 
freedom and directness. They sent me to see the sights of Calcutta, includ­
ing the zoological gardens and the art museum.
I followed up my trip to Calcutta with a visit to Benares and later to Agra. 
Benares struck me as a sinister fairyland. Agra, on the other hand with its 
palaces and tombs, including the Taj Mahal, was a lesson on the possibility 
of combining kingly lavishness with discipline and proportion.
From Agra I went on to Delhi. There I saw the fine National Physical 
Institute run by Professor Krishnan, and I was much gratified to see the 
equal emphasis on scientific progress and on the setting-up of a corps of 
workmen to make this scientific progress possible. The work that was being 
done on the use of solar energy was already beginning to yield results, and 
promises even greater ones for the future. If it is merely confined to cook­
ing by solar heat instead of over flames of burning cow dung, it will already 
have made an important contribution toward the improvement of the fer­
tility of the Indian soil.
I lectured at Krishnan’s institute as well as at the university. At the uni­
versity, I took up the theme on which I had already spoken during my 
popular lecture at Mylapore, of the significance of the automatic factory for 
the future of India.
My stay in India led me to reflect on the future role of the country in 
an industrialized and scientific world. As I have said, Indian scientists are 
the intellectual equals of those in any country. On the other hand, the 
class of skilled technicians, the non-commissioned officers of science and 

35: India 
483
technology, are much more difficult to recruit. In artistic matters Indian 
craftsmanship is excellent, but it tends to lack the precision and uniformity 
demanded by the workshops of the West. Much brave work is being done 
in recruiting a cadre of these noncommissioned officers, very largely within 
the military services themselves and in the great new national laboratories. 
The National Physical Institute depended for its supply of skilled workmen 
on the Sikhs, who show the same abilities in the workshop which have 
made them in the past one of the mainstays of the Indian army. However, 
the facilities of the country up to the present have rendered the new class of 
skilled workmen into which they are entering a rather limited one.
At the bottom of the population there is an unlimited supply of unskilled 
and not too efficient labor, which makes a country very susceptible to a 
devastating proletarianization of even worse character than that which 
took place in England under the early days of the industrial revolution.
In view of these circumstances, I doubt whether India should under­
take its industrialization in accordance with the accepted western pattern 
of mass factory labor. This is one of the quickest roads toward an immediate 
industrialization, and it gives India a chance to capitalize on its unques­
tioned asset of mass population. But I doubt whether this process is worth 
the price in human misery. Wretched and undernourished as a villager is, 
the industrial city promises to be even more wretched and to deprive the 
urbanized villager of whatever very small status he may have under Indian 
conditions of poverty. The unchecked growth of a nineteenth-century fac­
tory system is already making the outskirts of the great city into an unlovely 
hybrid of Indian famine and Manchester drabness.
I am not willing to ignore the possibility that the future industrializa­
tion of India may bypass much of the drabness and misery of Manchester 
or Chicago through the early introduction of the automatic factory. Misery 
is a result of unemployment, but it is even more a result of the sheer lack 
of goods. The automatic factory makes its demands on human efforts not 
at the bottom but at the very high level of the scientist-engineer and at the 
relatively high level of the small group of highly skilled trouble shooters 
and maintenance workers. It is quite in the cards that India can supply both 
of these within a matter of decades, while it can not supply a large group 
of fairly skilled factory workers able to earn enough to maintain them in a 
half-decent life for a large part of a century.
Of course, I may be wrong. The hothouse atmosphere of rapid industrial 
growth under the regime of the automatic factory may conceivably foster 
evils greater than any which it can alleviate. I do not know. What I do know 
is that the introduction of the new economics of the automatic factory may 

484 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
take place in India faster than most of us are willing to admit and that it 
might well be an easier avenue toward a prosperous and effective industrial­
ized country than any of its alternatives.
In other words, this is a possibility which we indeed may have to discard, 
but which India cannot afford to discard without a thorough consideration 
of what it means. I am told that Nehru is interested in thinking out the pos­
sibilities of this alternative path to industrialization.

36  Epilogue
I 
Am 
a 
Mathematician: 
The 
Later 
Life 
of 
a 
Prodigy
36: 
Epilogue
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
I am writing the last pages of this book at the age of sixty, an advanced 
period in the life of a creative mathematician. However, I am still at work, 
and I would not like to think that my efforts are now over. Many of my 
ideas still contribute to the growth of engineering and physics, so that a 
book of this sort can be nothing more than an interim report.
Many scholars find it interesting to speculate whether their motives for 
entering scholarship and their later success are due more to heredity or to 
environment. In my own case, it is particularly difficult to separate these 
two factors, because, to a large extent, my heredity was my environment.
I owe to my father not only his share of those genes which I carry but 
the sort of training which he conceived to be proper for a boy with exactly 
those traits of character which I derived from him. Without my share in 
Father’s nature, I would have been an unfit subject for his training; and 
without his training, the potentialities which I derived from him might 
well have gone undisciplined and unrealized.
One part of Father’s own outlook and one part of the training which he 
gave me was a very thorough synthesis of the theoretical and the practi­
cal. Father was a philologist who regarded the history of languages not as 
the quasi-biologic growth of almost isolated organisms but rather as an 
interplay of historic forces. For him, philology was a tool of the cultural 
historian, exactly as the spade is of the archeologist. It is not surprising that 
the son of a father who could not be contented with the formal and the 
abstract in the study of languages should himself fail to be contented with 
that thin view of mathematics which characterizes those mathematicians 
who have not made a real contact with physics.
My father was one of the most independent of men, and I could never 
have been a loyal son of his without declaring my own independence, even 
of himself. Fundamentally, he did the research he liked to do, and that was 
the kind of work which I had seen about me from my earliest childhood. 

486 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
His work was disciplined not in accordance with the injunction of others 
but in accordance with the inner demands of a stern and self-critical nature. 
As my father’s son, I could do nothing else but proceed in this pattern.
I have done those things I have done not in response to orders from 
outside but because my wishes followed a pattern which appealed to me 
and because the individual pieces of work which I have done have seemed 
to build up in a definite organized direction. My discipline has been a self-
discipline, in the image of the discipline imposed upon me as a child by 
my father.
The discipline of the scholar is a consecration to the pursuit of the truth. 
It involves a willingness to undergo such real sacrifices as are demanded 
by this consecration, whether they are sacrifices of money or sacrifices of 
prestige, or even in the extreme (but not unprecedented) case, of personal 
safety. However, the main part of this discipline is intrinsic and belongs to 
one’s relation to science itself rather than to one’s reaction to the external 
environment within which science is carried on.
In the first place, discipline does not preclude the making of errors. What 
it does preclude is the retention of an error which has clearly and distinctly 
betrayed its wrongness. If a theorem is inconsistent, or if a proof refuses to 
become complete under the greatest pressure which you can exert, cast it 
from you.
This is the negative side of intellectual discipline. There is, however, a 
positive correlate to this. If a theorem merely looks grotesque or unusual 
and if your maximum effort cannot discover any contradiction, do not cast 
it aside. If the only thing that seems to be wrong about a proof is its uncon­
ventionality, then dare to accept it, unconventionality and all. Have the 
courage of your beliefs—because if you don’t you will find that the best 
things you might have thought about will be picked up from under your 
own nose by more venturesome spirits; but, above all, because this is the 
only manly thing to do.
I am lucky to have been born and to have grown up before the First 
World War, at a period at which the vigor and élan of international schol­
arship had not yet been swamped by forty years of catastrophes. I am par­
ticularly lucky that it has not been necessary for me to remain for any 
considerable period a cog in a modern scientific factory, doing what I was 
told, accepting the problems given me by my superiors, and holding my 
own brain only in commendam as a medieval vassal held his fiefs. If I had 
been born into this latter day feudal system of the intellect, it is my opinion 
that I would have amounted to little. From the bottom of my heart I pity 
the present generation of scientists, many of whom, whether they wish it 

36: Epilogue 
487
or not, are doomed by the “spirit of the age” to be intellectual lackeys and 
clock punchers.
Have I gained or lost from my father’s unconventional training? I do 
not know, for I have had only one life to live. My conjecture is that under 
a more conventional and milder regime I might have come through with 
less emotional trauma, but that I would not have developed the strong 
individuality of my scientific vein, which was due to early contact with a 
very powerful and very individualistic man. It was this struggle to main­
tain my individuality in the presence of a tremendously vigorous father 
which certainly gave the very specific form to my work which it later 
assumed.
While I might have achieved something under another training, one 
thing is clear: that without any training and guidance at all, my career 
would have been hampered and my productivity would have been dis­
torted. It is very easy for a constitutionally vigorous mind to fritter its 
power away in trivialities. I put the highest value on my early contact with 
the standards of the intellect, and even though quite a different contact 
might have set me up as a scholar in another way, the absence of contact 
would have left me an ineffectual crank. I know of a number of cases where 
the relative paucity of scientific contacts, while not absolutely fatal, was 
still damaging and limiting.
A scientist must know what is being done in order that the very indi­
viduality of his own work may come to full fruition. He must live in a world 
where science is a career, where he has companions with whom he can talk 
and in contact with whom he may bring out his own vein.
It may well be true that ninety-five per cent of the really original sci­
entific work is being done by less than five per cent of the professional 
scientists, but the greater part of it would not be done at all if the other 
ninety-five per cent were not there to help create a high level of scientific 
opinion. Even the self-trained scholar must pay tribute to that atmosphere 
of disinterested scholarship created by the universities, which furnishes the 
frame within which he may operate.
There is no doubt that the present age, particularly in America, is one in 
which more men and women are devoting themselves to a formally scien­
tific career than ever before in history. This does not mean that the intel­
lectual environment of science has received a proportionate increment. 
Many of today’s American scientists are working in government laborato­
ries, where secrecy is the order of the day, and they are protected by the 
deliberate subdivision of problems to the extent that no man can be fully 
aware of the bearing of his own work. These laboratories, as well as the great 

488 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
industrial laboratories are so aware of the importance of the scientist that 
he is forced to punch the time clock and to give an accounting of the last 
minute of his research. Vacations are cut down to a dead minimum, but 
consultations and reports and visits to other plants are encouraged without 
limit, so that the scientist, and the young scientist in particular, has not the 
leisure to ripen his own ideas.
Science is better paid than at any time in the past. The results of this 
pay have been to attract into science many of those for whom the pay is 
the first consideration, and who scorn to sacrifice immediate profit for the 
freedom of development of their own concepts. Moreover, this inner devel­
opment, important and indispensable as it may be to the world of science 
in the future, generally does not have the tendency to put a single cent into 
the pockets of their employers.
Perhaps business has learned to take long risks, but they must be calcu­
lable risks, and no risk, by its very nature, is less calculable than the risk of 
profit from new ideas.
This is an age in which the profit motive is exalted, often, indeed, to 
the exclusion of all other motives. The value of ideas to the community is 
estimated in terms of dollars and cents, yet dollars and cents are fugitive 
currency compared with that of new ideas. A discovery which may take 
fifty years before it leads to new practice has only a minimal chance of 
redounding to the advantage of those who have paid for the work leading 
up to it, yet if these discoveries are not made, and we continue depending 
on those which already exist, we are selling out our future and the futures 
of our children and grandchildren.
Like a tradition of scholarship, a grove of sequoias may exist for thou­
sands of years, and the present crop of wood represents the investment of 
sun and rain many centuries ago. The returns of this investment are here, 
but how much money and how many securities remain in the same hands, 
even for one century? Thus, if we are to measure the long-time life of a 
sequoia grove in terms of the short-time value of money, we cannot afford 
to treat it as an agricultural enterprise. In a profit-bound world, we must 
exploit it as a mine and leave a wasteland behind us for the future.
There are scientific ideas which we can trace clearly to the time of Leib­
niz, a quarter of a millennium ago, which are just beginning to find their 
applications in industry. Can a business firm or a government department, 
moved primarily by the immediate needs for new weapons, compass this 
period of time in its backward glance?
The great grove of science must be left to long-time institutions capable 
of formulating and maintaining long-time values. In the past, the Church 

36: Epilogue 
489
was one of these institutions, and, even though it has somewhat fallen 
from its high estate, it has given birth to the universities and other intellec­
tual institutions, such as academies, which themselves have a continuous 
life lasting over centuries.
These long-time institutions cannot and do not ask for an immediate 
translation of their hopes and ideals into the small change of the present 
day. They exist on faith, the faith that the development of knowledge is a 
good thing and must ultimately conspire in the good of all men.
The problem of planning for a long future is not unknown to business, 
particularly to that most sophisticated one the insurance business. The 
art of the actuary is to estimate risks. But the insurance business in gen­
eral is not concerned merely with protection against destructive risks. The 
same companies that sell insurance also sell annuities. In a similar way, 
any long-time planning for the future must involve the discussion of rare 
and incalculable favorable circumstances as well as rare and incalculable 
catastrophes. One of the rare and incalculable benefits for which we must 
provide if the race is going to survive is the sudden emergence on the scene 
of great and original intellects.
A policy which integrates the gifts of the intellect into a long-time pol­
icy must transcend the lifetime of short-time institutions such as everyday 
business, and must be transferred to more stable institutions, like the foun­
dations and the universities, which at least contemplate such a continued 
existence.
I am not alone in saying these things, but I am swimming counter to 
the major currents of the times. It is popular to believe that the age of the 
individual and, above all, of the free individual, is past in science. There 
are many administrators of science and a large component of the general 
population who believe that mass attacks can do anything, and even that 
ideas are obsolete.
Behind this drive to the mass attack there are a number of strong psy­
chological motives. Neither the public nor the big administrator has too 
good an understanding of the inner continuity of science, but they both 
have seen its world-shaking consequences, and they are afraid of it. Both of 
them wish to decerebrate the scientist, even as the Byzantine State emascu­
lated its civil servants. Moreover, the great administrator who is not sure of 
his own intellectual level can aggrandize himself only by cutting his scien­
tific employees down to size.
The limiting case of the great scientific institution, by which we may test 
the soundness of the principles on which it acts, is the writing shop of the 
monkeys and the typewriters which, in the course of the ages, will almost 

490 
I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy
certainly succeed in making every possible combination of the letters of 
the alphabet and the words in the dictionary. What is the real value of the 
work of the monkeys and the typewriters? Sooner or later, they will have 
written all the works of Shakespeare. Are we then to credit this mass attack 
with creating the works of Shakespeare? By no means, for before writing the 
works of Shakespeare, they will almost certainly have created just about all 
the nonsense and balderdash conceivable.
It is only after the non-Shakespearean has been thrown away, or at least 
an overwhelming part of it, that Shakespeare will stand out in any signifi­
cant sense, whether theoretical or practical. To say that the monkeys’ work 
will contain the works of Shakespeare has no other sense than to say that 
a block of marble will contain a statue by Michelangelo. After all, what 
Michelangelo does is purely critical, namely, to remove from his statue the 
unnecessary marble that hides it. Thus, at the level of the highest creation, 
this highest creation is nothing but the highest criticism.
Of course, the large laboratory can make out a limited case for itself. 
However, it is perfectly possible for the mass attack by workers of all levels, 
from the highest to the lowest, to go beyond the point of optimum perfor­
mance, and to lose many really good results it might obtain in the unread­
able ruck of fifth-rate reports. This is a real observable defect of large-scale 
science at the present time. If a new Einstein theory were to come into 
being as a government report in one of our super-laboratories, there would 
be a really great chance that nobody would have the patience to go through 
the mass published under the same auspices and discover it.
The great laboratory may do many important things, at its best, but at 
its worst it is a morass which engulfs the abilities of the leaders as much as 
those of the followers.
I have not found the great laboratory the medium in which I can develop 
my work with the freedom which I need to express its particular message. 
This may well be a limitation of my own nature, but my experience with 
young men has shown me that it is a limitation shared by many of those 
who have much to say. I hope and pray that the value of this important 
stratum of scientific workers will not be thrown away on the basis of short-
sighted considerations of facility of administration and the trend of the 
times. Certainly I owe my own continued ability to do useful work to the 
cordial spirit of the administrators of M.I.T. and to their habit of protecting 
me from unwarranted claims on my time and from those who may have a 
narrow conception of my function.
After thirty-six years of functioning in the free atmosphere of M.I.T., and 
at the age of sixty, I do not find myself at the end of my scientific interests 

36: Epilogue 
491
nor, I hope, of my achievements. My collaborative work on brain waves 
seems to me about to blossom out into a considerable science. Similarly, 
my joint studies with Armand Siegel on the Brownian motion and on time 
series is leading me to a reconsideration of the relative parts played in this 
world by cause and by chance. How many years may be granted me, if 
not to carry out this program of work myself, then at least to see that it is 
being carried out and to understand the share in it of my past ideas, I do 
not know; but even now I can feel reasonably sure that my scientific career, 
though it began early, is lasting late.


Index
I
n
d
e
x
I
n
d
e
x
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
Aberdeen Proving Ground, 189–200, 
223, 242, 279
Aberdeen, Maryland, 194–200
Acta Mathematica, 327, 455
Adams, Eliot Quincy, 83, 103
Adams, Henry, 45
adolescence, 81–139
Adventures of a Young Naturalist in 
Mexico, 67
Aerodynamics, 247
Affair of the Rites, 371
Agassiz Museum, 53
Agassiz School, Cambridge, 34
Agra, 482
Ahmadabad, 475–477
Aiken, Howard, 417, 439–440
Air Force, U.S., 450
Air India, 472–473
Ajanta, 476
Albany, New York, 189–194
Albee, Ernest, 117–118
Alcott, Louisa, 85
Alexander, J. W., 196, 240, 292
Alexandria, New Hampshire, 33–34
Alger, Horatio, 85
Alger, Philip, 195
Alice in Wonderland, 33
All-India Science Congress, 471, 473, 
477
“Almost periodic functions,” 213, 319
Alpha rhythm, 456
Alternating and direct current, 274–275
American Colony at Göttingen, 307
American Mathematical Society, 173, 
269, 283, 305, 306, 316, 349, 351, 
387, 391
American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers, 448
American Telephone & Telegraph Co., 
365
Amerika-Institut in Berlin, 305
Ampère, André, 458
Analogy computing machines. See 
Computing machines, high-speed
Analysis, mathematical, 240, 250, 350, 
352, 362, 459
Ancestry, 12–21
Anchor Books, 468
Andersen’s Fairy Tales, 311
Anglophobia, 143–144
Annals of Mathematics, 327
Anthology of Russian Literature (Wiener), 
68
Anti-aircraft artillery control data, 242, 
326–327, 399–400, 405, 406–407, 
409, 410, 413–414, 461
anti-Semitism, 103, 120–122, 206–209, 
225, 378
Appalachian Mountain Club, 132, 214
Arabian Nights, 33, 52, 54
Arithmetic (Wentworth), 39
Arnold, Benedict, 155

494 
Index
Artin, 336
Ashkenazic and Sephardic culture, 332
Ataxia, 433
Atlantic Monthly, 439, 440
Atomes, Les, 248
Atomic bomb, morality of, 438ff.; 
public opinion on, 443–447; theories 
of, 238, 326, 334, 437ff.
Atomism, 293–294, 295
Atom-splitting, 334
Audacious, 170
Aurangabad, 479
Autobiography (John Stuart Mill), 62
Autocorrelator, 434–435
Automation, 424, 438, 447–451, 467; in 
India, 480, 482–484
Averages over curves, theories of. See 
Lebesgue integral
Ayer High School, 55, 73–79
Aztecs, 431
Babbage, Charles, 11, 322, 417
Bahaists, 76
Baker, H. F., 148
Baker, Louise, 109
Baldwin, Miss (principal of Agassiz 
School), 34
Balkan Wars, 142
Ballistic computation, 389, 410
Banach, Stefan, 173, 213, 264
Banach-Wiener space, theory of, 172–
173, 267, 289
Bangalore, 480
Bangor General Hospital, 185
Bangor, Maine, 185
Barnett, Irving, 245, 246, 350
Barnett, Isaac A., 208
Bartlett, F. C., 146, 156
Basic English, 15
Bauer, Frau, 159–160
Bavarian Court Library, 153
Beard, Daniel Carter, 53
Beaumont, Dr. (army doctor), 49
Beith, Ian Hay, 169
Bell Telephone Laboratories, 319, 320, 
353, 391, 406, 415, 466
Belmont, Massachusetts, 385
Benares, 482
Bennet, A. A., 196
Bentham, Jeremy, 57
Berger, Hans, 456
Berle, A. A., 103, 107, 108, 138
Berlin Institute of Technology, 253
Berlin, Germany, 15
Bernard, Claude, 435
Bernstein, Felix, 164
Beurling, 455
Bhabha, 481
Bierwirth, Professor, 255
Bigelow, Julian, 400–401, 405, 408, 
409
Binary scale. See Numeration
Birkhoff, G. D., 177, 194, 240, 241, 249, 
250, 283, 304, 306, 307, 316, 325–
326, 381, 428–429
Bisonette, Mr. and Mrs., 339
Bit, the, 420
Black Beauty, 75
Blackwood’s Magazine, 169
Blake, John, 4
Blake, Peggy Wiener, 315, 327, 329–330, 
331, 337, 357, 360, 364, 366, 374, 
386, 466, 468, 480
Blaschke, Wilhelm, 336
Bliss, J. I., 195, 196
Bôcher, Maxime, 49, 141, 178
Bôcher prize, 352, 354, 375
Bodet, Torres, 427
Boer War, 46
Bohr, Harald, 162, 213, 290, 309, 311, 
319, 455
Bohr, Niels, 148, 151, 297, 311, 444
Boltzmann, Ludwig, 460
Bolyai, John, 258
Bombay Rotary Club, 481
Bombay, 480–481

Index 
495
Borel, Félix Édouard, 211
Boring, Miss (Student at University of 
Maine), 185
Born, Max, 299–301, 303
Börne, Ludwig, 96
Bose, Professor, 482
Boston Herald, 202–204
Boston police strike, 208–209
Boston Public Library, 27, 33, 49, 85
Boston Sunday Herald, 106
Boston Transcript, 17, 170
Boston University, 27, 49, 232, 300
Boston, Massachusetts, 27
Bouligand, C. D., 212
Bouligand, G., 289, 291, 456, 467
Bourbaki, 454, 455
Bowdoin Prizes, 156
Brain waves and statistical theory, 434–
436, 456–457, 491
Brattleboro, Vermont, 45
Bray, Hubert, 196
Bridgewater, New Hampshire, 123
Bridgman, Percy, 166 
British Colony at Göttingen, 307
Broad, C. D., 205
Bromley, Kent, 47
Brown University, 317, 327
Brown, Frank, 75
Brownian motion, 247–249, 250, 267, 
273, 278, 290, 300, 353, 433, 491
Browning, Robert, 20
Bruce, H. Addington, 59, 93, 127n.
Bureau of Standards, 324, 440
Busch, Wilhelm, 46, 54
Büschen, Fräulein, 159
Bush, Vannevar, 303–304, 319, 321–
322, 323, 325, 353, 361–362, 392, 
393, 395, 398, 400, 437, 458
Bush differential analyzer, 321–322, 
400
Butler, Nicholas Murray, 171
Butler, Samuel, 58–59, 131
Byelostok, Russia, 13
Cairo, 371
Calculus of variations, 246, 402
Calcutta, 481–482
Calcutta, University of, 482
Caldwell, Professor, 400
calf love, 78
California, University of, 440
Calvin, John, 429
Cambridge Magazine, 146
Cambridge Philosophical Society (Eng.), 
155, 338
Cambridge University Press, 335
Cambridge University, 143–157, 169–
171, 236, 238, 256, 262,269, 306, 
328, 330–334, 335, 349, 354, 390, 
453; see also Trinity College 
Cambridge, England, 143–157
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 29, 30, 34, 
49, 50–51
Cameron, Robert, 353
Camp Devens, 199
Cannon, Walter B., 49, 88, 347, 384, 
408, 435
Cardinal of India, 473
Carleman, 455
Carlton College, 134
Carnegie Foundation, 89
Carnegie Institute of Technology, 209
Carnegie Institute of Washington, 
303–304
Carroll, Lewis, 33, 151, 205
Cartwright, Miss, 332, 333
Castle, W. E. (geneticist), 49
Catalpa Farm, 35–36
Caton, Richard, 456
Cauer, Mr. and Mrs. Richard, 325
Cayuga Lake, 118
Celestial mechanics, 325
Central Park Zoo, 41
Central Park, New York City, 41, 43
Century Magazine, 123
Chandrasekharan, 481
Chao Yuen Ren, 176, 370

496 
Index
Charcot, Jean, 234, 379
Cherbourg, France, 217
Chesterton, G. K., 41, 200
Chicago, University of, 243, 269, 381, 
454
Child, Francis, 27–28, 254
childhood, 29–79
China, 357–371, 471
Chinese-Japanese War, 365, 382, 422
Christie, Agatha, 478
Cincinnati, 168
Civil War, 25
Clark University, 138
Clonus, 425, 426–427, 432
Cockcroft, John, 334
Collège de France, 466
College of St. Francis Xavier (Bombay), 
481
Colloquium Series, 352–353
Cologne, Germany, 44, 45, 153
Columbia University, 171–174, 239, 
240, 257, 381, 437
Columbia, Missouri, 26
Communication theory, 413, 415, 416, 
417, 454, 458–462; in animals, 461; 
in England, 454; see also Cybernetics
Communications engineering, 273–278, 
410, 416–417, 423, 461; in England, 
332; see also Electrical engineering, 
theoretical
Communism, 181, 382–384, 430; 
Chinese, 383; English, 373; see also 
U.S.S.R.
Comptes Rendus, 212
Comptes Rendus. See French Academy of 
Sciences
Compton, Karl Taylor, 324–325, 375, 382
Computing laboratories, 405–407
Computing machines, high-speed, 321–
323, 352–353, 389–390, 393–396, 
398, 400, 401–402, 417–418, 420, 
435, 438, 439, 447, 453–454, 461, 
467; analog and digital, 322–323, 
361, 394ff., 435; see also Bush 
differential analyzer
Confucian tradition, 367
Congress, U.S., 445
Conrad, Joseph, 151
Consolidated Edison Co., 275
Constructionalism, 257–260
Continuistic theory. See Atomism
Continuous spectrum theory. See 
Harmonic analysis
Control theory. See Communication 
theory; Cybernetics
Cook, Dr. F. A., 89
Coolidge, Calvin, 209
Coolidge, Julian Lowell, 178, 179
Cooper, James Fenimore, 85
Copenhagen, University of, 311
Copley Theater, Boston, 185
Corliss, Janet, 314
Corliss, Mr. and Mrs. Louis, 314
Cornell University, 140, 143–152, 215
Cornell University, 21
Corposant, 280
Cosmopolitan Magazine, 67
Courant, Richard, 292, 299, 305, 306, 
307–308, 310, 377
courtship, 214–217
Cramer, 267, 414
Crothers, Samuel McCord, 66
Cudjo’s Cave (Trowbridge), 85
Cushman, H. E., 86
Cybernetics, 460–461, 463, 465, 463; 
publication of, 465–466
Cybernetics, 11, 208, 212, 420, 423–
424, 447, 458; see also Cybernetics
Czechoslovak trials, 373
Dabo, 261, 268
Dagsburg. See Dabo
Daily Worker, 373
Daniell, P. J., 208–209, 246, 288
Dartmouth College, 391, 392
Darwin, Charles, 234

Index 
497
de Broglie, Louis, 151
De La Vallée Poussin, 310
Delhi, University of, 482
Demos, Raphael, 175, 182
Destructive instincts, human, 441
Determinism, 245, 297, 299; see also 
Newton and Newtonian physics 
Deutsches Museum, Munich, 155
Dewey, Admiral George, 34
Dewey, John, 171–172
Dickinson, Lowes, 151
Dickson, Leonard Eugene, 269
Dielectric strength, 280
Differential equations and geometry, 
313, 321, 326–327, 333; and atomic 
bomb, 437
Digital computers. See Computing 
machines, high-speed
Dirac, Paul, 300
Disney, Walt, 65
Docent Lectures, Harvard University, 
164, 172, 177–178, 204
Doklady, 414
Dolbear, Katherine, 97n2, 138
Donlan (grocer at Ayer), 76
Dostoevsky, Feodor Mikhailovich, 60
Doubleday & Company, 468
Douglas, Jesse, 375, 376
Drake, Sir Francis, 333
Drew University, 466
Drew, Daniel, 25
Dreyfus, Mrs., 368
Drummer Boy (Trowbridge), 85
Du Maurier, George L. P. B., 42
Dufèze, M., 468
Duffy, Mary, 32
Duffy, Rose, 32, 66
Dumas, Alexandre, 67, 85, 132
Dupriez, L., 171
Ecole Polytechnique, 267
Ecole Supérieure de 
Télécommunications, 467
Econometrics, 413
Eddington, Arthur Stanley, 301n2
Editions des Deux Rives, 468
education, 37–40, 55–56, 61–62, 73–85
Edwards, General C. B., 203
Eger, Aqiba, 13
Einstein, Albert, 148, 150, 155, 212, 
236, 238, 248, 297, 350, 377, 428, 
443, 444, 490
Eisenhart, 269
El Greco, 431
Electrical circuit theory, 323, 325, 345, 
361–362, 363, 396
Electrical computing machines, 304; 
see also Computing machines, 
high-speed
Electrical engineering: in industry, 
321–322; problems in World War II, 
390; theoretical, 273–277, 345; see 
also Communications engineering; 
Power engineering
Electroencephalographs, 433, 434, 456, 
457
Electromotive forces, 279–281
Electron theory, 150
Eliot, Charles William, 99
Eliot, T. S., 170
Ellinger family, 23–24 
Elliott, Richard M., 159
Ellora, 476
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 195
Emotional symbols of mathematics, 
283; see also Mathematical aesthetics
Employment and unemployment, 
438–439, 450–451; see also Labor and 
management
Encyclopedia Americana, 189–193, 241
Engemann, Herbert, 215
Engemann, Margaret. See Wiener, 
Margaret Engemann 
Englischer Garten, Munich, 155
Epilepsy, 434, 456
Erdös, 390

498 
Index
Ergodic theorem, 325, 381
Erro, Luis Enrique, 427–428
Esperanto, 15
Espionage. See Security problems, U.S.
Estes and Sons (publishers), 68
Ether theory, 296–267
Euclidian geometry, 258, 260
European colonialism, 444
European travel, 43–47, 142–168, 169–
171, 212, 217
Evans, G. C., 103, 104
Everest, Mt., 477
Existentialism, 460, 463, 467
Ex-Prodigy, 233, 284, 468
eyesight deficiency, 60–62
Factory workers. See Labor and 
management
family background, 12–28
Fascism, 340, 371, 383, 389, 430
Father and Son (Gosse), 59
Fay, Charles Ernest “Tard,” 82–83
Federal Institute of Technology (Zurich), 
340
Feedback mechanisms, 362, 409, 416, 
419, 435; negative, 407–408, 409, 
436; in nervous and neuromuscular 
systems, 425, 435, 457; in office 
dictation, 464–465; see also 
Cybernetics; Statistical theory and 
mechanics
Fermi, Enrico, 377, 444
Finch, G. I., 477
Fire-control apparatus, 399, 409; see also 
Anti-aircraft artillery control data
First Hundred Thousand (Beith), 169
“First Men in the Moon,” (Wells), 67
Fisher, Bud, 89
Flip-flop circuits, 396–397, 419
Fluctuating currents and voltages, 
theory of, 274–275
Fluid flow, theory of, 290
Folin, Otto, 49
Fort Monroe, Va., 405–406
Fort Slocum, 197
Fourier Series and integral, 250, 277, 
319, 323, 335, 345, 352, 354
Fourier Transforms in the Complex 
Domain, 352
Fourierist community, 19
Foxboro, Massachusetts, 35–36, 67
Franco Spain, 373
Frank, Philipp, 336
Frankfurt, Germany, 45
Frankfurter, Felix, 108
Franklin, Philip, 196, 197, 206, 279
Fréchet, Maurice, 212, 213, 250, 257, 
260, 262, 263, 267, 268, 467; theory 
of limits and differentials, 264
Frege, G., 260
French Academy of Sciences, 277; 
Comptes Rendus of, 289, 414
Freud and Freudians, 29, 379–380
Freymann, 454, 456, 458, 463, 465, 467, 
472
Friends of China, 385, 479
Fuchs, Klaus, 299, 443
Fujiwara, Professor, 371
Fulbright grants, 466
Functions, theory of, 362–363
Funktionentheorie (Osgood), 201
Gadgeteers, 393
Galileo, 60
Galsworthy, John, 151
Gándara, Nápoles, 427
Gandhi, 477
Gardner, Mrs. Jack, 47
Gâteaux, M., 246, 267
Gâteaux, R., 208
Gauss, Karl, 258
General Electric Company, 189, 196, 
223, 241, 275
Generalized integration, theory of, 350
Geneva Canton Hospital, 469
Geodetic Survey of Greenland, 311

Index 
499
George, Clare, 314
German Association for the 
Advancement of Science, 309
German University at Prague, 336, 337
Ghosts (Ibsen), 305
Gibbs, Josiah Willard, 11, 210, 237, 245, 
248, 249, 273, 297, 326, 381, 410, 
411, 413, 459, 460
Gilbreths, 449
Gill, B. P., 196
Girton College, 332
Gödel, 150, 336, 460
Goebbels, Joseph, 160
“Gold-Makers, The,” 338
Gosse, Edmund, 59
Göttingen, 156, 159–167, 236, 238–239, 
242, 256, 291–292, 292–293, 297, 
298, 299, 303, 305, 306–308, 309, 
311, 313, 317, 340, 349
Grant, Ulysses S., 25 
Graustein, W. C., 196
Greek geometry, 258
Green Letters, 176
Green, Gabriel Marcus, 197, 200, 201
Greenacre, Maine, 75
Greene, Graham, 143
Greenhill, Sir George, 269
Grimm’s Fairy Tales, 77
Gronwall, T. H., 196
Groton, Massachusetts, 127
Group theory, 162
Guadalajara, 425, 430–431
Guggenheim Foundation and Fellows, 
216, 292, 351, 428
Guide of the Perplexed (Maimonides), 
113
Guided missiles, 439
Gulliver’s Travels, 301–302n2
Hadamard, Jacques, 269–270, 310, 363, 
364, 368–369, 372, 467
Hahn, Otto, 336
Hahn, Paul, 436
Haldane, J. B. S., 14, 338, 339, 372, 373, 
375, 456, 467
Hall, G. Stanley, 138
Hambourg, Mark, 46
Hamburg America Line, 168
Hamburg, Germany, 167
Hammer, 160
Hammond, W. A., 117
Hardy, G. H., 143, 147, 148, 151, 162, 
167, 236, 237, 238, 239, 250, 262, 
305, 306, 312, 317, 332, 333, 335, 
354, 377
Harmonic analysis, 276–278, 290, 292–
293, 298, 306–307, 311, 323, 327, 
362, 363, 381, 416, 433, 434, 453, 
455, 459; optical computer for, 
304
Harper, Miss (secretary), 68
Harper’s Magazine, 123
Harte, Bret, 17
Haruna Maru, S. S., 370
Harvard Library, 385
Harvard Mathematical Society, 164, 
173, 178
Harvard Mathematics Club, 242
Harvard Medical School, 49, 347–348, 
408, 432, 433
Harvard Observatory, 373
Harvard Philosophical Library, 137
Harvard Regiment, 181, 182, 187
Harvard Union, 103, 152
Harvard University Graduate School, 
88, 99–110, 119, 167
Harvard University, 27, 99–109, 129–
139, 176–182, 233, 235, 236, 239, 
240, 242, 243, 244, 254–256, 259, 
262, 263, 268, 279, 282, 283, 317, 
319, 325, 335, 336, 343, 347, 377, 
384, 417, 428, 439, 440
Harvard, town of, Massachusetts, 69
Haskell, Dr. (oculist), 61
Haskins, Professor C. N. (Dartmouth 
College), 199

500 
Index
Ha-Ta-Ma Hsien-Sheng, 364; see also 
Hadamard, Jacques
Hattori, U., 156, 122
Havana, Cuba, 16
Heat-death, 460, 462
Heaviside, Oliver, 213, 277–278, 417; 
calculus of, 277–278, 290
Hebraische Melodien (Heine), 133
Heilbronn, 321
Heine, Heinrich, 57, 132
Heisenberg, Werner, 148, 151, 299–300, 
402
Henderson, Lawrence J., 130
Henry of Prussia, Prince, 60
Henry, O., 186
Heredity in Royalty (Woods), 130
Herman et Cie., 454, 472
Hermite, Charles, 368
Hilbert, David, 132, 156, 162–63, 166, 
238, 292, 299, 300, 350, 363
Hilbert, David, 24–25, 96, 97, 108, 109, 
175, 192
Hiong, Professor and Mrs., 359, 360–361
Hiroshima, 441, 446
History of Yiddish Literature (Wiener), 
67, 115
Hitchcock, F. L., 210
Hitler, Adolph, 160, 167; see also Nazis 
and Nazism
Hölder, 381
Holland-America Line, 43 
Hollerith machine, 397
Holt, E. B., 129
Holy Rollers, 36
Homeostatic processes, 435
Homer, 133
Hopf, Eberhard, 325–326, 375, 376–378
Hopf-Wiener equations, 326, 403
Horace, 133
Hospital of the Holy Ghost, 29
Houghton Mifflin Co., 468
Houghton, Cedric Wing, 103, 107, 108
Howard, Hermann, 30, 38
Hu, Lottie, 385
Hugo, Victor, 85
Human Use of Human Beings, The, 
467–468
Humboldt Library, 52, 54, 234
Huntington, Edward Vermilye, 131–
132, 141, 178, 258, 259
Husserl, Edmund, 156
Hutchinson, J. I., 117, 148
Hyderabad, 471, 477–478, 479
Hydrogen atom theory, 297
Hyslop, W.W., 111
Ikehara, Shikao, 319, 321, 354, 357
Illinois Institute of Technology, 336, 
350
Illustrated London News, 170
Imaginary numbers, theory of, 275
Imperial College of Science and 
Technology, London, 160
Imperial Hotel (Tokyo), 357
Indeterminism, 297, 299; see also 
Determinism; Probability and 
statistics
India, 469, 471–484
Indian Academy of Sciences, 475
Indian Atomic Energy Commission and 
Institute, 473
Indian Congress Party, 475
Indian Institute of Statistics, 481
Indian Mutiny, 474
Induction motor. See Alternating and 
direct current
Industrial Revolution, 483
infant prodigy, 117–119, 131–139, 177–
178, 215, 288
Information theory, 352–353, 415
Ingham, A. E., 306, 307, 390, 391
Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton 
University, 142, 350, 352
Instituto Nacional de Cardiología, 425, 
429, 432, 458, 467
Interferometer, 434–4

Index 
501
International Business Machines Corp., 
397, 398, 400
International Mathematical Congress: 
1920 (Strasbourg), 212, 216, 268–
271; 1924 and 1928, 328; 1932 
(Zurich), 339–341; 1936 (Oslo), 369, 
370, 371, 372; Cambridge, Mass., 
468
International scientific cooperation, 
444–445
Iron lung, 433
Israel, National State of, 12
Italy, 309
Jackson, Dugald C., 111, 273, 274, 277
Jacob Wirth’s, 185
Jaffrey, New Hampshire, 30
James, Henry, 86
James, William, 86, 110, 129, 130, 137
Janet, Pierre, 234, 379
Japan, 357–358; in World War II, 444–
445, 339; see also Chinese Japanese 
War; Hiroshima
Japanese chess, 371
Jerusalem Talmud, 13
Jespersen, Otto, 96, 220
Jessen, 455
Jewish family structure, 12, 14, 42–43
Jewish origin, problem of, 113–117, 
119–122, 216, 225
Jewish Publication Society, 115
Joffre, Joseph Jacques, Marshal, 168
John the Orangeman, 60
Johns Hopkins University, 185, 430
Johnson, Martin and Osa, 271
Jones, Miss E. E. C., 151
Jordan, Camille, 269
Jordan, David Starr, 154–155
Josephine (French maid), 30
Jourdain, P. E. B., 205 
Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and 
Scientific Method, 150
Joyce, James, 190
Juárez, Benito, 427
Judaism, 12–13, 14, 120–121
Judson, Adoniran, 183
Jungle Book (Kipling), 31
Juniata College, 215, 303, 305
Kahn, Henry (grandfather), 21, 23, 68
Kahn, Mrs. Henry (grandmother), 68
Kakutani, 358, 390
Kaltenleutgeben, Germany, 46
Kansas City, Missouri, 19–20 
Kansas, University of, 269
Kantian theory of space, 260
Kapitza, P. L., 334
Kasner, Edward, 173
Keller, Helen, 60
Kellog, O. D., 211, 279, 281–282, 283
Kerensky, Alexander, 77, 181, 255
Khintchine, 328
Kiel, University of, 309, 310
Kierkegaard, Sören, 460, 463
Kinetic theory of gases, 295–296, 381
King of the Golden River (Ruskin), 67
King, Everett, 83–84, 186
King, Harold, 81–84, 110
Kingsley, J. S., 87, 88, 102
Kingsley’s Natural History, 234
Kipling, Rudyard, 28, 45, 121, 132
Kittredge, Dora, 30
Klein, Felix, 163, 178, 242, 292, 305
Kline, J. R., 306, 307, 308, 316, 350
Knowledge, theory of, 462–463
Koebe, 337
Kolmogoroff, 328, 414–415, 461
Koopman, Bernard, 249, 381
Korean War, 371
Kosambi, Professor, 480
Kraus, Karl, 45 
Kreuger, Ivar, 318
Krishnan, Professor, 482
Kropotkin, Prince Pëtr, 47
Krotoschin, Russia, 13
Ku, Dean, 354, 370

502 
Index
Ku-Klux-Klanism, 383
Kuomintang, 383
Labor and management, 424, 438–439, 
448–451; in India, 482–484
Laënnec, René, 430
Lafayette, Marquis de, 70
Lagrange, Joseph, 381
Lake Pontchartrain, 19
Lambert, F. D., 87
Landau, Edmund, 162–163, 238, 321
Language and writing, 461
Laplace, Pierre, 381
Lawrence Scientific School, Harvard 
University, 179
Lawrence, D. H., 334
Lawrence, Massachusetts, 266202–203
Learning, 435
Leavitt, Laura, 73, 74, 79
Lebesgue integral, 237, 246, 247, 248, 
249, 277, 289, 326
Lebesgue, Henri, 208, 212
Lee family, 33
Lee, Dr. Yuk Wing, 319–320, 321, 325, 
354, 358, 359, 361, 364, 365–366, 
368, 382, 422–424, 434
Lee, Mrs. Yuk Wing, 358, 359, 422
Leeds, University of, 306
Leeuwenhoek microscope, 293–294
Lefschetz, Solomon, 172
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von, 11, 86, 
150, 224, 246, 279, 294–295, 301n2, 
462, 488 
Leipzig, University of, 291, 337
Lemaître, Canon, 373
Letters from John Chinaman (Dickinson), 
151
Leukemia, 436
Levinson, Norman, 353–354, 377, 378, 
393, 410
Levy, Hyman, 160
Lévy, Paul, 250, 267, 288, 414, 455
Leyland Line, 142
Lichtenstein, Leon, 290, 291, 337, 340, 
349, 376, 381
Lichtenstein, Mrs. Leon, 291
Lincoln, Abraham, 25
Lipka, Joseph, 210
Littlewood, J. E., 148, 162, 237–238, 
306, 332, 344
Liverpool, England, 16, 47
Lobachevski, Nikolai, 258
London Times, 190
London, England, 46–47, 142–143, 
170
London, University of, 453
Loomis, F. W., 195
Los Alamos, 445
Low temperature physics, 334
Lowell, Abbott Lawrence, 99, 103, 137, 
179, 181, 187, 206–207, 384 
Lysenko, 373
Macy Foundation, 431
Madras, 474, 479–480
Madrid, 468
Maggy, “The Button-breaker,” 52
Mahalanobis family, 481, 482
Maimonides, Moses, 13, 113, 121
Maine, University of, 183
Mainz, Germany, 45
Malin, Henry, 353
Maloney, Hildreth, 52
Management. See Labor and 
management
Manchester, University of, 453
Mandelbrojt, Szolem, 363, 369, 372, 
455, 466
Manhattan Project, 437–438, 441
Marconi, Guglielmo, 274
Margain family, 427
marriage, 286–287
Martin, W. T., 353
Masani, 481
Masaryk, Thomas, 255, 336–337
Mason, A. E. W., 85

Index 
503
Massachusetts General Hospital, 434, 
457
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
104, 135, 147, 187, 196, 205, 
209–216, 219, 223, 225, 233, 242–
244, 245, 250, 269, 271, 273, 278, 
287, 288, 299, 303, 304, 313, 314, 
316, 319, 328, 335, 344, 347, 348, 
350, 352, 353, 354, 374, 375–376, 
377, 389, 390, 392, 400, 411, 421, 
423, 424, 425, 427, 432, 433, 434, 
440, 454, 457, 463, 465, 466, 481, 
490; administration of Compton, 
324–325
Material for the Study of Variation 
(Bateson), 87
Mathematical aesthetics, 265–266, 369
Mathematical collaboration, 369
Mathematical Institute (Hamburg), 336
Mathematical Society, Göttingen 
University, 349–350
Mathematician’s Apology (Hardy), 147
Max and Moritz (Busch), 46, 54
Maximilian, 427
Maxwell, James Clerk, 11, 295, 296, 
381, 460
Mayan race, 396
McLaurin, Richard, 323–324, 325
McTaggart, J. M. E., 151, 152
Meaning of Meaning, 147
Measure, theories of. See Probability and 
statistics, theories of
Mei, President, 354
Mejía, Gen., 427
Memory, 420, 435; of society, 461
Mendelssohn, Moses, 13, 16, 105, 122
Menger, Karl, 336, 350
Mercer, J., 148
Merriam-Webster Dictionary, 27
Message coding and decoding, 353, 398, 
443
Messenger of Mathematics, 148
Meteorology, 412–413
Metivier, Renée, 38
Mexican Mathematical Society, 425, 
430–431
Mexico City Nutrition Laboratory, 428
Mexico, 425–436, 458, 463, 469, 471–
472, 475
Mexico, University of, 427
Michelangelo, 490
Michelson, Albert, 297, 434, 435
Mikado (Gilbert and Sullivan), 32
Military expenditures, 437–438, 445
Military philosophy, 441
military service, 196–200
Mill, James, 57–59
Mill, John Stuart, 57–59, 59, 62
Milyukoff, Pavel Nikolaevich, 77
Milyukov, Paul, 181
Minnesota, University of, 353
Minsk Gymnasium, 15
“Miracle of Purun Bhagat,” 476
Missouri, University of, 254
Möbius’s sheet, 239
Modern Algebra (Bôcher), 141
Modern Painters (Ruskin), 67, 133
Modern Symposium (Dickinson), 151
Monist, 205
Monte Carlo method, 398
Montemar, Gen., 427
Moore, C. L. E., 210–211, 243
Moore, G. E., 129, 151–152, 167
Moral Science Club, 146, 151
Moreh Nebukim (Maimonides), 113
Morison, Dr. Robert, 432
Morize, Major, 187
Morley, Edward Williams, 297
Morris, William, 449
Morse, Professor, 352
Motion study, 449
Mount Passaconaway, 188
Mount Washington, 182
Mountbatten, Lord and Lady, 474, 
477
Muckenhoupt, Carl, 319

504 
Index
Munich, Germany, 143, 153–155, 156, 
157, 159, 335
Munroe, Walter, 63
Münsterberg, Hugo, 129, 131, 177–178
Murnaghan, Professor, 430
Murray Hill Hotel, New York City, 173, 
217, 305
Murray, Forrest, 268
Murray, Patrolman, 63
Mursell, Jim, 182
Muscio, Bernard, 146
Muscio, Dr. and Mrs. Bernard, 262, 267
Museum of the Ecole Centrale des Arts-
et-Métiers, 262
Musical notation, 299
Muss-Arnoldt, W. (Assyriologist), 50
My Friend Mr. Leakey, 374
Mylapore, 480
Mysterious Island (Verne), 67
Nancago, University of, 454
Nancy, University of, 453, 454, 455, 456
Nanking, 370
National Academy of Sciences, 351
National Chemical Laboratory (India), 
476
National Physical Institute (India), 482, 
483
National Physical Laboratories 
(England), 453
Natural History (Kingsley), 52, 87
Natural History (Wood), 31
Nature, 316
Navy Department, U.S., 439
Nazis and Nazism, 160, 167, 305, 307, 
336, 337, 349, 351, 359, 376, 378, 
382, 383, 389, 390, 438, 442, 444
Nehru, Jawaharlal, 473, 474, 477, 484
Nerve spike, theory of, 432
Nervous system and communication, 
418–420, 431–432, 433, 435–436, 
457, 459–460; see also Feedback 
mechanisms
Nesbit, Evelyn, 85
Neumann, John von, 249, 300, 350, 
363, 377, 381, 401, 413
Neurophysiology. See Brain waves; 
Harvard Medical School; Nervous 
system
New England Conservatory of Music, 27
New Machiavelli (Wells), 151
New Orleans, Louisiana, 16–17, 18
New York City, 23, 41–43, 170–174, 217
New York State Guard, 193
New York State Library, 191
New York State Museum, 191
New York Times, 335
New Yorker Magazine, 105–106, 108, 139
Newton and Newtonian physics, 240, 
245, 246, 299, 410, 411–412, 418, 
462
Ni family, 360
Nichols, Ernest, 324
Nobel Prize, 299
Noether, Emmy, 340, 350
Non-Euclidean geometry, 258
Nørlund, Professor and Mrs., 311
Notre Dame University, 336, 350
Nuclear research and theory, 335, 442, 
443, 444–445; see also Atomic bomb
Number theory, 309, 311
Numeration, 391–392, 396
Officers Training Camp, Plattsburg, 
182–183
Ogden, C. K., 146
Old Mill Farm, 69–77, 78, 79, 81, 84, 89, 
126, 131
Olvera, 429
On a Balcony (Browning), 20
Onnes, Kammerlingh, 334
Operators, theory of, 399–400
Organization theory, 454, 459; see also 
Communication theory; Cybernetics
Orono, Maine, 176, 182, 183–187
Orozco, José, 430

Index 
505
Osaka, University of, 357, 358
Osgood, W. F., 178, 188, 205, 242
Ostrowski, 455
Out on a Limb (Baker), 109
Oxford University, 236, 256, 262, 269, 
305, 331, 333, 456
Paley, 332, 339, 340–341, 344–345, 364, 
349, 352, 362, 363, 453
Palmer, G. H., 129
Palmieri, Father, 255
Parallel postulate, 258
Parker, C. P., 87
Pasteur, Louis, 368
Patents and inventions: in England, 
332; in U.S., 320, 365–366, 418
Pauli, Wolfgang, 300
Peabody School, Cambridge, 55, 63, 74
Peano, G., 139
Pearl Harbor, 422–423
Pearl, Raymond, 185
Pearson’s (pub.), 338
Peary, Robert E., 89
Peck, Annie, 20
Pedagogical Seminary, 138
Peiping Union Medical College, 367
Peiping, 358–364
Pennsylvania, University of, 306, 350
Perrin, Jean Baptiste, 248–249
Perry, Ralph Barton, 129–130, 174, 181
Phi Beta Kappa, 91–92
Phillips, Henry Bayard, 210, 211, 244–
245, 288, 318
Philosophy of science, 462
Phoutrides, Aristides Evangelos, 175
Physical mathematics, 244, 248; see also 
Gibbs, Josiah Willard
Piscataqua River, Maine, 75
Pittsburgh, University of, 269
Plancherel, 277, 455
Planck, Max, 293, 296
Plattsburg, New York, 182
Poems (Rosenfeld), 67
Poincaré, Henri, 177, 240, 250, 363
Pólya, 350, 355
Polytechnicum, Berlin, 15
Poona, 476
Pope, Alexander, 57
Poritzky, Hillel, 196
Postulationalism, 240, 257–260
Potential theory, 279–281, 288, 291; see 
also Lebesgue integral
Power engineering, 273, 274, 416; 
see also Electrical engineering, 
theoretical
Prediction, theory of, 236, 399–400, 
402, 403, 405, 406, 414, 439, 447, 
458, 460–461, 476, 481
Predictors, 437–438
Prime-number theory, 321
Princeton University, 243, 269, 281, 
292, 324, 325, 336, 350, 361, 419, 
439; see also Institute for Advanced 
Study
Principia Mathematica (Whitehead and 
Russell), 148, 150, 155, 172, 257, 259
Probability and statistics, theories of, 
237, 244, 245–246, 325–326, 328, 
411–413, 459; see also Lebesgue 
integral, Monte Carlo method
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical 
Society, 149, 164
Proceedings of the London Mathematical 
Society, 247
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 273
Profit motive, 488
Projective Geometry (Veblen and Young), 
141
Pythagoras, 276, 297
Quantum mechanics and theory, 
260, 293, 297, 299–301, 313, 476; 
background of, 293–297
Quantum theory of atom, 300
Quasi-analytic functions, 362, 363

506 
Index
Racial relations, international, 442, 
444–445, 481
Radar, 327, 403–405, 407, 450
Radcliffe College, 27, 30, 175, 193, 214, 
243, 352, 385, 466
Rademacher, 350
Radio broadcasting and radiotelephony, 
274, 416; see also Communications 
engineering
Radioactive isotopes. See Uranium 
isotopes
Raisbeck, Barbara Wiener, 315, 328, 330, 
331, 337, 357, 360, 364, 374, 386, 
458, 466, 480
Raisbeck, Gordon, 466
Raman, Lady, 476
Raman, Sir C. V., 475, 476, 480
Ramos, García, 428
Rand, Dr. Benjamin (librarian, Harvard 
University), 137
Ransom, W.R., 82, 88
Rattray, F. C., 130–131
reading, early, 52–54
Reid, Mayne, 52, 85
Relativity, theory of, 148, 155, 236, 238, 
428
Remington Rand, Inc., 448
Renou, Father, 370, 371
Reports of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences, 414
Republic (Plato), 117, 134
Reserve Officers Training Corps, 187–
188, 193
Reuther, Walter, 448
Revere Beach, Massachusetts, 89
Rhines, George E. (Editor, Encyclopedia 
Americana), 189, 190, 194
Rice Institute, 104, 196, 208, 246
Richards, I. A., 146
Richardson, R. G. D., 317, 327
Rickshaw boys, 364
Riemann, George, 188
Ring and the Book (Browning), 20
Ritt, J. F., 196
River, The, 482
Rivera, Diego, 429–430
Robertson, Helen, 60
Rockefeller Foundation, 305, 351, 432
Rockefeller Institute, 405
Rockwood, Ray, 63
Rogers, Homer and Tyler, 76, 79
Roman Catholic Church, 488–489
Röntgen ray, 50
Rosenberg, Julius and Ethel, 443
Rosenblueth, Arturo, 347–348, 408, 419, 
425, 429, 430, 432, 433, 435, 436, 
456, 458, 463, 469
Rosenfeld, Moritz, 45, 67, 115
Rotterdam, Holland, 44, 153
Royal Society of England, 301n
Royce, Josiah, 129, 130, 134, 137, 259
Ruckmich, Christian, 118
Ruskin, John, 67, 133
Russell, Bertrand, 129, 134, 137, 139, 
141, 143, 148, 149, 150–152, 155, 
156, 161, 167, 168, 170, 171, 172, 
176, 177, 205, 236, 238, 239, 257, 
259–260, 332, 460
Saccheri, 258
Sacco-Vanzetti case, 318
Sage Fellows, 118
Salpêtrière, 234
San Francisco, California, 20 
Sandwich, New Hampshire, 110, 133
Santa Claus myth, 65–66
Santayana, George, 129, 151
Sarabhai, Mme. Vikram, 475
Sarabhai, Vikram, 475, 476
Sartre, Jean Paul, 467
Saslaw, Samuel, 353–354
Scanning, 322, 393
Schaub, E. L., 119
Schiller, F. C. S., 138
Schmidt, Karl, 134 
Schmidt, Robert, 309, 310, 311

Index 
507
Schofield, W. H., 27
Schröder, E., 134
Schrödinger, Erwin, 148, 151, 300, 313
Schuster, Sir Arthur, 277
Schwartz, Mr. and Mrs. Laurent, 455–
456, 468
science fiction, 67
Science Service, 466
Scientists, wartime mobilization of, 
231–232
Scottish Ballads, 254
Scribner’s Magazine, 123
Second Jungle Book (Kipling), 476
Second World War, 79, 104, 196
Secrets, military. See Security problems, 
U.S.
Security problems, U.S., 442–444, 447
Servetus, 429
Servomechanisms, 407, 416–417, 420, 
424; see also Cybernetics, Feedback 
mechanisms
Sessions, Roger, 103, 107, 108
Shaker village, 71
Shakespeare, 490
Shannon, Claude E., 352–353, 415, 416, 
454, 472
Shannon-Wiener definition of quantity, 
415
Shaw, George Bernard, 131
Sheffer, Dr. H. M., 184
“Shot effect,” electronic, 249, 416
Sidis, Boris, 103, 105106
Sidis, W. J., 103–106, 107, 108, 131, 
138, 139
Siegel, Armand, 232, 482
Silver Lake, New Hampshire, 188
Sinusoids, 276–277
Smith College, 287
Smith, W. Benjamin, 26–27
Smoluchowski, 212, 248
Society for the Advancement of 
Management, 448
Solar energy, 482
Somerville, Massachusetts, 29
Southard, E. A., 130
Space, co-ordinate representation of, 
263
Spanish Armada, 333
Spanish Jesuits in India, 481
Spanish Loyalists, 384
Spanish-American War, 32, 34
Spencer, Herbert, 81
Spermatozoa, 294
Spinoza, Benedict, 86
Springer’s mathematical series, 409
St. Catherine’s College, Cambridge 
University, 145
St. Joseph, Missouri, 21, 23 
St. Martin, Alexis, 49
St. Nicholas Magazine, 34, 52, 53, 79
Stanford University, 350, 355
Star radiation, 326
Statistical theory and mechanics, 237, 
245, 247–248, 297, 402, 410, 415; 
of communications engineering, 
423, 461; of nerve impulses, 432; 
see also Brain waves; Probability 
and statistics, theories of; Quantum 
theory
Steinmetz, Charles P., 275
Stevenson, R. L., 52
Stone, 390
Strand, the (pub.), 85, 338
Strasbourg, 256–257, 261, 263, 268–270, 
287, 311
Stratton, Wesley, 324
“Stray Leaves from My Life,” 17
Struik, Dirk Jan, 313, 319, 427
Struwwelpeter, 54
Studies in Synthetic Logic, 164
Suez, 371
Sunnyasi, 475–476
Swift, Jonathan, 132, 294, 301–302n2
Switching devices, 352, 415, 417, 419; 
human beings as, 439
Synapses, 419, 432

508 
Index
Syracuse University, 353
Szász, Mr. and Mrs., 164, 349–350
Szegö, 350, 355
Szilard, Leo, 377, 444
Tagore, Rabindranath, 482
Taj Mahal Hotel (Bombay), 473
Taj Mahal, 482
Tamarack Cottage, 110
Tamarkin, J. D., 317, 327, 328, 352
Tata Institute, 480, 481
Tauberian theorems, 306–307, 309–310, 
375
Taxco, 463
Taylor, Dr. (physician), 66
Taylor, Frederick W., 449
Taylor, Isaac, 76
Taylor, James S., 269, 270
Taylor, Sir Geoffrey, 247, 250
Technology Press (M.I.T.), 465
Telephone and telephone engineering, 
274, 276–277, 353, 391, 404, 416, 
416–417, 450
Television, 274, 322–323, 404, 416, 
416–417
Tenniel, Joseph, 151
Tesla, Nikola, 275
Thackeray, William Makepeace, 132, 180
Thaxter, Ronald, 102
Théorie des equations integrales (Fréchet), 
201
Théorie des equations integrales (Volterra), 
201
Theory of Ignorance, 75
“Theory of Ignorance, The,” 459
Thermodynamics, second law of, 460, 
462
Thilly, Frank, 109, 113, 119
This Week Magazine, 106
Thompson, Benjamin, 155
Three Scouts (Trowbridge), 85
Through the Looking Glass, 33
Time series, 409, 481, 491
Time study. See Motion study
Titanic, 132
Tokyo, University of, 357
Tolstoy, Count Leo, 57, 59, 60, 73
Top of the World, 182
Topology, 239–240, 249, 257
Touraine, La, S. S., 261, 268, 270
Tracking, target, 251–252
Trajectories, computation of, 333
Treasure Island, 52, 75
Trinity College (England), 331, 332, 
333, 338; see also Cambridge 
University
Trowbridge, J., 85
Tsanoff, R. A., 119
Tsing Hua University, 185, 354, 359, 
360, 361, 363, 364, 370
Tufts College, 81–89, 138, 235, 466
Tulane University, 26
Turbulence, theory of, 247
Turing, 150, 454
Twain, Mark, 17, 186
Tyler, H. W., 206, 243 
U.S.S.R., 271, 334, 370, 389, 477–
479; and U.S., 443, 444; see also 
Communism
Unions. See Labor and management
Unitarian Sunday School, 66
United Auto Workers, 448
University College (London), 453
University of Maine, 237, 175–187, 192, 
213
University of Mexico, 84
University of Missouri, 26, 27, 113
University of Puerto Rico, 194
University of Warsaw, 15
Uranium isotopes, 437–438
Urey, Harold, 437
Utah State College, 215
Vallarta, Manuel Sandoval, 212, 289, 
304, 347, 373, 422, 425, 427, 475

Index 
509
Vallarta, Maria Luisa, 373, 427
Van Kampen, E. R., 382
Vanderbilt, Cornelius, 25
Veblen, Oswald, 141–142, 194, 195, 196, 
197, 206, 240, 249, 304, 350, 390
Vectors, theory of, 264, 267
Vedic ethics, 475–476
Verne, Jules, 67, 85, 420
Vibrating systems, theory of, 276, 297, 
362
Vienna, Austria, 45–46
Vijayaraghavan, 479–480
Von Mises, 336, 377
Wade, C. S., 82, 119
Walsh, Joe, 268
Walter, Grey, 456, 457
Walton, 334
Warsaw, Poland, 15
Wave filters, 404
Waves and vibrations. See Fourier Series 
and integral
Way of All Flesh (Butler), 58
Weaver, Warren, 405, 432
Wells, H. G., 67, 151, 372, 420
Westinghouse Co., 269, 275
Weyl, Hermann, 350, 352, 363
Whig party (England), 301n2
Whiskey Ring, 25
White Mountains, 132
Whiteface Mountain, 188
Whitehead, Alfred North, 132, 150, 
155–156, 240, 257, 259, 262
Whitehead, Jessie, 262, 331
Widder, David, 196
Widener Library, Harvard University, 
137
Wiener, Adele (aunt), 42
Wiener, Augusta (aunt), 42
Wiener, Barbara. See Raisbeck, Barbara 
Wiener
Wiener, Bertha (Kahn), (mother of 
author), 21, 25–26, 31, 42–43, 44, 
49–50, 56, 66, 94–95, 114, 115, 153, 
157, 174, 221, 235, 243, 308, 314, 
343
Wiener, Bertha (sister), 66, 68, 77, 123, 
143, 154, 243, 287, 291, 308, 328
Wiener, Charlotte (aunt), 3, 42
Wiener, Constance (sister), 20, 32, 43, 
62, 66, 71–72, 123, 126, 143, 154, 
185, 188, 193, 197, 200, 201, 243, 
287–288, 312
Wiener, Freda (grandmother), 36, 42, 
173
Wiener, Fritz (brother), 77, 124–125, 
126, 154, 287
Wiener, Jake (uncle), 41, 43
Wiener, Leo (father of author), 11–21, 
27–28, 31, 32, 33, 35, 37, 40, 43, 
44, 51, 52, 55–60, 61–62, 67–68, 69, 
74–75, 94, 95–97, 114–115, 153–154, 
168, 180–181, 183, 221, 233ff., 239, 
241, 242, 243–244, 251, 253–254, 
261, 279, 283, 287, 305, 308, 314, 
315, 343–344, 355, 378, 384–385; 
influence on Norbert, 234, 235, 485–
486; intellectual interests, 254–255, 
reputation at Harvard, 253–254; 
youth and education, 253–254
Wiener, Margaret Engemann (Mrs. 
Norbert Wiener), 215–217, 303, 305, 
306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 312, 313, 
314, 316, 327, 328, 330, 336, 337, 
338, 339, 339, 343, 357, 364, 368, 
370, 371, 372, 373, 374, 375, 378, 
385, 387, 458, 467, 468
Wiener, Moritz (uncle), 42
Wiener, Norbert, 29ff.; aids displaced 
European refugee scholars, 349–
351; 377, 381, 390; books read as 
child, 31–32; Brown lectures, 327; 
Cambridge lectures on Fourier 
integral, 335; childhood and 
adolescence, 233–234; college and 
graduate degrees, 235–236; comments 

510 
Index
on: availability for consulting, 
466; bringing up children, 386; 
college professors, isolation from 
world affairs, 318; competitiveness 
among mathematicians, 282, 
284–285; faculty salaries, 317–
319, 375; French, German and 
English university life, 164; 
German intellectual tradition, 
254; intellectual and moral 
responsibilities of modern scientists, 
446–447, 485–491; lecture tours, 
465; mathematical aesthetics, 265–
267; mathematicians vs. engineers, 
418; medical theory of today, 436; 
need for East-West understanding, 
472; present-day scientists and 
engineers, 420–422; public attitude 
towards scientists, 447; science 
fiction, 338, 420; secretaries and 
dictation, 464–465; student bull 
sessions, 421; summer vacations 
for teachers, 315; warfare, present 
and past, 442; consciousness of 
Jewishness, 235; dispute with Bohr 
on “almost periodic functions,” 290; 
dispute with Kellog on potential 
theory, 279–282; experiments in 
topology, 239–240; eye operations, 
464; first pleasures in math with 
Hardy, 236; first problems in 
probability, 246; Harvard lectures on 
Whitehead, 240; inventions of, 319–
321, 332; marriage and honeymoon, 
305–310; marital adjustments, 
282–284, 307–309; M.I.T. 
appointment and promotion, 243, 
325; motivation for studying math, 
283; as novelist, 371; present work 
habits, 464–465; psychoanalysis of, 
378–380; reaction to Paris life, 262; 
research activities: with Bouligand on 
potential theory, 289; with Fréchet, 
264, 267; with Jackson at M.I.T., 273; 
with Philips on potential theory, 
288; on prime numbery theory and 
Tauberian theorems, 310, 311; on 
quasi-analytic function, 362; with 
Rosenblueth on physiology and 
cybernetics, 432–434; in World 
War I, 239, 242; in World War 
II, 389–424; see also Anti-aircraft 
artillery control data; Automation; 
Brain waves; Brownian motion; 
Clonus; Computing machines, 
high-speed; Cybernetics; Feedback 
mechanisms; Harmonic analysis; 
Harvard Medical School; Lebesgue 
integral; Massachusetts General 
Hospital; Nervous system; Statistical 
theory and mechanics; travels: see 
Cambridge; Copenhagen; China; 
Göttingen; India; International 
Mathematical Congress; Italy; Japan; 
Madrid; Mexico; Strasbourg
Wiener, Olga (cousin), 36, 37, 42, 43, 
67, 114, 173
Wiener, Peggy. See Blake, Peggy Wiener
Wiener, Solomon (grandfather), 13
Wiesner, Dr. Jerome, 433
Wildes, K. S., 382
Wiley, John, and Sons, 465
Willard, Winn, 63
Wilson, E. B., 210, 273
Winthrop, Massachusetts, 89
Wintner, Aurel, 381
Wolfson, Harry, 197–198
Woods, F. H., 210
Woods, Frederic Adams, 130, 134
Woolwich, 269
Worcester Foundation for Experimental 
Biology, 466
World War I, 125, 127, 132, 161, 166, 
167–168, 169–171, 181–182, 187, 
189–200, 239, 255, 270, 271, 305, 
Wiener, Norbert (cont.)

Index 
511
330, 333, 349, 387, 389, 399, 450, 
471
World War II, 333, 336, 383, 386ff, 437, 
441ff, 450, 471
Wren, Dean F. G., 88
Wright, Frank Lloyd, 357
Wyman, Arthur D., 53
Yale University, 245, 273
Yatsevich, Michael, 255
Yenching University, 185, 359–360
Yokohama, 357
Yosemite Valley, California, 20
Yoshida, 358
Young, J. W., 141
Young, Mr. and Miss, 332
Youth’s Companion, 63
Zamenhof, Lazerus Ludwig, 15
Zangwill, Israel, 47, 121, 143, 152
Zaremba, 281, 289
Zionism, 12
Zionist movement, 351
Zurich Federal Institute of Technology, 
455

