Susan E. Meyer 
ROCKWELL'S 

BE 
the stars of radio, television, 
and motion pictures captured 
the American imagination, book and 
magazine illustrators were the popular 
heroes of their day. Among this cele- 
brated group, Norman Rockwell emerges 
supreme, remaining America’s most be- 
loved artist even years after the passing 
of the golden age of illustration. Rock- 
well’s art consistently touched themes 
that transcend fashion and events and 
tapped the very wellspring of the 
American character. 
It is a well-known fact that Norman 
Rockwell drew upon his immediate 
environment for the subjects of his 
paintings. The people and events in his 
life were the people and events in his 
illustrations. But who are the people 
who paraded through the artist’s can- 
vases over the years? Here, for the first 
time, the world of Norman Rockwell is 
presented as he saw it. 
Meet the Edgertons of Vermont, 
whose son Buddy was Rockwell’s favor- 
ite boy scout. Meet Don Spaulding, a 
student of Rockwell’s, who also used 
Buddy Edgerton (as the Lone Ranger) 
in his comic book illustrations. And 
meet Rockwell’s friend the illustrator 
George Hughes, who also painted 
Buddy Edgerton for the Saturday 
Evening Post. These are the people 
Rockwell knew and painted, and they 
formed a unique community of family, 
artists, and neighbors. 
For those who are unfamiliar with 
Rockwell’s work as well as those devoted 
buffs who know his illustrations inti- 
mately, here is a world of new faces and 
recollections never before published. 
A unique feature of this volume is a 
directory of Rockwell’s people, in which 
243 models used in his illustrations is 
identified by a detail of the painting or 
drawing and is keyed to the page on 
which the work is reproduced. 
Author Susan E. 
Meyer, noted 
authority on Amer- 
ican illustration, 
worked closely with 
Norman Rockwell’s 
immediate family in 
preparing this book. 
ie 
She drew from 
Rockwell’s personal photographic files, 
selecting hundreds of photos never 
before published. She has interviewed 
nearly 50 of Rockwell’s friends, rela- 
tives, and neighbors who posed for him 
through the years. Out of this journey 
into the past emerges a portrait of the 
artist behind the easel. 
- 
(continued on back flap) 



NORMAN 
ROCK WELLS 
fee 


Susan E. Meyer 
NORMAN 
ROCKWELL’S 
FEW PLE 
Harry N. Abrams, Inc., Publishers, New York 

FOR MARSHA 
Editor: Edith M. Pavese 
Designer: Patrick Cunningham 
Rights and Reproductions: Barbara Lyons 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Meyer, Susan E. 
Norman Rockwell’s people. 
Includes index. 
1. Rockwell, Norman, 1894-1978. 
2. Painters— 
United States—Biography. 
I. Rockwell, Norman, 
1894-1978. 
II. Title. 
ND237.R68M49 
759.13 
[B} 
81-1197 
ISBN 0-8109-1777-7 
AACR2 
Illustrations © 1981 The Estate of Norman Rockwell 
All copyright and other rights in the photographs of the models are the 
sole and exclusive property of The Estate of Norman Rockwell. 
Photographs of the models obtained courtesy the Old Corner House Collection. 
Published in 1981 by Harry N. Abrams, Incorporated, New York 
All rights reserved. No part of the contents of this book may be 
reproduced without the written permission of the publishers 
Printed and bound in Japan 

Contents 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 6 
DIRECTORY OF ROCKWELL’S PEOPLE 8 
PREFACE 13 
* 
INTRODUCTION 19 
€ 
NEW ROCHELLE: ANTICS AND ASPIRATIONS 
Introduction 34 
° 
Franklin Lischke 42 
Wilson, Malone, Campion 46 
+ 
Fredericks and Seal 48 
James K. Van Brunt 50 
« 
Fred Hildebrandt 54 
€ 
“ARLINGTON: FRIENDSHIP AND HARD WORK 
Introduction 58 
*° 
The Schaeffers 74 
+ 
The Athertons 88 
The Hugheses 94 
+ 
The Art Students 98 
+* 
The Edgertons 106 
The Schafers 116 
* 
The Neighbors 122 
€ 
THE FAMILY: MODELS AT HOME 
Introduction 160 
* 
Mary Rockwell 166 
*© 
Jarvis Rockwell 168 
Tom Rockwell 174 
+ 
Peter Rockwell 176 
€ 
STOCKBRIDGE: CELEBRATION AND MOURNING 
Introduction 184 
* 
The Mahoneys 196 
+ 
Louie Lamone 198 
The Campbells 200 
* 
Ed Locke 202 
+ 
Stockbridge Neighbors 206 
Models for Freedom 212 
€ 
NORMAN ROCKWELL: PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST 
Introduction 218 
* 
Portraits of the Artist 224 
+ 
Golden Rule 234 
e 
APPENDIX 236 
INDEX 239 

Acknowledgments 
t would have been impossible to venture into Rockwell’s past without 
the guidance of Rockwell’s people. “Another Rockwell book?” I 
heard many times from those who were weary of such interviews. 
It was their love for Norman Rockwell that rallied them for this 
project, because they knew I was looking at the subject afresh with the 
generous assistance of the Rockwell family itself. With almost no excep- 
tion, I was received with an overwhelming warmth and enthusiasm as | 
returned to Rockwell’s haunts and friends with tape recorder in hand. The 
following people were interviewed for this book, and to them all I owe my 
sincerest thanks: 
MAXINE ATHERTON 
BUDDY EDGERTON 
PATRICK O’NEIL 
MARY ATHERTON VARCHEVER 
CLARA EDGERTON 
JARVIS ROCKWELL 
JOHN BENEDICT 
EDITH EDGERTON ZINDEL 
MOLLY ROCKWELL 
HANK BERGMANS 
JOY EDGERTON FREISATZ 
PETER ROCKWELL 
HENRY BERGMANS 
CARL HESS 
RICHARD ROCKWELL 
MARIE BRIGGS 
MRS. ROSE HOYT 
TOM ROCKWELL 
LESTER BRUSH 
GEORGE HUGHES 
LEE SCHAEFFER GOODFELLOW 
MRS. LAWRENCE BRUSH 
JACKIE JAMES WALKER 
MEAD SCHAEFFER 
DR. DONALD CAMPBELL 
WALTER KELLY 
MARY AND CHRIS SCHAFER 
DORIS CROFUT WRIGHT 
LOUIE LAMONE 
WALTER SCOTT 
ROY CROFUT 
FRANKLIN LISCHKE 
DON SPAULDING 
JANET CROSS KEOUGH 
ED LOCKE 
LUCILLE TOWNE HULTON 
YVONNE CROSS DORR 
DAVID LOVELESS 
MARY WHALEN LEONARD 
FRANK DOLSON 
MOE AND JOAN MAHONEY 
ARDIS EDGERTON CLARK 
ANN MARSH 
Each of those interviewed helped me identify Rockwell’s models from the 
paintings, a process that became a marvelous detective game. Because | 
discovered that this who’s who is fascinating to Rockwell admirers, I 
include the names of all the models made known to me (about 140 of 
them!), apologizing in advance for those who may still remain anonymous 
and for some inadvertent misidentifications. The detective hunt will cer- 
tainly continue after this book is published. 
One individual in this list deserves a special note of thanks for her extra 
care and consideration in making my job not only easier but downright 
enjoyable. From the first day I met Clara Edgerton at a family gathering in 
Arlington, I knew we would be friends. She squired me everywhere, into 
the homes of her neighbors and through the hills overlooking the Batten 
Kill River. 
If ever there was such a thing as southern hospitality in 
Vermont, Clara extended it to me. 
Having dealt with the families of important people before, I was prepared 

for the tension that often arises when delicate family issues run the risk of 
exposure. Not so with the Rockwell family. With the Rockwells, matters of 
delicacy are matters for laughter, introspection, examination, perhaps, but 
not for secrecy. “Ask me any questions you have about my father. I’ll be as 
interested in exploring the answers as you are,” assured Jarvis Rockwell. For 
their candor, generosity, and humor I am most thankful to Tom, Peter, 
Jarvis, and Molly Rockwell. The family’s close reading of my text was 
extremely helpful in correcting several inaccuracies that have been perpet- 
uated through the years, and I am particularly grateful to Tom Rockwell for 
giving me the exclusive right to publish several of his mother’s letters about 
her husband. Written in 1932, and never before published, these letters 
provide an extraordinary insight into Mary and Norman Rockwell’s rela- 
tionship and describe vividly the artist’s struggle with his work. 
If the family proved supportive, the custodians of the Norman Rockwell 
estate were equally helpful to me in writing this book. David Wood, the 
Director of the Old Corner House in Stockbridge, and Laurie Norton, the 
registrar, could not have been more cooperative in providing me with 
photographs taken directly from Norman Rockwell’s personal photographic 
file and for their guidance through the morass of information at my dispos- 
al. My gift to the Old Corner House of the tapes from my interviews with 
Rockwell’s people will hardly be thanks enough for their help. 
Others along the way have provided invaluable help as well. Linda 
Davidson had an extremely rich interview with Peter Rockwell in Rome, 
providing much material for the book, for which I am grateful. Judy and 
Alan Goffman and Martin Diamond were most generous in lending me 
Rockwell transparencies so that so many of the original paintings could be 
reproduced for the first time. 
At the publishing company of Harry N. Abrams I have many friends who 
guided this book through some stormy seas. In particular, I give my special 
thanks to Lena Tabori, who recognized I was ready to write another book 
after a two-year hiatus and rushed to encourage me at a time when | was 
afflicted with many self-doubts about returning to the typewriter. Edith 
Pavese, Barbara Lyons, and Patrick Cunningham were an unbeatable team 
in ushering the book from concept to design. If this book is successful, it’s 
because all these professionals had confidence in me. 
Finally, my family, to whom I always owe so much. My mother, now 
most skilled at tolerating the changeable temperaments of the writers in her 
family, gave me great encouragement. And to my extended family, Rose- 
mary and Wayne Blake, my debt of gratitude is everlasting. Without their 
support—in more ways than one—this book might never have come to 
pass. Norman Rockwell forms a personal bond between us, a bond that 
made it possible for me to undertake entirely new directions in my work. 
And to Marsha Melnick, my best friend and business partner, I give my 
thanks for her unfaltering trust through so many firsts. 

DIRECTORY OF ROG 
KR VEE Ss ECrr. 
JOHN 
MARY 
JOHN 
ROBERT 
ROBERT 
FLOYD 
HANK 
ATHERTON 
ATHERTON 
BYRNE BAUER 
ART BECKTOFT 
BENEDICT 
BENEDICT, SR. 
BENEDICT, JR. 
BENTLEY 
BERGMANS 
203 
144 
BARBARA 
JASON BRAMAN 
BROOKS 
BILLIE BROWN 
HARRY BROWN 
197 
208 
ANN BRUSH 
JOHN BRUSH 
LARRY BRUSH 
LESTER BRUSH 
109 
122 
122 
BETSY 
DR. DONALD 
CORDELIA 
CAMPBELL 
CAMPBELL 
DAVE CAMPION 
TOM CAREY 
 EDDIECARSON 
DICK CLEMENS 
COMAR 
MR. COMAR 
DWIGHT COWAN 
201 
OSCEOLLA 
CHARLES 
MRS. CHARLES 
CRANDALL 
CROFUT 
CROFUT 
DORIS CROFUT 
RENA CROFUT 
ROY CROFUT 
GLADYS CROSS 
JANET CROSS 
“* 
208 
109 
143 
109 
143 
JOHN 
JOHN 
ARDIS 
EDGERTON 
CROSS, SR. 
YVONNE CROSS 

BUDDY EDGERTON 
CLARA EDGERTON 
JIM EDGERTON 
122 
JIMMY 
EDGERTON 
POP FREDERICKS 
FREEMAN GROUT 
FRANK HALL 
114 
AMELIA 
MRS. JESSIE 
JESSIE 
HARRINGTON 
HARRINGTON 
HARRINGTON 
CARL HESS 
208 
104 
HOISINGTON 
FRED HILDEBRANDT 
CHILDREN 
IRENE HOYT 
MARY IMMEN 
130 
235 
167 
OLIVER 
ELIZABETH 
MRS. EDGAR 
FLORENCE 
CHARLES 
KEMPTON 
LOUIE LAMONE 
ALBERT LA BOMBARD 
LA BOMBARD 
LAWRENCE 
LINDSEY 
LINDSEY 
ie 
i 
a 
44 
199 
208 
115 
ED LOCKE 
DAVID LOVELESS 
JIM McCABE 
HARVEY McKEE 
202 
205 

JOAN AND MOE 
JOHN L. 
MAHONEY 
MALONE 
ANN MARSH 
= CHUCK MARSH 
DON MARSH 
167 
167 
GRANDMA 
BILL 
ANNE MORGAN 
MOSES 
NIP NOYES 
OBANHEIM 
th 
BILLY PAINE 
GENE PELHAM 
DUANE PETERS 
171 
134 
168 
CYNTHIA 
GEOFFREY 
ROCKWELL 
GAIL ROCKWELL 
ROCKWELL 
JARVIS ROCKWELL 
Up 
ag ; 
é Sie 
f 
£ 
Fi i 
MRS. NANCY 
ROCKWELL 
MARY ROCKWELL 
DR. GEORGE 
TOM ROCKWELL 
' 
RUSSELL 
144 

ELIZABETH 
SCHAEFFER 
LEE SCHAEFFER 
MEAD SCHAEFFER 
CHRIS SCHAFER 
JOHN SCHAFER 
MARY SCHAFER 
HARRY SEAL 
118 
CLARA 
SQUIRES 
BILL 
WALT SMITH 
SPOT 
SQUIRES 
CHILDREN 
HERB SQUIRES 
WALT SQUIRES 
ED SULLIVAN 
SUNDERMEYER 
me 
50 
MRS. RALPH 
WALKER 
MARY WHALEN 
MRS. WHEATON 
MR. WHEATON 
ORIN WILCOX 
BOB WILLIAMS 
171 
151 
MRS. GEORGE 
DON WINSLOW 
ZIMMER 

Artist Before a Blank Canvas. Saturday Evening Post cover, October 8, 1938. 
12 * PREFACE 

Preface 
nlike most of his admirers, I was not introduced to Norman 
Rockwell through the pages of the Saturday Evening Post. | 
would have to say that my family considered itself a bit too 
high brow to fancy the prose and pictures of the weekly 
magazine as a regular diet, so I never recall seeing a copy of the Post when I 
was a child. By the time I was developing my own patterns of reading, the 
magazine—sinking badly—had already left me behind. 
It was not until I landed an editorial job at Watson-Guptill Publications 
in 1963, shortly after graduating from college, that I discovered Norman 
Rockwell. Assigned to study all the books written by the company’s found- 
ers, | was directed to Norman Rockwell Illustrator by Arthur L. Guptill. 
Released in 1946—and long out of print—this was at that point the only 
volume ever published on the illustrator. (The book was reissued twenty- 
five years later by the same publisher.) Through reading this publication I 
made several discoveries about art and writing, discoveries that dramati- 
cally altered the direction of my career. Fresh from my art history courses at 
the university, I had regarded the field of art and art criticism as somehow 
sacrosanct: art discussion required a reverential tone and a special vocabu- 
lary, and true artists were never commercial. Arthur Guptill’s book chal- 
lenged all that. The author’s tone was personal, downright friendly, and the 
illustrator’s work fascinated me. How could I reconcile these contradic- 
tions? My comfortable prejudices began to shatter. Was art meant to be 
accessible to a popular audience? Was art writing meant to be understood by 
everyone? After all, there must be some standards to uphold! 
I struggled with this thought for some time and concluded that I had 
learned more about the creative process by reading Guptill’s book than | 
had by reading all those lofty tomes and painstaking criticism required by 
my courses in college. There was nothing painful here: Norman Rockwell 
was a joy. 
As an artist himself, Arthur Guptill was particularly concerned with 
process— how an artist converts that vague sense of an idea into something 
concrete. In his writing Guptill conveyed both the drama and tedium 
involved in creative execution, not embarrassed to display his own child- 
like excitement for the subject. Through his writing the reader is with the 
artist, not above him, an empathy I found refreshing. In subsequent years 
PREFACE «13 

my enthusiasm for Guptill inspired me to adapt several of his art instruction 
books—written in the 1920s for the most part—to a contemporary audi- 
ence, and my own writing became more approachable as I gained confi- 
dence in the notion that art is approachable. 
If Guptill introduced me to a way of writing about artists, Norman 
Rockwell introduced me to the world of illustration, one I had never known 
before. This was no second-rate hack selling his soul for commerce. He was 
proud of his calling, considered himself part of an important tradition. Here 
was a story-teller in a contemporary context performing some of the same 
commercial functions the Old Masters had performed for their patrons. The 
humor was gentle, without rancor, and the scenes were familiar to me. 
Beyond the content, however, was the extraordinary skill he demonstrated. 
His sense of composition and color was superb, his draftsmanship impecca- 
ble. He was, as Peter Rockwell has called him, “a thinking painter.” And 
he was a revelation to me. 
My only regret is not having met Rockwell when I was first so inspired by 
his work. By the time I became acquainted with him in 1975, he was 
already in decline. Then Editor of American Artist magazine, I had commis- 
sioned the elderly illustrator to paint a cover for our bicentennial issue. 
During the months he worked on the painting, I visited with him several 
times and offered my suggestions when he asked for them. I felt deeply 
touched by the sadness that flickered through his frail blue eyes, and I was 
aware that he seemed embarrassed by the indignity of being held captive by 
age. It was hard not to reach out and embrace him, to protect him from 
what must have been humiliating exposure for the distinguished artist. I 
must have known then that his painting for American Artist would be his 
last magazine cover. 
To prepare for his book in 1945, Arthur Guptill ventured to Arlington, 
Vermont, where Norman Rockwell was then living. During Guptill’s stay 
he met many of the people mentioned in this book. It did not escape me 
that | was making the same trip thirty-five years later. Rockwell had moved 
from Arlington years before, and many of his friends were gone, but I found 
much of the past still vibrant in Arlington. My time there made clear to me 
that Rockwell’s emotional bond between the people in his life and the 
people in his pictures was strongest in Arlington, which explains why so 
much of this book is devoted to his friends, neighbors, and paintings from 
that location. 
The information obtained for the text of this book was gathered directly 
from Rockwell’s people and from his own photographic files in his Stock- 
bridge studio. The only published material used for reference was what 
Rockwell himself had written. Occasionally I refer to his book adapted from 
his course at the Famous Artists Schools, called Rockwell on Rockwell 
(Watson-Guptill, 1979), and throughout this book I have quoted from 
14 « PREFACE 

Rockwell’s superb autobiography, My Adventures as an Illustrator (Double- 
day, 1960). The latter is the single most valuable source of information on 
Norman Rockwell, documenting not only the events in his life, but the 
illustrator’s charming character as well. One word of caution: Rockwell’s 
own writing does not, in itself, guarantee the accuracy of the information. 
Rockwell’s version of the past is not always entirely reliable. “My father 
believed that the truth was interesting only so long as it didn’t disturb a 
good story,” observed Peter Rockwell. 
On the other hand, Norman Rockwell's People was not designed to be a 
systematically organized documentary. Although the material here derives 
from original sources, the book is not a biography. On the contrary, these 
recollections are what might be termed “sketches from life,” fragments 
drawn from memories and assembled to form a composite portrait of the 
illustrator. There are, of course, certain consequences that result from this 
unorthodox approach. The form and content of the information were 
necessarily determined by the number and nature of the people inter- 
viewed. Because of this fact, a few observations are in order here. 
In this book, I have made every effort to record accurately what Rock- 
well’s friends remembered and how they narrated these remembrances, and 
in so doing | surrendered to the idiosyncrasies inherent in the way memory 
tends to function. I asked Rockwell’s friends and relatives to reach back 
many years, to recall impressions and events that may have occurred as long 
as forty years earlier. (One even reached back sixty years!) Reviving the 
past generally means fastening onto two extreme methods of recall: through 
explicit details or through broad impressions; either too much detail or too 
little. Portrayal of the past tends to be subjective, demonstrating as much 
about the people themselves as it does about the subject at hand. Contra- 
dictory impressions can be reconciled only by considering their source. A 
single characteristic—was Rockwell shy, for example—would be inter- 
preted one way by a son, another way by a colleague from the city, and 
another way by a farmer living next door in Vermont. In fact, the compos- 
ite portrait must allow for the very complexities of Rockwell’s temperament 
that would reveal to some his urbane, party-loving nature, and to others his 
retiring and somewhat bashful character. I have considered all these im- 
pressions equally valid, maintaining that human nature cannot be so neatly 
compartmentalized, regardless of the journalistic temptation to select and 
exaggerate for the sake of a good story. 
Consequently, I have not attempted to reconcile what may appear to be 
contradictory observations. Only where memory was clearly inaccurate in 
recalling precise facts—dates, names, or similar data—have | altered the 
information presented by Rockwell or by his people. I must emphasize, 
however, that these lapses in interpretation affect only the nuances of the 
total picture. The consistencies of general impression far outweigh the 
discrepancies in detail. 
PREBACE = 25 

The number of people interviewed was dictated by those who still 
survive, and by their particular rapport with the illustrator. Several indi- 
viduals intimately connected to Rockwell have passed away: his profes- 
sional models, two of his three wives, and some of his closest friends, such as 
Jim Edgerton, Jack Atherton, Harry Dwight, to name a few. (Mead Schaef- 
fer died only four weeks after I had talked with him.) Clearly, I was racing 
against time to reach the older friends who still remain, having already lost 
the opportunity of meeting some of the most significant. 
Judging from all the interviews held for this book, I concluded that 
Norman Rockwell had no enemies in his lifetime. Being loved was essential 
for him—whether this was achieved through the covers of America’s most 
beloved magazine, or through a casual “hello” called out to a neighbor on a 
street corner. “He made you feel important” was a theme consistently 
restated by those who knew him. His warmth was the lifeblood of his work 
and of his connection to everyone he encountered throughout his life. 
As can be expected, his good nature won him many friends, but also 
attracted opportunists. He wrote checks freely, gave away paintings casu- 
ally, and frequently opened his studio to his admirers. Naturally, such 
generosity invited its share of avarice. “None of Norman’s closest friends 
ever owned an original Rockwell,” one friend observed. “You got a painting 
only by asking for one, because Norman was too embarrassed to offer— 
thinking it a pretentious gift—and his good friends were too embarrassed to 
ask.” 
The avarice that continues to flourish indirectly affected this book. Two 
gentlemen who were regular recipients of Rockwell’s generosity refused an 
interview when they heard I was not buying information. (My pride and 
principles prevented me from accepting their terms. Although the presence 
of these individuals is sorely missed from these pages, I feel certain that 
history will exonerate me from such omission.) In fairness, such opportun- 
ism is obviously a factor of the astonishing commercial rewards derived from 
Rockwell’s art. Signed reproductions have escalated in price since his 
passing. Porcelain figurines whose three-dimensionality violate his art 
continue to sell for inflated prices. The value of Rockwell’s originals matches 
those of the nineteenth-century masters. Tourism to Rockwell’s hometown 
is profitable to the commercial community. Such events in the marketplace 
can surely exaggerate even the most modest character flaws in an individual. 
It is ironic, indeed, that those who have gained from these exorbitant profits 
are often those who commend Rockwell for his “humility.” 
Fortunately, the opportunists in his life represented a minority of his 
friends. In nearly every instance friends and acquaintances expressed a 
strong sense of privilege for having known him at all. These are the 
individuals selected for interview, and their recollections constitute the 
major content of this volume. Even years later, the memory of the artist as a 
modest and thoughtful man emerges clearly, and all those I interviewed 
16 * PREFAGE 

were eager to return the kindness he had extended to them. Their eagerness 
to work with me derives from their enduring loyalty to Rockwell’s gentle 
nature. Dr. Campbell in Stockbridge expressed it eloquently: “I would 
happily put my small contribution toward anything that redounds to his 
memory.” Rockwell’s fans may have tramped the gardens around his home, 
peered through the windows of his studio, pulled at his sleeve for an 
autograph, but Rockwell’s friends continue to respect the privacy of their 
good friend. Their discretion on matters of delicacy described more about 
their affection for the family than any of the most explicit anecdotes might 
have revealed. 
Although they are loyal, Rockwell’s people are not reverential. They 
talked expansively about their good friend, without enshrining him in 
piety. I sensed that they felt fortunate in knowing him because he was a fine 
human being first and foremost, not because he was a genius in their midst. 
His family, friends, and neighbors regarded him as one of them, not 
superior to them, a true credit to his affable and modest nature. 
It is extraordinary that one illustrator has managed to maintain such 
phenomenal preeminence for so many years. He is as beloved posthumously 
as he was when he was the Post’s child wonder in 1916. There were other 
illustrators who achieved considerable fame in their lifetime, but none who 
sustained the consistent enthusiasm of the public for so many decades. 
There are illustrators who have become obscure, even though their images 
may still be familiar. Uncle Sam’s “I Want You” poster, for example, is far 
better known than its originator, James Montgomery Flagg. The Arrow 
Collar Man is generally not associated with its creator, J.C. Leyendecker. 
Although the Post certainly provided the visibility that made Rockwell 
familiar to millions, he never painted more than eleven covers in any one 
year for the weekly, and the less familiar J.C. Leyendecker illustrated nearly 
as many during his lifetime. 
Norman Rockwell, more than any of his colleagues, was tapping themes 
that have endured. His vision of humanity transcended current fashion and 
events by reaching into the deeper recesses of our dreams and memories. It 
was not the War he depicted, for example, but the soldier’s homecoming; it 
was not the Depression he illustrated, but the cherished moments between 
father and son. The yearnings for tenderness, for laughter, for peace have 
not changed with the fashions, and his pictures continue to have meaning. 
Rockwell’s paintings were an extension of the man. He believed in what 
he painted. His humanity was genuine, and what the public loved in his 
paintings his friends loved in him. In the end, it was his temperament—as 
much as his artistic gift—that made him America’s favorite illustrator. 
Susan E. Meyer 
New York City, 1981 
PREFACE = 17 

1962. Private collection. 
January 13, 
’ 
onnoisseur. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover 
= 
a 
The C 
18 « INTRODUCTION 

Introduction 
orman Rockwell never experienced real hardship in getting 
started, unlike most illustrators. His work was published regu- 
larly by the time he was eighteen years old, and he sold his first 
cover to the Post when he was only twenty-two. But Rockwell 
was not alone in his calling. He began his career in an environment that 
was receptive to his talents. A variety of forces at the turn of the century 
made it possible for Rockwell, and others like him, to rise to preeminence. 
The Ennobling Profession 
“To us illustration was an ennobling profession,” Rockwell maintained. 
“That’s part of the reason | went into illustration. It was a profession with a 
great tradition, a profession I could be proud of.” 
This profession Rockwell refers to may have had a great tradition, but it 
was not a very long one. American illustration had come into its own only 
during the Civil War, and Rockwell entered the limelight just when it had 
reached its heyday. Illustration had become the most significant way for 
business to reach a wide, popular audience. Only through printed images 
could books, magazines, and merchandise be sold effectively. Because 
illustration influenced so much commerce, 
these artists were in great 
demand by publishers and manufacturers; the potential for a talented and 
ambitious illustrator was enormous. As a result, book and magazine illustra- 
tors were the celebrities and heroes of their day. The tremendous activity in 
advertising and in book and periodical publishing—adult and children’s 
books, family magazines, youth magazines, humor magazines—produced 
a diverse group of clients and a selection of specialized illustrators to 
serve them. 
There were, in fact, more opportunities than there were artists. Every 
editor and publisher competed fiercely for the limited supply of talent 
available to them. With their extravagant promotion and their vast circula- 
tions, magazines constituted the most spectacular—if not the most 
enduring—showcase for creative talent. Radio, motion pictures, and tele- 
vision would eclipse the printed word and picture as the greatest source of 
public entertainment, but until their arrival the magazine captured the 
exclusive attention of millions of Americans and, like the newer arrivals, 
INTRODUCTION 
* 19 

represented in their day a particular form of show business. 
Norman Rockwell, therefore, was not alone in his status as a celebrity. 
He was part of a respected group of professionals who had captured the 
public’s imagination with visual images. “We were exalted in those days,” 
recalled Mead Schaeffer shortly before he passed away in 1980. “Do you 
know what it’s like to be venerated just for doing what you love to do?” 
Out of all this activity developed illustrators of a wide variety of artistic 
persuasions. There was the group from the Brandywine River Valley near 
Wilmington, Delaware, for example, whose members derived inspiration 
from their mentor, Howard Pyle. This was an inspired crew of painters, 
including N.C. Wyeth and Frank Schoonover, who knew just how to 
inject drama and reality into classic, heroic tales of adventure, stories in 
which chivalry and daring were virtues of the highest order. Then there 
were the decorative illustrators—Will Bradley and Maxfield Parrish, for 
example—whose talents were ideal for posters and magazine covers where 
pleasing line, space, and flat colors would tantalize the eye of the casual 
passer-by. There were the humorists—such as James Montgomery Flagg 
and John Held—and the chic New York illustrators—such as Charles 
Dana Gibson and Harrison Fisher—who portrayed fashionable society in 
sophisticated situations. Cartoons and classics; children’s stories; sports and 
fashion; the Wild West: all described through alluring images and delivered 
as a regular diet to the American public. 
Rockwell felt an artistic kinship to all these illustrators—with particular 
admiration for Howard Pyle—and he was like them in many ways. Almost 
without exception, these popular heroes shared a natural affinity for the 
American ideals of the Victorian and Edwardian eras, and they expressed 
these views in their work and in their personal philosophies. Their attitudes 
provided an important function in a nation creating an identity out of a 
cauldron of mixed ethnic ingredients. Through pictures of urban and rural 
life, these popular illustrators provided the public with its first image of 
American ideals. All readers could confirm their American identity through 
these artists, and the thousands of immigrants pouring into the country 
each day would find in the pages of American magazines prototypes after 
which they could pattern themselves. The Gibson Girl and the Arrow 
Collar Man became symbols of the ideal American, and Rockwell’s pictures 
described universal human experiences placed within a particularly Ameri- 
can context. 
For their skills, the illustrators were amply rewarded and lived well from 
the extravagant sums they received. As early as 1903, for example, Charles 
Dana Gibson was awarded a contract from Collier's for one hundred pen-and- 
ink drawings at the fee of $100 each. The publications treated their artists 
with respect. The established illustrators were regarded as authorities on the 
tastes of their public and most publications gave them total freedom. (It was 
not until the arrival of the so-called “art director” that the control shifted 
20 + INTRODUCTION 

The Gibson Girl by Charles Dana Gibson. 
from artist to publisher, a transition most illustrators found abhorrent. ) 
These attractions—the freedom to be creative and the commensurate 
rewards—made illustration a most attractive field to pursue. 
But it took more than ambition and talent to establish an illustrator. 
Temperament was also a factor. The ingredients necessary in this area were 
common to all those who succeeded, and Norman Rockwell especially 
shared these required traits. 
First, illustration required discipline. After all, vast sums of money were 
invested in fixed publishing dates and the illustrator was obliged to with- 
stand the pressures and meet deadlines reliably—without sacrificing the 
quality of his work in the process. This meant sustained application; no 
time for excessive indulgence in personal pains and pleasures that might 
prove distracting. Stability was crucial. Such application required a genuine 
passion for work. Without exception, all the illustrators of their day shared 
this passion. Work was their joy, their pain, their sustenance. They could 
not survive without it. Although a very different illustrator from Rockwell, 
N.C. Wyeth was convinced of the need for discipline, and put it this way: 
“There’s only one kind of work that counts, and that is constant, sustained 
effort. Drive, drive, drive in the one direction—painting. Without a break. 
It is the only way any man ever accomplished anything worthwhile.” 
While discipline and hard work required hours alone in the studio, the 
illustrator could not succeed by working exclusively in isolation. Collabora- 
tion with others was constantly required. To work with editors, models, 
writers, he had to be flexible, efficient, good natured. A sense of humor 
helped, too. He had to learn how to surrender his pride if an editor rejected 
an idea or suggested changes; he had to conform to restrictions of size, 
color, and subject that might be placed on him by a publication. Rockwell 
was not unaware of this need for humility when he wrote in his autobiography, 
A fine arts painter has to satisfy only himself. No outside restric- 
tions are imposed on his work. The situation is very different in 
commercial art. The illustrator must satisfy his client as well as 
himself. He must express a specific idea so that a large number of 
people will understand it; and there must be no mistake as to what 
he is trying to convey. Then there are the deadlines, taboos as to 
subject matter; ... the proportions of the picture must conform to 
the proportions of the magazine. Most fine arts painters feel that 
these restrictions constitute pure slavery. 
It was impossible for an illustrator to remain distant from the practicali- 
ties his profession demanded. It was equally undesirable for him to remain 
distant from his public. After all, his work was popular only as long as he 
continued to appeal to the appetites of the day. Unless he was prepared to 
face the consequences of falling behind the times, he simply had to keep up 
INTRODUCTION «» 21 

to date. “To stay in touch with the trend,” Rockwell said, “I keep my ear so 
close to the ground it’s full of dirt.” The very best illustrators—Norman 
Rockwell and N.C. Wyeth among them—were able to stay in touch with 
contemporary tastes, without disrupting the features that made them unique 
as artists. But the tension was always there; the uncertainty that fickle 
Time would shove the illustrator aside. Knowing the penalty for careless 
repetition, these illustrators were ever vigilant. 
These generalizations about illustrators may help explain why they were 
so self-sufficient as a group, and why there was a strong sense of camaraderie 
among them. For the most part, they enjoyed each other’s company. They 
tended to be witty, urbane, and well informed. The illustrators derived 
enormous pleasure from their success—the material comforts as well as the 
psychic rewards from having received public recognition for their private 
22 * INTRODUCTION 
ABOVE 
Winter by N. C. Wyeth. 
Original oil painting for 
“The Moods” by George 
T. Marsh for Scribner’s 
Magazine, December, 1909. 
RIGHT 
A Swiss Admiral by Max- 
field Parrish. Original oil 
painting, 1910. Private 
collection. 
FAR RIGHT 
Side by Side—Britannia! by 
James Montgomery Flagg. 
World War I poster, 1918. 
Collection Susan E. Meyer. 

efforts. There was enough prosperity, both actual and spiritual, that they 
tended to be non-competitive with each other, free of jealous yearnings. 
The illustrators respected each other’s work and shared the tensions that 
deadlines always pressed upon them. They asked and took advice freely, 
accustomed to being objective about the success or failure of a current 
project. They knew how to have a good time. Because of their gift for 
fantasy they enjoyed games and costume parties; they loved good food, 
literature, and—always—good art. They had reason to be proud and they 
knew it. 
The Next Picture 
“T think my work is improving. I start each picture with the same high 
hopes, and if I never seem able to fulfill them I still try my darnedest.” 
Each morning Norman Rockwell entered his studio and set into motion a 
process that continued to challenge him for over sixty years. Each painting 
renewed him. He was consumed by the process. Like an athlete in training, 
he exercised daily and was always preparing for the next feat before him. 
From the painful formation of an idea, the artist moved quite methodically 
and deliberately to the completion of the canvas, a process that required 
See ee 
Britain's 
Dee “1918 
MASS MEETING 
INTRODUCTION =* 23 

concentration and patience, for the painting rarely developed without at 
least a troubled moment or two. There was, of course, the jubilance 
generally experienced at the earliest stage of painting, and there were the 
familiar frustrations that could seem unendurable. A painting could take 
anywhere from three days to three months to meet his standards; the average 
painting took about three weeks. And many were discarded along the way. 
This was all part of the process that drove him year after year, until he could 
paint no more. 
To set the process in motion, Rockwell tended to follow a rather 
straightforward course. First was the idea. For an advertisement or calendar, 
the range of ideas was necessarily more restricted because of the nature of 
the assignments, but with the Post Rockwell was given full rein. He would 
search for an idea “which makes the reader want to sigh and smile at the 
same time.” But the process wasn’t easy and he had to work himself up to it. 
I know of no painless process for giving birth to a picture idea. 
When I must produce one, I retire to a quiet room with a supply of 
cheap paper and sharp pencils. My brain is going to take a 
beating—and knows it. First I invariably draw a lamp post. I have 
found that I must start somewhere and if I did not start with the 
lamp post or something else, I would spend the whole day looking 
at the blank paper. So I start with hope and prayer—and a lamp 
post. Next, I draw a drunken sailor clinging to my lamp post. Now 
I have an object and a person. Then I give my brain a little 
exercise. Through association of ideas I am reminded that sailors 
must do their own mending, so I put that down. That reminds me 
of a mother sewing up Junior’s trousers with Junior in them, and I 
draw that. At last I am on my way, but where I will end I never 
know. I keep hoping and praying for a knockout idea. And I keep 
on making sketches. Usually the first session gets me nowhere. 
Most authors, composers, playwrights, and other creative people 
seem to have the same experience. Somehow you must condition 
24 * INTRODUCTION 

Norman Rockwell From the Cradle 
to the Grave. Reproduced from 
Norman Rockwell, Illustrator by Arthur 
L. Guptill. Courtesy Watson-Guptill 
Publications. 
your brain to think creatively. So I generally end this first session 
of two hours or more completely discouraged. I feel that I never 
will develop another idea as long as | 
live. 
These words were composed for aspiring students at his course at the 
Famous Artists Schools, encouraging them to try harder. In his autobiogra- 
phy, Rockwell lamented on the same subject, “I never saw an idea happen 
or received one, whoosh, from heaven while I was ever washing my brushes 
or shaving or backing the car out of the garage. I had to beat them out of my 
head or at least maul my brain until something came out of it. It always 
seemed to me that it was like getting blood from a stone, except of course 
that eventually something always came.” 
Once his ideas were put in some recognizable form, he would show his 
sketch to friends and family. “If people seem uninterested or only mildly 
interested, I abandon the idea and search for another,” he remarked. “Only 
when people become enthusiastic do I become enthusiastic too, and then I 
am anxious to get to painting.” 
The hunt would then begin for the right model, props, and costumes. 
Here he would go to any length for authenticity. Peter Rockwell remem- 
bered his father telling him about the time he exchanged clothing with a 
derelict in Hannibal, Missouri, because he found the shabby clothes ideal 
for illustrating Tom Sawyer. Over the years, Rockwell managed to acquire a 
considerable assortment of authentic costumes, a delight for the kids at 
Halloween, although much of his collection was destroyed when his studio 
burned down in 1943. 
After gathering models and props for the picture, he would set up the 
model, in costume, and obtain the desired posture or expression. In the 
earlier years he worked directly from life, later years from photographs, but 
the session was similar. A foot might be propped by books to hold an 
awkward pose, a head silhouetted against a white backdrop, and details 
assembled to form the total composition that would tell the story most 
directly. 
INTRODUCTION 
« 25 

n theory, the progression of stages through a Rockwell 
I 
painting varied little through the years. Only in 
practice did the artist deviate from his standard proce- 
dures, casting about for a better solution, asking advice, 
changing his mind, and starting over. Rockwell main- 
tained that he worked in three stages: the first inspired by 
the notion that he was about to do the greatest of all 
paintings, followed by the second stage in which he was 
convinced he had destroyed the painting beyond salva- 
tion. (He called this the “oh-my-God-it’s-awful” stage. ) 
Finally, if he didn’t burn up the canvas as a result of stage 
two, he moved onto stage three, achieving a more 
moderate appraisal of the work and bringing it to com- 
pletion. For the painting, Just Married, Rockwell photo- 
graphed his models in costume on location. (Years before 
he would have painted them from life in his studio.) He 
eliminated some reference materials and combined others 
to create a complete charcoal drawing with the entire 
composition worked out in detail. An oil sketch, 
approximately the size of the final reproduction, estab- 
lished color relationships. On the final canvas Rockwell 
made a pencil outline of the subject, then laid in all 
the colors, following his charcoal drawing and the color 
sketch for reference, until he brought the painting to its 
finish. A painting for the Post might require anywhere 
from one week to several months before he was satisfied. 
At the opposite extreme, Rockwell had only three days 
to paint General Eisenhower in 1952, and he somehow 
managed to do it. @ 
26 * INTRODUCTION 

we 
TIT 
RS 
ic 
ae 
are 
potato 
sais 
re tarsal 
REE 
TSE 
\ ‘3 
eg 
7 
. x 
EN 
amisls 
Just Married. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, June 29, 1957. Color sketch courtesy Martin Diamond Fine Arts, New York. 
INTRODUCTION »¢ 27 

Over the years, Rockwell changed his painting procedures, but his 
general approach remained essentially the same. He would make a detailed 
drawing in pencil or charcoal—in the same size or slightly smaller than the 
painting. To accomplish this he resorted to the opaque projector, the 
balopticon. In his words, “The balopticon is an evil, inartistic, habit- 
forming, lazy and vicious machine!” Rockwell exclaimed. “It is also a useful, 
timesaving, practical and helpful one. I use one often—and am thoroughly 
ashamed of it. I hide it whenever I hear people coming.” 
Into the projector he placed his original rough sketch, which he had 
made before he used the models. Then he would set his drawing board on 
the vertical easel, trying different sizes of enlargement by moving the easel 
nearer or farther away from the machine until he could determine the 
appropriate size and proportions. 
He drew on architect’s detail paper, a dull yellow sheet made in rolls six 
yards long and forty-two inches wide. Before starting the drawing, he would 
rub the entire surface with a kneaded eraser to make the surface more 
receptive to the charcoal. On this surface he began to draw the reflected 
sketch, lightly and in outline. Then he took the photograph of the most 
important figure and placed that in the balopticon and enlarged it to the 
size of the same figure on the enlarged drawing of the sketch. He would 
then erase the figure in the enlargement of the sketch and in charcoal 
lightly draw the outline of the figure in the photograph. He did this with 
each of the details, arriving at a rough idea of how the entire drawing would 
look. Then he started all over with the main figure and would project it 
directly on the charcoal outline, drawing in the figure more carefully with a 
pencil. Along the way, of course, he made many alterations, adapting the 
image to what his idea was to be. 
Changes in the charcoal drawing were relatively easy to accomplish. 
Rockwell might cut out a section to be changed and substitute a new clean 
piece with rubber cement. Or he might shift one section of the drawing to 
another place, adhering the piece to the detail paper with the cement. 
This was the phase Rockwell most enjoyed. He completely developed the 
story and resolved all problems of drawing, composition, and tone—every 
problem, that is, except color. This stage was to him the very essence of 
story telling. The simple narrative could be heightened by the wealth of 
contributing details, none of which was carelessly drawn from imagination. 
Sometimes it took him as long or even longer to make the charcoal layout 
than the final painting. He would plan on a week of steady work to 
complete the drawing. 
There were times when he would work out the sketch in great detail 
before he photographed the models. He would then cut apart pieces of 
individual photographs and lay them down—piece by piece like a jigsaw 
puzzle—over the drawing, until all pieces were completely assembled in 
place. Mrs. Hoyt remembered seeing the photograph of her profile added to 
28 * INTRODUCTION 

the others in the sketch after she posed for Freedom of Worship. 
Rockwell always prepared a small color sketch approximately the size that 
the image would be reproduced, arranging the color shapes and patterns and 
judging its overall effectiveness. Normally taking him about a half day to 
prepare, the color sketch helped him determine the tonal values and the 
technique he would use for the final painting. (In later years he often 
painted a color sketch directly over a mat-finish photo print of the charcoal 
drawing.) Over the color sketch Rockwell placed a clean white mat, the 
borders of the frame giving him a good environment for judging the color. 
The final phase was painting. Rockwell stretched his linen, double- 
primed canvas and placed it on the easel. By then he had at least one 
charcoal drawing finished, and the color sketch made. He transferred the 
image from his full-sized charcoal to the prepared canvas either by tracing 
or by projecting the image onto his canvas and following the lines. In the 
first method of transferring, he would lay a sheet of tracing paper over 
the charcoal and trace the entire subject in pencil. Then he would shift 
the paper to the canvas, putting a sheet of transfer paper between the tracing 
and the canvas and following each line on the tracing paper, thereby 
transferring the image to the canvas. At times, if the tracing was straight- 
forward, he might hire someone to perform this function for him. 
At other times he transferred the image by projecting a photograph of the 
charcoal drawing directly onto the canvas. The projected forms would then 
be outlined on the canvas. 
After the image was transferred to the canvas, Rockwell sprayed the 
charcoal with fixative to prevent smudging and then treated the entire 
surface with a thin wash of oil, toning the surface in what is called an 
imprimatura. After the stained surface was dry, he created an underpainting 
in monochrome, generally in Mars violet, “to get a feeling of warm 
humanity.” He sealed this underpainting with a light, even coat of shellac, 
which enabled him if necessary to rub out what he later painted without 
losing the underpainting below. 
Then Rockwell would lay in the colors, an unnerving process for him 
because of the persistent thoughts racing through his mind as he worked. 
His greatest fear was that he would kill the painting at this stage by 
tightening up and destroying the spontaneity of the initial drawing. He 
went to any extent to prevent this from occurring. “Sometimes, just as an 
experiment, I paint with a brick or half shingle. You can’t be clever or slick 
with a brick or shingle. You have to paint loosely. And then I’ve tried 
painting with my left hand or half asleep or drunk. Anything, so I won't 
tighten up, anything to break my habit of overworking a head.” 
This was the process—often laborious and tedious; often exhilarating; 
always compelling. An average painting might take three weeks—with a 
minimum of a half day for getting models; three days on the first charcoal; 
half day on the color sketch; half day stretching canvas; one day on the 
INTRODUCTION 
« 29 

underpainting; five days on the final painting. Small wonder that Rockwell 
worked day in and day out to keep up with his deadlines. He was not a fast 
worker, but he was constant, diligent, and driven. 
Rockwell’s Early Years 
Rockwell’s people enter our story in New Rochelle. But where was Norman 
Rockwell until that time? Let’s go back to 1894 when Rockwell was born on 
103rd Street and Amsterdam Avenue in New York City. His mother was an 
Anglophile and named her second son Norman Percevel after Sir Norman 
Percevel who reputedly kicked Guy Fawkes down the stairs of the Tower of 
London after he had tried to blow up the House of Lords. In spite of this 
respectable connection, young Rockwell was ashamed of the appellation 
and dropped the Percevel as soon as he left home. 
Even in his childhood, Rockwell preferred the country to the city, 
eagerly awaiting the summer months when he would go off to a farm with 
his family. This preference for the country life continued into later years 
and formed the basis for his paintings. He found that people from the 
country were more approachable, more authentic. “Country people do fit 
my kind of picture better than city people,” he explained. “Their faces are 
more open, expressive, lacking the cold veneer behind which city people 
seem to hide.” 
Rockwell’s paintings of ungainly adolescents so frequently depicted’ 
in 
later years must have been inspired by his own awkward youth. His older 
brother Jarvis was athletic and popular, but Rockwell was quite different. 
“When I got to be ten or eleven and began to be aware of myself and how | 
stood with the world, I didn’t think too much of myself. I could see I wasn’t 
God’s gift to man in general, and the baseball coach in particular. A lump, 
a long skinny nothing, a bean pole without beans—that was what I was.” 
The drive for a place in the sun was directed exclusively toward drawing. 
“Because it was all I had, I began to make it my whole life. I drew all the 
time. Gradually my narrow shoulders, long neck, and pigeon toes became 
less important to me. My feelings no longer paralyzed me. I drew and drew 
and drew.” 
Not particularly close to his father, Rockwell remembered that even as 
children Potty (as he was called by the family) treated them “as sons who’ve 
grown up and been away for a long time.” Rockwell didn’t have much to say 
about his mother either. Baba, as she was called, seemed afflicted with a 
variety of illnesses that required continual ministration. (“My father cared 
for her constantly and with unflagging devotion.”) In spite of her illnesses, 
she lived to be eighty-five. 
The Rockwell brothers went different ways. Jarvis, the fine athletic 
specimen, was extremely successful in business until the Depression. He 
moved to Kane, Pennsylvania, to design toys for a manufacturer and 
30 * INTRODUCTION 
CHRISTMA 
Ub. 
aes 
Christmas. Saturday Evening Post cover, 
December 2, 1922. 
More than twenty years separated tl
painting of these two versions of Sa 
as toymaker. One was created for a 
magazine cover, the other for a gree 
card. Rockwell’s consistent and met 
ulous approach remained constant 
through the years, making it virtual 
impossible to determine which was 
earlier and which was done later in 
artist’s career. 

Ty airmen Phra: leyoree iil 
1 with Elves. © Hallmark Cards, Inc., 
sas City, Missouri. 
became quite successful at this profession as well. Jarvis was far more 
restrained than the younger sibling, conservative and correct where Nor- 
man tended to be playful and easy-going. In later years they rarely saw 
each other. 
When Rockwell was nine or ten, the family moved to Mamaroneck, a 
Westchester suburb of New York City, and lived there for a few years until 
they moved into a boardinghouse in New York City since his mother’s 
illnesses made it difficult for her to attend to household chores. By this time 
Rockwell had dropped out of highschool to study art full time, first 
attending the rather stuffy classes at the National Academy of Design where 
he found that the emphasis was on developing fine artists. He then trans- 
ferred to the Art Students League, which was more to his liking. At the 
League there was no distinction made between those preparing for commer- 
cial work and those preparing for fine art. As a result, Rockwell obtained a 
solid education in all aspects of studio work, including an appreciation for 
the Old Masters which inspired him throughout his career. From his 
afternoon classes with George Bridgman, Rockwell developed an ability to 
depict the human figure, and from his morning classes with Thomas 
Fogarty, he discovered the world of illustration, and was introduced to his 
favorites—Howard Pyle and Edwin Austin Abbey—through their repro- 
ductions. Rockwell always worked hard at his studies and took whatever odd 
jobs he could in the evening to help finance his art education. It was Fogarty 
who obtained Rockwell’s first commercial assignments. In one of these 
Rockwell actually earned $150 for ten or twelve drawings made for a 
children’s book called Tell Me Why Stories. He was not yet eighteen 
years old. 
By this time Rockwell’s family had gone to live in another boarding- 
house—Brown Lodge—in New Rochelle, New York. This town was an 
attractive suburb to other New York City artists and illustrators, such 
as Frederic Remington, Coles Phillips, and Charles Dana Gibson; car- 
toonists Clare Briggs and Clyde Forsythe lived in the town, and even J.C. 
Leyendecker himself—Rockwell’s hero—lived there. 
Rockwell was illustrating regularly for children’s publications—St.Nicholas, 
American Boy, Boy’s Life, Youth's Companion—developing a great tech- 
nique for depicting boys and girls that would later win him more favorable 
assignments. He rented Frederic Remington’s former sculpture studio with 
his friend Clyde Forsythe, and set himself to the serious task of becoming a 
professional. In his mind he had a fixed dream: to paint a cover for the 
Saturday Evening Post. Forsythe urged his friend to apply. Rockwell finally 
prepared two finished paintings and three sketches for the Post’s editor, 
George Horace Lorimer. To the young illustrator’s astonishment, Lorimer 
liked all five; he purchased the two finished paintings for $75 and gave 
Rockwell the approval to polish up the sketches for three more covers. And 
so began the career with the Post that continued uninterrupted for forty- 
INTRODUCTION »* 31 

seven years, in which he painted a total of 322 covers. 
The year he sold his first cover to the Post—in 1916—he proposed to 
Irene O’Connor, an attractive schoolteacher who was living in Edgewood 
Hall, the boardinghouse where the Rockwell family had recently moved. 
They were married not long before Norman Rockwell enlisted in the Navy. 
Although he was eager to see action in World War I, the Navy kept him in 
Charleston, South Carolina, to paint portraits and propaganda pieces, and 
he continued his covers for the Post. 
Discharged from the Navy after the war, Rockwell resumed his work for 
the publications and rented a studio from George Lischke over a barn on 
Prospect Street in New Rochelle, the studio where he worked until 1926 
when he finally bought a house at 24 Lord Kichener Road. There Rockwell 
had a studio designed and constructed for the enormous sum of $18,000. 
During these years, Norman and Irene Rockwell tended to go separate 
ways—he went to Europe twice without her, and he worked at his illustra- 
tion assiduously, while she acquired her own circle of friends. They were 
divorced in 1929. Rockwell dismissed the unfortunate match rather uncom- 
fortably in his autobiography: “We got along well together; never quarreled 
or made a nuisance of ourselves. We gave parties, belonged to a bridge club. 
Everybody used to like us together. We just didn’t love each other, sort of 
went our own ways. She didn’t take any interest in my work. Well, I guess 
you see what I mean.” 
For a year Rockwell rattled around in New York City trying to make the 
best of bachelorhood until he went to California with his friends Clyde and 
Cotta Forsythe and met Mary Barstow, a twenty-four-year-old schoolteacher 
from Alhambra. They married in April, 1930, and returned to the house 
on Lord Kichener Road in New Rochelle. This is where they lived—and 
where their three sons were born—until they took up permanent residence 
in Arlington, Vermont, in 1939. 
Throughout these years Rockwell produced an enormous amount of work— 
his covers for the Post, of course, but also the Boy Scout calendars, 
advertising assignments, illustrations for Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn, 
and for the magazines Life, Literary Digest, Ladies’ Home Journal, and 
American magazine. By the time he left for Arlington, he was one of 
America’s great illustrators, yet his best work still lay ahead of him. From 
the mid-1940s to the mid-1950s he reached his prime, an amazing achieve- 
ment for an illustrator who had already been at the top of his profession 
for over twenty years. 
32 * INTRODUCTION 

New Rochelle 
Pony TT Grse A ND ae eR eee 

Boy Pushing Baby Carriage. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, May 20, 1916. Old 
Corner House Collection, Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
34 * NEW ROCHELLE 

Boy on Stilts. Saturday Evening Post cover, 
October 4, 1919. 
Young boys and girls constituted many 
of the models Rockwell used throughout 
the years, and particularly in New 
Rochelle. Eddie Carson, shown above, 
was among Rockwell’s favorites of the 
period. Rockwell also considered Billy 
Paine, shown left, among his best child 
models. Posing as all three boys on this, 
the first Norman Rockwell cover for the 
Post, Billy Paine appeared on fifteen 
subsequent Post covers as well. He was a 
real prankster. While Rockwell was 
painting the boy one morning, Paine 
spotted a policeman through the 
window, and screamed for help in order 
to bring the cop running upstairs to the 
studio. The practical joker had a good 
laugh over the policeman’s disappoint- 
ment upon discovering nothing wrong. 
After Billy died (he fell from a window), 
Rockwell lamented, “He was a swell 
kid, a regular rapscallion. I missed him a 
whole lot.” 
orman Rockwell launched his professional life from New Ro- 
chelle. It was here that he began his association with the 
Saturday Evening Post and developed his distinctive approach 
to his subject. During his twenty-five years in New Rochelle, 
Norman Rockwell painted his vision of American life and introduced many 
of the themes that would continue to appear, in variation, throughout his 
mature work. 
His earliest illustrations for the youth magazines demonstrated a partic- 
ular knack for depicting the delicate moments of growing up. While he 
painted the carefree aspects of youth, he was equally sensitive to the 
awkward embarrassments in boyhood situations, to the pleasures and pains 
in young romance, and to the childhood yearnings for success. Because 
these subjects naturally required models that fit the part, locating children 
for his paintings was a major occupation for the young illustrator from the 
moment he arrived in New Rochelle. 
In his autobiography Rockwell recalls the difficulties he encountered 
searching out children for subjects; he would hang out in grade schools at 
recess, peer over fences into back yards, haunt vacant lots, and stop 
children on the street. By exercising his most persuasive appeals and by offering 
50 cents an hour, he might hope to lure a boy from a Saturday ball game. 
Capturing the boy was only the beginning: next he had to get him to hold 
the pose long enough for Rockwell to set it down on canvas. It was impos- 
sible to have the children assume and hold an entire pose at one time. 
Instead, if the child happened to be running (which was often the case), 
he would prop the model’s feet into a running position with bricks or 
boards, making him as comfortable as possible. Then Rockwell would 
pose the child’s right leg and draw that, then the left leg, the right and left 
arms, head, and finally he would work on the facial expression. Even so, 
the models would grow restless, squirm and complain. Finally, Rockwell 
hit upon a system of distracting them that seemed to work. At the begin- 
ning of the session he would stack a pile of nickels on a table alongside his 
easel. Every rest period he would transfer some nickels to the other side of 
the table, saying, “Now this is your pile,” so that the child could see just 
how much he was earning by holding still. The nickels made a good shiny 
Introduction * 35 

pile for the older models; with the younger children he used pennies 
instead, to make even bigger piles that would grow more visibly before 
their eyes. 
The boys were more trouble than the girls, but the girls cost more money. 
Aside from the model’s fee, Rockwell had to pay a chaperone, the mother, 
or some other accompanying adult. This remained so until the illustrator 
had developed a reputation for propriety which made it possible for mothers 
to permit their daughters to pose for him unaccompanied. 
These techniques of attracting models, paying them, and piecing together 
fragments of the figure for the total composition were later adapted to his 
use of non-professional models and photographing them. 
Rockwell recalled that after he’d been in New Rochelle for four or five 
months, he had developed a list of available models, names and addresses 
compiled in a notebook, and no longer was obliged to chase kids around 
the streets. Once he misplaced his notebook and instructed the child to 
write his name and address on the wall. The next child did the same, and 
before long all four walls and ceilings were covered with names and addresses, 
each signature outdoing the previous one for its display value. At least so 
the story goes. 
During this period Billy Paine was a favorite model for Rockwell, posing 
for the children’s magazines and for fifteen Post covers. (He posed for all 
three boys in Rockwell’s first Post cover.) After a while the young boy 
became too conceited about his popularity with Rockwell, bragging to his 
friends and playing the primadonna, and Rockwell decided to stop using 
him for a while. Eventually, the boy improved his manner and resumed 
posing with a bit more humility. Billy Paine died at age 13, when he fell 
from a second-story window. 
For $25 a month, Norman Rockwell had rented the second floor of 
George Lischke’s barn for a studio at 40 Prospect Street, and installed heat, 
electricity, plumbing, and a large north window. The Lischkes’ younger 
boy, Franklin, was one of Rockwell’s favorite models. Between the years 
1921 and 1928, Franklin posed for at least sixteen cover paintings and story 
illustrations. His pay rose from 50 to 75 cents per hour, and eventually he 
was promoted to Rockwell’s “studio boy” at $5.00 a week. His responsibili- 
ties included sweeping up the studio, running errands, and occasionally 
answering the phone to say that Rockwell was out when the artist was 
pressing to meet a deadline. 
Franklin Lischke was also on hand to help with the delivery of props to 
the studio. These could be small items—a straw basket or saxophone, 
perhaps—or they could be quite substantial in size. It was not unfamiliar to 
see a buggy, sofa, or doghouse moved up the flight of stairs to the studio. For 
a painting of a policeman on duty, Rockwell hauled a motorcycle up to the 
second floor. Carrying the cycle down the stairs proved to be a greater 
ordeal than bringing it up. Midway in the effort Rockwell lost his grip and 
36 * NEW ROCHELLE 

A long stride captured mid-air was difficult 
enough to pose for two or three minutes of 
photography. Holding a position such as this 
for twenty minutes at a stretch, however, 
could be a real test of stamina. Such was the 
exertion required when Rockwell painted 
from life during his years in New Rochelle. 
let it go. The motorcycle flopped down the stairs, broke through the closed 
door at the landing, and piled itself into a heap at the doorstep. 
Even small props could prove troublesome, however. Young Franklin was 
instructed to purchase a couple of trout at a neighborhood fish store for a 
painting of a farmer fishing from a pier. It was an unusually hot day for 
working, and particularly unsavory for painting dead fish. “Frank,” Rock- 
well called out after a few hours, “I can’t stand the smell of these fish a 
moment longer. Put them in your mother’s refrigerator and I'll finish 
painting them tomorrow.” Mrs. Lischke nearly fainted when she opened 
the refrigerator that evening and ordered her son to return the pair to 
Rockwell immediately. After the painting was completed the next day, 
Rockwell told Franklin to bury the fish in the back yard. The boy must not 
have made a deep enough hole, because some cats dug up the foul-smelling 
prop and deposited the bones gratefully at Rockwell’s doorstep. 
In a gesture of discretion, Rockwell advised the young teenager to stay 
away from the studio one day while he painted a model posing in a 
provocative one-piece bathing suit. Franklin happened to spot the attrac- 
tive female as she entered the building, and he could not resist a peek at her 
in costume. He climbed a shaky ladder at the back of the studio and peered 
through the window from the top rung. Observing the young man from the 
corner of his eye, Rockwell quietly walked over to the window and drew the 
shade. In Franklin’s haste to withdraw from the scene, he jumped from 
midway down the ladder, making an awful clatter as he dropped to the 
ground, and was too embarrassed to show up the next day. 
The trials and tribulations of using young children made for amusing tales 
told years later. The older teenagers—also an important subject category 
for Rockwell’s covers—were drawn from a more reliable source: a group of 
students attending New Rochelle High School. This group was sufficiently 
ample to service the entire community of New Rochelle artists and illustra- 
tors. Jackie James Walker recalls that modeling for the several artists in the 
immediate vicinity provided a steady means of earning pocket money for 
her and her friends. For them posing was as commonplace an activity as 
baby sitting. 
Of all the New Rochelle artists, “Mr. Rockwell” was the most desirable. 
His studio was not like the other cluttered, rather gloomy garrets; Rock- 
well’s was airy, light, and orderly. Rockwell also paid more than the others. 
But most of all, Rockwell made posing fun for them. “He had such a fine 
sense of humor,” Jackie James Walker recalled. “(He made the hours pass 
pleasantly.” 
Rockwell’s covers were more ambitious than the simple sketches executed 
by the other less notable artists in the community. These covers required 
hours of posing. The chore of sitting still for long periods was made 
enjoyable by the artist’s lighthearted talk and his easy manner of including 
his subjects in the planning process. He posed each subject separately, in 
Introduction 
* 37 

costume and with props, but made a point of first describing the overall 
concept from the small drawing, then sharing each stage of the painting at 
the periodic intervals when the model was relaxing from the pose. 
Posing adults presented its own set of difficulties for the New Rochelle 
illustrator. As long as Rockwell painted from life, he was obliged to find 
someone who could afford the time to pose. Working directly from a model, 
Rockwell figured the process of drawing the figure in charcoal on the 
canvas, then painting over the drawing in oil generally took three days to 
complete a single figure, sometimes longer. Consequently, he required the 
services of professional models. In New Rochelle it was fairly easy to hire a 
professional for two or three days, an unemployed actor perhaps, or a 
professional living nearby or working at the Art Students League in the 
city. There were favorites, of course, and the illustrators might have to 
make arrangements with each other to reserve a particular model in time for 
an impending deadline. Naturally, Rockwell had his own favorites that 
suited his themes and he used them over and over, posing them in a variety 
of ways to avoid monotony as much as possible. And if he was lucky, he 
could find a model no other illustrator had yet used. 
Such was the case with James K. Van Brunt, five foot two inches tall, 
bearing the finest mustache Norman Rockwell had ever seen. “What a 
face!” Rockwell reported, “And all mine, I gloated, all mine. That knobby 
nose, thick and square at the end with a bump in the middle; those big, sad, 
dog eyes which, however, burned with a fierce, warlike sparkle; that 
mustache. And all crammed together in a small, narrow head so that if you 
glanced at him quickly that was all you saw—eyes, nose, and mustache.” 
As it turned out, the face was somewhat too distinct and after Van Brunt 
appeared on three Post covers, editor Horace Lorimer objected. The public 
would get bored if exposed to the same face too frequently, he insisted. 
Rockwell was distressed by the thought of losing his favorite model and 
urged Van Brunt to shave off the mustache so that he could use the old man 
again. At first Van Brunt’s pride caused him to refuse the offer, but two 
weeks later he agreed to shave it off in exchange for ten dollars. Once the 
mustache was removed, Rockwell was even more distressed: “Mr. Van 
Brunt’s lower lip stuck out beyond his upper lip by about an inch and was 
just as identifying as the mustache,” he lamented. In order to disguise Van 
Brunt, Rockwell conceived of ways to paint the old man by concealing the 
upper lip and hiding the mouth altogether: “But it got to be more of a chore 
and worry than the mustache. I couldn’t go on painting pictures of an old 
man with the lower third of his face hidden behind his hands or a book or 
his hat.” Exasperated, Rockwell finally told Van Brunt to grow back the 
mustache. But his advanced age (by now he was over eighty years old) must 
have diminished his hirsute powers. The mustache “never attained its 
former sweeping plumpness, its majestic swoop at the ends.” Never without 
kindness, Rockwell endowed his favorite model with an even grander 
38 * NEW ROCHELLE 
Couple in Carriage. Saturday Evening Post 
cover, September 19, 1925. 

When Rockwell painted from life, he 
posed the figures in the appropriate set- 
ting and costume. If props were needed, 
the illustrator went to the effort of ob- 
taining them for the modeling session, 
regardless of how cumbersome such a 
project might be. This romantic pose in 
a surrey happened to be one Franklin 
Lischke particularly enjoyed holding 
for the considerable length of time 
Rockwell required. Photo United 
Press International. 
mustache, exaggerating its shape and density in his painting. “I faked the 
mustache bigger and fuller to please him. I did the same in the next two.” 
When he found he was again using Van Brunt too frequently, he used Van 
Brunt’s figure only, having him pose in ladies’ costumes. Rockwell remem- 
bered the old man prancing around the studio in an old maid’s outfit, lifting 
the long skirt and curtsying. Only a few months after Rockwell painted Van 
Brunt again (his hand over the mustache), the old man died. 
Like Van Brunt, Harry Seal was a favorite model Rockwell could use only 
occasionally because of his readily identifiable figure. Seal was rotund, with 
a jolly round face and thin small arms and legs. (‘“‘SSomeone once said he 
looked like a turtle,” Rockwell reported.) Harry Seal had once been 
extremely wealthy, holding a half-interest in the Royal Baking Powder 
Company until the money ran out, when he became a model at the Art 
Students League. But he continued to live high (“I can resist anything but 
temptation,” he had boasted) and Rockwell obtained optimum results 
when he pepped up Seal with a shot of whiskey. After using Harry Seal in 
three covers in one year, Lorimer again objected and Rockwell had to give 
him up for the Post, continuing to use him periodically for ads only. 
Although Rockwell’s most frequent themes involved youth and old age, 
he also took on an occasional period piece in those days. For these themes 
Rockwell preferred James Wilson, a former actor, who seemed to come to 
life in a costume. “He looked like a caricature of an old-time English ham 
actor, a nineteenth century Hamlet,” Rockwell observed. He was English 
and he owned several costumes himself, carrying some of them about with 
him in an old Gladstone bag. Rockwell remembered that he had a magnifi- 
cent Catholic cardinal’s costume, for example. Wilson provided for his 
entire family by posing for artists. He worked all day and far into the night, 
shopped for food, and supported his two grown sons who were striving to be 
artists. He was intensely proud of his profession as a model, flatly refusing to 
pose for photography because he regarded it as degrading. He was competi- 
tive with another of his professional colleagues at the League, Pop Freder- 
icks. Each claimed he could pose. for longer hours than the other, a 
competition that was abandoned because it ultimately proved too fatiguing 
to both models and artists alike. 
As he posed for Rockwell, Wilson would tell the artist one story after 
another about his days as an actor. It happened that many professional 
models were young or unsuccessful actors, capable of holding the most 
extraordinary facial expressions. Pop Fredericks was a former actor, and so 
was Edward Van Vechtan. 
As the years passed, Norman Rockwell’s work continued to mature. By 
the early 1930s he was among the most highly sought after illustrators in the 
country. He had remarried in 1930 and lived in a handsome home on Lord 
Kichener Road. In Mary Barstow, Rockwell felt he had found a real friend, 
“And I guess it saved me,” he said. 
Introduction 
* 39 

: 
5 
é 
URQRORRES 
40 « NEW ROCHELLE 

Franklin Lischke was the son of Norman 
Rockwell’s landlord, George Lischke. 
From the elder Lischke, Rockwell rented 
a second-story space and converted it 
into a studio. It was here that young 
Franklin posed for the illustrator and 
helped him with chores around the 
studio. Photos Franklin Lischke. 
I might have gone under without it. Because a few months after 
our marriage I began to have trouble with my work. Now that I 
was settled again and happy, the frenzied life I’d been leading 
before the divorce, the divorce itself, and the lonely, rootless 
months in New York fell in on me like a ton of bricks. While I’d 
been living all that, caught up in it, ’d somehow, without know- 
ing it, kept my work apart. Some inner defense had prevented it 
from reaching my work and tearing that down with the rest, so 
that though I had been miserable I had always had my work to 
hang onto. It had been the one sane element in my life. But now 
that it had brought me through, saved me, it collapsed. 
Feelings of indecision and low self-confidence nagged at Rockwell. Mary, 
Norman, and their eight-month-old son took off to France for eight months 
to see whether a new environment would make a difference. Letters written 
by Mary Rockwell to her family from Paris indicate that these were trying 
times (see Appendix) and it was not until Rockwell returned to the States— 
where he “stuck to the easel like a leech” —that he worked his way through 
the crisis. “Even now,” he said, “I don’t understand really what caused the 
trouble or how I gradually worked through it.” 
Shortly after returning from Paris, Mary gave birth to son Tom, and two 
years later Peter was born. The Rockwells lived well, employed a cook and a 
nursemaid, traveled frequently, and socialized with other illustrators in 
New Rochelle and in New York City. But Rockwell’s restlessness grew more 
intense. Many of his favorite models had grown up, disappeared, or passed 
away, and he was working with a newer crop of professionals. A younger 
breed of illustrator—contemporary artists like John Falter, Stevan Dohanos, 
and Al Parker—was creating work that forced him to question his own 
pictures. And for some time the Rockwells had been troubled by the 
demanding social pressures that were distracting and unsatisfying. A change 
was in order, a fresh environment that would provide the material and 
tranquility needed to make pictures. 
Rockwell was no fisherman, but the Batten Kill River sounded very 
attractive to him when his friend Fred Hildebrandt described it. Hilde- 
brandt was a model in great demand by the New Rochelle illustrators—a 
fine bone structure and figure that made him an ideal pirate, hero, romantic 
figure, or a Yankee Doodle. Fred Hildebrandt had become so valuable to 
Rockwell, in fact, that the illustrator had hired him as a handyman and 
used him to track down props and costumes as well. They became good 
friends. And Hildebrandt loved two things: women and fishing. He urged 
Rockwell to explore the area around the Batten Kill River in Vermont. You 
didn’t have to be a fisherman to see the virtues of the scenic river. 
Introduction 
* 41 

Norman) 
Rackwell 
De wes 
o doubt Rockwell was doing a kind of self-portrait 
N when he painted the scrawny boy lifting weights 
for a Post cover posed by Franklin Lischke, because this 
is how he perceived himself at that age. Staying in shape 
was certainly a prerequisite for posing when it came to 
the more active scenes. Nothing demanded greater 
stamina than posing live in a running position, for 
example. Franklin Lischke also posed for Pilgrim’s Prog- 
ress and for No Swimming (the skinny kid in the center; 
Nicholas Yager was the chubby boy at the right). Even 
sixty years later, Lischke remembered the difficulties 
involved in holding these poses: half-sitting on the edge 
of a low stool, his legs and feet were propped up by stacks 
of books, a position he had to hold for twenty minutes at 
a stretch. In later years, photography would simplify this 
arduous task, reducing a typical modeling session from 
three hours to a total of twenty minutes, perhaps. 
@ 
42 * NEW ROCHELLE 
Champ. Saturday Evening 
Post cover, April 29, 1922. 
No Swimming. Original oil painting for a 
Saturday Evening Post cover, June 4, 1921. 
Estate of Norman Rockwell. 

A Pilgrim’s Progress. Original oil painting for Life cover, November 17, 1921. Courtesy Judy and Alan Goffman Fine Art, Blue Bell, Pennsylvania. 
Franklin Lischke 
* 43 

Sneezing Spy. Saturday Evening Post cover, October 1, 1921. 
Self-Photographer. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening 
Post cover, April 18, 1925. Courtesy Judy and Alan Goffman Fine 
Art, Blue Bell, Pennsylvania. 
Kept In. Saturday Evening Post cover, June 10, 1922. 
The Rivals. Saturday Evening Post cover, September 9, 1922. 
44 * NEW ROCHELLE 

he son of Rockwell’s landlord, Franklin Lischke 
was, as Rockwell described him, 
a narrow-shouldered, stringy adolescent with a round 
head. He was one of the most gullible kids I’ve ever 
known... 
. his ability to digest fantastic stories was 
immense. Clyde [Forsythe] used to tell him the most 
atrocious things. He’d sit in the big armchair rub- 
bing his knees and gulping it all in. Then he’d dash 
downstairs to tell his father, and later on Mr. Lischke 
would laugh about it with us. Franklin was an awful 
nice little boy and a good model. We always used to 
kid him because just after he was born his other 
brother George had looked in the cradle and said, 
“What is it?” 
From the first job as a model in 1921, young Franklin 
continued to pose for Rockwell for fifteen other assign- 
ments until 1928, and he proved to be an excellent kid 
to have around the studio for odd jobs. As a result of his 
sustained relationship with Norman Rockwell, Lischke 
wound up being an illustrator himself. “He was the best 
thing that could have happened to me,” maintained 
Lischke nearly sixty years later. @ 
Moonlight Serenade. Saturday Evening Post cover, August 30, 1924. 
In Need of Sympathy. Original oil painting for a Saturday 
Evening Post cover, October 2, 1926. Courtesy Danenberg 
Gallery. 
Couple Striding. Saturday Evening Post cover, May 5, 1928. 
Franklin Lischke * 45 

ockwell got along well with John L. Malone, a pleasant, white- 
haired model he used often. Malone would read aloud to the illus- 
trator while posing. He could read as long as eight hours at a clip and he 
read Rockwell’s favorites: Balzac, Turgenev, Tolstoy, De Maupassant. 
@ 
ames Wilson was the best costume model Rockwell ever had. 
A former actor, Wilson carried his own costumes around in a black 
satchel and while he posed would talk for hours about his years in the 
theater. “He’d darn near kill you with his memories,” Rockwell recalled. @ 
1 
ave Campion, who owned a newsstand in New Rochelle, was 
a favorite model for Rockwell. Although he wasn’t a professional, 
he managed to spend the length of time required for posing. Rockwell 
was grateful for this because Campion’s lean physique was a type he 
liked to use frequently in his work. Campion posed with Pop Fredericks 
and Bill Sundermeyer for the Christmas carollers. According to Rock- 
well, “Dave Campion couldn’t play the violin, nor could Pop Fredericks 
play anything. Bill Sundermeyer had no ear for music.”*@ 
LEFT Top: Storekeeper Modeling Lady's Hat. Saturday Evening Post cover, May 3, 1924. 
LEFT MIDDLE: Principal and Graduate. Saturday Evening Post cover, June 26, 1926. LEFT BOTTOM: 
Man Threading Needle. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, April 8, 
1922, and advertisement for Interwoven, Division of Kayser Roth Corporation. 
Courtesy Judy and Alan Goffman Fine Art, Blue Bell, Pennsylvania. seLow: Valet Admiringa 
| 
Sock. Original oil painting for an advertisement for Interwoven, Division of Kayser 
Roth Corporation. Courtesy Judy and Alan Goffman Fine Art, Blue Bell, Pennsylvania. 

nae 
sce 
wer 
BP 
Th Sy 
t 
e 
fame 
eee 
= 
A 
eNO? 
= 
ee 
= 
Christmas Caroling Trio. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, December 8, 1923. Estate of Norman Rockwell. 
Malone, Wilson, and Campion * 47 

Dancing to a Cello. Saturday Evening Post cover, February 3, 1923. 
48 * NEW ROCHELLE 
Fishing in Comfort. Saturday Evening Post cover, 
July 19, 1930. 
any professional models started out as actors and 
M came to modeling because they had failed or 
retired. Like James Wilson, Pop Fredericks was an actor 
who claimed that he was “cheated of his fame” when he 
was replaced on Broadway in Abie’s Irish Rose only after 
the play became popular, others receiving credit for the 
role he had originated. Fredericks was a model for the 
Art Students League in New York City, and would 
come out to New Rochelle frequently to pose for the 
illustrators there. He took great pride in his modeling 
profession, but he clearly preferred the relaxed poses 
befitting his age and volume. Even if he should fall 
asleep as he posed in a comfortable chair, Fredericks 
would expect to be awakened at the end of twenty 
minutes so that “he could rest.’"*@ 

Dancing Couple. Original oil painting for a Saturday 
Evening Post cover, December 8, 1928. Courtesy Judy 
and Alan Goffman Fine Art, Blue Bell, Pennsylvania. 
ockwell forced himself to use Harry Seal sparingly. 
His rotund shape was so distinctive that Post editor 
Lorimer would object to the obvious repetition if Rock- 
well used Seal too frequently. A model at the Art 
Students League like Pop Fredericks, Seal was a gentle- 
man, “well bred and polite,” and the illustrator enjoyed 
using him. Rockwell told the story about Seal posing for 
the painting called Chivalry when Seal happened to doze 
off during the session. 
He was portraying a man who had fallen asleep over 
a book and I guess he was living the part off and on. 
Suddenly he started. “I’m getting faint,” he said, 
glancing wildly about. “You haven’t a drop of 
whiskey somewhere?” I ran into the house and 
brought out a bottle. He drank a shot. “Ahh,” he 
said, “‘s’better, better. That was a near thing, Mr. 
Rockwell, a near thing.” So every day after that 
he’d suddenly feel faint and I’d have to revive him 
with a shot of whiskey. @ 
Chivalry. Original painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, 
February 16, 1929. Courtesy Judy and Alan Goffman Fine Art, Blue 
Bell, Pennsylvania. 
L 
Card Tricks. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post 
cover, March 22, 1930. Courtesy Judy and Alan Goffman Fine Art, 
Blue Bell, Pennsylvania. 

re Es 
pe a 
a i a Rg 
NE SS aot ae 
Ls 
Sa ie 
2 Dispute. Original oil painting for advertisement for the Encyclopedia Britannica. Courtesy Martin Diamond Fine Arts, 
V York. 
— 
Bum Cooking Sausage. Saturday Evening 
Crossword Puzzle. Saturday Evening 
Post cover, October 18, 1924. 
Post cover, January 31, 1925. 

i 
SRS 
The Phrenologist. Saturday Evening Post 
cover, March 27, 1926. 
Browsing Among Used Books. Saturday 
Evening Post cover, August 14, 1926. 
Painting Tavern Sign. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, February 6, 
1926. Courtesy Martin Diamond Fine Arts, New York. 
he sequence of events leading to the unfortunate 
outcome in the life of James K. Van Brunt is fully 
documented in Rockwell’s illustrations. Van Brunt was a 
favorite of Rockwell’s throughout the 1920s. He was a 
dedicated model, would practice his poses in front of the 
mirror in advance of a session, and try to convince the 
illustrator that his ideas for the pose were better than 
Rockwell’s. He’d been through a great deal in his life- 
time, had fought the Indians, was a veteran of the Civil 
and Spanish-American Wars. But this distinguished, 
ninety-eight-pound gentleman (who normally dressed in 
a frock coat, waist coat, and high silk hat) went 
through one of the most humiliating ordeals in his life 
as Rockwell’s model. 
His pride and joy was his glorious mustache, the single 
feature that made him superior to all other models. 
Rockwell loved the mustache, too, depicted it with a 
particular flourish each time, but Horace Lorimer was 
quick to size up the situation. He demanded that 
Rockwell discontinue his use of the model with the 
bushy mustache before the Post readers got bored with 
it. With a good deal of friendly coercion and a $10 
check, Rockwell succeeded in persuading Van Brunt to 
shave off his glorious mustache. And for the first Post 
cover ever to be printed in full color (not in the old- 
fashioned red-and-black ink), Rockwell used the shorn 
Van Brunt as a model. Alas, the strange configuration of 
Van Brunt’s upper lip was even more conspicuous than 
the mustache had been. In the next two Van Brunt 
covers, therefore, Rockwell was obliged to conceal the 
unsightly feature the best he could. @ 
James Van Brunt « 51 

; 
Poochweili 
+}: 
Cowboy Listening to Records. Saturday Evening Post cover, August 13, 1927. 
52 * NEW ROCHELLE 

he sad saga of James K. Van Brunt continued after 
the stupendous mustache was shaved off. Rockwell 
could no longer continue to devise methods of conceal- 
ing Van Brunt’s unfortunate upper lip. Exasperated, 
Rockwell suggested Van Brunt grow back his mustache. 
But all was not repaired. Even without shaving for a 
considerable period of time, the elderly Van Brunt was 
incapable of restoring his mustache to its original splen- 
dor, no matter how much he encouraged it with regular 
preening. Van Brunt was simply too old to re-create his 
abundant whiskers. Rockwell felt so much compassion 
t 
3 
5 t 
for the man that in the following two Post covers he went 
out of his way to exaggerate the size of the meager 
mustache, making it bigger and fuller than life. It wasn’t 
easy to continue using Van Brunt under these condi- 
tions, so Rockwell had to concoct another way to make 
the best of his best model. Finally, he had the ingenious 
idea of posing Van Brunt as three old maids in the next 
cover, careful to avoid any suggestion of a single whisker. 
In his final Van Brunt cover, painted only a few months 
before the old man died of a respiratory ailment, Rock- 
well concealed the mustache for the last time.‘ 
@ 
Three Gossips. Saturday Evening Post 
cover, January 12, 1929. 
Eyeing a Sax. Saturday Evening Post 
cover, November 2, 1929. 
Painting a Flagpole. Original oil painting for 
a Saturday Evening Post cover, May 26, 
1928. Collection the McCullough Family. 
James Van Brunt * 53 

Home from Vacation. Original oil painting for a 
Colonial Couple. Saturday Evening Post cover, 
Saturday Evening Post cover, September 13, 193 
July 25, 1931. 
Collection Mr. and Mrs. Phil Grace. 

Yankee Doodle. Mural for the Nassau Tavern, Princeton, New Jersey, 1937. © Princeton Municipal Improvement, Inc. 
ean and lithe, athletic and handsome: that was Fred 
Hildebrandt, a favorite model for several of the New 
Rochelle illustrators. He could be an ideal Yankee Doodle, 
an adventurer, or a romantic lover, receiving proposals 
in marriage from women dazzled by his pictures. Hilde- 
brandt was a good friend to Rockwell, helped him with 
odd jobs when he could, and traveled with him to the 
west coast. According to Rockwell, Hildebrandt kissed 
three women as he posed for the Post cover published 
July 25, 1931. The first he kissed in New Rochelle where 
the cover was begun, the second in Chicago, and the 
third in Hollywood as the illustrator and model made a 
westward trip together. @ 
The Hunter. Saturday Evening Post cover, 
November 16, 1935. 

a
ea 
- E
a a
a Ec

Arlington 
Pere NDenlirP AND HARD WORK 

The Gossips. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, March 6, 1948. 

e 
ed 
ei 
Ae 
E* 
oy 
Pree 
be 
Res 
D 
ks 
en eee 
- 
a 
eee 
ee 
soe nea panies 
ae 
Ts 
cate 


Gossip, as one of America’s 
fa 
subject more than once ove: 
#1] 
in his 1948 Post cover in whic 
popular activity. “Like looking 
painting. It was just about t 
gathered in a single work. C 
the wrong spirit, Rockwell inc 
this precaution, however, he f 
regarded as a rather unflatterir 

vorite pastimes, 
was a favorite Rockwell theme. He used the 
ne years. 1 
»st ambitious treatment, however, was offered 
rhe depictes 
his Arlington neighbors indulging in this 
1 through 
iole,” observed Peter Rockwell about this 
greatest assembly of Vermont neighbors Rockwell ever 
cerned that 
‘iis friends might take the idea of the gossips in 
luded hit 
ond his wife Mary in the grapevine. Even with 
ound that 
« 
two models were unhappy with what they 
g portrayal! 
x of the Post, Ben Hibbs, questioned the 
authenticity of the faces. Only when Rockwell showed him the photographs he had taken of 
the models 
was Hibbs convinced the illustrator had not imagined these types: they were real! 
Only twelve of the fifteen gossips have been positively identified by Arlington neighbors. 
(“There are a few in here from Manchester,” offered Clara Edgerton.) From left to right, the 
‘irst is unknown, then onto Mrs. Comar, to Mrs. Jessie Harrington, to Jessie Harrington 
(also in Ration Board and son of a “‘charwoman”), to Jenny McKee (the other 
charwoman), to an unknown gossip, to Rena Crofut, to Mary Rockwell, to 
Doris Crofur 
(Rena Crofut’s daughter), to Lester Brush (of Facts of Life), to 
Mrs. George Zimmer, to another unknown gossip, to George Zimmer, to Frank Hall, 
completing the circle with the illustrator himself. 

s it happened, Fred Hildebrandt was absolutely correct about 
the virtues of the Batten Kill River. The river flows through 
Arlington, Vermont, weaving its way through a clump of 
mountains that form one of the most attractive sites in south- 
ern Vermont. The Arlington realtor Burton Immen arranged for the Rock- 
wells to purchase a white clapboard farmhouse and sixty acres of land along 
the bank of the river. Over the winter of 1938 the Rockwells had one of the 
two barns on the property converted into a studio and the family spent the 
following summer in their new home. The environment seemed so right 
that Mary and Norman winterized the house and took up year-round 
residence the following year. 
It seems extraordinary that four illustrators for the Saturday Evening Post 
managed to wind up in a community of only 1600 people. Besides Rockwell 
there were Mead Schaeffer and Jack Atherton, with George Hughes arriv- 
ing later. Their presence provided a unique kind of fellowship. Mead 
Schaeffer and his wife Elizabeth were especially close to the Rockwells. 
(“This friendship with Schaef—a working illustrator, someone who shared 
my ideals, understood my problems—stimulated me. I guess it helped my 
work almost as much as moving to Arlington.”) To this group, in 1948, was 
added the other Schafers—Chris and his wife Mary—who had come to a 
rural way of life from North Shore Drive in Chicago. Chris Schafer became 
Rockwell’s business manager, a function he continued to serve even after 
the Rockwells moved to Stockbridge, Massachusetts, in 1953. 
The Rockwells’ first home in Arlington was located on a secluded back 
road along the river. From 1939 until 1943 Norman Rockwell worked in 
the converted barn, situated about one hundred feet from the house. In 
1943, not long after Rockwell had completed his Four Freedoms, the studio 
burned to the ground in the middle of the night. “We kids were all down 
with the measles,” recalled the youngest son Peter, “and we watched the 
fire from the living room until dawn. We were so carried away by the aura 
of those great flames licking the rooftops that we almost hoped our house 
would catch on fire too, just to prolong the excitement. It was an amazing 
sight.” The fire destroyed many cherished items—paintings, sketches, 
costumes, antiques, photographic records, the accumilation of twenty- 
eight years of painting, traveling, and collecting. “It’s like losing your left 
Introduction 
* 61 

arm,” Rockwell said, “and waking up in the middle of the night and reaching 
out for a glass of water and suddenly realizing that you haven’t got anything 
to reach with.” 
The shock of the fire, combined with the Rockwells’ desire for a less 
secluded home, resulted in an immediate decision to buy a house a few 
miles away on West Arlington’s village green. (“Rockwell was like that,” 
said Chris Schafer. “He’d make up his mind to do something and that was 
it—it was done the same morning.”) 
Their second house stood only fifty feet from a twin Greek revival home 
that was occupied by dairy farmer Jim Edgerton, his wife Clara, and their 
four children, Edith, Joy, Buddy, and Ardis. Beyond the front porch of the 
Rockwell home stood the covered bridge spanning the Batten Kill, a 
one-room schoolhouse, a dance pavilion, and a New England church with 
an attached community hall. This environment had much to offer. The 
school was no longer in use, so Rockwell converted it into a temporary 
studio until Walt Squires, the carpenter, completed construction of the 
new Rockwell studio. (Buddy Edgerton remembers that the bulldozer that 
came to break ground for the studio was the first he’d ever beheld, because 
it was a machine not seen frequently during the war.) 
Several years later Rockwell invited six art students—Don Winslow, 
Don Spaulding, William McBride, Robert Hogue, Harold Stevenson, and 
Jim Gaboda—to work under his tutelage, offering the schoolhouse for 
dormitory living and studio. After that summer of 1950 Don Winslow 
continued to live in the schoolhouse for several more years. 
On the green were also located the dance pavilion and the grange hall 
where Norman Rockwell enjoyed square dancing regularly. (“He could go 
all night and never puff a bit,” Mead Schaeffer noted.) These places, so 
accessible to the artist, made living on the village green most amiable. 
The move to Arlington gave Rockwell a real lift. His temperament was 
ideally suited to the New England reserve surrounding him. Although he 
was known to be cordial, he had chosen to withdraw from the whirling 
social and professional pressures of New York, and he was not eager to 
replace that with other kinds of pressures a small town might impose. 
Needing solitude, Rockwell appreciated the civil but reserved manner of 
the native Vermonter. “The people we met were rugged and self-contained,” 
he remarked. “None of that sham ‘I am so glad to know you!’ accompanied 
by radiant smiles. They shook my hand, said, ‘How do,’ and waited to see 
how I’d turn out. Not hostile but reserved with a dignity and personal 
integrity which are rare in suburbia, where you're familiar with someone 
before you know him. In Vermont you earn the right to be called by your 
first name.” 
Rockwell had said it takes twenty years for a Vermonter to accept you as 
one of them. Others might say it’s never possible: “There are two classes of 
people who aren’t natives,” a Vermonter explained to one of Rockwell’s 
62 « ARLINGTON 
i
eee
My Studio Burns. Old Cond 
House Collection, Stockbridge, Massa- 
chusetts. During their fourteen years in 
Arlington, the Rockwells lived in two” 
different homes situated along the 
picturesque Batten Kill River. After 
an unfortunate fire destroyed Rock- 
| 
well’s studio and its contents in 1943 
(described with the illustrator’s charac- 
teristic humor in the drawing shown 
right), the Rockwells purchased a house 
on the West Arlington green. Here they 
lived only a few feet from a twin house 
owned by the Edgerton family. 

Ae 
J) by 
‘ 
% 
: 
: 
shee 
O# Ay the 
ne 
le 
ie 
| 
x 
- 
Sy 
° 
Re 
‘ 
“24 
A 
ro Vihe d/tbandmeten , 
Jboe FILA CL 
. 
iy 
LOCK MO tie 
" 
Pin fa boy nfoy Age 
8 
Introduction 
* 63 

friends: “There are summer people and there are year-round summer peo- 
ple.” For someone like Norman Rockwell, this freedom from social expec- 
tations represented a comfortable change from the whirl in New Rochelle, 
and a welcome atmosphere for work. 
In Vermont Rockwell found the environment he needed to concentrate 
totally on his pictures, a quiet and stable schedule for painting. What he 
also found was a community whose way of life most closely approximated 
the scenes he painted, a rural atmosphere where living is more clearly 
rooted to the universal themes associated with growing up and growing old. 
Rockwell didn’t have to search far for ideas and subjects: they were all 
around him in Vermont. “It was like living in another world,” he said. “A 
more honest one somehow. Because almost everyone had lived in the town 
all his life and had known one another since childhood and even every- 
body’s parents and grandparents, there could be little pretension. And 
because farming was a hard life and yet not competitive, there was great 
neighborliness... . The pressures were very strong, not toward conformity, 
but toward decency and honesty.” This was the world Norman Rockwell 
had depicted long before he had laid eyes on Arlington, Vermont. For the 
next fifteen years he would feel at home living in this world. 
If the tempo and style of living suited him, the way he adapted his 
methods of working to this environment were equally beneficial. All 
around him were potential subjects for his paintings. Whenever he stepped 
out of his studio he was likely to encounter a “type,” a natural and 
characteristic face for his pictures. With the exception of Fred Hildebrandt, 
who came to Arlington to pose for Rockwell from time to time, the 
illustrator no longer relied on professionals for posing. Instead he turned 
entirely to those living around him. “Now my pictures grew out of the 
world around me, the everyday life of my neighbors. I didn’t fake anymore.” 
All of this was made possible by Rockwell’s use of the camera. 
Until he moved to Arlington he had used photography as little as 
possible. Once, as early as 1921, he did use a camera, when he prepared a 
cover for American magazine. Inside the issue appeared a description of this 
cover: “Since he could not ask any boy to hold a yawn long enough for him 
to draw it, Mr. Rockwell went himself to a photographer and registered 
before the camera. In other words, Mr. Rockwell is his own model, so far as 
the yawn goes.” But he continued to use photography only occasionally, 
“trying to hang onto at least the shreds of my self-respect,” he said, until he 
was unable to resist the advantages that became more and more evident to 
him. A photographer came to help about 1937, but even then illustrations 
were painted from living models and from photographs. In the beginning, 
he used photographs for dogs and children only and was no longer forced to 
ask models to pose for long hours. Then came the pressure from the 
magazines to adopt different angles, new viewpoints into his work, as 
younger artists such as Stevan Dohanos were doing. No longer limited to 
64 * ARLINGTON 

the simple, head-on view from his easel, Rockwell could depict a scene 
viewed from above, or from near the floor. 
The photographs relieved Rockwell of a great deal of tension in working. 
He no longer had to paint frantically against the clock, commanding his 
models to check their poses for long hours. Professional models were the 
only ones who could afford the time necessary for posing, and they were 
accustomed to holding expressions and poses for an extended period of time 
without fatiguing. With photography he could snap a spontaneous expres- 
sion, could choose from among a variety of expressions, could record an 
awkward pose instantaneously. He also found he could be less literal in 
painting from photographs. “Working from the model, I had found it 
impossible to paint a green sweater from a red sweater. It sounds silly, but I 
just hadn’t been able to do it. So I’d had to hunt up the right sweater in 
green. A nuisance. When working with photographs, I seem to be able to 
recompose in many ways, in form, tone, and color.” 
In New Rochelle, Rockwell’s stable of models was necessarily limited by 
the number of models available to him under the demanding conditions 
required for posing. In Arlington, Rockwell discovered dozens of models 
who could suit his purposes. He found them everywhere—in the general 
store, square dancing at the grange hall, driving along the road, in the post 
office. Arlington had as many types as the artist had ideas. 
The range of subjects and their treatment expanded greatly in Vermont, 
partly because Rockwell had a greater range from which to select. He felt 
unable to contrive. He singled out the characters most closely associated 
with the topics of his paintings: The Story Teller, for example, shows a 
marine sitting in a cluttered garage, retelling war stories to attentive 
neighbors. For this idea Rockwell selected Benedict’s Garage in Arlington 
as the setting, and used both Benedict brothers (and a young man who had 
recently returned from the marines) in the garage to pose for the painting. 
For a cover involving a sheriff, Rockwell selected Arlington’s sheriff Harvey 
McKee; for a country doctor he called on Arlington’s own Dr. Russell. 
The strong kinship Americans felt for the personalities depicted in Rock- 
well’s work derived, in large part, from the authenticity of the subjects 
themselves; they were real. In a sense, Rockwell was a realist; he happened 
to view the American way of life with constantly renewing optimism, but 
he drew from genuine sources. 
Rockwell’s clarity of purpose was remarkable. He knew just what he 
wanted. It may seem strange, perhaps, that even though his imagination 
was consumed with a precise image, he still found it necessary to photo- 
graph. Why not paint directly from the imagination? 
The fact is that Rockwell was uneasy about making up pictures “in his 
head,” as he would say. He painted what he saw in front of him—from live 
models or photographs—rarely working out of his imagination alone. 
Although eager to entertain his youngest son Peter one evening because the 
Introduction 
* 65 

child was ailing with some minor illness, Rockwell resisted the boy’s 
entreaties to make some drawings. “I can’t draw if I don’t have a model in 
front of me,” he explained to Peter. He finally consented only under 
pressure from the boy. (“Just imagine a picture and draw it for me,” Peter 
urged.) The drawings—of clowns—were beautifully executed but not with- 
out difficulty. 
Photography, as a stage in the creative process, was a key step for him, 
therefore: first the imagined picture, then the photographs, then the 
painting developed in increasing stages of specificity. In selecting props, 
models, and costumes, he was responding to his imagined idea, committing 
the realization of this idea first to film, then to canvas. 
With photography Rockwell was able to reach for more complex subjects 
since he was no longer restricted to what he could construct in his studio. 
In 1942 the graphics of the Post cover changed, demanding more extensive 
treatment of the backgrounds, and the settings of Rockwell’s illustrations 
often became as important as the characters themselves. Photography made 
it possible for Rockwell to shoot on location the scenes not normally 
accessible to him: a backyard in Troy, a train station, an empty music hall. 
Here he could record the accidents of light and the specific details he might 
have missed in sketching. He could pose the model in the actual setting or 
in his studio, combining the setting with the model later if he chose. With 
a live model sitting before him for several hours, the illustrator and sitter 
shared a relatively constant middle ground viewpoint. With the camera, 
Rockwell could record the scene—either totally or in part—and deal with 
the image from a variety of viewpoints. In Freedom of Worship, for example, 
66 * ARLINGTON 
A jubilant group of Arlington citizenry 
enjoyed the triumph of shooting a black 
bear in the woods at Benedict Hollow. 
Jim and Clara Edgerton joined in the 
celebration, as did Tommy Rockwell 
standing alongside Jim Edgerton. 
Photo courtesy Clara Edgerton. 

The long, cold winters in Arlington had 
their redeeming moments. Here Jim 
Edgerton had hitched up his horse to a 
sleigh, in order to take the Rockwell 
boys on a 
joy ride. 
Photo courtesy Clara Edgerton. 
the viewer stands in an altogether different perspective from where the 
artist would have stood to achieve a similar composition. 
Although Rockwell knew a great deal about photography and could pull 
off any number of tricks in the darkroom if needed, he did not make his 
own photographs. He wasn’t even interested at looking through the camera 
during a photo session. Instead, he worked with a photographer, preferably 
one he had trained himself. His interest was not in acquiring fine photo- 
graphs, but in gathering abundant reference material, details that would 
reinforce the story line. In fact, Rockwell complained about a professional 
photographer he used once because he was too good. Rockwell liked 
photographs that were gray—in middle values only—so that he would not 
be led in his painting by photographic effects. He usually had three prints 
made for each subject—a normal print, one very dark (for highlight 
details), one very light (for details in dark areas), and he adjusted the values 
accordingly in his painting. For the same reasons he never used color 
photographs, preferring instead to establish his colors independently of the 
photograph. Photographs were taken with a 4 x 5 inch camera—generally 
set at f:8—and the photographer would develop the film and prints imme- 
diately after the session in the darkroom located in Rockwell’s studio. The 
illustrator would be waiting to examine the prints early the next day so that 
he could get started on his painting. 
The photographic session became a central part of the picture-making 
process for Rockwell. Mind you, this wasn’t just any routine photography 
session: it was a stage production. Imagine the amount of preparation, the 
sets, the props, the costumes necessary to stage some of the scenes: Mary 
Rockwell might spend days searching for precisely the right object for a 
precise function; the handyman would construct a set in the studio with 
props provided by Mary; the performers would come on stage and the 
director would set the characters in place. Rockwell carefully explained the 
entire scene, showing sketches, so that the performers would “climb into” 
their roles. In directing the models, Rockwell would, as he described it, 
“discard all dignity and vanity to get into the act.” Occasionally he would 
find a model who looked the part but couldn’t lay aside his own individuality 
to act another part. (“What you need is an actor,” Rockwell would say 
about his models.) So Rockwell would pose himself first, give the expres- 
sion he was looking for, then request the model to do the same. Frequently 
he would do this over and over until he struck exactly the right pose and 
the right facial expression. He’d extract the best performances by demon- 
strating the effects he was after: a cough, a sneer, a surprised expression, 
arms akimbo, legs twisted into a comical position, just what was needed for 
the story. After some time the model inevitably found the “ham in him,” 
losing all self-consciousness, and acting the part with genuine enthusiasm. 
When the models were properly whipped up, Rockwell would get excited 
and call out to the photographer, “ok, ok, ok, ok” gesturing wildly with his 
Introduction * 67 

hands to indicate the timing to the man under the black cloth. “It was a 
real occasion,” remembers Jarvis Rockwell. “He might bring a horse into 
the studio, or a bunch of chickens. It was like the circus had come to town. 
And you knew Pop was feeling good. He was at his best.” Don Spaulding 
remembered, “You’d want to do anything for him.” 
“In spite of occasional vagaries I couldn’t ask for better models than my 
neighbors,” recalled Rockwell. “Or more obliging ones. I put them through 
hell, asking them to assume (and hold) postures that would lay out a yogi, 
expressions which would exhaust a mime. And they do it happily, refuse to 
get mad. I don’t know what I’d do without them. . 
. . I guess if my neighbors 
weren’t so pleasant and obliging I’d have to give up work. I couldn’t do it 
without them.” 
Each session was an intense event, with many pictures taken. Often the 
artist discarded his idea from that session entirely, and it was hard to recall 
whether the image was used finally. 
My unfortunate practice of changing models in mid-picture is 
sometimes a source of trouble and embarrassment. I use one 
person, decide he’s not right, and get another. But in the struggle 
with the picture I often forget to inform the first model that he is 
no longer being used. So he tells all his friends, “Wait until you see 
me. I’m coming out on a Post cover next month. You watch for it. 
I’m the man holding the shovel.” Then the cover appears. He’s 
not on it and is quite understandably embarrassed. 
Rockwell’s talent for dealing with models was not confined to the way he 
posed them. He developed a rapport with them; he treated them “like 
honored guests,” Don Spaulding observed. Rockwell made them know how 
much he valued their work and that the success of his paintings depended 
on them. While he must have known that being selected to pose for the well 
known illustrator was a thrill for them, that it gave them the opportunity to 
see for themselves the magical process of producing a cover for the great 
magazine they saw each week, Rockwell was never patronizing or conde- 
scending to his models. He advised other artists to do the same: “If your 
models feel that you are their friend instead of their boss, and if you can 
make them feel that they are very important to the success of your picture, 
they invariably will cooperate. You cannot get people to do things for you 
that are difficult, no matter how much you pay them or order them about, 
unless they like and trust you.” 
Rockwell insisted on paying his models, even if they wanted to volunteer 
their services, and he paid them well. Other less successful illustrators 
admitted that Norman made it somewhat difficult for them because he paid 
his models so well they felt obliged to keep up with the rates. At the outset, 
Rockwell paid $5.00 a sitting for a child; $10.00 for an adult. Only his own 
68 * ARLINGTON 
During their years in Arlington, a com- 
munity of good friends surrounded the 
Rockwells. Their neighbor on the West 
Arlington green, Clara Edgerton (in the 
photo shown above, standing between 
Norman and Mary Rockwell), was a 
steadfast friend. For the Schaeffers and 
the Rockwells, just about any event 
was occasion for a gathering, espe- 
cially Thanksgiving and Christmas. The 
photograph shown below was taken at 
such an occasion. From left to right: 
Peter, Tom, Jarvis, and Norman Rock- 
well, Patty Schaeffer, Colonel Ayres, 
Mary Atherton, Lee Schaeffer, Mary 
Rockwell, Elizabeth and Mead Schaeffer. 


children earned less! Mrs. Hoyt received $15.00 when she posed for 
Rockwell’s Freedom of Worship, a sum that seemed extraordinary during the 
war. “I had eight children in the house at that time, so $15.00 sure came in 
handy,” she recalled. After the photographic session Rockwell would send 
out for Cokes for the children, thank his models earnestly, then hand them 
a check that had been sealed in an envelope, a gracious detail that did not 
go unnoticed by his colleagues. 
Rockwell enjoyed having people in his studio, particularly his good 
friends whose advice he valued. “I’m having trouble with a painting,” he 
might say to a friend, “and I really could use your help.” Mary Schafer recalls 
these sessions: 
You’d troop out back to his studio and you’d give your honest 
opinion. Everyone was an expert in his estimation. You could say 
anything you wanted with no fear whatsoever. And all kinds of 
opinions would spring forth. We all felt we were contributing to 
an important thing. He’d take in all the opinions and the next day 
he’d do whatever he wanted to do in the first place. 
“He’d ask you what you didn’t like about his painting in progress, and 
he’d watch your face while you studied it,” remembers Don Spaulding. “If 
you didn’t get the story right away he knew something was wrong.” 
Every detail in the painting was organized to support the story, a feature 
that is particularly critical for a magazine cover. “He had a passion for 
detail,” said Peter Rockwell. “And every detail had to be right.” When he 
was planning a painting, he was amazingly observant: the marvelous legs on 
the Brushes’ Victorian piano prompted him to borrow the two-thousand- 
pound instrument for two weeks. That ceramic pitcher he noticed last 
week—did it belong to Mrs. Marsh or Mrs. Whalen? He once came to a 
screeching halt in his car when he spotted precisely the rump he needed for 
a female figure. The next day the young woman appeared at his studio at 
8 o’clock, summoned by the eager illustrator, and proud to be of service. 
As his work matured, he became even more insistent on the precise 
details to be photographed. David Loveless, a printmaker in Stockbridge, 
remembered a time that Rockwell was so determined to have a model clothed 
in a specific dress that he had Loveless print an exact imagined paisley pat- 
tern on a piece of fabric. The printed fabric was then given to a dressmaker. 
“The ink from the printing was not even dry before he had the fabric in the 
hands of the dressmaker,” Loveless recalled. 
It wasn’t a matter of artistry alone that caused him to be so conscious of 
details. Attentive readers of the Post diligently inspected his covers for 
errors. On one cover he had painted a package about to be mailed, and 
several readers pointed out to him the package was stamped with insufficient 
postage. After that Rockwell made a point of weighing any similar prop at 
70 * ARLINGTON 

OVERLEAF: No painting left the Rockwell 
studio without the consultation of 
Rockwell’s immediate friends and fam- 
ily. The observations of the cook—Mrs. 
LaBombard—and her husband were as 
helpful as those of his wife, his son 
Peter, and his colleagues. Here the illus- 
trator is consulting his friendly critics 
about his painting, Norman Rockwell 
Visits a Ration Board. 
the post office, to be certain it contained the correct number of stamps. 
If Rockwell had any consistent problem in his work it derived from his 
tendency to overwork a painting, and thereby lose the spontaneity of it by 
tightening up. This might result in the picture becoming “too photographic” 
(as he would say himself) or overstated with too many details. This tempta- 
tion on Rockwell’s part was cause for differences between him and his 
wife Mary who continually urged him to finish the painting at a stage 
before he overworked it or added too many details. Rockwell knew this 
preoccupation was a weakness, but he found it very difficult to restrain 
himself. He could become so involved with small details that he might lose 
sight of some major detail that was wrong of left out. Here he depended on 
friends to find errors or omissions, such as the time the farmer Jim Edgerton 
had pointed out that a painting being prepared for a summer cover included 
a boy wearing a winter hat. No one managed to catch the error in the Post 
cover of the returning soldier: the carpenter at work had no ladder for 
climbing down from the roof of the porch. Then in another work there was 
the group of figures with an extra leg.... 
Rockwell’s humor was frequently directed at himself and his worry about 
details was something he knew had its amusing components. This is 
probably why he enjoyed painting the April Fool’s covers—he did three in 
all. He could play with details in a way that poked fun at their misuse. “I’ve 
fixed the mistake mongers,” he laughed after he completed his first such 
cover in 1944. (“Though of course, I hadn’t,” he admitted. “I put 45 
mistakes and incongruities into the picture; a man wrote me from South 
America claiming to have found a hundred and twenty.”) 
Although he envied his friend Mead Schaeffer's speed of execution, 
Rockwell was unable to paint faster, no matter how he tried. He worked 
and reworked until he was satisfied, never hesitating to burn a canvas he 
felt was less than adequate, regardless of the time he had already invested. 
And his family and friends continued to troop back to the studio to look at 
the picture. 
From time to time the Rockwells would get restless, particularly during a 
long Vermont winter, and they would be off. Three times during the 1940s 
they went to live in Mary Rockwell’s home state of California. At other 
times they would visit Cape Cod for a change of pace, or make a quick trip 
to New York City. Until Mary Rockwell became ill in the early 1950s, the 
family maintained this consistent pace. 
Mary Rockwell’s illness required that she make frequent visits to Massa- 
chusetts for treatment, and they both decided that it would be more 
convenient for them to live near the hospital. Norman Rockwell was also 
ready for the move, still convinced that a new environment every twenty 
years or so was stimulating. The Rockwells left Arlington to live in Stock- 
bridge, Massachusetts, in 1953, a swiftly-made and executed decision, with 
no pause for looking back. 
Introduction * 71 

a, 
ee . 
ae 
er 
ll 

PRA ES SSS 

THE SCH AEE Eis 
Mead Schaeffer’s illustrations were inspired by the great Brandywine tradi- 
tion that includes the heroic paintings of Howard Pyle, N.C. Wyeth, and 
Frank Schoonover. A graduate of Pratt, he began by modeling for Dean 
Cornwell, and for some time Schaeffer painted in the same studio building 
as Cornwell and Harvey Dunn, two illustrators working in the Pyle tradi- 
tion. Like these artists, Schaeffer preferred to illustrate blockbuster stories 
and novels, regarding magazine covers somehow as the more frivolous 
aspect of illustration. Schaeffer dreamed of pirates and giants, adventure 
and romance, heroism and villainy. Frank Dodd of Dodd Mead publishing 
company was a fishing companion and client, and he commissioned Mead 
Schaeffer to illustrate nineteen classics over the years, including all the 
novels by Herman Melville; but book illustration didn’t pay as well as 
magazine work (‘‘not even enough to pay the models,” said Schaeffer), so 
he balanced his efforts with the more lucrative assignments from the 
periodicals. For a considerable length of time, Schaeffer illustrated two 
serials a month for such magazines as Good Housekeeping, Cosmopolitan, 
and McCall’s. Each generally required a square and a vignette, with a 
double-page spread for the opening installment—six pictures in all. “All 
this called for the expenditure of a tremendous amount of energy, but I was 
young and enthusiastic,” said Schaeffer, “and had acquired a broad, direct 
manner of working—a technical facility, plus an ability to fake and 
improvise—which permitted prodigiously rapid accomplishment. Young 
men are fond of good money, and money came easily, so all in all I was 
well-satisfied for a long time.” 
Mead Schaeffer knew Rockwell only casually at the time they both lived 
in New Rochelle. Their phone conversations consisted primarily of talk of 
trading models. In particular, they planned their deadlines around the 
model Fred Hildebrandt. 
It was at Hildebrandt’s invitation that Schaeffer sampled the marvels of 
trout fishing on the Batten Kill River. He and his wife Elizabeth took an 
instant liking to Arlington and bought a house there, settling in the 
community in 1940, just about the time the Rockwells had decided to live 
there year round. Situated on the Green River, a tributary of the Batten 
Kill, the Schaeffers’ home was convenient for fishing. “I could fish for my 
supper. If we wanted to, Fred Hildebrandt, Jack Atherton, and I could 
fish all night in that beautiful river only steps away from my back door.” 
Although Rockwell didn’t share Schaeffer’s zeal for fishing, the two 
families became virtually inseparable. They would make local car trips 
together to places like Bennington, or Troy. They traveled to Brandywine 
territory, Wilmington, Delaware, where they visited N.C. Wyeth, Frank 
Schoonover, and the Delaware Art Museum, returning with a new spurt of 
74 * ARLINGTON 

Mead Schaeffer, shown posing for Rock- 
well in the photograph on the left, had 
much in common with his colleague. 
Their passion for illustration provided 
an inestimable bond between them. The 
Schaeffer daughters, Patty and Lee, 
shown posing with Mary Atherton on 
the right, were also favorite models for 
several of the Arlington illustrators, 
especially Norman Rockwell. 
inspiration. They traveled in each other’s company for two-and-a-half 
months in California, and brought back many ideas for illustrations. While 
artistically they were quite different, Rockwell and Schaeffer admired each 
other’s work, and each encouraged the other in his uniqueness. “In the car 
Norman and I would be in the front seat, the girls in the back. We'd talk 
pictures, pictures, pictures, driving from one door to the next, not always 
agreeing, but always sharing a respect for the other's view. We worked hard 
and we relaxed easily with each other. It was a marvelous friendship. 
There’s no denying it; that was a period in my life I long for again,” Schaeffer 
reflected wistfully. 
As artists, Schaeffer and Rockwell differed in their approach to specificity. 
Rockwell always looked for a model who was the right “type” to convey the 
story; Schaeffer was a broad painter, and specific details of individuality and 
expression were secondary to the overall sweep or mood of the illustration. 
One model could serve many functions over and over, because facial details 
were incidental to the movement of the figure. Like other artists inspired by 
Howard Pyle, Schaeffer worked in a manner that resembles that of the 
method actor: you become the figure as you paint it in an empathetic, almost 
visceral experience that transcends the recording of the immediate details 
from behind the easel. Schaeffer worked more comfortably from imagina- 
tion, from fantasy, inflating reality with a kind of drama and heroism. This 
approach differed considerably from the thoughtful, carefully constructed 
and composed details that Rockwell required for his realism. 
They benefited from each other by their differences. Rockwell, for 
example, had a real talent for extracting from a model precisely what was 
needed for a painting. “Sometimes I’d get a model who was a flat tire,” 
Schaeffer recalled, “and I’d call Norman in to whip him up, to direct him so 
he’d feel the part of the pirate if that was what was needed. Norman was a 
ereat ham and knew how to pull that model into his performance.” 
Elizabeth Schaeffer (nicknamed “Toby”) was sixteen years old when she 
met Mead Schaeffer in school. She had a bright and direct personality and 
was indispensable to her husband through the years. They would discuss 
every assignment before he accepted it and share solutions to artistic prob- 
lems (“she could have taught illustration”). Finally, Elizabeth Schaeffer 
went to study photography and became quite an expert with the camera, 
acting as her husband’s photographer. She and Mary Rockwell were the 
supporting elements in the four-way friendship. They frequently made 
shopping trips together, hunting down props and costumes their husbands 
needed, and confiding in each other about the difficulties and joys of being 
married to exalted illustrators. “And we were exalted,” Schaeffer recalled. 
Why, we were going to bring back the Golden Age of Illustration 
with our enthusiasm. It was more than just an excitement about 
art—though that was at the heart of it. There was the sense of 
The Schaeffers * 75 

fellowship and sharing we all felt, a generosity that spurred us onto 
greater heights. We were there for criticism, to model, to help 
each other out of a jam. All of us were supportive and eager to see 
the next guy succeed. That feeling among illustrators just doesn’t 
exist anymore. Neither does the exaltation. 
At 5:00—after a good day’s work—the Schaeffers and Rockwells and 
perhaps the Athertons and Hugheses might convene for cocktails, for the 
“children’s hour,” as one of them called it. The talk was naturally about 
pictures, a rapid exchange of ideas that Lee Schaeffer recalls vividly. 
“Listening to my father and his friends talk about these subjects—and 
sometimes the conversations became very heated—was inspiring for me as 
a child. These men were all so committed; so engaged; so purposeful.” 
Their gatherings at 5:00 were an important form of stimulation in this 
intimate artists’ community. The Schaeffers and Rockwells also entertained 
the editors and art directors who came through Vermont, people from 
Hollywood and New York who might come to visit. “Entertaining was an 
aspect of the business we were in, after all. And four could entertain more 
easily than two. You could always go to sleep without attracting too much 
notice.” 
Norman Rockwell joined his friend on location while Schaef was work- 
ing on the series of fourteen commemorative war covers for the Saturday 
Evening Post. Rockwell enjoyed meeting the generals and riding in the 
tanks, though he knew nothing about warfare and never painted combat 
subjects himself. “He was so boyish. A Will Rogers, if you know what I 
mean. He had a curiosity and enthusiasm about everything.” 
The Will Rogers in Rockwell would come out in situations Schaeffer 
found enviable, such as the time they were invited as distinguished guests to 
address the Art Directors Club in Chicago at a formal banquet before 
several hundred professionals. At his turn Rockwell simply rose to the 
microphone and addressed the group informally as if he’d known everyone 
76 * ARLINGTON 
Mead Schaeffer posed for many of his 
own paintings. (His wife was an 
accomplished photographer.) By posing 
himself, Schaeffer was able to “climb 
into” the subject of his painting, an 
empathetic approach to painting that 
was characteristic of this artist. 

in the room, typically relaxed and witty. Schaef, on the other hand, was so 
frightened that he trembled through the entire meal and had a distinctly 
queasy feeling in his stomach while the others spoke. Although his father 
had been a minister, Schaef claimed he inherited no oratory skills whatso- 
ever. Standing before the crowd, he grappled for his carefully written-out 
notes—first in this pocket, then that pocket—without success. He was 
paralyzed with fear. He lowered his eyes and picked out a friendly, receptive 
face in the crowd and started to stutter a most unexpected speech: “There 
are four ways to fish the Batten Kill River,” he began, and proceeded to 
describe the subject most dear to his heart. The topic was unusual for the 
event at hand, but a great improvement over the treatise on illustration he 
had prepared so assiduously. Schaef was spared disaster, but he vowed never 
again to accept such an invitation. 
The period of time spent in Arlington greatly influenced Schaeffer's 
work. He underwent a profound change in direction. He said in a 1945 
interview, 
The day had come when I suddenly realized I was sick of it all— 
sick of painting dudes and dandies, sick of exaggerated sentiment 
and of artificial romance and love, with the endless succession of 
‘he and she’ pictures. I was tired, too, of the constant struggle 
to meet deadlines, and of being subject to the moods and caprices 
of art editors. Especially I was surfeited with the constant faking: 
my work was supposed to be convincing, but I knew it was not. 
I longed to do honest work, based on real places, real people, 
and real things—work expressive of normal human emotions and 
activities. So I did a right-about-face, and have never regretted it. 
True, my production lessened, but the satisfaction of doing an 
honest job in my own way more than compensated. 
Like Rockwell, Schaeffer found in Arlington a return to the more 
fundamental aspects of picture-making. Eventually he left illustration en- 
tirely, abandoning his oils, and adopting watercolor instead: an abstraction- 
ist, a landscape painter, an honestly creative man who would have painted 
every day even if he never earned a nickel from doing so. 
The Schaeffers left Arlington in 1950 before the Rockwells left. Time 
and distance separated them over the years. Elizabeth and Mary died. The 
younger Schaeffer daughter, Patty, met an untimely death. Only the 
memories of a most unusual friendship remained. “When I went to see 
Norman in Stockbridge not long before he died, I found him on a bad day. 
He didn’t recognize me at all. Oh, I cried for the past when I 
left his side. 
I’ve never had a friend like him, before or since. I loved the man.” 
The Schaeffers * 77 

78 * ARLINGTON 
M ead Schaeffer’s only appearance as a central figure 
in a Rockwell illustration was as a tattooist. De- 
spite his objection that Rockwell exaggerated the size of 
his rump, Schaeffer was delighted to have taken part ina 
cover that became so popular. To acquire the authentic 
equipment used in the picture, Rockwell located a tattoo- 
ist on the Bowery in New York, and consulted with this 
professional and with former sailors to insure accuracy. 
The model for the sailor is Clarence Decker, whose 
daughter Phyllis happened to be the first girl Peter 
Rockwell ever kissed. Master of the Grange in Arling- 
ton, Decker posed for other paintings by Rockwell, 
including Strictly a Sharpshooter and The Forging 
Contest. 
@ 

won SORRGRET ? 
sees codes E pgreraae 
ess 

Soldiers and Seamen by Mead Schaeffer. Original oil painting for an illustration. Collection Mr. and Mrs. Robert Goodfellow. 
Photo Frank Forward. 
80 *« ARLINGTON 

An Alaskan Story. Original oil painting for an illustration by Mead Schaeffer. Collection the estate of Mead Schaeffer. 
Photo Eric Pollitzer. 
| 
n spite of—or perhaps because of —their artistic differ- 
ences, Norman Rockwell and Mead Schaeffer shared 
great respect for each other’s talents. Unlike Rockwell, 
Mead Schaeffer used design and color, rather than 
detail, to convey the story. A single model could be used 
over and over in Schaeffer’s illustrations because the 
artist focused on broad shapes and movement, gener- 
alizing matters of specifics, and painting rapidly to 
capture the overall composition and mood. Schaeffer’s 
debt to Howard Pyle and Dean Cornwell are evident in 
his daring and romantic approach to his subject. “Schaef 
is a slight, agile man,” said Rockwell. “Yet he has 
tremendous ability for painting the powerful, broad- 
shouldered, heroic man, sheer physical courage, man 
against nature. .. 
. His illustrations give one a real sense 
of robust, swashbuckling manhood. His attitude toward 
life is the same as that in his paintings.’*@ 
Embracing Man and Woman by Mead Schaeffer. Original oil 
painting for an illustration. Collection Mr. and Mrs. Robert Goodfellow. 
Photo Frank Forward. 

ty 
lhe Point of File by Mead Schaeffer. Original oil painting for a 
The Tank Commander by Mead Schaeffer. Original oil 
Saturday Evening Post cover, October 24, 1942. Courtesy 
painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, January 9, 1943. 
Judy and Alan Goffman Fine Art, Blue Bell, Pennsylvania. 
Courtesy Judy and Alan Goffman Fine Art, Blue Bell, Pennsylvania. 
The Engineer Corps by Mead Schaeffer. Original oil 
painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, October 28, 
1944. Courtesy Judy and Alan Goffman Fine Art, Blue 
Bell, Pennsylvania. 
82 * ARLINGTON 

The Heavy Artillery by Mead Schaeffer. Original oil 
painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, November 6, 
1943. Courtesy Judy and Alan Goffman Fine Art, Blue 
Bell, Pennsylvania. 
N orman Rockwell and Mead Schaeffer were both 
eager to make a real contribution to the war effort. 
Sketches in hand, they ventured to Washington, D.C., 
to volunteer their illustrations to the War Office. Their 
generous offer was declined. On their way back from 
Washington they stopped off at Philadelphia to see Ben 
Hibbs at the Post. Hibbs immediately invited Rockwell 
and Schaeffer to apply their talents to wartime subjects, 
knowing the inspirational value of such paintings in a 
time of national crisis. Rockwell painted his Four Free- 
doms for the Post, and Schaeffer completed a total of 
fourteen covers honoring the American forces in com- 
roe 
Carrier Signal Lieutenant by Mead Schaeffer. Original 
oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, June 12, 
1943. Courtesy Judy and Alan Goffman Fine Art, Blue 
Bell, Pennsylvania. 
bat. This series necessitated several trips to military 
facilities, and whenever time permitted, Rockwell joined 
Schaeffer. Although Rockwell painted only one combat 
picture himself (a war poster), he enjoyed these excur- 
sions with Schaeffer to the bases—bumping along on a 
dusty road in a jeep and examining the tanks. Like their 
other trips together, these were filled with an intense 
exchange of ideas and humor. “This friendship with 
Schaef,” Rockwell said, “‘a working illustrator, someone 
who shared my ideals, understood my problems—stimu- 
lated me. I guess it helped my work almost as much as 
moving to Arlington.” @ 
Mead Schaeffer * 83 

Strictly a Sharpshooter. Original oil painting for story of same title by D.D. Beauchamp, American Magazine, June, 1941. 
Old Corner House Collection, Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
84 * ARLINGTON 

f all the models Rockwell used here only the fighter 
at the left was authentic. The others represented 
imaginative portrayals of Rockwell’s friends and neigh- 
bors. He selected Elizabeth Schaeffer for the female in 
the painting, a role that was certainly out of character. 
“She is really a fine lady,” Rockwell asserted. Other 
models doubled up: Rockwell’s Arlington photographer 
and assistant Gene Pelham appears in the crowd as the 
man with a cigar and in the ring ministering to the boxer 
at the left. Nip Noyes, the East Arlington postman, 
appears twice also, wearing a bowler derby in both 
instances. The twisted expression on the boxer who is 
standing above Elizabeth Schaeffer was produced for 
Rockwell by Clarence Decker, the sailor in The Tattooist. 
The setting and subject were so unfamiliar to Rockwell, 
in fact, that he spent a considerable amount of time at a 
boxing club on Manhattan’s Columbus Circle to study 
the types likely to frequent such an establishment. 
@ 
Elizabeth Schaeffer * 85 

he Schaeffers had two daughters—Lee and Patty— 
who posed several times for Rockwell. They were a 
peppy pair and Rockwell used them when he wanted a 
lively teenager or a saucy blonde. The two sisters were 
painted together for Fixing a Flat. “He told me that he 
was incapable of painting a sexy girl,” Peter Rockwell 
related when talking about his father’s rendition of Lee 
Schaeffer as the blonde in the convertible. “They always 
86 « ARLINGTON 
The Convention. Saturday Evening 
Post cover, May 3, 1941. 
came out looking funny, rather than sexy.” This “fail- 
ing” on Rockwell’s part (actually, he was proud of it), did 
not prevent him from depicting a very appealing female 
in two of the paintings for the Willie Gillis series. “I fell 
in love with Willie Gillis’s girl when I saw her on the 
cover of the Saturday Evening Post,” boasted Bob 
Goodfellow, Lee Schaeffer’s husband. 
@ 

Arguing Over Willie Gillis. 
Saturday Evening Post cover, 
September 5, 1942. 
The Schaeffer Sisters * 87 

THE: AoE Roane NS 
John Atherton had great affection for his friends Mead Schaeffer and 
Norman Rockwell, but he did not share their passion for illustration. He 
was an illustrator himself, of course, but only out of necessity. Commercial 
work simply financed his two other passions: fishing and easel painting. 
And he was a master of both. 
Like Mead Schaeffer, Jack Atherton was drawn to Arlington for its 
excellent fishing. Meeting at the Society of Illustrators one evening in 
1941, Norman Rockwell invited Atherton to sample the trout on the 
Batten Kill. After a brief visit, Maxine and John Atherton decided to leave 
Ridgefield, Connecticut, and settle permanently in Arlington. 
The Athertons had originally come East from San Francisco, where they 
had met in art school. The prosperous community of Ridgefield, where they 
lived for several years, was convenient to New York City, but they found it 
difficult to maintain two very different groups of friends. Having been an 
outdoorsman all his life, Jack Atherton was in frequent demand for hunt- 
ing, fishing, and golf. An excellent shot, he participated in a number of 
very fashionable field trials. He was equally intimate with another, very 
different sector of the community. Because his mother was a professional 
pianist, and he had worked his way through art school playing the banjo in 
a jazz band, Atherton had a keen appreciation for music as well, and was 
drawn to the company of other musicians. The two groups did not inter- 
mingle comfortably, however. “My father explained what was meant by the 
‘Restricted’ sign posted at the entrance of the Ridgefield Country Club (of 
which he was not a member). It seemed astonishing that the musicians we 
loved and admired could not be admitted because they were Jews.” 
In Arlington, Jack Atherton was more successful in blending the many 
components of his life. The Saturday Evening Post paid him sufficiently well 
to permit him the time and energy for easel painting. Maxine and Jack 
Atherton, both avid fishermen, found the northern streams and rivers 
easily accessible and productive. They built a house right on the Batten Kill, 
the most contemporary home in Arlington, which was referred to as “the 
chicken house” by the more traditional neighbors. Intellectual stimulation 
was plentiful: they quickly found musicians, writers, and artists living 
nearby, and each week they drove to Bennington for concerts at the college. 
In temperament Atherton was very different from Rockwell. A man of 
firm convictions, he was easily annoyed by the things he disliked. Rockwell 
said, “Whenever something irritated him—and something did almost every 
day, for his threshold of irritability was low—he’d groan and wrap his arms 
around his head and sway from side to side as if you were sticking red-hot 
knives in him.” He disliked doing illustrations for ads—despised their silly 
restrictions—and he was annoyed by any form of sentimentality in art, 
avoiding human interest pictures whenever he could. He preferred painting 
88 * ARLINGTON 
"wat 
Sy 
1, Sw 
SERENE 
RABE 
SHG 
Soe 
Ready for Action by John Atherton. Painting for 
a Saturday Evening Post cover, December 12, 1942. 
PILYCREAED 
Spirit of 
Kansas City. Painted in collaboration 
with Jack Atherton. Undated. 

Unlike Norman Rockwell and Mead 
Schaeffer, John Atherton was more in- 
tense about fine art than he was about 
illustration, and he tended to favor land- 
scape and still life to the human figure. 
Even when he collaborated with Nor- 
man Rockwell for The Spirit of Kansas 
City, Rockwell painted the figure (Walt 
Squires) and John Atherton did the 
background. Both signed the painting. 
As a result of his preference, Atherton’s 
magazine covers tended to tell their 
stories through symbols rather than ac- 
tion. He particularly enjoyed assign- 
ments that permitted him to draw on his 
love for outdoor sports, such as the Post 
cover shown opposite. 
coolly surreal still-lifes and landscapes, later turning to abstraction. 
In spite of their differences, Rockwell and Atherton were loyal friends, 
each in great admiration of the other’s talents. Rockwell particularly re- 
spected Atherton’s facility as an artist. 
Jack Atherton was capable of separating his commercial work from 
his fine arts work and looking on each with a different viewpoint. 
He could do an abstraction in the morning, painting only to 
satisfy himself, brooking no interference from others... . And in 
the afternoon he could start a Post cover, making sure that it had 
the correct proportions and that the idea was clear and absolutely 
comprehensive to everyone... 
. I guess one of the reasons that Jack 
was able to do both commercial and fine arts work was his 
extraordinary facility. He could use any medium, letter beautifully. 
And he always knew just what he was going to do each time he 
put brush to canvas, pencil to paper... . Everything Jack did— 
skiing, tennis, painting, fishing, skating—he did to perfection. 
Something inside him forced him to excel, though it wasn’t 
particularly competitive. It was more, I always thought, a deep 
abhorrence of sloppiness, of amateurishness, of slip-shod perform- 
ance in anything. 
For his part, Atherton returned this esteem equally. He never understood 
why Rockwell accepted so many commercial assignments (the Boy Scout 
calendars he referred to as “propaganda, sentimental trash”), but he defended 
Rockwell’s work when anyone else criticized it, and promoted his friend 
to others when there was an opportunity to do so. In an effort to arouse 
more serious critical interest in Rockwell’s work, Atherton invited Robert 
Coates, an art writer for The New Yorker, to Rockwell’s studio and was 
disgusted with the critic’s neutral response. 
Rockwell and Atherton occasionally worked together. Atherton created 
a pattern for Rockwell to use as a wallpaper design in his Post cover, Facts of 
Life, and they both collaborated on a poster for Kansas City called The Spirit 
of Kansas City (Rockwell painted the figure; Atherton the background), an 
unlikely collaboration that produced a work bearing little resemblance to 
that of either artist. 
The Post illustrators were frequently in each other’s company, meeting 
for cocktails and dinner throughout the year when time permitted. Each 
Thanksgiving and Christmas—if they happened to be in town at the same 
time—the Athertons and Schaeffers came together for a feast at the Rock- 
wells’. “Shop talk and art talk” 
is what Maxine Atherton remembered 
about those convivial gatherings. “And always a lot of laughter.” Atherton 
had a fine sense of humor, except when it came to subjects he took very 
seriously. He willingly posed for Rockwell’s April Fool’s cover—submitting 
to being portrayed as a fisherman who does everything wrong—but he 
The Athertons 
* 89 

would not accept the painting when Rockwell offered it as a gift. Fishing 
was just too sacred for such tomfoolery. 
If they had a choice, the Athertons would have stayed in Arlington 
forever. Life was very good to them there. Their daughter Mary was in 
college at Bennington; they had a stimulating group of friends; and they 
took many fishing trips. Atherton had been invited to lecture; he judged art 
competitions, and even found time to write and illustrate a book on his 
favorite subject called Fly and the Fish. An increasing number of collectors 
was taking interest in his fine art, and he was preparing for a one-man show 
at the Famous Artists Schools in Connecticut. 
All this came to an end 
suddenly when, on a 
fishing trip on the Salmon River in Canada, Jack 
Atherton died of a heart attack. It was 1952. Maxine Atherton drove back 
to Arlington, escorted by George Hughes, and stayed with the Rockwells 
until she felt able to put her home in order. Almost immediately afterward 
she and her daughter moved to New York. Arlington was not the same 
without Jack Atherton. “I doubt if I will ever meet a man as volatile and 
stimulating, or have a friend as loyal,” Rockwell said. 
Original oil painting by John Atherton. Collection Chris and Mary Schafer. 
Photo Frank Forward. 
90 * ARLINGTON 
John Atherton’s work was executed care- 
fully, with close attention to a linear 
design treatment, quite opposite to 
Schaeffer’s painterly dabs of thick color. 
It is not surprising that over the years 
Atherton’s work evolved to pure abstrac- 
tion. A highly respected fine artist, 
Atherton had his paintings handled by a 
distinguished New York gallery, and was 
widely collected by museums. “Jack 
wasn’t set on reviving the golden age of 
illustration as Schaef and I were,” re- 
called Rockwell, “but he joined in our 
discussions of art, damning sentimental, 
human-interest pictures one minute, 
the next loyally (and violently) upbraid- 
ing us for down-grading our work, which 
was, after all, human interest and (some 
of it anyway) sentimental.” 

A 
A 
Oil painting by John Atherton for House and Garden, June, 1930. Copyright © 1930 (renewed) by the Condé Nast 
Publications, Inc. Courtesy Murray Tinkelman. 
John Atherton 
* 91 

ockwell never really comprehended the passion Mead 
Schaeffer and Jack Atherton shared for fishing. He 
particularly didn’t understand the purpose of fishing all 
day without enjoying the benefits of the catch at dinner. 
Instead, Schaeffer and Atherton would toss the fish back 
into the river as soon as they hooked it, starting the 
process all over again. This bewildering activity provided 
an ideal subject for Rockwell to satirize in an April Fool’s 
cover for the Post. Atherton agreed to pose for the 
picture, but out of respect for the sport could not bring 
himself to accept the original painting as a gift when 
Rockwell offered it. Although Rockwell may have been 
unfair to the sport, he managed to achieve a 
fair likeness 
of his friend whom he described this way: “Jack was a 
large, hulking man with powerful shoulders and big 
hands and arms. But his head was curiously small, and 
round and completely bald except for a fringe of light 
brown hair about his ears.”"@ 
92 « ARLINGTON 

ttf ae, i a 
April Fool. Saturday Evening Post cover, March 31, 1945. 
John Atherton 
* 93 

THE HUGHESES 
Until World War II, George Hughes had been known for his fashion 
drawings and his story illustrations—maritime adventure and romance. 
When the Post invited Hughes to do covers after the war, his anticipation 
of steady work enabled him to live away from the city. Recently married 
for the second time, he and his wife Casey chose Arlington because it was 
close to skiing, had a rural atmosphere, and because he would be able to 
utilize some of the same models the other Post illustrators were already 
using. Of these artists Hughes knew only Jack Atherton. 
George and Casey Hughes bought a farm in 1946 and immediately threw 
a party to become acquainted with their Arlington neighbors. The other 
artists were delighted to accept the invitation, and Norman Rockwell 
suggested that it would be especially amusing if Hughes put on a costume 
party in his newly acquired home. The Hugheses thought this was a fine 
idea, and Rockwell came dressed in an elaborate eighteenth-century mili- 
tary uniform. “He loved costume parties,” said Hughes, recalling another 
occasion when Rockwell asked him to come to a costume party staged on 
the theme of the World War I armistice. Rockwell suggested they go as 
Zouaves, Algerian soldiers in the French Army. The two of them rented 
splendid outfits from a theatrical costume supplier in New York City— 
Showing Off the Engagement Ring by George Hughes. Original oil 
painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, January 22, 1949. 
Courtesy Judy and Alan Goffman Fine Art, Blue Bell, Pennsylvania. 
94 * ARLINGTON 
Asan illustrator, George Hughes came 
from a very different orientation from 
that of his colleagues Norman Rockwell, 
Mead Schaeffer, and Jack Atherton. 
Fashion was his forte, an appreciation 
for high style and modern life. Younger 
than the others, Hughes’s work influ- 
enced a younger generation of illustra- 
tors. Many commercial artists of the 
1950s looked toward his crisp color and 
audacious composition for inspiration. 
Drawing from the same Arlington mod- 
els his friends were using, Hughes entirely 
transformed these familiar faces and fig- 
ures. Lee and Patty Schaeffer—Mead 
Schaeffer’s daughters, who fixed the flat 
in Rockwell’s illustration—were portrayed 
by Hughes as two working girls in a city 
bus, exclaiming over a diamond engage- 
ment ring. Buddy Edgerton—Rockwell’s 
favorite Boy Scout—was converted by 
Hughes into a lean young man whose 
romance on a Long Island beach has 
been interrupted. These differences made 
the Arlington art community of four 
seem far greater in scale. 
The Night Before Christmas by George Hughes. Original oil painting 
for a Saturday Evening Post cover, December 24, 1949. Courtesy 
Judy and Alan Goffman Fine Art, Blue Bell, Pennsylvania. 

Writing Christmas Thank Yous by George Hughes. Original oil painting for a 
Summer Romance Spoiled by George Hughes. Original oil 
Saturday Evening Post cover, January 9, 1960. Courtesy Judy and Alan 
painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, August 6, 1954. 
Goffman Fine Art, Blue Bell, Pennsylvania. 
Courtesy Judy and Alan Goffman Fine Art, Blue Bell, 
Pennsylvania. 
Rockwell was well known there for other rentals—and arrived made up and 
outfitted as an identical pair. 
It wasn’t long before the Hugheses were at home in Arlington. Two years 
after they arrived in Vermont they decided to abandon any notion of 
farming and sold their house to Chris and Mary Schafer, moving to another 
home nearby. As Hughes had anticipated, Arlington’s models suited his 
purposes. He painted Buddy Edgerton, Elizabeth and Lee Schaeffer, Mary 
Whalen, Chris and Mary Schafer and their children. Unlike Rockwell, 
Hughes was not very drawn to what he called “the all-American type,” 
preferring instead a more cosmopolitan personality. Having illustrated for 
automobile advertisements, for Vanity Fair and House and Garden, Hughes 
felt greater kinship with the sophisticated tastes and situations of the 
upper-middle class, and he tended to paint more urban themes. While 
Rockwell sought out authentic rural characters for his illustrations, Hughes 
would dress up his models to play the cosmopolitan roles he constructed for 
them. Buddy Edgerton became an East Hampton beach boy; the Schafers’ 
daughter Christina became a debutante; Chris and Mary Schafer became a 
romantic duo. 
In fact, Hughes suspected that Rockwell solicited his advice on paintings 
in order to determine what not to do with a picture in progress. Rockwell 
asked Hughes into the studio to give him a reaction to his current project, 
The Hugheses * 95 

* 
Waiting for the Art Editor. Old Corner House Collection, Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
96 * ARLINGTON 

George Hughes posed for Norman Rock- 
well only once, but the Post cover illus- 
tration never developed beyond the 
drawing stage. The idea came to Rock- 
well when he and Hughes were both 
calling on the Post headquarters in Phila- 
delphia. Rockwell was excited about 
recreating the publication’s waiting room, 
and had the brilliant leather chairs 
shipped to his Arlington studio. Hughes 
was depicted as the urbane figure at the 
right. 
Outside the Principal’s Office. “What do you think of it?” Rockwell asked, 
turning the canvas toward Hughes. “I think it’s fine,” the latter responded. 
“Now what do you think of it?” Rockwell asked, laying an overlay onto the 
canvas that introduced another figure into the scene. “I prefer the first 
version,” Hughes said. Rockwell turned to his wife who was standing 
nearby, “You see, Mary, he prefers the first version!” as if there had been a 
dispute between them over the two possibilities. Hughes felt quite satisfied 
with the exchange, until the Post cover appeared several weeks later, 
Rockwell having decided on the second version, after all. “I think he 
calculated that if I liked a painting it was too high-toned, so he did just the 
opposite.” 
Hughes remembered another incident when he talked about a painting 
with Rockwell at Jack Atherton’s house one winter evening. “I’ve been 
working on this painting all week and it’s going nowhere,” lamented 
Rockwell. “Today I got so mad at it that I threw it out of the studio, right 
into the snow. I think maybe the idea stinks.” Hughes inquired about the 
nature of the subject, and Rockwell described it: “It’s an old lady sitting in a 
railroad diner with a kid and they’re praying at the table. A bunch of toughs 
are looking over at them.” 
“You're right,” Hughes declared. “The idea stinks.” 
Hughes is now convinced that his response (truthfully expressed) was all 
Rockwell needed to have himself retrieve the painting from the snow the 
next day and return to work on it. Hughes also acknowledges that this 
painting, Saying Grace, is among Rockwell’s finest achievements. “Norman 
always ended up doing what he wanted to do anyway, no matter how much 
advice he asked. That’s why he was so good.” 
Hughes’s feelings for Rockwell went far deeper than simple professional 
admiration. He was frequently struck by Rockwell’s thoughtfulness, such as 
the time his daughter by his first marriage was getting married. Hughes was 
preparing for the trip to New York to give her away at the wedding when 
Rockwell phoned. “Norman felt that my going to the wedding might be some- 
what of an ordeal for me—especially since I would be seeing so many old 
friends from my first marriage. On the phone he announced that he was 
coming with me to the wedding to keep me company. Then Chris Schafer 
said he wanted to come, too. Their presence made it easier for me, but | 
never would have asked. It was like Norman to offer without being asked.” 
The Hugheses * 97 

THE ARDY s EeIDEN 
IES 
Although Rockwell was always happy to talk about painting, he took little 
interest in teaching the subject. In 1950 he made an exception by taking on 
a few students for the summer. Rockwell—fearing he was growing rusty in 
his work and ideas—felt that some younger illustrators might prove stimu- 
lating and might be an encouraging group to have near his gifted son Jarvis 
who was also painting at the time. 
He notified the Art Students League of his intention and suggested the 
faculty invite their best students on his behalf. William McNulty ap- 
proached his student Don Spaulding with this unique invitation, and the 
twenty-four year old student jumped at the chance to study with the great 
illustrator. Although Spaulding was personally attracted to the subjects and 
techniques of another contemporary illustrator—the eminent Western artist 
Harold von Schmidt—Spaulding was thrilled with the prospect of working 
with Rockwell. He never regretted his decision. By the end of the five 
months in Arlington, Spaulding changed his approach entirely and never 
returned to his former methods. 
Four other students came from the League with Spaulding—Don Winslow, 
Robert Hogue, Jim Gaboda, and Harold Stevenson. William McBride, 
Rockwell’s own choice, also joined the group. 
The six art students lived and worked in the schoolhouse on the West 
Arlington Green, the place that Rockwell had used six years before as a 
temporary studio until the carpenter Walt Squires had completed construc- 
tion on the new studio behind the house. On a platform at the back of the 
room that had once served as the stage for the schoolhouse, the kitchen and 
dormitory living quarters were set up. Several paintings by Rockwell and 
two original Mead Schaeffers hung on the walls. 
The method of instruction was casual. Rockwell gave them informal 
assignments and arranged for models to pose. He might saunter in during 
the day to comment on their work, or the students would join Rockwell in 
his studio later for a critique. Rockwell invited Mead Schaeffer, Jack 
Atherton, and George Hughes to talk with them. It was a fine experience 
for a serious student of illustration like Don Spaulding, an opportunity 
to witness the practical application of what he had been learning in art 
school. 
Most inspiring for Don Spaulding was watching Rockwell at work. 
Rockwell shared with them all stages of the painting in progress—planning, 
photography, painting—the methodical techniques unraveled before their 
eyes. “Watching him paint was like being reborn. It looked so easy. I'd 
think, ‘If I just apply myself I can do that, too.’ I couldn’t wait to get back 
to the easel, but the next time I’d work, I couldn’t accomplish what he did, 
no matter how much I applied myself. He simply came onto this earth a 
genius.” On the other hand, Spaulding learned from Rockwell the value of 
98 « ARLINGTON 

The one-room schoolhouse on the West 
Arlington green served admirably as an 
art studio. During the summer of 1950, 
six art students came to study with 
Norman Rockwell. They lived and 
worked in the old schoolhouse. Don 
Spaulding and Don Winslow—two of 
the six students—are studying the paint- 
ings by Rockwell and Schaeffer that 
were hung on the walls for inspiration. 
OVERLEAF: The interior and exterior of the 
schoolhouse are shown on the next 
page. Also shown is the photograph 
taken by Don Spaulding during a hike 
that summer. Here Norman Rockwell is 
standing with Peter Rockwell, Robert 
Hogue, and Don Winslow. 
Photos courtesy Don Spaulding. 
discipline and hard work, knowing that even this genius struggled with such 
problems as perspective. At times Rockwell simplified the technique, using 
a one-point perspective, perhaps, but at other times confronted his limita- 
tions, resolving them with determination in more complex treatments, such 
as in Shuffleton’s Barber Shop. “He never took the easy way out. He never 
faked anything.” For students who could become discouraged easily, wit- 
nessing this determination was gratifying. Equally inspiring to them was 
Rockwell’s enthusiasm for the painting process. His newest illustration 
challenged him, and he happily shared his excitement in a boyish drive to 
explore new territories with each painting. 
The group of students left Arlington after the summer, but Don Spaulding 
stayed into late fall, and Don Winslow continued to live in the schoolhouse 
for several more years. Winslow acted as Rockwell’s apprentice for a while, 
tracing the drawings onto the canvas, or painting in an occasional back- 
ground that required tedious application. (For a version of Facts of Life, 
Winslow painted a wallpapered background whose pattern had been de- 
signed by Jack Atherton.) Rockwell did his best to encourage this younger 
artist. He introduced Winslow to an agent and gave him help with his 
work when a painting wasn’t going quite right. But Winslow wasn’t 
fortunate enough to have Rockwell’s even disposition. His temperament was 
not well suited to the demanding deadlines imposed by unsympathetic 
clients and his moods would rise and fall unpredictably. 
Don Spaulding bought a summer home near Arlington and returned 
frequently to see his friends. Commissioned to do covers for Lone Ranger 
and Buck Jones comic books, Spaulding would take advantage of these 
visits by photographing the Arlington neighbors in the schoolhouse: Carl 
Hess, Alvie Robertson, and Buddy Edgerton. 
The Art Students * 99 



; 
Ithough a talented illustrator, Don Winslow was 
afflicted with unexpected bouts of depression that 
tended to interfere with his production. Making every 
attempt to encourage the young man, Rockwell hired 
him as an apprentice and introduced him to an agent in 
New York City. Rockwell would also help with techni- 
cal problems, such as the time when Winslow became 
frustrated with his inability to render the head of a young 
boy in one of his paintings. Rockwell made a rapid oil 
sketch for him to demonstrate the approach to the task 
and by copying Rockwell’s sketch, Winslow was able 
to complete the assignment. 
During the years Don Winslow lived in the one-room 
schoolhouse, Rockwell asked him to model several times. 
Winslow posed for Saying Grace among others. Placing 
Don Winslow and Gene Pelham in front of Mary Rock- 
well’s dressing table, the illustrator achieved what he 
wanted for Plumbers in a Boudoir. @ 
aS 
<“F 
ee 
- 
x 
Fi PPR 
£ Permteic e oP 
Demonstration oil sketch for Don Winslow by Norman Rockwell. 
Courtesy Don Spauding. 
102 « ARLINGTON 

Plumbers in a Boudoir. Original oil 
painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, 
June 2, 1951. Collection Gordon Andrew. 

IMPORTANT see 
= DELL'S PLEDGE TO PARENTS 
ON INSIDE FRONT COVER ——> 
Four comic book covers by Don Spaulding. Courtesy Don Spaulding. 
Carl Hess. 
Buddy Edgerton. 
104 » ARLINGTON 

F A LAWMAN’S 
PRIDE 
Don Winslow. 
Alvie Robertson. 
fter the summer with Rockwell, the art students 
disbanded, but Don Spaulding bought a house in 
nearby Dorset and was a frequent visitor to Arlington. 
Having changed his approach to illustration as a result of 
his exposure to Rockwell’s methods, Spaulding contin- 
ued to use photography in creating his pictures. He even 
used the same models as Rockwell for his commissions. 
Buddy Edgerton—Rockwell’s Boy Scout—became 
Spaulding’s Lone Ranger for the Dell comic book series. 
“Buddy was still rather lean for the part,” Spaulding 
recalled. “He needed some padding out. But the square 
jaw and dimpled chin were great.” Other familiar faces 
also appeared in the series. White-haired Alvie Robert- 
son posed for Rockwell in the Four Seasons and Carl 
Hess, holding the revolver in the Buck Jones cover, was 
the central figure in Rockwell’s Freedom of Speech. Buck 
Jones’ face was taken from still photographs of the Jones 
portrayed in the movies, while Don Winslow posed 
for the figure. Spaulding photographed these models in 
the one-room schoolhouse, where Winslow was then 
living. @ 
Don Spaulding * 105 

THE EDGERTON. 
When Rockwell’s studio burned to the ground one night in 1943, Norman 
and Mary Rockwell decided not to rebuild the structure but to move 
somewhere less isolated instead. The day after reaching this decision, they 
bought a house on the village green in West Arlington, which was yet 
another example of a Rockwell decision swiftly made and executed. 
The house they selected was one of two overlooking the green, the twin 
structures separated by a mere fifty feet. Only good neighbors could have 
lived so close by. “If anyone but Jim and Clara Edgerton had lived in the 
house beside the one for sale, I don’t think I would have bought it,” 
commented Rockwell. “But Jim and Clara are about the nicest and finest 
people I’ve ever known. | didn’t worry about living so close to them, I 
positively jumped at the chance.” 
Unlike their new neighbors, the Edgertons were native Vermonters. 
Jim Edgerton’s mother—who lived with them until she went into a nursing 
home—was only nine months old in 1876 when the family bought the 
house, and nearly all the Edgerton children were born in the bedroom 
upstairs. In spite of their different backgrounds, Rockwell had a deep 
appreciation of both the hardships and benefits derived from the small dairy 
farm that barely managed to support the Edgertons and their four children. 
“Farming is a hard life in Vermont,” Rockwell explained. “The growing 
season is short; there’s little flat land; the fields are rocky. Jim has had 
especially hard luck. One year he lost his herd through disease; another year 
he lost it when the barn floor caved in and choked the cows in their 
stanchions. But the hard life and misfortune haven’t soured Jim and Clara. 
[ don’t think they know how to be mean-spirited or nasty.” 
“We were poor, maybe,” said Buddy Edgerton, “but we were rich in so 
many ways.” No one in the family—not Clara, Jim, Edith, Joy, Buddy, or 
Ardis—felt strange about having the famous illustrator so close. “He was 
just one of us,” they agreed, “and so were Mary and the kids.” 
The Edgertons particularly recall spending Christmas Day with the Rock- 
wells each year. While their turkey was cooking in the oven, the children 
would dash over to the Rockwells’ house to discover what was left for 
them under the tree. Brown & Bigelow, the company for which Rockwell 
illustrated calendars, always sent a large box of almond crunch candy as 
well as other surprises the Edgerton kids found special. While they opened 
their presents, and admired the more elaborate Rockwell gifts, Mrs. Rock- 
well (Norman’s mother) sat in a rocker nearby, skinning a large portion of 
almonds for the Christmas meal. A Norman Rockwell scene, to be sure. 
Buddy Edgerton was an extremely handsome young man and his athletic 
figure, dimpled chin, and square jaw provided an ideal Boy Scout for 
Rockwell, a Lone Ranger for Don Spaulding, a romantic youth for George 
Hughes’s pictures.-From the time he was fourteen until he outgrew the 
106 * ARLINGTON 

part and was replaced by Freeman Grout, Buddy Edgerton was Rockwell’s 
favorite Boy Scout. Buddy needed to join no formal troop to indulge in Boy 
Scout activities. He hunted and fished (often with Tom Rockwell) and 
generally bought fishhooks with the money earned from modeling. Years 
later the illustrator requested the Edgerton services once again and this time 
both Buddy and his son Jimmy were used to illustrate the evolution from Cub 
Scout to Scout Master. 
Jim Edgerton was known for his gentle disposition and generosity, a man 
very much loved by anyone who knew him. He could always be counted on 
to sign for a loan, even if he didn’t have much money, or to help with haying 
a field when a neighbor was short-handed. He was less likely to impose on 
others when he needed help. Except with Norman Rockwell. There were 
times, Buddy Edgerton recalls, when his father made a purchase at a cattle 
or equipment auction but didn’t have the cash to cover expenses. In a 
simple but revealing measure of the trust each had for the other, Jim 
Edgerton felt free to borrow the money from Rockwell until the milk checks 
arrived, when he’d return the sum to his friend. “My father was a very 
proud man,” said Buddy Edgerton, “too proud to have borrowed from 
anyone else.” 
While the Rockwells’ friendship with the Schaeffers, Athertons, Hugheses, 
and Schafers tended to be somewhat social, the Edgertons were more like 
family. Ardis was a baby-sitter to Peter; Joy helped Mary with kitchen 
work. For the painting of Mrs. O’Leary’s cow (which was never published), 
Buddy Edgerton rounded up his prize-winning 4-H cow and modeled it 
for Rockwell. Clara ran errands for the Rockwells, frequently catching a 
train to New York or Philadelphia to deliver a finished painting, or driving 
Mary to Stockbridge for treatments when needed. 
The Rockwells left Arlington in 1953. Jim Edgerton gave up farming in 
the 1960s, the children married, and Jim passed away in 1979, only 
months after Norman Rockwell died in Stockbridge. “When | finally 
moved away from Arlington,” Rockwell said, “the thing I most regretted 
was leaving Jim and Clara.” 
The Edgertons * 107 

oO 
+ 
5 ON 
w= 
+ 
NN 
> 
iq 
fae} 
S 
c 
oO 
==, 
ey 
v 
> 
° 
oO 
BD 
oS 
ay 
bo 
& 
= 
v 
> 
ea) 
3 
~~ 
= 
S 
3 
~Y 
oO 
= 
2 
oD 
& 
ob 
= 
oO 
Qu 
6 
os 
AS 
ey 
6 
£ 
= 
KR 
Ski 
108 * ARLINGTON 

Willie Gillis with Food Package. Saturday 
Evening Post cover, October 4, 1941. 
iving immediately next door to the Rockwells, the 
Edgerton family was in constant contact with the 
illustrator. Rockwell could turn to the Edgertons if he 
needed a painting delivered, a baby-sitter, or a model. 
Jim Edgerton posed for the first of the famous Willie 
Gillis series (Post, October 4, 1941). His face, cleverly 
disguised with different facial expressions and cap posi- 
tions, appears in three of the six heads marching behind 
Willie. (Gene Pelham is the figure on the right. ) Clara 
Edgerton maintains that this was the last picture Rock- 
well painted from life. 
For Ski Train (Post, January 24, 1948), Clara Edgerton 
also doubled as model for two figures, posing for the 
blonde woman at the left and the brunette in the red 
jacket at the right. (Gene Pelham appears here as well, 
the prankster in the center.) For this painting Rockwell 
had the coach seats shipped from Albany to his Arling- 
ton studio. For his earlier train scene (Post, August 12, 
1944), Rockwell was even more ambitious: he asked the 
Rutland Railroad to leave a car side-tracked in Rutland, 
Vermont for him. (“People would do anything for Nor- 
man,” Don Spaulding had said.) During two very cold 
days in the winter of 1943, Rockwell posed his models 
and photographed them inside the unheated coach car. 
Clara Edgerton’s part here was small: the brush of blonde 
hair in the lower left corner. Others appearing in this 
painting include Roy Crofut as the soldier and Yvonne 
Cross as the girl seated alongside her mother, Gladys 
Cross. The hand of the train conductor at the right 
belongs to Gene Pelham. @ 
The Edgertons * 109 

ow“ 
Mrs. O’Leary’s Cow. Courtesy Martin Diamond Fine Arts, New York. 
110 * ARLINGTON 
A 
> Bes 
ATO AE MEo MILL YO EE GEL! 
uddy—the only Edgerton son—was a favorite 
Arlington model. Athletic and handsome, Buddy 
Edgerton was a splendid Boy Scout, Lone Ranger, or 
romantic lead. Rockwell used him frequently, not simply 
because of his good looks, but also because of his gentle 
and reliable disposition. For example, Rockwell knew he 
could count on Buddy Edgerton to negotiate the cumber- 
some task of photographing Mrs. O’Leary’s cow for a 
Brown & Bigelow calendar. With Buddy’s prize 4-H 
project—a docile heifer—in place, Rockwell set up his 
photography session in the Edgerton’s cow barn. The key 
parts of Bossie were photographed individually, Buddy 
nudging her head to face the camera, the hindquarters 
snapped from a safe distance—and the boy received the 
standard $5.00 fee for the session. The completed paint- 
ing (with the Rockwells’ cook, Elizabeth LaBombard, 
posed as Mrs. O’Leary) was eventually rejected. “The 
publisher suspected that no one would want to look at 
the rear end of a cow hanging on the wall for a full 
calendar year,” recalled Buddy Edgerton. 
Every year Norman Rockwell painted an official Boy 
Scout calendar for Brown & Bigelow. In 1944 Buddy was 
old enough to pose for such a calendar. For the occasion 
his father gave him a haircut. (“That was the last time he 
did that. Dad had to admit that saving the 35¢ just 
wasn’t worth the sorry results!”) and the calendar was 
published in 1945. Although Buddy never bothered 
joining up himself, he was to become America’s most 
familiar Boy Scout. @ 

INMMHONGR 9a 
J WILL DO MY BEST 
S1OGOL 
Va BHT 
ae 
Es 
. 
7 
Be 
3 
a. 
Si 
- 
Be 
an 
Bis hee ts 
# 
I Will Do My Best. Onigisit oil 
painting for a Scout poster-calendar. © 1945 Brown & Bigelow, Inc., a Division of Saxon Industries, Inc. 
Collection Boy Scouts of America. 
Buddy Edgerton * 111 

A Guiding Hand. Original oil painting for Boy Scout poster- 
calendar. © 1946 Brown & Bigelow, Inc., a Division of 
Saxon Industries, Inc. Collection Boy Scouts of America. 
Men of Tomorrow. Original oil painting for Boy Scout poster- 
calendar. © 1948 Brown & Bigelow, Inc., a Division of 
Saxon Industries, Inc. Collection Boy Scouts of America. 
LD uring his career as a Boy Scout, Buddy Edgerton 
was accompanied by other troopers along the way. 
Norman Rockwell’s middle son Tommy was still Cub 
Scout age when he posed with Buddy for the 1946 
calendar. Two years later the Edgerton boy was still 
appropriate for the Boy Scout, but the Cub Scout had 
outgrown his part and was replaced by younger brother 
Peter Rockwell. (In this 1948 calendar, Peter is shown 
gazing up at several versions of Buddy Edgerton.) Al- 
though Buddy outgrew his role as Boy Scout after this 
calendar and was replaced by Freeman Grout, he did 
return as a patrol leader in a 1966 calendar. Rockwell, 
having already moved to Stockbridge by then, phoned 
the twenty-nine-year-old Edgerton to ask if he would 
model for three of four profiles in the picture and to bring 
down his son to pose for the fourth. For the painting 
Rockwell added ten years to Buddy in order to create the 
Scout Master, removed ten years to create the Boy Scout, 
and inserted the Edgerton son Jimmy (whom Rockwell 
had never met) as the Cub Scout. “Norman insisted on 
giving us a check for a good deal more than $5.00 for 
the trouble,” Buddy Edgerton recalls, “though we would 
have gladly done it for him without any pay.’*@ 

Tieveaieon 
By 
inna A 
Growth of a Leader. Original oil painting for Boy Scout poster-calendar. © 1966 Brown & Bigelow, Inc., a Division of Saxon Industries, Inc 
Collection Boy Scouts of America. 
Buddy Edgerton * 113 

he youngest of the Edgerton children, Ardis, posed 
for the Soldier’s Homecoming when she was eleven. 
She had always been a rough-and-ready, energetic child, 
and when Rockwell asked her to be the excited girl 
standing on the porch, he intended for her to pose 
naturally. He had expected Ardis to arrive at the studio 
in her everyday clothing with her red hair characteristi- 
cally disheveled. Proud that the illustrator had asked her 
to pose, Ardis decided to put on her Sunday best for the 
occasion. She combed her hair neatly, slipped into a pair 
of new shoes, and wore a pretty dress. Fortunately, she 
lived only a stone’s throw from the studio, so Rockwell 
could send her home to change without losing much 
time. 
The painting, which Post editor Ben Hibbs considered 
his favorite Rockwell, included some other familiar 
Arlington faces: on the porch Ardis Edgerton stands 
between Jenny McKee and Yvonne Cross, with Norman 
Rockwell behind them gaping at the soldier. To their 
right, peering from the doorway, stand the Rockwells’ 
cook, Elizabeth LaBombard, and her husband Albert. 
Billie Brown, who posed for a number of Four Seasons 
calendars with Yvonne Cross, is shown leaping from the 
porch. The dog, Spot, belonged to Buddy Edgerton. 
Irene Hoyt, the daughter of Rose Hoyt appearing in The 
114 * ARLINGTON 
Four Freedoms, is beaming at her returning soldier, posed 
by John Cross, Jr., whose father, John Sr., is smiling 
from the rooftop. Only after publication was it pointed 
out to Rockwell that Mr. Cross had no ladder to the roof. 
The setting for Soldier’s Homecoming was Troy, New 
York, a nearby city from which Rockwell had frequently 
taken the train to New York City. Peter Rockwell, 
accompanying his father to Troy in search for the ideal 
backyard for the painting, remembers that Rockwell 
went directly to a section of town along the railroad 
tracks to find what he was looking for. As a youngster, 
Peter always assumed his father knew where to find these 
things. “He always seemed to have a sense.”"@ 

~ 
Soldier's Homecoming. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, May 26, 1945. Collection Mrs. Ben Hibbs. 
Ardis Edgerton * 115 

THE SCHAPERS 
When Chris and Mary Schafer came to Arlington in 1947, they fantasized a 
life very different from the one they had left at North Shore, Chicago. Still 
shaken by the shock of the war years, they sought an honest environment 
where they could raise their children in an atmosphere promising greater 
connection to fundamental human values. What better way to put this 
fantasy into actuality than to take up dairy farming in New England? They 
bought the farm from George Hughes in 1948, and set right to work. Only in 
retrospect could they appreciate their naivete. Pastoral life did not conform 
to their romantic picture; this banker and his wife were unprepared for 
the hardships of tending fifty cows, especially with the difficulties of find- 
ing experienced farm hands to help with the daily chores. 
Nevertheless, the Schafers discovered in Arlington a community of 
friends that more closely approximated what they had hoped to find. 
George and Casey Hughes introduced them to the others in the area and 
before long an active social life ensued. “Any event was an excuse for a 
party,” said Mary Schafer. “Bastille day, a birthday; why, we had the most 
wonderful gatherings!” It probably surprised the cosmopolitan Schafers that 
the artists—each having been exposed to so little formal education—were 
well informed on a wide variety of topics. George Hughes and Jack Atherton 
knew so much about music; Norman Rockwell was familiar with subjects 
116 * ARLINGTON 

ranging from baseball to literature. Conversation never faltered. The con- 
vivial atmosphere for these occasions was enhanced by Norman Rockwell’s 
keen sense of humor and his talents as a raconteur. Nor did Rockwell’s gift 
as an actor go unnoticed by this group. When Dorothy Canfield Fisher’s 
1920s play, “Tourists Accommodated,” was revived at the Arlington Li- 
brary, Norman Rockwell and Mary Schafer played the parts of husband and 
wife in the production. (“He was terrific,” the Schafers agreed. ) 
Mary Schafer was particularly fond of party games—charades, word 
games, twenty questions—and she recalled that Rockwell’s wit and intelli- 
gence sharpened these antics. She especially remembered one called “The 
Game.” The players simply wrote on a sheet of paper what he or she most 
liked and most disliked. The sheets of paper were then distributed and each 
player was to guess who had written which. Norman Rockwell’s were most 
telling. What he liked most: checks in the mail. What he liked least: the 
extra edges of white paper perforated around a sheet of new postage stamps. 
In 1951 Chris Schafer received a phone call from Rockwell’s assistant, 
Gene Pelham, urging Schafer to lend his skills as a banker by looking over 
the illustrator’s financial records. “The books are in an awful mess,” Pelham 
lamented, “and the Rockwells sure could use your help.” 
The books were in an awful mess, Schafer discovered. It appeared that 
Rockwell, who wrote checks for everything, and wrote many of them during 
the course of a week, didn’t bother to balance his accounts or to record the 
‘A LOVING WIFE, ALSO, IS SHE 
WIFING AND MOTHERING THE FOLLOWING THREE: 
CHRIS, HER HUSBAND, A’ PERFECT MOW 
AND TWO SWELL KIDS, TINA AND JOHN 
ee ee 
AND FOR THE THINGS SHE'S LEARNED FROM BOOKS 
ee 
BUT BOOKS ALONE AREN'T NECESSARY VU 
‘TO ONE SO BAIGHT AS OUR OWN MARY 
HAIL MARY, WARY FULL OF GRACE 
n 
- ww J 
ALL ARLINGTON'S A HAPPY PLACE 
° 
ee 
aes 
_ 
HIP HIP HOORAY AND GLORY BE, 
s 
ae 
PPS, 
FOR MARY'S oust TURWED IWENTYTHREE 
On the occasion of Mary Schafer’s 
birthday, Norman Rockwell wrote and 
illustrated a poem that expressed his 
en 
pee 
(as 
sentiments about his Arlington friend. 
pes 
ee 
es 
Sere 
Sipe 
Courtesy Chris and Mary Schafer. 
ge 
The Schafers * 117 

checks in his checkbook. Schafer found that Rockwell had actually paid his 
federal income taxes twice that year without realizing it! It required 
considerable effort for Chris Schafer, even with all his financial expertise, 
to straighten out these records and it seemed pointless to return the books 
to the hopeless Rockwell systems. Schafer agreed to work for Rockwell two 
days a week, an arrangement that continued after the Rockwells moved to 
Stockbridge. “Rockwell preferred to stay in his studio and paint, untroubled 
by these annoying details,” Schafer commented. 
In the studio, Schafer would work while Rockwell painted—each man 
silently absorbed in his work—until the illustrator signaled the time for a 
break, lighting his pipe, telling a story, then returning to work after this 
brief interlude. Later in the day they might head for a game of tennis on the 
court behind the house. 
Schafer assumed responsibility for most of Rockwell’s business matters. 
When Rockwell served on the board at the Famous Artists Schools, Schafer 
went to Connecticut to represent Rockwell; Schafer managed his affairs 
while the Rockwells traveled. By the time the Rockwells moved to Stock- 
bridge in 1953, Chris Schafer had given up farming entirely and had 
returned to banking, a field to which he was far better suited. He drove the 
two hours to Stockbridge once or twice a week, entering Rockwell’s studio 
at 8:00 a.m., about the same time as the illustrator began his day’s work at 
the easel, and returning to Arlington in the afternoon. 
The Schafers had two children—John and Christina (whom Rockwell 
erroneously called “Trina” instead of “Tina” for as long as he knew her, an 
appellation the family accepted affectionately). John Schafer volunteered 
for the Peace Corps shortly after the program was initiated, and was given a 
teaching assignment in Ethiopia. Rockwell, who laughingly suggested the 
recruit might return with an Ethiopian princess, was eager to accept when 
the young man offered an invitation to visit Ethiopia, and took this 
opportunity to illustrate the Peace Corps story for Look magazine. Rockwell 
and his wife (by this time he was married to Molly) flew into Ethiopia, 
stayed with John Schafer, and traveled deep into the Blue Nile region 
where probably only few white men had ever been seen. Although Schafer’s 
village was not used for the Look article, Rockwell did rely on the young 
man for the cover of that June 14, 1966 issue. By that time John Schafer 
had returned to the United States and was attending Harvard University. 
Rockwell asked him to come down to Stockbridge to pose for him and to 
bring as many other former Peace Corps recruits as he could manage to 
round up at Harvard. Typically Rockwell, the profiles he asked John 
Schafer to select for the cover were of those who had actually served. No 
other portraits would have been sufficiently authentic for him. 
118 * ARLINGTON 
Charcoal drawing illustration by 
George Hughes. Collection Chris 
and Mary Schafer. 
Photo Frank Forward. 

Two original oil paintings for illustrations by George Hughes. Collection Chris and Mary Schafer. 
Photos Frank Forward. 
Roce 
friends, Chris and Mary Schafer, had just 
the cosmopolitan air required for the stylish stories 
George Hughes illustrated. After buying the farm from 
Hughes, the Schafers had settled into their pastoral lives 
in Arlington, effectively weaned from Chicago’s North 
Shore. With the proper costume and in the appropriate 
setting they could still be transformed into the casual 
sophisticates Hughes preferred for his illustrations. Chris 
Schafer’s gray hair displayed a certain degree of distinc- 
tion, favoring his portrayal as a mature lover, or a gentle- 
manly father. Likewise, Mary Schafer played mother and 
lover in Hughes’s pictures. Happily, with the right cloth- 
ing and appropriate hair styling, daughter Tina was 
equally desirable for the sophisticated set, as was her 
brother John. @ 
The Schafers * 119 

120 * ARLINGTON 
wF 
x Fon Eo. ne 
naryne 
t 
. 
Woorottean 
Rorkwell 
orman Rockwell kept up his association with the 
Schafers for many years, a fact well chronicled by 
the pictures he made of the family from the time the 
children were quite young until their son returned from 
the Peace Corps in the 1960s. At Rockwell’s invitation, 
John Schafer recruited several of his classmates at 
Harvard—former Peace Corps workers like himself—to 
pose for Rockwell in Stockbridge. In the painting, John 
Schafer was placed at the center of the group. (“By 
including John F. Kennedy,” the Schafers noted, “Nor- 
man made it a totally Harvard painting.”) During the 
course of their friendship, Rockwell asked Mary Schafer 
to pose for an advertisement for Dexadril, the tranquil- 
izer, asking her to assume a rather nervous posture for 
the drawing. When he gave her the drawing as a 
gift, he 
wrote at the bottom, “Don’t worry Mary, we all love 
you. "@ 

The Peace Corps Led by Kennedy. Original oil painting for a Look cover, June 14, 1966. 
The Schafers * 121 

THE NEIGHBORS 
From his neighbors around him, Rockwell found a cast of characters that 
was as rich and varied as any group could be. There were two and three 
generations of several families that provided much material for the illustra- 
tor. There were the Crofuts, Hoyts, Brushes, Crosses, Marshes, Deckers, 
Squires, McKees, Martins, and Benedicts. Then there were individuals to 
whom he turned (many more than once) for illustrations: Carl Hess, Billie 
Brown, Alvie Robertson, George Zimmer, Nip Noyes, Lucille Towne, 
Dr. George Russell, Roy Cole, Frank Hall, Floyd Bentley. Rockwell was 
never at a loss for the right “type.” A call from Rockwell meant a match 
was being made between idea and actuality—and the neighbors stood ready 
to serve. “It made you feel important,” said Doris Crofut Wright. 
Although the entire community anticipated publication of a Post cover— 
knowing one of them was likely to appear—little fuss was made about the 
man who created these popular images. He was—as were the writer Dorothy 
Canfield Fisher, the composer Charles Ruggles, and the artist Grandma 
Moses who all lived nearby—simply a neighbor. “He was one of us,” said 
Mrs. Brush. “He never put on airs.” 
Willie Gillis with Food Package. 
Willie Gillis Asleep. Saturday Evening 
Saturday Evening Post cover, 
Post cover, November 29, 1941. 
4 
Willie Gillis at the U.S.O. Saturday 
Evening Post cover, February 7, 1942. 
October 4, 1941. 
Willie Gillis in Church. Saturday 
Evening Post cover, July 25, 1942. 
122 * ARLINGTON 
Arguing Over Willie Gillis. Saturday 
Evening Post cover, September 5, 1942. 

kK“ before Pearl Harbor, Norman Rockwell thought 
it would be interesting to do a 
series of paintings 
about one soldier. The young man’s experiences in 
combat would tell a story that all readers would appreci- 
ate, and through him Rockwell would create a lovable 
warrior in a variety of settings. For the paintings Rock- 
well would need someone likely to remain in the area for 
the duration of the series. He found Robert Otis Buck 
where he had found so many other Arlington models, at 
a square dance held at West Arlington’s Grange Hall. 
Buck had just the sort of innocent look Rockwell wanted 
for the part, and Buck was exempt from the draft. 
For the first painting in the series Rockwell posed Jim 
Edgerton and Gene Pelham behind Bob Buck, the men 
following an appetizing package from home. Needing a 
name for the address label on the package, Rockwell 
consulted his wife Mary. She thought up the name 
Willie Gillis after a book she had read to the children 
called Wee Willie Winkie. 
Willie Gillis on K. P. Saturday Evening 
Willie Gillis in a Blackout. Saturday 
Post cover, April 11, 1942. 
Evening Post cover, June 27, 1942. 
~ Willie Gillis with an Indian Fakir. Saturday — New Year’s Eve Without Willie Gillis. 
Evening Post cover, June 26, 1943. 
Saturday Evening Post cover, 
January 1, 1944. 
The series got off to a bumpy start: attentive Post 
readers pointed out that the Gillis package from home 
contained insufficient postage (after that Rockwell weighed 
in his packages at the post office before he painted any 
stamps), and some real Willie Gillises began to surface. 
Rockwell remembered one—a colonel who was later 
promoted to brigadier general. 
Ben Hibbs became Editor of the Post after four Gillis 
covers had been completed, and he urged Rockwell to 
continue. 
Although he had been exempted from the draft, Bob 
Buck felt he could not simply stay at home while a war 
was going on. To his dismay, Rockwell lost his Willie 
Gillis in 1943, when Buck enlisted as a naval aviator and 
flew off to the Pacific. Lacking a real model, the illustra- 
tor was forced to improvise if he wanted to keep the 
series going. In the next cover, he used photographs of 
Bob Buck when he painted Lee Schaeffer sleeping through 
New Year’s Eve. 
@ 
Bob Buck * 123 

ith Bob Buck off at war, Rockwell devised clever 
methods of continuing the Willie Gillis series 
without the model present. The illustrator was particularly 
proud of his ingenuity with this painting. Working from 
head-shots he had taken before Buck’s departure, Rock- 
well created six generations of fighting Gillises. He had 
a fine time with this trompe l’oeil still life. He switched 
around the head gear, careful to retain the accuracy of the 
historic costumes, and he fabricated a complete library 
of tomes documenting the military valor of the Gillis 
family. Pleased with his imaginative solution to the Gillis 
problem, he lamented at the public response: “The cover 
was very popular, mostly, I’m sorry to say, because of those 
books. All the Gillises in America wrote to me asking 
where they could buy them.” 
124 *» ARLINGTON 

art. 
September 16, 1944. Collection Mr. and Mrs. Ken Stu 
’ 
cael 
oO 
> 
° 
° 
~ 
”n 
S 
a 
op 
Ss 
Original oil painting for a Saturday Even 
The Fighting Gillises 
Bob Buck * 125 

s Fine Art Auctioneers, New York. 
Willie Gillis in College. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, October 5, 1946. Courtesy Phillip 
126 « ARLINGTON 

ORCL 
1 
vrerrrn 
a. 
% 
wih 
PL 
VUTTTY 
ny \\\ \ 
we 
\ 
\ mK 
y 
ockwell wasn’t obliged to improvise any more 
Willie Gillis covers without Bob Buck present to 
pose. Not long after his last ingenious effort with the 
Gillis series, the war ended and Bob Buck returned to 
Arlington. For the final cover in the Gillis sequence, 
Rockwell sent his subject to college. Starting with a 
whole host of props to tell the story, Rockwell eventually 
edited them down to only a few: the helmet, insignia, 
document, books, and golf clubs were sufficient to 
describe where Willie had been and where he was going. 
Naturally, Rockwell had to get the view from the college 
dormitory just right, so he went off to nearby Williams 
College to photograph the collegiate bell tower for the 
painting. @ 
Bob Buck * 127 

1952. 
LD iscouraged in their efforts to contribute their serv- 
ices to the government during World War II, Mead 
Schaeffer and Norman Rockwell went to Philadelphia to 
discuss their ideas with Ben Hibbs at the Post. As a result 
of this meeting, Hibbs commissioned Rockwell to do The 
Four Freedoms, a project to which the illustrator devoted 
a full six months. 
Freedom of Speech 
Rockwell began the series with Freedom of Speech, start- 
ing it over four times before he arrived at the final 
concept. The idea originated from a town meeting where 
Jim Edgerton rose to state his opinion of the proposed 
construction for the new Arlington High School replac- 
ing the old one that had recently burned down. Rock- 
well was impressed by the respect for controversy evident 
at the meeting and he rushed home to sketch out his new 
idea. 
Carl Hess had never posed for Rockwell before. Ex- 
cept for the times the illustrator filled his tank at Hess’s 
gas station, Hess hardly knew him. (“My kids went to 
school with his kids, and his wife came to the station 
often, but I didn’t have much contact with Norman 
Rockwell himself.”) It was Rockwell’s assistant, Gene 
Pelham, who thought of Hess for the central figure in the 
painting, and Rockwell wholeheartedly agreed with the 
choice. 
Freedom of Speech. Original oil painting for 
poster, 1943. The Metropolitan Museum of 
Art, New York. George A. Hearn Fund, 
In an earlier version, Rockwell placed all the figures 
sitting squarely around Hess. (In this version Dr. Russell 
is seated to the left behind Hess.) Although Carl Hess 
preferred this version (“looked more natural,” he said), 
Rockwell felt there were too many people in the picture. 
“Tt was too diverse, it went every which way and didn’t 
settle anywhere or say anything,” Rockwell reported. 
Instead, he took a view below eye level as if he too were 
sitting on a bench looking up—a far more dramatic 
expression. 
In fact, any of these individuals could have participated in 
that town meeting in Arlington. Inthe lower left corner is the 
ear of Carl Hess’s father, Henry. Jim Martin is in the lower 
right corner with Harry Brown (Billie Brown’s father) 
immediately above him. To the left of Carl Hess is Robert 
Benedict, Sr. (father of Robert, Jr. whoowned the Benedict’s 
Garage seen in the Post cover of October 13, 1945). 
Seated alongside Mr. Benedict is Rose Hoyt, a face more 
prominent in Freedom of Worship. To add interest to the 
left edge of the composition, Rockwell placed his own 
eye, a characteristic touch of the artist. 
Freedom of Worship 
The next in the series took two months to complete. 
Rockwell was inspired by a saying, “Each according to 
the dictates of his own conscience,” but had no idea 
where he had seen it. Mary Rockwell hunted for it, and 

me 
a 
a 



I 
Freedom of Worsh 
Four Freedoms 

Freedom from Want. 
Four Freedoms: 

: Freedom from Fear. 
Four Freedoms 
a 
Pe 
~~ 
vo 
QB 
5 
eit 
9 
oO 
DH 
7) 
= 
oO 
oD 
xz 
a 
mid 
~~ 
VY 
° 
~ 
NY 
SI 
° 
ie 
9 
a 
e 
O 
v 
® 
= 
oO 
ek 
re 
2 
° 
O 
Ss 
O 
co 
+ 
Oo 
m— 
eS 
OO 
u 
oD 
© 
a 
Qu 
oe 
< 
o 
Oo 
t 
oO 
= 
oor 
fo 
v 
E 
vo 
z 
° 
OD 
oO 
= 
= 
2 
OD 
& 
oS 
& 
oO 
Q 
Oo 
S 
& 
oD 
‘eZ 
° 
< 


SB 
aan 
te 
od 

he asked every model who came to pose, but the source 
was never located. It’s possible he made it up. 
Rose Hoyt’s braided hair crowned her head, and she 
was three months pregnant when she came to pose for 
Freedom of Worship. On a wall of his studio Rockwell had 
tacked a line drawing with cut-out photographs of pro- 
files dropped into place on the drawing. When Mrs. Hoyt 
arrived, he explained the idea for Freedom of Worship, 
pointing out which profile in the drawing had been 
designated for her. “Knowing I was a Protestant, he 
asked if I minded posing as a Catholic, and I assured him 
I had no objection. That pleased him because he felt the 
rosary was important to his picture. But it was thoughtful 
of him to ask.” She posed for three sessions before he 
finally got exactly what he wanted in the photograph. 
The others in the painting include Mrs. Harrington; 
Walter Squires (Rockwell’s carpenter, who also appeared 
in The Forging Contest and Spirit of Kansas City); Squires’ 
wife Clara at the right-hand edge; Winfield Secoy and 
Jim Martin in the center. 
“We had no idea the painting would become so 
important. Somehow we all took it for granted. It was 
just something you did.” 
Appearing in both Freedom of Speech and Freedom of 
Worship made Rose Hoyt very proud, and she was 
touched by Rockwell’s portrayal of her, as if he’d seen 
something special. “I never thought of myself as being 
beautiful,” Mrs. Hoyt said. But Rockwell certainly did. 
Freedom from Want 
The next two went far more easily. On Thanksgiving 
Day Rockwell photographed his cook, Mrs. Wheaton, 
laying out the turkey for the family. (“Our cook cooked 
it, I painted it, and we ate it,” said Rockwell. “That was 
one of the few times I’ve ever eaten the model.”) Others 
in the painting include, from Mrs. Wheaton to the right: 
Lester Brush, Florence Lindsey, Norman Rockwell’s 
mother, Jim Martin, Mr. Wheaton, Mary Rockwell, 
Charles Lindsey, the Hoisington children. (Shirley Hois- 
ington beat up Peter Rockwell in the sixth grade—sat on 
him, in fact—as the victim himself reported. ) 
Freedom from Fear 
Perhaps because he had so little difficulty with this 
painting, Rockwell was never pleased with it, nor, for 
that matter, was he partial to Freedom from Want either. 
Freedom from Fear “was based on a rather smug idea. 
Painted during the bombing of London, it was supposed 
to say, ‘Thank God we can put our children to bed with a 
feeling of security, knowing they will not be killed in the 
night.’” 
Jim Martin was the model for the father, Mrs. Edgar 
Lawrence the mother, and the two children of carpenter 
Walt Squires performed the role of the sleeping pair. @ 

l 
t wasn’t always easy for a model to know whether a 
session of posing would result in a published illustra- 
tion. Rockwell frequently discarded an idea along the 
way or replaced one model with another. Even if he 
managed to complete a painting entirely (as he did this 
one), he might still abandon it in favor of another idea. 
No wonder a model could lose track of an illustration. 
Although this painting was not used for the Post cover 
for which it was intended, it has nevertheless become 
almost as familiar as the one published on the April 29, 
1944 issue. (George Zimmer posed for the published 
version. ) Perhaps the unpublished work is the superior 
painting. It was certainly an example of Rockwell’s early 
experiments with a more subtle painting technique. “He 
experimented a lot,” said Peter Rockwell. “Here he 
started to get some of the colors and qualities of Dutch 
painting. He used the same techniques: underpainting in 
134 * ARLINGTON 
sepia, adding color, glazing and scumbling the surface as 
the Dutch masters did.” 
To authenticate this interior of Comar’s Diner, Rock- 
well used Mr. Comar himself behind the counter. Walt 
Smith, a shop owner in West Arlington, posed for the 
gentleman wearing eyeshades. Duane Peters, the young 
marine telling the war stories in Benedict’s Garage (Post, 
October 13, 1945) is posed here in uniform, and the 
small hunched figure holding the knife, Albert LaBom- 
bard, was the husband of Rockwell’s cook. 
@ 

Listening for the Invasion of D-Day. Original oil 
painting for Mr. Comar of the Quality Restaurant, 
Manchester, Vermont. Old Corner House Collection, 
Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
Listening for the Invasion of D-Day (final version). 
Saturday Evening Post cover, April 29, 1944. 
Arlington Neighbors 
* 135 

ifr 
gl 
\oA 
YOM 
EMP 
CAT 
LAS CH 
Naeee 
os 
. 
A 
: 
Back to Civvies. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, December 15, 1945. Courtesy Danenberg Gallery. 
136 * ARLINGTON 

he theme of the returning soldier was one Rockwell 
used in a variety of forms. Bob Buck had not yet 
returned to Arlington, but Art Becktoft, an air pilot who 
had spent many months in a prison camp, was home now 
and gave Rockwell the ideal model for the over-sized 
civilian. Rockwell had no difficulty gathering a wardrobe. 
of under-sized clothes,. but he made his final selection 
only after trying on some outfits himself and having 
others do the same. Becktoft’s uniform and satchel 
provided the authentic props. @ 
Arlington Neighbors * 137 

The Horseshoe Forging Contest. Original oil painting as illustration for the story ““Blacksmith’s Boy—Heel and Toe” by 
Edward W. O’Brien, Saturday Evening Post, November 2, 1940. Old Corner House Collection, Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
() nly a few miles from Arlington in South Shaftsbury, 
Vermont, stood Moon’s Blacksmith Shop which 
boasted on its sign: “Practical and artistic horse-shoeing.” 
(Today the location is a vacant lot.) Rockwell’s drawing 
of the shop was made from his visit there. The models 
were photographed individually in the studio that later 
burned down. Walt Squires, the carpenter who would 
build Rockwell’s new studio three years later, posed for 
one of the blacksmiths. (His large physique was just as 
suitable for the Spirit of Kansas City.) Divided equally 
down the center to allow for the gutter separating the 
double-page illustration, the composition is framed by an 
array of Arlington “types” looking in and out of the 
picture in a cleverly designed grouping. Locking eyes 
with the viewer on the lower left is Arlington’s under- 
sheriff, Harvey McKee, with his distinctive mustache. 
(“He hadn’t shaved his mustache since he was twenty- 
one,” his son reported recently.) On the right, McKee’s 
mustache has been removed by Rockwell’s brush and the 
under-sheriff—with the cigarette between his lips—is 
virtually unrecognizable. Instead, the mustache was 
given to the barelipped Nip Noyes, in the bowler above 
McKee, then removed again for the Nip Noyes immedi- 
ately below the same figure. Henry Hess (of Freedom 
of Speech) is in the lower right corner, and Clarence 
Decker (Strictly a Sharpshooter and The Tattooist) 
posed for one of the figures in the group at the upper left. 
Norman Rockwell peers at the viewer through the group 
at the left. 
@ 

ON 
on 
os 
e 
”n 
_ 
S 
-O 
2s 
0 
v 
oe 
= 
3 
SO 
aS 
cs 
= 

ockwell took no short cuts when it came to estab- 
lishing the authentic setting for a picture. The 
textures, architectural details, lighting—the very atmo- 
sphere of an environment had to be right. For Charwomen, 
he arranged a photography session in Broadway’s Majestic 
Theatre. Between performances of the musical Carousel 
the theater was empty and the illustrator was free to 
explore all the theatrical details that would make the 
painting convincing. The original concept of a cleaning 
woman playing the grand piano in rapture seemed 
exaggerated. Two women absorbed in reading the pro- 
gram after hours seemed more convincing and, at the 
same time, provided the artist an opportunity to work 
with a strong, simple composition. Rockwell was a 
master at using compositional devices that direct the 
viewer to the central story. Here the two women are 
framed by a sea of reds, encircled by delicately placed 
seat markers, and centered between the deliberate lines 
of two broomstick handles. Without seeming contrived, 
the selection and placement of these elements reinforce 
the story. 
Back at the studio, Rockwell selected two Arlington 
neighbors for the final picture: Jenny McKee, the wife of 
under-sheriff Harvey McKee, is seated at the left, and 
alongside her is Mrs. Charles Crofut, whose family is 
presented on the following picture spread. @ 
140 « ARLINGTON 

Charwomen. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, April 6, 1946. Collection Newell J. Ward, Jr. 
McKee and Crofut * 141 

Illustrations from Four Seasons Calendars. 
142 * ARLINGTON 
‘ 
No 
WOrMIAM 
Ruckwell 
TN oe an 
_ Rockwell 
Es 
© 1948 and 1955 Brown & Bigelow, Inc., a Division of Saxon Industries, Inc. 
Rockwell - 
Norman. 
~ 
Norman 
Rockwell. 
a 

harles Crofut was not very different in real life from 
the way he was portrayed by Norman Rockwell in 
the Four Seasons calendars. Almost as spry at seventy- 
five as he had been as a young man, Mr. Crofut enjoyed 
roaming the Vermont countryside, fishing and hunting. 
Posing with young Billie Brown and with a neighbor’s 
dog named Gent, Charles Crofut was eager to please the 
illustrator, but Rockwell was cautious not to let the 
elderly gentleman overexert himself for these vigorous 
poses. Charles Crofut’s wife had posed for Charwomen 
and his daughter-in-law and granddaughter Doris posed 
for The Gossips. His grandson, Roy Crofut, was a hand- 
some young lad who posed with Janet Cross for one of the 
Four Ages of Love in the 1955 Brown & Bigelow Four 
Seasons calendar. Rockwell took a liking to Roy Crofut 
and managed to find odd jobs for the boy to do during the 
winter when he knew money was short. Crofut cleaned 
out the Rockwells’ cellar, garage, and corn house, and on 
two occasions delivered pictures to Curtis in Philadelphia. 
“Be sure to tip everyone,” Rockwell told Crofut before 
departure, handing him sufficient money for an over- 
night stay in New York. “When I arrived in the city 
everyone seemed to know Norman Rockwell—the red- 
caps in Penn Station and the bellboys at the hotel all 
jumped to help me with the big package because they 
knew how generous he was.’"@ 
Charles Crofut. 
Doris Crofut. 
aftr 
*% 
Roy Crofut. 
The Crofuts * 143 

he office of Dr. George Russell in Arlington, Ver- 
mont, was a familiar room. Prior to photographing, 
Rockwell straightened up the place considerably, with- 
out destroying the warmth and reassurance associated 
with the office. Dr. Russell was beloved in Arlington for 
his paternal bedside manner and his devotion to his 
patients. He was also an avid collector of “Vermontiana, ” 
memorabilia from Old Vermont, which he proudly 
displayed. The medical equipment in the office, comical 
by contemporary standards, is well remembered by the 
Rockwell offspring: an electrical contraption shown at 
the right, which was used to remove a few warts from 
Tommy’s hand (“I got an awful electric shock from the 
thing”), and an X-ray machine “which would probably 
violate every radiation code today,” laughed Peter Rock- 
well. Dr. Russell never actually gave up his practice, 
although he made several attempts to do so. “Patients 
just wouldn’t let him retire,” Marie Briggs remarked. 
Rockwell knew he wanted to paint a family with 
Dr. Russell and with the Russell dog Bozo, and he had two 
photographic sessions for the painting with his good 
friend Ann Marsh and two of her sons. But Rockwell 
Visit to a Country Doctor. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post series, 
wasn’t satisfied with his composition. With much effort, 
April 12, 1947. Old Corner House Collection, Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
he arrived at a better idea and called Ann Marsh to see if 
she could pose that day. “My son Chuck was in New 
Hampshire which meant I couldn’t get him back to 
Arlington until the next day. But Norman could be 
impulsive—once he made up his mind that was it, and 
he just couldn’t wait that long!” 
Mr. and Mrs. Larry Brush were delighted to oblige 
when Rockwell called them. “He asked us to dress our 
baby in a romper suit for the picture,” Mrs. Brush 
remembered. “I guess it comes as a surprise for people to 
hear that the child in the blue romper is actually a girl!” 
The family portrait became even more treasured to the 
Brushes only a few years later when their son John, 
pictured at the right, was tragically drowned in a lake 
attempting to save another boy’s life. 
@ 
144 * ARLINGTON 


ay 
NOLATAANH 
1 
ast Arlington, where Shuffleton’s Barbershop was 
located before a grocery chain took over the build- 
ing, lies just on the other side of Arlington, one small 
street containing only a couple of shops and a post office. 
This is an unlikely location for what has come to be 
considered one of Rockwell’s most outstanding achieve- 
ments, possibly the finest example of pure painting ever 
to appear on the cover of any magazine. Rockwell was 
fascinated with the complex challenge of painting a 
lighted room through a dark room, and through a 
window. Only the Saturday Evening Post could provide 
Rockwell with a vehicle for stretching his artistic 
capabilities. And it is to his credit that Norman Rock- 
well took advantage of this opportunity, although he was 
so badly pressed by the pressures of deadlines from other 
clients. The painting demonstrates Rockwell’s admira- 
tion for the Dutch painters— Vermeer in particular— 
146 * ARLINGTON 
who delighted in painting the play of light within a 
darkened room. (Peter Rockwell remembered how proud 
his father was years later when he figured out exactly the 
window in Delft that Vermeer must have painted from.) 
Don Spaulding, who regards Shuffleton’s Barbershop as 
Rockwell’s finest painting, recalled the illustrator talking 
about the difficulties he encountered when he worked on 
the painting during a particularly cloudy two- or three- 
month period in the fall of 1949. With the qualities of 
sharp light as the central interest in the painting, the 
diffused cloudy days were a source of constant frustration 
to Rockwell. “When he’d get into trouble with a paint- 
ing,” Spaulding recalled, “He'd go into a funk, saying 
‘boy, what a Palooka I turned out to be,’ but by 8:30 the 
next morning he’d be back at it. His discipline was a real 
lesson to those of us who thought painting should come 
easily.""@ 

Shuffleton’s Barbershop. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, April 29, 1950. Estate of Norman Rockwell. 
Arlington Neighbors « 147 

THE 
OF 
LIFE 
Facts of Life. Saturday Evening Post cover, July 14, 1951. 
148 * ARLINGTON 

Ree did many versions for Facts of Life before he 
was satisfied. He asked so many friends for advice 
that most assumed he would eventually abandon the 
subject entirely. “He may just have found the subject too 
close to home,” suggested Jarvis Rockwell. 
Determining the perfect wallpaper pattern occupied 
much of Rockwell’s energy: several styles were pho- 
tographed, and a pattern—designed by Jack Atherton— 
was actually traced and rendered on canvas by Rockwell’s 
apprentice Don Winslow. Rockwell ultimately changed 
the setting altogether, shifting the location of the inti- 
mate talk from the bedroom to the living room, and 
simplifying the background treatment entirely. 
Rockwell also tried out other models before he select- 
ed Lester Brush for the father and Dwight Cowan for the 
awkward boy. “Dwight was my best friend in Arlington,” 
recalled Peter Rockwell, “but for years my father carried 
on a private war with him at the dinner table. He tried to 
give Dwight more than he could eat, just to see if he 
would ever stop asking for seconds. No matter how much 
food Pop piled on the plate, Dwight would ask for more. 
And no matter how much Dwight ate, he stayed pencil 
thin, just as he is in this picture.” 
Tall and lean, Lester Brush was a natural physical 
match to Dwight Cowan. “Norman Rockwell said I 
reminded him of one of his models from New Rochelle 
[Fred Hildebrandt],” said Brush. (Rockwell found Lester 
Brush equally appealing for Scrooge in a Hallmark Christ- 
mas card and for Abe Lincoln in an educational text. 
Brush is also one of the gossips.) For this part, Rockwell 
wanted to suggest a rather well-to-do man considerably 
older than Brush. To convey this in clothing, Rockwell 
asked his model to wear a pair of comfortable, casually 
worn-out slippers, and he gave Brush money to buy a 
new white shirt. @ 
Photo courtesy Don Spaulding. 

NX 
N 
\ 
‘Noworo nav 
“Roose lll 
Rees “keyhole approach” was used to good 
effect for Day in a Boy’s Life as it had been in The 
Gossips. In need of a cute and devilish type, Rockwell 
selected Chuck Marsh, the oldest son of local elementary 
schoolteacher, Ann Marsh. (Chuck Marsh had posed 
for the Four Seasons calendars and for the Family 
Homecoming. ) Rockwell’s skills as a director were espe- 
cially required for this sequence. Although the costumes 
provided some narrative value, the success of the cover 
depended almost exclusively on Chuck Marsh’s expres- 
sive face. 
Day in a Boy’s Life. Saturday Evening 
Post cover, May 24, 1952. 
The Rockwells felt a particular affection for the Marshes. 
When Chuckie was born in November, Mary Rockwell 
offered to baby-sit so that Lee and Ann Marsh could do 
their Christmas shopping, and Norman Rockwell took a 
creative writing course in Bennington with Mrs. Marsh. 
The Marshes had been at a party in the Rockwells’ studio 
the evening it burned down in 1943. Having already 
returned home, they soundly slept through the howling 
sirens as the fire engines sped by their home in the 
middle of the night. @ 
150 * ARLINGTON 

Day in a Girl’s Life. Original oil 
painting for a Saturday Evening Post 
cover, August 30, 1952. Old Corner 
House Collection, Stockbridge, 
Massachusetts. 
‘ 
0 
Ree a envoon Hen 
B Rosorisvve lif 
hen Rockwell painted Day in a Boy’s Life, he had 
not yet met Mary Whalen or he would have used 
her in that cover. He met the little girl for the first time 
when he attended a high school basketball game in 
which his son Tommy was playing. Complaining to her 
father that she was thirsty, Mary Whalen cheerfully 
accepted Norman Rockwell’s offer of a sip from his Coke. 
The illustrator had many favorite boy models during his 
illustrious career, but no girl ever came as close to 
perfection as this expressive child who could play any 
part he requested. “She was the best model I ever had,” 
he said, “could look sad one minute, jolly the next, and 
raise her eyebrows until they almost jumped over her 
head.” He used her first for a Plymouth advertisement, 
and then many times after that. She also posed for 
George Hughes and for Don Winslow, but Rockwell was 
her favorite. 
In Day in a Girl’s Life, Mary Whalen posed with 
Chuck Marsh, and for the party scene she was joined by 
her twin brother Peter and by Chuck’s brother Donny. 
Rockwell observed later that this cover was not as 
successful as Day in a Boy’s Life had been; probably, 
he conjectured, “because a girl’s activities are not as 
varied. "@ 
Marsh and Whalen * 151 

—aeereey 
HH k 
152 * ARLINGTON 
TS PORE 
ae 
tages 
thet 
as it necessary to put in the adults here or not? 
Rockwell wavered back and forth; he put them 
in and took them out, and put them back in. George 
Hughes is convinced they were retained because he 
advised Rockwell to remove them. Fortunately, the central 
figure was less problematic. 
A note from the school principal awaited Mary Whalen 
when she returned from a fourth-grade class outing one 
afternoon. Frightened, she begged her twin brother Peter 
to accompany her to the office to see what the charges 
against her would be. To her relief she discovered that it 
was simply a message from Mr. Rockwell saying he’d 
arranged with her parents to pick her up that afternoon 
for a photo session. At the studio she found Mr. Rockwell 

Oieteiik 
Rockwell 
zag 
Outside the Principal’s Office. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover. May 23, 1953. 
in excellent humor, laughing heartily over his funny cover 
idea as he showed her the sketch. (“He could be so 
impish,” Mary Whalen recalled. “Like a child himself”) 
He literally rolled on the floor with laughter as he urged 
her to produce a big smile for the camera, and her broad, 
devilish grin came easily. Rockwell had greater difficulty 
with the feet, and spent another session photographing 
only her shoes and socks. But the biggest chore was the 
black eye. He applied charcoal over Mary Whalen’ eye, 
without satisfaction. Then he applied makeup, but was 
unable to obtain the accurate colors and uneven swelling 
of a real black eye. Finally, he wrote about his dilemma in 
the newspaper, announcing that he would pay $5.00 for a 
genuine black eye. The item was picked up by the wire 
services and overnight he was offered several hundred 
black eyes from prisons and football teams. He eventually 
selected one belonging to a boy nearby. Success was 
achieved when he painted the real black eye over Mary 
Whalen’s unblemished one, giving him precisely the 
convincing effect he was after. 
Mary Whalen * 153 

hortly before moving to Stockbridge in 1953, Norman 
Rockwell photographed Mary Whalen for the Girl at 
the Mirror. He completed the painting in his new home. It 
was not until the magazine was published that the model 
ever saw the results from that single photography session. 
Rockwell mailed her the reproduction with a note, “I 
hope you like it.” “Sending me the picture and letter was 
so typical of him,” Mary Whalen observed. “It was not 
until years later that I realized what a special gift he had 
given me with this friendship. He cared about my twelve- 
154 * ARLINGTON 
year-old imagination. He felt that if I understood what he 
was trying to accomplish in a painting, the picture would 
be good, but if I didn’t, there was something wrong with 
his idea. We were all in it together, somehow. At least he 
made me feel that way.” 
Although the painting became one of Rockwell's most 
popular covers, the artist himself was critical. In retro- 
spect, he was sorry that he had included the magazine 
with Jane Russell’s photograph, a distracting detail he would 
have edited out if he were to do the painting over. 
@ 

Girl at the Mirror. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, March 6, 1954. Old Corner House Collection, Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
Mary Whalen 
* 155 

he idea for this painting came from Rockwell’s 
sense of loss when his eldest son Jarvis had 
enlisted in the Air Force and his two other boys had gone 
off to school. Completed in Stockbridge, the painting 
was begun in Arlington. Sometimes it is as interesting to 
consider the photographs Rockwell eliminated as it is to 
see the ones he finally selected. Like a series of sketches, 
these photographs describe the progression of his ideas, 
the creative process as Rockwell experienced it. The 
photographs reveal that he made several adjustments in 
the figures, eliminating the mother as an unnecessary 
detail along the way. (Tom Rockwell filled in for the boy 
in the photograph until his father made his final selec- 
tion.) Floyd Bentley, an Arlington farmer and cousin to 
the Rockwells’ cook Marie Briggs, sat for the father. The 
photographs demonstrate that Rockwell shifted from the 
running board of an old car, to the waiting area of a 
railroad station, and finally returned to his original 
concept. He indicated the railroad setting simply, by 
including the lantern and a slice of track in the fore- 
ground. The ideas were therefore absorbed into the final 
painting, not eliminated altogether. 
Peter Rockwell, who had graduated from high school 
when Rockwell was completing this painting, remembers 
the problem his father had with the signature. The 
illustrator tried placing it under the dog, but that didn’t 
work. He settled on the footlocker as a better location for 
his signature, careful to avoid any suggestion that it 
would appear to be lettering on the trunk. Attention to 
details such as this always impressed Peter Rockwell and 
he kept it in mind years later when he became an artist 
himself. 
@ 
156 * ARLINGTON 

Breaking Home Ties. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, September 25, 1954. Collection Don Trachte. 
Arlington Neighbors * 157 


The Family 
MODES AT HOME 

MG 
nc 
tM 
ME DR 
‘ 
ce 
9 
OE 
ne, 
ian 
gy 
1 
® 
$b oe oo fy: 
er: 
i” 
Spe 
ets 
4 
— 
: 
; 
; 
i 
: 
: 
t 
i 
\ 
. 
¢ 
eee 

Rockwell relied frequently upon his mod- 
els at home. Posing in costume with 
Mary Rockwell, the illustrator watched 
Henry Ford drive away in the first Ford 
automobile. 
rom New Rochelle to Arlington to Stockbridge, changes in 
geography did not seem dramatically to affect Norman Rock- 
well’s routine. All his studios even looked alike, constructed with 
a large window casting its north light onto an open area, with 
steps leading to an open balcony overlooking the studio. Throughout the 
years Rockwell maintained a disciplined routine, issuing relatively constant 
and even output wherever he worked. Naturally, the activity of the house- 
hold centered around Rockwell’s professional life, his deadlines, his disap- 
pointments and triumphs, and his requirements for adequate time and space 
for illustration. He organized his life to permit him this freedom: his wife 
helped him, there was a “Man Friday” on hand, a cook, neighbors frequently 
hired for odd jobs and for deliveries, and in later years he hired a secretary, 
a business manager, and someone to drive for him on occasional trips with 
the car. 
Rockwell never left his work far behind, even at night when he might 
awaken from his sleep with an idea, rushing to the studio before dawn to 
work it out. “He didn’t have time for anything else but painting,” recalled 
Peter Rockwell. “He painted a half day on Thanksgiving and even tried 
painting a half day on Christmas, until my mother put her foot down.” Don 
Spaulding observed: “He was totally single-minded about his work. Jack 
Atherton once remarked that he didn’t know how Norman managed to do 
it, never taking out the garbage or fixing a screen door. It was as if his entire 
life was directed to making pictures.” If domestic pressures became too 
great, in fact, Rockwell might be likely to retreat into his studio even more 
frequently. “He worked out many of his conflicts through his paintings,” 
Jarvis Rockwell commented. Where his life in the studio ended and his life 
outside began did become blurred, as even Rockwell himself noted: “The 
story of my life is, really, the story of my pictures and how I made them. 
Because, in one way or another, everything I have ever seen or done has 
gone into my pictures.” 
Rockwell worked every day, seven days a week, from about 8:00 in the 
morning until 5:00, with a break for lunch. He often returned to his studio 
after dinner, if only to clean his brushes or fret over a painting in progress. 
Even at meals, Rockwell was often absorbed in his work, preoccupied with 
a painting that wasn’t going right, or thinking already in advance of the 
next commission. 
Introduction 
* 161 

Although he enjoyed parties, was a convivial storyteller, and extremely 
interested in those around him, he avoided the distractions of a hectic 
social life. He would prefer to put up his guests at the Arlington Inn rather 
than have them stay at the house. George Hughes remembered that even 
when Rockwell expected guests for dinner he worked right up to the last 
moment, often rushing in from the studio as the guests pulled into the 
driveway. 
The Rockwells’ tastes were simple; no need to flaunt the substantial 
income he earned from his illustrations. For years in Vermont the family 
continued to drive the old Chevy station wagon their neighbor Colonel 
Ayres had given Rockwell during the war when cars were scarce in ex- 
change for painting his portrait. (The Edgertons adopted the car as a school 
bus when the Rockwells finally got a new automobile.) Little fuss was made 
over amenities of any sort. (“Norman always ate roast beef, steak, or lamb 
chops for dinner,” Chris Schafer recalled. “Like everything else about 
him—basic and honest, with no pretense whatsoever.”) 
Rockwell was a man of habit. He would sip one Coke in the late morning 
and another in the afternoon (throwing half away each time), listen to the 
Saturday afternoon Metropolitan Opera performance or the New York 
Yankees baseball game on the radio. He kept the studio neat at all times, 
sweeping up several times during the course of a day. His wife very often 
read aloud to him—she was a skilled reader, having been a schoolteacher 
before she met Norman— including 
all his favorite novels by Dickens, 
Dostoevsky, Tolstoy. (She read War and Peace to him twice!) The illustra- 
tor painted at a quiet pace, pausing to light his pipe, and oblivious to the 
sounds of the children nearby. 
Mary Rockwell’s letters, reproduced in the Appendix of this book, are 
evidence of the deep bond that existed between her and Norman Rockwell. 
The letters also reveal her accomplishments as a writer. Having studied 
writing at Stanford University, Mary Rockwell maintained her interest in 
writing throughout her life, although she never published any work other 
than an occasional article which she wrote in her husband’s name. Her 
admiration of fine literature extended into the field of children’s books and 
she gathered an extensive collection over the years. Ann Marsh remem- 
bered Mary Rockwell’s activity in the community, having served with her 
on the library board, and recalled her involvement in an intense commu- 
nity controversy over the use of school buses to transport the high school 
basketball team. 
While Mary pursued her own interests, she also ministered to the psycho- 
logical and practical needs of her husband. In addition to the many hours of 
reading to him, she attended to the multiple details supporting his work, 
making arrangements for props, screening phone calls and unwanted visi- 
tors, and shopping for food and incidentals. An intercom buzzer system was 
connected between the studio and the house, the number of buzzes signifying 
162 * THE FAMILY 
All of Rockwell’s studios were constructed 
according to a similar design. The studio 
in West Arlington—in which the illus- 
trator is shown selecting photographs for 
an illustration—was not very different 
from his earlier studio down the road or 
his later studio in Stockbridge. 

ABove: After the Honeymoon. Original 
oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post 
cover, August 23, 1930. 
BELOW: The Common Cold. 
There were certain dangers in Rockwell 
family members posing for the illustra- 
tor. After appearing on the Post as a 
neglected wife shortly after her marriage 
to Norman Rockwell, Mary Rockwell 
received a sympathetic letter from a 
friend in California who drew inaccurate 
conclusions about the status of the Rock- 
well marriage. More true to life perhaps 
was the scene of the common cold, 
shown below, in which Mary Rockwell 
ministers to her son Peter. 
the message being transmitted. The phone in the studio could be turned 
off, so that Mary could answer without disturbing her husband; then she 
would buzz the studio if the call required his attention. Only visitors known 
to the Rockwells were permitted to saunter into the studio unannounced. 
In fact, Marie Briggs, one of the Rockwell cooks, refused to admit Rock- 
well’s friend, Walt Disney, until his entrance was announced on the 
intercom in advance. The most frequent signal on the intercom was usually 
directed to Mary Rockwell: “Come out and look at the picture,” which she 
did at a moment’s notice. She was his most intelligent critic. 
The three Rockwell sons were born in New Rochelle—Jarvis in 1931, 
Tom in 1933, and Peter in 1936. Once in Arlington they attended the 
local schools. For a while, Jarvis and Tom attended Oakwood, a boarding 
school in Poughkeepsie recommended by the family friend Dorothy Can- 
field Fisher, and Peter went to Putney. (Two of the three boys eventually 
married girls they had met at boarding school.) 
The eldest, Jarvis Rockwell—Jerry, as he was called as a boy—was eight 
years old when the family moved to Arlington. He did not welcome the 
move, having already formed his early attachments in New Rochelle. From 
the casually accepted comforts of their home on Lord Kichener Road, the 
Rockwells took up residence in a secluded farmhouse on a back road in 
Arlington where the screeching of bobcats seemed a nightly reminder of 
their isolation. The community continued to drag the weight of the Depres- 
sion years at its heels. Many neighbors were still on the welfare rolls, and 
there was the shock of seeing a boy come barefoot to class in the middle of 
the winter. 
Jarvis Rockwell did not take easily to the shift. He never altogether 
overcame the sense of having been transplanted. Although the Rockwells 
were well received, they were not natives, and the subtle distance that 
separated them from the Vermonters seemed to be more disconcerting to 
the eldest son than to the others. Because fitting in did not come easily to 
the introspective Jerry, he tended to remove himself from the others, “lying 
in a hammock all summer,” he said. While he showed talent for drawing, 
he refused to consider any form of commercial art, a natural result, no 
doubt, of having such a renowned illustrator in the family. Quite abruptly, 
in the middle of his senior year, Jarvis dropped out of high school to study 
art at the Art Students League and at the National Academy of Design in 
New York City. Rockwell encouraged his son in this pursuit, transforming a 
corncrib into a studio for him behind the house and supporting him 
financially for years. Jarvis Rockwell is still a fine artist (“totally incapable 
of being commercial,” he has said), and working in an approach his father 
would call “very modern.” 
When he was a child, Jarvis posed for his father only a few times, 
“probably because I wasn’t the type of cute kid he wanted for his pictures.” 
After Jarvis passed through his awkward adolescent years, Rockwell tended 
Introduction * 163 

Jerry. Private Collection. 
Tommy. Private Collection. 
Peter. Private Collection. 
to use him more frequently, and he appeared in one of the illustrator’s most 
popular illustrations, Saying Grace, just before he enlisted in the Air Force 
at the age of nineteen. 
Quite unlike Jarvis, the middle son Tommy was determined to fit into his 
environment. He was popular with his classmates, played on the school’s 
basketball team, was yearbook editor and valedictorian. He was extremely 
attached to the Edgertons, and was just as likely to be in their home as his 
own. Tom posed fairly often for his father, the ideal Cub Scout to Buddy 
Edgerton’s Boy Scout, and was the most athletic of the Rockwell men. He 
was responsible for convincing his father to construct the tennis court in 
the back of the house. 
The closest Tom came to taking an interest in art was when he studied 
photography, a brief pursuit that was replaced by a more intense commit- 
ment to writing poetry. (He is now an author of children’s books, including 
the very popular, How to Eat Fried Worms.) In the late 1950s Rockwell was 
approached with the idea of publishing his autobiography. The ghost writer 
originally sent by the publisher was intent on creating a Horatio Alger 
tale—from rags to riches—an approach Rockwell found laughable. In- 
stead, Rockwell suggested his son for the job—the young man was a 
magazine editor by then—and Tom Rockwell did an admirable job of 
transforming his father’s recollections into an entertaining manuscript 
called My Adventures as an Illustrator. 
Like Jarvis, Peter Rockwell also decided to become an artist. Unlike his 
older brother, however, Peter was already in his last year at Haverford 
College when he announced his decision. His father was dismayed. “He’d 
lost his last opportunity to have one solid professional in the family,” Peter 
164 * THE FAMILY 

‘Norman 
== 
= 
‘Rockwall 
Graduation. Original oil painting for a 
Saturday Evening Post cover, June 6, 1959. 
Throughout the years, Rockwell depict- 
ed his sons as they were growing up. 
Jarvis appeared in a game of marbles for 
the first Post cover Rockwell painted 
in Arlington, and Tommy’s graduation 
from college prompted his father to paint 
the 1959 cover for the Post. 
Playing Marbles. Saturday Evening Post cover, 
September 7, 1939. 
laughed. “And the only thing worse than being a painter or poet was being 
a sculptor.” Norman Rockwell resisted it over a year, finally giving in only 
after consulting his friend Erik Erikson, the distinguished psychoanalyst. 
Peter Rockwell eventually became a sculptor, and settled in Rome, Italy, in 
an environment where the staggering artistic heritage may have helped 
place the impressive achievements of his father in greater perspective. 
While being the offspring of a father totally dedicated to his work may 
not always have been easy, Rockwell was by no means an unkind parent. If 
his involvement with work occupied most of his waking energies, he did 
not insist on imposing single-mindedness on his sons by confining their 
behavior to accommodate his patterns. Unlike many artists, Rockwell 
permitted the children to wander in and out of the studio freely, enjoying 
the sound of their laughter and the flurry of activity they brought with 
them. Peter Rockwell remembers going into the studio quite regularly to 
read. And all the children recall the richness of Halloween costumes they 
found in their father’s treasure trove of items used for his pictures. For all his 
set ways, Rockwell was not a stern father. “After all,” said the youngest 
Rockwell, “Pop was forty-two when I was born. By that time your habits are 
fixed.” Rockwell may have been preoccupied, but he was not authoritarian. 
For example, there was the time the family went to California for a few 
months, living in a hotel at the end of Hollywood Drive in a neighborhood 
where ten movie theaters were situated within an eight-block radius. Then 
twelve years old, Peter Rockwell, who had been growing up in a town 
where the nearest movie house was eight miles away, was determined to 
taste the pleasures of every film in the area. He managed to see nine double 
features-in a seven-day period. 
There wasn’t much time for holidays, but occasionally Rockwell would 
take his sons from Vermont into New York for three or four days—a great 
adventure—to attend the circus or drive down to the Bowery early in the 
morning. Peter Rockwell remembers when they went to Rockefeller Center 
one morning so early that the escalators hadn’t yet been turned on. 
“Running up and down those stationary escalators was one of the great 
moments of my life. It was magical,” he recalls. Without being too permis- 
sive, therefore, the Rockwell parents did allow their children the freedom 
of discovery. 
Norman Rockwell drew on the events in the family as inspiration for his 
work, and incorporated his three boys and wife into many of his pictures. In 
later years, after Mary’s death and after the children were grown, he went 
farther afield for subject matter and for models. The paintings that follow, 
therefore, are a family album that chronicles the Rockwell family in 
Arlington, Vermont. Among this group is some of his best work. 
Introduction * 165 

his is a genuine family reunion, bringing together 
all the Rockwells in a single painting. At the left 
edge of the painting is Peter Rockwell, who recently 
referred to himself as “the fat kid with glasses,” recalling 
this as a particularly nasty period of his adolescence. In 
the plaid shirt Tom Rockwell is standing with his hands 
in his pockets, while Mary Rockwell embraces her son 
Jarvis and Norman Rockwell—pipe between his lipsp— 
looks on affectionately. The idea for the cover was 
inspired by Jarvis’ homecoming from Oakwood, although 
the actual event never occurred. “We weren’t a family 
given to that kind of display,” said Peter Rockwell. Had 
such an occasion actually taken place, however, the 
same members of the group might just as well have as- 
sembled for such a homecoming. The three smiling girls 
in the center of the last row are, from left to right, Patty 
Schaeffer, Mary Atherton, and Lee Schaeffer. Mead 
Schaeffer stands behind Peter Rockwell and behind 
Grandma Moses, the painter, who was a friend of the 
Rockwells living in a nearby town. On the other side of 
the painting, standing behind Norman Rockwell, is 
Ann Marsh, with her baby Donny, and Mary Immen 
Hall. The boy in the foreground is Don’s brother, Chuck 
Marsh, who posed for Day in a Boy’s Life. The twin girls 
are actually one Sharon O’Neil, the daughter of Arling- 
ton’s Dr. O’Neil. When Sharon came to pose for 
Rockwell, she wore a charming plaid skirt. After painting 
the plaid in Tommy’s shirt and the patterns on the 
packages, however, Rockwell felt any more plaids would 
be too distracting. Ann Marsh recalled that Rockwell 
took the trouble to phone the O’Neil parents to be sure 
they didn’t object to his making the skirt red in the 
painting. “That was so typical of his thoughtfulness,” 
Mrs. Marsh observed. “As if anyone would mind!’"@ 
166 * THE FAMILY 
K 
VP, 
yak 
St Loe 
i 
ae 
(C 
. Sharon O’Neil 
7. Patty Schaeffer 
13. Ann Marsh 
. Grandma Moses 
8. Mary Rockwell 
14. Donny Marsh 
. Peter Rockwell 
9. Mary Atherton 
15. Mary Immen Hall 
. Mead Schaeffer 
10. Jarvis Rockwell 
~ 
16. Sharon O’Neil 
. Rena Crofut 
11. Lee Schaeffer 
17. Chuck Marsh 
. Tom Rockwell 
12. Norman Rockwell 
DMP 
WN 

Family Homecoming. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, December 25, 1948. Old Corner House 
Collection, Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
Mary Rockwell * 167 

Mh MAA 
yi 
sf 
TP octane 
Storyteller or Benedict’s Garage. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, October 13, 1945. Collection Judy 
and Alan Goffman. Courtesy Phillips Fine Art Auctioneers, New York. 
168 * THE FAMILY 

arvis and Peter Rockwell both posed for this Post 
cover, a painting Norman Rockwell felt was success- 
ful because of its authenticity. “Everyone was real,” he 
said. Peter Rockwell has faint memories of this wonderful, 
dark, greasy garage. “I think Pop actually added light to it 
for the painting,” he laughed. The group surrounding 
the storyteller could have been as real as the interior of 
the garage itself. John Benedict, who built cabinets and 
stairs for Norman Rockwell and delivered mail to him 
during the war, sits on the table alongside the real owner 
of the garage, his brother Bob Benedict, Jr. Hefty Nip 
Noyes, and lean Herb Squires are seated at the right. 
Duane Peters, a former marine discovered by Norman 
Rockwell at a Grange Hall square dance, posed for the 
storyteller. 
Benedict’s Garage was somewhat of a hangout in 
Arlington, but no place was finer for a gathering than 
the family’s rustic camping lodge in Benedict’s Hollow 
up the mountain. (Dr. Russell had a camp of his own just 
below the Benedicts’.) The Rockwell boys enjoyed going 
there, and Rockwell himself, though he wasn’t much of a 
card player, would join in for the “clam feeds” prepared 
by the neighbors. A black bear caught in the wilds in 
1943 was occasion enough for a grand party at the 
camp. @ 
Jarvis Rockwell * 169 

arvis Rockwell had just enlisted in the U.S. Air Force 
when he posed for his father in Saying Grace. He 
remembers that the painting did not come easily. George 
Hughes also remembers the difficulty Rockwell had with 
it. According to Hughes, Rockwell threw the canvas 
into the snow one night, so discouraged had he become, 
but returned to it the next day, determined to make it 
work. Given all the trouble he had with it, Rockwell 
never imagined it would become one of his most popular 
covers. 
Rockwell went to the railroad diner in Troy, New 
York, more than once to get the qualities of light and the 
details for the setting. Just how to paint a railroad yard 
on a winter afternoon through a rain-soaked window was 
a challenge the artist couldn’t resist, in spite of the 
complexity of these technical problems. Tables and 
chairs were shipped to Rockwell’s studio from an automat 
in New York City. (“‘A truck pulled up, deposited the 
furniture, then took it away a few days later,” recalled 
the cook, Marie Briggs.) And every detail was selected, 
examined, and placed carefully in the painting: the mugs 
of coffee, the suitcase, knitting bag, umbrellas, and 
cigarettes supporting the story in the painting and collec- 
tively forming a tight composition at the same time. “My 
father was very different from most other twentieth-cen- 
tury artists. He was a thinking painter rather than a 
visual painter,” observed Peter Rockwell who is an artist 
and art historian himself. “There are no useless details in 
this painting, and every detail has a design function as 
well. For example, even the red seats on the chairs have 
been used to isolate the figures in the center of the 
composition. Nothing is left to chance. Everything is 
exceptionally well thought out.” 
Rockwell’s selection of Bill Sharkey for the figure on 
the left holding the umbrella was particularly astute. 
Sitting all day long on a wooden chair at the edge of his 
porch, Sharkey was a 
self-styled derelict who seemed to 
enjoy doing as little as possible. Rockwell figured Shar- 
key would be a type likely to frequent a railroad diner 
such as this. (A good friend of Sharkey’s, another local 
character named Hoddy Woodard, would also have been 
suitable, but his practice of wearing the same outfit for 
six months in succession made the odor too unbearable 
for an indoor photo session, Rockwell maintained. ) 
Others in the painting include Don Winslow at the table 
with the elderly Mrs. Ralph Walker, who never lived to 
see the painting published. At the table in the fore- 
ground is Rockwell’s assistant Gene Pelham. 
@ 
170 * THE FAMILY 

: 
Saying Grace. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, November 24, 1951. Collection Mr. and Mrs. Ken Stuart. 
Jarvis Rockwell 
* 171 

172 © THE-BAMILY 

I 
wasn’t the cute type,” Jarvis Rockwell remarked, 
which explains why Rockwell rarely painted his oldest 
son in boyhood. Rockwell painted Jarvis as a young man 
instead. After returning from service in the Air Force, 
Jarvis continued to study art seriously, a fact that inspired 
Norman Rockwell to paint The Critic. This subject gave 
the illustrator the opportunity to play with his favorite 
Old Masters, the sixteenth-century Dutch and Flemish 
The 
painters. Indebted to them for his palette and technique, 
Rockwell enjoyed making these satirical renditions of 
works of Frans Hals and Peter Paul Rubens, an idea made 
even more amusing to him when his wife Mary posed for 
the Rubens portrait. The concept was easier than the 
execution. Rockwell must have made fourteen or fifteen 
sketches before he came up with the appropriately comi- 
cal expression. @ 
A cineiatiad for a Saturday Evening Post cover, April 16, 1955. Old Corner House Collection, Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
Jarvis Rockwell * 173. 

The Pocket Game. Saturday Evening Post cover, 
January 25, 1936. 
Boy Reading Sister’s Diary. 
Saturday Evening Post cover, 
March 21, 1942. 
174 * THE FAMILY 
ommy Rockwell was three years old when he posed 
for the child searching through his great Uncle Gil’s 
pocket to find a present, and he was nine when he posed 
for the boy reading his sister’s diary. Posing for the 
second cover, he grew restless in the uncomfortable seat 
placed in front of his mother’s dressing table. Rockwell 
reported that he had to bribe his son to keep him still for 
the photographs. Tommy was also a good subject for 
Rockwell’s Boy Scout calendars. These calendars could 
become tedious for the illustrator, and many times he 
considered giving them up entirely. The subject was 
limited at best, particularly because no humor was per- 
mitted. If a minor error was made in the color, insignia, 
or details of the uniform, the painting was returned for 
correction. Begun originally on a voluntary basis, the 
annual calendars became so profitable that Rockwell 
couldn’t afford not to paint them, especially during the 
long months, without pay, when he would work on a 
single Post cover to get it just right. (He also felt a certain 
loyalty, having painted the calendars for so many years. ) 
Determined to achieve accuracy in the Boy Scout pieces, 
Rockwell painted an authentic but intimate detail in 
the 1946 calendar: the unmistakable expression of 
concentration evident around Tommy’s mouth. He and 
brother Peter teamed up for the 1948 calendar, in which 
the younger boy played the Cub Scout and Tommy posed 
for one of the hiking figures. As a young man, Tommy 
posed for the 1953 calendar.’@ 

On My Honor. Original oil painting for Boy Scout poster-calendar. © 1953 Brown & Bigelow, Inc., a Division of Saxon Industries, Inc. 
Collection Boy Scouts of America. 

Boy on a Diving Board. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, August 16, 1947. Courtesy Martin Diamond Fine Arts, New York. 
176 * THE FAMILY 

Men of Tomorrow. Origi- 
nal oil painting for Boy 
Scout poster-calendar. 
© 1948 Brown & Bigelow, 
Inc., a Division of Saxon 
Industries, Inc. Collection 
Boy Scouts of America. 
hen Buddy Edgerton outgrew his role as Boy 
Scout, he was replaced by Freeman Grout of 
Arlington; when Tom Rockwell outgrew his role, he was 
replaced by his younger brother Peter. As a pair, Peter 
Rockwell and Freeman Grout posed for the 1949 and 
1950 Scout calendars. These were minor events in Peter 
Rockwell’s memory. Much more vivid is his recollection 
of posing as the boy on the diving board for the Post 
cover, August 16, 1947. 
To prepare for the scene, Norman Rockwell wheeled 
his studio easel toward the steps of his balcony, then 
cranked up the easel to the highest point on its stand. He 
then placed a plank with one end resting on a step and 
the other on the top of the easel. The board was well 
above eye level, precisely the angle he wanted for the 
picture. So he hoisted his son onto the plank, quite 
delighted with himself. Peter was truly terrified as he 
peered down from those heights, giving Rockwell just 
the authenticity he wanted for the picture. Although the 
illustrator achieved the frightened expression he was 
after, he was less satisfied with the qualities of light. “It 
would have been much better,” he said, “if I had posed 
the boy on the actual springboard instead of posing him 
in my studio as I did. You just can’t simulate the effect of 
real sunlight.” Peter Rockwell had little to say about the 
lighting in the painting. His mind was on other things. @ 
Our Heritage. Original oil painting for Boy Scout poster- 
calendar. © 1950 Brown & Bigelow, Inc., a Division of 
Saxon Industries, Inc. Collection Boy Scouts of America. 
Friend in Need. Original oil painting for Boy Scout poster- 
calendar. © 1949 Brown & Bigelow, Inc., a Division of 
Saxon Industries, Inc. Collection Boy Scouts of America. 
Peter Rockwell * 177 

T 
© prepare a winter Post cover, Rockwell would have 
to work through the summer, undeterred by practi- 
cal matters concerning physical comfort. Posing for this 
cover during the month of August was not one of Peter 
Rockwell’s easiest assignments, but it turned out to be his 
most lucrative. Some preliminary photographs were 
taken in the studio, but to get it right Rockwell had to 
photograph the scene inside a dining car. Since bringing 
such a car into the studio seemed unfeasible, Rockwell 
decided to do the next best thing: he arranged for a 
dining car to be sidetracked at the New York Central 
train yards in New York City. It happened to be the 
hottest day in August when the crew drove down from 
Arlington to New York City for the photo session. 
Rockwell selected one of many waiters offered to him by 
New York Central and for two-and-a-half hours his 
models posed in winter clothing inside a dining car that 
was baking in the summer afternoon’s heat. “I began to 
eripe,” Peter remembered. “But Pop said if I just did it 
without complaining he would take me to F.A.O. 
Schwarz and buy me anything I wanted. I can still 
remember my triumph as we drove back to Vermont with 
my fabulous new toy truck in my lap. I was convinced I 
got the better end of the deal!” 
@ 
Oil sketch for Boy in Dining Car. Courtesy Martin Diamond Fine Arts, 
New York. 
178 « THE. FAMILY 

SA ae 
ene 
a 
Boy in Dining Car. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, July 7, 1946. Private Collection, Old Corner 
House, Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
Peter Rockwell 
« 179 

-T 
orman Rockwell was living in Stockbridge and 
Peter Rockwell was a junior at Putney, a boarding 
school in Vermont, when his father decided to paint this 
cover for the Post in 1953. Rockwell came to the idea 
from talking to Peter who had had a summer job as a soda 
jerk at a local establishment the previous summer. It 
seemed most appropriate, therefore, that Peter pose for 
the cover, so the illustrator drove up to Putney and 
charmed the headmistress into allowing his son to return 
to Stockbridge with him for the weekend, along with 
eight or ten other classmates. Among the students who 
came to pose for the picture was Cynthia Ide, Peter’s 
future wife. It is a little known fact that she posed for this 
painting, probably because only a part of her figure (the 
rear part, in fact) was used for the painting. As long as he 
had his models for the appointed sessions, Rockwell was 
a benevolent host for the bunch, leaving them free to do 
as they pleased during their visit. It turned out to be a 
weekend of parties, a coincidental but fitting send-off to 
Peter’s last cover for Norman Rockwell. @ 
180 « THE FAMILY 

E 
Bee Sie 
Pee 
me 
iors tw RALL 
Ey 
Soda Jerk. Saturday Evening Post cover, August 22, 1953. 
Peter Rockwell * 181 


Stockbridge 
CPEE BRATION AND MOURNING 

Main Street, Stockbridge, at Christmas. Original oil painting for McCall’s magazine, December, 1967. Old Corner House Collection, 
Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
184 * STOCKBRIDGE 

The buildings along Stockbridge’s Main 
Street are Rockwell landmarks. The 
Christmas tree is displayed in a large 
window Rockwell installed when he 
rented this space for his studio. The 
central red brick building was the loca- 
tion of the town clerk’s office, where 
Rockwell’s Marriage License was portrayed. 
The Red Lion Inn, closed during the 
winters until 1969, stands desolate on 
the right. At the very extreme right is 
seen Rockwell’s white house and red 
studio. 
o the citizens of Stockbridge, the arrival of a celebrity was not 
an unusual addition to the community. The town had attracted 
men and women of distinction from the time its first mission- 
ary, John Sergeant, had settled there in 1734. It was in Stock- 
bridge that this industrious minister transformed a depleted tribe of Mahican 
Indians into Americanized colonists. Until they were nudged out gradually 
by ambitious settlers in later years, the tribe represented a unique group, the 
only Indians to assume an American name—the Stockbridge Indians— 
for their tribe and to fight on the side of the colonists in the Revolution- 
ary War. 
Others were equally drawn to Stockbridge for the promise of an improved 
life. Up the Housatonic River from Connecticut came settlers who pros- 
pered from the mills made productive by the great source of local water 
power. Over the years, Stockbridge has attracted a varied group of cultured 
and well-to-do families from Connecticut, New York, and Boston. Just as 
tolerance of the Indians made the town unique in the eighteenth century, 
acceptance of eccentricity continues today. “The town is prosperous, but 
Introduction 
* 185 

not commercial,” offered Walter Scott, a photographer from San Francisco 
who has lived next door to the Rockwells since 1961. “Except for the 
wealth brought by successful professionals and summer people, the town 
has little economic basis for its prosperity today. Its foundation has always 
been philosophical rather than commercial.” 
Scott’s point of view is supported by the numbers of cultured individuals 
who came to Stockbridge. Writers Nathaniel Hawthorne, Henry Wadsworth 
Longfellow, and Herman Melville settled there. Tanglewood, the summer 
outdoor music festival, was created in Stockbridge. The Berkshire Theatre 
has brought to Stockbridge the most prominent performers of the day, and 
Daniel Chester French—the sculptor who created the statue of Abraham 
Lincoln for the memorial in Washington, D.C.—lived there. In his treat- 
ment facility located in the center of town, Dr. Austen Riggs achieved 
remarkable results with the mentally ill. Reinhold Niebuhr, the theological 
philosopher, Erik H. Erikson, the psychoanalyst and writer, as well as pho- 
tographers, philosophers, writers, musicians, actors, celebrities seeking a 
retreat: all continue to live side by side in privacy, in Stockbridge, Massa- 
chusetts, a community whose entire population during the winter is not 
more than 2,200. 
The Rockwells’ move to Stockbridge in 1953 did not create a stir. Mary 
Rockwell’s continued treatment at the Austen Riggs Foundation was hardly 
considered out of the ordinary. So many people before and since (and so 
many of them famous) had come to Stockbridge for the same reason. And 
Rockwell used Riggs’ patients as models and photographers. Nor were Rock- 
well’s connections with publishing and advertising particularly unusual. 
Though he certainly was among the most prominent members of this circle, 
he was not alone. New York writers and publishers had been living in 
Stockbridge for years. It was almost as if Rockwell had returned halfway to 
New Rochelle; although Stockbridge was certainly not a New York City 
suburb, it was less rural than Arlington had been. New friends and new 
models stimulated him, and the Post covers he created during his first years 
in Stockbridge are among his finest. 
If the early years in his new home proved productive, they also represented 
a difficult time for him. Mary Rockwell showed only minimal improvement, 
though she had taken to drawing and was working with David Loveless at 
the Riggs workshop. (“She had talent, too,” her instructor recalled.) The 
house was silent now: Peter and Tom Rockwell were off at school; Jarvis 
lived elsewhere. And Norman Rockwell was older, suffering from occasional 
back pains and preoccupied with his wife’s illness. Even his work was 
troubling him. He had experienced periods of self-doubt before, but the fear 
of losing his touch seemed particularly acute during this time. He confided 
in Erik Erikson his apprehensions and he assiduously worked to improve his 
painting. On Tuesday mornings he attended a 
life drawing class at Peggy 
Best’s studio. The fast sketches he turned out during these two-and-a-half 
186 * STOCKBRIDGE 

Landscape Painting. Estate of Norman Rockwell. 
In later years Rockwell kept himself 
“loosened up” with rapid oil sketches. 
These impasto landscape paintings repre- 
sented a departure from his earlier sub- 
jects and techniques. 
hour sessions loosened him up. His work nourished him, renewed him, and 
to those who saw him every day he appeared to be in good cheer and 
enthusiastic about his latest painting. 
But the Rockwells’ life in Stockbridge was very different now. Not that 
Rockwell felt any regrets. (He was as unlikely to look back on his life as he 
was to look back on a painting he’d finished. Only the next painting 
interested him.) It was simply a different town and a different time. The 
town was larger and more cosmopolitan than Arlington, and without young 
children in the home, the Rockwells were less connected to the community. 
Rockwell’s recent assignments required travel, and when they were in town, 
their social life tended to be with the family itself. The boys—by now young 
men—returned for holidays and were soon bringing home wives to entertain 
as well. No circle of artists replaced the great fellowship shared with the 
Schaeffers, the Athertons, and the Hugheses. 
Except for Chris Schafer, who came down from Vermont twice a week to 
attend to the books, the Rockwells rarely saw their Arlington friends. 
Instead, a new circle developed to replace them. Rockwell and Harry 
Dwight, the president of the bank in Stockbridge, formed an informal 
group of peers which they called The Marching and Chowder Club. The 
charter members consisted of six or eight gentlemen and a number of 
occasional visitors, including psychoanalyst Erikson, playwright Thornton 
Wilder, and critic Walter Prichard Eaton. Each Thursday these gentlemen 
convened for lunch to exchange tall stories and philosophical thoughts. 
When they came to Stockbridge, the Rockwells first lived on West Main 
Street, directly across the street from the town physician, Dr. Donald 
Campbell. Mary Rockwell would come to chat with Dr. Campbell almost 
every morning and enjoyed spending time with his daughter Betsy, suggest- 
ing perhaps that she missed the companionship of a young child. 
For studio space, Norman Rockwell rented two rooms over the meat 
market on Main Street, replacing the small double-hung windows facing 
north with a single large studio window. He worked there until they moved 
into a colonial house on South Street across from the Red Lion Inn in 
1957. At the back of his home Rockwell had Ejner Handberg remodel an 
old carriage house for him, converting it into a studio that looked very 
much like the one he’d loved in Arlington. 
The Rockwells were within walking distance of the shops, restaurants, 
post office, and town folk. Norman Rockwell became a familiar sight to the 
neighbors as he’d nod hello (without stopping to chat) on his way down the 
street to purchase a newspaper or a packet of tobacco. An eager mother 
might discreetly parade her child before him in the hope that the illustrator 
would offer an invitation for the child to pose for him. (Not unrealistic: 
Rockwell selected more than one model from such “chance” encounters. ) 
Through the 1950s and into the early 1960s Rockwell maintained the 
pace of a young man, despite his advancing age. By simplifying his working 
Introduction * 187 

methods, he was able to accomplish more within a shorter period of time. 
In earlier years he photographed details in isolation from one another: one 
model, then the other; one prop, then another. Only when absolutely 
necessary did he take his photographer on location to shoot. He preferred 
to have what he needed delivered to the studio. For a given painting, a 
horse, pullman seat, chicken, or piano might arrive at the studio door. 
After the details were photographed, Rockwell assembled them to fit his 
concept. In later years, however, Rockwell was likely to arrange more of 
the composition at a single session. He might take his photographer 
on location—to a local luncheonette or to the town clerk’s office— 
and photograph all the models in place at the same session, composing 
his painting and photograph simultaneously, working with fewer pictorial 
fragments. 
Rockwell was less connected personally to his models in later years than 
he was earlier in his career. He painted more celebrities now, public figures 
in politics, entertainment, and sports. Models also continued to be neigh- 
bors, of course, but rarely were they close friends. During the 1950s and 
into the 1960s he was no less particular about the specific requirements for a 
model, but he was not always acquainted with the person who came to the 
studio. Louie Lamone might take a Polaroid photo of a potential candi- 
date, which Rockwell would approve. In the last years, Lamone remembered 
that the illustrator even became less fussy about specific choices. 
For something very unusual, or when he worked in a strange city, 
Rockwell might turn to a modeling agency. For example, in 1955 he went 
down to New York with Peter Rockwell to locate a mermaid for a Post 
cover. No self-respecting young woman in Stockbridge would want to pose 
naked to the waist for this subject, so he consulted nude photographs sent 
from a modeling agency in the city, and chose a French model from a lineup 
of several attractive females paraded before him at the agency. “My father 
told me that when she posed, the photographer was so embarrassed he 
wouldn’t come out from behind the camera. He just hid under the black 
cloth,” remembered Peter Rockwell, who wasn’t allowed in the studio for 
the session. “Even though Pop concealed the explicit details of her breasts 
by covering the nipples with the slats of a lobster cage, he still received irate 
letters from offended readers!” 
Rockwell’s uncanny knack for taking catnaps during the working day 
enabled him to extend his energies even further. No matter where he was 
working—in the studio or on location—Rockwell could stretch out on a 
bench or on the floor and fall off to sleep immediately. Fifteen or twenty 
minutes later he would awaken refreshed and ready to go again. 
With such energy, Rockwell continued to work his photographers very 
hard. He was lighthearted and friendly, but demanding. In Stockbridge, 
Rockwell used as photographers Bill Scovill, Clem Kalischer, and Louie 
Lamone. He called on his neighbor Walter Scott occasionally for photo- 
188 * STOCKBRIDGE 
Catch of the Day. Saturday Evening Post cover, 
August 20, 1955. 
Discretion dictated that Rockwell select 
a professional model from an agency to 
pose for the mermaid. 
Rae 
Picasso vs. Sargent. Illustration for Look, 
January 11, 1966. 
A one-day trip to Chicago’s Art Insti- 
tute for this cover did not fatigue the 
elderly illustrator. In fact, the young 
photographer working with Rockwell 
was far more worn out by the day’s work. 

graphs as well. Rockwell was nearly seventy years old when Scott flew out 
to Chicago with him for a day’s shooting at the Art Institute. With three 
catnaps taken during the day (“stretched out on a bench in the museum”), 
Rockwell was still fresh and alert at 3:00 when the session was over. “I 
couldn’t say the same for myself,” said the young man. “I was exhausted.” 
Seeing that the session had ended earlier than expected, Rockwell urged 
Scott to pack up the photography gear quickly so that they could try for an 
earlier flight back to New York. Rockwell paid $50 to a cab driver for a 
hair-raising ride to the airport, and was very pleased to catch a plane one 
hour earlier than originally scheduled. “I don’t know how he managed to 
keep up that pace. By the time we got back to Stockbridge that evening | 
could barely stand up, but he was still feeling peppy, and reminded me that 
he wanted to see proofs first thing in the morning.” 
Rockwell was by then considered the distinguished elder statesman of 
commercial art, an historic figure, the last remaining vestige of the venera- 
ble Golden Age of Illustration. The artist’s career was now being presented 
in retrospect. 
In 1960 the Post celebrated its long association with 
Rockwell by publishing his autobiography, My Adventures as an Illustrator, 
and the hardcover edition was published by Doubleday shortly thereafter. 
Times had changed. 
Since the end of World War II, illustration itself had been in decline. 
Most of the magazines were turning to photography instead. The art 
director became the visionary, assuming far greater importance on the 
publication’s staff. In 1959 Rockwell observed the change in the role of the 
art director when he wrote, 
No longer were they [the art directors] non-entities, errand boys 
who toted the illustrations and covers from the artist to the editor 
and back again. They were art directors once again and they 
directed art. Gradually, however, they began to overdirect. They 
usurped the role of the artist. Nowadays many illustrators use the 
art director’s ideas rather than their own. And illustrators who are 
given ideas won’t do as good work; they won’t feel the pictures 
they are painting; the pictures aren’t part of themselves. .. 
. Illus- 
tration is at a low point now. Maybe it’s because so many of the 
illustrators have surrendered their own dignity and possibilities. 
During that period many magazines encountered reverses. By the late 
1950s the Saturday Evening Post itself was in its greatest financial crisis. 
When Rockwell began with the Post in 1916, George Horace Lorimer, 
an eccentric and fiercely independent gentleman, was the editor. (“It was 
his magazine and his alone,” Rockwell had said.) Lorimer showed far 
greater brilliance in running the magazine than he did in selecting his 
successor when he retired in 1936. Only because of the magazine’s intensely 
loyal readership—developed by Lorimer over the years—was the magazine 
Introduction 
« 189 

able to withstand the editorial leadership of the ultra-conservative Wesley 
Stout. After six years with Stout the magazine began to stumble badly, 
rescued by Ben Hibbs, the soft-spoken and kindly man who became editor 
in 1942. (“Easy going and quiet, but with iron in his soul,” said Rockwell.) 
Hibbs intensified the written coverage of the war, commissioned Mead 
Schaeffer to paint fourteen commemorative war covers, and published 
Rockwell’s Four Freedoms. Like several other mass-circulation magazines, 
however, the Post did not adapt with sufficient flexibility and ingenuity to 
the post-War generation. While the company was reshaping old formulas, a 
new breed of publisher was emerging, innovators with magazines that had 
more immediate appeal to the modern American reader: Harold Ross with 
The New Yorker; Henry Luce with Fortune, Time, and Life; DeWitt Wallace 
with Reader’s Digest. 
The Post was sliding. The simple folksiness did not seem relevant at a 
time when Fidel Castro was waging his revolution and the Civil Rights 
struggle made headlines. In 1961, the first year in its history that the Curtis 
Publishing Company operated at a loss, Hibbs resigned from the Post, and a 
totally revamped publication was announced with an appropriate cover by 
Norman Rockwell. The eight covers by Rockwell that followed illustrate 
the dubious course the magazine maintained for its survival. In an attempt at 
greater immediacy, the Post commissioned Rockwell to do portraits of 
international celebrities. Although these and his presidential candidates 
are excellent portraits (and Rockwell enjoyed doing them), they signaled the 
end of the Post’s eagerness to employ Rockwell for his narrative capabilities. 
His long tenure with the publication was terminated in 1963. 
It would be difficult to assess precisely to what extent leaving the Post 
affected his work. He was never short of assignments. (On the contrary, he 
had too many, and encountered difficulties keeping up with all his commis- 
sions.) Without the Post, however, Rockwell was disoriented, for no 
publication could give him the artistic freedom he had enjoyed for forty- 
seven years. The covers for the Post had represented a unique arena for 
Norman Rockwell and such an opportunity would never again be available 
to him—or to any other illustrator. Magazine covers were now more 
restricted in function, now designed to attract readers with the immediacy 
of their message. Tied to the contents of the specific issues of the maga- 
zines, these covers attracted the busy readers with an image that suggested 
urgency. The covers for the Post—and the strength of Rockwell’s contribu- 
tion to that publication—projected situations that were independent of the 
specific contents of the issue itself. The images mirrored the yearnings of 
the readership and described the magazine by reflecting a profile of its 
readers. They were self-contained images that projected the aspirations 
inherent in the American dream, and Rockwell was the greatest of these 
mythic creators. Magazines no longer reached families who lingered over 
their contents in the same way. Magazine covers now competed with one 
190 * STOCKBRIDGE 
Rockwell made this drawing of himself 
and his wife Molly for a personal Christ- 
mas card, 1967. 
Redesigning the Post Cover. Saturday Evening 
Post cover, September 16, 1961. Old Corner 
House Collection, Stockbridge, 
Massachusetts. 

On assignment for Pan American Air- 
ways, Rockwell traveled around the 
world. Throughout the last twenty years 
of his life, he traveled extensively, al- 
ways stimulated by the sights, costumes, 
and customs, and particularly by the 
people he met everywhere. 
another to win readers away from the more appealing medium of television. 
Without the Post, Rockwell now had new relationships to establish, new 
kinds of demands that could not have come easily to the seventy-year-old 
illustrator. Even so, he happily accepted assignments from Look and 
McCall’s, and took off into entirely new directions as a result. 
If the changing trends in magazine publishing disappointed him, other 
changing fashions were even more disturbing. Illustrators, regarded as 
popular heroes until World War II, had declined in influence after the 
War. By the 1950s the American cultural heroes being celebrated were the 
Abstract Expressionists. Illustrators were considered “low brow” by “high 
brow” standards. An article written by Wright Morris in the Atlantic 
Monthly was critical of Norman Rockwell for destroying the taste of the 
American people. For the first time in his career, Rockwell was placed on 
the defensive by the very medium of communication that had once exalted 
him. And it hurt. 
The shock of Mary Rockwell’s sudden death—a massive coronary that 
claimed her life during a mid-day nap in the summer of 1959—left Norman 
Rockwell griefstricken, and it was several months into 1960 before he 
experienced any release from his despair. At the persistent urging of his 
friends Rockwell made an effort to socialize, to take up outside interests. 
It was this motive that propelled him to an adult education class on 
Introduction 
* 191 

poetry at the Lenox, Massachusetts, Library. The informal discussion group 
was under the direction of Molly Punderson, an English teacher recently 
retired from Milton Academy. Until she became personally acquainted 
with Norman Rockwell, Molly Punderson had hardly known who he was. 
In fact, she had never seen the inside pages of the Saturday Evening Post, 
having developed a pattern of reading the more sophisticated periodicals, 
such as Century, Foreign Affairs, and Atlantic. Norman Rockwell? Until he 
moved to Stockbridge, she’d barely heard of him. 
The poetry class may have been therapeutic for Rockwell, but he was not 
a serious student. “Norman was such a naughty boy at those sessions,” 
Molly Rockwell recalled. “Our earnest discussions about Yeats and Eliot 
seemed to amuse him. Once, when we were interpreting the meaning of a 
poem by Robert Frost, in jest Norman offered to phone up the poet right 
then and there to ask what the poem meant. Why spend two hours talking 
about it when a phone call would settle it all?” 
Molly Punderson and Norman Rockwell were married in 1961. “We 
wanted to dance in the street,” remembered a Stockbridge neighbor. “We 
were so happy for Norman.” Arlington friends were happy, too. Mary 
Schafer said, “Molly and Norman were well matched. They looked as if 
they'd known each other all their lives. They even resembled each other in 
an odd way.” 
Molly Punderson Rockwell is an independent and resourceful woman, 
qualities Norman Rockwell admired greatly. While she was sensitive to her 
husband’s wishes, she did not neglect her own interests. After all, she'd 
been independent for sixty-four years and was not likely to change her ways 
entirely. For the first two years of their marriage, she maintained her old 
family house on Main Street. To escape tourists during the summer, 
Norman and Molly Rockwell ate dinner and breakfast and spent the night 
there until they decided to sell the house and consolidate their home in one 
location. Encouraged by Norman, she studied photography with her neigh- 
bor Walter Scott. “Considering that she had rarely picked up a camera 
before, it was remarkable how well she did with the equipment, as if she’d 
been working with it for years.” Norman Rockwell painted from photo- 
graphs she made while they traveled, using them primarily for background 
material. An old ice house on the Rockwell property was converted into a 
studio for her. Here she worked on the photography and wrote a book about 
a thrush called Willie was Different, which her husband illustrated. 
Unlike Rockwell, Molly Punderson came from a rich New England 
heritage. On the paternal side of her family, Pundersons and Mellens date 
back to pre-Revolutionary days in New Haven and Berkshire. For Norman 
Rockwell, whose own parents had moved from one boardinghouse to 
another, Molly Rockwell provided a link to a past that placed him firmly 
within a Berkshire legacy. 
Molly Rockwell gave Norman Rockwell a new lease on life. She was a 
192 * STOCKBRIDGE 
# 
Portrait Sketch of a Russian Girl. Orig- 
inal painting. Old Corner House Col- 
lection, Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
During his travels to Russia, Rockwell 
painted a number of portraits, demon- 
strating this remarkable gift for a bold, 
painterly approach he had never exhib- 
ited before. 

Springtime, Stockbridge. Original oil 
painting. Old Corner House Collection, 
Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
Riding his bicycle every day with his 
wife and friends, Rockwell became a 
familiar sight along the main roads of 
Stockbridge. 
superb traveling companion. During the last decade of his active profes- 
sional life, his assignments took them to different parts of the world, 
adventures they made with relish: to paint Nehru in India; Nasser in Egypt; 
the Peace Corps in Ethiopia; two trips to the Soviet Union; to Hollywood 
for the film “Stagecoach”; to Houston and Cape Canaveral for the launch- 
ing of the astronauts. For vacations they went to Central America, the 
Caribbean, North Africa, the Riviera; and they frequently combined these 
trips with visits to Peter Rockwell who had settled with his family in Rome 
in the fall of 1961. 
Rockwell’s new assignments gave him the opportunity to paint more 
controversial subjects, political and social themes that were of current 
importance to the American public: desegregation of the schools, the Peace 
Corps, Civil Rights, the War on Poverty, the United Nations. No doubt 
Molly Rockwell contributed greatly to his sensibility in these areas, encour- 
aging him to portray his humanitarianism in a format that would have the 
greatest impact on the American public. By contrast to these subjects, 
Rockwell also created more lyrical scenes, absent of any narrative what- 
soever: Main Street, Stockbridge; portraits of Russian peasants; spring 
flowers. Now he was working in both horizontal and vertical formats, 
leaving behind the proportions dictated by the Post covers for so many 
years. His brushstrokes were freer; his colors bolder. 
When he was in town, Rockwell continued to attend the weekly gather- 
ings of The Marching and Chowder Club, though his favorite charter 
members had either moved or passed away, and he complained to Molly 
that the new group was not as “analythical” as the earlier one, an error in 
pronunciation she found too dear to correct. Molly and Norman Rockwell 
also joined the one-hundred-year-old Monday Evening Club, a group from 
Introduction 
* 193 

Pittsfield. On alternate Mondays a member would prepare a paper on a 
subject and read it aloud to the others. Rockwell was an excellent raconteur 
but found presenting a “subject” a formidable task. Under his direction, 
Molly Rockwell wrote on such topics as plagiarism in art and education in 
Russia, subjects the group found fascinating. On the evenings when it was 
the Rockwells’ turn to entertain, dinner was ordered into the house from 
the Red Lion Inn and the group would adjourn afterwards to the studio, 
where the paper was read. 
Such socializing became more infrequent with the years. Rockwell’s age 
began to affect his pace. The town was becoming increasingly protective. It 
was not uncommon to see the elderly illustrator and his wife on their 
bicycles, riding through town and down Route 7. Accustomed to this sight, 
a driver would slow down and give the cyclists a wide berth. This was a 
measure of safety, but also a gesture of affection. “Seeing old Mr. Rockwell 
on his bike made you feel good,” remembered Ed Locke. “You’d know he 
was feeling well and you wanted him to stay that way.” 
Rockwell’s artistic powers were diminishing. Although he was still capa- 
ble of turning out a superior painting during the mid-1960s, his work was 
uneven. He began to lose the delicacy of colors, a natural condition of age. 
Bright oranges and yellows, colors that had been unnatural to him, ap- 
peared in his work. “He didn’t know they were getting garish,” Peter 
Rockwell remembered. “I think his pictures would have held up anyway if 
he had only loosened up. But he tended to work against himself when he 
got nervous, and instead he would tighten up even more. When Molly 
would get him off on vacation he’d loosen up again. His paintings from 
these trips were free and impressionistic. But when he returned to the 
studio he’d fall into his old patterns and this would make him nervous 
again.” 
His weakening faculties did not diminish his appetite for work, however. 
What had been the center of his existence continued to spur him on with as 
much force as ever. He entered his studio every morning at the same time 
and took on new assignments, creating images for Franklin Mint’s silver 
plates and commemorative medals. He created portraits of celebrities— 
Frank Sinatra, Arnold Palmer, John Wayne, Colonel Sanders—and he did 
more advertisements. Periodically he would become frustrated (or “ner- 
vous” as Peter Rockwell has described it) and would break away from the 
studio, taking a swiftly arranged trip with Molly. 
On one trip to Holland Rockwell caught a cold and went to see a doctor. 
He was advised by the doctor to give up smoking his beloved pipe. 
Obediently, Rockwell threw away the pipe and stuck to the new regimen 
for about two weeks, suffering a great deal more from not smoking than he 
had from the cold. After returning to Stockbridge Rockwell consulted his 
physician, Dr. Paddock, who reassured his patient that it was acceptable for 
a man in his seventies to continue smoking his pipe. Rockwell was delighted, 
194 * STOCKBRIDGE 

Happy Birthday. Bicentennial illustration. 
© Billboard Publications, Inc. 
Courtesy American Artist magazine. 
Rockwell struggled with his painting for 
American Artist’s bicentennial issue, never 
altogether satisfied with the results. It 
was the artist’s final magazine cover. 
returning immediately to his pipe and his Edgeworth Executive Mixture. 
The late 1960s brought a surge of renewed public interest in Rockwell, 
overshadowing any lingering fears the artist may have had of becoming a 
has-been. In 1969 Danenberg Galleries mounted the first solo exhibition 
of Rockwell’s work. About fifty canvases were displayed in this fashionable 
New York gallery, a tribute to Rockwell’s eminence as an illustrator whose 
original painting ranked with that of many of the most sought-after artists 
of the day. 
Harry N. Abrams—the publisher of fine art books—also took Rockwell’s 
work seriously by publishing the first major monograph on the illustrator in 
1970. With text written by a museum director—Thomas Buechner—the 
book placed Rockwell within an historical context normally reserved for 
easel painters of the highest order. If Norman Rockwell was beloved until 
then, his stature as an artist rose to even greater heights with the publication 
of this handsomely produced book. 
Norman Rockwell became a greater celebrity in the last years of his life 
than he had been during his sixty active years as an illustrator. Radio and 
television appearances were numerous. Museum exhibitions were held 
throughout the country: at the Museum of the Arts in Fort Lauderdale, at 
the Brooklyn Museum, at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington, 
D.C., followed by traveling exhibitions in San Antonio, San Francisco, 
Oklahoma City, Indianapolis, Omaha, Seattle, and Philadelphia. Rockwell 
signed limited edition prints, created medals, and autographed books. The 
Old Corner House in Stockbridge displayed a permanent collection of 
Rockwell’s most important works. In 1973 New Rochelle proudly staged a 
Norman Rockwell Day, a celebration that included renaming one of its 
streets Norman Rockwell Boulevard. That same year a documentary film 
was made on Rockwell, and a year later another film. In 1976 Stockbridge 
honored the illustrator with its own Norman Rockwell Day. A parade, 
floats, balloons, and music were all performed before the eighty-two-year- 
old illustrator who sat above the crowded streets on the reviewing stand. 
These honors helped to offset Rockwell’s frustrations with his work. 
Physically he was no longer able to create on canvas the images that still 
were alive in his imagination. Two bicycle accidents in 1974—the first at 
Little Dix in the Caribbean, the second in Stockbridge—had accelerated his 
physical deterioration, and work was increasingly difficult for him. A cover 
for American Artist in 1976—his last magazine cover—did not altogether 
meet his personal standards of excellence, and many other canvases re- 
mained unfinished because they failed to measure up under his scrutiny. 
Even when he was no longer able to work at all, he made regular visits to 
his studio. It would be impossible to know what thoughts must have traveled 
through his mind as he sat silently in his chair, alone in the soft fading 
north light. His studio was his sanctuary to the end. When he died in 1978, 
an unfinished painting remained on his easel. 
Introduction * 195 

Pp 
atients and staff at the Austen Riggs Foundation, the 
psychiatric treatment facility in Stockbridge, pro- 
vided a good source for Norman Rockwell’s photographers 
and models. During the planning stages of Marriage 
License in the late winter of 1954, Rockwell asked a Riggs 
nurse to pose. She was unavailable, but suggested her 
sister Joan for the part. Sight unseen, Rockwell was 
pleased with this recommendation because Joan was 
about to be married and using a genuine couple for 
Marriage License appealed to him. He interviewed the 
young woman in his studio over the meat market and 
asked her to bring her fiancé, Moe, to him. “Knowing 
Moe as I do now,” Joan Mahoney said recently, “I know 
he’d never have gone to be ‘looked over’ by some 
stranger. He must really have been in love with me then 
to do it!” Finding the pair ideal for his painting, 
Rockwell instructed them how to prepare for the photog- 
raphy session. Moe was to wear wing-tipped shoes and a 
pale blue (not white) shirt. Rockwell asked Joan to 
lighten her hair and to wear a bright yellow summer dress 
with puff sleeves. Finding a summer dress in the middle 
of the winter was not easy, particularly one so specific, 
and a dressmaker finally was called in to make it. By the 
time the Mahoneys posed for Marriage License, Rockwell 
had begun to consolidate his methods of assembling 
196 « STOCKBRIDGE 
reference material for his paintings. He photographed all 
three models at the same time and in the actual location 
of Stockbridge’s town clerk’s office. The models worked 
less than an hour, which was fortunate for Joan who was 
coming down with the flu and was chilly posing in a 
cotton dress in the middle of the winter. Rockwell 
instructed Moe Mahoney to squeeze his fiancée tightly 
(“Like you're in love with her,” he directed), and she 
stretched onto her tiptoes as far as she could. While Bill 
Scovill photographed the two of them, Jason Braman, a 
shopkeeper who posed for the town clerk, waited his 
turn. Having lost his wife only recently, he was still 
feeling sad, and his son and daughter-in-law felt posing 
for Rockwell might cheer him up a bit. As he sat waiting 
his turn, he fell into this melancholy position and for the 
painting Rockwell eventually selected this accidental 
pose over the others. 
Rockwell arrived at the initial figures almost immedi- 
ately, but the color sketch shows the changes he made in 
the room’s interior: he replaced the filing cabinets with a 
pot-bellied stove and made changes on the door. After the 
Mahoneys were married that May, Rockwell presented 
them with this oil sketch as a wedding gift, a charac- 
teristic gesture for the artist who never failed to 
demonstrate his gratitude toward his models. 
@ 

Marriage License. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, June 11, 1955. Old Corner House Collection, 
Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
Moe and Joan Mahoney * 197 

fter posing his friend David Loveless for the soda 
jerk in After the Prom, Norman Rockwell changed 
his mind. The position of the arms was acceptable, but 
Rockwell was looking for a different facial expression. So 
he retained Loveless’ arms and replaced the face with 
that of his assistant Louie Lamone. (Lamone posed for 
the figure at the left as well.) Artistically, After the Prom 
is a curious combination of two Rockwell extremes: the 
painting technique and subdued colors he adopted in 
later years were in direct contrast to the element of 
caricature pervasive in so much of his earlier work. 
Rockwell himself was disappointed with the results. To 
overcome what he perceived as a monotony of weak 
chins, he concealed that part of the face on the left-hand 
figure and used the girl’s fingers to deemphasize the chin 
on the soda jerk. But he was annoyed at himself because 
he “was overcome by an irresistible impulse to .carica- 
ture,” as he confessed later. Rockwell varied the texture 
here by mixing gravel with the pigment for effect, an 
experiment that backfired: the paint surface eventually 
crackled. @ 
198 * STOCKBRIDGE 

Lo 
G We 
aa 
> TBE | 
nn 
1% 
a 
nh 
SNUB 
DP Nac UA 
Louie Lamone 
* 199 

he Campbells lived directly across the street from 
the Rockwells’ first home in Stockbridge. Betsy, 
one of the four Campbell daughters, was a favorite of the 
neighbors, and as a youngster she frequently wandered 
over to pass the afternoon with Mary Rockwell. Riding 
down the street on a tricycle one day, Betsy Campbell 
was pursued by a dog yapping at her heels. Frightened, 
she lost her balance and took a nasty spill. Norman 
Rockwell, who happened to witness the accident, rushed 
to pick her up, brushed her off, and said reassuringly, 
“Don’t worry about that. We'll fix it up right away.” 
Holding her in his lap, he drew her a series of cartoons of 
a little girl riding a tricycle and being pursued by a dog. 
In the final picture the little girl is seen on the ground, 
her face licked all over by the dog, with a caption below 
saying, “You see, all he wanted to do was give you a kiss 
anyway.” In recounting this event, Dr. Campbell cites 
this as typical of Rockwell’s kindness, a simple gesture 
performed with love. 
For the Post cover, the girl on the right, Anne 
Morgan, was selected because she was actually missing 
her front teeth. The illustrator asked Betsy Campbell to 
pose for the middle figure. Sewn by her mother, the plaid 
skirt Betsy wore was so charming that a letter to the Post 
from a reader in New York inquired about buying a half 
dozen of them. 
@ 
200 * STOCKBRIDGE 

Siw 
> * 
The Check-Up. Saturday Evening Post cover, September 7, 1957. 
Betsy Campbell * 201 

f Dr. Russell was the beloved family doctor in Arling- 
ton, Dr. Campbell could be considered Russell’s coun- 
terpart in Stockbridge. Rockwell altered the interior of 
Dr. Campbell’s office slightly, shifting the location of the 
furniture from one wall to another, but essentially main- 
taining the same elements in the room. In order to avoid 
taking too much of Dr. Campbell’s time for posing, 
Rockwell had Louie Lamone pose for the body, then 
substituted the doctor’s head at a later stage. Not so with 
the young man, however. Ed Locke was only about seven 
years old when he posed for this cover, and Rockwell 
* 
oes 
- 
6) 
= 
oe 
F. Babbott. 
Doctor's Office. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, March 15, 1958. Collection Dr. and Mrs. Edward 
was so easy-going that the boy posed without shame, 
altogether unprepared for the effect it would have on 
his future reputation among his peers. After the cover 
appeared, his chums teased him mercilessly about the pose, 
and for years he heard that he’d sold his body for $5.00. 
Other children in Stockbridge could look back on 
their modeling career with greater pride than Ed Locke 
might feel, however. Hank Bergmans, the child posing 
in the Boy Scout calendar, Can’t Wait!, was thrilled when 
his picture was displayed everywhere. “It made me feel 
terrific,” Bergmans remembered. @ 

unc aro ern 
e 
URL OO 
| 
Can't Wait! Original oil painting for Boy Scout poster-calendar. © 1972 Brown & Bigelow, Inc., a Division of Saxon Industries, Inc. 
Collection Boy Scouts of America. 
Locke and Bergmans 
* 203 

fter posing for The Doctor’s Office, Ed Locke was 
bound to be a bit more cautious the next time 
around, avoiding any assignments that might embarrass 
him again. Fortunately, The Runaway was harmless 
enough, and he even remembers having fun the day he 
posed for it at the Howard Johnson’s in Pittsfield. There 
204 * STOCKBRIDGE 
he met Dick Clemens, a real state trooper, who was 
posing in the same picture. While the lunch counter 
scene was being prepared for photography, Clemens let 
Ed Locke sit inside his cruiser, showing him how to work 
the sirens and lights. “That was the most fun of all!” 
Locke remembered. Rockwell made several changes in 

n 
SPECIAL TODAY 
man 
va 
‘ 
FIED 
The Runaway. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, September 
Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
20, 1958 . Old Corner House Collection, 
the painting along the way, trying out many attendants 
until he found one with precisely the savvy expression he 
wanted. Rockwell had originally intended to use the 
Howard Johnson’s interior for the final painting, but 
decided on a more rural-looking lunch counter in order 
to give the idea that the child had gone some distance 
before this event took place. @ 
Locke * 205 

‘om Carey, the figure wearing black in Elect Casey, 
was the village character of Stockbridge. He was 
quite a horseman. Carey’s business was transportation. 
Not exactly the big-time kind, but every day for about 
fifty years he transported the mail from the railroad 
station to the post office in his horse and buggy or sleigh. 
For additional income he would take tourists in his 
surrey on a rather informal tour through town. He was a 
great raconteur. Knowing the pedigree of everyone in 
Stockbridge, particularly the well-to-do, he would happily 
furnish some choice bits of gossip to spice up the tour a 
206 * STOCKBRIDGE 
bit. The town still refers to the time when he met Mrs. 
Austen Fox Riggs and offered her a ride home in his 
buggy. His spirited steed took off while he was lifting the 
“mooring stone,” leaving Carey deposited by the side of 
the road. Mrs. Riggs was an excellent horsewoman, but 
Carey had put the reins where she couldn’t reach them, 
and Mrs. Riggs held on for dear life until the horse 
reached his stable on Sergeant Street, where he stopped. 
Tom Carey had many eccentricities, and everyone 
liked him, including Norman Rockwell.’ @ 

1958. Collection Saturday Evening Post. 
’ 
Elect Casey. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, November 8 
Tom Carey * 207 

ae. 
eek AO 
eh 
oy 
onete 
% 
a 
a 
a 
. 
(eam, accra 
eeth cama fe Oa rae 
ASS Cb al aig ate) GSR 
NS SR 
Peers en gehens iy At aati i 
ek 
ees 
5 
Oo 
sce 
hs 
decane 
SAS 
aE 
es 
it 
a: 
race 
PE 
CEE 
IO 
LATA, 
someorinpae 
nee 
oe 
as 
aeornamia 
AT 
Le 
Ay 
RES 
Ty 
FRA 
AR) 
EE 
OR 
RS 
ia 
ape 
a 
2 
2 
Ret 
E Be 
IE 
ER 
OER 
BP. 
eb - 
SSO 
ae 
SSE 
te 
See 
iS 
oe 
: 
a 
f 
; 
(perience, a 
eae he hpsties | he: Tape 
Se ae SRE 
td Roe 
eres 
te 
< é 
, x 
I 
4 
2 
i 
ON 
begets 
ee agen 2 Sete toh 
RE 
i a Rincon ay Beeler ant tne 
ope ir AE age 
Mh 
AR 
DE APR ae MRI 
oO 
_— 
(RR 
0 aR Sib a Sean 
aed pour ecrenone: 
at aa 
J 
as 
. 
reed 
Ferrans 
4 
sak 
‘aes nani pepe Ripiect o> chatttenaedabre 
ean 
1s; 
5 
J 
me 
Be 
to ag Be AS ty 
ao 
eR a 7 See 
oO 
cP) 
) 
Wpecctebise Gabe 
coy eigen 
ap eagerness 
aero teen 
erate: 
bk 
ee, 
4 
: 
fe 
By 
a 
Seppe pe LE Sign 
Ne eerie neem cee timate 
sees 
The Jury. Saturday Evening Post cover 
208 * STOCKBRIDGE 

B 
y the mid-1950s, Norman Rockwell had succeeded in 
simplifying his methods of developing a composi- 
tion. Ten years before he might have photographed each 
of the eleven figures here individually, in his studio, 
combining them as a group with the interior in a 
composite drawing. Instead, he directed the scene with 
the eleven figures in place and on location. For the 
session, Rockwell asked his friend Oliver Kempton to 
gather some men in Stockbridge to pose for the jury, and 
in a single session Rockwell resolved the entire composi- 
tion, adding the twelfth juror at the right and substitut- 
ing himself for one of the standing figures. The members 
of the group include, from left to right: David Loveless, 
Norman Rockwell, Barbara Brooks, Louie Lamone (Rock- 
well’s Man Friday), Byrne Bauer, Bill Obanheim, Ed 
Sullivan, Bob Williams, Bob Brooks (Barbara’s husband), 
Oliver Kempton, Ken Hall, and Crandall. @ 

he Family Tree was the subject of frequent discus- 
sions between two generations of Rockwells. Peter 
Rockwell and his wife Cynthia urged Norman Rockwell 
to put a black man or woman at the bottom of the tree. 
The older Rockwell, seeing the validity of the idea, 
turned it around in his mind, but eventually decided the 
Post audience would not go for anything more provoca- 
tive in the family than an Indian squaw and a swarthy 
pirate. “He was not a moralist,” insisted Peter Rockwell. 
“He wanted to please his audience, not challenge it.” 
The family resemblance in the tree is not accidental. A 
single model, Frank Dolson, was used for all the men 
and even for one of the women in the tree. “He’s got a 
good face,” Norman Rockwell wrote in his chronicle 
of the painting, “strong jaw, mouth, nose (the broad bridge 
is a characteristic which will carry through from a 
pirate 
to the modern man very nicely—noticeable but not 
obtrusive, so that the pirate’s descendants will bear a 
family resemblance to each other, but won’t look exactly 
alike); heavy eyebrows.” 
Posing for Rockwell, Frank Dolson changed his facial 
expression to suit the various roles, a matter of purely 
subjective interpretation: “Look like a pirate. Now look 
like a rancher. Now look like a preacher’s wife,” Rock- 
well commanded as Clem Kalischer recorded the subtle 
differences with his camera. Any Rockwells in the tree?, 
one might ask. Exactly two: daughter-in-law Gail (Tom 
Rockwell’s wife) is the southern belle, and the illustra- 
tor elected himself to portray the preacher. @ 
210 * STOCKBRIDGE 

eas 
% 
POE ee 
a 
eee 
ace 
Jae 
ae 
A 
A 
ees NS 
E 
a 
i 
Family Tree. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, October 24, 1959. Old Corner House Collection, 
Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
Frank Dolson * 211 

ABOVE AND opposite: Civil Rights Sketches. Originals for Look magazine, June 29, 1965. Old Corner House Collection, Stockbridge, 
Massachusetts. 
N orman Rockwell’s work took a decidedly more 
political turn during the 1960s, a far cry from his 
reluctance to put a black face at the bottom of the Family 
Tree only a few years before. His shift had less to do with 
his personal politics—he had always been a liberal— 
than it did with the fact that he began to express his 
political ideas in his illustrations. Several factors influ- 
enced this development. The 1960s witnessed events 
that produced major upheavals—the civil rights move- 
ment, the Cuba missile crisis, John F. Kennedy’s 
assassination—generating widespread public reaction. 
And the magazines reaching this public responded in 
kind. With the demise of the Post, Rockwell found 
himself engaged with other publications that encouraged 
him to depict controversial subjects. Look magazine, in 
particular, published several of these subjects by Rock- 
well. The illustrator’s eagerness to give vent to his 
convictions was supported—indeed encouraged—by his 
new wife, Molly. These illustrations brought Rockwell 
into a new arena, and he thrived on it.@ 
ovERLEAF: The Problem We All Live With. Original oil painting for Look magazine, January 14, 1964. Old Corner House Collection, 
Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
he seventy-year-old Norman Rockwell, renowned 
for his innocent domestic scenes, managed once 
again to astonish his audience. The sheer bravura of this 
composition is evidence of his mastery: painting on an 
enormous canvas, Rockwell cropped four of the five 
bodies in order to focus on the smallest figure in the 
painting, an artistic choice that would be disastrous in 
the hands of a less capable artist. The apparent simplicity 
of the composition is also deceptive. The gaping space 
212 * STOCKBRIDGE 
between the girl and the men marching behind her—a 
space that represents about two-fifths of the entire 
canvas—would have been deadly were it not for Rock- 
well’s skillful treatment of the tomato-stained concrete 
wall. Rockwell may have been an elderly artist when he 
undertook this scene in the tranquillity of his Stock- 
bridge studio, but he was still taking the kind of risks 
even painters far younger would never attempt.@ 

Models for Freedom * 213 

1 
od 
$ 
t 
r 
D 
A 
; 
F 
ri 
5 
. 
r 
on 
S 
5 
; 
‘ 
i 
4 
AR 
e 
ae 
/ 
, 
: 
‘ 
e 
iH 
€ 
| 
4 
t 
iM 
b 
« 
3 
: 
‘4 
, 
y 
> 
. 
i 
S 
K 
b 
it 
< 
c 
J 
{ 
ys 
, 
| 
= 
. 
L: 
f 
\ 
e 
i 
5 
aS 
i 
a 
aI 
| 
fee 
| 
3 
i 

o 
— 


Norman Rockwell 
POW TRAIT OF THE ARTIST 


The portrait of the artist as seen 
through the lens of a camera was a 
subject that appealed to Rockwell. 
Here Barry Goldwater photographs 
the artist as the artist depicts 
Barry Goldwater. 
orman Rockwell appears in many of his own paintings. As a 
secondary figure, he frequently made an Alfred Hitchcock-like 
cameo appearance, eyes twinkling out from a lower corner of a 
painting, a profile in a crowd, an incidental head in a family 
tree. Designed for his own entertainment, these casual appearances were 
unexpected details that exemplified Rockwell’s wry humor. So basic to his 
illustration, his humor was equally characteristic in his demeanor: a ten- 
dency to play the joke on himself, at his own expense, free of cruelty or 
sarcasm. “He took his work seriously,” said Don Spaulding, “but he didn’t 
take himself seriously.” 
Rockwell’s talent for poking fun at himself was acquired during boyhood, 
when he was an awkward, knock-kneed adolescent who wore corrective 
shoes and round spectacles that earned him the name Moonface or Mooney. 
Turning the laughter inward reduced the sting of humiliation; his light- 
hearted antics became known by his family as “Norman’s stunts.” Laughter 
was, for Rockwell, a means of conveying sympathy for the poignant experi- 
ences shared by even the most arrogant of souls, a gentle reminder that 
we're all human. 
Still more revealing were his self-portraits in which he portrayed himself 
at the easel, his back to the viewer, a man whose essence was realized 
through images privately conceived and rendered. Yet through this essentially 
solitary process, Norman Rockwell reached millions of Americans, an audi- 
ence that perceived in these images a simple truth expressed without pretense. 
From his adolescent days when he felt like “a lump, a long skinny nothing,” 
until he worked at the easel from a wheelchair, Norman Rockwell satisfied 
his deepest needs and yearnings through his art. His work brought him love, 
and being loved counted most of all. 
Rockwell’s work and character were consistent. The humor and gentle- 
ness, the sentiment and modesty so evident in his paintings were the very 
qualities he presented to those he encountered every day. “If something 
went wrong,” said Louie Lamone, “he always blamed himself, not the other 
guy. Once I made a terrible mistake about something and all Norman said 
was, ‘I guess you’re human after all,’ not angry with me for having fouled up 
with his business.” Walter Scott observed a similar quality in Rockwell: 
“Norman was incapable of complaining about anything.” “T never saw him 
Introduction * 219 

angry,” said Buddy Edgerton. He was thoughtful about small details and his 
friends never forgot it. On his trips abroad Rockwell always remembered to 
bring back something to his friends. If Louie Lamone happened to arrive in 
the studio early in the morning, Rockwell often thought to bring him a cup 
of coffee, “even before he had his own breakfast. He didn’t care who you 
were. He would never talk down or make me feel as if I weren’t his equal.” 
“He was the kindest man I ever knew,” said Chris Schafer. 
Throughout his life, Norman Rockwell played to his audience like an 
actor. Keenly sensitive to his public, Rockwell depicted attitudes that 
might not conform to his own views but would touch his public. His 
opinions could be quite separate—though not in contradiction—from 
those expressed in his paintings. Rockwell’s mission, as he saw it, was to be 
in harmony with his public, not to challenge popular convictions. He was 
not a moralist, and he didn’t pretend to be: “I have always wanted every- 
body to like my work. I could never be satisfied with just the approval of the 
critics (and, boy, I’ve certainly had to be satisfied without it) or a small 
group of kindred souls. So I have painted pictures that didn’t disturb 
anybody, that I knew everyone would understand and like. (Everybody who 
comes into my studio from the grocery boy to the vice president of an 
advertising agency has to comment on the picture I’m painting and I take 
all comments to heart. 
)” 
Only in later years, partly in response to pressures from his family and 
partly because the post-War audience would accept it, did he portray more 
controversial issues in his paintings. Rockwell was more progressive in his 
politics that his public might have assumed. He wanted to paint a black Boy 
Scout, for example, long before such subjects were acceptable to the 
general public. Likewise, his sense of fairness enabled him to paint portraits 
of all the presidential candidates in a given election, regardless of his own 
preferences. 
This is not to say that Rockwell was inauthentic in his work. “He 
believed in what he painted. That’s why his work is so good,” said Mead 
Schaeffer. No imitator of Rockwell—and there have been many—has been 
successful in duplicating Rockwell, simply because an artist’s work is more 
than a visual phenomenon; it is a manifestation of the inner person. 
Rockwell was genuine. Over the years he developed an outlook that 
enabled him to cope with pain. An unfortunate situation could be rendered 
tolerable—even pleasant—with a slight twist of reality. Said Rockwell, 
“Maybe as I grew up and found that the world wasn’t the perfectly pleasant 
place I had thought it to be, I unconsciously decided that, even if it wasn’t 
an ideal world, it should be so and so I painted only the ideal aspects of 
it... . If there was sadness in this created world of mine, it was a pleasant 
sadness. If there were problems, they were humorous problems.” 
Rockwell was amply rewarded for his optimism. The adulation he received 
from his public through his paintings and his loving personal relations 
220 * PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST 
Detail from The Gossips. 
Detail from The Forging Contest. 

reinforced what he painted and how he performed. He exposed few people 
to his deep inner conflicts. He always managed a cheerful greeting for a 
neighbor. Even while Mary Rockwell was ill and he was undergoing psychi- 
atric treatment himself—shattered by the sadness he felt for his wife and 
discouraged about the direction of his own work—he conveyed enthusiasm 
and high spirits to his models, to his neighbors, and to his friends. In his 
painting and in his personal relations he protected others (and himself, one 
suspects) from the harsh realities of a world that “wasn’t the perfectly 
pleasant place” it should be. He must have paid a substantial personal price 
for this kindly deception. 
Because he played to his public—and was a superb actor—he tended to 
exaggerate some of the qualities he felt his public wanted to see in him. His 
Will Rogers manner was not a false persona, by any means, but he was a 
good deal more cosmopolitan than his public demeanor suggested. “Nor- 
man was no hayseed,” said George Hughes. Peter Rockwell agreed. “In 
public he was conscious that he was a famous person and to some extent he 
performed accordingly. He was actually a serious and intelligent thinker, 
but played that down because he felt his audience wanted him to be more 
folksy.” 
He was conscious of his fame and he thrived on it. Even on this subject, 
however, he did not overlook the joke on himself. Characteristically, he 
made fun of his susceptibility to vanity. Peter Rockwell recalled his father’s 
return from a second trip to Moscow. The illustrator confessed that the trip 
had been a 
bit trying because no one in the city seemed to recognize him. 
Walking down a street in Moscow on the third day of their visit, Molly and 
Norman Rockwell saw a familiar flash of recognition come over the face of 
a gentleman approaching them. Prepared for the gratifying greeting ahead, 
Rockwell extended his hand enthusiastically. The man was thrilled, in- 
deed: “Why, you must be Molly Punderson’s husband,” he exclaimed, 
looking into Norman Rockwell’s disappointed eyes. So much for interna- 
tional fame. 
Rockwell was more flattered when he was talking with Russians and was 
informed that an entire floor at the Hermitage had been devoted to a 
permanent display of his paintings. Later he discovered they had confused 
his name with that of Rockwell Kent, the American painter who was 
persona non grata in the United States because he had made no secret of his 
admiration for the Soviets at a time when such affection was most unpopu- 
lar in America. But Norman Rockwell? Never heard of him. 
In America such moments of anonymity were rare, of course. In later 
years, when his face was as familiar as the Saturday Evening Post itself, 
Rockwell was pursued by fans who pleaded for a handshake, an autograph, a 
memento to take home to the family. Rockwell was an obliging celebrity. 
He shook hands and autographed every piece of paper held before him, 
always with a smile and a personal acknowledgment. During the day a 
a 
—_ 
Detail from University Club. 
Introduction * 221 

neighbor could feel free to leave a book on the kitchen table for him to sign. 
The next day the neigbor would return and the signed book would be 
waiting where it had been left. When Rockwell was very advanced in years, 
no longer able to paint, he signed dozens of prints every evening. He 
enjoyed doing it. 
Jarvis Rockwell remembered being with his aged father one day when the 
sound of children’s voices outside brought Rockwell out of the doldrums. 
“He came to life when he saw the kids. He joked with them, signed 
autographs, and told a story. After they left, Pop withdrew again into his 
dark mood, like an animal in a cave. The children made him feel like his 
old self for a moment. He loved his public.” 
Within Rockwell’s character mingled an odd mixture of supreme self- 
confidence with fretful feelings of inadequacy. His self-assurance enabled 
him to attack the most ambitious painting problems—such as Shuffleton’s 
Barbershop and Saying Grace, two very complex compositions—setting 
standards of excellence that demanded he summon all his artistic resources. 
Asa student, Don Spaulding was astonished at Rockwell’s daring at the easel. 
Rockwell was not embarrassed to take credit for his achievements either. 
His signature—where it was placed and how it was indicated—was impor- 
tant to him, one of the first decisions he made. Walter Scott remembers 
Rockwell’s blank canvas. Before any of the painting was laid in, the canvas 
was set in a frame and the signature already indicated. Rockwell felt the 
signature should be clear and obvious to the viewer, because he considered 
the artist’s name an important aspect of an illustration. He placed his name 
carefully—in block letters, cursive writing, or initials—to suit the compo- 
sition, easily located, but not intrusive. 
“Rockwell presented his work in the best possible way. You had to take it 
seriously,” observed Don Spaulding, “by the size he painted his pictures 
and by the way he framed them. So many artists shipped their paintings 
down to the Post tacked to a shabby mat board. Norman was never so 
casual. All his pictures were delivered by hand. As large as they were, they 
came framed beautifully, like important paintings from The Metropolitan 
Museum of Art.” 
This attention to the signature and to the presentation suggests a man 
who felt his work was worthy. By contrast he could be indecisive. He asked 
advice over and over. (“Pop always needed everyone’s opinion on every 
subject that mattered to him,” said Jarvis Rockwell.) Getting many opin- 
ions on a subject of personal or professional importance was his method of 
thinking through a problem. To consider all points of view was a painstak- 
ing process that inevitably led to a decision. But he never relaxed. Rock- 
well was fully aware that to remain at the top he had to perform over and 
over again. In spite of repeated successes, he never altogether lost his fear 
of falling out of favor. When he thought the Post was going out of business 
in 1942, he felt a mixture of sorrow and relief. “By 1942 I had been painting 
222 * PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST 

Beyond the Easel. Original oil painting. 
©1969 Brown & Bigelow, Inc., a Divi- 
sion of Saxon Industries, Inc. Collec- 
tion Boy Scouts of America. 
Post covers for twenty-six years. It had been a constant challenge. If a cover 
was unpopular, I felt my work was sagging and, becoming scared, thought, 
I'll be dropped from the Post. Every new illustrator had been a threat. 
Perhaps he’ll be better than I, I’d thought, and force me off the Post. So for 
twenty-six years I’d had to prove myself all over again with each cover | 
did.” The Post did not fold in 1942, and Rockwell continued to work with 
the same apprehension as he had for the previous twenty-six years. 
No doubt Rockwell’s work managed to stay fresh for nearly six decades 
because he continually re-evaluated his efforts. “I know I’m not satisfied 
with my work,” he said. “At times it seems shallow, incomplete. But that 
keeps me working. If 1 thought I was perfect or even close to it, I’d probably 
pawn my brushes and quit.” He worried that he was stagnating, that he was 
losing his freshness, and he continually sought methods of re-energizing his 
approach. “Now and again the pressure builds up and I begin to worry about 
being old fashioned, outside the mainstream of art in our age,” Rockwell 
recalled. “Most times I rid myself of this feeling by experimenting with new 
techniques. But every so often I try a whole new approach.” In the early 
1930s he experimented with Dynamic Symmetry, then fashionable, and 
went to study in Paris. Mary Rockwell’s letters written from Paris (see 
Appendix) verify the depth of his artistic struggle during this period in 
Rockwell’s life. Jarvis Rockwell remembered his father, much later in his 
career, studying two reproductions placed at the foot of his bed—one 
by the fifteenth-century painter Piero della Francesca and the other by the 
Abstract Expressionist Willem de Kooning. Rockwell admired the former 
but struggled with the thought that he might have missed some important 
lesson in the modern painter. 
This fear of falling behind might lead him to attack a subject more 
familiar to his younger colleagues at the Post—Stevan Dohanos, John 
Falter, or George Hughes—a contemporary theme, such as television or 
suburban living, perhaps. The results were unconvincing. (“A disaster,” 
Rockwell said about his new approaches. “I have enough sense to know | 
can’t do anything but my own kind of work.”) 
The single artistic pursuit that haunted him for years was “the big 
picture,” a pictorial statement of universal importance. He came close to 
achieving this goal with two of his Four Freedoms. (Rockwell was relatively 
satisfied with Freedom of Worship and Freedom of Speech, whereas “neither of 
the other two,” he said, “has any wallop.”) The hope of painting “the big 
picture” never altogether left him, and he felt compelled to try it over and 
over. None of his attempts was totally effective. He started—and never 
finished—a painting on the United Nations; he followed with The Golden 
Rule as a Post cover and The Right To Know as an illustration for Look. His 
paintings of the Peace Corps, the War on Poverty, and the team of Apollo 11 
were additional attempts. “By dropping his story telling, he dropped one 
of his best elements,” Peter Rockwell explained. Rockwell was a vulnerable 
Introduction 
* 223 

man, given to sentiment and easily moved by simple gestures of feeling. 
Surrendering to this tendency meant creating paintings that were too 
sentimental, a danger he fought in every painting. At its best, this quality 
produced some of his finest work. Paintings such as Saying Grace and 
Breaking Home Ties succeeded so well because they were honest responses to 
deeply felt experiences. If he failed with others, he did so because he 
became too sentimental. 
Above all, it was Rockwell’s profound humanism that distinguished him. 
He was to his art what his favorite writers were to their novels: Dickens, 
Tolstoy, Mark Twain, and Thackeray. Like them, Rockwell delighted in 
the idiosyncrasy, individuality, and eccentricity of those he observed around 
him. Like them, he placed his individuals within a universal context, 
casting his characters in an extraordinary pageant of familiar life experi- 
ences. This vast parade of personalities and situations made life worth 
living for him. He observed the human condition and celebrated it with a 
loving brush. In the end, by sharing his affection for humanity, Norman 
Rockwell gave as much love to his people as he received. 
Di 
a 
en 
een 
224 * PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST 
his is as serious a self-portrait as Pop could do,” 
observed Peter Rockwell. As an appraisal of the 
portrait, this statement expresses much about the artist 
himself. The Triple Self-Portrait is a summation of Rock- 
well as an artist. This is not simply a collection of 
familiar furniture surrounding him. The details here 
represent the artist’s history, they document his personal 
and professional tastes: a glass of Coke, a dog-eared art 
book, a metal trash bucket that protects a smoldering 
match from spreading into flame, the signature on a 
nearly blank canvas, and the spectrum of painters who 
inspired him throughout his life—Albrecht Diirer, Rem- 
brandt, Pablo Picasso, Vincent Van Gogh. Typically, 
each of these details has a descriptive purpose, as well as 
a function in the design structure of the painting. Not 
one detail has been carelessly selected or placed in the 
composition. Given his precision—his aversion to am- 
bivalent meaning in his narrative work—it is impossible 
to overlook the suggestive handling of the face itself. 
Why are his eyes totally concealed by the eyeglasses in 
the reflection and featured so prominently on the can- 
vas? Was he suggesting that he was one man in the 
mirror and another in his art? Rockwell left open the 
possibility that he was simply playing games in the 
painting, a characteristic trait, but this self-portrayal 
might also have been his psychological interpretation of 
the man behind the easel as well. 
@ 

a 
eeE 
AN 
ISS 
Ee RA ON as 
i SPT ee 
fA 
< 
7 
* 
Triple Self-Portrait. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post cover, February 13, 1960. Old Corner House Collection, 
Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
x 
¥ 
Norman Rockwell * 225 

n later years Rockwell tended to go farther afield for 
his subjects. He traveled more and was less intimately 
connected to the specific people in his pictures. He 
brought his photographer to the University Club in New 
York City for this cover and painted his models from a 
distant view. Peter Rockwell remembers how much fun 
his father had painting the sailor, and Rockwell himself 
remarked, “The peculiar way a sailor stands when talking 
to a girl—slouched above her, left leg straight, hip out, 
right leg bent at knee, right arm propped on wall behind 
her head—has always fascinated me.” The girl receiving 
all the attention was a movie starlet at the time, a young 
actress named Gen Melia. Just for fun, of course, Rock- 
well inserted himself in the lower left corner and added 
Gail, his son Tom’s wife, as well. 
@ 
226 * PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST 

= 
cane 
ae! 
(| i 
Be 
Norman Rockwell * 227 

LD uring the war, the nearest ration board to Arlington 
was in Manchester, Vermont, which explains why 
Rockwell selected most of his models for the painting 
from that town. (Only Jessie Harrington, the man stand- 
ing at the table, was living in Arlington at the time. ) It 
was like Rockwell to place himself in a painting to 
demonstrate his feeling of membership in a community. 
He included himself in The Gossips in order not to offend 
his neighbors. After all, he was no different from them. 
Here he is simply the next in line, waiting to see his local 
ration board during the war. He did not perceive himself 
as special or exceptional. Even achieving the status of a 
celebrity did not spoil him. His sense of humanity 
derived from his authentic connection to those around 
him. To alter that bond would have destroyed the 
lifeblood of the artist. 
@ 
228 * PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST 
a 
Ration Boa 
NORMAN ROCKWELL —
VISITS A 
| a
CUVTUNG wats 
ons thee based, sand the henagmuent Vermont sam, 
te 
x ) pee trated every otter nak and crantsy in the Towa of 
M 
SS 
cersenthy made its way ints « oettain quiet room ehere sit 
ad rave wotrust sat around a hong, plain tabhe, Then, inthe flan 
wate The «ong af’ binds, the feagrano of fewer, aud 
Nagemate 
4 
Ve fast of these three. at developed, wanted samethiag: “The 
Teard, mever having hed @ visitor whe dithit, eviieed my seipeiee 
Hockwetl’s caw, however, the ceskteratsion wast rea of the thingie 
the test af us try to wheedle cot of oar tating bewurds 
— 
What PE weaht fhe,” sand Ationina’s favorite atid, “is the peti 
wf potitetinng paetanes of all woos bowie meustoers.” 
Cewild it have eon at ghow of paowsmre, Uke stinring: ef cine 
Sig 
Mappresesd vanity, that comet tmanentarily ty illamine the seve | 
After all, New Englanders are lioran, 
And when Hockwell paiety yam 
the work sews you. 
At any rate, the bewnd yenbets comeultedt 
tet a 
wither, reached a decision, aid ix turks modkted te the artint 
a 
«But make ws hook woud, few 
In a flash, Rockwell sew his advantage. 
Livieg te Net Pinglint 
sharpens a man, brings oot the tracker in him. 
a 
Hf Pada” he Tevgrivinest, 
sat you give nee a Berd?” 
: 
Seven pairs of eyes converged ape the conthtent, hatl-seatling © 
a 
Living it New Baugh helps, of qoune, beat it doesnt pet & 
the sateen class with pene whe were born they, 
i 
Nag, but if yous diet Why salah, “welt take away yaa § wand 
In w Bash, Nockwell took a tewk seat (the same cme you ee 
secupying a few inches to the right of where yoor eyes ane tm) ai 
his favorite: pipe inv bis nieiath, spout all diny 
a choy of seniabeiane 
stewers 
watching Ammetics parade by 
; 
Th wana portaite that has been cnt still i ida 
on 
all 
emer the bj 
parade which alitlors freae all other parades 
tr this 
every bewty: 
: 
Pe 
Vhkat as why it interested Rockwall, 
1t isaac intemal part cl thee Aner 
fran scone 
mow. 
There was pe sack thing afew yours age, anid Wie 
waa Peover Sra cust etiiow baarcta w iil dintaaridd ated thiks nique pouraibe ¥ 
fiever? Bat no matter, 
far Hoekwell has necordind the sense 
ihe 
Peart at work aint tickew 
the importunete citizens whe apprat hefete 
That reord, repratucet here, 
is the newest chapter ia Eek whl 
has heen in the making fir twouty night comeeutine: years, 
The te 
doight well be entitled Nocrnan Rockwell's History of the 
tS 8. Team 
Taine he tent, 
arnt neests mecie 
To deaf Urea its paages is te keer \ 
fea as was 
Bow its poopie Reked and acted, bow (hey recent 
am 
t 
mourned and grinned 
between the sears 2415 aed 1968. 
Uther chopters will be ached fram tite to this 
Misny of them, 
Nowet, 
ba feet, 
we 
wohl 
Hike 
te 
see 
thean 
post keep ao appenie 
fenbedinatedy 
aunt ae the Poot 
- Five Hell 

: 
Norman Rockwell Visits a Ration Board. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post series, July 15, 1944. 
Norman Rockwell 
* 229 

Kees. membership in the publishing community 
no doubt inspired him to include himself in the 
offices of the country editor. The newspaper office was 
actually located in the midwest, but the atmosphere of 
the place was probably no different from that in any 
other town, and Rockwell’s presence hardly seems to 
matter. He was unlikely to impose himself on a new 
situation anyway, and would certainly not have stolen 
the thunder from his own illustration. @ 
230; + PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST 

ie 
Mont 
Cou 
Appe 
Ngai 
eo 
ISL 
EVE 
3 
—— 
Visit to a Country Editor. Original oil painting for a Saturday Evening Post series, May 25, 1946. 
OVERLEAF: 
hile he was painting other luminaries of the 
1960s for Saturday People—Ringo Starr, Jonathan 
Winters, Prince Philip, Leonard Bernstein—Norman 
Rockwell included his wife and himself in the group. He 
was not unaware of his fame—on the contrary, he 
flourished in it—but he had not lost his modesty either. 
In the end what nourished him, what integrated the 
extremes between his private and public selves, was his 
work. Without it, life was over. @ 
Norman Rockwell * 231 

os 
I 
| aaa 
Saturday People. Original oil painting for illustration, McCall’s magazine, October, 1966. Old Corner House Collection, 
Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
232 « PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST 

"SS woerta ace 
‘Ryne 
welll 
a= 
az2au 
U 
ea 
Kp apt m, 
ua 
Norman Rockwell * 233 

Sketch for Golden Rule. 
66 
he big picture”: that’s what Norman Rockwell 
wanted to paint for years, a universal statement 
about humanity. Perhaps the idea was greater than any 
artist had a right to entertain, but he felt he had come so 
close with The Four Freedoms and was compelled to try 
again. The Golden Rule did not succeed. Nor, for that 
matter, did any other Rockwell painting come close to 
fulfilling the artist’s ambition. But The Golden Rule is a 
marvelous painting in other ways: it is a panorama of 
Rockwell’s people, a gathering of the friends and rela- 
tives he had loved through the years. 
The big picture was originally started in Arlington 
many years before as a tribute to the United Nations. It 
was an enormous undertaking. Rockwell spent five months 
producing fifty portraits for a ten-foot-long charcoal, 
then photographing and reassembling them into a com- 
position of twenty-eight heads for the finished painting. 
In addition to these assorted subjects, Rockwell intended 
to include the delegates to the Security Council at the 
United Nations, the chief representatives from the United 
States, United Kingdom, Soviet Union, and Chile. The 
first two subjects were acceptable, if somewhat forbid- 
ding, but Rockwell encountered insufferable frustrations 
in getting the Soviet Union delegate, Andrei Vishinsky, 
234 * PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST 
to pose. When Vishinsky was finally replaced with 
another delegate, leaving Rockwell to start all over, the 
artist threw up his hands and abandoned the project 
altogether. 
Rockwell recovered the charcoal drawing of the United 
Nations tribute when he prepared his cover for the 1961 
Post cover. From his file he pulled out the old photo- 
graphs he had taken of his Arlington neighbors—Rose 
Hoyt and her child, Jim McCabe, Gene Pelham, Buddy 
Edgerton—and integrated these with subjects from the 
Stockbridge area—a Japanese student from Bennington 
College, a Brazilian boy, a Chinese girl living in Pitts- 
field, an Arab from Stockbridge, a retired postmaster. 
During his recent travels around the world, Rockwell 
had acquired costumes which he used to good advantage 
in the painting. The faces and costumes changed as he 
developed the painting. Some were added, others taken 
away. The group in The Golden Rule evolved into a 
gathering of distant and intimate friends. In the upper 
right-hand corner, immediately behind Chris Schafer, 
Rockwell painted his wife Mary, who had died only 
recently. In Mary Rockwell’s arms is the grandchild— 
her first—whom she never knew. Geoffrey Rockwell was 
born less than four months after she passed away. @ 

Golden Rule. Original oil painting for 
Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
a Saturday Evening Post cover, April 1, 1961. Old Corner House Collection, 
Neighbors and Family * 235 

APPENDIX 
Excerpts from letters by Mary Rockwell to her family, Paris, 1932 
March 8: 
We rode down to the boat very peacefully in a large 
[Pierce Arrow taxi ] with our numerous bags and Jerry [six 
months old] and Raleigh [the Rockwell’s German shepherd] 
whom there was scarcely room for—not so peaceful. 
Can’t you see us—me leading the dog—Norm carrying 
Jerry—followed by the luggage ascending the fortunately 
vacant gang plank. 
Norm at last has a studio which is perfect. It is in an old 
studio building on the Avenue de Saxe... . It has a direct 
north light, grey walls and a coal stove and—piece de 
resistance—a couch and shelves in a corner all covered 
with deep wine colored velvet. 
It’s really nice and the 
woman had an easel Norm could use. He bought a table, a 
stool, put out his sketches and a clothes tree with costumes 
until it looks very homelike and exactly the place to work. 
April 11, 1932: 
And now the best thing of all that I have to tell you is 
about Norman’s work. The preliminary struggle, nearly two 
years long, has ended at last and he knows what he wants to 
do. He sent a final cable to Snyder and Black, refusing to 
do the Cocoa Cola, but letting them use his name. (He 
couldn’t do less as he had see-sawed between yes and no so 
long.) He has indefinitely postponed his Post covers. | 
personally rather doubt if he’ll do any more. 
You see this was all decided once in America, but was 
much harder to adhere to there. He got scared at the idea of 
so complete a change, worked furiously and got up four 
good Post ideas, and with those as security, sailed. I was 
sure he wouldn’t want to do them, but fortunately I kept 
still. It’s funny, I can often prophesy what will happen to 
him way ahead of time. When we got here he worked until 
a week ago on the picture he started at home, the story 
book characters marching along—only changing it and 
236 * APPENDIX 
putting them in an enchanted forest which is much better. 
He never worked so hard before, but he really loved it and 
wanted to work on it, so he was never discouraged. But a 
week ago knowing C. C. had to be in by May 15th and 
insisting he must do a Post cover first—he started one. 
Well, he worked four days and tried a brand new La Got- 
taist technique in a different kind of paint, used at least six 
canvases, got thoroughly mixed up, discouraged, upset, 
cold in the chest (better now) and so on. The reason he 
tried [a] new technique was because he couldn’t bear to do 
the same old thing and doing a Post cover meant that 
unless you changed completely. He kept worrying because 
he didn’t really like most modern things and so wasn’t going 
with the trend. Then he got a new model and took a day off 
before starting. He went to a modern gallery and then the 
Louvre and got so excited he rushed back to get. . . me, and 
we went to the modern exhibit and then spent the rest of 
the afternoon at the Louvre (which is the most thrilling 
place I think I’ve ever been). He and I spent two hours 
there before I went off to luncheon and when we came out 
the die was cast. I told the model and he called Snyder and 
Black. Today he is doing the last preliminary work before 
painting on the big picture and tomorrow he is going to 
begin the first of three days sketching around Paris. For the 
first time in his life he is going to be a free man and do every 
thing he really wants to do. 
April 25th: 
Truly, this trip is the best thing that ever happened to us. 
It has made Norman a different person. He has found the 
courage to do what he wants for six months which shows 
that after two years of struggling—and it truly was that—he 
has at last come out in the open and knows what he wants 
to do, which is experiment with all sorts of things for the 
next six months so become an artistic artist instead of a 
commercial one. Don’t fear that he will go modern. That is 

his last thought. Never. For a while that worried him; but 
as I told you the Louvre inspires him and modern galleries 
do not, so now he’s decided to be the thing that is in him to 
be—to do what he did, only in a much finer way. 
You see for two years before we were married, while he was 
going with that crowd, he was drawing on all his past reserve. 
After the divorce and our marriage he was a different person 
entirely, but his work went on being the same and all during 
the first two years we were married he was trying, blindly at 
first, to reconcile the two. Finally we got desperate—the 
pressure of people and things in New Rochelle was too 
much, though we saw them seldom; it all weighed on us 
terribly so somehow or other we found the courage to come 
over here which was the best thing we ever could have done. 
You should see us start off sketching in the morning; 
Norman in a hat with turned down brim, a pipe, a raincoat, 
sketching outfit slung over one shoulder and a stool in his 
other hand; me with a suit and the polo coat, a beret, and 
flat heeled shoes, which no Frenchman fails to gaze at—and 
how they stare here! and a well stuffed bag under my arm. . 
. 
May 9th: 
But the important thing is about Norman’s work. I last 
told you about how he had decided to experiment. That 
didn’t satisfy him for long so he and | thought and talked a 
great deal more, went to the Louvre and he decided that 
the only thing he really wanted to do was the same sort of 
thing he’d always done so we felt much better. He got 
models, made a charming charcoal layout and then some- 
thing stopped him, he couldn’t figure out what. Finally he 
realized that in taking an old Post cover subject he’d gone 
to the other extreme which really wasn’t himself any more; 
so after a good deal of agony he suddenly realized that the 
thing he wanted to do was a picture that he had planned to 
do before he came over but had gotten side tracked on. So 
he found his models and started today. I’m sure all will go 
right now. 
We have made a big decision; to move out of New 
Rochelle the minute we can find a place somewhere in 
Connecticut with some ground and a Colonial house. We 
couldn’t stand going back to New Rochelle! 
about May 20th: 
Three days ago Norman moved his studio to a small 
studio apartment. 
. 
. altogether more comfortable and prac- 
ticable. There is also a kitchen and a bedroom where he 
can store things and where his models can dress, and, the 
prize feature, a toilet. In the other studio he had to go down 
three flights to find one, which is not convenient. The 
other apartment on the floor is rented by a young art 
student, Alan Haemer... So that is awfully nice for Nor- 
man, because there is some one near him, a man, and an 
artist with whom to talk things over. Today he started his 
illustrator picture for the fourth time, and I’m quite sure the 
final time as everything seems to be straightened out now. 
June 10th: 
Now, please do not be worried about Norman. .. 
. he is 
just going through a period of transition which is necessary 
to an honest artist when he is changing the purpose or 
direction of his work. Before he had few thoughts beyond 
Post covers. Now he wants to do much finer things, but of 
the same human sort, and probably he will do some covers 
again when he gets straightened out.... He says he feels 
for the first time as if he knew what he was doing. 
... 1, though I had two strong opinions about the picture 
when I entered the room, mentioned neither of them but 
let Norman come around to them himself. You see he is so 
honest that he will always see things for himself, if you give 
him time and it is much better to do that than to force your 
opinion upon him. Having tried the right way once, | know 
I will have no trouble again. ... What I can do, however, 
is to ask leading questions, and clarify the atmosphere when 
he gets too involved, by bringing him back to the question, 
and explaining when he asks advice that he is the only one 
who can decide the question, and he has to do it by 
searching inside himself for the thing he instinctively feels. 
So I think I have discovered a good working combination. 
June 19th: 
I have one big tremendous announcement to make—no, 
not another child—but its equivalent—a picture finished. 
I’ve written you of Norman’s struggles. You see he came 
over here to learn to paint in the way that was natural to 
him now, not to repeat the old thing that was no longer 
part of him—did not express his present self. So each time 
he felt a picture was doing that, something instinctively 
honest in him made him stop doing it. This happened so 
many times that, as you can imagine he got pretty desperate 
APPENDIX *¢ 237 

in a way. So finally just a week ago he decided to do the 
illustrations for a story the Journal wanted him to do. Well, 
it was like a miracle, all at once he got hold of a technique, 
far easier and far more artistic (I mean genuinely so, good 
composition, simplicity, pattern) and yet retaining every 
bit of the character and charm that his people have always 
had, but with infinitely more real spirit and freedom about. 
He worked terribly hard on it, but it doesn’t look worked at 
all... . now he feels he has something he can develop and 
go on and on with instead of working right up against a flat 
wall all the time as he has since we have been married. So it 
has all been worth while, all the agony and struggle he has 
been through. It’s funny and nice; through it all he’s always 
had more work than he could possibly do—[the] Depres- 
sion not withstanding. ... 
To continue, the Post keeps telegraphing N. to ask how 
he is and how his work is going, which is flattering. 
July 29th: 
As I said, we shall probably go home in October as Norm 
feels he should see his mother and my longing for familiar 
things and sudden eschewal of drink and cigarettes would 
point to the fact that another member of the family is on 
the way, which I am very glad about as I am very fit... and 
especially because Norm is so tickled. ... 
I have other even better news. The day I have been 
waiting for for two years arrived yesterday and Norm came 
home with the definite knowledge and feeling that his 
problem is completely solved and that whole new worlds are 
opened to him. The Journal illustrations were the first step. 
And characteristically enough he found the solution on a 
Post cover. You know how grand his charcoal layouts have 
always been, and how more and more he has hated to spend 
two weeks finishing up in oil. Well, yesterday he finished 
more than one figure in less than a day (he used to take at 
238 * APPENDIX 
least four). With the solid background of his layout he 
washed on color and does all sorts of things, difficult to 
explain but with a result that is a thousand times more 
artistic and spirited and thrilling than anything he ever 
did.... 
It will take him perhaps five days at most to do a 
Post cover now whereas before it took two weeks time. .. 
. 
And now he feels he can do so many things that with his 
old technique he couldn’t touch. 
August 9th: 
Norm is simply getting along marvelously now. He just 
sent off two Post covers. And now, having found a different 
technique in which he feels there are possibilities, he feels 
free to experiment to his hearts content, which means he is 
really going to be an artist. . . . it is going to be perfect if the 
Post approves of his new covers... . 
Between Aug. 10th and 18th: 
Of course our present decision [to remain in Paris] rests 
on what we hear from the Post concerning the two covers 
he just sent over. I have no doubt what we’ll hear. Of 
course he has. But when we do hear favorably it means that 
he can spend five days a week making income each month 
and the rest of the time painting. 
Aug. 18th: 
The other day we decided to go back and live in New 
York this winter. The difficulty is that we are still awaiting 
word from the Post about the two covers, which makes 
Norman just as upset as possible, though he is bearing up 
nobly and working on the Boy Scout calendar. 

INDEX 
Numbers in roman type refer to text pages. 
Numbers in italic type refer to pages on 
which illustrations appear. 
Abbey, Edwin Austin, 31 
Abrams, Harry N., 195 
Abstract Expressionists, 191, 223 
After the Honeymoon, 163 
After the Prom, 198, 199; oil sketch 
for, 198 
Alaskan Story, An (Schaeffer), 81 
American Artist magazine, 14, 195; 
cover for, 195 
American Boy magazine, 31 
American illustration, history of, 
19-23, 189, 190-191 
American Magazine, 32, 64; painting 
for, 84—85 
April Fool, 89, 92, 93 
Arguing Over Willie Gillis, 87, 122 
Arlington, Vermont, 14, 32, 60, 61, 64, 
74, 75, 77, 83, 88, 94, 95, 98, 99, 
114, 116, 163, 165 
Arrow Collar Man (Leyendecker), 17, 20 
Art Directors Club, Chicago, 76 
Art Institute of Chicago, 188, 189 
Artist Before a Blank Canvas, 12 
Art Students League, New York, 31, 38 
39, 48, 49, 98, 163 
Atherton, Jack, 16, 74, 76, 88-90, 97, 
107, 116, 161, 187; as artist, 61, 
89, 98, 99, 149; as model, 92; 
paintings by, 88, 90, 91; photograph 
of, 92 
Atherton, Mary, 68, 75, 90, 166 
Atherton, Maxine, 88-90 
Atlantic Monthly magazine, 191 
Austen Riggs Foundation, Stockbridge, 
186, 196 
Ayres, Colonel, 68, 162 
Back to Civvies, 136, 137 
balopticon, 28 
Barstow, Mary, see Rockwell, Mary 
Barstow 
Batten Kill River, Vermont, 41, 61, 62, 
74, 88 
Bauer, Byrne, 209 
Beauchamp, D.D., 84 
Becktoft, Art, 137 
Benedict, John, 65, 122, 169 
Benedict, Robert, Jr., 65, 122, 128, 
169 
Benedict, Robert, Sr., 122, 128 
Benedict’s Garage, see Story Teller 
Bentley, Floyd, 122, 156 
Bergmans, Hank, 202 
Bernstein, Leonard, 231 
Best, Peggy, 186 
“Blacksmith’s Boy—Heel and Toe” 
(O’Brien), illustration for, 138-139 
Boy in Dining Car, 178, 179 
Boy on a Diving Board, 176, 177 
Boy on Stilts, 35 
Boy Pushing Baby Carriage, 34 
Boy Reading Sister's Diary, 174 
Boy Scout calendars, 32, 89, 106-7, 
110, 174; paintings from, I11, 112, 
MEWS: 177, 203 
Boy’s Life magazine, 31 
Bradley, Will, 20 
Braman, Jason, 196 
Brandywine River Valley Tradition, 20, 74 
Breaking Home Ties, 156, 157, 224 
Bridgman, George, 31 
Briggs, Clare, 31 
Briggs, Marie, 144, 156, 163, 170 
Brooklyn Museum, New York, 195 
Brooks, Barbara, 209 
Brooks, Bob, 209 
Brown & Bigelow, calendars, 106, 110, 
143; paintings from, 111, 112, 113, 
LOZ 7/208 
Brown, Billie, 114, 122, 128, 143 
Brown, Harry, 128 
Browsing Among Used Books, 51 
Brush, John, 144 
Brush, Larry, 144 
Brush, Lester, 60, 122, 133, 149 
Brush, Mrs. Larry, 144 
Buck, Robert Otis, 123, 124, 127, 137; 
photographs of, 124 
Buechner, Thomas, 195 
Bum Cooking Sausage, 50 
Campbell, Betsy, 187, 200 
Campbell, Dr. Donald, 17, 187, 200, 202 
Campion, Dave, 46 
Can't Wait!, 202, 203 
Card Tricks, 49 
Carey, Tom, 206 
Carrier Signal Lieutenant (Schaeffer), 
83 
Carson, Eddie, 35 
Castro, Fidel, 190 
Catch of the Day, 188 
Champ, 42 
Charleston, South Carolina, 32 
Charwomen, 140, 141, 143 
Check-Up, The, 200, 201 
Chivalry, 49 
Christmas, 30 
Christmas Caroling Trio, 47 
Civil Rights Sketches, 212, 212, 
213 
Clemens, Dick, 204 
Coates, Robert, 89 
Cole, Roy, 122 
Collier's magazine, 20 
Colonial Couple, 54 
color sketches, see oil sketches 
Comar, Cordelia, 60 
Comar, Mr., 134 
commercial artists, see illustrators 
Common Cold, The, 163 
Connoisseur, The, 18 
Convention, The, 86 
Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington, 
Bi@yeos 
Cornwell, Dean, 74, 81 
Cosmopolitan magazine, 74 
costumes, 25, 26, 38, 39, 46, 66, 70, 
94, 161, 165, 234 
Couple in Carriage, 38 
Couple Striding, 45 
Cowan, Dwight, 149 
Cowboy Listening to Records, 52 
Crandall, 209 
Critic, The, 173, 173; oil sketches for, 
172 
Crofut, Charles, 143 
Crofut, Doris, 60, 122, 143 
Crofut, Mrs. Charles, 140, 143 
Crofut, Rena, 60, 122, 143, 166 
Crofut, Roy, 109, 122, 143 
Cross, Janet, 143 
Cross, John, Jr, 114, 122 
Cross, John, Sr., 114, 122 
Cross, Yvonne, 109, 114, 122 
Crossword Puzzle, 50 
Curtis Publishing Company, 190 
Dancing Couple, 49 
Dancing to a Cello, 48 
Dannenberg Galleries, New York, 195 
Day in a Boy’s Life, 150, 150, 151, 166 
Day in a Girl’s Life, 151, 151 
Decker, Clarence, 78, 85, 122, 138 
Decker, Phyllis, 78, 122 
de Kooning, Willem, 223 
Delaware Art Museum, Wilmington, 74 
Dickens, Charles, 162, 224 
Disney, Walt, 163 
Dispute, The, 50 
Doctor’s Office, 202, 202, 204 
Dodd, Frank, 74 
INDEX »* 239 

Dohanos, Stevan, 41, 64, 223 
Dolson, Frank, 210 
Dostoevsky, Feodor Mikhailovich, 162 
drawings, 24-25, 26, 26, 28-29, 63, 97, 
116-17, 120, 163, 164, 186—87, 190, 
204, 209, 219, 234, 234 
Dunn, Harvey, 74 
Diirer, Albrecht, 224 
Dwight, Harry, 16, 187 
Eaton, Walter Prichard, 187 
Edgerton, Ardis, 62, 106, 114 
Edgerton, Buddy, 62, 110, 114, 177, 220; 
as model, 94, 95, 99, 105, 106-7, 
112, 164, 234; photographs of, 104, 
LLOF 2 
Edgerton, Clara, 60, 62, 66, 68, 106-7, 
109 
Edgerton, Edith, 62, 106 
Edgerton, Jim, 16, 62, 66, 67, 71, 106-7, 
OSM Ss Lo? 
Edgerton, Jimmy, 107, 112 
Edgerton, Joy, 62, 106, 107 
Eisenhower, Dwight David, 26 
Elect Casey, 206, 207 
Embracing Man and Woman (Schaeffer), 81 
Encyclopedia Britannica, advertisement 
for, 50 
Engineer Corps, The (Schaeffer), 82 
Erikson, Erik H., 165, 186, 187 
Eyeing a Sax, 53 
Facts of Life, 60, 89, 99, 148, 149; 
early version, 149 
Falter, John, 41, 223 
Family Homecoming, 150, 166, 167; detail 
from, 221 
Family Tree, The, 210, 211, 212; detail 
from, 221 
Famous Artists Schools, Connecticut, 
14, 25, 90, 118 
Fighting Gillises, The, 124, 125 
Fisher, Dorothy Canfield, 117, 122, 163 
Fisher, Harrison, 20 
Fishing in Comfort, 48 
Fixing a Flat, 86, 86 
Flagg, James Montgomery, 17, 20; 
poster by, 23 
Flirts, The, 87 
Fly and the Fish (Atherton), 90 
Fogarty, Thomas, 31 
Ford, Henry, 161 
Forsythe, Clyde, 31, 32, 45 
Forsythe, Cotta, 32 
Fortune magazine, 190 
Four Freedoms, The, 61, 83, 114, 128, 
190, 234; Freedom from Fear, 132, 
133; Freedom from Want, 131, 133; 
Freedom of Speech, 105, 128, 129, 
133, 138, 223; original version, 
128; Freedom of Worship, 29, 66—67, 
LOMIZS (30 135% 223 
Four Seasons calendars, 105, 142, 143, 
150 
Franklin Mint, illustrations for, 194 
Fredericks, Pop, 39, 46, 48, 49 
Freedom from Fear, see Four Freedoms 
Freedom frdm Want, see Four Freedoms 
Freedom of Speech, see Four Freedoms 
240 * INDEX 
Freedom of Worship, see Four Freedoms 
French, Daniel Chester, 186 
Friend in Need, 177 
friendships, 16-17; Arlington, 61, 68, 
70, 71, 187: Athertons, 88—90; 
Edgertons, 106—7; Hugheses, 94-95, 
97; Schaeffers, 74-77; Schafers, 116-18; 
Mary Rockwell, 39; New Rochelle, 
41; Stockbridge, 187 
Gaboda, Jim, 62, 98 
Gibson, Charles Dana, 20, 31; drawing 
by, 21 
Gibson Girl, The, 20, 21 
Gillis, Willie, series, see Willie 
Gillis series 
Girl at the Mirror, 154, 155 
Golden Age of Illustration, 75, 189; 
see also American illustration, 
history of 
Golden Rule, The, 223, 234, 235; 
detail from, 221; sketch for, 234 
Goodfellow, Bob, 86 
Good Housekeeping magazine, 74 
Gossips, The, 58, 59-60, 143, 150, 228; 
detail from, 220 
Graduation, 165 
Grout, Freeman, 107, 112, 177 
Growth of 
a Leader, 107, 112, 113 
Guiding Hand, A, 112 
Guptill, Arthur L., 13, 14, 25 
Hall, Frank, 60, 122 
Hall, Ken, 209 
Hall, Mary Immen, 166 
Hals, Frans, 173 
Handberg, Ejner, 187 
Happy Birthday, 195 
Harrington, Jessie, 60, 228 
Harrington, Mrs. Jessie, 60, 133 
Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 186 
Heavy Artillery, The (Schaeffer), 
83 
Held, John, 20 
Hess, Carl, 99, 105, 122, 128, 138; 
photograph of, 104 
Hess, Henry, 128 
Hibbs, Ben, 60, 83, 114, 123, 128, 
190 
Hildebrandt, Fred, 41, 55, 61, 64, 74, 
149 
Hogue, Robert, 62, 98; photograph of, 100 
Hoisington, Shirley, 133 
Home from Vacation, 54 
Horseshoe Forging Contest, The, 78, 133, 
138-39, 138-39; detail from, 220 
House and Garden magazine, 91, 95 
How to Eat Fried Worms (Rockwell, T-), 
164 
Hoyt, Irene, 114, 122 
Hoyt, Rose, 28, 70, 114, 122, 128, 133, 
234 
Huckleberry Finn; illustrations for, 32 
Hughes, Casey, 94, 107, 116 
Hughes, George, 76, 90, 94-95, 107, 116, 
151, 152, 162, 170, 187s as artist: 
61, 97, 98, 106, 119, 223; drawing by, 
118; as model, 97; paintings by, 94, 
95, 119; quote from, 221 
Hunter, The, 55 
Ide, Cynthia, 180 
illustrators, 19—23, 41, 61, 74, 94, 
189, 191 
Immen, Burton, 61 
imprimatura, 29 
In Need of Sympathy, 45 
I Will Do My Best, 111 
Jerry, 164 
Jury, The, 208, 209; drawing for, 
209; oil sketch for, 209 
Just Married, 26, 27; drawing of, 
26; oil sketch of, 26 
Kalischer, Clem, 188, 210 
Kempton, Oliver, 209 
Kennedy, John E, 120, 212 
Kent, Rockwell, 221 
Kept In, 44 
LaBombard, Albert, 114, 134 
LaBombard, Elizabeth, 71, 110, 114 
Ladies’ Home Journal magazine, 32 
Lamone, Louie, 70, 188, 198, 202, 
209, 219, 220 
Landscape Painting, 187 
Lawrence, Mrs. Edgar, 133 
Leyendecker, J.C., 17, 31 
Life magazine, 32, 190; cover for, 43 
Lindsey, Charles, 133 
Lindsey, Florence, 133 
Lischke, Franklin, 36, 37, 39, 42, 45 
Lischke, George, 32, 36, 45 
Listening for the Invasion of D-Day 
(final version), 134, 135 
Listening for the Invasion of D-Day 
(original version), 134, 135 
Literary Digest magazine, 32 
Little Voyeuse in the Train, A, 109 
Locke, Ed, 194, 202, 204 
Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth, 186 
Look magazine, 118, 191, 212, 223; 
cover for, 121; illustrations for, 
188, 212, 213, 214-15 
Lorimer, George Horace, 31, 38, 39, 
49, 51, 189 
Loveless, David, 70, 186, 198, 209 
Luce, Henry, 190 
Mahoney, Joan, 196 
Mahoney, Moe, 196 
Main Street, Stockbridge, at Christmas, 
184-85, 185 
Malone, John L., 46 
Mamaroneck, New York, 31 
Man Threading Needle, 46 
Marching and Chowder Club, Stockbridge, 
187, 193 
Marriage License, 185, 196, 197; oil 
sketches for, 196 
Marsh, Ann, 122, 144, 150, 162, 166 
Marsh, Chuck, 150, 151, 166 
Marsh, Donny, 151, 166 
Marsh, George T., 22 
Marsh, Lee, 122, 150 
Martin, Jim, 122, 128, 133 
McBride, William, 62, 98 
McCabe, Jim, 234 

McCalls, magazine, 74, 191; illustrations 
for, 184-85, 232-33 
McKee, Harvey, 65, 122, 138, 140 
McKee, Jenny, 60, 114, 122, 140 
McNulty, William, 98 
Melia, Gen, 226 
Melville, Herman, 186 
Men of Tomorrow, 112, 177 
Metropolitan Opera, New York, 162 
models, 25, 65, 66, 67-68, 70, 75, 
105; adults, 38; Arlington, 64, 65, 
Coy a LOOM 
22-23 128 133, 
137, 138, 140, 143, 144, 149, 150, 
151, 156, 166, 170, 234; artists, 75, 
92; celebrities, 188; children, 
35-36, 37, 42, 45, 106—7, 150, 151; 
family, 161-81; New Rochelle, 37, 38, 
46, 55, 65; professional, 38-39, 46, 
48, 49, 51, 65, 188; Stockbridge, 188, 
196, 200, 202, 204, 206, 209, 234; 
student, 102 
Monday Evening Club, Pittsfield, 193 
“Moods” (Marsh), 22 
Moonlight Serenade, 45 
Morgan, Anne, 200 
Morris, Wright, 191 
Moses, Anna Mary Robertson (Grandma), 
122, 166 
Mrs. O’Leary’s Cow, 107, 110, 110 
Museum of the Arts, Fort Lauderdale, 195 
My Adventures as an Illustrator (Rockwell), 
—15, 164, 189; see also Rockwell, Norman, 
autobiography of 
My Studio Burns Down, 63 
Nassau Tavern, Princeton, New Jersey, 
mural for, 54—55 
Nasser, Gamal Abdel, 193 
National Academy of Design, New York, 
31, 163 
Nehru, Jawaharlal, 193 
New Rochelle, New York, 31, 32, 35 
36, 37, 41, 48, 55, 74, 163, 195 
New Year’s Eve Without Willie Gillis, 
Of wll 328 
New York City, 30, 31, 32, 41 
New Yorker magazine, 89, 190 
New York Yankees, 162 
Niebuhr, Reinhold, 186 
Night Before Christmas, The (Hughes), 
94 
Norman Rockwell from the Cradle to the 
Grave, 24—25 
Norman Rockwell, Illustrator (Guptill), 
1325 
Norman Rockwell Visits a Country Editor, 
230, 231; oil sketch for, 230 
Norman Rockwell Visits a Ration Board, 
60) 71, 228, 229 
No Swimming, 42, 42 
Noyes, Nip, 85, 122, 138, 169 
Obanheim, Bill, 209 
O’Brien, Edward W., 138 
O’Connor, Irene, see Rockwell, Irene 
O’Connor 
oil sketches, 26, 29, 102, 102, 172, 
173, 178, 187, 192, 196, 196, 198, 
209, 212, 213, 230 
Old Corner House, Stockbridge, 195 
O'Neil, Dr., 166 
O'Neil, Sharon, 166 
On My Honor, 174, 175 
Our Heritage, 177 
Outside the Principal’s Office, 97, 
1S 2eulSs 
Paddock, Dr., 194 
Paine, Billy, 35, 36 
Painting a Flagpole, 53 
Painting Tavern Sign, 51 
Palmer, Arnold, 194 
Pan American Airways, illustrations for, 
19] 
Paris, France, 41 
Parker, Al, 41 
Parrish, Maxfield, 20; painting by, 23 
Peace Corps Led by Kennedy, 118, 121 
Pelham, Gene, 85, 102, 109, 117, 123, 
128, 170, 234 
Peter, 164 
Peters, Duane, 134, 169 
Philip, Prince, 231 
Phillips, Coles, 31 
photography, 25, 26, 28, 37, 42, 60, 64- 
68, 110, 114, 156, 186, 188—89, 196, 209 
Phrenologist, The, 51 
Picasso, Pablo, 224 
Picasso vs. Sargent, 188 
Piero della Francesca, 223 
Pilgrim’s Progress, A, 42, 43 
Playing Marbles, 165 
Plumbers in a Boudoir, 102, 103 
Pocket Game, The, 174 
Point of File, The (Schaeffer), 82 
Poor Richard’s Almanack, detail from, 220 
Portrait Sketch of a Russian Girl, 192 
Principal and Graduate, 46 
Problem We All Live With, The, 212, 214-15 
props, 25, 36-37, 38, 39, 66, 67, 70, 97, 
109, 127, 137, 170, 188 
Punderson, Molly, see Rockwell, Molly 
Punderson 
Pyle, Howard, 20, 31, 74, 75, 81 
Reader’s Digest magazine, 190 
Ready for Action (Atherton), 88 
Redesigning the Post Cover, 190 
Rembrandt van Rijn, 224 
Remington, Frederic, 31 
Riggs, Dr. Austen, 186 
Riggs, Mrs. Austen Fox, 206 
Right to Know, The, 223 
Rivals, The, 44 
Robertson, Alvie, 99, 105, 122; photo- 
graph of, 105 
Rockwell, Cynthia, 210 
Rockwell, Gail, 210, 226 
Rockwell, Geoffrey, 234 
Rockwell, Irene O’Connor, 32 
Rockwell, Jarvis, 30—31 
Rockwell, Jarvis (Jerry), 41, 156, 163, 
186, 223; as artist, 98, 163; as 
model, 163—64, 165, 166, 169, 170, 
173; quotes from, 68, 149, 161, 222 
Rockwell, Mary Barstow, 41, 67, 68, 77, 
97, 102, 106, 107,128, 150, 186, 
187, 200, 234; death of, 191; importance 
to Rockwell, 39, 71, 75, 162— 
63, 221; marriage of, 32; as model, 
60, 133, 163, 166, 173; photographs 
of, 69, 72-73, 160; as writer, 162 
Rockwell, Molly Punderson, 118, 192-93, 
194, 221; drawing of, 190 
Rockwell, Mrs. Nancy, 30, 106, 133 
Rockwell, Norman: as actor, 117, 221; 
artists and, 41, 61, 89, 90, 95, 97, 
187; as author, 14, 15, 21, 150; 
autobiography of, 15, 21, 25, 164, 
189; drawings of, 24-25, 26, 26, 
28-29, 63, 97, 116-17, 120, 163, 164, 
186-87, 190, 204, 209, 219, 234, 234; 
early years, 30—32; films on, 195; 
friendships of, 16-17, 39, 41, 61, 
68, 70, 71, 74-77, 88-90, 94-95, 97, 
106-7, 116-18, 150, 187; honors 
for, 195; as illustrator, 19, 21, 31, 
35, 189; last cover of, 14, 195; 
models of, see models; oil sketches, 
D6. 2S NO2 OZ 72 et S85 
187, 192, 196, 196, 198, 209, 212, 
213, 230; painting technique, 29, 31, 
37, 38, 71, 134, 140, 146, 173, 192, 
193, 194, 198; as parent, 165, 178; 
photograph by, 26; photographs of, 39, 
CONOO 2132.92 1005 103.5114: 
127, 137, 140, 160, 162, 178, 206, 
218, 224, 226, 230; photography in the 
work of, 25, 26, 28, 37, 42, 60, 64— 
68, 110, 114, 156, 186, 188-89, 196, 
209; Saturday Evening Post and, 17, 
LOA S26 solo) DS Oe tO miu One 
128, 146, 190, 212, 222-23; self- 
portraits, 12, 24-25, 42, 58, 60, 114, 
115, 128, 129, 138, 166, 167, 190, 
208, 209), 210921 e219, 219, 220; 
22 DIA RDI 
ONL LO, 227 ae Done oo 
230, 231, 232; students and, 62, 98- 
99, 102; studios of, 37, 61, 62, 70, 
106, 161, 162, 185, 187, 194, 195; 
themes of, 35, 39, 60, 64, 137, 193, 
212; working methods and procedure, 
23=26; 28=30, 35-36, 64-665 7), 99, 
153, 161, 188, 196, 209; see also 
costumes; models; props 
Rockwell, Peter, 25, 41, 65—66, 71, 78, 
107, 133, 146, 163, 186, 188, 193, 
210, 226; as artist, 156, 164-65, 
as model, 112, 163, 166, 169, 174, 
177, 178, 180; photographs of, 68, 100; 
quotes from, 14, 15, 60, 61, 70, 86, 
114, 134, 144, 149, 161, 166, 169, 170, 
178, 194, 221, 223, 224 
Rockwell, Tom, 41, 107, 144, 151, 163, 
164, 186, 210, 226; as model, 112, 
156, 164, 165, 166, 174, 177; photo- 
graphs of, 66, 68, 112 
Rockwell on Rockwell (Rockwell), 14 
Ross, Harold, 190 
Rubens, Peter Paul, 173 
Ruggles, Charles, 122 
Runaway, The, 204, 205; drawing for, 204 
Russell, Dr. George, 65, 128, 144, 169, 
202 
Russell, Jane, 154 
St. Nicholas magazine, 31 
Sanders, Colonel, 194 
INDEX « 241 

Santa with Elves, 31 
Saturday Evening Post magazine, 13, 31, 
60, 61, 76, 88, 89, 94, 123, 146, 178, 
189-90, 192, 212, 222-23; cover by 
Atherton for, 88; covers by Hughes for, 
94, 95; covers by Rockwell for, 12, 
18, 27, 30, 34, 35, 38, 42, 44, 45, 
46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 
55, 58, 79, 86, 87, 93, 103, 108, 
109 4 MO? D3 ZS IZ 
6r S5; 
136, 141, 147, 148, 150, 151, 153, 
1551S elOS OS O/mehOoyiz, 
173, 174, 176, 179, 181, 188, 190, 
197, 199, 201, 202, 205, 207, 208, 
De D252 27,9229 Sl 2505 covers 
by Schaeffer for, 82, 83; illustrations 
by Rockwell for, 138-39, 144-45; 
Rockwell’s career at, 17, 19, 24, 
Msp SiS 35, Kn. HO), TH, SINE Wash, 
190 
Saturday People, 231, 232-33 
Saying Grace, 97, 102, 164, 170, 171, 
222, 224 
Schaeffer, Elizabeth, 61, 68, 74, 75, 77, 
85, 95, 107 
Schaeffer, Lee, 68, 75, 76, 86, 94, 
95, 123, 166 
Schaeffer, Mead, 16, 74—78, 88, 89, 
92, 94, 107, 187; as artist, 20, 61, 
71, 81, 83, 90, 98, 99, 128, 190; as model, 
166; paintings by, 80, 81, 82, 83; 
photograph of, 68; quotes from, 62, 
Delo 
Schaeffer, Patty, 68, 75, 77, 86, 94, 166 
Schafer, Chris, 61, 62, 95, 97, 107, 
116-18, 119, 162, 187, 220, 234 
Schafer, Christina, 95, 118, 119 
Schafer, John, 118, 119, 120 
Schafer, Mary, 61, 70, 95, 107, 116-18, 
119, 120, 192 
Schoonover, Frank, 20, 74 
Scott, Walter, 186, 188-89, 192, 219, 
222 
Scovill, Bill, 188, 196 
Scribner's Magazine, 22 
Seal, Harry, 39, 49 
Secoy, Winfield, 133 
Self-Photographer, 44 
Sergeant, John, 185 
Sharkey, Bill, 170 
Showing Off the Engagement Ring (Hughes), 
94 
Shuffleton’s Barber Shop, 99, 146, 147, 
2D 
Side by Side—Britannia! (Flagg), 23 
Sinatra, Frank, 194 
242 * INDEX 
Ski Train, 108, 109 
Smith, Walt, 134 
Sneezing Spy, 44 
Society of Illustrators, 88 
Soda Jerk, 180, 181 
Soldiers and Seamen (Schaeffer), 80 
Soldier’s Homecoming, 114, 115; detail 
from, 220 
Spaulding, Don, 62, 68, 70, 98-99, 106, 
109, 146, 161, 219, 222; comic book 
covers by, 104—5; photograph of, 99 
Spirit of Kansas City, The (Atherton and 
Rockwell), 88, 89, 133, 138 
Squires, Clara, 133 
Squires, Herb, 169 
Squires, Walt, 62, 89, 98, 122, 133, 138 
Starr, Ringo, 231 
Steamship Comfort, 48 
Stevenson, Harold, 62, 98 
Stockbridge, Massachusetts, 14, 61, 70, 
Th, 77, 1185 1545 156, G1, 160; 
185-86 
Storekeeper Modeling Lady’s Hat, 46 
Story Teller (Benedict's Garage), 65, 
168, 169 
Stout, Wesley, 190 
Strictly a Sharpshooter, 78, 85, 84-85, 138 
Sullivan, Ed, 209 
Summer Romance Spoiled (Hughes), 95 
Sundermeyer, Bill, 46 
Swiss Admiral, A (Parrish), 23 
Tank Commander, The (Schaeffer), 82 
Tattooist, The, 78, 79, 85, 138 
Tell Me Why Stories, drawings for, 31 
Thackeray, William Makepeace, 224 
Three Gossips, 53 
Time magazine, 190 
Tolstoy, Count Leo, 162, 224 
Tommy, 164 
Tom Sawyer, illustrations for, 25, 32 
“Tourists Accommodated” (Fisher), 117 
Towne, Lucille, 122 
Triple Self-Portrait, 224, 225 
trompe l'oeil, 124 
Twain, Mark, 224 
University Club, 226, 227; detail from, 221 
Valet Admiring a Sock, 46 
Van Brunt, James K., 38-39, 51, 53 
Van Gogh, Vincent, 224 
Vanity Fair magazine, 95 
Van Vechtan, Edward, 39 
Vermeer, Jan, 146 
Visit to a Country Doctor, 144-45, 
144-45 
von Schmidt, Harold, 98 
Waiting for the Art Editor, 96 
Walker, Jackie James, 37 
Walker, Mrs. Ralph, 170 
Wallace, DeWitt, 190 
War and Peace (Tolstoy), 162 
Watson-Guptill Publications, 13, 14 
Wayne, John, 194 
West Arlington Green, Vermont, 62, 
98, 106; see also Arlington 
Whalen, Mary, 95, 151, 152, 154 
Whalen, Peter, 151, 152 
Wheaton, Mr, 133 
Wheaton, Mrs., 133 
Wilder, Thornton, 187 
Williams, Bob, 209 
Willie Gillis Asleep, 122 
Willie Gillis at the U.S.O., 122 
Willie Gillis in a Blackout, 123 
Willie Gillis in Church, 123 
Willie Gillis in College, 126 
Willie Gillis on K.P. Saturday Evening, 123 
Willie Gillis series, 86, 109, 123, 124, 
127; paintings in, 87, 109, 122, 123, 
1259126 
Willie Gillis with an Indian Fakir, 122 
Willie Gillis with Food Package, 109, 109, 
122 
Willie Was Different (Rockwell, Molly), 
192 
Wilson, James, 39, 46, 48 
Winslow, Don, 62, 98, 99, 102, 105, 149, 
151, 170; illustration by, 102; 
photographs of, 99, 100, 105 
Winter (Wyeth), 22 
Winters, Jonathan, 231 
Woodard, Hoddy, 170 
World War II, 128, 189, 191 
Wright, Doris Crofut, see Crofut, Doris 
Writing Christmas Thank Yous (Hughes), 95 
Wyeth, N.C., 20, 21, 22, 74; painting 
by, 22 
Yager, Nicholas, 42 
Yankee Doodle, 54-55 
youth magazines, illustrations for, 35 
Youth’s Companion magazine, 31 
Zimmer, George, 60, 122, 134 
Zimmer, Mrs. George, 60 


in \e 
a) 2 
~ 
ry 

Norman Rockwell’s People presents a 
warm and multifaceted view, showing 
clearly that the artist’s work was an 
extension of the man. Through the 
firsthand recollections of Rockwell's 
models, we see that Rockwell truly 
believed in what he painted, and that 
his humanity was genuine. What the 
public loves in Rockwell's art, his friends 
and neighbors loved in him. 
Susan E. Meyer has written exten- 
sively on the subject of illustration and 
has made many important contribu- 
tions to the field. Editor Emeritus of 
American Artist, she is the author of 
numerous books on art including 
Abrams highly successful America’s 
Great Illustrators. @ 
400 illustrations, including 100 plates and 
2 foldouts in full color 
SOME OTHER ABRAMS ARTBOOKS 
NORMAN ROCKWELL’S AMERICA 
By Christopher Finch 
659 illustrations, including 129 plates in full color 
NORMAN ROCKWELL: ARTIST AND 
ILLUSTRATOR 
By Thomas S. Buechner 
614 illustrations, including 111 plates in full 
color, and foldouts 
NorMAN ROCKWELL’S CHRISTMAS BOOK 
Consulting Editor, Molly Rockwell 
95 illustrations, including 83 plates in full color 
NORMAN ROCKWELL’S WORLD OF SCOUTING 
By William Hillcourt 
120 illustrations, including 70 plates in full color 
AMERICA’S GREAT ILLUSTRATORS 
By Susan E. Meyer 
417 illustrations, including 186 plates in full color 
THE ArT OF WALT DISNEY: FROM MICKEY 
MOusE TO THE MaGcic KINGDOMS 
By Christopher Finch; with a special 
essay by Peter Blake 
763 illustrations, including 351 plates and 
12 foldouts in full color 
Wa 
rt DISNEY’s TREASURY OF 
CHILDREN’S CLASSICS 
Edited by Darlene Geis 
228 illustrations, including 201 plates in full color 
WALT DISNEyY’s TREASURY OF 
STORIES FROM SILLY SYMPHONIES 
Edited by Darlene Geis 
229 illustrations, including 226 plates in full color 
Harry N. ABRAMS, INC. 
110 East 59th Street 
New York, N.Y. 10022 
Printed in Japan 

urea am 
GA-648* 
ISBN 0-8109-1777-7 

