
Norman Rockwell’S 
AMERICAN 
HOLIDAYS 
by Milton Garrison 
This lavishly illustrated volume 
will delight the eyes and revital¬ 
ize the spirit. The collection of 
nostalgic stories is comple¬ 
mented with full-color and black- 
and-white illustrations. These 
narratives will bring back memo¬ 
ries of childhood, holidays, 
travel, and family moments. Both 
the joyous memories and the try¬ 
ing times are warmly depicted in 
the vignettes created by Norman 
Rockwell. 
Stroll down memory lane 
with Norman Rockwell's American 
Holidays. Familiar people, places 
and times are vividly brought to 
life through the special art of 
Norman Rockwell. 



Written by Milton Garrison 
/ 
/ 
CRESCENT BOOKS 
New York 

Copyright: Norman Rockwell's American Holidays 
Illustrations reprinted under license from 
the Estate of Norman Rockwell. 
Copyright © 1990 Estate of Norman Rockwell 
Photographic material courtesy of 
The Norman Rockwell Museum at 
Stockbridge, Stockbridge, MA 
Created and manufactured by arrangement with 
Ottenheimer Publishers, Inc. 
Copyright © 1990 Ottenheimer Publishers, Inc. 
This 1990 edition is published by Ottenheimer 
Publishers, Inc. for Crescent Books, 
distributed by Crown Publishers, Inc., 
225 Park Avenue South, New York, New York 10003 
All rights reserved. 
Printed and bound in Hong Kong. 
ISBN: 0-517-03173-6 
h g f e d c b a 

Contents 
INTRODUCTION 9 
CHAPTER I 11 
Our National Holidays 
CHAPTER II 63 
Special Holidays 
CHAPTER III 81 
Holidays for Children 
CHAPTER IV 109 
Family Holidays 
/ 

Merry-Go-Round (1947) 
8 

Introduction 
For six decades, starting in 1913, Norman Rockwell celebrated Amer¬ 
ica's red letter days with an abundance of works. He, like the century, 
was in his teens. Until his death, Norman Rockwell continued re¬ 
cording the American experience faithfully and in faultless detail. He 
started painting in this country's horse-and-buggy days and contin¬ 
ued into the space age. 
Through those generations, Norman Rockwell shared and reflected 
his fellow Americans' interests, sorrows, and joys. From the begin¬ 
ning, the holidays were an occasion for joy, and he recorded those 
joys with empathy, drama, humor, and accuracy. The sympathy and 
fidelity with which Norman Rockwell portrayed the human experi¬ 
ence accounts for the lasting regard and affection we have for his 
paintings. 
Another factor is present in this universal popularity: Norman Rock¬ 
well's works evoke a remembrance of times past. In our memory, as 
in his paintings, life was simpler, relationships more straightforward. 
Families celebrated the holidays together, they were closer knit. Many 
Americans of today are too young to have experienced that time of 
innocence, of high hopes and common purpose, of country lanes 
and wood smoke, of children playing safely on clean city streets. 
That is the America we find in Norman Rockwell's paintings. It is a 
comfortable place, and even if we were never there, we enjoy visiting 
it. 
9 

John Sargeant and Chief Konkapot (1972-1976) 
10 

Chapter 1 
Our National Holidays 
IN or man Rockwell recalled that as a small boy he sketched Admiral 
George Dewey's flagship, USS Olympia, as it steamed into New York 
Harbor at the close of the Spanish-American War, in 1898. He con¬ 
tinued to depict our national holidays, when the air and the water 
were clean, when it was inconceivable that an American president 
could tell a lie and when we assumed good intentions in one another. 
We knew our neighbors better then; it made it easier for us to like 
one another. Norman Rockwell's oblique approach to his subjects 
and his humor are evident throughout his work displayed here. 
v / 
/ 
11 

Golden Rule (1961) 
12 

Martin Luther King's Birthday 
O n January 20, 1986, the United States celebrated the birthday of 
the great civil rights leader and humanitarian Martin Luther King Jr. 
for the first time. This national honor to a black American was a long 
time coming. Although Martin Luther King Jr. was born on January 
15, the national holiday celebrating his birth is now held on the third 
Monday in January. 
Martin Luther King's birthday is a national holiday that celebrates 
the life and accomplishments of a unique leader. He preached both 
non-violence and the adamant pursuit of racial equality in an era 
marked by riots, unrest, murder and violence against black and white 
advocates of civil rights. 
Norman Rockwell's paintings on the civil rights struggle during the 
1960s reveal a great deal about the artist's sharp insight and unfailing 
decency. 
The paintings make no frontal attack on the violence, the cruelty, or 
the sheer injustice of institutionalized bigotry. But they illustrate 
sharply the human consequences of bigotry and the violence it pro¬ 
duces. 
It seems the artist, like so many Americans of his time, longed for 
an end to racism and violence, a return to fair play and decency for 
all Americans. It also seems obvious that Martin Luther King Jr. 
personified the best hope for these goals. 
/ 
13 

Dr. King's Career 
Born in 1929, in Atlanta, Georgia, Martin Luther King Jr. was the 
son of a Baptist minister. He received a bachelor of divinity degree 
himself, and a bachelor of arts degree from Morehouse College. 
Boston University conferred a doctorate on him in 1954, one year 
after he had risen to national prominence in Alabama. From that time 
forward, he was a leader in the national civil rights movement. Al¬ 
ways advocating peaceful means and non-violence, he helped forge 
the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and coordinated the 
Freedom Rides and sit-ins that battled institutionalized segregation 
in that era. 
14 

The Problem We All Live With (1964) 
/ 
/ 
15 


Martin Luther King's Dream 
In the summer of 1963, Dr. King helped organize the March on 
Washington. As many as a million people assembled in the nation's 
capital for a peaceful demonstration for civil rights. His speech that 
day, facing the Mall before the brooding statue of the seated Lincoln, 
proclaimed for all America the essence of the civil rights movement 
and its goals. The eloquence of his "I have a dream" speech continues 
to touch and inspire us. 
/ 
/ 
17 

The Long Shadow of Lincoln (1945) 

t i 
Presidents Day 
Presidents Day, the third Monday in February, is a modern inno- 
vation. By an Act of Congress, we now honor all the presidents, even 
the ones nobody can quite place. To be sure, Lincoln's birthday is 
still the occasion for partisan gatherings by the political party he 
founded, and the Democrats memorialize Thomas Jefferson (born 
March 12) and Andrew Jackson (born March 15) in the same partisan 
spirit with Jefferson-Jackson Day celebrations. 
It was very different in Norman Rockwell's time. We had fewer heroes 
then and we made less fuss over them. The exceptions were Wash¬ 
ington and Lincoln, each considered peerless in his own way. 
/ 
19 

The New Tavern Sign (1936) 
20 

George Washington's Birthday 
George Washington was altogether a more august and daunting 
figure than Lincoln. For one thing, there was that business with the 
cherry tree. It was exemplary of the boy Lincoln to brave the snows 
for a book to read by a flickering fire. But for little George to invite 
a spanking, admit he'd chopped down the cherry tree with his little 
hatchet—that was honesty that most flesh-and-blood American chil¬ 
dren had difficulty relating to. Further, there was that announcement, 
“Father, I cannot tell a lie." Frailer mortals might try very hard not 
to tell a lie, but for most kids it was not an impossibility, particularly 
if the lie in question was a very small “white lie." George Washington, 
as described in their story-books, was a little daunting. 
f 
He had the same effect on adults. There is no recorded instance of 
Washington cracking a joke, indulging in horseplay or enjoying him¬ 
self. He had apparently led an upright life. 
The source for the cherry-tree fable was Mason Locke Weems, an 
itinerant book salesman and revival preacher. He wrote a “Life" of 
Washington in 1806 that had great circulation, if dubious accuracy. 
It included the cherry-tree story and an account of a conversation 
with an Indian warrior who shot Washington 17 times with no visible 
effect. 
/ ' 
21 

Our First President 
VV ashington was born into the landed gentry in Virginia, and re¬ 
mained a gentleman farmer all his life. He distinguished himself as 
a soldier for the British in the French and Indian Wars. Then he 
returned, as he always did when not serving his country, to the life 
of a country squire. He joined fellow Virginia aristocrats like Thomas 
Jefferson and James Madison in resisting royal outrages. So high did 
his fellow colonists regard his character and his military abilities that 
he was named commander-in-chief of the Continental Army while 
still serving as President of the Continental Congress that produced 
the Declaration of Independence. It appears that he neither sought 
nor campaigned for this or any other office or distinction. 
He led his bedraggled, starving army through repeated defeats to a 
final and unlikely victory in 1781. Having seen the job through, he 
resigned his commission and returned to Mount Vernon. In 1787, 
when the weak Confederation was floundering, he accepted the pres¬ 
idency of the Constitutional Convention. In 1789, he was elected the 
first American President. He was reelected in 1792 and refused a 
third term, setting a precedent that was not broken until Franklin D. 
Roosevelt ran for his third term in 1940. In his farewell address, 
Washington warned the nation against "entangling foreign alli¬ 
ances." This was the basis for U.S. foreign policy for more than a 
century. 
22 

t 
The New Tavern Sign (1936) 

J'i 
i ■"*' 
* 
* 
24 
Ate Lincoln in Illinois (1939) 

Abraham Lincoln's Birthday 
Lincoln was born February 12, 1809—less than a century before 
Norman Rockwell—and was slain in 1865. The artist grew up among 
people who had known Tdonest Abe as a contemporary, who had 
read his speeches in the daily papers, and had voted for him or against 
him. 
✓ 
25 

Lincoln, the Common Man 
Lincoln was, among other things, a rail splitter. In an America that 
was still largely rural, split-rail fences were part of every landscape; 
and many men, or their fathers, knew the labor and the techniques 
Lincoln had used to construct them. He had been born in a log cabin. 
So had many of Norman Rockwell's contemporaries, and many peo¬ 
ple still lived in them. 
His life was a dramatic story, and it reinforces cherished ideas: hon¬ 
esty is the best policy; any American child can grow up to be Pres¬ 
ident. Through it all runs a general affection for Lincoln—Honest 
Abe, the Rail Splitter, Father Abraham, Old Abe. Americans sensed 
that he liked them, and they liked him. 
26 

Abraham Lincoln Delivering the Gettysburg Address (1942) 27 

Lincoln, the President 
Lincoln was a man of the people, but he now belongs to the ages. 
He fascinated Americans, not only because they could relate to his 
humble origins but because he had achieved greatness. Many authors 
published book after book, article after article about Lincoln, and the 
public never seemed to get enough. In all the books, the man that 
emerged was wise and compassionate. He retained the laconic style 
and shrewd wit of his frontier breeding, never succumbed to the 
trappings and pretensions of high office. He was unimpressed with 
ambassadors and generals. He held the nation together through a 
cruel and divisive war by the strength of his character. In the darkest 
days, he acted on his own sense of right and wrong, popular or not, 
and followed his own wisdom. 
As the nation's favorite, Lincoln was a godsend to teachers and par¬ 
ents bent on instilling in children the old-fashioned virtues and val¬ 
ues: honesty, industry, modesty. 
28 

Lincoln for the Defense (1962) 
29 

Veterans of Two Wars (1918) 
30 

Memorial Day 
Memorial Day is also known as Decoration Day. Its first observance 
was spontaneous and gracious. Early in the Civil War, Southern 
women went to the fields of recent battles to decorate the graves of 
both Union and Confederate dead. 
31 

Remembering 
General John B. Murray, in 1866, proclaimed May 5 as Memorial 
Day for the Union dead. The Grand Army of the Republic embraced 
the holiday and made it a national one. 
In succeeding generations, men from all the states died in overseas 
wars, and the nation forgot the bitterness of the Civil War. Quite 
soon. Southern states observed the national Memorial Day as well 
as the Confederate Memorial Day. 
32 

/ 
/ 'V 
33 

34 
Man Painting Flagpole (1928) 

t i 
Day 
Norman Rockwell captured a younger America's quiet, matter-of- 
fact devotion to the flag. We had been taking the flag for granted for 
well over a century when President Woodrow Wilson proclaimed 
June 14 as Flag Day. Apart from the addition of new stars, the Stars 
and Stripes has remained our standard since it was adopted by the 
Continental Congress on June 14, 1777. That flag, the original Old 
Glory, replaced the Grand Union flag, adopted in 1775, which had 
the same red and white stripes, but the Union Jack in place of the 
field of stars. 
/ 
/ 
35 

Betsy Ross 
There is no reason to disbelieve the legend that Betsy Ross made 
the first flag of stars and stripes. Mrs. Ross was a fine seamstress 
and upholsterer who had sewn “ships colours'' for the Pennsylvania 
State Navy. The Continental Congress, the story goes, sent Robert 
Morris, George Ross, and George Washington as a Commission to 
secure a flag. When the Commissioners showed concern about get¬ 
ting the new flag right, Mrs. Ross quickly snipped out a batch of five- 
pointed stars for them. 
36 

Mending the Flag (1922) 

The Star-Spangled Banner 
The comfortable, easy-going affection and respect in which earlier 
generations of Americans held Old Glory began with children in 
school, pledging allegiance to the flag. The pledge did not contain 
the words “under God" until sometime after World War II. In the 
Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts, children learned the code and procedure 
for raising, lowering, and displaying the flag; that flying it upside 
down was a distress signal; that no other flag could be flown or 
displayed above it, or in a position of greater prominence. Most 
Americans knew the prescribed way to fold and store the flag. We 
were taught that a tattered or soiled flag must be respectfully de¬ 
stroyed. Ironically, the only proper way to destroy the flag was to 
burn it. 
38 

Under the Flag (1917) 
39 

Saluting the Flag (1917) 
40 

Independence Day 
The Fourth of July appears to have triumphed over the centuries of 
change and the advances of technology and skepticism. We celebrate 
it today with the same exuberance that is described in early nine¬ 
teenth century accounts, and with the same spirit Norman Rockwell 
portrayed. 
41 

The Peals of Liberty 
It must have afforded the artist much pleasure to incorporate the 
Liberty Bell in his paintings. The Liberty Bell was associated in Amer¬ 
ican recollection with Philadelphia and by extension with the Sat¬ 
urday Evening Post, founded there as its masthead proclaimed, 
"A.D. 1728byBenj. Franklin." And Norman Rockwell was associated 
with the Saturday Evening Post. He had painted covers and story 
illustrations for the magazine from 1916 through 1963. It is part of 
our folklore that the bell cracked as it rang out the news of the 
Declaration on July 4, 1776. 
42 

Liberty Bell (1976) 43 

The Glorious Fourth 
.Apart from advances in fireworks technology, things have been 
pretty much the same every Fourth of July since 1776. For most of 
Norman Rockwell's lifetime, Independence Day parades, like fire¬ 
work displays, were notable more for amateur enthusiasm than for 
polish, and his paintings reflect this. Tootling bands, out-of-step 
marchers, and the dangerous tendency of little boys to set off fire¬ 
crackers, cherry-bombs, and torpedoes were the hallmarks of the old- 
fashioned Fourth. 
Nowadays, in the final decade of the twentieth century, it seems 
the Fourth of July is the one day when we shrug off suspicion and 
skepticism and return to the time when Americans believed the best 
of one another. We cut loose with the same enthusiasm, the same 
oratory and parades. We are all patriots on the Fourth. 
And why not? The day we celebrate is a milestone for mankind. On 
July 4, 1776, the Continental Congress adopted the Declaration of 
Independence, which held that all men are created equal and pro¬ 
claimed the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. 
44 

V- 
WSk 
• Norman 
: 
ESQjUI*CENTENNIAL< CELEBR 
OF ’THE ♦SIGNING*OrrnH3 
L ARATION » OF’INDEPEMOaiS 
Ben Franklin's Sesquicentennial (1926) 45 

Two Plumbers (1951) 
46 

Labor Day 
Labor Day, the first Monday in September, is a uniquely American 
holiday, and it has changed considerably as our times have changed. 
Beginning with the Eighties, it lost some of the drama and tension 
it previously expressed, when union labor and its political allies flexed 
their muscles. But Labor Day is well established as a national holiday. 
It is observed by all Americans. It still marks the end of summer 
vacations, the sure sign that it is time to prepare for school again, 
and the occasion for family outings of all sorts. 
y 
47 

Labor Awakens 
It was very different in Norman Rockwell's time, and especially in 
the strife-torn years of organizing, strikes, and struggles of the 1920s, 
1930s, and 1940s. In those decades, union men and women carried 
banners and flags in marches. 
Apparently, the American labor movement showed no interest in the 
European idea of celebrating Labor Day on May 1. The shift to the 
first Monday in September took place in 1882. That first Labor Day 
parade by 10,000 unionists was around Union Square—named, of 
course, for the federal union preserved in the recent war. 
Most Americans, then as now, were only marginally involved in the 
labor part of Labor Day. But in a most important sense, they were 
participants nonetheless. In the earlier years of this century. Labor 
Day, like the Fourth of July, May Day and Memorial Day, was a time 
for family outings, picnics, potato-sack races, horseshoes, and pick¬ 
up games of softball and baseball. 
In a way, the present, relaxed Labor Day honors workingmen and 
workingwomen in a general way that would probably have pleased 
Thomas Jefferson and other early Americans who visualized a nation 
of peaceful and industrious yeoman farmers and mechanics. 
48 

Mine America's Coal (1943) 49 

50 
Disabled Veteran (1944) 

' / 
Veterans Day 
The fourth Monday of October, was designated in 1954 as the day 
Americans honor the men and women who served in this country's 
wars. 
It incorporates many aspects of Armistice Day, November 11, on 
which the nation—together with the British, the French, and all the 
World War I allies—marked the close of the most horrible war men 
could then imagine. 
51 

A Tribute 
On Veterans Day we pay tribute to the men and women who have 
fought in America's wars, a holiday that honors all who served. 
Armistice Day was a tribute to those who had fallen in battle—and 
more: a day of renewed dedication and idealism. 
It had been called an age of innocence, when we believed that the 
Unknown Soldier had given his life in the war to end wars, to make 
the world, in Woodrow Wilson's phrase, “safe for democracy." But 
more than naivete was involved. The lesson the First World War 
taught Americans was the futility of war. At the eleventh hour of the 
eleventh day of the eleventh month, the nation observed a minute 
of silence. Then the bands struck up the old tunes—“Pack Up Your 
Troubles in Your Old Kit Bag," “Tipperary," “Over There"—and the 
soldiers marched in somber parade. 
52 

Harm 
Raet\ 
You Can Trust Me Dad (1917) 
53 

The War to End All Wars 
It was on November 11, 1918, at 11 a.m., that the Germans applied 
to the Allies for the armistice that ended the First World War. It had 
begun in August, 1914, and had slaughtered a generation of young 
Britons, Germans, and Frenchmen. The United States entered the 
war on April 16, 1917, and its fresh masses of troops, coupled with 
American manufacturing capacity, had turned the tide for the ex¬ 
hausted Allies. 
The horrors of the Civil War were more than fifty years past; the old 
people didn't dwell on them. Relatively few men fought in the Span- 
ish-American War, a brief one that had won America a Pacific empire, 
and no one recalled the toll disease had taken of our soldiers. 
54 

| -- 
■ 
i4f 
Carrying On (1920) 55 

World War II 
By the time of the Second World War, Norman Rockwell was older. 
He had shared America's experiences with the harsh realities of the 
age, and he knew—among other things—that war was no fun. The 
old cheerful spirit remains in his World War II paintings, but it is 
tempered by a realistic approach. The underlying mood is one of 
serious purpose rather than jaunty tours by ambassadors of good 
will. The nation knows now that its soldiers suffer, are wounded, 
and die in war. Battle is portrayed as deadly business. 
Still, there were happy interludes. Norman Rockwell's stock-char¬ 
acter soldier, Willie Gillis, goes through a series of adventures in the 
peacetime draft army and through much of the war. It was frustrating 
for Norman Rockwell when the model for Willie, a neighbor boy, 
shipped out after joining the Navy. 
56 

Willie Gillis: Food Package (1941) 
57 

Homecoming 
At last, the war was over, and the men and women came home. 
The artist welcomed them, paid tribute to their sacrifices, but seldom 
painted of war again. 
But Armistice Day remains the inspiration for a treasured American 
holiday. In 1921, to honor the dead in the same fashion as our allies 
who suffered such great losses, the United States sent an American 
soldier to France. The soldier selected one of the coffins of uniden¬ 
tified American soldiers and an American warship brought the body 
home for a state burial in Arlington National Cemetery. Ever since, 
private soldiers of the U.S. Army have done sentry duty at the tomb. 
58 

Homecoming Marine (1945) 
59 

In Memory 
Since 1921, on each Armistice Day and Veterans Day, the President 
makes the pilgrimage to Arlington Cemetery for a simple, touching 
tribute. The bugler sounds taps, a squad of riflemen fires three vol¬ 
leys, and the nation honors its war dead. 
The remains of unidentified men killed in the Second World War and 
in Korea have since been interred in the Tomb of the Unknown 
Soldier, now called the Tomb of the Unknowns. 
60 

Willie Gillis in Church (1942) 
61 

Something to Be Thankful for (1922) 
62 

' • / 
Chapter II 
Special Holidays 
In the centuries that stretch back to pre-history, holiday customs 
have been adopted, adapted, combined, and confused. Pagan cele¬ 
brations of fertility, of the planting and harvest seasons, of that glim¬ 
mer in the darkest time of year that made it evident that the days 
were getting longer again—all these have been incorporated willy- 
nilly into our special holidays. 
63 

64 
Happy New Year (1945) 

The New Year 
Americans celebrate the new year with the rest of the world. We 
did not originate the New Year's Eve party that marks the beginning 
of the year with an entirely different date. In the earliest times the 
end of the old year and beginning of the new one was always a time 
for celebration. The time of the new year varied from one society or 
religion to another, in midwinter or at planting time, but it always 
called for much noise. Americans can justifiably feel that they have 
long been preeminent in the field of exuberant and high-spirited New 
Year's celebrations. 
/ 
/ 
65 

Old Acquaintances 
Until the early years of this century, the genteel practice in this 
country was for friends and relations to exchange both gifts and visits 
on New Year's Day. 
Another custom that still survives is that of eating some form of pork 
on the first day of the year. Whether the dish is roast suckling pig 
or the ham hocks and beans popular in the South, the origin is Middle 
European. The symbolism is direct: this is the time for looking ahead 
and a hog, unlike the goose or turkey served a week earlier for 
Christmas dinner, characteristically roots forward when foraging for 
food. Also, in a time before diets and food warnings, fat was good. 
Serving pork was a symbolic supplication for a fat year—a prosperous 
future. 
66 

The Christmas Coach (1935) 
* 
67 

68 
Boy and Cupid (1924) 

Valentine's Day 
Saint Valentine's Day, February 14, is the day we make an outward 
show of affection to people we hold dear. Though named for a saint— 
there is no way of telling which of the three Saint Valentines, all born 
on February 14, is the Saint Valentine—it has no discernable religious 
significance, and apparently never did. 
Nevertheless, Valentine's Day has been celebrated since the Middle 
Ages. In former times, it was believed the birds mated on February 
14 in honor of one Saint Valentine or another. 
/ 
t 
69 

Tokens of Affection 
Of course, the Victorians, on both sides of the Atlantic, developed 
the lacy Valentine cards and flowery sentiments that set the pattern 
for the modern Valentine observance. For longer than anyone can 
say, Valentine's Day has been for lovers. 
In the matter of love, Americans of the first half of the twentieth 
century were considerably more reticent than in the current age, and 
Norman Rockwell's Valentine's Day paintings reflect this. They are 
about sentimentalizing, flirtation, and romancing. In the days of the 
Twenties and early Thirties—people did not flaunt passion or ad¬ 
vertise deep commitment. They did, however, freely announce in 
the words of a popular song, “Yes sir, that's my baby." 
70 

The Most Beloved American Writer (1937) 71 

Willie Was Different (1967) 
72 

Arbor Day 
.Arbor Day may very well be a holiday whose time has come, in 
view of the conservation and preservation of the environment. It had 
a homespun start in 1872, when a man named J. Sterling Morton 
succeeded in having it established in Nebraska, to stem the soil ero¬ 
sion he had observed there. His obvious solution, then as now, was 
to plant trees. 
Traditionally, the president plants a tree on the White House grounds 
each April 27, and Arbor Day is observed as a tree-planting day in 
every state but .Alaska. Arbor Day is observed on the third Friday in 
January in Florida; April 22 in Nebraska; the last Friday in April in 
Utah; and whatever date the governor selects in Wyoming. In West 
Virginia, there are two Arbor Days each year: one in the spring and 
one in the fall. 
/ 
1 
73 

A Living Legend 
It is an appropriate time to recall John Chapman, who in his own 
lifetime became a legend along the Western frontier as "Johnny Ap- 
pleseed." Chapman spent most of his life as a missionary and trav¬ 
eler, and always carried a gunny-sack filled with apple seeds, with 
which he planted countless orchards. He died in 1845, in Indiana. 
Many an apple tree survived him, and his legend and spirit are still 
alive. 
74 

HI mMwmm, 
Spring Flowers (1969) 75 

76 
Mother Tucking Children into Bed (1921) 
■lit 

Mother's Day 
The first Mother's Day observance in the United States was on May 
10, 1908, in the Andrews Methodist Church, in Grafton, West Vir¬ 
ginia. The observance came after a patient campaign by Anna M. 
Jarvis, a spinster who taught Sunday School in the church for 20 
years. Miss Jarvis was devoted to her mother, Anna Reese Jarvis, 
who had died in 1905. After that first service, a tribute to Mrs. Jarvis 
rather than all mothers, Miss Jarvis expanded her vision. 
By 1910, the governor of West Virginia proclaimed a statewide Moth¬ 
er's Day, as did the governors of Oklahoma and Washington. By 
1911, Mother's Day was observed in every state, in China, Japan, 
several African countries, Mexico and Canada. For years, Miss Jarvis 
traveled the country to promote her tribute to motherhood. But she 
came to regret the energy and devotion she had put into Mother's 
Day. She deplored the cards and gifts, the sales and advertisements, 
and ostentatious displays of later Mother's Days, and dismissed them 
as commercialization. She had become blind, and was both needy 
and disillusioned when she died in 1948. 
The idea for which she worked so earnestly survives her. Mother's 
Day, the second Sunday in May, remains universally popular. 
✓ 
t 
77 

Father's Day 
By coincidence, the first American Father's Day was also observed 
in West Virginia, and was the brain-child of a devoted daughter as 
well. Mrs. John Bruce Dodd, of Spokane, Washington first urged 
fellow-Americans to honor fathers. She was devoted to her widowed 
father, William Jackson Smart, who raised her and her five brothers. 
In 1916, President Woodrow Wilson proclaimed a national Father's 
Day, as did Calvin Coolidge, in 1924. Senator Margaret Chase Smith, 
of Maine, introduced a resolution to establish a permanent national 
Father's Day in 1957, but it was 1972 before President Richard M. 
Nixon signed a joint resolution passed by Congress establishing Fath¬ 
er's Day, but omitting any recurring date. Father's Day is customarily 
observed on the third Sunday in June. 
There is an ancient precedent for Father's Day. In Rome, Parentalia, 
from February 13 to 22, was the time of homage to departed parents. 
78 

^aicrpBQ^fTo 
K-tnuri tw^DD 
Dinner Jacket (1963) 
79 

Day in the Life of a Little Boy (1952) 
80 

• / 
Chapter III 
Holidays for Children 
Children participate in holidays with body and soul—totally invig- 
orated. Their exuberance shines through Norman Rockwell's art. Sev¬ 
eral holidays seem tailored for children to exercise their ingenuity 
and express their special talents. 
81 

April Fool Fishing (1945) 
82 

April Fool's Day 
N o one seems to know the origins of April Fool's Day, but it is dear 
to the hearts of American school children. It is recorded as far back 
as the Eighteenth Century in Britain and France, where it was ob¬ 
served by sending gullible people on pointless errands and by playing 
practical jokes in much the same fashion as it is marked in this country 
today. 
/ 
t 
83 

Easter (1955) 
84 

Easter 
Easter, in the Western church calendar, falls on the first Sunday 
following the full spring moon, and its observance incorporates the 
symbols, such as eggs and chicks and the rabbits and hares, that 
characterized pre-Christian spring fertility festivals. 
/ 
/ >* 
85 

New Beginnings 
It is the season of flowers, and the season of new beginnings. Since 
it can occur in either early or late spring, Easter heralds the earliest 
flowers and the urge to begin the garden. New clothes and new hats 
are a prerequisite for the Easter parade. A choir boy makes a last- 
minute effort to slick down his cow-lick. Females throughout the land 
primp before mirrors in their Easter finery. 
86 

Planting the Garden (1962) 
/ >> 
87 

From Time Immemorial 
In earliest Rome, eggs were given as prizes to winners of Easter 
foot-races run on oval race-courses. The ancients took their symbols 
seriously, and literally. It was the hare that represented the spring, 
or planting moon, because hares are born with their eyes open and 
rabbits are not. Another precursor of the Easter Bunny was the hare¬ 
like egg symbol of the Anglo-Saxon goddess of spring, Eostre. The 
Japanese have a high regard for the spring hare. 
88 

Stained Glass Window (1960) 
89 

Easter Finery 
Many Easter symbols and customs are direct and unequivocal. The 
Easter Parade is a direct descendent from the Emperor Constantine 
who required his council to wear finery to celebrate the resurrection. 
The custom of buying new bonnets and other apparel for the day is 
rooted in the ages-old superstition that new clothes at Easter bring 
luck for the year. The custom of rolling eggs on the White House 
lawn and other lawns is an ancient one, symbolic of rolling the stone 
away from the sepulcher. 
90 

Girl Choosing Hat (1931) 91 

Culinary Customs 
Hot cross buns on Good Friday are an adaptation from ancient 
rites, in which many peoples and tribes baked pastries as offerings. 
The Anglo-Saxons baked buns for their spring festival, and early 
missionaries added the cross of icing as a blessing. On one Good 
Friday in the eighteenth century, it was reported that 50,000 Lon¬ 
doners besieged the Old Chelsea Bun House and bought 150,000 hot 
cross buns. Another culinary custom, eating pancakes on Shrove 
Tuesday, is believed to be grounded on the need to use the flour, 
fat, and sugar that would not be needed for the 40-day Lenten fast. 
92 

Rural Vacation (1938) 
93 

I mm 
Springtime: Boy with Rabbit (1935) 
94 

• / 
May Day 
May Day, the spring festival, has celebrated the first spring plant¬ 
ing, the renewal of life, since time immemorial. It is quite recognizable 
as the feast day for Flora, the Roman goddess of flowers. It was the 
beginning of the year for the Druids, a time for purification. In Swe¬ 
den, May Day was at one time the occasion for mock battles between 
men representing winter and summer. 
/ 
i -V 
95 

Traditions 
Earlier in this century in America, May Day was observed in schools 
and on playgrounds. Children prepared May baskets with strips of 
colored paper and strung together flowers for decorations. They 
danced around the maypole, plaiting and unplaiting gaily colored 
strips of cloth or paper, fastened to the top of the pole. 
The tradition is still celebrated in Britain, especially in rural villages, 
where the May pole is decorated and both children and adults cel¬ 
ebrate with dancing. It could be that all that scrambling was the source 
for the World War II aviators' radio distress call, "Mayday! Mayday!" 
96 

Barefoot Boy Playing Flute (1938) 97 

A Celebration of Spring 
In earlier times, both in Britain and the United States, it was the 
custom to “bring in the May." People gathered flowers and branches 
to decorate their homes. The community selected a local girl as the 
Queen of May, and on May Day the young men drew her through 
the town on a cart. 
May heralds the spring flowers, the renewal of foliage in which rab¬ 
bits and other browsers can safely forage for succulent new shoots. 
It also used to be the time for the dreaded spring tonic, usually 
composed of sulphur and molasses. 
98 

The Music Master (1920) 
99 

Prom Time 
Spring is the time for romance and for school proms. Sweethearts 
are resplendent in their formal prom dress, and starry-eyed with 
thoughts of their futures, together or apart. For each heart that may 
have been broken on prom night, there was another that had pledged 
eternal love. 
100 

Prom Dress (1949) 
101 

Grandfather Frightened by Jack-o-Lantern (1920) 

/ 
Halloween 
Halloween embodies spirits of imps and hobgoblins, who lived in 
ancient times and in the minds of little children. Named after All 
Hallows' Eve, Halloween is a special holiday which gives children 
the chance to dress up in costume and visit their elders with that 
infamous demand for sweets, "Trick or Treat." 
By the end of October, people are ready for a holiday. The promise 
of autumn and Indian summer starting with Labor Day weekends 
has been fulfilled. The harvest festivals are to come with Thanksgiv¬ 
ing. And, as with most American holidays, there is ample historical 
precedent for a holiday on October 31. The Celtic Druids in Wales, 
Ireland, the Scottish highlands, and Brittany, celebrated New Year's 
Day November 1. 
103 

The Jack-o-Lantern 
The Jack-o-Lantern has an Irish story behind it. The legend is that 
Jack, a renowned drinker and mischief-maker, once tricked the devil 
into climbing a tree to get some juicy apples. He quickly carved the 
sign of the cross on the tree trunk, marooning Satan himself in the 
upper branches. Jack made the devil swear never to come after his 
soul again if he let him down, and the deal was struck. When Jack 
died and presented himself at the pearly gates, St. Peter sent him to 
the devil anyway. But the devil, still smarting from that apple tree 
trick, rejected Jack. He threw a coal from the fires of hell at Jack, who 
has been wandering between heaven and hell ever since. 
104 

mmm 
■Hi 
mmm 
m 11 
PSgfc, 
N o rnr*rA«r 
RocrtWe 
Man Playing Violin (1921) 
105 

Trick or Treat 
In Colonial times, October 31 was called "Mischief Night" and "Nut- 
crack Night." Until well into the twentieth century, the treats dis¬ 
tributed to diminutive ghosts and goblins were mainly apples and 
nuts. These same gifts were distributed in ancient Rome. The mis¬ 
chief, which by the early twentieth century had become the tricks, 
were fairly harmless stuff: ringing doorbells and running away; taking 
gates off their hinges; overturning outhouses. 
If the tricks have undergone some changes—after all, how often in 
modern America do you find an outhouse to overturn?—the old 
elements of witch and goblin costumes and children trooping from 
door to door survive. 
106 

Slim Finnegan (1916) 107 

The Discovery (1956) 
108 

Chapter IV 
Family Holidays 
Thanksgiving and Christmas seem to be the favorite holidays of the 
year and Norman Rockwell recorded them with extraordinary insight. 
It is the one season for homecoming, for the gathering of families. 
Perhaps this, combined with the nostalgia Americans have always 
felt for the good old days, accounts for the popularity of these two 
holidays. 
109 

Thanksgiving 
1 hanksgiving starts with the Pilgrims, those hardy and dour souls 
who arrived at Plymouth Rock, Massachusetts, in November, 1620, 
and celebrated their harvest and their survival in the wilderness the 
following year. 
Neither turkey nor pumpkin pie were part of the first Thanksgiving 
menu. The wild turkeys the Pilgrims encountered were extremely 
wily and elusive birds, not at all like our unintelligent domestic va¬ 
riety. The barnyard turkey did not then exist. It is a source of con¬ 
fusion that the guinea fowl brought over on the Mayflower were 
called turkeys, simply because the first guinea fowl seen in England 
had come from Turkey. 
It was a men-only celebration, and it lasted three days. Thirteen 
women had died in that hard first year, and it was left to four women 
and two teenage girls to prepare the banquet. 
In addition to venison, there was goose and local seafood, as well as 
eels, white bread, cornbread, leeks, watercress, and a variety of 
greens. For dessert, there were wild plums and dried berries. 
110 

Thanksgiving (1919) 
111 

The First Feast 
A n indian named Squanto joined the Pilgrims and remained with 
them until his death, in 1622. It is possible that without his help, the 
colony would not have survived that first winter. Squanto helped 
the Englishmen build their houses, and he instructed them in the 
ways of tracking the local game and finding the wild fruits and berries 
needed to supplement their ship-borne stock of food. Squanto had 
also instructed his new friends on cultivating the native corn (he 
specified that a fish be planted in each corn-hill), how to construct 
fish traps, and how to net herring.Despite the hardships and deaths, 
the Pilgrims had a lot to be grateful for on that first Thanksgiving. 
They had shelter—seven houses and seven other buildings. They 
had harvested 20 acres of corn, but harvested nothing from six acres 
planted with wheat, barley, and peas. 
The bounty of corn even permitted an increase in the ration of corn- 
meal. It seemed the colony, in spite of everything, was well launched. 
So the Pilgrims celebrated in style. They invited Massasoit, chief of 
the Wampanoags, who came with 90 braves. The colonists paraded, 
discharged blank charges in their muskets, and sounded bugles. They 
played stool ball, a game that resembled croquet. The colonists and 
Indians competed in races and jumping games, and the Indians dem¬ 
onstrated their skill with bow and arrow. 
The Indians outnumbered the Pilgrims two to one, and they brought 
five deer to the feast with them. 
112 

A Pilgrims Progress (1921) 
113 

A Family Affair 
Most of Norman Rockwell's Thanksgiving paintings—especially in 
his early years—refer closely to Thanksgiving traditions. The artist's 
characteristic light touch and observations of the human condition 
sparkle in his Thanksgiving art. 
He brings to life the joy that families share at this special holiday. 
Family gatherings, replete with enough food to feed an army, set the 
tone for the beginning of this special holiday season. 
114 

Co, 
m mJ 
L® 
,® i ■ « inn 
Lff Jit 
•i jgJ 
« j*je * mm m 
My- TS 
.mr i. k t, * ->i; -1 
t W.. 
Thanksgiving: Mother and Son Peeling Potatoes (1945) 
115 

116 
Gramps in the Snow (1937.) 

Christmas 
' / 
Christmas is a just about everyone's favorite holiday. While it is a 
time of Santa and gifts, of wonder and joy to children, it is much 
more to the grownups. It is the greatest family holiday of all. As far 
back as we can remember, from the appearance of that first street- 
corner Santa ringing his brass bell at his station next to the big cast- 
iron pot, anticipation and tension grew. By December 24, the radio 
was broadcasting little other than Christmas carols, the children were 
agog with excitement. 
/ 
f 
117 

The Anticipation 
By the time of Norman Rockwell and his several generations of 
contemporary Americans, the Christmas celebration had been well 
established for as far back as most people remembered. Americans 
embraced all the symbols and customs of Christmas. It is a religious 
holiday, but Americans, following the British tradition, have always 
emphasized the merry part of Merry Christmas. 
Ours is the old-time English Christmas, with only a few alterations. 
The domestic turkey, dressing, and cranberry sauce quickly replaced 
the Christmas goose so beloved by Dickens' characters. Our American 
contribution, pumpkin pie, doesn't seem to have made any converts 
overseas. 
118 

Children Looking in Toy Store Window (1920) 
119 

A Joyous Holiday 
It seems we've always exchanged Christmas cards. But the cards, 
too, are a fairly modern development. They were first exchanged in 
England in the 1840s and were decorated mostly with floral designs. 
Religious scenes appear to be a twentieth century development. 
Christmas carols and the custom of strolling through the town or 
neighborhood and singing to the people in their homes, is authen¬ 
tically an English heritage, and an old one. 
When Norman Rockwell began his career early in the twentieth 
century, Americans were celebrating Christmas in much the fashion 
we do today. We exchanged cards, sang carols, trimmed trees, pre¬ 
pared for the feast. Americans bought and hid Christmas presents 
and complained about the commercialization of the good old holiday, 
just as we do now, and counted the shopping days 'til Christmas. 
It is all very jolly and very happy, as it always was. And somehow, 
after all the shopping, wrapping, cooking, traveling, and tensions, 
we remember what it is about: peace on earth, good will toward men. 
120 

Christmas: Santa's Christmas List (1924) 
121 

The Day! 
Christmas is a religious holiday, to be sure, but it is also very much 
a secular holiday. It is in this secular sense, as a season to be jolly, 
that Norman Rockwell portrayed Christmas, just as he did many 
other holidays. To Americans of all generations, Santa Claus and the 
spirit of giving were and are the personifications of Christmas. This 
same spirit of giving need not be limited to one holiday, one time a 
year. Norman Rockwell knew and painted that very spirit. 
122 

ft? rrrtfwfl , 
Girl with Christmas Doll (1917) 
123 


Picture Credits: 
Triple Self Portrait, I960, endsheets, courtesy of Norman Rockwell 
Paintings Trust at Old Corner House, Stockbridge, Massachusetts. 
Liberty Bell, 1976, page 43, courtesy reprint from American Artist 
magazine with permission from BPI Communications, Inc. Copyright 
© 1976 BPI Communications, Inc. All rights reserved. 
Ben Franklin's Sesquicentennial, 1926, page 45, courtesy of Bernard & 
S. Dean Levy, Inc., New York. 
Disabled Veteran, 1944, page 50, courtesy of Judy Goffman Fine Art, 
American Illustrators Gallery, New York City. 
Barefoot Boy Playing Flute, 1938, page 97, courtesy of Judy Goffman 
Fine Art, American Illustrators Gallery, New York City. 
A Pilgrim's Progress, 1921, page 113, courtesy of Judy Goffman Fine 
Art, American Illustrators Gallery, New York City. 


Born in New York City in 1894, 
NORMAN ROCKWELL devoted 
his artistic career to capturing the 
essence of American family tradi¬ 
tions. Many of his most famous 
and most beloved paintings 
appeared as Saturday Evening Post 
cover illustrations. 
In 1977, the year before his death, 
Rockwell was awarded the Presi¬ 
dential Medal of Freedom for his 
"vivid and affectionate portraits of 
our country." 
He worked without pause almost to 
the date of his death in 1978. His 
legacy is a collection of Americana 
dear to the hearts of all of us. 
Milton Garrison is enjoying the 
United States now after some 20 
years in the Orient, the Middle 
East and London. His first Norman 
Rockwell book was Norman Rock¬ 
well's American Fisherman. 
Printed in Hong Kong 
CRESCENT BOOKS 
Distributed by 
Crown Publishers, Inc. 
225 Park Avenue South 
New York, New York 10003 

Norman Rockwell’S 
AMERICAN 
HOLIDAYS 
by Milton Garrison 
At last, the timeless works of America's beloved 1 
Rockwell have been brought endearingly to life 
pages of this new series. Showcasing the geniu; 
great storyteller, each book is replete with Rockwe 
trations—more than 60 in all—many in glorious c 
Z8S-V9VH99 
Both enchanting reminiscences and detailed accounts of 
bygone days refresh the memories of those who were 
there, and capture the imaginations of those too young 
to remember. Encompassing our national holidays, spe¬ 
cial holidays, and family and children's holidays, Nor¬ 
man Rockwell's cherished illustrations continue to 
embody countless facets of American life. 
9780517031735 
11/05/2019 13.36-2 

