
 
Norse, Celtic Mythology & Runes:
Explore The Timeless Tales Of Norse &
Celtic Folklore, The Myths, History, Sagas &
Legends + The Magic, Spells & Meanings of
Runes. (3 books in 1)
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sofia Visconti
 

© Copyright 2021 - All rights reserved.
The content contained within this book may not be reproduced, duplicated, or transmitted without
direct written permission from the author or the publisher.
Under no circumstances will any blame or legal responsibility be held against the publisher, or
author, for any damages, reparation, or monetary loss due to the information contained within this
book, either directly or indirectly. 
Legal Notice:
This book is copyright protected. It is only for personal use. You cannot amend, distribute, sell, use,
quote or paraphrase any part, or the content within this book, without the consent of the author or
publisher. 
Disclaimer Notice:
Please note the information contained within this document is for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All effort has been executed to present accurate, up to date, reliable, complete
information. No warranties of any kind are declared or implied. Readers acknowledge that the author
is not engaged in the rendering of legal, financial, medical, or professional advice. The content within
this book has been derived from various sources. Please consult a licensed professional before
attempting any techniques outlined in this book.
By reading this document, the reader agrees that under no circumstances is the author responsible for
any losses, direct or indirect, that are incurred as a result of the use of the information contained
within this document, including, but not limited to, errors, omissions, or inaccuracies.

Click Here
 

Table of Contents
Book 1: Celtic Mythology
Introduction
Chapter 1: Deities of the Celts
Chapter 2: Brittany Celtic Myths and Legends
Chapter 3: Cornish Myths and Legends
Chapter 4: Welsh Celtic Myths and Legends
Chapter 5: Irish Celtic Myths and Legends
Chapter 6: Scottish and Isle of Man (Manx) Celtic Myths and Legends
Chapter 7: An Overview of Popular Celtic Fairy Tales
Chapter 8: Celtic Mythical Creatures and Beasts
Chapter 9: Celtic Bards, Druids, Holidays, and Festivals
Conclusion
References
Introduction

Book 2: Norse Mythology
Chapter 1: A Brief History of the Norseman
Chapter 2: The Viking Life
Chapter 3: The Norse Myth of Creation
Chapter 4: The Aesir Gods
Chapter 5: The Vanir Gods
Chapter 6: Viking Spirituality
Chapter 7: Mythological Creatures
Chapter 8: Ragnarok
Conclusion
References

Book 3: Runes
Introduction
Chapter One: Ancient Origins
Chapter Two: Understanding Runic Alphabets
Chapter Three: Spell Casting and Divining
Chapter Four: The New World

Chapter Five: Witness Your Future
Chapter Six: Runic Exercises & Preparing Your Mind
Chapter Seven: Rituals to Accompany the Study
Chapter Eight: Facts about the Blank Rune and Whether You Should Read
It
Chapter Nine: Runic Spreads
Chapter Ten: Hidden Runic Roots
Chapter Eleven: Uncomfortable Truths about Norse Mythology
Chapter Twelve: Runes and Naming of the Seven Days of the Week
Chapter Thirteen: Runes and the Power Plants' Flowers
Chapter Fourteen: Going Deeper
Conclusion
Resources

 
Celtic Mythology:
Delve Into The Depths Of Ancient Celtic
Folklore, The Myths, Legends & Tales of The
Gods, Goddesses, Warriors, Maidens,
Monsters & Magic
 
 

Introduction
Since we were small children, we’ve learned of fairy stories, tales of great
heroes, Gods, Goddesses, and mythical creatures such as unicorns or
dragons. They capture the imagination, teach various life lessons, give
hope, and encourage you, especially for most children who grow up in
Brittany, Scotland, Cornwall, Wales, and Ireland. Children lucky enough to
grow up in these societies get to live the tales as they passed from
generation to generation. Some schools still teach mythology in these areas
to keep the old traditions, beliefs, and ways alive.
To the rest of the world, however, mythology and related subjects can be
quite confusing. Instead of getting lost in the romance, power, intrigue, and
magic of mythology, you might often end up getting frustrated with the
complexity of the way the story is written. I have published many books
about runes, astrology, tarot, the Wiccan ways, and ancient mythology. My
books are popular because they are well structured, engaging, entertaining,
and written to take the reader on a journey through the topic.
Celtic Mythology: Delve Into The Depths Of Ancient Celtic Folklore, The
Myths, Legends & Tales of The Gods, Goddesses, Warriors, Maidens,
Monsters & Magic delves into the depth of Celtic mythology. By the end of
this book, you will know who the Celts were, as well as their beliefs; you
will also have a better knowledge of their Gods and Goddesses. If you were

looking for a book about Celtic mythology to captivate your interest, this
book is for you. You will learn about heroic adventures, mythical creatures,
intriguing fairy tales, fair maidens, magic, folklore, and more.
Who Were the Celts?
The Celts were an extensive collection of tribes that originated in the
central European Alps. They were a group of people from all walks of life,
such as nobility, farmers, druids, commoners, noble knights, and warriors.
The Celtic culture has been around since 1200 B.C. They were a nation that
grew to occupy most of the European continent, expanding from Turkey in
the east through to Ireland in the west. The Celts were the power in central
Europe for many years before the Romans.
The Celtic people were bound by their customs, beliefs, and language; each
tribe acted independently of the other. They had no formal governance or
organization, although they valued their nobility, serving them with honor
and pride. The Celts took war seriously and put a high emphasis on winning
their battles. They also honored their Gods and Goddesses with significant
monuments and festivals, which they celebrated through their astronomical
calendar.
The Celtics would honor their dead by constructing tombs aligned with the
stars. All of nature and her creatures were viewed as sacred to the Celts and
treated with great respect. Celtic mythology has been around for as long as
the Celtic people have, but it was never well documented except for bits
and pieces put together by the earlier monks. It was the Romans that first
recorded the Celtic beliefs, but they saw the Celts as barbarians and their
enemies. Thus, many of the Roman accounts of the Celtic way of life were
tainted. The Romans recorded the Celtic God’s names with the Roman
equivalent for them. It was mostly Christian missionaries in the eleventh
century that transcribed the various pieces of scripts that had been written
by the druids on bark or wands of aspen. The Celts were highly intelligent
and excellent artisans and engineers; they wrote in a script called Ogham.

But to them, their culture was of the utmost importance, and they preferred
to pass down their stories, beliefs, knowledge, and skills verbally.
As you can imagine through the ages as stories passed from generation to
generation, elements were added to them or exaggerated. Some stories were
probably lost altogether, either forgotten or woven into another tale, leaving
us with the ones we have today. Most of the myths, legends, and stories
about Celtic mythology, as we know it in the modern world, come from the
Welsh and the Irish. Legends that originated in Brittany, France, such as
Isolde and Tristram, were retold by the Irish or Welsh. When the Romans
started to be the dominating force in Europe, there were not many Celtic
regions except for Britany, Spain, Scotland, Ireland, Cornwall, and Wales.
Today the most abundant remaining Celtic culture can be found in Ireland,
Scotland, and Wales.
Celtic Beliefs
The Celts had hundreds of tales, which would be sung in a lyrical form by
the bards or by stories the village elders would tell. Each tribe of Celts had
their own Gods that they worshiped to keep their village safe and
prosperous. There are, however, a lot of commonalities between their Gods,
stories, myths, creatures, and legends. Most of the Celtic mythology, as it is
known today comes from the Irish.
Celtic Mythology has two main groups; each group shares a related
language and beliefs. These groups are called Brythonic, for Cornish,
Brittany, and Welsh, and Goidelic, for Irish, Scottish, and Manx.
Celtics Ways of Worship and Religious Sacrifice
The earliest Celts built significant monuments in their Gods’ and
Goddesses’ honor, but Nemetons were the place they would gather or go to
worship them. A nemeton is a large grove of trees which the Celts held as

sacred. References to how sacred trees were to the Celts are in the tales of
heroes or heroines named after trees.
The custom of building temples of worship came about during Roman times
for the Celts. This was a tradition that they passed on to the tribes that
displaced them, such as the Germanic tribes. The Romans like to paint the
Celts as a bloody barbaric race that would participate in human sacrificial
rituals as a standard practice.
Julius Caesar himself wrote, “In times of danger, the Celts believed that
unless the life of a man is offered, the mind of the immortal gods will not
favor them” (Classic Authors Writing About the Ancient Celts, n.d.). Up
until quite recently, it was thought that a lot of what Julius Caesar and the
Romans had written about the Celtic beliefs was hearsay. Archeologists
have found that the Celtic druids may have practiced human sacrifice and
maybe even cannibalism (Owen, 2009).
In ancient times tribes would go to any lengths to win if that meant taking
the potions mixed by the druids or sacrificing prisoners or even their
noblemen. As stated before, the Celts held victory in the highest regard and
thus had some of the fiercest warriors.
Some of the Druids, such as the Druids of Erin, were considered to be
sorcerers; they told fortunes, prophesied, made charms, and put a lot of faith
in luck. Thus, they believed there were lucky and unlucky days and would
look out for omens. As they mainly worshipped the sun and the moon,
many of their festivals and rituals revolved around certain days of the year,
such as November for Samhain (moon) and May for Bel-Taine (sun).


Chapter 1: Deities of the Celts
There are many different Gods and Goddesses throughout Celtic
mythology, but there are a few common deities or variants of some of the
more popular ones.
Popular Celtic Gods and Goddesses
The following deities are the more well known of the God and Goddesses in
Celtic mythology. Some of the Celtics groups may have a different name or
a variant of their name. As scholars of modern times that study Celtic
mythology come to find, the Celts were not very good at keeping their
pantheons in a neat row—contributing to the reason why one may see
different versions of names of one deity.
The All-Powerful God
The Dagda (translates as the Good God), was the supreme God of the
Celts. The Dagda is referred to as Sucellos in Gaul, where he is depicted
with a hammer and cup.
Unlike in most other mythologies, the Supreme Celtic God was not the God
of anything in particular, like the Supreme God Zeus in Greek mythology,
who was the God of the Sky and Thunder.
In Irish mythology, The Dagda is always referred to as having immense
power and holding a club. With one blow, The Dagda’s club could kill nine
men. The hilt of the club, however, could bring the dead back to life. The
Dagda is usually standing near or next to a cauldron that was known as the
Undry. This cauldron was one that could fill up everyone in the village and
keep their bellies full, as it was a bottomless cauldron.

The Dagda was the protector of the various Celtic tribes. He watched over
them like a father-figure and made sure the village was kept safe as well as
prosperous. In Ireland, he was the king of the Tuatha de Danann. The
Tuatha de Danann were the children of an earth Goddess named Danu.
Danu has no surviving tales about her origins other than being the mother of
the Tuatha de Danann. There is also a lot of debate about her name and the
meaning thereof (Danu (Irish Goddess). n.d.).
The Dagda rose to power by defeating Nuada. The laws in those days stated
that for a person to become king, they had to be fit and their body whole.
The Dagda wounded Nuada and took over his throne as the All-Father. He
lived in a place called Brú na Bóinne, a known philanderer that had many
lovers and lots of children.
The Dagda was said to be a giant of a man. Because of his size, his clothes
were always too tight, and his stomach would stick out of his shirt. The
same was true for his trousers, where the top of his buttocks stuck out. He
was an offish God that wore a woolen cloak. His face was unshaven,
leaving him with a long curly, unruly beard. Because of his incredible good
looks, people barely noticed his attire. He may have been offish,
philandering, and quite offensive, but he was also witty, wise beyond
compare, and Wiley.
The Dagda’s holy day is the 9th of August.
The Queen of Demons, or Phantom Queen
The Morrigan, sometimes spelled Morrigna, was the wife of The Dagda.
Her name may sound familiar to those who love the Arthurian legends
where she was known as Morgan le Fay or Morrigan the fairy. She was a
fearsome deity as the Goddess of destiny and death.
As the Goddess of Fate, Morrigan was turned to before a battle offering
favor to the heroes of the battlefields, both warriors and Gods alike. She
was a triple Goddess comprising three of the most powerful Celtic
Goddesses. She would appear on the battlefield as either a raven or crow to

relish over the blood spilled. She would carry off the fallen in a conspiracy
of ravens.
War and death are what Morrigan reigned over most of all, she was
associated with ravens that would always be present somewhere on a
battlefield. Before a battle, Morrigan would appear to either the kings and
queens or warriors of the side she favored. For a price, she would offer up a
prophecy or share their fate. As she could see everything in the future,
including the end of the world, her prophecies were never wrong.
There are many stories where Morrigan appears as three Goddesses, there is
a bit of inconsistency as the names of the trio. Although most tend to lean
towards her sisters, Banba, Fódla, and Ériu, making up the triple Goddess.
Morrigan’s title as the Queen of Demons, or Phantom Queen, stems from
her link to the dead and the underworld. She was the daughter of a Mother-
Goddess, Ernmas. Ernmas was the daughter of the king of the Tuatha Dé
Danann, Nuada. Morrigan’s father is not known. Along with her sisters
mentioned above, there were another two, Macha and Badb. Morrigan had
five brothers, namely, Ollom, Glon, Gnim, Coscar, and Fiacha.
Master of Skills
Lug or Lugh reigned over kings, rulership, justice, and was the God of the
kings. While he lived he was the first Tuatha Dé Danann chief Ollam. This
was a testament to him being a judge, ruler, and poet. Upon Lug’s death, the
position of Ollam became ranked in most of the courts in Ireland. He
carried a lightning spear that no mortal or God could withstand called the
Assal.
Lug was both a trickster and master of all arts as well as a devious warrior
who had no qualms stooping to tricks to get his way. Lug was celebrated on
Lughnasa, August the 1st, which is the start of the harvest season. The first
of the finest fruit and vegetable pickings for the season would be offered to
Lug.

Lug’s name has a few possible meanings, some of them include “to bind by
oath,” which would reference his role as a ruler of contracts and oaths.
Another possible meaning would be “artful hands,’’ which would reference
his mastery of the arts. One other possible meaning would be “light,’’ as he
wields the lightning spear. The most popular name for Lug was “of the long
arm” about the long spear of light.
Lug also had a mixed culture which made him a unique character in that he
was born from a Fomorian mother, Ethliu. His mother's father was the
dreaded Fomorian king Balor. His father was Cian of the Tuatha Dé
Danann; Lug’s paternal grandfather was a healer of the tribe named Cedh.
Lug grew up with foster parents, but who those foster parents were is a
matter of great debate amongst scholars. Some of the potential candidates
that pop up in scripts are the Queen of the Firbolg, Tailtiu. Another is the
God of the smiths Gavida or Manannán, who was the Irish sea god.
There is no mention of siblings, but Lug did have many wives, namely Nás,
Buach, and Buí. Some of Lug's more notable children were Cú Chulainn
who he had with Deichtine, a mortal woman. Another would be the son
born to him by Nás, the daughter of the king of Britain.
Lug was a highly-skilled character that served as the God of justice. His
judging was swift, final, and given without mercy. He is also the inventor of
entertainment such as fidchell, which was a game much like chess and
horse-racing. He loved sports and many that are still played today he was
attributed to.
Lug dwelled at Moytura in County Sligo, and he had another residence at
Tara in County Meath.
Ruler of Winter
Caillech is the Veiled One, Goddess of the winds and cold, and controller
of the winter weather. Still today there are some places in Ireland, Scotland,
and the Isle of Man that believe in Caillech. She is known as a Divine hag
that controlled not only how long the winter would be, but how grueling it

would be. “Caillech” means hag or old woman, so many scholars think that
she may have gone by another name.
Some depict her as Biróg, who saved Lug when he was a baby, or she could
have been one of Lug’s wives, Buí. There are quite a few regions in
Scotland and Ireland that are named after her, such as the ‘‘Storm Hag’’
found in Scotland. “The Hag of Beara” in County Cork, Ireland, is another
such place.
Cailleach appears in many different forms, depending on the mythology. In
the Isle of Man, she is a shapeshifter that likes to take the form of a huge
bird. In other areas, she could commit great feats like riding storms and
jumping over tall mountains. Her skin was either blue or an eerie, deathly
white, and she had red teeth. She liked to adorn herself in garments from
which skulls hung.
Most of the tales about Cailleach don’t make her out to be good or evil. She
had a hammer that helped her to control the weather and shape much of the
landscape. When it flooded it was said to be because of the magic well
Cailleach controlled, which had overflowed. She could be a wild
destructive force that blew through villages on the backs of raging storms.
But she was also a lover of all kinds of animals, for which she was known
to tend to throughout the icy winter months.
There were two faces to Caillech, an old hag through the winter and a
young woman through the spring and summer. In Irish legends, Caillech
was only able to regain her youth in the spring for seven periods. After the
seventh period, she had to remain as the old crone she was through the
winter months.
In Manx and Scotland's legends, Caillech would transform into the Goddess
Brigid. Her transformation would take place at the fertility festival of
Beltane on the 1st of May. It was a tradition for the Celt to dedicate the last
of the harvested grain to her by using it to start the next crop.
Being the Goddess that forged all the landscape, none could rule over it
without first getting her approval. Some of the most inaccessible and
unforgiving landscapes throughout the Gaelic Celts is dedicated to Caillech.

The only known family of Caillech was Bodach. Bodach was a trickster
spirit, well known in Scottish myths. Although she had quite a few children
with Bodach, she also had many others with her many other husbands.
Through Caillech’s summer transformation back to her youth, she would
once again become a maiden. Being an immortal, Caillech got to birth her
children, their children, and so on, watch them age, and die. She outlived all
of her family and is rumored to be an ancestor to nearly every Celtic tribe in
Ireland, Scotland, and the Isle of Man.
Keeper of the Cauldron of Inspiration
Ceridwen originates from Welsh mythology and is a great sorceress, or
white witch. There are many ways that her name can be spelled, including
Cerrydwen or Kerrydwen. She is known as the Goddess of creation, and has
a cauldron in which she brews powerful potions. These potions can change
her looks, they can bring about beauty in people, as well as imbue them
with knowledge. As a Goddess of creation, she is possibly the most
powerful of all the witches of sorceresses in Celtic mythology.
Ceridwen has a magical throne from which she can lend her powers to
others at her will. From her cauldron, she offers others the gift of awen,
which is the power of insight and spiritual strength. Awen is a status used
by the Druids, which is covered in another chapter in this book. Ceridwen’s
story was told long before the rise of Christianity; scholars deduce that she
was written as a sorceress rather than a Goddess by Christian monks.
She is a white witch, meaning she only uses her powers for good and to
help others, though her cauldron has both the power to imbue gifts and the
power to harm. Once a potion from her cauldron is taken, that person can
have the potion again. A few drops could do them fatal harm. On occasion
she was known to get upset, but according to the myths she never did much
harm.
Tacitus the Bald (Tegid Foel), is Ceridwen’s husband and they lived at Bala
Lake where he was a formidable ruler. They had a beautiful daughter named
Creirwy; she was as fair as any maiden could be. Their son, however, was
deformed and a bit demented. His name was Morfran Afaggdu, and it was

written that his skin was burned. In Arthurian legend, Morfran is one of
King Arthur's warriors.
Later in her life, Ceridwen gives birth to another son, Taliesin. Taliesin is
often thought to be the origins of Merlin, the powerful wizard in the courts
of king Arthur. Taliesin was a bard, but he was also gifted with his mother's
powers. There is more about Taliesin in this book in a later chapter, as he
was an important bard and advisor to many a king of Britain.
Ceridwen’s cauldron of inspiration appears in many Celtic myths, and she
shares some commonalities with other sorceresses in Slavic and Greek
mythologies.
The Mother Goddess
Danu, an ancient Goddess, who was known as the mother of all the other
Celtic Gods. She is also quite the mystery to Celtic mythology scholars, as
there is not much written or known about her. Some theories link Danu to
the Danube river which suggests she was a river Goddess with connections
to the fairy mounds, dolmens, and fairies themselves.
Royalty would be blessed by Danu with wealth, power, and many other
gifts. Danu was the Goddess who ensured that the Tuatha Dé Danann were
highly skilled craftsmen and bore many exceptional talents. Even though
most of her origins remain a mystery, the Irish depended on Danu to bless
everything from good weather to health, and prosperity.
There is no reference to who Danu’s husband was, but she was the mother
or maternal grandparent to all of Tuatha Dé Danann's divine members.
God of the Wild Hunt
Herne was known as the God of the wild hunt and vegetation as well as the
God of the commoners. Like a lot of the Celtic Gods, most of the story of
Herne was lost due to poor transcription. He also mainly appears in British
Celtic Folklore as he was known to haunt the forests of Windsor. In

folklore, Herne was thought to have taken his own life; it was due to the
shame of his death that he became a cruel, embittered figure.
He was a ghostly figure that would haunt the Herne Oak tree. People would
know he was around when they heard the rattling of chains and eerie
moans. All decay that was found in a forest or animal was associated with
him. It was said that he could make a tree or creature wither and die by a
mere touch. If he came near a farmer's cows he could produce blood instead
of milk.
As the stories of Herne progressed he became depicted with antlers upon
his head, he carried a horn and was accompanied by vicious hounds. A
sighting of Herne was taken as a bad omen that would mean sure death or a
disaster would ensue.
Wild God of the Forest
Cernunnos was a horned God that could tame any wild beast or creature.
He was known as the mediator of both man and nature. An ancient God of
the Gauls with a name meaning “horned one,” he was also known as “God
of the wild places.”
Although he was primarily a God of the Gauls, there are many other Gods
throughout Celtic myths that share his likeness and attributes. Some believe
that Cernunnos was also a fertility God or God of life because of his love
for, and way with, all-natural life.
He loved animals and would have gatherings in the woods where he would
feast on wild berries, vegetables, and fruits. The animals that would gather
together around him, and did so without preying on each other. Thus
wolves, birds, snakes, deer, and so on would all come together in peace
around him. Cernunnos could calm all creatures and make them live in
peace side by side.
For the rural tribes, Cernunnos was the God that provided for their
settlements and protected them against evil or raiders. Cernunnos was

depicted with horns and a beard as the spirit of the wild hunt. Thus villagers
looked to him for guidance to make their hunting prosperous.
Hearth Goddess of Ireland
Brighid, or Brigid, is the Goddess of life and fertility, she was also known
as the Exalted One. Due to her association with life and fertility, she was
also the Goddess of spring. She is celebrated on the holiday called Imbolc,
which takes place on the 1st of February, mid-winter.
She is primarily an Irish Celtic Goddess, but as with the many other Celtic
Goddesses she shares commonalities with other Celtic Goddesses. St.
Brigid of Kildare, a Catholic saint, has a lot of similarities to this Irish
Goddess. There are a lot of Irish waterways that are named for her and as
such, she came to be the Goddess of the Wells.
As the Goddess of life, she was filled with all the contradictions that go
with life. On one hand, she was kind, caring, gentle and healing, a nurturing
mother figure. On the other side of her personality was a burning fire of
passions that would rage against injustice. Her fire and passion were
depicted in her image of flowing red locks and her cloak made of
sunbeams.
Brighid was an inspirational Goddess which can be seen in the many
poems, songs, and text written about her through the ages. Because of her
affiliation with the sun, she was sometimes referred to as the Goddess of the
sun. Most of the pictures of her show her wearing her cloak of sunbeams
referenced earlier in this section. The Celts accredited her with always
knowing what was needed, hence her ability to heal and insight. The Imbolc
celebrates the breaking of winter's hold over the sun as it starts to return to
the land.
Brighid was the daughter of the Dagda, and as such, she had many powerful
gifts. Being his daughter lifted her to an exalted position as she was held in
high esteem by the Celts. Bres, the High King of the Tuatha Dé Danann,
was her husband. They had a son, Ruadán, who was known as the God of
mystery or espionage. He was often used by his father to infiltrate their

enemies' camps and spy on them to give their warriors an edge on the
battlefield.
The God of Storms
Taranis is an important part of Celtic mythology. He is the God of thunder
and was depicted by a Celtic symbol of the sacred wheel. Said to move in a
flash across the sky, he would travel across the universe at high speed.
The God of storms and bringer of thunder was associated with bad weather.
Because of his connection to the sacred Celtic wheel symbol, he was
alternatively known as the Wheel God. In our time we at least have a basic
understanding of the storms that rip across the skies. In ancient times they
did not have the same understanding, so it was only natural the Celtic
culture of old would be terrified of them.
It was that terror that drove the early Celts to deem Taranis worthy of
whatever sacrifice it took to quiet a raging storm. According to the Romans,
if the storm was too great the Celts would have no problem with sacrificing
a human to please Taranis. He was the leader of all the other Gods, and as
such also their protector. Humans wanted to keep in his good stead, as he
wielded a lightning bolt and could move faster than a striking snake.
In Irish mythology, Taranis is known as Tuireann and Ambisagrus in Gaul.
The God of War
Neit died at the Second Battle of Moytura while fighting alongside the
Tuatha dé Danann. He was the uncle of Dagda and husband to Badb and
Nemain. Neit was the God of War in Irish mythology, a fierce master of the
art of battle. The Fomorian Dot was his son and Balor, the king of the
Fomorian was his grandson.
There is not a lot written about Neit, though he tends to have played a major
role in fighting for the domination of Ireland. In Gaul, he is called Neto and
bears a common likeness to Apollo from Roman myths and legends.

 


Chapter 2: Brittany Celtic Myths and Legends
Brittany is in the far northwest regions of France, with its capital being
Rennes. It consists of beautiful small islands and idyllic coastal towns.
Although still spoken in some parts of Brittany, Breton was once the
dominant language. It is steeped in Gaulish history and takes pride in its
Celtic heritage.
The Bretons were originally from Great Britain. They settled along the
shores of north-west Gaul, or what we know today as France. They fled
Britain when the Anglo-Saxons invaded and made Gaul their new home, as
well as the place where their myths and legends were born. Brittany forms
part of the Brythonic Celtic culture.
Popular Myths and Legends of Brittany
Like all the other Celtic tribes, the Bretons held their traditions in high
esteem and took their beliefs seriously. This chapter tells the stories of some
of the more popular myths and legends of the Bretons.
Ankou
There are not many graveyards in Brittany that do not have a stone statue of
a hooded figure guardian at its gates. This stone figure is known as Ankou,
a spirit that looks after the graveyard and ensures that the souls of the dead
move on as they should. The Ankou is a hooded figure that carries a scythe
that bears a resemblance to what we know to be the Grim Reaper. He is
often mistaken as death. Often pictures of Ankou will have a wheelbarrow
or cart near or with the hooded figure. This is the cart he collects the souls
of the dead in.

The Ankou at each gravesite only gets to be the hooded spirit for a year.
Each year a new Ankou takes over the role of the watcher of the dead. As
legend has it, the last person to be buried at the end of each year takes over
the role of Ankou.
The Midnight Washerwoman (Les Lavandières)
There are a few stories about the three women who appear in the dead of
night at the water's edge to do the washing. Most accounts of them are of
small women with webbed feet and ghostly pale skin. They wash the
shrouds of those who are about to die.
These three women are incredibly strong, even though they are quite small
in size. They do not like to be disturbed when they are doing their laundry
and will curse any who dare do so. They may ask a stranger to help them,
and if the stranger refuses they will drown or have a bone in their body
broken.
In some stories, the three women are sinners that have been damned for all
eternity to wash the shrouds of those about to die. They have been known to
wash blood-stained clothes of people who are about to die in battle, and so
on. Although they tend to shy away from the living or move them along if
they are spotted, they are not to be trifled with. The best way to stay out of
their grasp or get cursed is to not be out too late at night.
Mythical City of Ys
Like most myths, there are a few versions of the city of Ys which was
fabled to have been engulfed by the sea. The legend has the city of Ys being
built by the king of Cornouaille, Gradlon the Great (Gradlon Mawr).
Cornouaille is in the Southern part of Brittany. Ys was rumored to be in
Douarnenez Bay. It was one of the most beautiful cities around and was
built below sea level. To keep the town from flooding, huge sea walls
protected the city. When the tide was low the gates of the walls would be
left open, but when the seas were high they would be locked tight to keep
the water out.

There was only one key to the gate of the tidal walls which Gradlon wore
around his neck at all times. Only he could lock or unlock the gates that
protected the city. Gradlon fell in love with a beautiful woman who was
half human and half fairy. Together they had a daughter, Princess Dahut.
Because of his stormy relationship with the fairy he loved, he kept Dahut
and raised her in the city of Ys. Dahut loved and worshipped the water and
refused to give up her pagan ways, even when her father converted to
Christianity.
Dahut was not a nice person and dreamt of only great riches and a place
where she could be free to do and live as she wanted to. To fill the city with
wealth, Dahut gifted a dragon to the people who live in the city. The dragon
would help them capture merchant ships and fill the city with riches. Soon
the city became the richest and most powerful in all of Brittany.
Dahut had a habit of killing her lovers, of which there were many. One day
a knight, dressed in red and as handsome as any man she had seen before,
arrived in Ys. She seduced the knight and the evening a storm broke out.
The knight seemed intrigued by the waves pounded against the walls and
gate, but Dahut was not worried. She told the knight that the gates and walls
of the city could withstand any storm.
The knight got Dahut to steal the key from around her father's neck while
he slept and give it to him. The knight opened the gates in the middle of the
raging storm and the waters started to flood the town. It was then that the
red knight revealed himself to be the devil and the town, now debauched in
sin and fallen into ruin, sank into the sea. Gradlon climbed upon his magic
horse, Marvarc’h, but as they started to leave the city, Gradlon was warned
to leave the demon Dahut behind. So Gradlon pushed Dahut off his horse
and got himself to safety.
Dahut, however, was pulled into the sea and turned into a mermaid
(morgen). She became a water spirit that was doomed to swim the sea for
eternity. In most myths, mermaids are believed to drown men.
Korrigans

The Korrigans are small fairy-like creatures, with the word Korrigan
meaning small dwarf. They are small water sprite creatures that can be
found near rivers and springs. Said to appear as beautiful golden-haired
lusty maidens during dusk, they lure men into their beds–only their beds are
watery graves for any man who is tempted by these small sirens.
If they were to be seen during the day, their appearance would be different
and not at all alluring. During the day their eyes are red, the skin all
wrinkled, and their hair scraggly and white, much like that of an old
chrome. This is the reason why they are not seen during the day, as they
hide away so people cannot see what they truly look like.
Much like sirens from dusk and well into the night during the moonlight,
they can be seen brushing their long golden hair and singing. Their voice
and beauty lure men in, making them fall deeply in love before the
Korrigan drowns him.
They were also known to steal human children, especially babies, swapping
them out for changelings.
Lady of the Lake
Viviane, or the legendary Lady of the Lake, was believed to have raised
Lancelot and stolen the heart of the wizard Merlin. She was the Lady that
gave Arthur Excalibur, that proved him to be the true king of Britain.
Viviane was a faerie who enchanted Merlin. Although Merlin could tell his
own fate, he could not stop himself from falling in love with her. He built
her a magical crystal palace in the waters that surround the Chateau de
Comper in Brittany. This palace was a testament to his great love for her.
But Viviane did not return his love, instead, she used him to teach her some
magic. Viviane tricked Merlin into meeting her at the fountain of youth,
where she restored the magician's youthful features. Once he was young
and virile again Viviane trapped him in a magical prison, where he died a
slow death.

Merlin
Merlin is one of the most well-known wizards in the world today; even
Disney movies have fashioned wizards after him. He was an advisor to
Uther Pendragon, and some say he raised Arthur in secret until the day
Arthur pulled Excalibur from the stone.
There is not a lot written about the origins of Merlin, but a lot is written
about his personality as a joker and his love for wine. He was also a
shapeshifter who became a wizard in Arthur's court. It was during his time
serving Arthur that Merlin met and became enchanted with Viviane. He
was, by then, a lot older than Viviane. She did not return his love; in fact,
she was repulsed by him.
Merlin taught Viviane magic and she, in turn, used that magic against him.
Paimpont Forest was once known as the legendary Broceliande and is
where Viviane trapped Merlin after giving him back his youth at the
fountain of youth. Legend has it that Merlin’s tomb is somewhere in the
heart of the forest, quite close to the fountain of youth.
The Golden Tree
Everyone who knows about king Arthur will know who the legendary
Morgan Le Fay is. She is sometimes shown as an evil vindictive sorceress,
and other times as she came across as a strong woman. Men feared her with
good cause, as she was said to trap and imprison her lovers in the
Broceliande Forest–specifically in a golden Chestnut tree that stood in the
center of the forest.
She was known as a shape-shifter that would go to any lengths for power
and control. She is also a half-sister to King Arthur. In some stories, she
takes Excalibur and gives it to Accolon, one of her many lovers. He takes
the sword to use it against Arthur but his plot fails. Not wanting to admit
defeat, Margan throws Excalibur’s scabbard into the lake. The scabbard was
what protected Arthur from harm.

Morbihan
The Gulf of Morbihan is said to have been formed from the tears shed by
the fairies as they were driven from their home in the forest of Brocéliande.
The Gulf of Morbihan lies just south of Brittany, where 368 islands can be
found. These islands were believed to have formed from the pretty garlands
the fairies either lost or threw in the sea. Houat and Hoedic Islands in the
Atlantic Ocean were formed when two of the garlands landed there. The
Isle of Beauty in the Atlantic Ocean was formed from the crown of the
Fairy Queen.
Megaliths
If you have ever read an Asterix and Obelix book, you would see that Oblix
always seemed to be holding a huge boulder in his hands. In Brittany, there
are many, many rock formations or standing boulders that have some
connection to their myths and legends. Most of these rocks or stone
formation can be associated with wizards, druids, and fairies. Some even
have more sinister folklore connections.
There are different types of stones such as:
Menhirs
Menhirs are tall stones that are mostly shaped like tall round columns.
There are many stories associated with such as worship for the druids and
celebrations for the fairies. Because of the shape, they can resemble a
human form. This brings about the story of two blasphemous priests that
were turned into menhirs in Locarn.
Dolmens
Dolmens looked like large tombs that were made as a burial ground mark.
They may also have been used as places of worship. Dolmens were built
with four tall supporting stones on top of which was a large flattish
capstone. They were all made to stand at an angle with the capstone tilting
off to one side.

There is a lot of superstition surrounding these portal tombs, some of which
say they were made with the help of or by the fairies.
Carnac Alignment Stones
The Carnac stones are large stones that were positioned across an axis each
at a certain distance apart. These stones were mined from local granite by
the people of Brittany, who erected over three-thousand of them.
There is a myth from Christian times that the stones are Pagan soldiers that
were chasing down Pope Cornelius, who turned them into stone.
Much like the alignment stones at Stonehenge, these were thought to be in
alignment with the direction of the sunsets. Some alignment stones were
used to mark tombs or druid burial sites.
Steles
Stele were large monumental stones that would often have carvings on
them. They were created to commemorate the fallen, as a monument to
Celtic gods, or places of magic. For instance, a stele in Seven-Léhart was
where sterile women would go on certain nights to rub their bellies on the
stone’s flat surface. It was believed to be a fertility stone that would allow
the women to conceive and have a baby nine months later.
Tumuls
Tumula were dolmens that were not as high as most dolmens, and they were
covered with earth. They were mainly used as tombs to house the bodies of
the high born.
 


Chapter 3: Cornish Myths and Legends
 
Cornwall is one of the six Celtic nations and forms part of the Brythonic
Celtic culture. Its history is different from that of the rest of England. Up
until around the 16th century, Cornwall was closely linked to Ireland,
Wales, and Brittany. During the Iron-Age the Cornovii and Dumnonii Celtic
tribes inhabited what is known as Cornwall today.
During the Anglo-Saxon invasion, the Celtic tribes were known as
Westwals in reference to West Welsh because of the Celtic heritage. The
Cornish Celts stood steadfast in protecting their Celtic heritage and were
often at war with the Anglo-Saxons. The River Tamar became a formal
boundary between the Cornish Celts and the Anglo-Saxons. The Celts in
this region of Cornwall never let go of the culture, even when there was no
longer a boundary dividing the two nations. The Anglo-Saxons saw the
Celtic nations as fiercely private people who kept to their own kind and
closely guarded their customs.
Popular Cornish Myths and Legends
Like all the other Celtic nations, Cornwall's history is steeped in the dark
mysteries, intrigues, and romance of myths and legends. This chapter looks
at a few of the more popular myths, legends, and stories of the Cornwealas.
Tristram and Iseult
The tale of Tristram and Iseult, or Tristan and Isolde, is one of the most
famous of the Cornish legends, as well as the most tragic. It is a tale of deep
love, betrayal, and jealousy that ends in the death of the hero and heroine. It
is a story about Tristram, the nephew of King Mark of Cornwall, and Iseult,
who was the daughter of the king of Ireland.

Tristram’s tale begins with tragedy, in that his father was killed in battle as
his mother gave birth to him. While Tristram was born as a healthy baby
boy, his mother did not recover. To protect the boy from his father's
enemies, Tristram was spirited away by his father's trusted companion,
Rual, who adopted him. Rual and his wife raised Tristram as their own and
taught him in the manner that all royals were. He learned all the airs, graces,
and skills that befit a prince.
Tristram was a fast learner and mastered many skills including
swordsmanship, hunting, and music. He could play the harp as beautifully
as the angels themselves. When Tristram was fourteen years old he was
kidnapped by Norwegian merchants. But as luck would have it a terrible
storm befell the Norwegian ship. As a superstitious culture, the Norwegian's
were sure their ship was being pummelled because they had kidnapped
Tristram.
The Norwegian merchants vowed that if the storm subsided and spared
them as well as their ship they would set Tristram free. The storm died
down and they set Tristram free at the next port, which happened to be
Cornwall. From there Tristram made his way into the court of King Mark
before the two knew they were related. King Mark was impressed by young
Tristram’s skills and valor. King Mark made Tristram his confidant,
courtier, and companion.
While Tristram was setting himself up in the king's court, poor Rual was
searching for his adopted son. He hunted down the Norwegian ship that had
taken Tristram and was told that he had been set ashore in Cornwall. Rual
made his way to Cornwall where he found Tristram, who instantly
recognized Rual. Rual was brought in front of king Mark where he
explained who Tristram was. king Mark was both amazed and happy to find
out his nephew lived and proclaimed Tristram to be his heir. He also swore
to protect Tristram’s claim to the throne by never marrying. Tristram was
soon thereafter knighted.
King Gurmun and his Queen Iseult (or Isolde) of Ireland used the giant
Morold, the Queen’s brother, to extract a tribute from both England and
Cornwall. Each year the tribute to Ireland would grow and because it was

Morold who would come to collect king Gurmun’s due, none would
challenge the giant. Morold’s strength was legendary as was his skill with
the sword.
Tristram, however, was tired of his country being oppressed by Ireland and
having the threat of Morold hung over them. So he set out to challenge the
giant to a duel on a small island in sight of Cornwall. Tristram and Morold
each arrived on the small island in their own boats. Morold arrived first and
soon thereafter Tristram arrived only to push his own boat back out into the
sea.
When the giant asked Tristram why he had done that, Tristram replied that
only one of them would be getting off the island alive. As it would be
Tristram, he found the giant’s boat more than adequate to take himself
home.
Morold was fierce and skilled but he was also devious, for his blade was
laced with poison. As the furious fight between Morold and Tristram
ensued, Morold managed to stab Tristram in the leg drawing first blood.
The giant gloated of what he had done to Tristram. He told Tristram that
only Queen Iseult knew how to cure the poison that now ran through
Tristram’s veins. He tried to get Tristram to give up and accept defeat by
offering to take Tristram to his sister, the Queen, to be cured. But Morold
would only take him if he vowed to continue paying tribute to the king of
Ireland.
Instead of relenting, Tristram charged the great giant and knocked him
down. As Morold tried to get back up, Tristram managed to cut off the
giant's arms with one blow. As the giant screamed out in pain, Tristram
brought down another heavy blow that split Morold’s skull. The blow to
Morlod’s head was so intense that a chip of the blade got wedged in the
giant's head.
As Morold lay dying, Tristam leaned over his body and told the giant that
he now needed his sister’s to doctor him because he was the one now
seriously wounded. Tristram raised his sword one more time and cut off
Morold’s head. Ignoring his own wounded leg, Tristram returned to the
mainland of Cornwall where he was greeted with cheers for his victory.

Tristram was soon to find out that the giant had spoken the truth about the
poison. The wound on Tristram’s leg was not healing, but getting worse. He
had to make a plan to get to the Queen Iseult. Tristram gathered up his most
trustworthy men and set sail for Dublin. When they arrived near the
shoreline, Tristram was put into a small boat with his harp and a few
supplies.
Although Tristram’s wound was dire, he was still able to play sweet tunes
on his harp. As the small boat drifted onto the shore some passersby heard
his music and went to investigate. They found Tristram and he told the
strangers his ship had been set upon by pirates who had wounded him and
set him adrift. Tristram managed to charm the strangers into taking him for
an audience before the Queen to ask for help. He claimed that he had heard
about the Queen's unparalleled healing skills from stories told of her.
When he met the Queen she was impressed with the stories the strangers
had told her about his ability with the harp, even while being near death.
She took pity on Tristram, thinking him to be a minstrel, and she agreed to
help heal his wound. In return, however, she wanted him to teach her
daughter, Princess Iseult (named after her mother), how to play the harp.
Tristram agreed to this deal. He told the Queen his name was Tantris and
the Queen set about curing Tristram’s poisoned wound. It was not long
before the wound started to heal enough for Tristram to begin giving
Princess Iseult harp lessons.
Tristram was immediately struck at Princess Iseult’s beauty, of which he
thought none other was near equal to. The Princess was not only a fair
beauty but a keen and eager pupil who became nearly as adept at playing
the harp as Tristram was under his tutelage. Trist was so taken with her
magical voice that he compared it to that of a siren's voice that could tempt
and lure a man to give up their heart.
Once Tristram was fully recovered from his leg wound and the princess
well versed in playing the harp, Tristram knew he needed to leave Ireland.
He also knew that the Queen would not let him leave without just cause.
Knowing how sacred the Queen held holy wedlock, Tristram told the Queen
that he had to leave because he was married and had a family back in

Cornwall. He knew that the Queen would bid him his leave if he told her
that his wife had to be his first loyalty. So the Queen bid him his leave to
return to his country of Cornwall and to a wife he did not have.
King Mark was overjoyed when his nephew returned, fully recovered from
the giant's near-fatal wound inflicted upon him. However, the king's
followers were not happy with the fact that he had vowed not to wed and
less happy that the king protected Tristram so fiercely. They did everything
they could to make Tristram look bad or unworthy in the king's eyes, but
nothing worked. The king remained true and loyal to his only nephew.
In his recounting of how he had tricked the Queen into healing him,
Tristram had told King Mark of the princess. He had sung her praises and
painted a picture of her unrivaled beauty to king Mark. Upon hearing of
this, King Mark decided that Princess Iseult was to be his bride and no other
would do. The princess would also ally Ireland to Cornwall, and Cornwall
could use such a powerful country to back it up.
The problem was that Cornwall and Ireland were sworn enemies. There was
no way the king of Ireland was going to let King Mark bid for his daughter's
hand in marriage, and King Mark had no way of wooing the princess of
Ireland.
Tristram thought up a cunning plan to help his uncle win the hand of
Princess Iseult. Tristram had heard about a dragon that was plaguing the
lands of Ireland. The word was that the king was so upset about this beast
that he had offered the hand of his daughter to whoever could slay the
wretched beast. Tristram offered to be his uncle’s spokesperson to Ireland
and king Mark agreed to Tristram’s plan.
Tristram once again set sail for Ireland, and once there he hunted down the
voracious fire-breathing beast until he found it. Armed with a shield, sword,
and spear, Tristram attacked. It was by no means an easy battle, as the
dragon was large, had sharp teeth, claws, and could breathe fire. But
Tristram did not back down and stood his ground, finally defeating the
beast. Tristram was exhausted and bore wounds from the attack of the
dragon, but he knew he would have to get proof that he had slain the beast
for the king.

Using the last vestiges of his strength, Tristam managed to pry open the
great jaws of the dragon and cut out its tongue. He put the tongue in his
pocket not realizing that it was a poison that would seep into his system.
Exhausted, and sick from the poison, Tristram dropped himself into a
shallow pool to keep himself alive.
At the court of the king of Ireland, another suitor was vying for Princess
Iseult’s hand. The king’s chief steward wanted her badly, despite his ardor
not being reciprocated. This steward happened to stumble upon the slain
dragon, and having heard nothing of anyone claiming the kill, he claimed it
for himself. This devious steward made sure friends and others witnessed
him with the dragon. The steward cut off the dragon's head and took it to
the king. Here the steward lay claim to the hand of the Princess for slaying
the beast that was terrorizing the land.
This did not make the Princess Iseult happy, so she shared her grief and
anguish with her mother. The Queen was a woman adept in a certain magic,
and she had an inkling that what the steward claimed was not true. The
Queen had a vision, and in that vision, she pictured a handsome man that
had slain the dragon. She also saw that the man was wounded and had
fallen into a shallow pond.
Together the Queen and the Princess hurried to where the Queen knew the
handsome hero to be. There they found Tristram barely conscious, lying in
a shallow pool of water. While the Queen was trying to revive him, she
found the dragon's tongue in Tristram’s pocket. The Princess recognized
Tristram as the minstrel Tantris and told her mother as such.
The Queen asked a now semi-conscious Tristram if he was indeed the
minstrel Tantris to which he replied he was. She asked him why he was
back in Ireland to which Tristram told her he was seeking safe trade as a
merchant from Ireland. That is why he had slain the dragon, in the hopes
that the king would grant him favor and protection.
As Tristram had done Ireland a great favor by slaying the awful dragon, the
Queen promised Tristram Ireland's protection. She had him taken back to
the castle where she once again nursed him back to health. It was during
this time that the now more mature Princess Iseult began to notice how

handsome and manly Tantris was. While Tristram was recovering, he had
heard that another had laid claim to his kill and the claim for the princess's
hand. He knew too that the princess was not in favor of the steward laying
the claim.
Tristram was nearly fully recovered when the princess found Tristram’s
sword and recognized the piece missing from it. The nick in the sword
matched the mark in her uncle Morold’s head. She immediately held the
sword defensively at Tristram and got him to admit the truth.
The Queen found them and the Princess explained who Tristram was and
that she was going to kill him. But the Queen forbade it, telling the Princess
that they had already granted Tristram protection.
Tristram took the opportunity to offer the two ladies a deal. He would solve
the princess’s problem of disproving the stewards claim to her hand a lie.
He would also offer a match for the princess to King Mark of Cornwall.
Both the Queen and the Princess agreed to Tristram’s proposal and so the
deal was done.
When the the dragon's head was presented to the king by the steward, the
steward promptly demanded his reward. This reward was the promise of the
the pricesses  princess’s hand in marriage. Tristram was able to disprove the
stewards' claim to killing the dragon as he had the dragon's tongue, proving
the dragon had been killed by Tristram and not the steward who had found
its lifeless body.
As King Mark had already agreed to the arrangement, it was not that hard
for Tristram to get a contract between King Mark and Princess Iseult.
Tristram was to escort Princess Iseult back to Cornwall for her marriage to
King Mark. The Queen set about making a very potent potion, which she
entrusted to the princess’s confidant. The potion was to be given to both
king Mark and Princess Iseult upon their wedding night. It was a potion that
would ensure they had a marriage of blissful love. The potion was mixed
with a bottle of wine.
During the voyage from Ireland to Cornwall, Tristram and Iseult did not get
along and clashed when their paths crossed. The weather was also not in

their favor during the voyage. Storms made the journey very choppy, and as
a result nearly everyone on the ship became seasick. To give the crew and
passengers a break, Tristram had the ship dock at the next seaport they
came across so all those aboard could regain their land legs and well-being.
The only two who stayed aboard the ship were Tristram and Princess Iseult.
While alone on the ship they had time to talk about trivial matters. They
went to find something to drink and came across the bottle of wine Iseult’s
mother had given her companion. Thinking it only wine, they drank the
contents of the bottle together.
Brangaene, the one who was entrusted with the love potion, then returned to
the ship. She immediately recognized the bottle of wine that was being
shared between Tristram and Iseult. Brangaene snatched the bottle and
threw what was left into the sea warning the two that no good was going to
come of this.
Not long after the wine was thrown into the sea did Iseult and Tristram
began to realize that they no longer hated each other. Their hate, mistrust,
and animosity had been replaced by the exact opposite emotions. They had
fallen in love and could not bear to be parted for too long. By the time they
returned to King Mark’s court Iseult faced another problem, as she could no
longer call herself a maiden. To make sure King Mark was not made aware
of this, on the wedding night, Brangaene was who the king unknowingly
took to his bed. As time passed, Tristram and Iseult's love, as well as their
affair, only grew stronger.
King Mark grew more and more suspicious of his wife and nephew as time
went on, until one day King Mark was forced to banish both Tristram and
Iseult from his court. The two took refuge in the nearby forest and found a
cave where they could stay. They were undisturbed for a long time, until
one day the king’s hunting party found them. But before they could peek in
the cave where Tristram and Iseult were, the two hatched a plan. What the
huntsmen saw when they looked in the cave was Tristram and Iseult
sleeping on the crystal floor with a sword forming a barrier between them.
The king took this as their loyalty and fidelity, and welcomed them back
into his kingdom.

Thereafter it became harder and harder for Tristram and Iseult to be
together so they decided to end their affair. Tristram left Cornwall to make
his home elsewhere, before he left Iseult gave him a ring. The ring was a
memento of the deep love they shared. Tristram left Cornwall on a ship
bound for Normandy with a very heavy heart.
He made Arundel his home, a small island that sat between Brittany and 
England.  
It was here that Tristram met Kaedin and his sister Iseult. Kaedin was a
knight and Iseult was lovely and unwed. As Tristram was staying in
Kaedin’s castle, he and Iseult were often found in each other’s company. It
was only to be expected that Tristram would find himself thinking about her
in a more desirable way. Tristram was confused over what he felt for Iseult,
but over time he gave in and married her. On their wedding night, Tristram
made up an excuse not to sleep close to his new wife. He told her that he
had an old injury that was causing him pain.
Tristram could not bring himself to touch his new wife, and one day Kaedin
found out. He confronted Tristram, who told his friend everything. Not long
after that Tristram was injured in a battle with a poisoned spear, while in
Kaedin’s service. Tristram knew that only Queen Iseult, the love of his life,
could save him as she now possessed her mother's healing abilities.
Kaedin set sail for England, as this is where Queen Iseult now resided,
hoping to get her to agree to come back and help Tristram. Tristram told
Kaedin that if she agreed to come back with him, he must fly both a black
and white flag. If not, only a black one. He told Kaedin that this would help
him know what was to come of him before Kaedin reached land.
What Kaedin and Tristram did not know was that Tristram’s wife had
overheard the entire conversation. She knew what the plan was, and her
jealousy rose into hatred. When the ship returned Tristram asked his wife if
she could see the ship's flag, and if so what color were they. Tristram’s wife
went to look and came back to tell him that the flag was black and only
black.

Tristram knew that it was not only his wound that was sealing his fate but
his broken heart and spirit. He repeated “Dearest Iseult” four times as his
heart broke and he closed his eyes for the last time. But Tristram’s wife had
lied out of spite and jealousy, as the ship had both black and white flags.
Iseult had indeed come to help her love, but upon embarking, they were told
that Tristram had died.
Iseult the Fair ran to where Tristram lay dead, she laid her head upon his
chest proclaiming that he had given up his life for her and so she would
give up hers for him. Those were the last words she spoke, as she, too, died
on the spot in her lover's arms.
Tristram and Iseult were buried next to each and a rose vine grew from each
of their graves. As the rose bushes grew their branches met and intertwined
joining the two lovers forever and proving that love conquers all.


Chapter 4: Welsh Celtic Myths and Legends
Wales occupies the western part of the United Kingdom. It is nestled
between the Bristol Channel in the south and England to the east, with the
Iris Sea surrounding it on the north and west. Due to the location of Wales,
not many invaders conquered Wales, nor did they mix with the inhabitants
of that part of the British Isles.
Still today the Welsh maintain their proud Celtic heritage with their own
language and culture. The craggy shores and diverse lands of Wales add to
the colorful Celtic myths and legends with their renditions and unique
stories. The Welsh form part of the Brythonic Celtic culture.
Popular Welsh Myths and Legends
Wales was inhabited by neanderthals, and later homo sapiens, that came to
the land over 30,000 years ago. As man developed through the ages, so did
their many myths and legends about the world and the beings in it. This
chapter looks at a few of the more popular myths, legends, and stories of
the Welsh.
Lludd and Llefelys
This is the story of dragons, demons, a thieving wizard, and two kingly
brothers. In the early years of Wales and Britain, a wise king named
Llefelys ruled France while his brother Lludd ruled Britain. It was ancient
times where demons, dragons, and magic prevailed throughout the
kingdoms of both Britain and France.
Britain, however, became overrun by a demonic trice that was called the
Coraniaid. This was not King Lludd’s only problem; the people of Britain
were also being terrified by the most awful, mysterious screams. The

screams were so bad they were said to make women miscarry and leave
animals barren. The screams were also making crops not produce. On top of
all these problems plaguing King Lludd’s kingdom, provisions kept
vanishing from the court.
King Lludd called upon his brother king Llefelys of France for help. King
Llefelys helped his brother by telling him about a potion consisting of water
and crushed insects. The potion would destroy the Coraniaid. They devised
a trap that caught the wizard stealing supplies and made him subservient to
king Lludd.
After investigation, it was found that the awful screams were coming from
two fighting dragons. King Llefelys told King Ludd that he needed to dig a
hole in the middle of Britain. The hole or pit needed to be filled with mead
and then covered with a cloth. The two dragons got trapped in the cloth and
were buried far underground in North West Wales, at Dinas Emrys.
Dinas Emrys
There is a legend that surrounds Dinas Emrys that also involves two
dragons. King Vortigern tried to build a castle on top of Dinas Emrys, but
was unsuccessful. The King could not understand why the walls that had
been built during the day would be destroyed each night.
King Vortigern sought the help of Myrddin Emrys (Merlin the wizard).
Myrddin told the King that there were dragons that were trapped in Dinas
Emrys. Each night they would fly around in the mound, fighting.
The king got his men to dig up the mound and release the dragons. There
was a white dragon and a red dragon. When they were released they
brutally attacked each other and the red dragon killed the white dragon. The
red dragon returned to his lair and king Vortigern was able to build his
castle upon Dinas Emrys.
The castle was called Dinas Emrys in honor of Myrddin and the red dragon
became a celebrated figure in Wales.

The Devil's Bridge
There is a tale of the Devil that visited Wales in the 11th century. He
appeared in the form of a human. There he came upon an old woman
staring across a river. She seemed very upset and so the Devil approached
her asking her what was wrong.
She told the devil that her cow had crossed the river and she had no way to
get it back. The Devil saw this as a great opportunity to get a soul, so he
made a deal with the old lady.
The Devil promised the old lady that he would build her a bridge, and in
return he got to keep the first living thing that crossed the bridge. The old
lady made the deal and went home on the promise the bridge would be built
for her the next day.
That night, upon reflection, the old lady wondered about the stranger and
his offer. Although it was a very tempting one, the old lady thought, if she
was the first living thing across the bridge she would not get her cow back.
The next day the old lady set off to the bridge only this time she took her
old farm dog with her. When she got to the river, to her surprise was the
most beautiful bridge she had ever seen. The Devil saw the old lady and
told her that he had lived up to her end of the deal now it was her turn to do
so.
The old lady walked to the edge of the bridge, stopped, drew out a piece of
bread which she threw onto the other side. The huge dog took off after the
bread. The Devil looked on in disbelief and screamed at the old lady that he
could not use a dog. The Devil disappeared in a cloud of anger and the old
lady was able to cross the bridge to get her cow.
The Devil was never again seen in Wales.
Gelert
Another well-known legend in Wales is the story of a dog named Gelert. In
Wales there is a village called Beddgelert, it thought the town was named

after this dog as the town was built around his grave.
Gelert was the favored dog of Prince Llywely of Gwynedd. Gelert was a
fearless hunting dog and a gift from King John of England. Gelert was also
the Prince’s loyal companion. One day the Prince and his Princess set off to
go hunting and left their baby son with his nurse and one other servant in
their hunting lodge.
The nurse and the servant left the baby prince asleep and unguarded in his
crib when they went for a walk in the woods.
While out hunting, the Prince noticed that Gelert was missing. Worried
about his dog, the Prince turned the hunting party around to go find him.
One of the first places the Prince looked at was at the hunting lodge.
As they approached the Prince saw Gelert run out of the lodge. When he
dismounted and upon closer look, he found that Gelert was covered in
blood. Panicked and afraid the Prince rushed into the lodge. There he found
his son's cradle overturned and blood everywhere. There was no sign of his
son.
Enraged and grief-stricken, the Prince drew his sword and ran it through
Gelert. Gelert whimpered and died as the cries of the Prince’s son could be
heard. Shocked, the Prince rushed back into the lodge and behind the crib
was his son unharmed. That is when the Price saw the large wolf lying dead
and bloodied on the floor near the crib.
Gelert had sensed the baby was in trouble and taken off to go and save it.
The dog had killed the wolf and saved the young Prince. Stricken with
remorse at what he had done to his dog, especially after such a heroic act,
Llywelyn never spoke again.
Llywelyn buried Gelert in a meadow nearby, marking the dog’s grave with
a cairn of stones. For the rest of his life, it was said that Llywelyn was
haunted by the dying sounds of his faithful hound.
Cadair Idris

Standing approximately 893 meters high, Cadair is one of Wale’s most
well-known mountains. It overlooks the Welsh town Dolgellau in
Gwynedd, in northwest Wales. Historically it was the county town of
Merionethshire that ran along the River Wnion. The mountain stands at the
foot of what is known as the southern gate of Snowdonia.
This mountain is said to be the throne of the giant Idris that sat upon it. The
mountain has three peaks: Pen y Gadair, which means head of the chair;
Cyfrwy, which means the saddle; and Mynydd Moe, which means the bare
mountain.
The mountain is said to have been built as Idris' chair so he could sit in it
and stare up at the heavens. At the bottom of the mountain is a bottomless
lake called Llyn Cau. At the foot of the mountain are three large stones.
These stones were said to have been cast there as pieces of grit that Ibris
found in his shoe while sitting upon his throne one day.
There are few of these large stones that can be found in some of the villages
around the mountain. Each one said to have been thrown there by Idris, well
the larger ones, the smaller being put down by his wife.
The Oldest Tree in Wales
One of the oldest trees in the world is a Yew tree that was planted in a small
graveyard around 4,000 years ago. This tree can be found in a village in
north Wales—Llangernyw, Conwy. This particular Yew tree comes with a
frightening legend. To this tree comes a spirit that appears twice a year to
announce the names of the parish members that were going to die that year.
Twice a year the parish members gathered together and listened from
beneath the east window of the church to the names the spirit would say out
loud. These names were said to be the angel's list. The dates upon which
this spirit appears each year are October 31st and July 31st.
The spirit is said to live in the Yew tree and the land upon which the church
now stands has always been sacred land.

King March Ap Meirchion
King March Ap Meirchion, or king March for short, is a tale about
deformity and the lesson to not to judge a book by its cover.
King March was a king that had everything: riches beyond compare,
possessions of every kind, and a rich prosperous kingdom. His subjects
loved him, as he was a fair, kind, generous, and just king. His people were
happy with their lot in life; they worked hard and lived good lives.
Although he had everything and people saw him as a happy king, he was
not. For he bore what he thought was a terrible secret: he was born with the
ears of a horse. No one, except for his barber, Bifan, and his long passed
parents knew his secret. The king grew his hair long to cover his ears and
had a special crown made which covered them up.
Bifan was sworn to secrecy with the threat of losing his head if ever the
king's secret were to come out. Keeping the secret weighed heavily on
Bifan, and for years he kept his word to the king and the secret was never
revealed. Through the years the burden of the king’s secret felt heavier and
heavier to Bifan until he stopped eating, he became depressed, and fell ill.
A wise and experienced physician was sent to tend to Bifan. The physician
examined Bifan and asked him many questions. When he was done he told
Bifan that the problem was physically but it was some burden or secret that
was causing Bifan distress. Bifan told the physician that he did have a
secret one he had sworn a sacred oath to keep. If he did not keep this secret
he would lose his life. He did not tell the man what the secret was, only that
he had one he could not share.
The physician warned Bifan that if he did not tell the secret he would die of
depression. After the physician had left Bifan pondered upon his problem
and a solution came to him. The next day he set out into the wilds where
there was no one around for miles and miles; it was just him and nature. He
found a river that was dense with reeds. He sought a dry spot near the banks
where he could lay. As he lay with his belly in the sand and his face near
the earth, he told his secret to the ground, the river, and the reeds.

When he was done, Bifan started to feel better. The weight had been lifted
from his shoulders and he even felt hungry again. He went back to the town
where he had a good dinner and after a few days started to recover.
Back at the court of King March, the king wanted to have a huge feast
complete with pipers at the Great Hall of Castlemarch. King March
summoned the best piper in all of Wales to play at the feast.
The piper was on his way to Castlemarch when he came across some fine
reeds growing at the river banks in a wild spot. He thought that they would
make sweet music to play at King March’s feast, so he cut some of the
reeds. The piper was unaware that the spot where he cut the reeds from was
the spot where Bifan had confessed the secret he had been keeping.
It was a merry day at Castlemarch; the feast was well underway. When the
guests had eaten their fill, the king decided it was time for the piper to play
for them. Having made his new pipe, the piper stepped up and started to
play. But what he played did not come out of the pipes; instead, the only
sound to come out of them was “King March had horse ears!”
The piper was confused and mortified, he tried to play again but again the
pipes repeated the sound about King March’s ears. The pipes repeated this
statement again and again. The guests were shocked and King March was
utterly humiliated; he immediately went to cut off the piper's head. But the
piper dropped to his knees in front of the king beginning his merch and
explaining it was not him. It was a new pipe he had made from these reeds
he had cut on the way to the castle.
Realizing that the reeds must have been the same reeds where he had
confessed the King’s secret, Bifan came forward. He told the king about his
illness and what the physician had said to him. Bifan told the king that he
did not want to betray him so he had told the earth in the most remote spot
he could find. But the reeds had absorbed this secret and it was not the
piper's fault.
King March was hurt and enraged, although it was more his humiliation
that influenced his actions, and so he drew his sword on Bifan. But as he
was about to cut off the barber's head, he turned to his guests; they stared at

him, but not with pity. Something inside the king no longer felt hollow, it
felt warm and filled. The king dropped his sword and burst out laughing as
he pulled off his crown to reveal his ears.
His guests looked upon their king with admiration and cheered him for his
courage. The king forgave both the piper and Bifan, assuring them that no
harm would come to them. For the first time in his life, the king felt happy
and unashamed. The king learned that day that his people loved him for
who he was, and that people will judge you on your deeds–not your looks.
This tale has many lessons in it, it shows acceptance, forgiveness, and
human weakness. It is a story that encourages people to be themselves and
not be ashamed of who you are.
 


Chapter 5: Irish Celtic Myths and Legends
The word folklore immediately makes Ireland spring to mind: a country that
is steeped in rich traditions, mythical creatures, superstitions, and eerily
beautiful landscapes with heartbreaking tales. As with all the other Celtic
nations, Ireland consisted of many tribes each with their own chieftain
overseeing the village. Although each village had its own chieftain and
worshipped their own gods, they did all share a common law system:
Brehon law.
The Irish form part of the Goidelic Celtic culture. This chapter looks at
some of the more popular Irish myths and legends.
Popular Irish Myths and Legends
Irish history has through the ages inspired poets, authors, and songwriters
alike with its ancient heritage of sagas, myths, legends, and battles. It is
thanks to the Irish that most of the popular Celtic myths and legends we
know about today survived the ages.
Dagda's Harp
The Dagda had a golden harp; it was a magical harp that only he could play.
The harp would play the music that could tame a beast, incite his men for
war, bring joy, sorrow, or cures for what ailed his battle-weary men.
After the Battle of Moytuirné, which fought between the Tuatha de Danann
and the Fomorians, the Tuatha returned home victorious. That night they
celebrated their defeat of the Fomorians with a huge feast. The soldiers ate
their fill from Dagda’s bottomless cauldron that the Dagda took out the
sword of the Tethra. The Tethra was a great sword in which a spirit lived.

The Dagda ordered the spirit inside of the sword to regale his men with the
tale of how the sword came to be.
As the men listened intently, they were unaware that some Fomorians had
broken into their camp and stoled Dagda’s magical harp.
It was not until the soldiers asked Dagda to grace them with the sounds of
his magical harp that he found his sweet-tongued harp was missing. He was
enraged and worried as the harp not only played magical music but it
helped to control the weather. Without the harp, the farmers and hunters
would suffer.
The Dagda asked of his men who would go with him to rescue his harp.
The taking of the harp was also of great insult to the Dagda. Lugh Longarm
and Ogma the Artificer rose and united with Dagda to embark on the
mission to rescue the harp.
The Fomorians and the Tuatha de Danann were two very different people.
Where the Tuatha were light and fair, the Fomorians were dark. To reach
the Fomorians Dagda, Lugh, and Ogma had to travel through nine valleys,
nine mountains, and nine rivers. When they came upon the camp of the
Fomorians it was dark, dank, and cold. The camp bore witness to the
Fomorians’ recent defeat, leaving the people with very little food.
At the edge of the camp, the three men saw that many soldiers protected the
harp and they needed a plan to get to it. Dagda was not worried; instead, he
stretched out his arm and called for his magic harp. Hearing its true master's
voice, the harp sprung from where it had been hung on the wall. The harp
flew to Dagda, and the men that got in its way were cut down.
Noticing what was happening, the camp sprang into action, but the harp had
found its way back to Dagda. The Fomorians started to advance on Dagda,
Lugh, and Ogma when Lugh told Dagda he needed to play his harp.
Dagda swept his fingers across the strings of the harp, and a beautiful
melody started to play. It was the music of grief that had the Fomorians stop
and bow their head as they sobbed. Even the soldiers sobbed, but they drew
their mantles so none could see the tears flowing from their eyes.

The music stopped and again the Fomorians started to charge the three men.
Dagda once again drew his fingers across the strings of the harp and this
time the music of mirth filled the air. The Fomorians fell into fits of
laughter, and once again tears rolled down their eyes as their bellies ached
from the laughter. The music stopped and once again the soldiers charged
the three men.
Once again, Dagda drew his fingers across the strings of the harp, and this
time the music was gentle and soothing. It lulled all in the camp into a deep
sleep.
Dagda, Lugh, and Ogma rode away back to their home with the harp back
where it belonged. The harp was never stolen again or touched by anyone
other than Dagda.
Macha the Goddess of Horses and War
Crunden was a farmer who lived in Ulster and tragically lost his wife. She
left him to look after three young children. As he had to work during the
day, he had no option but to leave his kids to run amok in the house. The
house had fallen into disarray and each day his guilt sliced through him
about having to raise his children this way.
One day Crunden came home from working in the fields feeling exhausted
and dreading the mess he would find. As he stepped into the house, he
could not believe he was in the right place. The kids were sitting all quiet,
clean, fed, and happy. The house too was the clean and fine smell of
cooking met his nostrils.
As he wandered to the kitchen a beautiful woman stood dishing up a plate
of food for him. Macha introduced herself to Crunden and told him that she
had come to be his wife and help him. Crunden, a kind and good man,
could not believe his luck. He settled into married life with Macha. He did,
however, realize that she was not from this world but the otherworld. She
did not walk like a normal person, but instead she seemed to glide. Macha,
he noticed, could run faster than the wind. They settled into married life
together and were quite happy, as were Crunden’s children.

One day the king received some new horses that were as fast as any their
kingdom had ever seen. The king wanted all his people to celebrate his new
purchase, and thus threw a feast. Crunden was invited to go, but before he
did Macha made him promise not to say a word to anyone about her.
Crunden, not waiting to ruin their life together, promised he would not say a
word about her.
At the feast, Crunden had a fair share of wine to drink. While all the other
men boasted of how beautiful their wives were or what good cooks they
were, Crunden kept quiet and said nothing. This continued until the king
stood up and boasted at how fast his horses were. No longer able to hold his
tongue, Crunden boasted that his wife was so fast she could outrun any
horse.
The king was taken aback and highly offended. He immediately sent his
men to get Macha. When his men got to Crundens house they found Macha
to be very pregnant. They brought her before the king, who insisted that she
race against his horses or her husband would lose his life. Macha agreed,
but pleaded with the king to wait until after she had given birth. But the
king refused. Macha turned to the king's soldiers and implored them to help
her. She knew that a lot of them had families and must know the risks of her
running a race so far pregnant.
However, not one warrior stood up for her or came to her aid, nor did any of
the other guests. They had all been drinking and feasting, and they thought
that this would be excellent entertainment. There was something about
Macha that made the king hesitant, and he insisted his chariot not be
weighed down with unnecessary objects. He wore no armor and made his
charioteer step down.
Macha implored the king one last time to reconsider and wait until she had
given birth, but he refused. The race began, and Macha of course proved
she was as fast as the wind and won the race. At the end of the race she
collapsed onto the grass, writhing in pain as her contractions started. She
gave birth to twins on the field–but they were stillborn. In her grief and
anger, Macha gathered her lifeless children in her arms. She stood staring at

the soldiers. She cursed them for not using their strength and courage to
stand up for her.
Because they did not defend her, Macha cursed them for nine generations to
come. The curse would render every soldier or warrior in the court's
strength to fade when they needed it the most. They would feel the pangs of
childbirth for nine days and nights. This curse would go through the next
generation starting when a boy child was old enough to grow facial hair.
Macha took her dead twins and left the field; she was never heard of or seen
again. But her curse remained true and for the next nine generations before
each battle, the men would endure the pains of childbirth for nine nights
and night days. Thereafter for nine generations the soldiers of the court of
king Ulster suffered the pains of childbirth before each battle.
The Headless Horseman — The Dullahan
Dullahans have inspired many a tale and movie in the modern-day. They are
terrifying spectacles that race across the countryside on a demon horse with
glowing red eyes. One would think a wild black demonic horse would be
enough to scare the wits out of a person, but the demonic horse rider has no
head upon his shoulders. Instead, it carries its head mounted on its saddle,
beneath its arm, or raised high in one of its hands. The Dullahans head
looks like it is pasty and rancid, like dough left to rot and sour. Its black
eyes rattled around like they were darting all around the sockets. On his
face he wears a smile that looks like it has been carved from ear to ear, and
his head glows.
It is said that wherever the Dullan stops, there is going to be a death nearby.
This creature can see for miles ahead of him, so he can spot one who is
dying from wherever he is. People fear to look upon him for he will poke
out an eye or hurl blood in their face. The Dullahan thunders over the
countryside on his demonic horse using a human spine as a whip.
Each journey the head can only talk once and when it does it is to call out
the name of the one that will die. The Dullahan is mostly seen on the nights
of Irish feast days. The Dullahan does not seek out souls but rather responds

to cries of a dying soul. He is thought to be the ancient god Crom Dubh. He
was a god of fertility, and to give life he demanded human sacrifice each
year. The human sacrifice was to be beheaded in his honor.
When sacrificial religions in Ireland were done away with, Chrom Dubh
was not happy, so he took on physical form to hunt down souls. It is said
there is nothing you can do to ward off the Dullahan, as he is the herald of
death. But, he has a fear of gold; wearing an object made of gold may scare
him off.
Butterflies and The Wooing of Étaín
In Irish legends, butterflies are the souls of the dead making their way to the
Otherworld. One of the most beloved stories about this is the Wooing of
Étaín. Étaín was the daughter of King Ailill of Ulaid. Étaín is often depicted
much like how Snow White is; her skin was as white as snow, her lips a
ruby red, her cheeks flushed, and her eyes an unnatural blue.
Étaín caught the eye of the fair-haired Tuatha de Danann warrior, Midir.
Midir lived in the mounds of the earth with the fairy race and was first
married to Fúamnach. When Midir came upon Étaín he was smitten and had
to have her for his second wife. With the help of his step-son, Oengus,
Midir was able to get Étaín’s father's approval to marry her.
Midir was so taken with Étaín, that Fúamnach was all but forgotten.
Fúamnach became embittered and jealous of Étaín, and devised a way to
get rid of her. Fúamnach used magic and turned Étaín in a pool of water,
then a worm, and then finally a butterfly. Afterward, Étaín found Midir as a
butterfly and stayed close to him. Midir was unaware that the butterfly was
Étaín, but got a strong attachment to it anyway. He took it wherever he
went. Over time, he lost interest in human women and only cared for the
butterfly.
Fúamnach became more enraged, and conjured a wind that blew Étaín
seven years into the future. However, Étaín landed with Midir’s step-son
Oengus. Oengus knew that the butterfly was Étaín, so he created a sweet
little glass chamber for her and he too carried her with him.

Once again Fúamnach found out that Étaín had returned to her circle, so she
conjured yet another wind to blow Étaín even further into the future. Each
time Étaín returned, Fúamnach blew her further into the future until Étaín
landed in the wine goblet of the Chieftain Etar’s wife. His wife drank the
wine, unknowingly swallowing Étaín and soon thereafter became pregnant.
Étaín was born again with no recollection of her past.
When she grew up, Étaín married the High King of Ireland, Eochaid. Midir
found her again and tried to get her to remember her past. He attempted to
trick her into his bed, hoping that if she slept with him it would bring back
her memories. But, she evaded his tricks numerous times.
Desperate to win her back, Midir approached Eochaid and tried to trick him
into giving Étaín back to him. After being given a series of tasks and
challenges by Eochaid, who knew Midir was trying to steal his wife, Midir
completed them all successfully. Midir demanded a kiss from Étaín as his
prize. Ecochaid agreed and Midir embraced Étaín, kissing her with such a
passion that it sparked the memories of Étaín’s previous life with him.
Étaín allowed Midir to whisk her way, and they retreated to Midir mound
while Eochaid, distressed and mourning his wife, spent the rest of his days
digging up every fairy mound looking for her.
 


Chapter 6: Scottish and Isle of Man (Manx) Celtic
Myths and Legends
Like Scotland, the shores of the Isle of Man have been raided by various
other nations many times throughout history. This island lies in the middle
of the Irish Sea and is an equidistant between Scotland, Ireland, England,
and Wales. It is also said to be where the Manx cat, a tailless domesticated
breed of cat, originated from.
The King of Norway sold his suzerainty to Scotland in 1266. Like the
Scottish, the Manx are superstitious and fiercely proud of the heritage.
Their culture is filled with folklore, mythology, and the ever-popular ghost
stories.
The chapter looks at some of the myths of Scotland and the Isle of Man.
Popular Scottish Myths and Legends
Misty rolling hills, lochs, rugged mountains, and mysterious creatures form
the grounds for Scottish myths and legends. This proud nation has many
tales that inspired, intrigued, and warned the Celtic people who once lived
there. The Scottish form part of the Goidelic Celtic culture.
Stories of the Loch Ness monster, ghosts that wander the hills, and great
heroes echo through the beautiful land that makes up Scotland. This chapter
takes a look at some of the more popular myths and legends of Scotland.
Sawney Bean
This story is about one of Scotland's most famous cannibals, Sawney Bean.
Born in East Lothian, Sawney moved to Ayrshire where he married and had
a home near Ballantrae in Bennane Cave. His home was a mass of tunnels

that ran inside solid rock, into which they excavated a few rooms as their
family grew. When he and his wife were first wed, he found himself
unemployed and having to find another means by which to support his wife.
Sawney took to robbing stagecoaches or lonely travelers traveling along
small narrow roads. These types of roads made it easier for Sawney to
ambush his prey and rob them. He worried that his victims might identify
him, so to keep his crimes from being discovered he murdered his victims.
Butchering them to destroy any evidence would allow him to dispose of the
bodies, and from there he could feed his family.
Soon the Beans had fourteen children with a lust for human flesh. As the
children grew so did the list of missing persons in the area. Although the
local authorities looked for the missing, no one thought to check the caves.
The Bean family grew and the children became adept at finding their prey.
One night, however, a man and his wife were riding home from a fair when
the Bean family attacked them. They managed to get the wife off her horse,
but the man fought them back. They were not prepared for the fight that
ensued, nor to be discovered as a troop of other people returning from the
fair came upon the man fighting off the savages.
It was not long after that that the search for the Bean family began, and they
were found in the caves. What the authorities found was beyond horrific.
Human body parts had been pickled and hung from hooks, much like a leg
of mutton in a butcher shop. There were piles of human bones, clothes, and
other evidence for their crimes.
All of the Bean family was arrested and taken to prison in Edinburgh. Their
crimes were considered so heinous that the courts thought conventional law
did not apply. Thus, the Bean men had their arms and legs cut off and were
left to slowly die as they bled out. Meanwhile, the Bean women were
burned alive in huge bonfires.
Strike Martin

On the northern outskirts of Dundee, Scotland is Strathmartine. It was
named after a brave young man named Martin. The legend tells of a farm
called Pitempton, on which lived a humble farmer and his nine daughters.
One night he asked his eldest daughter to go down to the well and fetch
some water. When his daughter did not return, he sent his next eldest to go
look for her sister. His second eldest daughter did not return either, so he
kept sending his daughters until they were all gone.
Worried, he himself went looking for them, only to come across their
bloodied bodies laid out in a row. Eating off their flesh was a creature
resembling a dragon that looked like it was mixed with a serpent.
Frightened, the farmer ran off to seek the help of his neighbors. They all
banded together and allowed the farmer to lead them to the well where they
found the creature still feasting upon its recent kills.
Outnumbered, the creature tried to make its escape, but a young man named
Martin struck the beast down with his club. The crowd cheered as the beast
fell and died, and Martin became known as Strike-Martin. The spot where
he had slain the dragon became known as Strike-Martin as well, and later it
was named Strathmartine. Near the village of Bridgefoot, there is a lone
stone that stands in a field known as Martin’s stone.
The Ghost Piper
Scotland is full of ghosts and ghost stories that make a person's hair stand
on end. One such story was the story of the ghost piper of Clanyard Bay.
Scotland is notorious for the wailing soulful sound of bagpipes. Scotland is
awash with mountains and hillsides that extend as far as the eye can see.
Within these hillsides are often a series of caves or mysterious tunnels that
network different villages together.
There is said to be a network of tunnels that start at the Cove of Grennan
and extend to the craggy cliffs of Clanyard Bay. In times gone by, the locals
believed these tunnels to be where the fairies lived, and none dared to
disturb them by going in. One young piper, however, decided to find out for
himself if the fairies really did live there.

Armed with his bagpipes and his dog, he entered the caves. He blew loudly
on his bagpipes as he walked deeper and deeper into the depth of the
tunnels. His bagpipes got softer and softer until they could be heard no
more. After a lengthy silence, his dog rushed out of the tunnels whimpering.
All the dog's hair was gone, and so was the young piper.
It is said that some nights or at certain times of the day you can hear him
play his bagpipes. The sound wails from beneath the ground as he plays.
Brownies and Giants
In Scotland there were tiny little people known as Brownies that were like
little elves, only they did good deeds for people. It was said that late at night
when the people slept those in need would get a visit from the Brownie
people. They would come into the house and do what needed to be done.
They were shy and would run away before they were discovered by
humans. Many tales incorporate these little people; even the Romans
believed in small people who helped out, though they called them Lares.
From tiny people to giants, nearly all mythology has something written
about giants. Scotland is no exception. One particularly well known
legendary giant is Cailleach, a female giant. In the Forest of Mar in
Aberdeenshire is a large formation of rocks that looks like a collapsed
house. This is said to be the remains of Cailleach’s house and the Alisa
Craig island was formed by her when a large pebble fell out of the apron
she always wore.
Isle of Man (Manx) Celtic Myths and Legends
The Isle of Man is a small island perched between Ireland and Britain in the
Irish Sea. Like Wales, the Island was not of any interest to the invaders of
Britain at the time the Celts occupied the land. The Vikings invaded the
island in the 8th century and brought with them significant change. The
Tynwald is the Isle of Man’s parliament and has been around for a thousand
or so years.

This small island has been around since about 8,000 years BC, and has its
myths developed through many significant ages of man. The Isle of Man
forms part of the Goidelic Celtic culture.
The Isle of Man was populated for centuries before the Celts came along,
during the Iron Age. Through the different periods of the Island's
development many dark, mysterious, and entertaining stories were woven to
a captive audience that looked to the bards, druids, and Gods for
explanations for things we take for granted today. The event of dying crops
was most likely something to do with an unhappy God, a child taken early
was some demon’s doing, and so on.
Ancient accounts of the weather, death, and natural disasters built up a
collection of stories that we read today as myths and legends. This chapter
looks at a few of the more popular myths, legends, and stories of the Manx.
The Old Caillagh
Caillagh ny Groamagh was known as the sullen or gloomy old woman. She
was thought to have been a witch that was cast out Ireland and into the sea
where she would be drowned, only she kept herself afloat and landed on the
shores of the Isle of Man on the 1st of February, St. Bridget's Day. To dry
herself off, she went about gathering up as many sticks as she could find to
light a fire.
The following spring was a very wet one, and the entire spring had only bad
weather. The legend that followed was that every ditch on the Isle of Man
had to be covered with snow on St. Brigid's Day. This was so that the
Caillagh could not find sticks to gather up to dry herself with.
If Caillagh found enough sticks and got dry on the 1st of February, spring
on the Isle of Man would have bad weather. If Caillagh could not find sticks
to gather and remained wet, spring would have nice weather.
Fairy Bridge and Mooinjer Veggey

On the Isle of man, the little people are called Mooinjer Veggey and never
referred to as fairies. This is especially true when crossing the fairy bridge
on the south-east of the Isle of Man. The bridge lies between Castletown
and Douglas.
When crossing the bridge you have to greet the fairies and if you do not bad
luck will befall you. You have to say either:
● Moghrey mie Mooinjer Veggey — Good morning Mooinjer
Veggey.
● Fastyr mie Mooinjer Veggey — Good afternoon or evening
Mooinjer Veggey.
● Laa mie Mooinjer Veggey — Good day Mooinjer Veggey.
Arkan Sonney
The Arkan Sonney are little magical fairies that look like a pig crossed with
a hedgehog. To catch an Arkan Sonney is meant to bring good luck and
fortune to the one who catches it. It is a little white pig with hedgehog type
quills, and those that cross its path will find a silver coin in their pocket.
The Little Shoe
One day, Mr. Coote saw Molly walking along the side of the road. He saw
she was not looking very happy on this day. Mr. Coote loved telling stories
of the little folk and fairies that roamed the Isles. He had just the story for
sweet little Molly to put a smile back on her cheeks.
He called her, and she stopped to greet him. He asked her why she was so
blue and she shrugged; she was not too happy on this day. He asked Molly
if she had ever heard of the Cluricaune. As he suspected, she had, as her
father told her stories of these little people much like the Irish Leprechaun.
Mr. Coote asked Molly if she had ever seen one, to which she replied she
had not. She asked Mr. Coote if he had seen one, but he had not either,
though, his grandfather had way back when he was a much younger man.

His grandfather had suspected there may be Cluricaune living in the barn,
as he had heard scuffling and whistling late at night.
One night his grandfather had gone out to the barn to feed the old mare that
was ailing. As he got to the door, he heard hammering like the sound a
shoemaker makes. His grandfather was curious, and he slowly stepped into
the barn. That is when he saw the little man hammering away at a tiny shoe
while singing the sweetest song.
His grandfather looked all over the barn to see if he could find the little
creature, and found him hidden in the mare’s stable between some bales of
hay. The little man was whistling and singing so loudly he did not hear Mr.
Coote’s grandfather sneaking up on him. Before the Cluricaune could react,
his grandfather had captured him in his hand.
Mr. Coote’s grandfather laughed in glee, as he had captured a Cluricaune. It
is said that if you can get a Cluricaune’s purse, you will have endless riches.
But the Cluricaune was not about to give up his purse. Mr. Coote’s
grandfather would not set the little creature to go until the Cluricaunned
told Mr. Coote’s grandfather that he would need to get it back at his house.
So like an old fool, his grandfather opened his hand, allowing the
Cluricaunne to escape. He was so excited to be getting the little creature’s
purse that he did not realize it had tricked him.
The Cluricaunne had, however, left behind his little shoe he had been
working on. So Mr. Coote’s grandfather took the shoe, and that year his
farm gave good crops and his cows had an abundance of milk. To the end of
his days, Mr. Coote’s grandfather was convinced it was because he had kept
the little creature’s shoe that such good luck had come to them.
Molly asked Mr. Coote if he had seen the shoe, but he said he had not. But
his mother had. They had lost it long before Mr. Coote was born. But every
night he still leaves a little of food and water out in his grandfather’s old
barn just in case the little man comes back.
Molly had loved the story and thanked Mr. Coote for the tale. As she
skipped off home and neared the barn of their farmhouse, she heard
hammering. Slowly Molly walked into the barn, but there was nothing there

except a tiny little shoe. Molly smiled as she picked it up. It was beautiful.
She thought about the story Mr. Coote had told her, then carefully put the
shoe back.
As she went to get her dinner, Molly was no longer feeling blue.
 


Chapter 7: An Overview of Popular Celtic Fairy
Tales
Not only did the Celtic nation have some of the greatest myths and legends,
but they were also excellent storytellers. Each story would be one of either
inspiration, encouragement, love, strength, forgiveness, or instead be a
lesson or warning.
Some of their fairy tales would be entwined with one of their
Gods/Goddesses, heroes/heroines, royalty, or beasts. Others would be of
normal everyday people that things would happen to.
This chapter takes a look at some of the Celtic fairy stories from the Celtic
nations.
Many of the fairy stories of today have been taken from the fairy stories of
old Celtic tales. Here are a few popular Celtic fairy tales that you may find
you have heard a different version of.
A lot of fairy stories as we know did originate for Celtic folklore such as:
● The Goose Girl
● Frau Holle
● Clever Hans
● The Girl Without Hands
● Goldilocks and the Three Bears
● The Frog King
● The Pied Piper
There are hundreds of old stories to choose from, below are some of the
older Celtic fairy tales for you to enjoy. They have been written as the old
story, but in a more modern-day English language.
Jack and His Comrade

Jack lived with his widowed mother, and they were very poor. They grew
potatoes and would live from meal to meal, waiting on the potatoes to be fit
for eating. One summer, however, the potatoes were very scarce. So Jack
decided it was time for him to take charge and seek his fortune.
Jack told his mother that he was going to go out and do what he could to
find his fortune. As soon as he found it, he would be back to share it with
his poor mother. He asked her to bake him a cake and kill his hen. Jack’s
mother did as he asked and he set off at sunrise the next day.
Jack's mother walked him to the gate and at the gate, she asked him if he
would take only half the chicken and half the cake, or take the whole lot
and her curse. Jack looked at his mother and laughed that he would never
want her curse. Happy with her son’s answer, she gave Jack the full cake
and all the chicken for his journey.
Jack walked and walked until he could walk no more, as fatigue caught up
with him. He saw a farmer’s house and thought to ask for a bed in the barn
for the night. As he turned onto the road he found an ass that was stuck in
the bog that ran alongside the road. The ass had tried to get to the sweet
grass on the other side of the bog when he got stuck.
The ass called out to Jack to help him out of the bog or he would surely
drown. Jack, always willing to help, found stones which he threw into the
bog until the ass was able to climb out.
When the ass was safely on solid ground, he thanked Jack and promised to
pay him back for his good deed one day. He then asked Jack where he was
going. Jack told the ass (Neddy was his name) that he was on his way to
find his fortune.
Neddy asked Jack if he could come along as he too may find some good
fortune. Jack was happy for Neddy to come along on the journey, so they
headed off to find shelter for the night. As they passed through a small
village they saw a dog with a tin tied to his tail and a troop of gossoons
(small boys) chasing it with sticks.
The dog saw Jack and Neddy and ran to them for protection. Neddy was
mortified at the treatment of the poor dog so he let out the mightiest of

roars, scaring the gossoons. As they ran off, the dog thanked Jack and
Neddy then asked them where they were headed. Once again Jack told the
dog they were going to find their fortune.
The dog asked if he could join Jack and Neddy as he too could do with a
change of scene and be rid of the boys chasing him. The dog's name was
Coely. The three of them set out to find shelter for the night and came upon
an old wall. They sat down below it, Jack pulled out the provisions his
mother had made him, and gladly shared it with his friends.
Neddy decided he would prefer the thistles he found on the side of the road
while Coely shared with Jack.
While they ate and chatted, a half-starved cat came over to them, his meow
was as pitiful as can be. Jack and his new companions felt sorry for the cat
and Jack offered it some food. The cat's name was Tom and he thanked Jack
by blessing him with hopes that one day Jack’s children never knew a
hungry belly.
The cat asked where they were going, so Jack told Tom and asked if he
would like to join them. Tom was delighted by their offer, and when their
bellies were full and their feet rested the four of them set off. As they
walked and the night shadows grew longer, they heard a great crackling
coming from the bushes alongside the road.
As they neared the noise a fox jumped out of a ditch; in his mouth was a
large black rooster. Neddy once again roared like thunder, scaring the fox.
Jack sent Coely after it. The fox, Rynard was his name, dropped the rooster,
and ran off into the night. The rooster was a bit battered and bruised, but he
thanked Jack and his friends for saving him. The rooster then asked where
they were all heading, so Jack told the rooster they were going to seek their
fortune. Jack offered for the rooster to join them, which the rooster gladly
accepted.
So they set off down the road again as the night grew later there was no
farm or barn in sight. As it was summer night Jack decided they could go
into the wood and make a camp there in the long grass. So off they went
once again to make a camp in the woods.

Jack stretched out in the long grass, Neddy lay next to him, Coely on the
other side, the rooster took a tree and Tom cuddled down in Neddy’s lap.
They had all drifted into a deep sleep when the rooster decided it was time
to crow. Neddy got such a fright he yelled at the rooster for disturbing him
from his sleep.
The rooster yelled back that it was daybreak and couldn't he see the sun
starting to shine?
But it was not the sun, it was candle light that glowed in the distant dark.
The five of them set off to go explore. They found a cabin and from inside
they could hear the sound of merriment. Being very quiet, they tiptoed to
the window to see inside. There was a band of thieves eating, drinking, and
bragging about the theft of Lord Dunlavin’s gold and silver. They toasted to
the porter at the Lord's house that had helped them steal all the gold and
silver.
Jack and his friends decided to scare off the robbers so they could return
Lord Dunlavin’s gold and silver to him. So Neddy put his hooves upon the
windowsill, and Coely jumped onto Neddy’s back. Tom climbed up on
Coely’s back, and the rooster on top of Tom’s head.
They started to make a big noise of barking, hissing, and roarings, and Jack
shouted at the window for the thieves to surrender as they had the house
surrounded. The thieves were deeply frightened and ran off into the woods,
leaving their weapons, food, and loot behind. Jack and his friends ran into
the cabin, closed the shutters, locked the doors, and finished what was left
of the robbers’ feast.
Later that night the captain of the robbers decided to double back and go
check back at the cabin, but when he got inside the cabin was dark. He
quietly snuck towards the fire. When he got there the cat flew at him and
landed in the captain's face, scratching at him with his sharp claws. The
captain screamed and tried to make it to the door, but he stood on the dog’s
tail while doing so. As a result, the dog bit him on the arm and legs.
Swearing, the captain ran for the door only to have the rooster drop down
on his head clawing and pecking at him.

The captain dashed out of the cabin and headed straight for the woods,
where he told the rest of his band of thieves how he had been brutally
attacked. All the thieves decided it was best not to attempt to go back there.
When the morning came, Jack and his friends had a good hearty breakfast.
They collected Lord Dunlavin’s loot and set it on Neddy’s back. The five
friends then set off, headed for Lord Dunlavin’s castle. When they arrived at
Lord Dunlavin’s court, they were greeted at the door by the thieving porter.
The porter asked them what they were doing there, to which Jack replied he
had business with Lord Dunlavin. The Porter was shirty with him and told
him the Lord did not have a place for the likes of them. But the rooster was
not having this thief stop them from their quest, so he challenged the porter
about the robbery, making the porter's cheeks go red. It was then that the
Lord and his daughter made their presence known. They had been listening
to the entire time at the window.
The porter tried to discredit the five friends saying he did not open the door
to let the six thieves in. To which Jack replied, “How did you know there
were six if you did not let them in the door?”
Jack handed the lord the bags of silver and gold they had brought back and
asked for nothing more than a bed and food for the five of them. But the
Lord was not having any of that. He told Jack and his friend that they would
never be poor again, for what they had done was a truly noble deed.
So the rooster, dog, and the ass got a prime spot in the Lord's farmyard,
while the cat got a nice warm kitchen. The Lord took Jack under his wing
and decked him as any fine gentleman should be. Jack was made the Lord's
steward.
Jack went and fetched his mother, settling her into a nice cozy house with
everything she could need. Jack and his mother never wanted for anything
ever again.
The Three Crowns

Once upon a time, there lived a king who had three daughters. While his
youngest was as good as gold, his two eldest were bossy and quarrelsome.
Three princes visited the king's castle, all brothers, and the king found that
two of the brothers were just as troublesome as his eldest daughters. One of
the brothers, however, was just as good and easy as his youngest daughter.
The king, his three daughters, and their suitors all went for a walk around
the lake one day. There they met a beggar. The King would not give the
beggar anything, neither would the eldest two of the princesses or princes.
But the two youngest out of the brothers and sisters gave the beggar food
and treated him with kindness.
As they walked further along the lake, they came across one of the most
beautiful boats they had ever seen. The four eldest of the brothers and
sisters all said they would take a sail in the boat. The two youngest of the
siblings both said they would not like to take a sail in the boat. The
youngest did not want to get onto the boat, for she feared that the boat was
an enchanted one.
The youngest princess's father finally got her to get on the boat. The
princesses climbed aboard first. But when the king and princes wanted to
follow, a small man no bigger than seven inches tall sprang in front of them.
The princes went for their swords, only to find they could not draw them.
The tiny man laughed and told the men to say goodbye to their princesses
for they would not be seeing them for a while.
As the little man started to sail away, he said to the youngest of the brothers,
fear not, for you will see your princess again. The little man also told the
youngest man that he and the youngest princess would live a very happy
and loving life. The little man left the men with a final word: “Bad people if
they were rolling stark naked in gold, would not be rich.” With that, he bade
the four men good-bye and sailed away with the princesses.
Although the princesses tried to speak they found that they could not; they
had no voices. Once the boat was out of sight the princes and king could
move again. They rushed after the ship, but it was gone. But there was a
well from which hung a rope, the same rope that had tied the boat to the
lake's edge.

When they pulled the rope up, there was a basket at the end of it. The eldest
prince was the first to climb inside the basket to go find the princesses.
After a day, he did not return. The second eldest prince went down the well
to find the princesses. Then on the third day, the youngest prince went down
the well while their men stood guard of it.
When he got out at the other end, there was a beautiful garden with a castle
in the middle. The prince walked into the castle looking from room to room
but could not find a single soul. Eventually, he came across the dining room
where a feast was laid out. The prince was very hungry, but thought it was
rude to eat other food without invitation. The prince made himself
comfortable by the fire and waited.
It was not too long when the seven-inch man came into the room with the
youngest princess. The prince and princess rushed to each other, and the
man asked the prince why he had not eaten; the prince told him he thought
it would be rude.
Seven-inches laughed and told him that his brothers had not felt that way.
That is when he saw that his two brothers had been turned to marble statues.
The man told the young prince that he would have to rescue the other two
princesses from the giants they were imprisoned with.
The next day, the prince set about rescuing the other two princesses from
the two giants. The man turned the older princes back to flesh and let them
all leave together. But before they could go, the man gave each of the
princesses a set of three crowns and told them that they had to wear them on
their wedding. They had to all be married together, or ill fate would befall
them.
The oldest brothers were not very happy with their youngest brother, and
were plotting something against him. The youngest princess heard this,
turned to her prince, gave him her crowns, and told him to put a stone in the
basket if the eldest two made him go last. When the princesses were safely
above, the two eldest brothers made the youngest wait to go last.
When the basket came down for the young prince he put a stone in it. As it
was pulled to the top the rope was cut, and the basket with the boulder in it

came crashing down. The prince was beside himself, but he had nothing
more to do than go back to the seven-inch man’s castle. There he was
treated to the heartiest of meals and finest of wine, as well as given a
comfortable bed. After a week had gone by, the young prince was lonely
and missing his true love.
To appease him, the seven-inch man gave the young prince a beautiful snuff
box. The snuff box would call the man if ever the prince needed him, as it
was time for the prince to leave the castle. He pointed the young prince in
the direction of walking, and as he did he felt so tired that he bowed his
head and did not pay attention to where he walked.
It was not until he heard a hammering that he raised his head and realized
he was no longer at the seven-inch man’s castle. His attire was not that of
prince’s any longer, but of a commoner. He walked past a smith’s shop,
where the smith called to him and asked him if he was any good with a
hammer. The young prince said that indeed he was, and went to work with
the smith.
The prince and the smith were turning horseshoes when in walked the tailor
with news of the royal wedding of the two older princesses. They were all
finely dressed with their beautiful crowns upon their heads, but as the
grooms walked down the aisle, the floorboard opened and down they fell.
The king then decided to put off the wedding until the youngest had her
crowns and her groom. The king offered the princess’s hand to whoever
could make the crowns. The king was also willing to put up the gold, silver,
and copper to make the crowns with.
The young prince knew that he could get the crowns down, for he had them
hidden beneath his tattered old clock. He sent the smith to go fetch the
metal from the king, and promised that he would forge the crowns for him.
The smith did as the young prince asked and brought him back the metal.
The prince told the smith to leave and then sealed up the forge tight. That
night the villagers heard the hammering and cursing of the young man they
thought to be the smith's apprentice. In the morning the young prince
handed the smith the crowns. The smith told the young prince to come to
the castle with him, but the young prince refused.

When the smith showed the king the crowns he was overjoyed, and offered
the smith the young princess’s hand in marriage. But the smith could not lie
and he told the king it was not he who had made the crowns, but a young
man he had taken in the previous day. The king asked his daughter if she
would take that young man as her husband but she wanted to see the crowns
first.
The young princess recognized her crowns instantly and knew they were
from her true love. So the princess agreed to marry the young man who had
sent the crowns to the castle. The king told the eldest prince to go and fetch
the young man in the king's carriage. They then lived a full and happy life,
always together.
Golden-tree and Silver-tree
Once upon a time, there was a great king with a beautiful wife whose name
was Silver-tree. They had a daughter whose name was Golden-tree, and she
was even more beautiful than her mother.
Silver-tree was a very vain person, as well as a jealous one. She wanted to
be the fairest in all the land, so each year she would go down to the glen
where there was well with a magic trout. In this one year she went down to
the well, called upon the trout, and asked the fish if she was not the
beautiful queen in all of the land.
The trout said she was beautiful Golden-tree was more beautiful than her.
Enraged, the queen went home and lay down on her bed. She vowed she
would not be well again until she had the heart of her daughter Golden-tree.
The king was given word that the queen was ill; he went to see what was
wrong. The queen told him that she needed the heart of Golden-tree if she
would never be well again.
The king loved his wife dearly, but he loved his daughter too, so he sent his
daughter away to be wed to a prince in a far off land. He told one of his
huntsmen to find a goat, cut out its heart, and bring it to him. The huntsmen
did as he was told, and the king presented the queen with the heart of the
goat in the pretense that it was the heart of Golden-tree.

Meanwhile, Golden-tree and the prince were truly in love with each other
and started their own happy life far away from her mother, the evil queen.
The following year, Silver-tree once again approached the trout in the
magic well and asked if she was not the most beautiful queen there was.
Once again, the trout told her that it was the Golden-tree that was the most
beautiful queen.
The queen was now even more enraged, having found out that her daughter
was still alive and she had been deceived.
The queen then commandeered her husband's boat and took off to the far
off land, where her daughter was now wed to the prince. But Golden-tree
had gotten word of her mother's arrival, and told her husband of her fears of
her mother wanting to murder her.
The prince locked Golden-tree in a tower so her mother would not be able
to get to her. Upon the queen's arrival, she called for her daughter but was
told she was locked in a tower and could see the queen. The queen found
her way to the tower and called her daughter to come and see her mother.
But Golden-tree said that she could not. The queen told Golden-tree to put
her finger through the hold in the tower door so she may bestow her
daughter with a kiss. Golden-tree thought no harm could come of this, so
she did as her mother asked.
Triumphant, the queen pierced Golden-tree’s finger with a poison dart, and
Golden-tree fell dead to the floor. When the prince found his princess he
was devastated, so he placed Golden-tree in a beautiful glass box in the
tower. He locked the door and let no one near it.
Time passed, and one day one of the princess's companions made their way
to the tower. There she found her princess laying so pale and lifeless. On
closer inspection, the women found there was a poison dart in the princess's
finger. The women pulled out the dart, and Golden-tree awoke.
The prince was overjoyed to see his beautiful wife alive and they one again
resumed their happy life.

Another year had passed, and Silver-tree once again went to the well to ask
the trout if she was the most beautiful queen of all. Once again, the trout
responded that Golden-tree was still the most beautiful of all.
The queen was even more outraged than ever, finding out her plan to poison
her daughter had failed. The queen set off for the far off land, and this time,
she took a bottle of poison wine.
When she arrived, the princess and her companion approached the queen as
she came off her ship. The queen feigned joy in seeing her daughter alive
and offered her a drink of wine to celebrate. But the princess’s companion
told the queen that in their land it was custom for the guest to take the first
sip.
The queen lifted the glass to her lips, but the companion pushed the glass as
she put it to her mouth, and wine went down the queen's throat. The queen
gasped as the poison flowed through her, and she dropped dead where she
stood.
They buried the evil queen far from the kingdom and celebrated Golden-
tree's freedom from her mother, the evil queen.
The Sprightly Tailor
The Laird MacDonald of castle Saddell employed a sprightly tailor to make
him a pair of trews. As the tailor set about taking the Laird’s measurements,
they got to talking about the old ruined, haunted church. It was said that
weird things happened in the ruined church by the light of the moon.
The Laird challenged the sprightly tailor to make the trews by night in the
haunted church. If the tailor could make these garments there for the Laird,
the tailor would be handsomely rewarded.
The tailor, wanting the reward and thinking himself to be a sprightly fellow,
agreed to the challenge. That night he set off to go and make the Lairds
trews in the ruined church. He found a gravestone upon which to sit and lit
candles all around him so he could see to sew the trews.

The tailor was well into sewing the garments without incident, thinking to
himself that the Laird was going to have to pay when he won the challenge,
when the ground shook. The tailor kept his fingers busy sewing as he
looked around for the source of the disruption. From a stone in the ruined
church, he saw a great head rise.
The head asked the tailor if he saw him, to which the tailor replied that
indeed he did but he had a garment to sew so he could not stop stitching.
The head rose a bit higher out of the ground until its neck was visible and
again it asked the tailor if he now saw his neck.
The tailor replied that he did, but he still needed to keep stitching as he had
a garment to finish. This continued as each time the other part of the spirit's
body would rise a bit higher from the ground. Each time it would ask the
tailor if he saw, and each time the tailor responded that he did, but he had to
keep sewing.
The tailor continued to sew until the giant of a creature pulled out his first
leg and stamped on the ground. The tailor knew he would have to hurry
with the garment, so he took to doing a long stitch. By the time the creature
had extracted his last leg the tailor was finished with his stitching, and took
off out of the churchyard the newly made trews under his arm.
The giant raced after the tailor, hollering for him to stop, but the tailor did
not. The tailor ran until he came upon the safety of Saddell castle, and shut
the giant out. Angry, the giant took a swing, leaving his fingerprints
embedded in the wall. But the tailor had won his bet, and the Laird paid him
handsomely for his trews.
Each time the Laird wore his trews, he had the greatest tale to tell about a
brave tailor who spotted the creature that lived beneath the stones at the
ruined church. The tailor had not only lived to tell the tale, but had sewn the
finest trews–though if the Laird had looked closer, he would have seen the
long stitch.
 


Chapter 8: Celtic Mythical Creatures and Beasts
In the ages of myths and legends, there were reportedly all sorts of fantastic
creatures and beasts running around, from mermaids to fairies, leprechauns,
dragons, and magical horses. These creatures were either fierce and
frightening, or simply magical beings. This chapter delves into some of
these Celtic mythical creatures.
Black Dog (Faerie Hound)
Dogs, especially black dogs, have been considered as the guardians of the
gates of hell throughout Europe for centuries. The Cu Sidhe, which means
faerie hound, in Celtic myths are either green or black large dogs with
glowing red eyes. Some of them are as big as a small horse.
They do the bidding of their fairy master, whether it is to abduct a human
woman to nurse a fairy baby or guide a soul through the gates to the
underworld. They say that this large dog is silent and can sneak up on a
person more silently than a cat. Sometimes they will howl three times as
they appear, and the sound can echo over a far distance. When men heard
this sound they would lock up their womenfolk in fear of them being taken
to the faerie realm. The black dog is a prominent figure in Scottish and Irish
Celtic myths.
Bugul Noz
The Bugul Noz is a type of faerie creature found in Bretton that is so ugly
that some say if you see him you will die. The Bugul Noz is not at all an
evil creature; he is a kind and gentle soul, only he is so ugly that he hates
for people to see him. He will try and frighten people or creatures away so
they will not look at him. He even tries to keep the creature safe in the
woods late at night, as this is the time he goes out. In the dark of the night,
no one can see how hideous he is.

Dearg Due
Dearg Due never started out as a bloodsucking vampire; she was just a
young woman of incredible beauty who wanted nothing more than to settle
down with the man she loved. However, her father was a cruel and selfish
man who thought of nothing but wealth and owning large amounts of land.
The young woman's father refused to let her marry her true love, a humble
father, and instead sold her for wealth and land to their clan's chieftain. The
chieftain was as cruel as any man could be, and treated her like she was a
possession that he alone could see. He locked her up so no other could see
her or go near her.
The young woman was so unhappy that she withered away to nothing and
died. Her husband had already married another by the time they had buried
her. Her true love was the only one who bothered to visit her grave and each
day asked for her miraculous return.
On the eve of the first anniversary of her death, the young woman clawed
her way from her grave, rage burning through her breast. Her one purpose
for coming back to life on the eve was to seek revenge on those that had
mistreated her so.
The first she called upon was her cruel and selfish father. While he slept,
she placed her lips on his and sucked out his life force. Her next victim was
her even crueler husband, whom she found in the middle of a group of
lustful women. The woman ran out screaming when they saw her. She
captured her husband, and instead of sucking the life out of him, she drank
every drop of his life's blood.
The blood energized her and gave her great power; she felt stronger, faster,
and had become immortal. From that day forward on the eve of the
anniversary of her death, she arose, luring men in with her incredible beauty
and feasting on their blood.
Groac’h

The Groac’h are water faeries of Bretton. They are known to be quite ugly
and old; some have even been reported to have long walrus teeth. They
mainly come out at night and can change their form; in some tales, they lure
men in and turn them into fish. They then serve the fish up for dinner.
They have also been known to overwhelm humans with the gifts of their
desires, and have the human beholden to them for the rest of their lives as a
result. They live wherever there is water and can be found beneath the sand
on the beach, caverns, and beneath the sea. Some of the Groac’h can control
the forces of nature.
Morgens
Morgens are water sprites from Bretton mythology. They are a lot like
sirens, whereby they sit upon the rocks brushing their hair seductively to
lure sailors to their doom. There are quite a few stories about Morgens;
there are a few variations of this mermaid type water-sprite. Just off the
coast of Brittany, there are legendary little mermaid type people who are
said to be quite beautiful to look upon. They kidnap people and take them to
their crystal dwelling beneath the sea to be married. These little people are
known as “morganezed” for the females, and “morganed” for the males.
In one story there was a beautiful human girl that was kidnapped by an old
ugly morganezed; he took her to his dwelling at the bottom of the sea to
become his bride. But his handsome son found her, and the two of them fell
in love. The young morganezed rescued the young woman from his father
and spirited her away.
Morvarc’h
Morvarc’h is a magical seahorse that has been known to be able to walk or
gallop on the waves. It is a horse that pops up in quite a few Bretton
legends, including the story of the Ys. The horse is said to be large with a
shiny black coat and flowing mane. It can breathe fire and is fiercely loyal
to its master.

Yan-gant-y-tan
Yan-gant-y-tan is a troll-like figure that roams the night and makes a
nuisance of himself. The only way to tell him apart from other trolls is by
the five candles he holds in his one hand, spinning them around. If you
want him to leave you alone, you need to appease him with gold. He also
does not like to turn around too fast, as he does not like to have his five
candles go out.
Faeries
Celtic myths and legends are filled to the brim with tales of faeries. There
are many different types of faeries, and they come in all shapes and sizes.
Although each Celtic nation may have different names for each type of
faery, they all share a few commonalities. A lot of the myths and legends do
not paint faeries as very nice, as we are taught to think of them as young
children. Some types of faeries can be quite malevolent; for example, some
love to snatch human children and leave changelings in their place.
Leprechaun
The little green man with his hat, shamrock, and pot of gold is synonymous
with the Irish. They believe they are lucky, while others believe they are a
small nuisance that loves to play pranks and steal ale. They also like to
make shoes for some reason, and every coin gold they find they store in a
pot and hide it at the end of a rainbow. If a person is lucky enough to catch
one, they are said to grant you three wishes if you let them go. But just like
a genie, you have to be careful what you wish for, as everything has a price.
The leprechaun myth goes back for centuries and originates from the word
“luchorpan,” which translates to “little body.” Luchorpan were water spirits
that bonded with garden faeries to produce the leprechaun that developed a
healthy taste for alcohol and would raid cellars.
Pooka

The Pooka, also spelled Puca, is a shapeshifting creature that likes to take
the form of either a dog, a horse, a goblin, a rabbit, or goat. The earlier
accounts of the pooka were always that of a pitch-black horse with a very
long flowing mane and tail. The Pooka is known to have either gold or red
glowing eyes.
Pooka can communicate with any creature they come in contact with; they
love to twist a story. Small dark pools and bottomless lakes that look black
are often called Pooka pools.
There are many interesting and varied stories about the pooka, but none
where the creature actually harms or has any intent on harming anyone.
They do love to chat with humans and have been known at times to give
good advice.
Loch Ness Monster
The Loch Ness monster, or Nessy as she is referred to in modern times, was
first sighted around 560 AD. Nessy came up out of the water and snatched a
servant from the water's edge. In the age of monsters and dragons, the
rumors of the monster in Loch Ness spread far and wide. After the first
sighting, other strange happenings and sightings around Loch Ness have
occurred which all refer to the giant sea monster or kelpie in Loch Ness.
Dragon
As with faeries, much folklore, myths, and legends have to include the huge
fire-breathing dragons that once plagued the lands of Europe. There were
all sorts of dragons and they took on various shapes, such as the large flying
dragon with a huge wingspan and scaly body resembling a lion. Then there
are the serpent shape dragons with long twisting bodies that look a bit like a
snake with legs walking on tippy toes. There are many different types of
dragons in all shapes and forms, even colors like the red dragon of Wales.
Some breathe fire, others breathe ice, they have tails like thick sharp arrows
points at the end. Their tails are also usually powerful and their hands have

talons that extend from their fingertips. They usually all have wings.
The Wulver of Shetland
The Wulver is a legend from the Shetland Islands and is a lot like the myth
of the werewolf. The Wulver stands up like a human, complete with arms
and legs. But instead of fingers or toes, it has claws. Its body is covered in
hair and its head is that of a wolf. It has never been a human and it has
never been a complete wolf. The Wulver is also not a shapeshifter; he stays
in the form all the time.
The Wulver lives all alone in a cave on the Shetland Island, and lives in
peace with the inhabitants there. He does not attack humans as long as they
do not attack him. He is also not vicious or fearful, but instead has a kind
and generous heart.
He loves to fish, and most have spotted him fishing off the rocks or around
rocky pools. If he does come near humans it is to help those that have lost
their way or are in danger. He has even been said to leave fish on the
windowsill of those that are poor and hungry.
Kelpies
Kelpies are shape-shifting spirits that like to haunt the rivers and lakes in
Scotland. Their preferred form is that of a horse. They like to pose as a
docile beautiful pony standing grazing beside the edge of a lake or river, but
that is just to lure people to them as they are malevolent spirits. They
particularly love children; some say the one reason they take the shape of a
pony is that most children are drawn to horses.
The thing about a Kelpie when they appear as a horse is that they encourage
a person to climb upon their back or touch them. But they have a sticky
hide, and once a person touches it, they are stuck to the Kelpie that will run
into the nearest body of water and eat them.
Kelpies have also been known to appear in human form, as beautiful young
women. Like the mermaids, they try to lure young men in so they can

drown them. Some Kelpies like to take the form of a hairy, bone-crushing
ogre-type creature that will lie in wait beneath the surface of the water.
When someone gets near, they jump out and grab hold of the person,
crushing them to death.
Another power a Kelpie has is that of summoning storms and flooding
rivers. It is said that if you hear a loud wailing that is coming from a water’s
edge, it is a Kelpie warning of an imminent storm. The only way to catch a
Kelpie is in its horse form as its bridle is its weak spot, but a caught Kelpie
is very dangerous and has the strength of ten men.
Changelings
Changelings were said to be human babies that were swapped out by faeries
or demons. The human babies are either given to the devil or taken to the
fairy realm, where they would be used to strengthen the fairies' stock.
Many a deformed infant or imbecilic child would be thought to be a
changeling. The only way to get rid of a changeling was to beat it, pinch it,
or put a red hot poker on it. It was believed that abusing the changeling
would send it back to where it came from, and the human baby would then
be returned.
Naturally, this myth was responsible for a lot of child abuse during the
times of the changeling belief. It was believed in olden times that infants
were the most susceptible to demonic possession and easier to abduct by the
fairies or demons.
Banshee
The Banshee is another type of faery in Irish mythology and legends. The
Irish call her “scream caoine,” which translates to keening, and her wail is
believed to be the call of death. Those that hear her are being warned that
there will soon be a death in the family.
It is believed that there is a Banshee for each family, and that they can be
killed or deterred by a weapon made of pure gold. But even if she is killed,

it will not stop the death of the family member. Legend says that even those
who have tried to leave the area or country were never rid of the Banshee,
as she would follow wherever they went.
The Blue Men of Minch
Not far off the coast of the Isle of Lewis lives a race of sea creatures. They
are both male and female creatures that are much like mermaids and
mermen. Their skin is said to be like the skin of a dolphin, and their legs
resemble the dolphin's tail. They will use whatever wiles they can to lure
sailors to a watery grave.
They live in caves along the craggy coastline between the Shiant islands
and Pabail Uarach peninsular. They are thought to be the ancestors of
Pasiphaê and Minos, who was the king of Crete. They were thought to have
fled to the Mediterranean sea with the destruction of Crete and made their
home in the Scottish Hebrides.
Finfolk
The Orkney islands sit off the north coast of Scotland in the cold,
unforgiving North Sea. The Finfolk are creatures that would live deep
beneath the waves of the North Sea during the winter months. The area in
the North Sea where they live is called Finfolkaheem, and it can be found in
the sea's deepest darkest depth.
During the winter months, the Finfolk do not cause much threat to humans,
but when the summer months come they swim ashore and make Hildaland
their home. They are cunning, shape-shifting monsters that abduct humans
to take them to live in Finfolkaheem. Once there, they start to lose their
human selves and gradually become the same as the Finfolk.
They come ashore during the summer months to find humans to abduct to
keep their race alive. Finfolk were how some people, in those days, would
explain mysterious happenings. They could also explain or justify the
disappearance of people, especially the disappearance of young women.

 


Chapter 9: Celtic Bards, Druids, Holidays, and
Festivals
The Celts believed in magic, gods, and wizards, and Druids held a high
status in the tribe. Bards were also held in high regard, as they were the
people who sang the Celts' history, triumphs, tragedies, and more.
The Bards of the Ancient Celts
Bards were the poets, musicians, and singers of the Celtic era. They would
regale their audiences with the music and songs of great heroes, royalty,
beasts, and so on. Bards were regarded as storytellers, to praise whoever
employed them, and commemorate certain dates or victories.
There were not many kings who did not have a bard in their court to take
note of the king's lineage, his stories, and triumph. They also employed
them to sing of these accomplishments at great feasts.
Bards did not just get up one day and think, “I have a harp, so I am going to
be a bard.” They needed to be trained, and some even had apprenticeships
with other bards before they could become one themselves.
Bards needed to be able to add to their songs and create ones practically on
the fly without writing anything down. They were the custodians of the
Celtic myths, legends, and folklore.
Taliesin, Chief of the Bards
Taliesin was the chief of the Bards and served in many of the kings
throughout Britain. In the Arthurian legends, Taliesin served in the courts of
King Arthur. He was as beautiful as he was talented, and he had the gift of
prophecy to add to his lure.

Taliesin’s name means “radiant bow,” and was a Bard of great renown that
charmed with his wit as well as his talent.
Mongán
There are many tales about Mongán, a bard and the son of the sea god,
Manannan Mac Lir. Mongán’s mother was Caíntigern, the Queen of Dál
nAraide which made her the wife of King Fiachna Mac Báetáin. The
kingdom over which Mongán’s mother reigned was not a very nice
kingdom. It was no surprise that the kingdom ran into problems for which
they needed Manannan’s help. Manannan said he would help, but only if
Fiachna let him lay with his wife Caíntigern. With that union, Caíntigern
fell pregnant with Mongán.
Manannan raised Mongán, and when he was a boy Mongán told his father
that he had had a vision of his own death. He told his father that he would
be killed with a stone his mother had picked up when they had gone for a
walk together.
Caíntigern heard about this and was mortified that the beautiful stone she
had taken from the beach would kill him. Caíntigern tried to throw the stone
into the sea but the next day the stone was back on the sand.
Mongán eventually became the leader of the Dál nAraide and a poet.
Aengus
Aengus was the God of love and poetry, as well as the chief Bard to the
Tuatha De Danann. Dagda was his father, so he inherited a few gifts for the
great man. One of them was Dagda's love of music and poetry.
Aengus was charming, crafty, and could inspire the masses with his poetry.
Unlike most other bards, Aengus had power over the dead and could
resurrect them. He resurrected those he wished to with his power, which
was the breath of life.

He was a young and beautiful man that could also shapeshift. His powers
allowed him to woo both the young and the old.
The Druids of the Ancient Celts
The Druids are from the ancient Celts and were of a learned class. They
practiced as advisors, teachers, judges, and priests to the Celtic people.
Most of what is known about these mysterious people was told by Julius
Caesar, and later by Christin Monks. Some scholars believe that a lot of
what was recounted about the Druids was speculation. For Julius Caesar,
the Celts were his sworn enemies and for the Christians, they were Pagans
and heathens.
The Druids knew of the art of healing through various herbs, which they
would brew up or use as a poultice. They were also known as the wise men
of the village, and drawings usually depict them as cloaked older men. They
would have long white beards, wear cloaks, and carry a long crook-type
staff.
They were always called upon to be the judge of a dispute or any other type
of accusation. There were usually some sort of tests if the Druid was
unsure. The Druids would also be the ones to decree the punishment for any
crimes committed or to settle arguments.
The chieftains and kings would rely upon the Druids for prophecy and to
advise them. They were also in charge of the sacrifices and worship of the
Celtic Gods. Within the sector of the Druids was also a hierarchy. One
Druid was appointed the chief of Druids and would remain so until his
death, when another would be appointed to the position.
Druids were never expected to join in any battle, rather they would stay
away from the fight and ensure the Gods were appeased. This privilege
drew a lot of people to want to join the order of the Druids. It was an honor
to be accepted by the order, whereupon the student would be taught many
studies such as astronomy, philosophy, verse, and about various herbs,
potions, and healing arts.

Many feared the Druids as they had incredible power, not just mythical but
within the Celtic societies. They had the power to get between warring
nations and stop or prevent war. Through the supposedly prophetic visions
and gifts of being able to see well into the future, kings and chieftains
would turn to them for advice on many matters, including invasions and
war.
There is a lot of speculation about the Druids’ sacrificial practices.
According to Julius Caesar, he believed that the Druids had no problem
sacrificing prisoners of war or their own men to ensure that they were
victorious over the enemies.
A lot of the megaliths that are found around ancient Celtic ruins, or where it
was thought there was a Celtic burial or scarce ground, have megaliths
associated with the Druids. These megaliths, such as the likes at
Stonehenge, seem to be strategically placed to align with the stars, sun, and
moon.
The Different Classes of the Druids
Within the Druid's sector, they had different classes of Druids and these
reflected their standing or learned experience. The Druids class was
represented by the color of the robes they wore:
● The Arch-druid, or Chief-druid, wore gold robes. He was also
usually the eldest and most experienced Druid.
● The Druid below the Arch-druid wore white, and they acted as
priests, judges, and mentors.
● The Druids who performed sacrifices wore red robes.
● The Druids who were the artists, scribes, and translators wore blue
robes.
● The Druids who were learning wore black or brown robes.
Legendary Celtic Druids

There are quite a few legendary Celtic Druids of ancient times. A lot of
wizards were thought of as Druids, in Irish legends, there were even female
Druids.
Bodhmall
Bodhmall is a female Druid who appears in Irish legends in the Fenian
Cycle. She was one of the caretakers of the famous Fionn mac Cumhaill
(Finn MacCool) when he was a child.
Bodhmall was also a fierce warrior, and was one of the women charged
with raising Fionn when he was sent away after his father was killed.
Merlin
Merlin is usually depicted as a powerful sorcerer or wizard. Merlin is based
on a poet who was deemed a madman named Myrddin Wyllt, or in English
Myrddin the Wild. He has appeared as Merlin throughout many Celtic
myths and legends, including Arthurian. Merlin is probably one of the best
known Druids of all the Celtic Druids.
Amergin Glúingel
In the Irish Mythological Cycle, Amergin was the Chief Ollam of Ireland.
Amergin was a poet, bard, and a judge for the Milesian people. During the
Milesians’ conquest of Ireland and the battle of the three kings, Amergin
acted as an impartial judge, laying down the laws of engagement.
Mug Ruith
Mug Ruith was a very powerful Druid on the Island that could change his
size. He could grow as big as a giant, and his breath had the power to call
up a storm or turn men to stone. He drove a chariot that at night would be as
bright as the sun and was pulled by a band of oxen. It was believed that he
could fly by means of a contraption called the Roth rámach, or oared wheel
in English.
Tlachtga

Tlachtga was a powerful Druidess and the daughter of Mug Ruith. She had
long fiery red hair and went everywhere with her father, learning his
magical secrets and forging her own path. She gave birth to triplets upon a
hill that was named for her called the Hill of Tlachtga in Ireland County
Meath. Her triplets were said to be from different fathers after she was
raped by three men. These three men were the sons of Simon Magus the
sorcerer.
The Celtic Holidays, Festivals, and Celebrations
The Druids were a well ordered sect and were concerned with nature. Trees
were sacred to them and they followed many of nature's patterns as their
way of life. Their season cycle ran in line with the lunar and solar cycles,
which is why they had eight main holy days of worship.
Samhain
Samhain was the ancient Celtic equivalent of the current New Year's Day. It
fell on the 31st of October each year. It was a day for many celebrations
because it was the day that the last of the harvesting would be done. It was
also the day when the veil between the living and dead was said to be at its
thinnest. This meant that the living and dead would be in close proximity to
each other.
Yule
Yule was the celebration of the winter solstice. It was the night that the
Druids would sit on sacred mounds for the entire night so they would be
reborn again with the first rays on the sun.
Holly was associated with the long cold winter months, where people
would hang it in their houses. It was a sign of hope and encouragement to
push through the long dark days into the bright light of the summer.

Holly and mistletoe were sacred to the Druids, who were said to cut the
trees six days before the winter solstice with a golden sickle. These two
plants are still to this day a symbol of Christmas and winter in the Northern
hemisphere.
Yule fell on the 21st of December, which was the longest night but the
shortest day. For the Celts, winters were harsh and they did not have the
luxury of central heating or goose down duvets. They tried to survive the
long bitter winters as best they could. Yule marked the return of the sun to a
frozen land so they would rejoice by gathering and having large bonfires.
The wine and ale flowed freely, while some of the livestock that had
survived would be slaughtered, gathered, and rotated on large spits to feed
the masses.
Imbolc
Imbolc is the holiday that marks the halfway point between winter and the
coming spring. The celebration starts on the 1st of February and lasts until
sundown on the 2 February. It usually follows the start of the animal
breeding season, and is why the Celts celebrate the fertility Goddess Brigid
on this day. It was a time of hope and the promise of the warmer spring
days to come.
The celebration would be held by the Celts lighting a huge effigy of the
Goddess which was made from bundles of rushes and oats. The Celts would
have a huge celebration in the honor of the Goddess, and light various
lamps and bonfires. By the end of the celebration, offerings of fruits,
vegetables, and oats would be left.
Ostra
Ostra was the spring equinox and was celebrated on the day that the night
and day are of equal length. This usually happens on or around the 20th of
March and celebrates the Goddess Ostara. Ostra is a Goddess of fertility,
and she’s where the name “Easter” comes from. This was another day of

celebrations where wine and ale would flow freely. Bonfires would be lit
and feasts would be spread for all to enjoy.
Beltane
Beltane was the start of summer celebrations for the Celtic people. Beltane
welcomed the change of seasons. The Celts did this with bonfires, feasts,
and merriment to enjoy the warm bright weather of the season. This
celebration usually took place on the 30th of April or 1 May.
Litha
There is a legend that during the winter and summer equinox the Holly
King and the Oak go to war. At the time of the winter equinox, the Holly
King wins and rules the dark cold days of the winter. During the summer
equinox, the Oak King wins and rules the bright warm days of summer.
Litha is the summer solstice holiday and the day when the Celts would
celebrate the Oak King’s victory over the Holly King. It is also the longest
day and shortest night that was celebrated on the 21 st of June.
Lughnasa
Lughnasa celebrated the first harvest of the year and took place in the
autumn months on the 2nd of August. This day and holiday were associated
with the God Lugh, to whom the Celtic people would offer the first pickings
of their harvest in tribute.
Mabon
Mabon was the holiday that celebrated the autumn equinox and harvest
moon. It was celebrated during the time in autumn when once again there
was an equal time during the day and night. It was a celebration of balance,
abundance, and sharing that took place on the 21 September.

 

Conclusion
Mythology can and has been depicted in many ways through the ages. All
the interpretations we have today are from scripts or tales handed down
from generations past. A lot of the scripts have been written in ancient
languages that are also open for misinterpretation by the translator. Even the
stories handed down from generation to generation would have been added
to or told differently to what was told. Most everyone at some point in their
life comes across the old game of broken telephone or Chinese whispers;
the story whispered at the start of the telephone chain never comes out the
same at the end of it. Handing down mythologies and legends is the same.
In our modern-day world, we are lucky enough to have scholars and
advanced technology to help them dig a bit deeper into what we know as
historical truths. It is thanks to these scholars, as well as the Celtic people
keeping their heritage alive, that we get to become a part of their world. To
have a better understanding of who we are, it is essential to know where we
came from and the cultures that were our past. Learning about Celtic
mythology, the folklore, fairy tales, druids, royalty, gods/goddesses, and all
they entail keep these cultures alive for future generations.
In this book, we covered all the basic gods/goddesses, great legendary
kings, and both fair and evil queens. We looked at some of the more popular
fairy stories of the Celts and celebrated their most well-known heroes and

heroines. You were introduced to bards and some of the most powerful
druids, and learned about the Celtic culture, their mythical beasts, magic,
festivals, and sacrifices. There is a lot more to Celtic mythology than
presented here, as there is only so much a writer can squash into one book.
But hopefully, this one book has inspired you to want to delve deeper into
the adventure that is Celtic mythology. Even great writers like Shakespeare
were inspired by the rich folklore of the Celts.
Many great books have been translated from the older texts that you can
read and a host of information in various libraries on the subject. Of course,
one of the best ways to find out more would be to take a trip to some of the
heritage sites attributed to these myths and legends. These places always
have vast treasure troves of information about their respective legends. It is
when you visit these places that you realized just how diverse Celtic
mythology truly is. The six nations that still hold a tribute to their Celtic
heritages are Scotland, Ireland, Wales, Cornwall (Conaulles), the Isle of
Man (Manx), and Brittany (North West Gual) in France. There are also
parts of Galicia in Spain that still maintain parts of their Celtic heritage
along with quite a few Celtic heritage sites.
Some good books having to do with Celtic mythology, folklore, and legends
are:
● Cath Maige Tuired
● The Cattle-raid of Cualnge (Tain Bo Cuailnge)
● Heroic Romances of Irelands (there are two volumes)
● Of Gods and Fighting Men
● The Books of the Takings of Ireland
● Cuchulain of Muirthemne
● VIII: The Battle of the Trees
● The Lament of the Old Woman of Bear
● Beira, Queen of Winter
● Part II Book IV: The Hunt of the Slieve Cuilinn
● Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry
● Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland
● Pagan Celtic Britain: Studies in Iconography and Tradition


We live in a world that through modern-day advances a lot of what most
myths and legends were built on can be explained. However, there is still a
lot that cannot be explained by science or technology. Even though the four
corners of our world have been discovered, there are still many layers of it
that have not. Strange and wondrous things are being discovered every day
that makes us stop and go “Oh wow!” Maybe one day the things that were
unexplained to us will go down as future generations’ myths and legends.
I hope you enjoyed this journey through the romance, lure, battles, and
wonders of all that is Celtic mythology as much as I enjoyed writing it for
you. You should now have your own piece of the Celts’ mysterious, ancient
past to regale others with such as the bards once did. Unlike the bards,
however, we have the power of the internet to help us spread their
wonderfully creative and magical tales. Through books like this one and the
interest of all its wonderful readers, these myths and legends will stay alive
well into the future.

References
Ankou. (n.d.). Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ankou
Ashliman, D. (2013). Tristan and Isolde. Pitt.edu.
https://www.pitt.edu/~dash/tristan.html
Blue Men of Minch. (n.d.). Britain Explorer.
https://britainexplorer.com/listing/blue-men-of-minch/
Breton Myths & Legends. (n.d.). Gites and More.
http://www.gitesandmore.co.uk/Legends%20of%20%20Brittany.htm
Brittany. (n.d.). Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/place/Brittany-
region-France
Bugul Noz. (n.d.). Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bugul_Noz
Celtic Mythology. (n.d.). Myths and Legends.
http://www.mythencyclopedia.com/Ca-Cr/Celtic-Mythology.html
Changeling. (n.d.). Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/art/changeling-
folklore
Classic Authors Writing About the Ancient Celts. (n.d.). People.
https://people.stfx.ca/mlinklet/ClassicalAuthors.htm
Danu (Irish Goddess). (n.d.). Wikipedia.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Danu_(Irish_goddess)
Fairy Bridge. (n.d.). Transceltic. https://www.transceltic.com/isle-of-
man/fairy-bridge
Jacobs, J. (n.d.). Jack and His Comrades. Fairytalez.
https://fairytalez.com/jack-comrades/
Johnson, B. (n.d.). The Kelpie. Historic UK. https://www.historic-
uk.com/CultureUK/The-Kelpie/

Lady of The Lake. (2019, September 2). Encyclopedia.com.
https://www.encyclopedia.com/literature-and-arts/literature-
english/english-literature-1499/lady-lake
Lavandière de Nuit. (n.d.). A Book of Creatures.
https://abookofcreatures.com/2015/04/17/lavandiere-de-nuit/
Lloyd, E. (2016, November 28). Mythical Submerged City Of Ys – Europe’s
Own Sodom And Gomorrah. Ancient Pages.
http://www.anciehttpsntpages.com/2016/11/28/mythical-submerged-
city-of-ys-europes-own-sodom-and-gomorrah/
MacQueen, D. (2018, March 24). Finfolk, the sinister creatures of the deep
and the hidden islands of Orkney. Transceltic.
https://www.transceltic.com/scottish/finfolk-sinister-creatures-of-
deep-and-hidden-islands-of-orkney
MacQueen, D. (2018, April 20). Wulver: Shetland’s kind and generous
werewolf. Transceltic. https://www.transceltic.com/scottish/wulver-
shetlands-kind-and-generous-werewolf
Merlin. (n.d.). Fandom. https://questforcamelot.fandom.com/wiki/Merlin
O’Regan, A. (2018, October 02). The Dearg Due - How a revengeful young
lover became Ireland's most famous female vampire.
https://www.irishcentral.com/culture/entertainment/dearg-dur
Owen, J. (2009, March 20). Druids Committed Human Sacrifice,
Cannibalism?. National Geographic.
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/news/2009/3/druids-sacrifice-
cannibalism/#:~:text=Recent%20evidence%20that%20Druids%20pos
sibly,of%20Druidic%20savagery%2C%20archaeologists%20say.
The Black Dog. Also known as Cu Sidhe or Coinn Iotair. (2011, June 14).
Mayo Folk Tales. https://amayodruid.blogspot.com/2011/06/black-
dog-also-known-as-cu-sidhe-or.html
The Three Crowns. (n.d.). Fairytalez. https://fairytalez.com/the-three-
crowns/

Who Were Celts? (2019, October 24). History.com.
https://www.history.com/topics/ancient-history/celts
Wright, G. (n.d.). Celtic Gods. Mythopedia. https://mythopedia.com/celtic-
mythology/gods/

 
Norse Mythology:
Explore the Timeless Tales of Norse Folklore,
the Myths, History, Sagas & Legends of the
Gods, Immortals, Magical Creatures, Vikings
& More

Introduction
The first world that came into existence, before the beginning of time, was
Muspelheim, a realm of fire, flames, and heat. To the north lay the realm of
ice and frost, Niflheim, and separating the two contrasting lands was
Ginnungagap, the world of chaos, a great abyss of void and nothingness.
But, as Ginnungagap met both the world of ice and the land of flames, it
linked the two. The venomous waters of Niflheim flew into the void, stuck
in a perpetual cycle of freezing and thawing caused by the hot winds that
blew into the vast nothingness from Muspelheim. The water drops that
came from the union of the two natural elements, ice, and fire, built up and
took the form of the frost giant Ymir, the first of his kind and the earliest
form of life in Nordic mythology.
The birth of Ymir marks the beginning of the mythical world of the Nordic
people, and it paves the way for all the myths and legends that are to come;
stories of the clever and driven Odin, of the courageous Thor and devious
Loki, characters that we are all more or less accustomed to. Lately, the
fascination with the Vikings, their beliefs, and their way of life is at its

peak. We see mythological Norse heroes and gods in popular movies, we
have TV shows starring fearless Vikings and their historical conquests, and
we have comics and video games that allow us to follow along with the
adventures and legends of the old Nords.
And yet, all these mediums take artistic liberties, and at the end of the day,
we are left striving for more. We want to get to know the people behind the
fantastic stories. We want to understand where these legends are coming
from and what they meant for the Nordic civilization. This desire to learn
more and understand the culture that created the gods and heroes we love,
and to discover characters, creatures, and legends that didn’t get the “media
treatment” they deserved, needs an outlet. I hope that this book can become
yours.
I am Sofia Visconti, a mythology expert, and an Amazon bestselling author.
I can wholeheartedly say that the success of my books comes solely from
my passion for the subject. I’m an absolute mythology freak, and there’s
nothing I love more than introducing people to the wonderful world of
gods, legends, and breathtaking creatures. What makes mythology so
fascinating is not the stories in themselves, although some are truly a feast
to the eyes, but how they came to be and what they mean for the people that
live by them. Mythology is nothing more than a creative expression of a
culture. It embodies the beliefs, way of life, and values of a civilization,
representing its identity. That is why each mythology is unique, and it can’t
exist apart from its culture. This also applies to Norse mythology. To
understand it on a deeper level and connect with it, we must first get to
know the Nords and how they saw the world they lived in. I can’t wait to go
on this adventure with you and show you the great and exciting world of the
Vikings!

By the end of this book, you will be more familiarized with the gods and
legends of Norse mythology, as well as the people who created them. You’ll
know who the Norse were, how they lived their lives, their beliefs, their
faith as a civilization, and how they influenced the modern world. And, of
course, you’ll know more about your favorite gods, such as how Odin
became the ruler of the Aesir gods, how Thor got his famous hammer
Mjolnir, and who Loki's children are. I hope that the magical creatures of
the Norse world and the peculiar characters of the Nordic tales will conquer
your heart as it did mine!
Now before we start, if you’re a beginner into the endeavors of mythology,
there is something you should keep in mind: expect the unexpected and
don’t be discouraged when things appear to not make sense. I admit that
most stories tend to be quite weird or have mystifying elements. Take that
as part of the old’ mythology charm and don’t dwell too much on the
unexplainable. I will do my best to analyze the myths and explain their
origins and meanings, but not everything has scientific answers, and that’s
ok.
Another thing to keep in mind is that Nordic gods and heroes are not perfect
beings. They have human characteristics, making them charmingly flawed.
They get angry, make mistakes, act on the spur of the moment, and can be
very cruel at times. However, that is what makes the Norse gods so
appealing. We can relate to them and connect with them on a deeper level.
They don’t represent untouchable standards. That’s why the Norse people
were so close with their gods and saw them as role models as well as fearful
forces subjected to whims and tempers.
With everything out of the way, let’s imagine ourselves following into the
steps of the great Odin. He sought knowledge, and in order to get it, he was

willing to sacrifice anything. And so he did, by handing himself from
Yggdrasill, the tree of life, to get the runes of knowledge, and by giving up
one of his eyes to drink from the Well of Knowledge. Odin’s hunger for
wisdom is evident in many of the stories that involve him, and I invite you
to share his willingness to let go of your reality and jump into the
mysterious world of the old Norse.
Let’s drink from the Well of Knowledge and jump into a realm of wonder,
where nothing is as it seems!


Chapter 1: A Brief History of the Norseman
The Norse people, commonly known as Vikings, were seafaring warlords
and warriors from the pagan Scandinavia. They had such a great impact on
Europe’s history that the time in which they raided, colonized, and
conquered European soils, from around the ninth to the 11th century, was
named after them: “the Viking Age.” When we hear the word “Vikings” we
can’t help but imagine an army of barbarians who bowed to no gods and
who only took pleasure in plundering and raiding. Honestly, we are not to
blame for having this mental image. That’s just how Vikings are usually
portrayed, and the concept is stuck somewhere deep in our subconscious
mind. But is this image close to the historical truth? Let’s see!
The Origins of Vikings
Vikings came from Sweden, Norway, and Denmark, many hundreds of
years before they were recognized as stand-alone countries, and they were
mostly land-owning farmers and fishermen. They lived in villages ruled by
chieftains or clan leaders, and they had few towns. Chieftains often fought
for dominance over the lands, and with a seemingly inexhaustible arsenal of
strong men who sought adventure, it was fairly easy for skillful leaders to
organize armies and fearful bands. Historians are unsure what prompted
Vikings to leave their lands and become seafaring pillagers, but they do
propose a couple of theories.
The political instability caused by the frequent clashes between clans makes
a good motive for branching out. Another would be localized

overpopulation, which led to families owning smaller and smaller lands that
could no longer provide sustenance for all the family members.
Additionally, around the seventh and eighth centuries, the Vikings refined
the way they constructed ships and vessels, adding sails and modifying their
structures to sustain longer voyages. These longships were swift and
shallow, allowing them to go across the North Sea and land on the beaches
of unsuspecting lands. If we consider shipping advances, the troubled socio-
economic situation of the Vikings at the time, the adventurous nature of
these warrior-spirited people, and the tales of riches brought along by
merchants, it’s not hard to understand why one day they decided to raid the
coasts of Europe.
The Start of the Viking Era
The first historical account of a Viking classical hit-and-run raid dates back
to the year 793, when a monastery in Lindisfarne, England was plundered
of its sacred, golden religious artifacts. Though, as a side note here, it is
unlikely that this was the first time the Vikings attacked England. Evidence
shows that English coastal villages had started to organize defenses against
sea attacks earlier in the eighth century, suggesting that there were Viking
raids or at least attempts before the attack on the Lindisfarne monastery.
Many medieval English documents refer to them as “seagoing pagans” for
their tendency to target holy places, which, to be fair, were full of unarmed
men and gold, so who can blame the Vikings for taking the opportunity?
The term “Viking,” which is derived from the old Scandinavian word
vikingir (pirate) or from the word vik, which means “bay,” was popularized
closer to the end of the historical Viking Age. Terms such as Dani
(inhabitants of present Denmark), Normani (Northmen), and simply pagani
(pagans) were more generally used when referring to the Scandinavian

warriors by the European people who were unlucky enough to face their
wrath.
From the year 793 forwards, Viking bands consisting of freemen, retainers,
and young, adventure-seeking men led by chieftains had gone on to further
attack England and its surroundings, especially Scotland, Ireland, and
France. Additionally, some accounts from the latter years of the Viking Era
speak of Viking attacks or sightings in the Iberian Peninsula, Ukraine,
Russia, and even the Byzantine Empire. Originally, the raids were pretty
small-scale. There were only a handful of ships, and the Vikings would
happily return home when they collected enough booty or if they
encountered a resilient defense. But from the 850s, the Vikings began to
double down on the force and organization of their raids, establishing bases
in the newly conquered lands and starting to dominate the surrounding
island areas.
Viking Raids in England and Scotland
In 865, England was struck by the micel here (the great army) of Ivar the
Boneless and Haldfan, a pair of brothers and the sons of Ragnar Lothbrok -
a renowned Viking warrior. They attacked the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms one-
by-one, capturing the ancient kingdoms of Northumbria, Eastern Anglia,
and most of the kingdom of Mercia. By the year 878, only Wessex, a
southern kingdom led by the inexperienced King Alfred, was standing. In
January of that year, the Viking forces led by Guthrum attacked Alfred by
surprise at his royal estate in Chippenham. The king of Wessex barely made
it out alive, but he managed to gather an army and defeat Guthrum at
Edington.

Despite Alfred’s victory, most of England was controlled by Vikings. They
held the north and the Midlands, and for the next 80 years, the territory
remained divided between Alfred’s successors and Viking kings. Eirik
Bloodaxe, the last Viking ruler of England, was killed by Eadred, King
Alfred’s grandson, in 954, putting an end to the Viking control and uniting
England. Other Viking attempts at reconquering England were only briefly
successful, with England being for a while part of the empire of Canute,
another Scandinavian king. In 1042, England’s Viking Era ended, with the
restoration of its native ruler, William I. Although no longer under Viking
control, the seafaring warriors left deep marks on the area, influencing the
social structure, dialects, and customs of England. Fun fact, William’s
great-great-great-grandfather was Rollo, a Viking. So, the Viking influence
over England goes deeper than we might imagine.
Scotland was struck in 794, and the Vikings took control of the Hebrides,
Shetlands, and the Orkneys. Their hold on Scotland was long-lasting, and
they remained in control of Orkneys well into the 11th century.
Western Dominance
In the west, the Viking expansion was ruthless. They invaded Iceland,
Greenland, and they even attempted to settle in North America (which they
called Vinland, a name that roughly translates to “the land of wild grapes”).
The Norse saga “Eirik the Red’s Saga” credits Leif, son of Eirik the Red, as
the accidental discoverer of North America, while “The Saga of the
Greenlanders” claims that Bjarni Herjolfsson, a Viking explorer, was the
first to lay eyes on Vinland. Although we can’t know for sure who the
Scandinavian Columbus was, we do know that Vikings made it to North
America, thanks to the discovery of the L’Anse aux Meadows archeological

site. The archeological remains of ancient houses were found in the 1960s
by Helge Instad, a Norwegian explorer, and his wife Anne Stine, an
archeologist. Although the site is unlikely to have housed the main Vinland
colony, it still confirms the epic Viking sagas.
Viking raids in Ireland began around the year 795, and, despite valiant
resistance from the natives, the Vikings managed to establish kingdoms and
fortified ports. Waterford, Limerick, and Dublin were under Scandinavian
control, and in 1014 there was a failed attempt to unify Ireland under the
Scandinavian rule. Even so, the Vikings remained dominant even early into
the 12th century, when the English invasion started.
Viking Attacks on France and the End of the Viking Age
Viking raids on France started a bit later, in 799, and the Scandinavian
powers benefited a lot from the political turmoils of the Frankish kingdom.
Their powers grew exponentially, and in 885, they almost conquered Paris.
However, the Carolingian empire was too great of a foe for a nation of
raiders and pillagers, no matter how skilled they were. Thus, the
Scandinavian power never reached its peaks in France, at least not on the
scale it did in England, Ireland, and Scotland. As the Viking Era went on,
there were numerous raids, but none of them led to permanent victories.
The greatest manifestation of Scandinavian influence in France remains a
couple of small settlements established on the Seine River in the tenth
century.
Eastern Europe was a different affair for the Vikings. There were raids, but
nothing too violent, and no Scandinavian kingdom was established through
armed forces. Nonetheless, Vikings made it into the heart of Russia, where

they were subsequently “absorbed” into the native Slavonic population,
calling themselves “the Rus” (Russians).
At the end of the 11th century, the raids began to stop and Viking leaders
became a thing of the past. Norway, Sweden, and Denmark became united
kingdoms. The first two were done with adventures, while the latter,
Denmark, became somewhat of a force to be reckoned with and managed to
amass its unruly, young, adventurous men into their royal military. The last
historical Viking leader who adhered to the old tradition was Olaf II
Haraldson, who lost his “title” in 1015 when he was crowned king of
Norway.
The Other Side of Viking History
The writers and chronicles of the Viking Era had no qualms when it came to
demonizing and denigrating the Scandinavian people who ravaged their
land. Clerics, such as Alcuin of York, were especially dramatic in their
account of Viking raids on monasteries and places of worship, describing
the carnage in minute detail and painting the assailants as demonic beasts
rather than people. No matter the artistic liberties that were taken by Anglo-
Saxon clerics, we can’t deny that Vikings carried out violent and destructive
attacks. But reducing the Vikings only to their warrior ventures is a grave
mistake.
These Scandinavian men were indeed great fighters and military tacticians,
but they were also merchants, explorers, artists, storytellers, and poets.
They came from a rich and complex culture that they shared and left behind
in the numerous lands they conquered or settled in. The Vikings’ maritime
voyages seem to have always been driven by two factors. One is the raiding
and the plundering, and the other the sheer sense of adventure and desire to

discover new places. This led them to venture into the Faroes, around the
eight century, which they used as a longphort (a fortified port) to advance
across the Atlantic.
In 872, Viking colonists led by Ingolf Arnarson settled on Iceland, where
they established a unique, independent society. This Icelandic settlement
went on to become a republic, ruled by the Althing, an assembly of
chieftains that is considered to be one of the earliest parliaments. From this
Scandinavian settlement, we also have some of the earliest Viking-written
history pieces, the Islendingabok - the history of Iceland and the
Landnamabok - an account of the first Icelandic Viking settlers and the land
lots they took as their own. Besides these historical pieces, the Vikings who
colonized Iceland also kept a written account of the tumultuous relationship
they had with Iceland’s natives. In the Islendingasogur (The Icelandic
Family Sagas), the Vikings speak of the feuds, betrayals, allegiances, and
conflicts that marked their first 150 years of settling in Iceland. The tales
from the Islendingasogur are today considered to be some of the most
important pieces of European literature from the Middle Ages, and they
show the Vikings’ proficiency in composing prose of great power.
Iceland also served as a platform for further exploration. In 982, Eirik the
Red, a chieftain with a fiery temperament was exiled from the Icelandic
colony for his involvement in a murder case. Unphased by this development
(perhaps due to his history of being an exile from Norway for another
murder-related affair), Eirik decided to take to the sea, and he sailed west in
search of a rumored land. A 300-kilometers voyage brought Eirik’s
longship to Greenland, a lush land that exceeded his wildest expectations.
With this discovery on hand, Eirik the Red returned to Iceland, filled 25
longships with colonists, and established his own settlement in Greenland,

one that would survive well into the 15th century. Eirik’s son, Leif, a name
you are probably familiar with by now, outdid his father as an explorer,
sailing further west and discovering Vinland, but as a colonist, he wasn’t as
prolific as Eirik. Leif tried to replicate his father’s strategy, however, the
hostility from the Native Americans was too much for the small number of
Viking settlers to handle, and Vinland was subsequently abandoned.
Regardless of his success at colonizing America, Leif Eirikson has garnered
the reputation of a great discoverer and explorer, and for a Viking, few
things mattered more than one’s reputation. Sure, attributes such as bravery
and intelligence were sought after in a Viking warrior, but leaving a legacy
behind and being remembered was the icing on the cake. An aphorism from
the Havamal, a collection of Viking sayings, goes something like
“Everything dies, we, our cattle, our families, but one thing that never dies
is a dead man’s reputation.” The language used in the Havamal is a bit
more sardonic, but I tried to give it a modern twist to better reflect the idea.
And this concludes our brief look into the Viking’s history. Now you have a
timeline for the Viking Age, and you have a better picture of who they
were, where they came from, and the many places they settled in or
conquered. Before we move on to take a more in-depth look at the Viking
way of life and what it entailed, I thought it would be a great idea to say a
few words about some famous Vikings who, just as Leif, managed to leave
their mark on history and garner a reputation that would last throughout the
ages.
Famous Vikings and Heroes
Ivar the Boneless is part legend and part historical character. You might
remember that he and his brother Haldfan were the leaders of the great

army that took Northumbria and Eastern Anglia by storm. Ivar also led
attacks in Ireland and he is considered a founding father of the Viking rule
in the kingdom of Dublin. Not much is recorded about him after the year
870, but it is presumed that he led attacks and ruled in the Islands of Man,
Ireland, and other places around the Irish seas.
In Viking sagas, Ivar is the son of Ragnar Lothbroke, and his attack on
Northumbria is an act of revenge against its king for killing his father. As
for his peculiar nickname, its clear origin is unknown. Some historians
believe that it stems from his fighting style and flexibility, which gave the
illusion of him being “boneless,” while others think it’s a sly remark
regarding his masculinity (alluding to him being impotent). An Irish annal
notes the year 873 as the date of his death.
Sigurd is a legendary Norse hero who appears in many stories. Although
different sources propose variations regarding his character and fate, he is
usually portrayed as being strong, courageous, and successful in his
endeavors. In earlier accounts, Sigurd is described as being of noble
lineage, which might hint at a potential historical origin and his connection
with an old Scandinavian ruler. In the Prose Edda, we find one of Sigurd’s
most famous legends - the slaying of the great dragon Fafnir. The saga
speaks of how Sigur stabbed the beast and tasted its blood, gaining the
ability to understand the language of the birds. This allows him to find out
Reginn’s plan to murder him to acquire the dragon’s treasure. Thus, Sigurd
kills Reginn and keeps the gold for himself. He then marries the daughter of
a king and helps his brother-in-law, Gunnar, ask for the valkyrie Bruhild’s
hand in marriage. But in doing so, he tricks the valkyrie by taking Gunnar’s
form to complete Brunhild’s challenges. This whole plot ends up leading to
Sigurd’s demise when Brunhild takes her revenge for being tricked. In a

different version, Gunnar kills Sigurd when he believes that the hero had
slept with Brunhild.
In many stories of Sigurd's life, Brunhild is the one that inevitably gets him
killed, in one way or another. But other legends see the courageous hero
becoming a king of the Franks or learning the magic of the runes from the
valkyrie Sigrdrifa (which is another one of Brunhild’s names). Due to all
the variations, we can say that Sigurd’s tale is open-ended, leaving space for
interpretations and choosing which version better suits our preferences.
Eirik Bloodaxe is often portrayed as the stereotypical Viking fighter, with
an overly Viking nickname. His accomplishments include being the king of
Northumbria as well as the king of Norway. However, this last honor came
to him in a rather dishonorable way. To become first in the line of
succession he and his wife, Gunnhild, killed five of his brothers, earning
Eirik his nickname “Bloodaxe” as well as the ire of his people. When
Hakon the Good, another brother of his, rose to fight him for the throne,
Eirik received no support whatsoever from the Norway people, and he
chose to flee for his life. Not a very Viking-like action for him. Rumors at
the time praised Eirik for his abilities as a fighter but condemned him for
being dominated and too easily influenced by Gunnhild. So, despite his
accomplishments, Eirik is not very close to the classical Viking hero.
Cnut the Great definitely beats Eirik when it comes to his Viking
reputation. He was the son of a Danish king, Svein Forkbeard, who had
managed to conquer England in 1013. But Svein’s luck was tough, and he
died shortly after asserting his claim over the lands. His oldest son, Harald,
inherited the Danish throne, and poor Cnut received the mission to reinstate
Viking control over England, which was already back in Anglo-Saxon
hands. The young man rose to the challenge, and in 1016, he conquered

England and married the last king’s widow to cement his position. In the
years to follow, Cnut also became king of Denmark (apparently through
peaceful means) and the king of Norway (which he conquered in 1028).
Thus, Cnut became the ruler of the largest North Sea empire of the Middle
Ages.
Although Cnut would use the good old’ Viking tactic of warfare to keep
England in check, he was arguably a good ruler. Under him, the towns
became important administrative and economic centers. Denmark
flourished with material wealth and an influx of innovative ideas. Cnut also
developed a coinage system, firmly established the Christian Church, and is
known for going to Rome on a peaceful pilgrimage to meet the Pope in
person. From this point of view, Cnut can be seen as closer to an Anglo-
Saxon king than a Viking ruler and conqueror. Ironically, Cnut’s ability to
adapt to different circumstances and cultures makes him, to some degree,
the ultimate Viking, for this flexibility allowed the Scandinavians to be so
successful in their European endeavors.
Helgi Hundingsbane is another legendary Norse hero that may or may not
be based on a real historical figure. It is said that on the night of his birth,
the Norns had foreseen a great future for Helgi, decreeing that he will
become one of the greatest princes that will ever exist. This is perhaps why
his parents Sigmundr and Borghildr had named him Helgi, after another
famous epic hero, Helgi Hjotvarosson. It is also theorized that our Helgi
was the reincarnation of the late eponymous hero because their fates ended
up being strikingly similar. Back to our story; when he was a youngster,
Helgi disguised himself to explore the court of king Hunding, an enemy of
his father’s. He almost got caught, but he managed to escape, and Helgi

later killed Hunding, earning him the name “Hundingsbane.” Then the
Valkyrie Sigrun called for his aid to help her escape an unwanted marriage.
Helgi fought for Sigrun and came up victorious, even though Sigrun’s
father and brother were slain. He then married her, and the pair had many
children. All was fine and well until Dagr, another brother of Sigrun, had
called for Odin’s aide to avenge his fallen brethren. Odin listened to his plea
and offered him his mighty spear, with which Dagr killed Helgi. However,
Odin had picked him to be part of his honorable warriors in Valhalla. Helgi
and Sigrun had one last final meeting before his departure for the realm of
the honorable dead. It is said that Sigrun’s sorrow was so deep that she too
perished, not long after her beloved.
Aud the Deep-minded and Freydis Eiriksdottir are two famous Viking
women with very different stories but a similar fiery spirit. For the most
part of her life, Aud was the poster wife and mother. She married the king
of Dublin, Olaf the White, in the mid-ninth century and gave birth to their
only son, Thorstein the Red. After Olaf’s death, she and Thorstein moved to
Scotland, where he established himself as a great warrior. Thorstein ruled
over most of Scotland before dying a Viking’s death in battle. Aud
understood that she could not recover her importance in Scotland without
her son, so she took her grandchildren and fled for the new Iceland colony,
which seemed very promising. Aud took her family, friends, and a couple of
Irish and Scottish slaves (who she later freed to garner their loyalty). She
chose a large piece of Icelandic land for her and her entourage. She is
considered to be one of the great founding colonists of Iceland, and many
great medieval Icelandic families could trace their ancestry back to Aud the
Deep-minded. She was definitely a strong, Viking woman who knew how
to take the opportunities that life gave her and make the most out of them.

Freydis’s fate was strikingly different. She was the daughter of Eirik the
Red and, consequently, Leif’s sister. Freydis was deeply involved in her
brother’s attempts to colonize Vinland. She was part of the group that
initiated contact with the Native American population. At first, their
relationships were friendly, but soon the natives turned on her men. Freydis
was a true Viking warrior and, despite being in the later terms of her
pregnancy, she picked up a sword and was ready to smite her attackers.
Thankfully, at the sight of a murderous pregnant woman, the natives ran for
the hills to save their lives.
On a different account, we see Freydis’s bad side. During another attempt to
conquer Vinland, she discovered that the group she traveled with had
brought more people aboard her ship than she had agreed to. Furious, she
pushed her husband and his men to slaughter all the unwelcome crewmates.
And so they did, except for the women, who they did not want to kill. Then
Freydis took the gnarly task upon herself and killed the understandably
frightened women. She also forced her men to take an oath that what
happened on the ship would never transpire on their return to the Greenland
colony. Not much else is known about Freydis, the daughter of Eirik the
Red, but from what we know, we can guess that she either died in battle or
went on to die a more peaceful death.
Einar Buttered-Bread is well-known for a tale of treachery from the
Orkneyinga saga in which he played a simple pawn rather than the leading
role. I wanted to end the list of the famous Vikings with him because Einar
has a rather unique story. He was the grandson of the Earl of Orkney,
Thorfinn Skullsplitter, and he was tricked by Ragnhild, Eirik Bloodaxe’s
daughter, to take part in the fight over the Orkney earldom. Ragnhild was a
smart, driven woman who knew how to manipulate others into her schemes.

She was first married to Thorfinn’s heir, Arnfinn, but she had him killed,
and she made his brother Harvard Harvest-Happy earl in his stead. She
went on to marry Harvard, after which she immediately started to conspire
with Einar, to get him removed. Ragnhild promised Einar to make him earl
of Orkney if he killed Harvard, who, let’s not forget, was Einar’s uncle.
Einar Buttered-Bread completed his part of the deal, but Ragnhild had other
plans. While her second husband was getting murdered at her orders, she
instigated Einar’s cousin, Einar Hard-mouth to kill him and become the
earl. But the web of treachery goes even deeper! Hard-mouth himself was
then killed by Ljot, yet another cousin, who went on to claim both the
earldom and Ragnhild as his. Was this Ragnhild’s plan all along? We have
no way of knowing, but I like to think of it that way.
As for poor Einar, that’s where his story ended. The only mystery that
remains is that of his peculiar name. After all, Butter-Bread is not really a
tough Viking warrior name that inspires fear and awe. But this mystery, just
like Ragnhild’s plot, is to remain unsolved.


Chapter 2: The Viking Life
We’ve seen the power and force of this warrior civilization. Still, the Viking
way of life can’t be reduced to naval endeavors and great battles. In fact, a
closer look at the Vikings’ daily lives shows a far more ordinary picture
than we’d like to imagine.
Typical Settlements and Agriculture
Most Vikings lived in rural areas, where their main focus was agriculture.
The settlements themselves were relatively small, and they consisted of
somewhere around fifteen to fifty farms per village. Trade towns existed,
but they were so far and few between that only an incredibly small percent
of the population lived there. Additionally, isolated farms built-in remote
areas such as mountains, forests, or fjords were pretty common, and so were
villages that comprised only two or three farmsteads. Cemeteries were
placed right at the edges of villages or farmsteads, serving as a morbid
representation of one’s claim over the land (because their ancestors had
lived, worked, and died there). Not very poetic but rather successful at
showing your legitimacy of owning the said plot of land.
Men would occupy themselves with taking care of the land, involving
themselves in fertilizing the soil, sowing, and plowing while women took
upon themselves tasks that were performed mainly inside the house, such as
cooking and producing clothing and alcoholic drinks. Harvesting the crops
usually fell on the entire family since it was a laborious task that required
all hands on deck. The care for farm animals was also divided between men

and women. During the summer the men would take the cattle and the
sheep out to graze and watch over them, and during the winter, when the
animals were kept inside to protect them from the cold, the women would
cater to them, milking them and keeping their enclosures clean. Speaking of
farm animals, horses were cherished by Vikings. They represented the main
form of transportation of both men and their goods, even in the coldest parts
of Scandinavia where the snowfall was substantial. In such areas, horses
would pull sleds and be fitted with spiked footwear to allow them to cross
frozen lands and bodies of water.
Back to farming, Vikings plowed their lands using an almost-vertical,
wooden scratch plow that was pulled by oxen or slaves. The wooden spike
did the job of breaking up the soil, but it didn’t turn it. That is why Viking
fields were cross-plowed, by plowing a second row of lines intersecting
with the first. Because the plow was wooden, it would often break after a
few days of wear, and it would have to be replaced - iron plows came after
the end of the Viking Age. The Norsemen practiced crop rotation,
alternating which fields were sown to allow them to rejuvenate naturally,
and they used animal and human waste as fertilizer. To harvest, men used
scythes to cut the crops and women had rakes to expose the grains. Then
men would prepare the grains with precise club-strikes, and hand mills were
used to ground them. Once the process was done and over, women could
use the resulting material for baking, cooking, and making beer or other
alcoholic beverages.
Ironworking was practiced on farmsteads, and it was reserved to fulfill the
needs of the household. Professional smiths would practice their craft in the
few urban areas, and they would often trade their goods in exchange for
food. Most physically demanding tasks were carried out by the slaves that

the Vikings captured during the raids or in battles for supremacy. Although
one can look at this farming-centric life through rose-colored glasses, it was
far from an idyllic situation. Sure, Vikings had slaves to carry out the
unpleasant tasks or do hard work, but taking care of the land still required
incredible effort and labor to accomplish even the easiest tasks. Besides
that, these Viking farmers lived in constant fear of famine, natural disasters,
or raids that would deprive them of their crops and, consequently, their
means of living. Diseases were rampant at the time, and famine loomed
over the lands. It wasn’t uncommon for children to die before reaching
adulthood, and the image of the strong, muscular Viking warrior may not be
as close to the truth as we think it is.
With their at-home situation looking so grim, it’s not hard to understand
why raiding and establishing settlements on other lands became such a big
focus for Vikings. They just wanted a better life for themselves and their
families. And they were willing to do anything to accomplish that.
Social Classes
The Vikings had three main social classes: the slaves, the free men, and the
earls. Their social hierarchy was similar in nature to that of other European
civilizations of that time.
The slaves were the lowest class of the Viking society. There were three
ways in which one could become a slave. One was, as I already mentioned,
being captured in a war or raid. Vikings believed that the ones who they had
spared in battle needed to pay them back with their freedom for being
allowed to live. From the Vikings’ point of view, this was a fair trade, and
that’s how they justified slavery. The second way to become a slave was to
be born to a slave. The descendants of slaves were also slaves, a logic

justified by the same “your freedom for the gift of life” principle. Lastly,
one could become a slave if they went bankrupt. A poor person could give
up their freedom to someone who was of higher status in exchange for
gathering that person’s protection. More often than not, that was the only
choice these poor people had, especially when debts were involved. They
simply had nothing else to give but their freedom, so they would willingly
become someone’s slave to have their material needs (such as food, clothes,
and shelter) taken care of. It was a steep price to pay, but it was a better
alternative to dying of hunger or at the hands of creditors.
Slaves were mainly used for farm work, but it wasn’t uncommon for
masters to sell their slaves into the slave trade business that was already
flourishing in Europe. There are also a few accounts of slaves being
sacrificed after their master’s death, following the beliefs that they had to
continue to fulfill their roles in the afterlife. From being subjected to
inhumane amounts of labor to being sold into the slave trade network or
being sacrificed during their master’s funerary rites, it’s more than fair to
say that Viking slaves had few prospects.
Mostly, the Viking society consisted of free men. These were farmers (the
wealthier ones had their own land, and the less fortunate worked the other’s
lands in exchange for permission to harvest a plot for themselves),
merchants, craftsmen, and warriors. The majority of Vikings who took part
in raids and great battles were free men. In the Viking society, the older a
son was, the more he would inherit from his father, so the younger children
would often be left with scraps. That’s why Viking warriors were mainly
young men, with nothing tying them down to a place, looking to make a
name and material situation for themselves. They sought silver and plots of
land for farming in the areas that would become colonies and settlements.

These young men simply wanted something better than the little they had at
home and, because they enjoyed the protection of the law and had the
means to improve their financial situation, there was nothing that could stop
them from doing so.
The jarls (earls) were at the top of the Viking social hierarchy. They were
mostly chieftains who became wealthy through plundering and raiding. In
the later years of the Viking Age, earls were closer to what we call
aristocrats, serving as the king’s subordinates and appropriating as much
land as they pleased.
Viking Politics
Throughout most of the Viking period, the political power was in the hands
of clan leaders and chieftains, who exerted their control over small groups
of people. They led bands in raids and vicious attacks while also competing
with other fellow chieftains for power and dominance. To assert their
position, chieftains needed to find great and loyal warriors that would stand
by his side and bring him great success. And earning the loyalty of Vikings
was no easy deed. A chieftain had to be fearless, generous with his man,
always victorious in battles, and he had to have a good reputation. Success
in battle was pretty much the means to everything, and the wealth they
gained allowed them to be generous and “inspire” poets and storytellers to
build up their reputation. These stories and epic sagas would then reach
young men who wanted to fight under such a famous chieftain, growing the
numbers of the warlord’s armies and thus helping him be more successful in
battle. It was an efficient cycle that smart chieftains knew how to work in
their favor.

Wealth during the early Viking period was not expressed through coins.
Warlords dispensed silver, gold, and arm rings, which ranged from simple
to exquisitely ornate. Plots of lands were also commonly used as a trading
coin since having land was a fundamental element of Viking success.
Chieftains would reward their men by throwing great feasts, that were
usually intertwined with religious elements. The generosity of the chieftains
came at a simple but essential price: loyalty. This attribute was very
important in Viking society. One of the greatest honors for a warrior was to
die in battle alongside their chieftain, proving that their loyalty is not only
tied to economic gain. Sure, wealth was an incentive, but Viking warriors
wanted more. They sought honor and a sense of belongingness, which a
great leader could artfully provide.
Besides these warlords who held control over particular regions, the power
was held by a legal assembly. This institution ruled through laws, and it was
highly respected. Legal assemblies were held in outdoor areas, and during
these gatherings, free men would recite, amend, or make new laws. Slaves
didn’t have the right to participate, and women could only contribute when
serving as representatives for male relatives. By modern standards, these
Viking assemblies had legislative and judicial functions, but on a smaller
scale. It was perfectly possible for two Nordic villages to have different sets
of rules because the assemblies were local and had only local power. Since
the assemblies had no executive branch, the decisions were enforced by the
victorious party (for disputes) or by the community. If, for example,
someone was fined and they refused or failed to pay, they would become
outlaws. As an outlaw, you were no longer under the protection of the law,
so anyone could kill you. Because this system was efficient enough, the
assembly did not need an executive branch to carry out their dirty work.
The Icelandic Althing was a more developed form of legal assembly with

deep roots in politics, making it more similar to the form of government we
have in the present days.
Speaking of politics, as chieftains became more and more influential, the
battle for supremacy intensified. The most successful leaders in battle
amassed greater armies of good, loyal warriors, and soon enough some
armies grew large enough to conquer others. The most powerful leaders
declared themselves kings over wide areas, to the terror of Medieval Europe
that would now face greater, more organized attacks. The transition from
warlords to kings didn’t happen at once in the Scandinavian region.
Denmark came first, followed by Norway, and Sweden, where the process
went beyond the historical Viking Age. The switch from chieftains to kings
was more than a power shift; it was also a shift in role and tradition. Viking
kings, such as Cnut the Great, had more in common with European rulers
than traditional warlords. The great scale of power made it impossible for
kings to maintain that close, loyalty-based relationship with their men.
Things were now more structured and bureaucratic. There were also rules in
place regarding governance and succession and taxes were introduced.
Interestingly, this shift in politics happened at the same time as the one in
religion, with the Norsemen converting to Christianity (more on this in a
later chapter!), so we can wholeheartedly say that this was an era of change
for the Vikings.
With the introduction of Christianity, the relationship between the people
and their king was formulated in religious terms. They were to serve their
king unconditionally, just as they did God, swerving even further from the
traditional Viking chieftain-warrior relationship. Although the rise of kings
made Vikings a more organized and successful military force, it also

represented the “death” of the old Viking way of life, leading to the end of
the great Viking Age.
Commerce
The Norse people had one of the greatest trade networks of the Middle
Ages, stretching as far as Baghdad and Asia. This feat is even more
extraordinary if we look back at the simple way of life of early eight
century Vikings. They were farmers who rarely produced more than their
household needed to survive, and few people lived in urban areas where
trade was common. But these “trade towns,” regardless of how small they
were, propelled the Scandinavian people into the vast Eurasian trade
networks, starting a new age of commerce. With trade towns on the rise,
people began to specialize in crafts, understanding the huge opportunity that
foreign trade represented. Jewelers, blacksmiths, antler workers, and many
more migrated to the trade towns where they would produce their goods
mainly for export.
The most cherished Scandinavian trade items were by far furs. The cold
Nordic climate was home to animals with thick, warm pelts that were
coveted and prized abroad. Another pillar of the Viking trade was slaves, as
it was for many civilizations in Eurasia at the time. The Viking slaves were,
let’s not forget, people that were captured in raids. And since it was not
uncommon for Vikings to raid other Viking settlements, many of the slaves
that were traded were Norsemen themselves. To the Vikings, it didn’t
matter much whether you were a foreigner or a Scandinavian, a Christian,
or a worshipper of the Norse gods. All that mattered was your market value.
The Vikings were very pragmatic in that way. Additionally, since trade
towns were flourishing at the time, the abundance of valuable trade goods

made them alluring targets for potential raids. Commerce was a brutal affair
in the Viking age, even between Norsemen themselves.
For Viking chieftains of that time, trade was simply a way to garner more
wealth and luxury goods. These gave them status and allowed them to be
very generous with their men, strengthening loyalties and their power as
leaders. For the Viking farmers, the rise of the trade towns gave them an
opportunity to buy commodities in exchange for food or whatever goods
they produced on their farmstead. Around the year 1000, due to the changes
in politics and the switch to kings, the luxurious trade towns almost
vanished, leaving space for market places that mainly focused on
commodities and that were more accessible to the regular people. This is
yet another way in which the shift to a more European type of society had
negative repercussions for the Viking civilization.
Gender Roles in the Viking Age
We’ve gone through quite a few aspects of Viking life, and I’ve presented
two outstanding Viking women, Aud the Deep-minded and Freydis
Eiriksdottir, who held important positions in the Scandinavian society. But
did the Vikings have an equal society? Were the Viking shield-maidens a
reality or a figment of our feminist desires?
Well, the Viking society, just as many others of the time, gave men a higher
social status than women, and they judged someone’s worth based on how
well they fulfilled their designated role. Men had to be manly, great
warriors and/or farmers, and women had to ace housekeeping duties. The
societal role of women was traditional in the sense that they were expected
to be wives and mothers. On the bright side, a woman who could fulfill her
role was greatly appreciated by her family and Viking society. But their

appreciation never quite reached the level of the respect and reputation that
men could garner. Great women had no stories made about them, no poems
to speak about their deeds, and no songs to sing their accomplishments. But
at least they got some recognition, which is more than many women in the
Middle Ages could hope for.
Viking women didn’t have much of a say when it came to marriage; the
proposal came from a man, and the bride-to-be’s family negotiated terms on
her behalf and decided if the proposal was to be accepted or refused. Yes,
the poor woman had no say in this. Adultery was also a capital sin for
women, as their husbands were allowed by law to kill both their cheating
wife and her suitor if they caught them in the act. Some Viking settlements
had laws for men caught committing adultery, but the punishments were
more lenient, as it was somewhat more socially acceptable for a man to
cheat than a woman. It was commonplace for warlords and kings alike to
have multiple wives and maybe some concubines on the side, but the
women were expected to be loyal to their husbands. A pretty standard idea
for the Middle Ages.
Women did, however, have the right to divorce their husbands. Women who
found themselves in unhappy, abusive, or otherwise bad marriages, and who
could prove their husbands’ wrongdoings, were allowed to divorce them
and would receive monetary compensation, to ensure that they could
provide for themselves. When it came to careers though, women couldn’t
aspire to anything else except for being housewives. Only men could work
the land, hold political power, speak in assemblies, become warriors, and
leave their homeland. Sure there are stories of women going into battle
alongside their men, and some artifacts showing that women were skilled in
warfare and owned weapons, but as of now, we don’t have enough scientific

evidence to say this was the norm. They could have been exceptions to the
norm. As of the mythical valkyries - the winged female warriors who took
men to Valhalla, their historical counterparts were most likely sorceresses
and not female fighters. The sorceresses were women who, allegedly, could
use magic to aid Vikings in battle. But their magic could only influence the
outcome of the wars, so their presence on the battlefield was not necessary.
Since we brought magic to the mix, that is one thing that belonged only to
women. It was socially acceptable for women to practice seidr (Norse
magic), but men that delved into such practices were deeply despised and
sometimes even killed for their affinities. For some reason, Vikings saw
magic as something akin to homosexuality, which brought dishonor for the
overly masculine Norse warriors. And since women were seen as weak and,
obviously feminine, they were free to flaunt their magic powers in bright
daylight without anyone giving them the stink-eye. So, that’s one point for
the women, I guess?
These would be the generalities on gender roles, but as with any rules, there
were exceptions. High-status women did exist in the Viking Age. Most of
them had garnered this status through marriage or being born in an
aristocratic family, but they had status nonetheless. Women could also
inherit properties, if there were no male heirs, and indulge in artistic
endeavors such as poetry - although there are few accounts of female poets.
While Viking women did not have it good, they definitely had more
liberties and overall better quality of life than their contemporaries in other
nations, who were treated pretty much as a man’s property and were
considered disposable.
Food, Clothing, Jewelry, and Weapons of the Viking Age

Although not as captivating as other subjects, I think it’s good to have at
least some idea of these aspects of a Viking’s life.
Starting with the food, different parts of the Scandinavian region offered
different resources. Speaking on general terms, the most cultivated grain in
the Viking world was barley, which was used for bread loaves and bread
buns. Other plants and grains that would be added to the traditional bread
recipe include oats, flax, rye, and pine bark. A Viking’s diet also included
plentiful dairy products, because they had sheep, goats, and cattle. The
proximity to the sea made fish a common element of Viking foods, with the
favorites being herring and cod. And of course, we can't forget about meat -
the Scandinavians had many options when it came to this dietary element.
The meat came from farm animals such as pigs, cows, and chicken, as well
as from hunting. The Vikings hunted a wide array of beasts from deer,
rabbits, and wild boars to seals and whales. The latter two were considered
delicacies and their oils were used for cooking or as butter substitutes.
Because they were strong warriors, they did not skip on fruits and veggies.
Vikings cultivated cabbage, peas, beets, and beans, and they gathered from
the wild blackberries, strawberries, pears, cherries, hazelnuts, and others.
Another interesting aspect of Viking meals is that they loved spices and
aromatic herbs. Their meals often included parsley, garlic, thyme, mustard,
cumin, salt (extracted by boiling salt water), and honey (as a sweetener).
The staple Viking beverages were mead and beer, made from honey and
barley. These alcoholic beverages would usually be drunk from cattle horns
or wooden cups (if they wanted to enjoy their drink). Vikings also made
fruit wines, but because they didn’t know how to distill alcohol these were
pretty tame. Luxury wines brought from abroad would usually be served in
silver bowls or imported glass vessels, for a touch of refinement.

Viking clothing was mainly made from wool and flax (from which comes
linen), to provide warmth, and was worn in layers to protect them from the
harsh climate. Women produced the clothing by spinning the materials and
weaving them into garments. It was a long and arduous process, which is
why richer families would buy commercially-made fabrics. Linen was
preferred for undergarments because it felt nicer on the skin, and fur was
typically used for cloaks and decorative trimmings. Natural dyes were used
to spice up the simple, white clothing (because the Scandinavian sheep
were predominantly white) but they were of low quality and they faded
quickly. Calfskin and goatskin were used for boots. Linen or silk bands
were used as hair ties for both men and women.
The clothing itself was pretty typical, with shirts, breeches, and tunics for
men and linen chemises and woolen dresses for women. Silks, adornments,
and fancy embroideries were reserved for the wealthy. As a side note here,
the popular portrayal of Vikings as being unkempt is far from the truth.
They valued their physical appearance and they used utensils such as
razors, combs, and tweezers to take care of themselves. They also didn’t
live in huts, but in halls that were maintained by the women and would
house feasts whenever there was a reason for celebrating.
Jewelry for the Vikings served two purposes: to show one’s status and to act
as forms of payment if the need arose. They consisted of rings, necklaces,
brooches, pendants, and amulets. The most popular amulets of the time
were representations of Thor’s hammer, miniature thrones (which were
linked with the worship of Odin), and crosses (when Vikings switched to
Christianity).
In the Viking Era, all free men had the duty to own weapons. Swords were
the staple weapons of the Norse society, and only the elite had the honor of

carrying one. Many poets and song-writers would mention the swords of
warlords in their works, using artistic metaphors such as “flame of Odin.”
At the start of the eighth century, most swords were single-edged, but as the
Viking age went on, iron double-edged swords became more popular. Axes
were the weapons of choice for the common people. They served both as
tools and weapons, and they were simply made. All that distinguished one
ax from another was the shape and size, which varied a lot. Viking spears
were either for throwing or thrusting, and they were a staggering half a
meter long. Bows and arrows were used for both hunting and war, although
those taken to the battle were rudimentary and simply put together.
Viking shields were made from wood and they were heavily decorated with
mythical motifs of colorful symbols. Chainmail was reserved for the
wealthy, but helmets were worn by the great majority of Vikings. They were
made from leather or iron and were rounded, with simple designs. So no,
they didn’t wear horned helmets, mostly because they were impractical in
combat. The more you know.
The Old Norse
The Vikings spoke the Old Norse language, and all the texts that we have
from the Viking Age are written using it. Old Norse evolved from a
northern dialect of the Proto-germanic language, and it is part of the
Germanic family of languages like modern German and English. By the
beginning of the Viking Age, around the year 750, the dialect had
transformed into Proto-Norse, becoming a new language altogether. Even
so, because the Vikings were spread all around Europe and in many other
regions, the Old Norse had many regional dialects that were still pretty
close to each other. The Old Norwegian and the Old Icelandic were about as

different as North American English is to British English. Something to
note here would be that, because most of the texts that survived from the
Viking Era come from Iceland, what we presently refer to as Old Norse is
actually the Iceland dialect of Old Norse.
From a grammatical point of view, the Old Norse had a free word order,
with few rules regarding positioning, such as an object had to follow a verb.
Only pronouns had separate dual forms, and verbs were inflected for mood,
number, tense, and person. The first syllable of a word was always stressed,
and the following could be either short or long. For written texts, the
Vikings used the Younger Futhark alphabet, a runic script that was later
replaced by the Latin alphabet when most of Scandinavia converted to
Christianity.
Old Norse is considered to be the parent language of modern Icelandic,
Norwegian and Faroese.
Valhalla and Viking Individualism
Valhalla or the Hall of Slain Warriors was pretty much the Viking
interpretation of Heaven. If a Viking died an honorable death, in battle, he
would be taken by a Valkyrie into Valhalla, where Odin himself would
welcome them. Depiction of Valhalla in Norse literature describes it as an
incredible hall, with golden shields adorning the roof and rafters made of
spears. There, the warriors would fight all day to keep their skills sharp and
feast all night to celebrate their great deeds. Feasting and fighting do sound
like a Viking’s greatest pleasures, right? These honored dead men, known
as einherjar would spend their afterlife preparing for Ragnarok (the end of
the world) and feasting from the meat of Saehrimnir, a boar that came back

to life every night to satisfy the men’s hunger and drinking Heidrun’s mead
(a goat that produced the finest alcoholic beverage).
However, out of the warriors who died in battle, only half made it to
Valhalla. The ones that were not chosen by the mighty Valkyries would go
to the field of Freya, where they would spend their afterlife offering their
company to women who died as maidens. Some would argue that this sort
of afterlife is more appealing than being stuck in a perpetual cycle of
fighting and feasting, but again these are Vikings and to them, Valhalla was
the ultimate goal. The Vikings who died of sickness or old age would go to
Hel (the Underworld, also referred to as Niflheim). This place is not
equivalent to our concept of Hell, but rather a less satisfying version of
Valhalla. The dead were being taken care of by Hel, the goddess of the
underworld. But there was a special place in Niflheim for adulterers,
murderers, and other evil-doers, where they would pay for their bad deeds
and where a dragon ate their corpses, an imaginative punishment.
Now, something that I felt I should touch on before we dive into the Norse
mythology is the character of the Vikings. We tend to see them as a
somewhat patriotic civilization who put loyalty above personal gain and
interests. But the Vikings were pretty selfish. They put themselves first,
even if that meant betraying their own kin, just as we’ve seen in the case of
Vikings enslaving other Norsemen to sell them on the slave market. The
Norse idea of self only existed in relation to one’s actions and social
standing. The way you acted and the relationships you had made you who
you were, so Vikings were somewhat constricted to be loyal to family,
friends, and their leaders to not risk being considered unhonorable. Even so,
the Viking society was permissive and it allowed people to choose their
social relationships. That gave Vikings the liberty to refuse or accept

obligations, for the most part. Their society was not as lenient on women,
and certain obligations such as those for family and one’s chieftain could
not be refused.
The men who achieved greatness would be celebrated by name, in songs
and poems, making them immortal in a sense. The graves of Vikings were
individual, and they were decorated according to the person’s life and
achievements, another measure to ensure that someone’s valiant deeds
would not be forgotten. Remember, reputation was everything to the Norse
people. The selfish individualism of Vikings is also apparent in their
relationships with the higher beings, the gods. The Scandinavians
worshipped them, and “served” them in the same way that they served their
warlords, to garner favors and riches.
These are the Vikings; they treasured the ideals of honor and loyalty but
what they ultimately desired was personal glory and immortality through
great reputation. From this point onward in the book, we’ll go into the
mythical world of the Vikings and we’ll discover the Norse gods and how
the Northmen worshipped them. It’s finally time to drink from that Well of
Knowledge and meet Odin and his entourage of gods and goddesses.


Chapter 3: The Norse Myth of Creation
One thing I learned in all my years of studying mythology is that the best
way to get into a new mythological realm is to start with the beginning, and
that is the myth of creation. All cultures and religions have their version of
how the world came to be and the Vikings make no exception. In fact, this
book had actually started with the first few lines of the Norse creation myth,
to give you a little taste of what was to come later and get you into the
mystic atmosphere of the Viking mythos. How about we pick up from
where I left it in the Introduction, and then we’ll establish some basic
notions about Nordic mythology.
The Birth of the Giants and the Aesir Gods
Ymir (the Screamer), the first living creature, born in Ginnungagap from
the melted ice of Niflheim, was a giant and a force of destruction. He was
also a hermaphrodite who could reproduce on his own. As he slept, the
giant started to sweat, and from the sweat of his armpits, a man and a
woman were born, while from the sweat of his legs emerged another man.
This is how the first frost giants were born into this world. From the ice that
was still melting in the void, another creature was brought into being - the
cow Audhumla. She would lick salty ice blocks for nourishment and she
graciously offered her rivers of milk for Ymir to feast on and grow.
While liking the salt, Audhumla found and uncovered a man - Buri (the
Progenitor), the first of the Aesir gods. Buri was a strong handsome man,
and he had a son called Bor. He then married Besla, the daughter of a frost

giant. This unlikely pair of god and giant had three children: Odin, Vili, and
Ve.
The Creation of the World and the First Men
One day, Odin and his brothers killed Ymir. The amount of blood that
poured from Ymir’s wound was so tremendous that it flooded
Ginnungagap, drowning almost all the frost giants. Only Belgemir and his
wife managed to escape, and he fathered the giants that came after. Odin,
Vili, and Ve carried Ymir’s corpse to the middle of the void and they built
the world from his carcass. They made seas, oceans, and lakes from Ymir’s
blood, they used his muscles and his skin to brandish the Earth, from his
hair they made trees and vegetation, they constructed mountains from his
bones (except for the skull, that comes a bit later) and from his teeth, they
made pebbles and rocks. A bit hard to imagine but bear with me. The gods
then turned the creatures that fed on Ymir’s body into dwarves. They would
become great craftsmen that could create anything, from jewelry to magical
weapons, such as the legendary hammer Mjolnir.
The gods used Ymir’s skull to create the sky, and they placed a dwarf at
each corner (north, south, east, and west), to keep the skull floating above
the Earth. For clouds, they used Ymir’s brains, and for stars, they gathered
flying embers from Muspelheim. The newly created Earth was surrounded
by waters, and the sons of Bor gave the land that was close to the sea to the
giants, to settle and live there. But since the giants were hostile beings, the
gods wanted a place to protect them from the creatures’ fury, so from
Ymir’s eyebrows (or eyelashes in some versions), they created a stronghold
inland, far from the sea. They called this citadel Midgard. A side note here,
this great sea was also the abode of Jurmurgandr, the giant serpent who is

said to have been so enormous that it could coil itself around the entire
world. Yet another reason to keep humans away from the waters.
While walking around the shores, Odin and his brothers found two trees
from which they decided to create a man and a woman, the first humans.
Odin gave them the spark of life, Vili gave them consciousness, and Ve
gifted them with clothes and identities. The first man received the name
Ask, and the first woman Embla. The sons of Bor built a fence around
Midgard and gave the stronghold to the humans, to keep them safe while
they grew in numbers.
One human, called Mundilfari, had two children who were so radiant that
he named them Sol (Sun) and Mani (Moon). When the gods found out
about Mundilfari’s arrogance (yes they saw him being proud and giving
fancy names to his children as arrogance) they punished him by taking Sol
and Mani and putting them in the sky, to light it up during the day and
respectively night. They both rode chariots and were pursued by two
wolves, Hati (Hate) and Skoll (Treachery). At Ragnarok, the end of the
world, it is said that the wolves would catch and eat the sun and moon. In a
different version of this myth, Mundilfari is replaced with the giant Norvi,
who had only a daughter called Nott (Night). She had a son named Dagr
(Day), and the pair would ride chariots across the sky to bring day and
night. The two wolves Hati and Skoll are present in this version of the
myth, still chasing the chariots in hopes of devouring the sun and the moon.
Asgard and the Aesir
Odin and his brothers now wanted to build a place for their own kind, so
they went to the middle of the world and created Asgard. Many stories in
the Norse mythology happen in Asgard, and there lived almost all the

important gods we’ll later discuss. Asgard had a great hall called Hlidskjalf,
where Odin sat on a high chair, kind of like a throne, from which he could
see the whole world and understand everything that was going on.
Odin went on to marry Frigg, and their descendants, known as Aesir, would
inhabit Asgards and its kingdoms. Because he created men and fathered the
Aesir gods Odin is also known as the “All-Father.” His first child was the
mighty and powerful Thor, who dominated every living creature with his
strength. Other remarkable Aesir gods are Loki, Baldr, Tyr, and Heimdall.
The main sanctuary of the Aesir is the tree of life, Yggdrasil, where they
hold their court and their feasts. Yggdrasil is said to have been the greatest
tree that ever existed, with branches that reached the heavens and spread out
over the world. Its roots reach all the other realism, including that of men
and that of giants, Jutunheim. Nidhogg, a dragon of death, feeds from the
roots of Yggdrasil while the Norns (the three fates) decide the fates of the
humans at the base of the great tree.
The Aesir and the Vanir
Odin might be the father of the Aesir gods, but not all Norse deities are part
of this family. There is a second, smaller family called the Vanir, which
contains fertility deities, gods of climate, and deities of harvest. For obvious
reasons, the Vanir gods such as Freyja, Freyr, and Njord were very popular
in farming communities, while the Aesir, who were usually connected with
government and war, were mainly worshipped by kings and warriors. In
Norse mythology, the two families are portrayed as being in a constant state
of conflict, to the point of there being numerous Aesir-Vanir wars.
However, these wars always end with peace and with the deities fusing their
families together. This peace reflects the Viking concept that society needs

both social classes, the farmers and the warriors, to function and prosper.
Analyzing the Myth of Creation
As fascinating as it is, the Norse myth of creation is, unceremoniously said,
weird and it requires a closer examination of its themes if we want to
understand the concepts that lay hidden at its core. One of the first things
we are introduced to in this story is the abyss Ginnungagap and the frost
giant Ymir. These are both personifications of the idea of the chaos that
comes before creation and its limitless potential. They are “nothingness” in
the sense that they don’t represent something material, but they contain
what the gods need in order to create everything they want or need. After
all, Ymir, a crude personification of chaos, is the creator of the first beings,
and the sons of Bor use his body to build the world as the Norse saw it.
In Viking mythology, the frost giants are always characterized as beings
who want to corrupt the world and destroy the order created by the Aesir
gods. They are chaotic in nature, just like Ymir was, and they instinctively
seek destructions. But, they also present the potential to create great things.
The giants are described as having great abilities such as that to brew ale,
craft enormous cauldrons, create runes and meads with magical properties,
and so on. In many stories and legends, the gods recognize the resources
that giants possess and they attempt to steal them for personal use or to
benefit the Norse culture. In a way, we can say that the Aesir gods see
giants as nothing more but raw materials, that they can mold and shape to
their own advantage. Ymir is simply the first mythological account of this
concept of gods using the chaotic potential of giants.
Another interesting thing about Ymir is that he is characterized as being a
hermaphrodite, that can reproduce on his own. That is mostly because the

differentiation between sexes did not exist at that point - it is a concept
invented and created by the gods. This is yet another way in which Odin
and his brothers polished and used the raw chaotic energy of Ymir. Even the
name Ymir (the Screamer) alludes to the idea that the Aesir took a scream,
a wordless means of communication, and transformed it into language,
giving it an elevated form.
As with many other creation myths, the Norse interpretation of the origin of
the world is focused on the theme of conflict. Ymir is created as a result of
the conflict between ice and fire. The world comes into being as a result of
the sons of Bor killing and dismembering Ymir, the conflict between chaos
and order. This primordial murder is not interpreted as a sin, as it would
have been in a Biblical myth. The slaying of Ymir is a necessity, an act that
had to be done for the sake of creating the world and bringing honor to the
gods’ name. This myth taught Vikings that they needed to do what it takes
to garner a good reputation and that they should specifically engage in
honorable aggressions.
The Norsemen believed that their gods were the forces that impaired
sanctity and order into the world, and that held the cosmos together. This is
why there are many stories about the gods interfering in Earthly affairs; it is
their role to maintain order in the world, a role that would only end when
the world itself would perish. But the Norse believed that giants too were
able to intervene in the human world. Everything that was created came
from Ymir and aspects of his, such as his ruggedness, his might, his
fluctuating character, were still present in the world of mortals, despite the
gods shaping all that existed to fit their personal agenda. For the Vikings,
the conflict between the gods and the giants was a never-ending ordeal, and
they, the humans, were right in the middle of it, presenting characteristics

from both worlds: the order and honor of the gods but also the wickedness
and chaos of the giants. The resolution of this fight will be Ragnarok, the
end times, when all will be destroyed and nothing will remain of the old
world. Then, a new world will rise from the seas, and the cycle of life will
start again.
Mythology in Viking Society
Despite having a collection of stories through which we can look at a
different side of Viking society, Norse mythology is a hard subject to pin
down. In the Old Norse, they refer to it as siour (custom), and each
individual declared their devotion to a deity that they connected to, on some
personal level, and the worship of said god became an integral part of that
person’s life.
Norse gods were complex beings with distinct personalities, and many were
venerated by entire communities. Scandinavian settlements had temples and
places of worship where they would make sacrifices to garner the favor of
the gods in times of war or celebrations. We don’t know much about the
exact rituals or customs they had, because much of their religion was passed
down orally, from a generation to another, and not written. We should also
keep in mind that the Norsemen were extremely flexible, even when it came
to their traditions and worship. Their religion transformed with time and it
had multiple variations across the vast Viking world. They shared the belief
in the divine powers but each settlement assigned them their own functions
and attributes. Even when they shifted to Christianity, Vikings remained
polytheistic, mostly adding to the list of divine beings they believed in
rather than replacing one with another.

Besides the families of gods and the giants, the Norse people also believed
in Disir (female deities who were worshipped by specific families or
individuals, kind of like the household deities of Roman, Greek, and other
cultures), elves (who were separated into dark elves and light elves),
dwarves, trolls, draugar (the undead), dragons and many other fantastic
creatures. So it’s a rich mythological world with plenty of supernatural
beings, most of them representing certain fears or beliefs of the Norse
population of that time.
With all being said, let’s jump right into meeting the most powerful and
important Norse gods and discover who they were and what they meant for
the Norse people through their most iconic stories.


Chapter 4: The Aesir Gods
Most of the popular Norse gods belong to the Aesir family. In this chapter,
we will cover some notable Aesir gods along with their iconic myths and
their potential interpretations.
Odin the Allfather
Odin is regarded as the ruler of the Aesir gods, and he is one of the most
complex characters in Norse mythology. He is attributed to a number of
contradicting traits that make him a hard to understand deity, especially if
we look at things from a Viking’s perspective. Odin is both a god of war,
justice, and law but also a selfish seeker of knowledge who dwells in poetry
and doesn’t care for communal values such as fairness. He is worshipped by
those who look for honor and prestige but he is also a patron of the outlaws.
Even his name, Odin (the Master of Ecstasy) alludes to a unity between the
multiple aspects of life respectively wisdom, war, magic (which is weird
because as I mentioned before, Vikings had little respect for men who had
magic abilities) poetry, sovereignty, and death. So, in what manners does
Odin reflect these often contradicting aspects? Let’s take them one by one
and see.
War is perhaps the aspects that Odin is most predominantly linked with, in
our modern portrayals of him. We often see him represented as an
honorable commander, leading his armies into battle. But this portrayal is
more suitable for deities such as Thor or Tyr. Odin, on the other hand, was
adept at inciting strife between peaceful people, for his sheer enjoyment. He

was, for the most part, concerned with the chaotic energy of war and the
frenzy that came with it. As for those he affiliated himself with, Odin kept
closer to rulers and berserkers, rather than the average warriors. Only the
greatest fighters and heroes were deemed honorable enough to gain Odin’s
favors. As for the berserkers, they were special warriors who had the ability
to tap into the spirits of ferocious beasts, such as bears and wolves, and use
their power in battle. Since Odin too dabbled in shamanisms and other such
spiritual practices, it’s not hard to see why he was a patron of the warrior-
shamans.
Sovereignty and leadership is another aspect that’s closely tied in with
Odin’s identity, mostly because he is the archetypal ruler and the chief of
the Aesir gods. So it was natural for the Norse chieftains and kings to claim
themselves to be Odin’s descendants or his protegees. But Odin is not the
only Norse divinity associated with the Scandinavian rulers. Few know that
Tyr was also a patron of kings, with the difference being that Tyr
represented the lawful, virtuous, and just ruler while Odin was associated
with cunning, devious, and inspired rulers. Let’s not forget that Odin
patronage outlaws, especially those who were exiled for heinous crimes.
These men were strong-willed but they, just like Odin, defied societal
norms. They were warriors but also poets at heart, and they sought to carve
their own path into the world. The men that garnered Odin’s favor were
creative, intelligent, and unstoppable when it came to getting what they
desired. Only luck and circumstances deemed them either rulers or outlaws.
In fact, Odin’s popularity among criminals is said to have led to his
banishment from Asgard for ten years, because the other gods didn’t want
to be associated with his vile reputation. Thus, being a ruler that served
Odin didn’t always speak wonders of your character.

Wisdom and magic (or shamanism) are perhaps the two aspects that the
Vikings attributed most frequently to the Allfather, and we seldom find
them in modern portrayals of Odin. Unlike the Christian God, who is all-
knowing, Norse deities are limited by their particularities. Odin makes no
exception to this, which is why many stories of him present him in the role
of a seeker, for wisdom, knowledge, and power (usually magical power).
Odin is a driven individual who is ready to go the extra mile to surpass his
limitations. In Norse legends, Odin is always on the look for new means of
gaining knowledge and power. He speaks to wise people, he uses his two
ravens, Munin (Memory) and Hugin (Thought), to gather news about
what’s happening around the realms of Norse mythology, and his throne,
Hlidskialf, lets him see everything that’s going on, without him having to
leave Asgard. His desire to know all there is to be known also stems from
his dread for the ever-approaching Ragnarok when he is doomed to perish
alongside the other gods. Let’s see the iconic Norse myths that speak of
Odin’s thirst for knowledge.
Odin’s Sacrifice to Learn the Magic of the Runes
The story of how Odin learned the magic spells from the rules is rather
well-known. It is said that Odin pierced himself with his own spear,
Gungnir, and hung himself from a branch of the World Tree, Yggdrasill,
above the Well of Urd (that was guarded by the Norns) to garner the
wisdom of the runes. You see, only the dead to those who were deemed
worthy by the Well of Urd were allowed to learn the magic of the runes, so
he put a noose around his head and he hung himself for nine days and nine
nights, managing to learn nine spells - a great accomplishment considering
that he allegedly only saw the runes for a split second before falling from
the branch. The number nine has a special significance, and it is mostly

associated with magic. During his time in the tree, Odin forbade any deity
to aid him in any way.
The ninth night is when Odin ritually died. All light extinguished to mark
the god’s death and the magical powers of the spirit world reached their
peak. The last night of the ritual coincided with the celebration of Walpurgis
Night when large bonfires are lit to celebrate this moment of great power.
Odin’s death was however short-lasting, and after midnight the light
returned to the world, and with it the Allfather who now knew the mighty
spells of the runes as well as how to perform incredible feats. For example,
Odin learned how to heal all wounds, to wake the dead, to free himself from
any type of constraints, to win and keep the love of anyone, and many other
things. With this knowledge, he became one of the wisest beings in the
Universe.
Thematically speaking, Odin’s sacrifice is of himself to himself, and his
lower self (that died) to his higher self (the Odin who gained more
knowledge, becoming a better version of himself) ringing true to that selfish
sense of individuality characteristic of Viking civilization.
Odin and the Well of Mimir
The Well of Mimir, most commonly referred to as the Well of Knowledge,
was near Yggdrasill’s root that extended over to Jotunheim (the world of
the frost giants) and it was guarded by Mimir. He was the wisest of the
Aesir gods, specifically because he often drank from the Well of
Knowledge. But the price he requested out of those who wanted to gain
knowledge was not cheap. Heimdall, the Norse god who guards the Bifrost
(the rainbow bridge that links Asgard to Midgard) had to give up one of his
earlobes to drink from the well and Mimir didn’t make any special offers

for the ruler of the Aesir. On the contrary, he asked for one of Odin’s eyes.
It is unknown whether Odin immediately accepted or bargained for a more
suitable deal, but in the end, he did sacrifice his eye, becoming the One-
Eyed-God.
The fact that Odin’s sacrifice is one of his eyes is a meaningful detail. The
eye was always seen as a symbol and metaphor, both in poems and in
everyday expressions. It is the window of the soul and the physical
representation of one’s perception of the world. Here, it seems like the latter
concept is more suitable, meaning that Odin traded the way he saw the
world for wisdom, which allows for a different perception. For Odin, this
trade must have seemed fair, since for him all that mattered was to become
his “higher self” and gain the wisdom of the divine.
In a separate myth about one of the numerous Aesir-Vanir wars, Mimir’s
head is cut off and sent to Odin. The Vanirs felt cheated when they were
given Vili as an advisor, only to find out that he wasn’t very bright and all
his good advice was actually from Mimir. Vili was Odin’s brother so they
didn’t dare to touch him, but Mimir was fair game. Odin however, was not
one to waste a good opportunity. Mimir was, after all, the wisest of the
gods. When he received Mimir’s head he embalmed it, with his special
herbs so it would not decay. Then, he used one of the spells he learned from
the runes to bring Mimir’s head back to life. From then on, Odin would
often use Mimir’s advice in times of need. This is yet another way in which
Mimir provided Odin with knowledge, albeit we could argue that Mimir got
the short end of the stick here, becoming a talking head and all.
Magic and Poetry

Odin and Freya are the greatest shamans of the Norse gods. Shamanism is a
form of magic in which practitioners can contact spirits or interact with the
spirit world to accomplish a purpose. Odin is especially known for his
spiritual-journeys, while his body remained in Asgard, appearing to others
as if he was asleep. Such an instance is when he visited the underworld, on
Sleipnir (an eight-legged horse attributed to shamanic trances) to find out
what was Baldur’s fate. As a practitioner of shamanism, Odin is surrounded
by plenty of animal familiar spirits, such as his ravens, the wolves Geri and
Fleki, and even the Valkyries (even though they are maidens, they are still
spiritual beings that serve the Allfather). The ritual of death and rebirth that
Odin underwent in order to decipher the runes is also part of shamanic
practice, if there was any doubt left regarding the god’s abilities.
Shamanism is a part of the traditional seidr, the form of magic that was
considered acceptable for only women to master - that is why Freya is a
patron of it. Men who practiced seidr were scorned and even banished from
society if the animosities ran deep. Odin’s affinity for shamanism made him
a target for ridicule and taunts. His 10-years exile from Asgard is said to
have been in part due to his preferences in “doing a woman’s work.” To say
that magic tarnished Odin’s reputation would be an understatement. It
questioned his honor and his ability to perform his “manly” duties.
However, to Odin, the idea of honor was not everything, and he gladly
discarded the concept if it meant he could indulge in ecstatic practices.
Odin’s connection to poetry goes back to the time when he stole the mead
of poetry, a drink made by the dwarves from Kvasir’s corpse. Kvasir was
the wisest man to ever live, and anyone who consumed the mead made
from his body gained knowledge and the ability to compose poems. Of
course, Odin was interested in possessing this mead, and he acquired it

through trickery; by seducing the giantess who guarded it. But Odin, in an
act of generosity, decided to share the gift of poetry with humans, gods, and
other beings, making him a patron of scholars, poets, storytellers, and
composers. To flaunt his poetic abilities, it is said that Odin only speaks
through verses.
Death
We may not think of Odin as a god of death, but the Vikings clearly
believed him to be deeply connected to the dead. He is, after all, the one
who presides over Valhalla, the Viking Heaven, and a fine connoisseur of
the spiritual world. His ability to speak and interact with the dead makes
him sort of a necromancer, although his purpose is solely to garner as much
knowledge as he can.
Perhaps to honor this aspect of Odin, his worship consisted of frequent
human sacrifices, especially notable ones such as enemy rulers or nobles.
These sacrifices were accomplished with the use of a noose or a spear,
elements that allude to Odin’s self-sacrifice to learn the magic of the runes.
Although Odin is not the stereotypical Norse god or a personification of the
Viking ideals, he is the vital force of all vital forces and the ruler of all
gods. He represents inspiration, fury, ecstasy, selfishness, and the drive to
accomplish the goals he has set for himself, regardless of how others might
judge him for it.
Odin presides over the most fundamental aspects of a Viking’s life, and for
that, even though he was fundamentally flawed, he was the most
worshipped and honored of all Norse deities. A far cry from our idea of a
ruler of the gods, but at least he was a relatable figure that the Norsemen
could connect with on a deeper level.

Thor the God of Thunder
Thor is the son of Odin and one of the most prominent deities in Norse
mythology. He is the ideal Viking warrior, a role model for all young
Norsemen, sporting virtues such as honor and unshakable loyalty. These
qualities come in handy because he is the defendant of Asgard, protecting
the gods from the ever-present threat of giants and whatever enemies might
come their way. No one can measure in strength with Thor, and to double
up his forces he wears a special belt of power and yields the famous
hammer Mjolnir (Lightning) that never misses and always comes back to
his owner. Whenever there was a lightning storm, the old Scnaidnavians
believed that it was Thor battling with the giants in Asgard, as he rode in
his chariot drawn by goats. As a side note here, the Vikings didn’t believe
that Thor was actually riding in a chariot pulled by real goats, they are just a
symbol for the invisible and incomprehensible world of the gods. Many
elements in Norse mythology are not meant to be taken literally.
Although Thor is the greatest slayer of giants and, subsequently the greatest
keeper of peace and order, he is ironically described as having giant
proportions and coming from a giant ancestry. Let’s not forget that Odin is
half-giant, and Thor’s mother, Jord, is of pure giant blood. This is just to
show that relationships between the gods and the giants were not as simple
as we’d like to believe, and many gods were in some way or another of
giant lineage. Nevertheless, Thor’s greatest foe is Jumurgandr, the great sea
serpent that’s coiled around the human world. It is said that the two will
face each other at Ragnarok when both will day of the other’s “hands.”
The Creation of Mjolnir

The story of how Thor got his favorite weapon is quite funny. It all started
with Loki, the god of mischief, who, on a particularly boring day decided to
pull a prank on Sif, Thor’s wife, and cut her beautiful golden locks.
Understandably, Thor didn’t appreciate Loki’s sense of humor, and he
threatened to break every bone in Loki’s body if he didn’t fix the situation.
The trickster god pleaded for his life, and he came up with the idea to go
and ask for the help of the crafty dwarves. Surely, they would find a way to
give Sif a new head of golden hair.
In Svartalfheim, the home of the dwarves, Loki found what he was looking
for, but he also managed to get himself into even more trouble. You see, he
first approached the sons of Ivaldi and told them that the gods were holding
a contest to see who could create the most marvelous gifts. They crafted
Sif’s hair, alongside two other great artifacts: Gungnir that would become
Odin’s spear, and Skidbladnir, the greatest ship in the world, that was gifted
to Freyr. Loki however, also approached the dwarven brothers Brokkr and
Sindri, and he taunted them saying that they could never create marvels as
incredible as those of the sons of Ivaldi. The brothers took the bait, on one
condition - if the gods preferred their gifts, Brokkr and Sindri would receive
Loki’s head. Against his better judgment, Loki accepted the wager, but he
was also not adept at playing fair. To sabotage the brothers, he transformed
himself into a fly and he pestered Brokkr who tended to the fire while
Sindri worked on the gifts.
Despite Loki’s involvement, the first two pieces ended up being flawless.
The first marvel was Gullinbursti, a boar with golden hair, who was faster
than any horse and who lit up in the dark - he was gifted to Freyr, the god of
the harvest. The second wonder was Draupnir, a magic ring that would
create eight golden rings of similar weight and value every nine nights

(again notice the use of number nine in relation to magic). This ring of
wealth went to Odin, the Allfather. But for the third marvel, Loki’s sabotage
prevailed, and Mjolnir, the greatest hammer to ever exist, ended up having a
rather short handle. Sindri and Brokkr were unhappy with the hammer, but
they were still pretty confident in the quality of their gifts, so they made
their way to Asgard to present them to the gods.
The gods were extremely happy with everything they got. Sif had recovered
her wonderful golden hair, Freyr had two new tools to help him complete
his duties, Odin had a mighty weapon and a ring that produced him more
wealth, and Thor had the perfect item to help him smite giants - he couldn’t
care less about the short handle. To Loki’s horror, Brokkr and Sindri were
declared winners, and they were eager to claim their prize. But Loki was as
clever as he was devious, and he pointed out that he had not promised them
his neck, thus there was no way for them to take his head. The dwarves then
decided to sew Loki’s mouth shut, and they returned to Svartalfheim empty-
handed but content. That is the story of how Thor got his hammer, a myth
that speaks more of Loki’s character than of Thor’s.
Thor’s Role in the Viking Society
Besides his role as a divine guardian, Thor is known for his activities in the
human realm. He was called upon whenever there was a need for
protection, comfort, and purification, especially of a place or event. The
hammer, Mjolnir, is said to have had both smiting and blessing powers (in
the sense that it destroyed evil forces), and many runic inscriptions that
speak about Thor invoke him to bless places, plots of lands, and weddings.
A peculiar demonstration of Thor’s ability to purify and bless is the myth of

him eating his goats and blessing their hides with his hammer to bring them
back to life.
Thor’s association with agriculture and fertility, in general, comes from him
being a sky god - one that could invoke rain as he pleased. Historians
believe that his golden-haired wife Sif was a personification of good
harvest, her locks symbolizing fields of grains, thus their marriage being a
portrayal of prosperity through the union of the divine spirits of the sky and
those of the Earth.
But Thors’s principal role in the Viking society remains that of a role model
for warriors. If we add his affinity to the farming class to the mix, it is not
hard to see why Thor was such a beloved god for the Norsemen. In many
ways, Thor is the perfect opposite of Odin. He is the god of the common
people and the fighters, and he values honesty and loyalty. This is why
Thor’s popularity skyrocketed throughout the Viking Age, to the point that
he surpassed Odin, with the most telling example of this preference being
the Icelandic Viking colony. The Norsemen of Iceland venerated Thor, in
part because they were mainly a farming settlement, but also because they
had experienced first-hand the oppressions of the noble class (who
happened to worship Odin). To farmers, settlers, and colonists, Thor is seen
as a protector and a true leader, one that rules with honor and blesses his
people.
Thor’s cult also saw a peak when Christianity first came to the
Scandinavian world. This new religion sought to annihilate the traditions
and beliefs of the Norsemen, and Thor became a symbol of hostility
towards these invading forces. Vikings of that time who refused to give up
on the old gods would wear pendants brandished to resemble miniature

hammers - small Mjolnirs, to show their allegiances, a retaliation to the
cross amulets worn by Christians.
Loki the Trickster God
Loki is a very peculiar character of Norse mythology, with a similarly
strange lineage. His father, Farbauti, is a giant and his mother, Laufey, is of
unspecified descent in Norse lore. She could have been a giant, a god, or
even a human. Loki himself has fathered a complicated family. His proper
wife was Sigyn, a goddess of victory, with whom he had a son called Narfi.
But Loki also had an entanglement with the giantess Angrboda, with whom
he had three children, Hel, Fenrir, and Jumungandr, each being more
monstrous and destructive than the other. Jumungandr and Fenrir alone
have rather prominent roles to play at Ragnarok, and Hel is the goddess of
the underworld.
Leaving his perplexing family ties aside, Loki is a deity that defies most
Viking societal norms. He has little to no regard for his fellow gods, he is
malicious, cowardly, extremely selfish, and almost every action he takes is
with self-preservation and mischief in mind. Loki also defies the laws of
nature in an instance by being the mother of Sleipnir, the shamanic horse
with eight legs. That was possible when he turned himself into a mare to
seduce Svadilfari’s stallion, stopping him from winning a bet with the gods
that would have granted him the sun, the moon, and the goddess Freya as a
bride. We’ve already seen Loki’s character in the Creation of Mjolnir, but
another story that speaks volumes about his treacherous character and his
lack of loyalty towards any faction is that of the Kidnapping of Idun.
The Kidnapping of Idun

Idun is a primordial goddess of Norse mythology, and she is the keeper of
the fruits of immortality, which allow gods to remain young and strong.
Whenever a god felt like they were starting to age, they would go to Idun
and she entrusted them one fruit- that was enough to ward off old age and
give them their youth back. So, what happened to her?
Well, one day, Loki, Odin, and Hoenir went on a perilous journey. There
was little to eat in the desolate regions they traveled through, but they
managed to find an ox and kill it. But no matter how long they kept the
meat over the fire, it wouldn’t cook. It turns out that Thjazi, a giant, was
using magic to prevent them from cooking their meat, and he wanted a
piece of the ox for himself in exchange for letting them prepare their dinner.
The gods reluctantly agreed, but when the giant came down, taking the
form of an eagle, and snatched the biggest, juiciest piece of meat, Loki got
angry. He launched a thick branch at the eagle, but Thjazi fought back and
took Loki to the sky. Loki, terrified that Thjazi would drop him, pleaded for
his life, and the giant relented. But his price was high, to say the least. He
wanted Idun and her fruits of immortality.
Loki spent what remained of the journey thinking of a plan to trick Idun
into being captured by Thjazi. Of course, he found a way. He told her that
he had seen incredible fruits - yes, even more, incredible than hers, beyond
the walls of Asgard, and that he would bring her to these fruits if she
wanted to compare them by herself. Poor Idun was fooled, and when they
reached the wood she was taken by Thjazi, to his abode situated in the
highest mountain peak of Jotunheim. Without Idun and her fruits, the gods
grew old and sick. They quickly discovered that Loki was behind the
goddess’s disappearance and they threatened to kill him if he didn’t retrieve

her. Loki then took Freya’s hawk feather cape, which allowed him to turn
into a hawk and he flew to Jotunheim.
He was lucky enough to find Idun alone and unsupervised, and he wasted
no time. He turned her into a nut and flew back to Asgard with her in his
talons. But Loki didn’t make it back home before Thjazi found out, and he
turned into an eagle and caught up with the treacherous god. Fortunately for
Loki, the gods from Asgard were on the lookout and they built a wooden
barrier around Asgard. After Loki made it back, they lit the barrier, killing
Thjazi who didn’t have time to turn back and plunged right into the flames.
However, the story doesn’t end there. Skadi, Thjazi’s daughter soon came to
Asgard to demand restitution for the murder of her father. Her request was
for the gods to make her laugh because the death of her father had saddened
her deeply.
Loki, the trickster god, was the only one who could accomplish such a feat.
He tied one end of a rope around his male parts and the other one around a
goat’s beard, creating an absurd spectacle that even the frost giant couldn’t
gaze at without laughing. That is how Loki both caused and solved Idun’s
kidnapping and how he made up for the death of Thjazi to his daughter,
Skadi.
The Deity Without a Cult
There are countless legends in which Loki commits crimes against the gods,
and he ultimately pays for his wrongdoings. To punish him, the gods tie him
down, with his legitimate son’s entrails, to three rocks. The number three is
sacred in Norse myths, and it is usually linked to royalty and divinity. In
this case, it signifies Loki’s divine punishment. It is said that a poisonous
snake sits above Loki, dripping poison in his eyes. Sigyn, his wife, stays by

his side and holds a bowl above his face, to catch the poison. But every
once in a while the bowl gets full and she has to go and empty it while Loki
writhes in agony. Loki will be freed at Ragnarok, to witness the end of the
world at the hands of his children (mostly Fenrir).
Loki’s identity was questioned by the many Scandinavian tribes. Some
recognized him as a god, others considered him a giant, and a few cults
believed him to be a different kind of mythological being. Similarly, there is
confusion regarding the meaning of his name. If we go by the popular
theory that Loki means tangle or knot then that is very telling of his
character. His schemes tangle the deities in dangerous situations, and he
himself can be considered the knot or the flaw in the cosmos that causes the
end of the world. What’s certain is that Loki is a traitor, a schemer, and a
complete antithesis of the traditional Viking values. Thus it is to no surprise
that, as far as we know, there was no cult or following around him. There is
no record speaking of Loki worshippers, nor of celebrations or sacrifices in
his name. So, ironically, Loki is one of the most important characters of
Norse legends and the element that causes or triggers most Norse myths,
but there is no worship or cult around him. In the end, it seems that Loki’s
biggest joke was himself.
Baldur the Beloved God
Baldur is the son of Odin and Frigg, and he is the deity beloved by all
beings and creatures that have a physical form. He is often described as
being handsome and cheerful, but his name which roughly translates as
“bold” also alludes to Baldur’s war-like character. The most well-known
myth about Baldur is that of his death.

The Death of the Beloved God
The story starts with an ode to Baldur’s character and how much he was
appreciated by the other gods for his ability to bring joy to anyone’s heart.
But, at some point, the young god starts to have ominous dreams about his
death, making everybody in Asgard worry about his fate. The gods
appointed Odin to look into the matter and find out what Baldur’s dreams
meant. And so he did. Odin disguised himself, took Sleipnir, and embarked
on one of his shamanic journeys to the underworld where he knew of a wise
seeress who could clarify the matter. When he got to the cold realm of
Niflheim he was surprised to see the halls decorated, as if some great
celebration was about to occur. He hurried to the seeress and inquired her
about the preparations only to find that the distinguished guest for whom all
the underworld was decorated was no other than Baldur.
Odin returned to Asgard and shared the sorrowful news. That’s where
Frigg, a devout mother, stepped in. She was prepared to do anything to
potentially spare her son from this horrible fate. In a desperate attempt, she
went to all the living and nonliving things in the universe and extracted an
oath for them, to not harm Baldur. Frigg was very thorough in her mission
but she made a fatal mistake - she skipped the mistletoe. To her, the small
plant looked harmless, and there was no point in asking. Surely, there was
no way that the mistletoe would bring any harm to her beloved son. When
Loki got wind of this, he saw the opportunity for mischief.
While all the other gods made somewhat of a sport out of Baldur’s
invulnerability, by throwing rocks and sticks at him and laughing when they
bounced off, leaving no wound behind, Loki got to scheming. He carved a
spear out of mistletoe and he approached Hodr, the blind god, with apparent
kindness. Loki told Hodr that he understood that he felt left out and he

offered to help him take part in the game and honor Baldur’s invincibility.
The trickster handed Hodr the mistletoe spear and he guided his hands in
the right direction. All Hodr had to do was throw, and throw he did. The
weapon pierced Baldur, killing him in an instant. Poor Hodr who just
wanted to fit in was nothing but a pawn in Loki’s game.
The gods remained still at the sight of Baldur’s corpse, not just because they
cared deeply for the god, but also due to the fact that his death was foreseen
in the first presage of Ragnarok. Frigg was the first to snap out of the stupor
and look for a solution. The only chance that Baldur had left was for
someone to go to the underworld and bargain with Hel, the goddess of the
death, for his release. Hermod, a brother of Baldur took on the challenge.
He borrowed Sleipnir from Odin and off he went to the realm of the dead,
while the other gods prepared a worthy funeral for their dear friend. Beings
from all the nine realms attended this ceremony, from gods to giants,
dwarves, elves, humans and even valkyries gathered to mourn the death of
Baldur.
They turned Hringhorni, Baldur’s ship, into a funeral pyre and they
attempted to launch it into the sea. When the ship didn’t bulge, they called
for Hyrrokkin, the strongest giantess, to free Hringhorni from the sand. The
giantess managed to launch the ship to sea, but Nanna, Baldur’s wife,
couldn't bear the sight of her husband being carried to his last voyage and
she died of sorrow. They place her body next to Baldur’s and then Thor lit
the flames. As sacrifices, Odin placed his ring Draupnir in the flames, and
Baldur’s horse was led in the fire, to follow his master in the afterlife.
Hermod’s journey took nine nights (the divine number) but he made it to
Hel. The half-living, half-dead goddess of the underworld was a strange
sight, and her popularity as a harsh and greedy deity did not honor her. And

there, sitting in a chair next to Loki’s monstrous daughter was Baldur, or
what had remained of him - a pale and lifeless spirit who looked nothing
like the joyous deity. Hermod pleaded for Baldur’s life, telling Hel that all
the living things in the world missed him deeply. Hel was not a cruel
goddess, so she presented Hermod with a deal. If the gods could determine
that all the living things wept for Baldur, the living world would get him
back. If, however, even one being did not care for Baldur's demise, he
would remain in the underworld, forever. Hermod hurried home with the
good news, and the gods wasted no time in sending messengers to find out
if everything wept for Baldur. And they all did, except for one giantess
called Tokk, who showed no sympathy towards Baldur’s fate. Tokk was
none other than Loki himself, determined to see his devious plan to the very
end.
Thus Baldur was doomed to remain in the underworld, and his joyous and
glorious light never graced the land of the living again.
Baldur’s Character
Although in his most famous legend Baldur plays a passive role, we should
not forget that he is a Norse god, who adheres to Viking ideals of a role
model. In different sources that mention him, Baldur is presented as a deity
that’s always eager to engage in war and lead others to battle, making him a
similar figure to Thor, albeit on a much smaller scale. Baldur never quite
matched Thor’s popularity, and because most of the sources that speak of
Norse mythology are fragmentary in nature, we don’t know a great deal
about Baldur. What we do know is that the Vikings held him in high regard,
for both his joyous personality and his war-like attributes, and they honored
the memory of the beloved god of Asgard.

Tyr the God of War and Justice
When we think of important Norse deities, Tyr is not the first god to pop
into our minds. He, like Baldur, is not present in many myths and legends,
but it is widely believed that he was once one of the most cherished deities
in the Norse pantheon, for his role as a war god and protector of justice. In
epic poems, Norse heroes such as Sigurd, often invoke Tyr to garner
victories in battles. Additionally, the part he plays in the story of the
Binding of Fenrir, speaks volume of his just and heroic character.
The Binding of Fenrir, Son of Loki
Fenrir the wolf is the third son of Loki and the giantess Angrboda. Just as
with his brothers, the gods had terrible premonitions regarding Fenrir’s fate.
He is said to be the one who will devour Odin at Ragnarok, allowing chaos
to reign free and destroy the cosmos. Out of all Loki’s monstrous children,
the gods feared Fenrir the most, so they took him while he was still a pup to
grow in Asgard, under their watchful eyes. The deity who took upon
himself the responsibility to feed and care for the infant wolf was Tyr, the
most honorable of the gods.
As weeks turned into months, Fenrir grew bigger and bigger, and the Norse
deities understood that they had little time to find a way to contain the
beast. They attempted to bind him with various chains, by tricking Fenrir
into believing that they were but challenges to test his strength. With each
chain that the beast shattered, the gods cheered to not garner the wolf’s
suspicion, but their anxiety grew with every failure. Finally, in the last
attempt, the gods asked for the dwarves’ help. They were, after all, the
greatest craftsmen in the nine realms, surely they could create a chain that
could bind even the fearsome Fenrir. This final attempt proved successful

when the dwarves created Gleipnir, a chain made out of things that don’t
exist, such as the beard of a woman and a fish’s breath.
But Gleipnir was a light and dainty-looking chain, and upon seeing it Fenrir
suspected foul play. The wolf beast was not stupid, he agreed to try the
chain only if a god or goddess would put their hand in his mouth, as a
symbol of good faith. Of course, no deity rushed to fulfill Fenrir’s demand,
as it meant losing a limb. And yet Tyr, the brave, volunteered to put his
hand in the wolf’s jaw, for the sake of the world. You’d think that Fenrir
would have a moment of hesitation to bite the proverbial hand that fed him,
but he didn’t. When he realized the gods’ treachery, he chomped off Tyr’s
hand in an instant. Fenrir’s story ends with him being tied to a boulder and
transported to some sordid place. There, with a sword in his jaws to hold his
mouth open, Fenrir awaits for Ragnarok, when he will be freed to carry out
his destiny.
This myth is the most telling portrayal of Tyr as a divine upholder of the
law. He sacrifices his hand not only to save the world from Fenrir’s threat
but also to offer just compensation for the gods not maintaining their side of
the oath. His act fulfills the deities’ end of the bargain, bringing justness
and order to this whole affair. This instance mimics that of Odin sacrificing
his eye for wisdom, showing that he is the foremost deity of wisdom, with
the difference that, through his sacrifice, Tyr proves that he is the greatest
god of justice and law.
Tyr’s Roles in the Norse World
It might seem weird that a god of justice is also one of war, but for the
Vikings, these two aspects were deeply entwined. From the Norsemen’s
point of view, war was not simply a chaotic bloody business, but somewhat

of a lawful duel, where the gods decided who won and who was defeated.
In many cases, the dates and places of the battles were chosen beforehand
by both armies, and the Vikings had precise rules in place to prevent good
war conduct. Similarly, the law could sometimes be used to gain victory
over an enemy, just like war, so it makes sense to have the same deity
handling both law and war.
Even though there are few surviving records of Tyr, it is clear that he was,
at some point, a cherished deity of justice, before whom people swore
oaths, but also a patron of honorable warriors. His worshippers valued him
deeply and considered him to be on par with the mighty Thor and Odin, the
ruler of the sky. It goes to show that if a deity of the time wanted the
people’s respect, all they had to do was sacrifice their hands to a monster of
destruction that would one day bring the end of the world. Tough crowd,
right?
Bites of Aesir Gods
Because few written accounts of Norse myths and legends have survived
through the ages, there are plenty of Viking deities that we know little about
- so little that I don’t even have enough information to give them their own
separate subchapter here. So, instead of allowing these gods to be forgotten,
here are some “bites of the Norse gods” with some interesting things we
know about the more obscure Aesir deities.
Heimdall
Heimdall is the son of Odin and the guardian of Asgard, who sits at the top
of the Bifrost. He is said to have keen eyesight and hearing, which he uses

to detect potential intruders. Heimdall holds the horn Gjallarhorn, which
will ultimately signal the arrival of giants at Ragnarok. Heimdall’s biggest
enemy is Loki, and they are destined to kill each other at the end of the
world, much like Jumungandr and Thor. Some Old Norse poems speak of
Heimdall as being the one who created mankind and established the Viking
society. An interesting fact about the guardian of Asgard is that he was born
from nine different mothers, a miraculous feat to say the least.
Vili and Ve
Vili and Ve are Odin’s brothers, and they are credited both for the
construction of the universe and for the creation of the first two humans
(both feats were done in collaboration with the Allhather). Despite being
founding deities, there are few mentions of Odin’s two brothers in myths
and poems, except for a small note that they had slept with Frigg during
Odin’s 10 years of exile. Even so, they must have been extremely important
to the Vikings at some point for their simple kinship to the ruler of the Aesir
if for nothing else. In the Old Norse, Vili roughly translates to “will” and Ve
to “temple,” suggesting that the pair were associated with the sacred and the
holy. Other interpretations are that the three brothers represent the basic
forces that distinguish the existing world from chaos, respectively
inspiration, intention, consciousness, and the sacred.
Some Old Norse texts allude to the fact that Vili and Ve are nothing more
than different representations of Odin, a theory that complicates the family
ties of the Aesir gods.
Ullr

Ullr was the son of Sif, and he is said to have been a great hunter and
archer. Although he is an obscure deity, some surviving accounts of him
describe Ullr as being a handsome war-deity, who was frequently invoked
before duels. The mention of “Ullr’s Blessing” in an epic poem suggests
that Ullr was a deity of great importance in the Norse pantheon. His name
can be translated as either “temple” tying him to the sacred, or “glory”
linking him furthermore with war and war-like abilities. Some historians
suggest that Ullr was a deity of law and justice, connecting him with Tyr,
but there is little to no evidence to prove this supposed link. Other theories
are that Ullr was actually part of the Vanir tribe, because there is a mention
of him crossing the sea at some point, and many Vanir deities were
associated with the iconography of water. But that is also just another
theory about the enigmatic son of Sif.
Hoenir
Hoenir is another god with an enigmatic existence. He is often portrayed as
the travel companion of Odin and Loki, but most accounts about him are
confusing, to say the least. In some stories, he is credited with having a role
in the creation of Ask and Embla, the first humans, while other legends
speak of him as if he is an extension or identity of Odin (mostly because
ecstasy was his gift). Hoenir is described as being a swift god, a fearful
deity, and a handsome man. In fact, during an Aesir-Vanir war, when he and
Mimir were offered as hostages from the Aesir, the Vanir were taken aback
by Hoenir's beauty and they made him their chieftain. The rest you already
know, although in that story Hoenir was replaced with Vili; the Vanir
discovered how dim-witted Hoenir was and in a rage, they decapitated
Mimir and sent his head to Odin, as a retaliation. But this characterization
of Hoenir being a timid and dim-witted deity is contradictory to other

portrayals in which he resembles Odin in abilities and characteristics. Was
Hoenir nothing more than a pretty face or was he a powerful and important
Norse deity? We’ll probably never know.


Chapter 5: The Vanir Gods
There is a lot of debate when it comes to the Aesir-Vanir classification of
the Norse gods. What sets the Vanir apart from the Aesir is a tendency
towards having a closer connection to mankind and their affinity for
agriculture as a whole. But even these attributes aren’t always singular to
Vanir gods. Take Thor, for example. Besides his roles as guardian and
warrior, he is also a god of fertility and harvest, and his connection with the
Viking people is perhaps one of the most significant out of all Norse deities.
And yet, he is undeniably an Aesir god. Additionally, the word “Vanir” is
rarely used in Old Norse texts that precede the Christian conversion of
Vikings. So, at the end of the day, the whole Aesir-Vanir matter is pretty
confusing.
Regardless of the controversies, three deities are commonly assigned to the
Vanir family: Freya, Freyr, and Njord. According to Norse myths, they
lived in Vanaheim (the realm of the Vanir), a place that is said to have been
closer to nature than Asgard but still within the Aesir realm territory. The
existence and descriptions of Vanaheim are just disputed in the historical
world as those of the Vanir family.
Freya
Freya is one of the most important Norse goddesses, and the most
prominent Vanir deity (although she became an honorary Aesir after an
Aesir-Vanir war). She is the sister of Freyr and the wife of Odr, a god of
inspiration and ecstasy. Freya is frequently portrayed as being beautiful,

joyous, gentle, and very fond of material possessions as well as the elusive
concept of love. Many stories speak of her romantic endeavors with other
gods and creatures of the Norse mythology, including elves. But let’s not
forget that to Asgard and the old Norsemen, Freya was much more than a
fun-loving deity with a fondness for the finer things in life. She is the
goddess who presides over Folkvang, the afterlife realm for unmarried
maidens, and one of the greatest practitioners of seidr (and the one who
brought magic to gods and humans alike).
I mentioned seidr a lot throughout this book, but I never took the time to
explain its nature. It is a form of magic combined with shamanism, that
serves the purpose of finding out the course of one’s fate and changing it by
adding new events. Thus seidr could be used in a great number of ways. In
the Viking Age, the women who practiced seidr were known as vola, and
they would perform acts of magic in exchange for goods, food, or
accommodation. The Vikings' sentiments towards volas were mixed. They
respected them and celebrated them, but they also feared them and treated
them as outcasts. In the historic period that preceded the Viking Age, it was
customary for a war chief’s wife to be a practitioner of seidr, and her role
was to foresee and influence the outcome of a plan of action through her
magic.
How Freya’s beauty Led to Mjolin’s Theft
The most popular stories of Freya revolve around her beauty. She was often
the object of desire for antagonists, such as the giant Svaldifari who wanted
to marry her (and get the moon and the sun) in exchange for building an
impregnable wall around Asgard. Thankfully for her, Loki took one for the
team and sabotaged Svaldifari by seducing his horse.

But another, more mainstream legend that speaks volumes of her reputation
as a rare beauty is that of the theft of Mjolnir. The story goes that one day,
Thor woke up to find that his precious hammer was gone. This was bad
news for Asgard since without his weapon Thor couldn’t fight off potential
giant attacks. Freya lent Thor and Loki her falcon fathers to look for
Mjolnir, and they quickly deduced that the perpetrator was Thrym, a giant.
When confronted about the theft, Thrym made no effort to hide his crime,
and he had the insolence to ask for something in return. Of course, this
wouldn’t be a story about Freya’s beauty if the giant hadn’t asked for her
hand in marriage. The gods of Asgard, especially Freya, were livid, and
they gathered to find a solution. The proposed plan quickly turned this
otherwise classic myth of honorable gods versus the treacherous giants into
a quirky legend: Thor was to disguise himself as Freya and go to the realm
of giants to attend the wedding and get back his hammer. Somehow, all the
gods agreed that was the best course of action.
And so Thor, dressed in a bridal gown, and Loki, disguised as his maid of
honor, made their way to Jotunheim. At the welcome feast, Thor almost
gave himself away with his insatiable appetite and his piercing gaze, but
thankfully Loki was there to find unbelievable explanations that mitigated
Thrym’s suspicions. Then, at the ceremony, Mjolin was brought to bless the
union, as the traditional custom required. But when the hammer got to Thor,
he took it and wasted no time to slay his groom along with all the wedding
attendees. Thor then returned home with his precious weapon and all was,
once again, well and good in Asgard.
Freya or Frigg

Although most sources present Freya and Frigg as being distinct deities,
many elements connect the two. For one, Freya’s husband, Odr, is virtually
Odin. The names themselves are a dead giveaway (Odin and Odr have the
same root) but Odr’s association with inspiration and ecstasy is truly the
nail in the proverbial coffin. There is even a story that portrays Freya as
being Odin’s concubine. If we also take into account the tales that speak of
Odr’s frequent journeys, it becomes very evident that Odr and Odin are the
same deities, or at least that Odr is an extension of Odin. That in exchange
means that Freya and Frigg are either the same goddess or different sides of
the same deity.
Let’s not forget that Frigg herself had somewhat of a bad reputation of
being an arduous lover, who even went as low as sleeping with Odin’s
brothers while he was exiled from Asgard. That sounds pretty similar to
Freya’s tales of romantic endeavors. Additionally, Frigg is frequently
associated with the practice of magic, which comes to light through her
proficiency in weaving and her extensive knowledge of the fate of all
beings. The names of the two goddesses are also very peculiar. Freya or
Freyja roughly translates to “lady” which sounds more like a social title
than a name. Meanwhile, Frigg in the Old Norse meant “beloved,” tying her
to attributes such as love and desire, which are frequently used in portrayals
of Freya. So in a weird twist, Frigg’s name describes Freya’s identity, while
Freya’s name describes just a social status rather than a unique
characterization.
No matter how we look at this, it’s impossible to not conclude that Freya
and Frigg are ultimately the same people. Their husbands, their use of
magic, their portrayal as sensual women, and their significance in the Norse
pantheon, make it crystal clear that they share an identity. And yet, in many

myths and legends they are portrayed as different individuals, one the
Allmother and one a Vanir goddess of magic and fertility. Where is this
separation coming from and what purpose does it serve? Unfortunately, we
have no way of knowing that.
Freyr
Freyr is a god of peace, masculinity, good weather, and prosperity. He is
Freya’s twin and one of the most beloved deities of the common Norsemen
who were farmers and settlers. Since his blessings were usually good
harvest, fertility, prosperity, and health, it’s not hard to understand why he
was held in high regard and was often the recipient of sacrifices, especially
during harvest festivals and weddings. Fortunately, his sacrifices were often
boars and not humans, because that was Freyr’s favorite animal, perhaps in
reference to Gullinborsti - the golden bristled boar he had received from the
dwarves Sindri and Brokkr.
Although he is a Vanir god and an honorary Aesir, Freyr lives in Alfheim,
the realm of the elves. That could mean that he was a ruler of the elves or
he had deep connections with the elusive creatures. Freyr is also known for
his famous ship, Skidbladnir, that could be easily folded to fit in a bag and
that always had a favorable wind. Skidbladnir is considered to symbolize
the ritual ships used by the Scandinavian people during funeral rites or
celebrations and not their long-ships. For on land transport, Freys is said to
have used a chariot drawn by boars, his preferred beasts. During harvest
celebrations, Freyr worshippers would put a statue of the god in a chariot
and travel through the lands with it. All the settlements would welcome the
procession and the festivities would ensure, overseen by the kind and
peaceful presence of Freyr (or at least his statue).

We can understand the magnitude of Freyr’s importance for the Norse
people simply by the amount of information that we have regarding his
worship and cult. As you’ve probably noticed by now, not much is known
about the spiritual life of the Vikings, and yet for Freyr, we have details
regarding not only sacrifices but also celebrations in his name. That’s pretty
huge! On top of that, the deity is credited with being the founding father of
numerous royal lines and tribes.
Freyr’s Wedding
The most well-known and one of the only surviving stories of Freyr is that
of his marriage to the giantess Gerdr. It’s a touching myth of how Freyr one
day saw the woman of his dreams when he sat on Hlithskjolf, Odin's throne.
Freyr then was overcome with sadness, because he couldn’t be with that fair
woman. His father, Njord noticed his son’s depression and sent a servant,
Skirnir, to tend to his needs. Freyr told Skirnir about his plight and he
implored him to find Gerdr and ask for her hand in his name. Skirnir
accepted the task but he asked for something in return - Freyr’s magical
sword, that fought on its own. Freyr complied and soon enough he and
Gerdr met for the first time and they became a happy couple.
The myth is sweet in nature, but Freyr’s sacrifice was perhaps bigger than
what he bargained for. Without his sword, Freyr encountered many
hardships in fights with various giants. It is said that at Ragnarok he will
perish at the hands of Surtr, specifically because the sword is no longer in
his possession.
Njord

Njord is the father of Freyr and Freya, and he is a Vanir deity associated
with fertility, wealth, and the sea. Considering that seafaring was an
important aspect of a Viking’s life, it’s safe to say that Njord held an
important place in the Norsemen’s hearts. And yet, one of the only
historical accounts that we have of him is the story of how he married
Skadi.
Skadi was Thjazi’s daughter, who came to Asgard to avenge her father’s
death at the hands of the Aesir deities (although Thjazi himself was not so
innocent, by kidnapping Idun and stealing the gods’ immortality). One of
her requests was for the gods to make her laugh, which Loki accomplished
with his parlor tricks. Another wish of hers was for her father to be
honored, and to do so Odin took his eyes and transformed them into stars in
the night sky. Lastly, to appease Skadi, she was allowed to choose any god
she wanted for marriage with the catch being that she could only choose
them based on their feet. Her personal preference was Baldur because he
was the most beloved of the gods, and she chose the pair of feet that she
believed to be the fairest -worthy only of Baldur. But the gods with the
fairest feet ended up to be Njord. Thus the two got married.
Their marriage however was short-lived because they couldn’t agree on
where to live. Skadi found Njord’s home, Noatun (a place near the sea) to
be too sunny, and with noisy seabirds that didn’t let her sleep. Njord hated
the cold of Skadi’s home, Thrymheim, and the sounds of the howling
wolves. They ended up parting ways after only 18 nights spent together.
Njord seems to have been widely worshipped at some time in the Vikings’
history, but we’ll never know to what extent or how he was honored by his
worshippers.


Chapter 6: Viking Spirituality
Just like all complex religions, Norse spirituality had two main elements:
rituals and mystical knowledge that allowed people to understand the inner
workings of the universe and how to find their purpose.
When it comes to rituals and other practical ways of worshipping the deities
we don’t have much to refer to. It is obvious that the Norse gods had a
devout religious following which served the social, spiritual, and
psychological needs of the Vikings, but the myths and legends do little to
explain how the actual worship of the gods played out. Historical evidence
speaks of the Norse blot, a ceremony through which Odin and other
important deities were celebrated. The blots were usually performed at
temples or special “blot houses” and they involved sacrifices, of both the
human and animal kind. Enemy rulers or noblemen were frequently
sacrificed to honor Odin, while animals were used wherever the specific
deity had an animal that they could be linked to, such as Freyr with boars.
The animals would be killed and consumed by the religious practitioners, in
a ceremony that somewhat resembles a modern Christian communion -
meaning that the animal was seen as an embodiment of the god.
Blots were a central part of Vikings’ lives, and the month of November was
named after the divine ceremonies “Blotmonth” or “Bloodmonth.” Old
Anglo-Saxon writings speak of en masse sacrifices of cattle and horses,
where the blood was gathered in special vessels to be consumed and
“splashed” over the attendees of the ceremonies. A priest would then bless
the meat, vessels, and goblets used at the feast and they would ensure the
celebrations. A goblet was ceremoniously emptied to honor certain gods.

First Odin, to bless the ruling class, then Freya and Freyr to bring peace and
good harvest. Attendees could also empty a goblet to honor their departed.
Viking sacrifices were seen as gifts to the gods, to show appreciation for
their blessings and for maintaining order and peace in the cosmos. For the
Norsemen, their deities were not perfect or all-powerful. They too were
governed by fate and by the laws of the world. Vikings saw them first and
foremost as protectors of order, that kept the evil forces in check and
seldomly intervened in the events that happened in the mortal world. If we
consider how dangerous and harsh the Viking world was, it’s not hard to see
why the Christian portrayal of a loving and omnipotent god didn’t flourish
in the minds and hearts of Norsemen. They worshipped their gods with the
hopes that they would, in exchange, bless and protect their families and
communities. That was all.
Most of the mystic knowledge of the Vikings came from their myths and
legends. Through these tales of the realm of the gods and how the cosmos
came to be, the Norsemen can easily find ideals, role models, and goals to
strive towards in their lives. Odin is a model for kings, knowledge seekers,
and fathers alike. Thor is the ultimate Viking - warrior, loyal, and
determined to fulfill his duty to the very end. Freya and Frigg are symbols
of motherhood, the joy of life, and Norse magic. Freyr is the personification
of wealth, peace, and prosperity. And the symbolic peace that is established
between the Aesir and the Vanir tells Vikings that all the aspects that the
deities represent and equally important to lead a happy life and have a
successful society. Norse tales are also full of numerology and hidden
elements that only the wise and knowledgeable can decipher. These people
who were wise enough to see beyond the apparent could practice divination
and seidr, to foresee and influence someone’s fate.

There’s no doubt that Viking spirituality ran deep, and was a lot more
complex than Anglo-Saxons of the time believed. And yet, close to the end
of the Viking Age, the Norsemen started to give up on their gods and
traditions and embrace Christianity. There are many dramatized stories
speaking of forced conversions and even of saints or angels that aided
Christian clerics in their mission to bring God to the Viking pagans. But in
reality, Christianity came to the Viking world naturally and progressively.
Vikings were very flexible with their beliefs, and they started to incorporate
Christian elements in their religion as soon as they set foot on European
soil. Sure there were a few traditionalists who clung on to their Mjolnir
pendants, but most of the Scandinavian population was open to inclusion,
though they opted to accept one element at a time rather than make a full
180 degrees conversion. Old Norse iconography mixed with Christian
symbols and customs to create hybrid religions. It was perfectly acceptable
for baptized Norsemen to still invoke Thor’s protection in their times of
need.
The conversion to Christianity of the Norse population was slow, and it
started way before Christian missionaries officiated it. The challenge clerics
had was not to teach Norsemen the values and practices of Christianity, but
rather to convince them to embrace only these Christian elements, and give
up on all remnants of their pagan beliefs. The conversion to Christianity
didn’t happen on its own as a singular event. It came together with the
“Europeanization” of Vikings, which led to the Norsemen giving up on
traditional values and norms. They made the switch from chieftains to
kings, they adopted the Latin alphabet, and little by little the Viking world
adhered to European standards.

But what triggered the conversion to Christianity, in the first place? Well,
although we can’t know for sure, the most plausible reason is the selfish
character of the Vikings. Remember, they worshipped their gods in hopes of
garnering protection, blessings, and prosperity. But there were things the
Norse gods could not provide. Norse deities were ambivalent and not prone
to forgive. They did not offer the salvation of one’s soul, and they were not
always in the “mood” to listen to mere mortals. The Christian God,
however, was kind, ever-loving, and forgiving. For the Vikings, all that
mattered was who could offer more, thus Christianity was an easy pick. The
benefits that it bought were deemed enough to merit worship and loyalty.
Viking kings and rulers were usually first to convert because it helped them
make powerful alliances. And if the king went first, his people would
usually follow. As time went by, Christianity slowly became the default,
and the once pagan Vikings became devout followers of God.


Chapter 7: Mythological Creatures
Norse mythology presents a rich and complex world of spiritual and
supernatural beings. These beings lived among the gods or humans and
carried out their specific roles. The dwarves, for example, are often called
upon by the gods for their unmatched talents of crafting incredible weapons
and tools. Dragons are fearful beasts that have a special love for material
things, especially gold. Such an example is Fafnir, the great dragon that was
slain by the Nordic hero Sigurd, to avenge his father’s death and obtain the
dragon’s treasure. Only the most honorable and brave could kill these
magnificent and malevolent beasts. And the Valkyries are Odin’s familiars
and the ones who choose who goes to Valhalla. But there is not much to say
of these creatures, at least nothing new or exciting. So, here in this chapter,
I’ll cover some more elusive sprites of the Norse mythology, some of which
will give us a better understanding of the Viking civilization and the values
and beliefs they held dear.
Elves
Elves, or alfar as they were called by the old Norsemen, were divine beings
that were above the human race. They were often described as being tall
genderless or androgynous-looking beings, with a pale complexion and
light-colored hair. Elves were renowned for their beauty and their ability to
use magic, and some stories go as far as to call them gods or demi-gods due
to their powers and affiliation with the Norse deities.

As a side note here, we must understand that the way in which the
Norsemen classified their mythological creatures was kind of confusing and
it left a lot of room for interpretation. For example, there are no clear
distinctions between the gods, elves, dwarves, and other beings, and the
boundaries between the classifications are blurred further due to the
apparently free-handed use of terminology. Some sources describe the Vanir
gods as being elves, with Freyir being their lord and ruler, while other texts
consider them separate beings. Another result of this confusing
classification comes to play when describing the nature of the elves. A
long-held belief was that elves were beings of light and goodness, who
could heal or aid humans (in exchange for offerings or sacrifices). But in
reality, it seems like elves were rather ambivalent, and it wasn’t uncommon
for them to use their magic to cause illness and misfortune to humankind.
Although this ambivalence was common in Norse belief, Christianity
couldn’t wrap its head around the concept. So, in an effort to categorize the
elven race, 13th-century historians divided them into classes of dark and
light elves, drawing inspiration from Christian concepts of angels and
demons. Ijosalfar were the elves of light, who personified the good
attributes of the human race, while the dokkalfar, the dark elves, became
demonic beings who brought upon temptation and destruction. The
distinction went as far as to ascribe a separate realm for each type of elves,
with the light elves living in Alfheimr and the dark elves in Svartalfaheimr.
It’s worth mentioning that these post-Viking Era historians misunderstood
many of the Old Norse writings. Such an example of misinterpretation
could be the use of the term dokkalfar to refer to the dark-elves. The
Vikings used dokkalfar when they spoke of the dwarves. Additionally, the
realm of the dwarves was called Svartalfar, which is conspicuously similar
to Svartalfaheimr, the realm attributed to the evil elves. Thus, the dark-elves

of the 13th-century writings may be nothing more than the old Norse
dwarves.
In many senses, the early Vikings worshipped elves as they did their deities,
in the hopes of winning their blessings. Humans who accomplished great
deeds in their lives were believed to become elves after their demise, an
element that ties in the worship of elves with that of the ancestors. Perhaps
because the elves were somewhat closer to the human realm, so much so
that cross-breeding was an option, the worship of elves had ultimately
outlived that of the gods, disappearing entirely only when the conversion to
Christianity of the Viking world was completed.
Huldra
The Scandinavian space has always had plentiful forested areas, and it
comes as no surprise that the dark and mysterious-looking woods sparked
the imagination of the old Norsemen. From witches to trolls and
shapeshifting monsters, there was no end to what could hide among the
trees of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark. Tales of forest spirits are very
common in areas with lush greenery, but no spirits are as interesting and
treacherous as the Nordic Huldra or Skogstra. These are female spirits who
ruled over the vast forest of the Viking world, sowing fear and perhaps
curiosity, in men’s hearts.
In the early days, forests were seen somewhat as separate realms, that hid
both perils and wonders, violence and beauty. It was a place for outcasts
and forces of evil, where dangers awaited at every step. And they were not
wrong. Without maps or modern navigation equipment, a wrong turn or a
slight shift in the weather could lead to someone getting lost, increasing
their chances of bumping into dangerous forest beasts such as bears and

wolves. Many people who ventured into the forest of the old Norsemen
never made it out alive, which is most likely why tales of forest sprites were
so popular. They served as explanations of why loved ones failed to return,
but also as a warning for children and adventurous youngsters. At the time,
blaming natural events such as disappearances on fantastic creatures was
more appealing than finding a reasonable and logical explanation. Most
mythological creatures are born as a result of this tendency towards
fantasizing the “unexplainable.”
Our Huldra or Skogsra was a forest spirit who usually took on the form of a
young, beautiful maiden with a fox or cow’s tail. Because the Scandinavian
world was rather big, the creature has many names, and there is a lot of
variation when it comes to her descriptions and the stories revolving around
her. She would lure young men, make love to them, and then eat them alive,
much like the popular tales of the sirens and mermaids who caused
shipwrecks and feasted on human flesh. This anthropomorphic being is
often portrayed as a stereotypically seductive creature that roams the woods
naked and can barely carry her large breasts. Other portrayals of the Huldra
describe her as being an animal-human hybrid, that looks beautiful from the
front but it has a backside that resembles a rotten tree-trunk. Whatever the
version, Huldra is undeniably an anthropomorphic representation of nature
itself, that is about alluring and dangerous.
Some tales, however, speak of female forest spirits that gave birth to half-
monster half-human babies, alluding to forbidden relationships between
young men and the Huldras. Indeed, not all forest spirit-human interactions
led to death and misfortune. Men who willingly became a forest spirit’s
lover would receive the Huldra’s blessings and aid in times of need. A
Huldra could ensure that your arrow always reached its mark or that you

would survive perilous situations. These relationships would often lead to
the human counterparts being looked down upon or even punished by the
church. Of course, there were also situations in which the humans would
refuse such an intimate relationship, and they could allegedly safely do so
by burning the private parts of the spirit. Because most stories of the Huldra
and the Skogsra are sexual in nature, they likely have, in part, originated
from erotic fantasies of men who spent a lot of time in the woods.
Draugr
Draugr are the undead of the Norse mythology, who would rise from their
graves to kill and terrorize the living. These creatures would maintain the
physical abilities that they had during their lives, with an added element of
magical powers such as the ability to increase their size, superhuman
strength, and knowledge of the past and future. Draugr were violent and
very hostile towards the living, which is why the Norse people feared them
and took many precautions to prevent their dead from coming back to life.
One such method was the creation of a special “corpse-door” through which
the corpse of the recently deceased was carried to their burial place. You
see, the Norsemen believed that the undead could only enter a house by
using the door through which their body had last left the house. So they
dismantled a part of the walls to use as a “corpse-door,” that would quickly
be repaired after the funeral was completed. Another way of keeping the
dead at bay was to build walls around gravesites, although if the Draugr had
the power to grow as tall as they wanted, I don’t think that method was too
successful. A more strategic approach was to bury the dead with blunt
weapons or broken weapons, so the dead couldn’t use them or to place a
large boulder over a person’s grave.

But what caused the dead to come back to life? Norse people, just like other
civilizations of the past, had a very deep connection with the afterlife. The
fate of the dead was often more important or real for Vikings than their life
in the world of the living. Dying an honorable death and being chosen to go
by Odin’s side was pretty much the goal of a Viking’s life. However, death
is a complicated concept, and the Norsemen didn’t see the bodies of their
deceased as being “dead.” Reanimation was a real fear, especially because it
could happen to anyone. Sure, things like practicing magic, being an
outlaw, or being buried outside a graveyard court would make it more likely
for the dead to come back to life, but so was dying of an accident. That
could happen to anyone, especially in an age and geographic region as
dangerous as the Viking one.
Draugr were dangerous creatures that killed any humans they laid eyes
upon. But there are also stories and accounts of weird acts done by the
undead and specific Draugr that featured in Norse tales. Starting with the
first, a quirky thing that the Draugr were said to indulge in was “riding
roofs.” That means that they would climb on people’s roofs at night and
stomp on them, to disturb the sleep of the inhabitants. Having a Draugr
“riding your roof” was surely preferable to being killed by one, but it was
still a way of terrorizing the living. Famous Draugr include Glamr, an
extremely aggressive sprite that was killed in a wrestling match by the
Norse hero Grettir, and Thorgunna, a Draugr lady who came back to life
because the men carrying her to her grave did not treat her body with
respect. You’d think that Thorgunna’s body was reanimated to get its
revenge but you’d be mistaken. In exchange, she came back to cook for
them, naked. The men, pleased with Thorgunna’s cooking and perhaps
impressed with her attire (or lack of) buried her a second time, in a
churchyard.

Some Draugr were said to guard the treasure they possessed while they
were living, kind of like the nefarious Fafnir who was obsessed with his
gold. Apparently, the only correct way of killing a Draugr was by burning
it, which is likely part of the reason why ship burials were preferred
especially for kings and people of high status - they ensured the dead won’t
come back while the soul was making its way to Valhalla.
Fossegrim
Fossegrim is a troll or a water spirit that plays the fiddle from beneath
waterfalls. This sprite shares many attributes with the Huldra such as its
beauty, its alluring nature (the Fossegrim is said to play enchanting music),
its apparent nudity, and its ambivalence towards humans. But there is one
big difference that sets them apart - the Fossegrim is male. The music of the
Fossegrim is said to be so enchanting that even the lame, sick, and old
would dance to its tunes. Just as with the Huldra, the Fossegrim is a
seductive spirit that can lead humans to their doom. He is more prominent
in Norwegian folklore, although legends of the Fossegrim can also be found
in Sweden and Denmark.
Some stories speak of women and children who were lured to bodies of
water where they ultimately drowned. Again these stories are more likely
just ways to rationalize drownings and warn the young ones about the
dangers of lakes and rivers. Let’s not forget that water is a force of nature,
that brings both prosperity through fishing and agriculture but also death for
those foolish enough to challenge the depths and currents. The more
intimidating and awe-inducing an element was at the time, the more
supernatural beings were attributed to it. Our Fossegrim just happens to be

one of many such as water serpents and Krakens - the giant octopuses or
squids that pulled ships downwards to their demise.
Other stories of the Fossegrim are more lighthearted. It is said that the sprite
would teach you how to play the fiddle if you offered him a proper
sacrifice. The requirements for the offering were pretty intense. For once,
the sacrifice had to be a plump white male goat, offered in secrecy on
Thursday evening. The goat had to be thrown into a waterfall, while the
animal’s head was turned away from the wall of water. Only waterfalls that
flowed northwards were considered acceptable. Another type of sacrifice
that suited the refined tastes of the Fossegrim was smoked mutton, but this
too had a catch - it had to be stolen from a neighbor, on four subsequent
Thursdays. If one would successfully make an offering to the water sprite,
the Fossegrim would take the person’s hand and play the fiddle until their
fingers bled. After this harsh training, the person would gain the musical
abilities of the spirit. If, however, the goat was too lean or the mutton
insufficient in any way, the Fossegrim would only show you how to tune
your fiddle.
Because the fiddle was so tightly linked to the legends of the Fossegrim, the
instrument was banned from being used in churches, and those who played
it were discriminated against in religious communities. This hatred resulted
in many fiddles being burnt or destroyed, in an attempt to cast away the
esoteric forces.
Kraken
Since I’ve mentioned the humongous beast, it seems fair to go into a little
more detail about this Norse creature that was based on a very real fear of
the sea. The Kraken is a species of sea monsters said to swell in the waters

of Greenland and Norway. Many depictions of them describe the Kraken as
being so huge that they could easily pass for islands, that, if you were
foolish enough to dock for a quick exploration, would sink as soon as you
set foot on “land” turning you quite literally into “fish food.” This
description ties the Kraken to another well-known sea creature, the island
whale - a sea beast that was frequently mistaken for land and which took
sailors to the depths as soon as they lit a fire on its back. In one way, we can
think of the Kraken as the result of humanity’s greatest sea-related fears.
First, we have the unimaginable size, then the apparently neverending
number of limbs and its violent nature. And of course, its preference for
dragging ships to the bottom of the sea - a gruesome way to die. We can’t
really fault the sailors for believing in such stories, especially when they
were presented with the perils of the sea on a daily basis.
For people in Medieval times, if you rowed too many miles into the
Norwegian Sea, you were merely a few seconds away from becoming the
victim of the greatest animal creation that ever existed. The first and
foremost sign that you were close to encountering a Kraken was when you
started to reel in an unusually large amount of fish. The sailors believed that
the fish fled for the surface in an effort to escape the sea-monster, thus
resulting in great luck for the fishermen. But escaping the Kraken was not
impossible. If the rowers could flee the area in which their catch was
suspiciously good fast enough, they could escape with their lives and see
from a distance the enormous creature coming to the surface. The Kraken
though is not a stupid sea-monster. It was known to form whirlpools with its
giant tentacles, to draw in ships, and use small fish as bait for unsuspecting
sailors. Nonetheless, many stories make note of the Kraken’s appetite for
fish and how, if left alone, it wouldn’t go out of its way to harm humans.
These stories tell the tales of how the creatures used its excrement (which is

described in way too much detail as being thick and making the waters
appear muddy) to lure fish directly over their mouth for a quick and
efficient fish-snack.
I wanted to finish off the Mythological Creatures chapter with the Kraken
for two reasons. One would be that it’s an extremely popular mythological
being that most of us have heard of, at least in passing, and second, it is one
of the few fantastic beasts that is based on a real-life animal - the giant
squid. These creatures are just as elusive as the mythical Kraken but they
are without a doubt real, roaming the waters of the world in search of food
and having epic underwater battles with their life-sworn enemies (and
natural predators) the sperm whales. With this in mind, it’s not hard to
understand why so many European legends speak of the Kraken and its
formidable nature.


Chapter 8: Ragnarok
In Norse mythology, Ragnarok is the end of the world, kind of like the
Christian Apocalypse. It is a great cataclysm that will trigger the destruction
of the universe and all its beings, including the gods. For the Vikings,
Ragnarok, which roughly translates to “the Fate of the gods” was a
prophecy that foretold the doom of all life, and it had a big influence on
how the old Norsemen perceived the world around them. Although no one
knows when the prophecy will happen, the story itself is very complex and
detailed, including signs that foretell the beginning of the end, clear
descriptions of the great battle between the gods and the giants, the outcome
of the divine war, and what is to come after the apocalypse. Let’s go
through all of these aspects first and then we’ll take the time to understand
the impact that Ragnarok had on the Norse civilization.
The Signs of Ragnarok
The first sign included in the tellings of Ragnarok is one that has already
happened in the mythological universe of the Norse people, and that is the
murder of Baldur. We’ve covered the circumstances of his death and the
deities’ attempt to bring him back - for their sake and that of the universe
since Baldur’s resurrection would have meant the delay of Ragnarok. Then,
at some point, the Norns, the three creatures that spin the fate of the cosmos
(called Urd, Verdandi, and Skuld) will decree the coming of the
Fimbulwinter (the Great Winter), a long a bitter winter unlikely any other
than the world has seen before. The cold will be so great that the warmth of

the sun could no longer reach the Earth, allowing the snow to fall without
interruption and the temperatures to drop to unimaginable lows.
This great winter will be as long as three normal winters, with the exception
that there will be no summer in between. Mankind will be at the brink of
extinction, their desperation to survive chipping away at their morality. At
its peak, the frenzy of survival will take control of them all, and the age of
swords and axes will begin. No laws of nature or society will be able to stop
the chaos of the human world. Fathers will slay their sons, sons will kill
their fathers, and brother will turn against brother in hopes of surviving the
end times. This situation will only worsen when the two wolves, Skoll and
Hati, will finally catch and devour the moon and the sun bringing darkness
into the world. The stars too will vanish, leaving behind a black void.
Yggdrasill, the great world tree, will tremble, causing the mountains and the
trees to fall to the ground.
Then in Jotunheim, the realm of the giants, Fjalar (The All-knower) a red
rooster, will warn the frost giants that Ragnarok has come. A second red
rooster will announce to Hel and all the dead from Niflheim that the time of
the final war is upon the world. And finally, in Asgard, a third red rooster
called Gullinkambi, will warn the deities that the giants are coming. The
number three, which is used to symbolize the sacred is heavily present in
these tellings of the signs of Ragnarok. There are three Norns, Fimbulwinter
lasts three winters, and we have three rosters that warn the gods, giants, and
dead at the beginning of Ragnarok.
The Great Battle
As Ragnarock starts, all the beasts will run free and join the army of the
giants. Fenrir’s chain will snap, Loki will escape from his cave of torment,

and Jumurgandr, the great serpent, will rise from the depths of the sea,
spilling the waters over Midgard. The convulsions created by the coming of
Ragnarok will free the ship Naglfar, which is made from the toenails and
fingernails of all the dead in Niflehmein. Aboard this ship will be Hel and
her dead, the giants, and all the forces of destruction and the captain of
Naglfar will be none other than Loki, the god of mischief. With the world
now engulfed by waters, the ship will easily make its way to the realm
Vigrid, where the last battle will take place. As the great serpent will poison
the Earth and the waters with his great venom, Fenrir will roam the Earth,
with his jaws wide-open, devouring everything in his path.
While this whole procession will make its way to Vigrid, the sky will open
and the fire-giants of Muspelheim will be led by Surtr the destroyer. This
procession will march across the Bifrost, breaking the rainbow bridge. Then
Heimdall will blow the Gjallarhorn, to announce the beginning of the end.
The horn will be heard by Odin’s honorable warriors, the einherjar, and
Freya’s folkvangr, and they will hurry to march into battle alongside their
veneered deities. The fallen Aesir gods, Baldur and Hodr, will come back
from the realm of the dead, to join the battle and aid their kin. Odin will
consult Mimir’s head, for one last time, before deciding to go to battle and
fulfill their destiny. They will swiftly arm themselves and then they will
follow the All-father, who will lead them to Vigrid, on the back of his trusty
steed Sleipnir. With his spear, Gungnir in his hand, Odin will dive into the
battle that he knows he is destined to lose.
The battle of Vigrid will happen as it was foretold. Odin and his warriors
will fight valiantly but they will be eaten by the great wolf Fenrir. Vidar, a
son of Odin, will avenge his father by holding open the wolf’s mouth with
one leg in which he’ll have a special shoe made only from the leather that

has been discarded by shoemakers, and sliding his sword in the beast’s
throat, killing him in an instant. Garm, the wolf of the underworld, and Tyr
will kill each other. Loki will finally get his ultimate punishment by dying
at Heimdall’s hands, although the guardian deity will also perish in the
process. Freyr will be killed by Sutr because he will no longer possess his
sword. Thor will finally face his lifelong foe, Jumurgandr, and he will kill
the beast with a blow of his precious Mjollin. But the snake’s venom will
end up putting an end to the mightiest of the Norse gods, and Thor will lie
dead on the battleground of Vigrid after managing to take nine last steps.
The number nine here shows Thor’s connection to pagan beliefs and
signifies the turning point of the battle.
In the end, most of the gods and giants will die, and the dragon Nidhug will
feast on the corpses. Other dragons will come and their fire will destroy the
world, and the waters will engulf what will be left of it. Thus, a new void
will be created, and everything will be as if the universe from before had
never existed.
A New World
Many believe that the tale of Ragnarok ends there, but the prophecy goes on
to speak of a new beginning. A green and beautiful world will rise from the
waters. The gods that will survive Ragnarok, which are Baldur, Hodr, Vidar,
Vali, Modi, and Magni, will reinstate the realm of the deities, Ivadoll. Here
they will build great houses with golden roofs and they will be ruled by a
great unnamed leader. A man and a woman, Lifthrasir and Lif, who were
lucky enough to hide in the Wood of Hoddmimir (or in the sacred tree
Yggdrasil in some versions) will survive Ragnarok, and they will
repopulate the realm of men. A new sun will adorn the skies, and new

places will be established such as Okolnir (Never cold) and Namstrod (a
shore of corpses). There will also be a new underworld, for murderers and
thieves, where the great Nidhug will satiate his hunger for dead meat.
Not much else is known about this new era that will come after Ragnarok.
The Vikings and Ragnarok
The first problem that arises when we look at what Ragnarok meant for the
Norse people is the fact that we have two versions of the story. In one, the
world ends and all that remains is a void, and in the other one, the
demolition of one world leads to the birth of a new one. The generally
accepted explanation is that the second version, that in which rebirth
follows destruction, is newer and it shows the shift in Norse belief brought
by the introduction of Christianity in the Viking world. We can look at this
as a representation of the death of the old gods and the birth of a new era,
presided over by a mighty ruler, who could or could not be the Christian
God.
But let’s take a step back and look at the other version, which is more
authentic to the Viking way of thinking. In one way, their belief in
Ragnarok brought a somewhat tragic meaning to their lives. After all, who
wouldn’t feel like their life was meaningless if they knew that one day the
universe itself will end and nothing and no-one can change or survive that?
It is as if you grow up knowing that you are destined to die and disappear
forever. However, in another way, the tale of Ragnarok taught Vikings how
to act and what was expected of them. It taught them the importance of
having a noble attitude and facing your fate with courage and honor. After
all, if the gods can courageously march towards their doom and fight
valiantly despite knowing that no matter what, they will fail, then so could

humans. Thus, Vikings embraced the inevitability of death and focused on
accomplishing great deeds and creating a name for themselves - one that
would be passed down for all the generations to come.
And their reputation would live on until the arrival of Ragnarok when the
world would end.

Conclusion
This marks the end of our Norse journey. We've seen how the Vikings
transitioned from a peaceful, agriculture-focused society into a military
force to be reckoned with, that made all the European world tremble in fear.
But these people were far from our preconceived idea of barbarians, pagans,
and mindless brutes. They were an advanced society with a rich culture and
deep belief in the sacred and the divine. The Vikings had legal assemblies
where they proposed and voted laws for settlements to live by. They were
driven, courageous people who were ready to risk their lives for a chance at
improving their social and financial situation, and garnering a good
reputation. They valued their social bonds deeply and they honored their
kin, and even if their ideas of gender roles were still private, the Norse
women enjoyed liberties and luxuries that few of their European sisters
could dare to dream of in Medieval times.
One of the most important aspects of a Norseman's life was worshiping and
honoring their deities, in hopes of winning them over and receiving their
blessings. The kings, rulers, and noblemen invoked Odin for guidance and

inspiration. The warriors asked for Thor's protection in battle. The farmers
celebrated Freya, Freyr, and the mighty Thor to ensure their harvest would
be plentiful and that their family will prosper. Although most Norse rituals
and traditions are lost to time, we can't deny the deep connection these
people felt with their gods. For them, deities were their role models, their
guides, their protectors, and the answers to all their questions about life and
its purpose.
The Norse also believed in mythological creatures that roamed the forests,
waters, gravesites, and the other unseen realms of gods, elves, and giants.
Most of these creatures, just as the Norse gods, were ambivalent in nature,
able to bring both fortunes and disasters. Their belief in the mythical was so
deep that people would take precautions against the living dead and they
would banish any individual that seemed to be connected to the esoteric.
This negative attitude towards the unexplained was only worsened when the
Norse people renounced their faith in favor of Christianity. But that's not the
only aspect of the Vikings' life that was changed by the Europeanization of
the Scandinavian space.
The shift to Christianity also marks the end of Norse tradition and politics.
War chiefs were replaced by kings, the loyal and honorable clans became
armies, the trade-cities flourished and the Norse turned their back to their
gods. These changes led to military and economic success, but it cost the
Vikings their identity. Their pragmatic way of regarding their fate had
softened, and even Ragnarok, the grim prophecy of the end of the universe,
had changed to better fit this new mentality. It became a tale of hope and
new beginnings, a fitting story for the new-generation Vikings, who
renounced their old ways as soon as those no longer worked in their favor.

So who were the Vikings? How should we describe this flexible civilization
that swept the European world like a storm? They were brave, strong,
educated, driven, perhaps greedy, thirsty for adventure, and open-minded.
They were warriors, discoverers, poets, story-tellers, and colonists. They
took all the opportunities that life threw at them and they never looked
back, no matter where their destinies brought them.
I hope you enjoyed our ride through the history, life, and mythological
world of the old Norse people. Good luck with your mythological travels
and don't forget to keep your eyes open for new discoveries! There is so
much that we don't know about these forgotten civilizations and every new
archeological finding brings us one step closer to understanding them and
finding out who they really were.

References
Ager, S. (2017). Old Norse language, alphabet and pronunciation.
Omniglot.Com. https://omniglot.com/writing/oldnorse.htm
Apel, T. (2019a). Freya. Mythopedia. https://mythopedia.com/norse-
mythology/gods/freya/
Apel, T. (2019b). Freyr. Mythopedia. https://mythopedia.com/norse-
mythology/gods/freyr/
Ashliman, D. L. (2010, February 17). The Norse Creation Myth. Pitt.Edu.
https://www.pitt.edu/~dash/creation.html
Black, J. (2020, June 25). The story of Ragnarok and the Apocalypse.
Ancient-Origins.Net; Ancient Origins. https://www.ancient-
origins.net/myths-legends/story-ragnarok-and-apocalypse-001352
Encyclopedia Mythica. (2004, October 9). Helgi Hundingsbane |
Encyclopedia Mythica. Pantheon.Org.
https://pantheon.org/articles/h/hundingsbane.html
Encyclopedia Mythica. (2005, October 11). Helgi Hjörvarðsson |
Encyclopedia Mythica. Pantheon.Org.
https://pantheon.org/articles/h/hjorvardsson.html
Foster, J. (2020, August 31). Fossegrim and His Fiddle: The Troll at the
Heart of Norwegian Music — The American Skald. Jameson Foster.
https://www.theamericanskald.com/blog/fossegrim
Groeneveld, E. (2017, November 2). Norse Mythology. Ancient History
Encyclopedia; Ancient History Encyclopedia.
https://www.ancient.eu/Norse_Mythology/

Harasta, J., & Charles River Editors. (2015a). Decline of the Norse Faith -
Odin: The Origins, History and Evolution of the Norse God. Erenow.Net.
https://erenow.net/ancient/odin-origins-history-evolution-norse-god/6.php
Harasta, J., & Charles River Editors. (2015b). Legends About Odin - Odin:
The Origins, History and Evolution of the Norse God. Erenow.Net.
https://erenow.net/ancient/odin-origins-history-evolution-norse-god/3.php
Harasta, J., & Charles River Editors. (2015c). Norse Mysticism and Odin -
Odin: The Origins, History and Evolution of the Norse God. Erenow.Net.
https://erenow.net/ancient/odin-origins-history-evolution-norse-god/5.php
Harasta, J., & Charles River Editors. (2015d). Worship of Odin - Odin: The
Origins, History and Evolution of the Norse God. Erenow.Net.
https://erenow.net/ancient/odin-origins-history-evolution-norse-god/4.php
Joe, J. (1999). Odin Hanging From Yggdrasil (Search For Wisdom)
Explained. Timeless Myths.
https://www.timelessmyths.com/norse/wisdom.html#:~:text=Odin%20had
%20several%20means%20of
Kuusela, T. (2020, July 16). Skogsrå and Huldra: The femme fatale of the
Scandinavian forests. #FolkloreThursday.
https://folklorethursday.com/folktales/skogsra-and-huldra-the-femme-
fatale-of-the-scandinavian-forests/
Lloyd, E. (2020, May 24). Draugr - Vikings Feared This Ugly Living Dead
With Prophetic Visions. Ancient Pages.
https://www.ancientpages.com/2020/05/24/draugr-vikings-feared-living-
dead-with-prophetic-visions/
McCoy, D. (2012a). Baldur. Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/gods-and-creatures/the-aesir-gods-and-
goddesses/baldur/
McCoy, D. (2012b). Elves. Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/gods-and-creatures/elves/
McCoy, D. (2012c). Freya. Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/gods-and-creatures/the-vanir-gods-and-

goddesses/freya/
McCoy, D. (2012d). Freyr. Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/gods-and-creatures/the-vanir-gods-and-
goddesses/freyr/
McCoy, D. (2012e). Frigg. Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/gods-and-creatures/the-aesir-gods-and-
goddesses/frigg/
McCoy, D. (2012f). Heimdall. Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/gods-and-creatures/the-aesir-gods-and-
goddesses/heimdall/
McCoy, D. (2012g). Hel (Goddess). Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/gods-and-creatures/giants/hel/
McCoy, D. (2012h). Hoenir. Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/hoenir/
McCoy, D. (2012i). Loki. Norse Mythology for Smart People. https://norse-
mythology.org/gods-and-creatures/the-aesir-gods-and-goddesses/loki/
McCoy, D. (2012j). Mimir. Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/gods-and-creatures/others/mimir/
McCoy, D. (2012k). Njord. Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/gods-and-creatures/the-vanir-gods-and-
goddesses/njord/
McCoy, D. (2012l). Odin. Norse Mythology for Smart People. https://norse-
mythology.org/gods-and-creatures/the-aesir-gods-and-goddesses/odin/
McCoy, D. (2012m). Odin’s Discovery of the Runes. Norse Mythology for
Smart People. https://norse-mythology.org/tales/odins-discovery-of-the-
runes/
McCoy, D. (2012n). Ragnarok. Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/tales/ragnarok/

McCoy, D. (2012o). The Aesir Gods and Goddesses. Norse Mythology for
Smart People. https://norse-mythology.org/gods-and-creatures/the-aesir-
gods-and-goddesses/
McCoy, D. (2012p). The Binding of Fenrir. Norse Mythology for Smart
People. https://norse-mythology.org/tales/the-binding-of-fenrir/
McCoy, D. (2012q). The Creation of the Cosmos. Norse Mythology for
Smart People. https://norse-mythology.org/tales/norse-creation-myth/
McCoy, D. (2012r). The Creation of Thor’s Hammer. Norse Mythology for
Smart People. https://norse-mythology.org/tales/loki-and-the-
dwarves/#:~:text=Loki%20immediately%20stung%20Brokkr
McCoy, D. (2012s). The Death of Baldur. Norse Mythology for Smart
People. https://norse-mythology.org/tales/the-death-of-baldur/
McCoy, D. (2012t). The Fortification of Asgard. Norse Mythology for
Smart People. https://norse-mythology.org/tales/the-fortification-of-asgard/
McCoy, D. (2012u). The Kidnapping of Idun. Norse Mythology for Smart
People. https://norse-mythology.org/tales/the-kidnapping-of-idun/
McCoy, D. (2012v). The Marriage of Njord and Skadi. Norse Mythology
for Smart People. https://norse-mythology.org/tales/the-marriage-of-njord-
and-skadi/
McCoy, D. (2012w). The Mead of Poetry. Norse Mythology for Smart
People. https://norse-mythology.org/tales/the-mead-of-poetry/
McCoy, D. (2012x). The Vanir Gods and Goddesses. Norse Mythology for
Smart People. https://norse-mythology.org/gods-and-creatures/the-vanir-
gods-and-goddesses/
McCoy, D. (2012y). Thor. Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/gods-and-creatures/the-aesir-gods-and-
goddesses/thor/
McCoy, D. (2012z). Thor the Transvestite. Norse Mythology for Smart
People. https://norse-mythology.org/tales/thor-the-transvestite/

McCoy, D. (2012aa). Tyr. Norse Mythology for Smart People. https://norse-
mythology.org/gods-and-creatures/the-aesir-gods-and-goddesses/tyr/
McCoy, D. (2012ab). Ullr. Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/ullr/
McCoy, D. (2012ac). Vanaheim. Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/cosmology/the-nine-worlds/vanaheim/
McCoy, D. (2012ad). Vili and Ve. Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/vili-ve/
McCoy, D. (2012ae). Who Were the Historical Vikings? Norse Mythology
for Smart People. https://norse-mythology.org/who-were-the-historical-
vikings/
McCoy, D. (2012af). Why Odin is One-Eyed. Norse Mythology for Smart
People. https://norse-mythology.org/tales/why-odin-is-one-eyed/
McCoy, D. (2013a). Shamanism. Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/concepts/shamanism/
McCoy, D. (2013b). The Norns. Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/gods-and-creatures/others/the-norns/
McCoy, D. (2013c). The Old Norse Language and How to Learn It. Norse
Mythology for Smart People. https://norse-mythology.org/learn-old-norse/
McCoy, D. (2014a). Daily Life in the Viking Age. Norse Mythology for
Smart People. https://norse-mythology.org/daily-life-viking-age/
McCoy, D. (2014b). Odr (god). Norse Mythology for Smart People.
https://norse-mythology.org/odr-god/
McCoy, D. (2014c). Viking Clothing and Jewelry. Norse Mythology for
Smart People. https://norse-mythology.org/viking-clothing-jewelry/
McCoy, D. (2014d). Viking Gender Roles. Norse Mythology for Smart
People. https://norse-mythology.org/viking-gender-roles/

McCoy, D. (2014e). Viking Political Institutions. Norse Mythology for
Smart People. https://norse-mythology.org/viking-political-institutions/
McCoy, D. (2017a). The Viking Social Structure. Norse Mythology for
Smart People. https://norse-mythology.org/viking-social-structure/
McCoy, D. (2017b). Viking Trade and Commerce. Norse Mythology for
Smart People. https://norse-mythology.org/viking-trade-commerce/
McCoy, D. (2018a). The Vikings’ Selfish Individualism. Norse Mythology
for Smart People. https://norse-mythology.org/the-vikings-selfish-
individualism/
McCoy, D. (2018b). Viking Food and Drink. Norse Mythology for Smart
People. https://norse-mythology.org/viking-food-drink/
McCoy, D. (2018c). Viking Weapons and Armor (Swords, Axes, Spears,
Etc.). Norse Mythology for Smart People. https://norse-
mythology.org/viking-weapons-and-armor-swords-axes-spears-etc/
McCoy, D. (2019). The Vikings’ Conversion to Christianity. Norse
Mythology for Smart People. https://norse-mythology.org/the-vikings-
conversion-to-christianity/
McKay, A. (2018, July 19). Creatures in Norse Mythology. Life in Norway.
https://www.lifeinnorway.net/creatures-in-norse-mythology/
Mythology Wikia. (2020a, September 25). Fossegrim. Mythology Wiki.
https://mythology.wikia.org/wiki/Fossegrim
Mythology Wikia. (2020b, October 26). Sigurðr. Mythology Wiki.
https://mythology.wikia.org/wiki/Sigur%C3%B0r
Parker, P. (2018, November 26). A brief history of the Vikings. History
Extra; History Extra. https://www.historyextra.com/period/viking/vikings-
history-facts/
Ramirez, J. (2015, August). “Vikings didn’t wear horned helmets,” plus 7
more Viking myths busted. HistoryExtra.

https://www.historyextra.com/period/viking/historical-fact-check-vikings-
myths-busted-did-wear-horned-helmets-violent-barbarians/
Short, W. R. (2019). Hurstwic Norse Mythology: The Story of Creation.
Hurstwic.Org.
http://www.hurstwic.org/history/articles/mythology/myths/text/creation.htm
Simon, M. (2014, September 10). Fantastically Wrong: The Legend of the
Kraken, a Monster That Hunts With Its Own Poop. Wired.
https://www.wired.com/2014/09/fantastically-wrong-legend-of-the-kraken/
Skjalden. (2011a, June 1). Creation of the World in Norse Mythology.
Nordic Culture. https://skjalden.com/creation-of-the-world-in-norse-
mythology/
Skjalden. (2011b, June 1). Ragnarok - The end of the World in Norse
Mythology. Norse Mythology. https://norse-mythology.net/ragnarok-in-
norse-mythology/
Skjalden. (2018, June 15). Important and Secret Numbers in the Icelandic
Sagas & Norse mythology. Nordic Culture. https://skjalden.com/important-
numbers-norse-mythology/#:~:text=Pagan%20%E2%80%93%20Magic
The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica. (1998, July 20). Old Norse
language. Encyclopedia Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/topic/Old-
Norse-language
The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica. (2009, June 4). Fafnir | Norse
mythology. Encyclopedia Britannica.
https://www.britannica.com/topic/Fafnir
The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica. (2019, September 19). Siegfried |
Germanic literary hero. Encyclopedia Britannica.
https://www.britannica.com/topic/Siegfried
The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica. (2020). Ragnarök | Scandinavian
mythology. In Encyclopædia Britannica.
https://www.britannica.com/event/Ragnarok

The Editors of Encyclopedia Britannica. (2018). Viking | History,
Exploration, Facts, & Maps. In Encyclopædia Britannica.
https://www.britannica.com/topic/Viking-people
V.K.N.G. (2019, January 21). 15 Scariest Norse Mythology Creatures
[Monster List]. Norse and Viking Mythology [Best Blog] - Vkngjewelry.
https://blog.vkngjewelry.com/creatures-of-norse-mythology/
Williams, G. (2016). Ivar the Boneless, Ragnvald of Ed and 6 more Vikings
you should know about. HistoryExtra.
https://www.historyextra.com/period/viking/8-vikings-you-should-know-
about/
Winters, R. (2017, June 30). The Diverse Nature of Elves in Norse Myth:
Beings of Light or Darkness? Ancient-Origins.Net; Ancient Origins.
https://www.ancient-origins.net/myths-legends-europe/diverse-nature-elves-
norse-myth-beings-light-or-darkness-008327
Zarka, E. (2019). Draugr: The Undead Nordic Zombie | Monstrum
[YouTube Video]. On YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VNM1Y8i8tuI&ab_channel=Storied
 

 
 
Runes:
A Guide To The Magic, Meanings, Spells,
Divination & Rituals Of Runes
 
 
 
 

Introduction
There is evidence that many people these days want to learn runes.
However, because it's ancient, there is no clear guide on how to go about it.
There are many misconceptions surrounding the topic of runes. Some
associate them with magic, spells, and divination. On the other hand, some
only know them as a sacred alphabet. All these are right, but depending on
the context of the user. The starting point for anyone wishing to learn and
use runes is to understand the whole topic. Runes have been there since
ancient times, and like many other things, they have evolved over time.
Did you know that similar to Hebrew letters, each runic symbol has a
meaning? Well, for your information, each symbol has, in fact, a deeper
meaning that goes beyond its function as a letter. In a nutshell, runes are
practical, effective, and useful symbols that have a wide array of uses. Just
to shed more light on this interesting topic, today, some of the most
common application of rune lore is in areas of spell casting and divination.
Also, the modern-day, Bluetooth logo is a combination of two runes. What

this means is that there is a lot to learn and understand about runes before
one can successfully apply them.
This book delves into the topic of runes to bring out what they are and what
they are not. It focuses on the history of runes, runic alphabet, spell casting
and divining, modern use, connecting with the sources of energy and future,
exercises and descriptions, and lastly, rituals to accompany the study. We
provide details and uncover what many do not know about runes so that
anyone interested can have an easy time learning the ropes of runes. We do
this knowing that the real power of runes comes from understanding their
value. More specifically, we get the real power of runes when we find the
wisdom in each runic symbol and internalize it within ourselves.
While the contents of this book may seem overwhelming at first, you will
find it easy and enjoyable learning about runes. This book is, therefore,
intended to be a guide to anyone interested in learning runes, how to use
them, and their benefits. What we know is that runes can only help you if
you understand them better and you can practice. As you read, you will gain
knowledge, and more importantly, understanding the power and usefulness
of runes. If you get things right, you might reap a lot, including unlocking
your potential to connect with sources of energy, healing, and love. As an
inspiration, some people have mastered the art and are gaining from the
hidden power of runes. You can become one of them too.
Every chapter of this book brings out interesting ideas you probably didn't
know. For instance, one of the chapters of this book explains how you can
see your future with the help of runes. It explains how you can use runes by
sending them into the Cosmo to help you consult as well as manifest a goal
about a given situation. We hope that this and other interesting things you

learn in this book will be useful. Without further ado, let's delve into the
deeper meaning of runes and their application.
 


Chapter One: Ancient Origins
The history of runes is very vital for your understanding and how you can
apply them. While there are a lot of historical facts worth knowing about
runes, this chapter provides a brief history of context only. Before you
understand what it is and how it works, it is important to know how runes
developed.
Runes have a history that dates back to about 100 BCE in Northern
European and about 1600 CE in Scandinavian countries. While most runes
came from Germanic tribes, a couple of others were stolen from Greeks and
Romans as well. Since then, runes have evolved. However, the fact is that
despite the changes that have occurred over time, they have been
consistently used for centuries.
Initially, runes were characters in several alphabets of Germanic languages
used in the first century. As Christianity spread, runes were gradually
replaced with Latin letters. However, despite the replacement, runes did not
completely disappear. Those who understood their deep meaning kept and
continued using them. They were then reviewed in the twentieth century
when many ancient spiritual practices were making a comeback. While a lot
has been said about runes over time, the complete story remains unclear.
For this reason, there is so much variation when it comes to symbols,
meaning, and their uses.
Origins

Runes stemmed from an ancient form of the alphabet that was widely used
by Nordic and Germanic tribes of Northern Europe, Britain, and
Scandinavia. While their primary use was in writing, runes were also used
those times for magical as well as divination purposes. Although their
existence came to the limelight in the 3rd century, there is a belief that they
existed long before that time.
According to Norse Mythology, the word rune derived from the German
word run whose meaning is secret or whisper. It is further believed that the
first person to gain the knowledge of runes was Odin, the king of gods. He
gained it to help him in war and give him the wisdom to lead the other gods
well. History has it that in order to gain full knowledge of runes, Odin hung
himself in the Tree of life for nine days. When the period was over, he had
acquired so much wisdom that helped him to understand that, indeed,
hidden powers existed in runes.
Overjoyed with the fact that there was so much hidden power in runes,
Odin shared the knowledge he had gained with humanity. From there, it
spread, and it has also evolved over time to what it is currently. It is,
however, unclear whether or not Odin was taught the signs, or he developed
them just to make it easier for humankind to understand.
A couple of years later, the rise of Scandinavian and Viking languages
around AD800 led to the replacement of a couple of runic signs and
alphabets. This might explain the existence of the various types of runic
alphabets and the many changes that have taken place over time. This is
evidenced by the remains of carvings that were created at different times
and are still kept for reference to date. In ancient times, runic signs were
carved into hard surfaces, including wood, bone, metal, and stone, among

others. As of the 21st century, there were still people who still curved runes
into surfaces just like it was done in ancient times.
Early Inscriptions
Early runic inscriptions dating back to around 150 AD have been found in
many objects, including stones, weapons, and jewelry, among others. While
most of these objects vanished as those who made them underwent
Christianization, some uses of runes, especially for specialized purposes
withstood the wave of change and remained up until the 20th century. In
Northern Europe and Rural Sweden, for instance, runes were able to resist
the change and remained since they had a special place in calendars and
decoration activities.
From 150 AD to around 1100 AD, there were three best-known alphabets,
namely the Elder Futhark, the Anglo Saxon Futhorc, and the younger
Futhark. While there are many other runic alphabets, they are also
descendent from these three ancient ones. In fact, even the Latin alphabet
bears a great resemblance to the Elder Futhark. Many argue that a lot of
exchange and borrowing happened during the times when Christianity was
spreading to many parts of Europe, especially in the Northern areas that saw
a massive change from their old lifestyles and religions to the Christian way
of life.
Norse Beliefs
Norse beliefs are embedded in the very rich Norse Mythology, which is
often called the Germanic Mythology. But what is this mythology all about?
Well, it is not just a myth but is also a religion practiced by the Vikings as
well as the Germanic people. Vikings were conquerors, raiders, traders,

settlers, and explorers from current-day Denmark, Iceland, Norway, and
Sweden. These are the people who spread the Norse Mythology. While
there are many beliefs in Norse Mythology, not all of them are explored in
runes books and inscriptions that have helped hand over the beliefs from
old generations to the modern-day.
One of the famous Norse beliefs is the argument that there is not one world
but nine, perhaps corresponding to the nine planets. It is also worth noting
that the concept of luck came from Norse beliefs. Essentially, there was no
Norse code of conduct since morality was based on family bonds and a
concept known as 'weird,' which meant fate or luck. Other beliefs included
those of rebirth after death. Other beliefs, including the killing of men in
raids with the belief that those killers would be rewarded. Some of these
beliefs were swept away by the wave of Christianity, but there are a few
people who remained with them. They have been handing over from one
generation to another to date, especially in Northern Europe.
Descriptions and Alternate Meanings
Learning runes in their original runic language can be an uphill task for
people who might be used to a different language like English. The starting
point for learning should, therefore, be understanding the alternate
meanings of runes in other languages, mainly English. Without a
translation, runes become more mysterious, not forgetting that there are
already many mysteries surrounding runes and their use. It is thus
imperative for every learner to understand the various descriptions as well
as meanings of various runic signs.
Illustrated in the table below are alternate meanings of the runic signs used
in the 12th century. They are the sixteen runic signs that stemmed from the

original 24 signs of the Elder Furthark (explained later in chapter 2 of this
book). Here we go:
Runic Name
Meaning
fẻ
wealth
úr
rain
thúrs
danger
ás
haven
reið
speed
kaún
disease
hágáll
hail
náúðr
need
isá
ice

ár
good harvest
sol
the sun
tyr
justice
bjárkán
spring
mádðr
humankind
logr
water
yr
endurance
The first step in learning runic languages should start with understanding
the meanings of the various runes, mostly the sixteen, as they represent the
recent signs that were finally picked after refining the old runic signs. After
mastering these runic signs and their meanings, you can proceed to learn
more about the special powers associated with each of these signs. You will
also realize that there are different gods and goddesses associated with
different runes. Remember that learning is only enjoyable when you
understand what you are learning, and you can relate to a real-life situation.

When written in runic alphabets, runes tend to appear as strange things. But
once the English meaning of the signs is given, it becomes easy to visualize
what runic sign could be used for in real-life situations. As you will see
later in this book, most runic activities, including rituals, practices, and
exercises are things you can easily understand if you know their meanings.
With the above table, you strange signs won't again strike you. Most
importantly, you will be in a position to make translations from runic
alphabets to English.
Gods and Goddesses Associated with Runes
Just as there are in many cultures in different parts of the world, there are
gods and goddesses associated with runes. They are the drivers of the
different forces responsible for different happenings or special powers. Here
are the most common runic gods and goddesses:
Frey
Frey is associated with Ingwaz rune. He is the runic god of peace, plenty,
happiness, sexual love, and abundance. He is also known as the protector of
natural vegetation and fertility. Some writers and books call him the god of
this world since most of the things he grants are seen as belonging to this
world only and not the world of spirits.
Fry
Fry is associated with Perthro rune. She is the goddess of marriage, love,
reconciliation, where there are a crisis, pregnancy, and childbirth as well. In
a nutshell, she is the god of the family who takes care of different family
affairs. Her desire to make sure that families are safe, protected, and have

peace makes her a favorite goddess for families facing struggles and other
problems that are a bit tough to solve.
Freyja
Freyja is associated with Gebo rune, and she is responsible for feminine
beauty, sexual pleasure powers. Some books call her the lady as she is
mostly concerned with showering ladies with beauty.
Baldur
Baldur is associated with Sowilo rune. He is the god responsible for light,
joy, persuasion, and the power to reconcile warring parties. Since light is
associated with the sun, rituals and gifts give to Baldur were mainly done
on the day of the sun (Sunday).
Hands
Hands god is associated with Naudhiz, and he is the god of the moon. He
was dedicated on Monday or the day of the moon. He is believed to preside
over natural processes and timings just as different moon phases are used to
make different timings or seasons. Hands can change cycles in favor of the
needs of those who believe in him.
Heimdal
Heimdal is associated with Mannaz rune. He is the god who gives the
ability to hear sounds, including the quiet ones that would go unheard. He is
believed to have sacrificed his own ear to help his people get a unique
power of hearing. Others also know him as the god who connects the earth
and heaven.

Thor
Thor is associated with Thurisaz rune. He presides over deadly natural
forces such as thunder and lightning. He uses these forces to keep the
atmosphere free from chaos or any forms of distractions that tend to make it
impure. Many believe that Thor uses a deadly hammer to keep things in
order. The hammer is, however, not only for hitting wrongdoers, but it is
also a sign of a hardworking god who helps men as they labor with their
daily hassles.
Gefion
Gefion is associated with Jera and Fehu runes, and she is the goddess of
virtue and women who are unmarried. She is also responsible for fertility
and has the ability to shift shapes to match the different needs of those
struggling with infertility. Her favorite colors are gold and green, which is a
sign of fertility.
Sunna
Sunna is associated with Raidho, Ansuz, and Ehwaz runes. He is the god of
powerful protection in times of need, inspiration, and general weather.
Among all the gods and goddesses associated with different runes, Sunna is
the most powerful and strongest of all. Just like Thor, he has the ability to
wield a strong hammer that causes deadly lightning flashes upon the earth.
Many other runic gods and goddesses exist, but the ones discussed here are
the most common ones who are often invoked for intervention in various
human activities. Their special powers/forces and abilities to influence
human activities positively is what makes them popular since the ancient
times of Germanic people when runes were developed.

 


Chapter Two: Understanding Runic Alphabets
Traditionally known as futhark, the Runic Alphabet is believed to have
stemmed from the Greek Alphabet. In fact, a couple of letters in the Runic
Alphabet have a great similarity to those used in the ancient Greek version.
However, that is not the only alphabet system that the Runic Alphabet bears
resemblance with. It is also argued that it might have been developed from
the ancient alphabets that were initially used in Italy. While little is known
about the origin of Runic Alphabets, there is much that can be talked about
when it comes to its development and change over time.
Types of Runic Alphabets
There are at least three different runic alphabets, namely Elder Futhark,
Younger Futhark, and Medieval Futhark. While there are a couple of
differences among these three alphabets, there are many similarities as well,
bearing in mind that they are all Runic Alphabets. Their only major
difference is the fact that they were developed at different times of history
and have all had their own changes over time. To get a better understanding
of each of these alphabets, here are the details:
Elder Futhark Runic Alphabet
Elder Futhark is the oldest Germanic runic alphabet. It was widely used in
many parts of Europe until many years later when other alphabets came into
existence. It is believed that all others that came after stemmed from the
Elder Futhark. They emerged as a result of changes that occurred over time
in the way the European people used their languages. Experts in the runic

alphabet argue that the name Futhark was derived from the first six runes.
Besides, there are 24 runic signs that represent different letters. The signs
and the corresponding letters that the Futhark alphabet signs correspond to
are illustrated here:
Regarding the origin of the signs used in the futhark alphabet, researchers
seem not to have a consensus on it. In addition, the order of the letters used
does not in any way narrow down to the usual letters of the alphabet
(ABC…) since their development was independent of the already existing
English letters of the alphabet. However, some scholars argue that the
development of the elder futhark was inspired by the Etruscan writing as
well as the Roman alphabet since those were the commonly used systems at
the time.
A couple of Elder Futhark runic inscriptions have been found in many
artifacts, some dating to as old as the 2nd century. The most common ones
include runestones, weapons, and amulets, among many others. The
inscriptions, of course, consist of twenty-four runes, but picked from the
first six runes, namely F, U, P, A, R, K. Later during the Viking Age, the
Elder Futhark runic alphabet was simplified to match the phonological
changes that had occurred in the Germanic languages. More specifically, the
number of runes was reduced by 8 to 16 to form the Younger Futhark.
Younger Futhark Runic Alphabet
History has it that towards the end of the 8th century, the spoken language
had encountered a lot of changes, and there was a need to reform the runes.
To illustrate the change, it is reported that the number of vowels had
increased from the initial 5 to 9. Seeing the changes, one runemaster
decided to change the runes by reducing them to 16. Further changes

occurred in the 9th century, and eventually, in the 10th century, the changes
were accepted in Scandinavia. The acceptance is what can be said to have
given birth to the Younger Futhark alphabet.
The Younger Futhark Runic Alphabet has two variants, namely, the Long
Branch, which is also known as the Danish variant, and the Short Twig
runes, also known as the Swedish & Norwegian runes. The difference
between these two variants is said to be in their use. For instance, the Long
Branch runes were mainly used when making inscriptions on stones. On the
other hand, the Short Twig runes were mainly used when writing official as
well as confidential messages. The authenticity of these differences in use
is, however, a subject of controversy with no clear explanation of their
development.
Signs used in the Younger Futhark alphabet vary between the long-branch
runes and the short twig runes. The variation is not, however, large between
the two. In fact, some differences are just as a result of the simplification of
runes of the other variant. More precisely, nine runes in the short twig runes
are a simplification of those of the long-branch. The other remaining seven
are just similar. Here are the illustrations:
Long Branch Runes
ᚠ
ᚢ
ᚦ
ᚬ
ᚱ
ᚴ

ᚼ
ᚾ
ᛁ
ᛅ
ᛋ
ᛏ
ᛒ
ᛘ
ᛚ
ᛦ
f
u
þ
ą
r
k
h
n
i
a
s
t

b
m
l
ʀ
Short-Twig Runes
ᚠ
ᚢ
ᚦ
ᚭ
ᚱ
ᚴ
ᚽ
ᚿ
ᛁ
ᛆ
ᛌ
ᛐ
ᛓ
ᛙ
ᛚ
ᛧ
f

u
þ
ą
r
k
h
n
i
a
s
t
b
m
l
ʀ
A couple of years later, the younger Futhark runes saw another change.
Signs that were previously not there were introduced. What exactly
happened is that voiceless signs were introduced to denote their voiced
counterparts. This essentially increased the number of runes from the
original number that existed before the changed happened. The expansion
of the existing runes is what gave birth to the next runic alphabet; the
Medieval Futhark.
Medieval Futhark Runic Alphabet

The transition from the Younger Futhark to the medieval runic alphabet
took place during the spread of Christianity in Scandinavia. It took place in
the late 18th century, and it saw many changes occurring in the language
system that was there previously. Although a lot happened at the time, runic
masters argue that the change mainly involved the decoration of runes using
Latin letters. Yes, it brought a new way of writing runes, but there were
confusions, especially in the use of three letters, namely s, c, and z. In a
nutshell, runes were Latinized to match the new Christian way of life that
was rapidly spreading at the time.
While the wave of Christianity had a great impact on the use of runes, it
didn't completely stop it from being used. Runes were, in fact, in common
use side by side with the Latin system of the alphabet. In addition, a great
interest in learning and use runes grew a lot in some areas such as Iceland
after the 15th century. The tremendous growth is evident from the hundreds
of Norwegian runic inscriptions that have been preserved in many archives
to date. Many have been discovered over time, with the greatest ones being
the 600 that were discovered in the 19th century in Bergen. This reinstates
the fact that despite the reality that runes alphabets have been there for
centuries, their usefulness is still great.
Today, there are still many people who use runes for different purposes.
Discussions are ongoing on the best way to store and pass on the unbroken
tradition that has stood the test of time to its current status. A lot has been
written in books about runes and the continued growth of interest to learn
and use them among many even in the 20th century points out the fact that
they still have a special place and use as well in modern-day activities.
Misconceptions

You've probably have come across stories detailing the common
misconceptions that exist about runes. They have been there since ancient
times, and they are not about to vanish any time soon. Well, in all honesty,
anything that seems difficult to understand or uses strange signs often
attracts different interpretations, including misconceptions about it. Runes
are not spared either. Those who have tried to learn but and left it on the
way or couldn't just connect the dots to make meanings out of runes have
many stories and myths about runes. If you come across some of those
stories, you may no longer move on with your quest to learn runes and use
them to improve your life. Misconceptions surrounding them are no doubt
misleading, let alone the fact that they are discouraging. The most
widespread misconceptions about include the claims that runes are no
longer useful, they have no powers, are used by Satanists, can attract bad
omen, and others. All these are just baseless claims spread by those who do
not understand what runes really are and their role in humanity.
The truth is that runes are totally different from the messages that these
statements send out, especially to unknowing rune novices. To set the
record straight, runes are primarily used for communication. Like any
language, it uses signs, and it has evolved over time. Besides, the use or
runes in everyday activities simply is for the purpose of serving the specific
use and not any hidden or specialized function that cannot be understood as
is often said by agents of misconceptions. Also, when spells are carved into
runes, the power comes from the spell and not the rune. Similarly, all other
functions where runes are involved do not necessarily imply that anything
unusual is from the runes. It could be a different force. For instance, there
are gods and goddesses associated with runes. Anything good or bad
associated with them belongs to the forces (gods and goddesses) and not the

runes. Runes only help in connecting with these forces or powers that have
an influence on human behavior.
 


Chapter Three: Spell Casting and Divining
Runes are said to have magical properties/powers that can be used in spell
Casting and divining. Since time immemorial, runes have been used for
many other activities apart from general communication. In this chapter, we
delve into the use of runes for spell casting as well as divining. Although
there have been many changes over the years, the fact remains that runic
signs are still useful in many ways.
Meaning of Spell Casting
Spellcasting is a practice that has been there for many years. However, it
has been misunderstood by many, especially those involved deeply in
spiritual work. So what exactly is this practice all about? Well, it is simple.
Just as we bring different letters to do works that finally combine to make
meaning, so does spell casting work. It is about stringing things together to
make something great that can enhance life. Spell casting is not, however,
necessarily about changing things but rather supporting what our minds can
do.
Contrary to the general beliefs, spell casting is about bringing oneself into
proper alignment with the inner purpose. Therefore, people spell craft to
change their own lives and not to influence the lives of those around them
negatively. Just to illustrate this, we can use spell casting in our lives to
attract something to our lives, strengthen our character, increase our self-
confidence, and benefit ourselves. These are the ways in which spells are
used, although the practice of spell casting varies from one place to another.

Apart from spell casting to improve our lives, spells can also be used in
meditation to connect with other beings. Besides, other people use spell
casting as a spiritual tool or as a divine power to deal with daily life
challenges. Other than these, spells can be used in many other different
ways. In addition, there are different levels of spell craft that can be used.
With that said, spell casting remains an ancient practice that has stood the
test of time to become an activity that is still applicable by many in different
parts of the world.
Types of Spells
There are hundreds of different types of spells. In fact, there are spells of
almost every activity or imaginable task. Human needs are unlimited and
endless, as well. Therefore, there are spells for almost every need that a
human mind would want to achieve. These spells also vary from one place
to another and from one culture to another. And since there are many
different cultures across the world, you can imagine how many types of
spells exist in this world.
Protection spells, loves spells, abundance spells, wealth spells, trick spells,
health spells, life spells, beauty spells, luck spells, weather spells, fantasy
spells, and spirit connection spells are just a few types. As it is evident,
these types of spells correspond to the different activities that people do on
a daily basis. People do different things to achieve what they want, and
spell casting is just one of the ways people try to enhance their living
environment.
The Connection between Runes and Spell Casting

Runes are letters or individual elements which when they come together,
make words that eventually make meanings. They can thus be used in spell
casting, and in fact, many people continue to use them in different parts of
the world. When runic signs are brought together, they make words and
meanings that can be attached to these different words. People, therefore,
use runes or rune casting to strive to achieve their daily needs. More
specifically, runes are used to create a cause-effect and predict a likely
outcome in one's life.
Runes act as excellent tools for spell casting. Just to illustrate this, runes
may be used to create writings, curves, paintings, or castings with special
meanings or powers. People can then use them according to their needs.
This practice has been there for centuries, and even today, spell casting
people still use them for different purposes. It is, however, worth noting that
spell casting using runes or rune casting as some people call it is so diverse.
As such, there is no single formula for doing it. It all depends on what one
is interested in achieving at the end.
One popular way of using runes for spell casting is working with an
individual or even a set of runes that is inscribed into an object so as to
access the power associated with it. Powers associated with such
individuals or sets of runes include healing power, luck in work, protection
power, and many others. Runes, therefore, whether written or carved into an
object, act as marks of protecting, healing, love, and other aspects of life
already outlined. While sometimes these practices are condemned as
witchcraft or magical works, they have remained popular for many years.
To date, many people are learning the different ways of using runes for spell
casting.

Indeed, runes spells are powerful and very useful to some people. On the
other hand, some look at it as mysterious and things that belong to witches
only. The reality, however, is that an everyday person can use runes for
spell casting without necessarily doing it for witchcraft purposes. People
who know what spell casting and understand its role use it to draw the
things they need in life. It has worked for some, and many others are
inspired to explore the power that exists in using runes for spell casting.
As a way of wrapping it up, if you are interested in testing the power of
spell casting using runes, then there is a lot to do. First, understand what it
is all about since there are so many misconceptions about it. The fact is that
there are so many good things worth knowing about runes and spell casting.
In fact, spell casting might just be what you need to change your life and
find it easy to meet your daily needs. Many testimonies are there about the
success of runes and spell casting. It is, therefore, a matter of how you
perceive and use it.
Rune Casting Techniques
While the art of casting runes has changed over time, the fact remains that it
is all about using runes to find meanings of hidden things and changing
one's life as well. It relates things to find a possible cause-effect relationship
and a likely outcome. Some of the common types of rune casting practices
include the following:
Simple Rune Casting
As the name suggests, simple casting is easy to carry out. It does not require
anything that is too special or out of the ordinary. To do it, simply take your
bag of runes, stir it around to mix them up, and pick up a bunch. Throw

them on a white cloth then keenly monitor how they land on the place you
have thrown them to.
Some runes will face up, others down, and others upright. The directions
they face have a meaning, and that's what you should interpret. You can
formulate a question that relates to the puzzle that you are trying to unfold.
If a rune faces a give direction, then it means a certain thing.
Spiritual Nine-Rune Cast
This is often done by people who want to obtain deeper insights about an
event or situation that is facing them. Why nine runes? Well, in Norse
Mythology, nine has a meaning as well as magical significance. To do it,
pick nine runes randomly then hold them between your hands as you think
about the problem you want to solve. Scatter them on a piece of cloth, on
the table, or even on the floor.
How the results of nine rune casting are interpreted is subjective. Everyone
has their own way of making meaning out of the results obtained. However,
although there is variation, there a general rule regarding the nine-rune-cast
is the runes lying at the center are the ones who carry the greatest meaning
and relevance. You should, therefore, focus on interpreting them to help you
answer your questions.
Ground Casting
Unlike the earlier types, ground casting is a bit unique in a couple of ways.
First, it uses rune tines such as sticks and twigs on which symbols of runes
are inscribed. Also, its interpretation is a bit simple. You just cast them on
the ground then look at those that land upright. Their positions in relation to
each other are also important in interpreting the outcome.

Regarding meanings, if runes cross each other upon landing on the ground,
it means they are in opposition. If they are lying in a parallel position, they
are related. Also, those that group far away from the others imply
something too. You should, however, note that interpretation techniques
applied here rely a lot on intuition. So you have to build your own
techniques that suit your needs and situation.
Divining
In the simplest terms possible, divination can be explained as the act of
trying to discover hidden knowledge or foretell what is likely to happen in
the future. It is a practice that has been there for many centuries, and it
continues to exist to date. The history of divination dates back to about
200bc when the people of Mesopotamia, Egypt, Canaan, and Anatolia, just
to name a few, communicate with their deities through divination. This
practice did not, however, end at the time. It has evolved over time, and
many people in different parts of the world still practice it mostly for
religious purposes.
Intuitive forms of divination are the most practices. It simply involves
people using natural or human phenomena to reveal hidden things or tell the
future. One common example to illustrate this is an analysis of stars,
weather, birds' behavior, moon, and entrails to derive the meaning of
various happenings. Some people also speak to the dead, cast lots, shoot
arrows, or drop oil in water, all in an attempt to predict the future or
interpret the hidden meaning of things that are happening presently.
Types of Divination Methods

Different methods of divination exist, and people use them depending on
what they want to achieve at the end. Some methods are also common in
some regions of the world, while others are promoted for religious
purposes. Even more interesting is the fact that people choose what works
best for them, leaving the other types. While there is no specific number
regarding the types of divination, the most common types include the
following:
Rune Stones
Runes stones, otherwise known as Norse runes, are also used in divination.
They are carved into stone, and those who understand and use them argue
that they are sacred and holy gifts that human beings can use. More
specifically, they are often used to help in finding out what the future has or
what events are likely to happen. One, however, has to understand the runic
language, including runic alphabets, in order to make use of this divination
method.
Numerology
Numerology in divination is simply the use of numbers to help reveal the
hidden meanings of different mysteries or unforeseen future. The belief
behind the use of numbers is the fact that they have magical and spiritual
significance. In addition, some numbers of particular combinations of
numbers are believed to be more powerful than others. They are thus used
for divination practices.
Use of Pendulum
The use of a pendulum is the most common method of divination often used
in different parts of the world. Its common use can be attributable to the fact

that it helps solve simple puzzles just as everyday life choices. This method
uses a weight that is attached to a chain or string and calibrated to help
answer simple yes or no questions. Users argue that it is the easiest method
of divination.
Automatic Writing
This method is one of the most popularly used ones when one wants to get
messages from the spiritual world. It simply involves holding a pen and
allowing the spirit to relay messages about any events or circumstances.
One requirement here is that one should not apply any effort or think about
what to write. Instead, they should allow the spirit to relay messages
through automatic writing.
Unique Intuitive Ability
Although it is a rare one and is only used by a few people, intuitive ability
is also another method of divination. In this method, one uses an
extraordinary ability to know things without being told. It has been there for
years, and it still exists to date. Like the other methods, it also helps
uncover hidden things or tell what will happen in the future.
While there could be other methods of divination, these five are the most
common ones. They are still used in many parts of the world among people
of different cultures and religious beliefs. Some have, however, changed
over time, and they are no longer done the way they used to be done in the
past. For instance, some practices have been mixed with Christianity and
hence transformed so that they are done in an acceptable Christian manner.
Runes of Divination

As already explained previously in this book, runes are said to have magical
powers that can be used to meet human desires. For instance, those who
understand the runic language and its signs can cut runes to uncover a
hidden thing or to cure a serious illness. Also, as part of the methods of
divination rune, stones and signs can be used for different activities.
Besides, there are different runic objects, including necklaces and other
ornaments that are used as divinatory aids.
It is believed that Vikings (Inventors of runes) used runes for everyday
activities, including divination. Although there is no clear evidence to
support this, there are many runic activities and inscriptions that are
connected with divination in many ways. For instance, runic readers believe
that the future is not fixed. That is, one can change what will happen in the
future by acting differently at present. Similarly, divination involves
foretelling future events and changing behavior currently to avoid any
future disasters. One can thus say that runes can be used for divination,
especially when the intention is to explore the future and find out what it
has for one.
One thing to remember is that although runic signs and stones can be used
for divination, rune casting is not all about fortune telling as it is often made
to appear like. It is simply a way of asking questions about the future or
finding meanings of the present happenings that we would otherwise not
understand without the use of runes. Most importantly, it is good to note
that not all runic materials can be used for divination. The commonly used
ones are stoned, pebbles, and inscriptions. Others, including bone, metal,
and many other signs, serve other purposes. Either way, runes have a
special role to play in everyday life and in the solution of human
challenges, including the uncertainty of the future.

Take-Home Point
Rune casting, spell casting, and divination are not the same thing. Unlike
the later, rune casting is not supernatural. Neither is it also superstitious. It
is just about making use of your subconscious mind to connect things.


Chapter Four: The New World
The culture surrounding runes has been there for centuries, and it continues
to find use even in modern-day society. To date, runic alphabets act as a
symbolic representation of certain aspects of life. For this reason, those who
understand it continue to apply it in many ways. However, there is another
interesting thing that many people do not know. Almost everyone has used
runes but most likely without their knowledge. In this chapter, we explore
some of the technologies that make use of runes.
Bluetooth Technology
Let's face it! The Bluetooth technology has completely transformed
communications and made work easier than it used to be. These days, we
can easily connect to devices without having to use cables as they were in
the past. Since its invention, billions of devices have created connections
and shared data and information thanks to this amazing technology.
Moreover, many other technologies have come as an improvement in
technology. It has, therefore, acted as a base or reference technology for
other inventors interested in adding features to what we are already
enjoying.
Aside from the usefulness of Bluetooth technology, there is one interesting
thing that many people do not know. Well, The Bluetooth logo you see on
your smartphone is a combination of two bind runes, namely Haglaz and
Berkana. These runes are equivalent to letter "H" and "B," and they
represent the initials of the name of King Harald Blåtand. He was the King
of Denmark during the Viking age and tried to build connections across the

borders of his country. Interestingly, almost everyone with a mobile device
or smartphone has used Bluetooth to create connections and transfer files.
However, not many people know the fact that the technology's name has a
runic origin. Indeed, this is something interesting to explore if you like
runes and would like to understand its applications even in modern-day
society.
Why Bluetooth Is Named after Powerful King of Denmark and
Norway
Bluetooth is named after Harald "Blatand," who was a king of Denmark and
Norway. He is remembered for many things and especially his efforts
beyond borders that sought to unify his people, including neighbors. While
most of his subjects were pagans, King Harald embraced Christianity and
worked tirelessly to spread the religion. He promoted the faith within his
borders throughout his tenure. His main aim was to unify the people of
Denmark and Norway. Perhaps Bluetooth is named after him because of the
similarity between the work he did and what Bluetooth does these days.
Well, the technology connects by going beyond the borders of a single
device to help make communication easy.
According to some scholars, King Harald was got the name "Blatand,"
which means Bluetooth because he had a rare dental condition. He had a
dead tooth that literally turned dark and bluish. That is what led him to get
the name Bluetooth. How the name transferred to a telecommunications
technology is, indeed, interesting. According to Jim Kardach, one of the
founders of Swedish Telecommunications Company, Ericsson, the name
Bluetooth was chosen for all the right reasons. The founders felt that
Harald's ability to negotiate beyond borders and unite people was a great
thing. They, therefore, saw it right to name their technology after the King

since the intention of coming up with it was to 'unite" devices and make
communication easy.
Since its invention and release, Bluetooth technology has, indeed, lived the
life of the name it is named after. In fact, it had done much more than what
the owner of the name did when he was alive. The technology has
connected 
millions 
of 
smart 
devices 
worldwide 
and 
enabled
communication. Most importantly, it has helped in the sharing of important
files, documents, and anything worth sharing or transferring from one
device to another. It is also great to note that other technologies have also
borrowed from the features of Bluetooth to help develop other similar
technologies to help share information and resources easily.
In modern English, the Bluetooth logo is simply a combination of letters H
and B. These two letters are the initials of Herald Bluetooth, the kind who
died centuries, but his spirit of communicating across boundaries and
among different groups live to date courtesy of powerful innovation. Letter
H and B were, however, not written in Viking language the way they are
currently written in English. That takes us to a very interesting question.
Can Modern English Be Translated to Runic Language?
The truth is that it is easier to translate the Runic language to English than
to do the vice versa. Taking English names and translating to runes is a
complicated procedure. It is an attempt to transcribe words whose sounds
never existed in languages from which runic alphabets were developed. But
that does not, however, mean that it cannot be done. With research and
more studies on phonology, there might come a time when it will be
possible to write whatever we want in English then have it translated into
runes. If that happens, a lot will be achieved, and people will be able to

create more runic exercises, and practices in their own language then have it
put in runes for originality.
Away from translation, the fact that runic signs are being used in modern-
day technologies, writings, and even in-wall decorations affirms the power
that exists in runic language. Despite many changes that have occurred over
time in runic alphabets, runes still exist to date, and more people are
continuing to learn it. One distinguishing trait that could possibly explain
the uniqueness of runic signs is the use of the same signs for voiced and
voiceless consonants, a trait that is not existent in modern English.


Chapter Five: Witness Your Future
Runes are still used these days in many ways by those who understand them
and what they are capable of doing. In this chapter, we explain how runes
are used these days to make predictions about the future. In a nutshell, runes
can help answer questions about the past, what is happening presently, and,
most importantly, what the future has for one.
How Runes Can Be Used to Predict the Future
Runic readers argue that you can unlock your ability to connect with the
sources of energy, healing & love and be able to tell what is likely to
happen. This does not, however, imply anything to do with fortunetelling.
On the contrary, what rune casting or the art of using runes to predict the
future does is that it gathers a couple of variables and offers advice on what
one can do in the event that something occurs. Simply put, runes give you
hints of what is likely to happen but leaves you with the freedom to decide
what to do now.
According to the assumptions of rune casting, the future is not fixed and
that if you don't like the direction you are following presently, you can at
any time divert. The implication of this assumption is that individuals have
the power to make their own decisions and follow their own path. So if
there is something you fear that it might happen in the future, you ought not
to fear anymore as you have the power to change it. You can take a different
route and see the future you desire unfolding before your eyes.
When Should You Resort to Rune Casting?

You can use runes in many situations depending on your circumstance and
what you are really interested to know about the future. A good example is
when you have limited information about a future event, or you want to act,
but you have an incomplete picture of what is likely to happen. At such
instances, consulting rune readers can help unearth the hidden future, so
you can act accordingly.
When you can use runes, you are ideally asking a question or thinking
about an issue. The idea here is to focus your conscious and unconscious
minds to help you make a decision. Runes can thus be said to be useful
when you are in a situation of indecision. It is, therefore, right to say that
rune casting helps to bring out the decisions already made but not opened to
you. Casting runes can thus help you get a better picture of what awaits you
in the future and what to do if what awaits you is not what you have been
anticipating.
Runes Used to Discover the Future
There are twenty-four different runes that you can use to discover your
future. Each of them has a runic meaning as well as its implication for your
life. Most importantly, they help answer whatever questions you have about
the future. Therefore, when you cast them, the order in which they fall has a
meaning in your life. They also determine your fate. Although there are
renowned runic readers, anyone can cast runes and interpret if they have the
knowledge of rune casting.
Here are the twenty-four runes you can use to discover your future and their
corresponding meanings:
i. Fehu Rune: money, wealth, and material goods

ii. Uruz Rune: strength & manhood
iii. Thurisaz Rune: a new start
iv. Ansuz Rune: a signal or message
v. Radio Rune: travel
vi. Kaunaz Rune: fire
vii. Gibo Rune: blessing
viii. Wunjo Rune: happiness
ix. Hagalaz Rune: chaos
x. Nauthiz Rune: pain
xi. Isa Rune: frustration
xii. Jera Rune: Fertility and harvest
xiii. Eihwaz Rune: barriers/protection
xiv. Perth Rune: hidden things
xv. Algiz Rune: defense
xvi. Sowelu Rune: perfection
xvii. Tyr Rune: victory
xviii. Berkana Rune: rebirth or a fresh start
xix. Ehwaz Rune: overcoming obstacles
xx. Mannaz Rune: humanity

xxi. Leguz Rune: motherhood
xxii. Inguz Rune: beginning
xxiii. Degaz Rune: sunlight
xxiv. Othela Rune: possessions
There are different ways of rune casting to discover the future. If you want
to give a try, then do not go for complicated procedures. Simply find a quiet
environment that can allow your mind to focus on the issue or question at
hand. Have the runes preferably the stones in a box before you as you
meditate. After meditating, cast the runes onto a cloth, or a pouch then read
those that are fallen the right side up. Check the bearing and try to interpret
the meaning, as already explained. This is one of the commonly used
methods, but there are also other alternatives.
Can Runes Help Predict Future Misfortunes?
Future runes are not only aimed at discovering good. As already hinted,
there are used to tell what the future holds. Runes tell the future whether it
is good or bad for you. There are, in fact, runic signs that are a sign of
unfortunate occurrences on the part of humans. Those are the ones that can
help predict misfortunes likely to happen in the future. There are many
runes that can help predict any unfortunate happenings that are likely to be
experienced in the future. That means that as you learn about runes, you
should be a good student of both good as well as bad runes as they all have
an influence on your living.
An example of rune that represents dark forces acting against human is the
Thurisaz. The meaning of Thurisaz is ogre, and from ancient tales, ogres are

hostile gods that threaten to destroy humans. If you cast your runes and
what you see is Thurisaz, then that could mean that you are headed towards
something that might not be good for you. For instance, it could mean that
your timing is unfavorable if you were preparing to start a project.
Is It Possible To Carry Out Past and Future Cleaning Using
Runes?
Although it is a little bit confusing and painstaking process, it is possible to
carry out the cleaning of your future from any damage that you are likely to
face. Similarly, it is possible to use runes to restore your energy or health
that might have happened to you as a result of magical effects. Many people
say that it is hard, but the truth is that if you are determined to rid you're
your past and future of any unfortunate occurrences, then it is possible to do
it.
Runes are highly versatile, and they can be used for different roles and
purposes, including cleaning. You can, in fact, do whatever you want with
runes provided you know what you are doing. Most importantly, you ought
to aggressive in learning the different runes and how to apply them to make
your life better. The learning process should actually be continuous with the
goal of finding out new ways of using runes to make your life worth living.
For future cleaning, you'll need to be familiar with rues of constructing the
future or shaping it up the way you want. You can, for instance, seek the
help of Sunna, the most powerful rune with the ability to transform
anything. If you combine the power of Sunna plus a couple of others that
have powers for transforming human life, then you can be sure to change
your future and make live knowing that there is no misfortune awaiting you.

Regarding damage suffered in the past that is likely to affect your future,
you can use certain restorative runic combinations to overcome the effects.
If left uncured, they can easily cause physical weakness, indifference, and
spiritual emptiness. At the worst, people who are victims of such magical
effects at some point even contemplate suicide or anything that can easily
take away their lives.
Glyphs, staves, and bandages are a combination of runes that are often used
to restore as well as cleanse. The process of carrying out these combinations
is also not that tough. Simply choose that which will help you get back to
the status or health condition. Once you pick a combination that best solves
your problem, carry it on yourself as a picture for a period of nine days.
These days are ideally the length of cleansing time. At the end of it, and if
you had picked the best combination, it is possible to completely rid your
life of any past magical effect that has been affecting you.
Note that cleaning or restoring alone is not enough if you are a victim of
past misfortunes, and you even fear that you are likely to face a lot in the
future. You need to go a step further and look for a way of protecting
yourself. Without protection, you risk going back to the former self or state
of trouble that you have been trying to emerge from. That again calls for
learning about rune protection and how you can apply it to stay safe now
and in the future.
Runes That Can Be Used For Personal Protection Going Into
the Future
Turisaz, Teyvaz, Algiz, and Isa are the four runes that you can use to protect
yourself from the impact of your feared enemies in the future. These four
runes have powers to stop bad energy and forces that are threatening to

destroy your future. Apart from using these runes to protect yourself, you
can also use them to protect your loved ones, your home, and even your
workplace if you fear that there are threats there too.
To enjoy the security of runes of protection, use a marker or a ballpoint pen
to draw these runic signs on the wall, objects at home, or on your body. You
should, however, note that with time, drawings tend to fade. More
specifically, those on your body are likely to be washed as you bath each
day. Therefore, a more permanent way to have the lasting symbols is to
make special amulets of the images you want. Curving the sign or symbol
on wood or stone would be the best way to put your protection in place
permanently.
For clarity about the runes of protection, Teyvaz is the best rune to protect
your business, money, and general financial situation. It has the ability to
send back negative spells send to your business and also resist any
circumstances that are likely to affect your finances negatively. For
protection from jealous individuals, Isa is the best rune. For evil eyes, use
Turisaz, and you will be safe. Apart from offering you the protection you
need, these runes also attract good luck and bring happiness into your daily
activities.
As a reminder, the magic properties, as well as the powerful protection of
runes, depend on many factors, among them your understanding and use of
them. You can only enjoy the benefits if you are a strict follower of
instructions and if you have also perfected the art of connecting with runes
perfectly. The most experienced users of runes also say that runes are not a
quick solution to problems. You have to take the time to build their power
by frequently using them until you master the best ways of harnessing their
powers.


Chapter Six: Runic Exercises & Preparing Your
Mind
Runic exercises support meditation as well as the psychological work of the
body. While there are many ways to use runes to connect with the spiritual
world, using the body can help is one of the ancient methods that have been
proven to be highly effective. This chapter explores various aspects of runes
exercises. It provides a guide to runic exercises, descriptions of different
exercises (Both long and short), and ends by explaining the various benefits
of runic exercises.
Guide to Runic Exercises
A guide is necessary when doing any activity. It provides directions to
follow from the start to end. Most importantly, it prepares your mind by
outlining what you should expect and be prepared to do. Before you get
started with any runic practice or tasks to help you make your learning
process simple, you ought to prepare your mind accordingly. Here is a
precise yet detailed guide to runic exercises:
Prepare Yourself by Having Your Body Relaxed
Having your body relaxed is very vital when it comes to runic exercises.
Also, a relaxed body is flexible, and the chances are that you are more
likely to be effective in your exercises if your body is free. This means that
you need to relax your muscles, mind, jaws, and eyes since these are the
parts that play a vital role in learning.

To achieve a complete state of relaxation, you need first to solve your
internal conflicts, put your mind in a state that is ready to learn, and, most
importantly, achieve quietness. These are the essential things you need if
you want to perform runic exercises easily and reap maximum benefits
associated with them.
Control Your Breath
Runic exercises are about connecting with the spiritual world and inner self
to help you deal with the challenges of everyday living. For this reason,
proper breathing is very necessary for yourself before you embark on any
runic exercises. Even when you start exercising, full conscious breathing is
very vital.
It is, therefore, recommendable that you exercise the art of controlling
breath way before you kick off the actual exercises. Practice complete
exhalation and wait until the urge to breathe in comes naturally. Most
importantly, at all times, allow your diaphragm, ribcage, and shoulders to
move freely as you breathe.
Learn to Control Your Thoughts
It is important to control your thoughts before and, most importantly while
exercising. If you let your mind roam around without concentrating on what
you are doing, then achieving the results you want may be an uphill task.
Controlling your thoughts here means making sure that what comes to your
mind is all about what you are doing and how you can improve on it. In
simple terms, let your mind get used to meditation mode. That way, you can
easily concentrate on the task at hand and enjoy the full benefits of what
you are doing.

Learn to Sing Sounds Properly
Some runic exercises include singing specific sounds. It is thus important to
learn how to change pitch, vary sounds, and move the body. You need
perfect this before you start whichever runic exercises you want to practice.
Doing so ensures that all runic exercise procedures, including singing, won't
challenge you once you start exercising.
If you feel that you might not be comfortable practicing in a group, then
learn to do it alone. Privacy gives you the confidence you need to practice
high and low pitches. While doing it, make sure to perfect the art of raising
and lowering pitch. Most importantly, learn to feel the differences and
various impacts of the different sounds that you'll be practicing. That's one
way to enhance your practice sessions.
Purity Can Also Be a Necessary Condition
One last thing to remember is that some runic exercises need purity. You
should thus learn to clean your body to wash off all impurities symbolically.
In some instances and depending on the kind of exercises you'll be doing, it
may be necessary to use certain oils or herbs to help you clean all
impurities. Some runic rituals/exercises demand that you just be pure in
body and, most importantly, in mind.
Following these guidelines will make your training or exercise sessions
fruitful. Remember that you will not just be exercising, but you will be
doing it to help you solve life problems and achieve your needs. You can
only uncover the secrets of runes and enjoy their benefits if you prepare
well and put your mind and body in the right shape.
Runic Exercise Descriptions

While there are many runic exercises, knowing some of them and
understanding what it takes to do, one can be helpful as you develop your
own exercises. Here, a few examples have been given to help you get a
clear picture of an effective runic exercise that you can try. Here we go:
Exercise 1: A long Runic Visualization Exercise
Requirements
● Your runes
● Candles preferably purple ones
● Appropriate meditation music
● Incense
● Cinnamon
● Wormwood
● Dandelion
● Bay
● Jasmine
● Mugwort
Methods
1. Go to a private, quiet place. For ease of access and total privacy, your
bedroom is the best place. So go there light your candles, burn the incense
and play low meditation music to help you get to the right moods. Experts
recommend non-intrusive classical music.
2. Sit, look around, and make sure you are comfortable in your sitting
position. Make sure you have your bag of runes near you or simply on your

laps. This stage should last for about twenty minutes to allow you to
connect with your environment in readiness for the subsequent steps.
3. Relax your body, take deep breaths, and close your eyes, then try to
banish all distractive thoughts not related to your exercise. At this stage,
you do not need to have your bag or runes on the laps. You can put it aside
to allow you to control your thoughts easily.
4. Open your eyes, take your bag and then, with the power of your hand,
pick one using your sense of feeling without having to look at it. Hold it for
about ten minutes, then put the bag aside once again.
5. Settle down, close your eyes, breathe slowly to relax your muscles,
specifically those at the arms, legs, hands, and let it continue all the way to
the brain. Finally, let the muscles in your face relax as well.
6. While seated, connect to the spiritual world by visualizing a journey to a
sacred place with the intention of finding a solution to any problem that you
are facing. It should take a bit longer, as is the climax, healing moment, or
realization of your goal. Thirty minutes are okay.
You can imagine taking a walk to the river in a nice cool afternoon. It is
generally warm, and a soft breeze from the river ruffles your hair as you
walk towards or along the river bank. The air is filled with sweet songs of
the birds singing to cheer the beautiful wildflowers as the wind swings them
side-by-side.
While you cannot see or understand clearly where you are heading or what
exactly you are going to do in the river, let the environment give you a fresh
feel. Take a keen look at anything to help you concentrate and ask yourself
a couple of rhetoric questions. Perhaps looking at a bird singing could be
all you need to find a solution to that problem that has bothered you for
long. Try to connect what you see with the happenings in your life.

Listen to your senses. What are you feeling, smelling, or hearing? Once you
are satisfied and happy with the feeling, start the journey back. That
possibly is an indication that you have undergone an inner change and
experienced spiritual powers. Once you arrive back, open your eyes and
take a deep breath.
7. After the small journey of meditation and experiencing a new
environment away from your secluded bedroom, take the time to recover.
You are most likely to feel tired, bearing in mind that any journey, whether
a real one or an imagination makes you tired. A time to recover is thus
essential before you complete your exercise.
8. Shut out the rest of the world, and get back to your room. Look up at the
ceiling. What do you see? Is it the same thing you are used to seeing every
day? You will most likely discover something you had not seen in the past.
That's the essence of this exercise. To help you look at things differently
and see life from a positive angle than you have always done.
That's one powerful runic exercise description that can completely change
things in your life. As a reminder, you may not necessarily have to follow
everything here religiously. You can add or subtract a few things to create
your own unique program that matches your needs and the change you want
to experience. Besides, not all runic exercises have to be too long as the one
given here. There are short ones that are useful as well and can help you
solve your problems effectively.
Simple Exercises
Exercise#1: Write a Poem for Every one of Your Favorite Runes
If you are a novice in runic exercises, then starting with the simple ones like
writing poems can help you as you develop and learn the artfully. You can

later get into the tough ones once you get started and fully understand the
power of runic exercises.
Writing a poem for runes is a simple exercise since you do not need any
special materials to have the job get done. All you need is bad of runes, a
pen, and a paper to write on your favorite song or message to your runes.
Steps
1. Read about and understand all your runes
2. Find out the special powers associated with all your runes
3. Learn how to connect with the runes
4. Find out the historical contexts relating to all your runes
5. Write a nice sweet poem for each rune
Make sure that the poems you write help you understand and improve your
relationship with every poem. Doing so will help you understand certain
aspects of runes, such as the signs that you would otherwise not just
understand by reading about them.
Exercise#2: Visualizing Runic Images
Image casting is also part of runic exercises, and one way to connect with
the runes is to visualize their images. Sometimes, visualizing can help you
see what you cannot see when your eyes are opened and looking at the
runes.
Steps
1. Pick a rune and visualize its image forming right in front of your eyes

2. Chant its name as you visualize the image
3. Look at the rune and sing what you see
4. Continue singing for about 15 minutes each time including the name of
the rune as you sing
5. Ground yourself and write whatever you saw and felt while visualizing
the rune
Please beware that you can do this for every rune for as long as you want.
Each time, try to see what you have not seen before in the rune, you are
visualizing. You can also do it a couple of times a day, as it is a process that
has no end. It is the best thing to do if you want to master rune casting.
Therefore, take the time and practice it well until you master it well.
NOTE: As you perform these or other runic exercises of your choice,
always try to ensure that nothing disrupts the flow of energy in your body.
That's why your choice of a private or secluded room is very vital. It
determines how you will go about the process and the results, as well.
Usually, many people prefer a quiet place in the garden or simply in the
bedroom, as was illustrated in the first exercise. Such places allow you to
concentrate and increase your overall energy in the body, which you need to
complete an exercise successfully.
Benefits of Runic Exercises
Persons of all ages and from different cultures use runic exercises for many
reasons. Despite the great variation in the types of exercises performed, the
benefits enjoyed cut across and in fact, are similar. Some do the exercises to
obtain their daily needs. Others do it since they are interested and have been

doing for years. Also, others are much into the benefits of mental exercise
and fitness associated with runes. Irrespective of the reason for doing the
exercises, the benefits do not discriminate against anyone. Here are some of
the assured benefits of regular doing of runic exercises:
Improved Quality of Life
Invoking rune spells or signs associated with happiness such as WUNJO,
ALGIZ, and BERKANO can help improve one's quality of life. Different
people invoke different runic forces and powers. The good thing about
runes is that you don't have to stick to a particular method to enjoy its
benefits. You can have your own runic activities that match your specific
needs. The best way is to focus on those that will help you overcome your
weaknesses and improve your overall quality of life. It might take time to
master runes and what it is capable of doing, but the journey is worth it.
Improved Mental Fitness
As illustrated in the example exercises given, runes engage the mind taking
it through simple as well as tough workouts through imagination as well as
visualization. It is, therefore, almost obvious that when runic exercises
become part and parcel of daily routine, the assured benefit is mental
fitness. Some people, in fact, use runes to sharpen their minds and put them
in better fitness levels. If you are experiencing any forms of weaknesses in
the mind and you wish to overcome, then exercising runic activities can
help solve the problem.
Achievement of Short and Long-term Plans
Everyone has ambitions and things they wish to achieve in the short run, as
well as after a couple of months or even years. Learning runic signs and

applying them appropriately can help one remain on the right track that
leads them to achieve what they have planned for themselves. Some plans
tend to be hard, and achieving them requires extra inspiration and
dedication. With the help of runic exercises and other practices, such plans
can be made simple and realistic. How it works is that runic exercises put
your mind in the state of achievement, and once the mind wins it, you
already have it.
Discovery of Secrets
Through runic divination, one can uncover hidden secrets and even find out
what the future holds. How is this possible? There are many ways to do it. It
can go through rune tossing, arranging them in certain styles, and putting
together a couple of them to make a certain unique pattern. Meanings can
then be attached to them to help discover secrets. For many years, people
have been using this method to solve simple yes/no puzzles and even
interpret complex secret situations. Although there are no specific
procedures of making the discovery, different people apply the methods
they understand to make meanings out of otherwise unknown events of
happenings.
A Chance to Connect with Nature
Runic meditations are not just a way of understanding runes, but they also
help in doing what one would not do without runes. For instance, the art of
connecting with nature is not a usual thing but a special process best done
with runes. Since ancient times, runes have played a very vital role in
communicating with nature and understanding what it needs or what it can
give to those who know its power.



Chapter Seven: Rituals to Accompany the Study
Learning runes cannot be complete without exploring a couple of rituals
that accompany different runic activities. In this chapter, we delve into the
topic of rituals in the context of runes. Although different people create
their own runic rituals depending on what they are using runes for, there are
common ones worth knowing. With that said, here we go:
Why Rituals Accompany the Study of Runes
When learning anything new, people often have different ways of making
their learning process easy and enjoyable. In schools, for instance, some
concepts are taught with the aid of experiments. The reason for having such
practical activities is to make it easy to understand what's happening and
also make it easy for learners to remember. Similarly, in the learning of
runes, rituals act as 'experiments' that make the process simple and
enjoyable as well. They add the spices to the process hence giving the
learner a reason to go further and not just get the basics.
Rituals are not, however, meant to replace the real learning process as some
people tend to argue. Rather, it is meant to supplement it. Besides, runic
rituals are not static. They change over time, and you can even have your
own rituals to make your learning process unique. For this reason, there are
ancient runic rituals as well as those of the 21st century. If you want to
understand runes better, create your own runic rituals. But remember that if
you want to create perfect ones, you must first learn from the existing runic
rituals. It, therefore, makes sense to understand a couple of runic rituals that

have been in use since the long-gone days when runic alphabets came into
being.
Common Runes and Their Corresponding Rituals
While they were initially used as a form of language in Germanic cultures
in Northern Europe, runes are also powerful spiritual tools. They have been
and are continuing to be used for religious purposes, divination, and magic,
as well. Runes are, however, extremely versatile as they vary from one
place to another and from one culture to another as well.
Here are five common runes and rituals to accompany them:
#1: BERKANO
The BERKANO rune is all about new beginnings and manifestations in
one's life. It helps in making it easy for you to bring to life whatever new
thing you want. It could be a new home, project, job, business, or even
welcoming a new child. Anything that you are working hard to make it a
reality, Berkano can help you bring it to reality.
BERKANO Ritual
Connecting with the power of Berkano is not difficult, and anyone can
easily learn it. To perform this ritual, you need a stone, paint, or anything
that can help you make a permanent mark. Besides, this ritual is often
performed once the full moon is sighted. Once are these conditions are met,
then you can connect. Simply visualize the new thing you want in your life,
and as you think about it, make a painting or drawing of it on the stone.
Place it in a place you'll be seeing as often as possible.
#2: WUNJO

Wunjo is all about happiness and overcoming any life hassles that bring
sadness, anxiety, and other feelings that take away joy and happiness. Let's
face it! Almost everyone undergoes different life happenings that bring
sadness. It happens, and it is not a surprise. If you feel that you are
overwhelmed, then Wunjo is all you need to be happy. It will grant you the
happiness you need, even when things are tough on your side.
Wunjo Ritual
The Wunjo ritual is performed on the night of the first appearance of the
full moon. Some people, however, tend to overlook this and perform it
anytime. To perform this ritual, you need to make a sacred place or an altar,
as is usually called in religious language. Put all things that make you
happy on that altar. Make sure to pick those that make you the happiest
when you see them. Look at your altar every day, and you'll always be
happy.
#3: ALGIZ
If protection is all you need, then ALGIZ rune can completely change your
life and provide a sense of protection you need in life. Algiz is not only a
sign of protection, but it also helps you connect to your higher self and feel
deeper inside you that you are safe. Many people often use this rune at
times of crises, such as feeling scared and in need of protection in daily
activities.
ALGIZ Ritual
Unlike other rituals that have to be strictly performed during specific moon
phases, you can perform the ALGIZ ritual during any phase of the moon,
although there are arguments that the dark phase is the best. To perform this

ritual, you need three sticks, one long stick, and two shorter ones. Place the
shorter ones at the center of the long one to make a v shape that looks like
the Algiz symbol. Hang it on the wall or put it on your altar. It will provide
the security you need, and you'll feel safe.
#4: TIWAZ
Also called the warrior rune, Tiwaz is known for its ability to strengthen
people who are going through different difficulties of life. Whether you
have a legal battle, facing indecision, have disagreements, or advocating for
justice, Tiwaz might just be the rune you need to change things in your life.
It is a powerful rune known for providing great strength.
TIWAZ Ritual
The Tiwaz Ritual is often performed during the first quarter moon. To do it,
you simply need three things, namely a candle, a lighter, and a toothpick.
You may, however, have to get many candles as you will need one for each
problem you have. For instance, you may need a candle for your legal
battles, disagreements, and other issues. Light the candles and sit with them
until it is over, then you can extinguish it. You can, however, put it off when
you finally win the legal battle you had, find justice, resolve a
disagreement, or any other problem.
#5: FEHU Rune
In all honesty, we all love abundance, and in fact, we always strive to make
sure that we have it as much as possible. Besides, our daily struggles are
mainly to help us make ends meet, get daily bread, and enjoy many other
blessings. However, getting all this is often not an easy job. Fehu helps

during struggles and makes us enjoy abundance amidst great adversities and
daily struggles.
FEHU Ritual
To perform the FEHU Ritual, you need a green candle, a lighter and a
needle, toothpick, or anything that can help you carve the Fehu symbol on
the candle. Carve the symbol while thinking of you enjoying blessings,
wealth, and being showered with goodies. Once you are through carving,
light the candle and look at it quietly to enjoy the power of Fehu and is the
ability to bring abundance.
There are many other runic rituals for almost all the challenges we face. As
already hinted earlier in this chapter, the one good thing about runic rituals
is the fact that you can come up with your own rituals depending on your
needs. But as a reminder, when you decide to create one for your needs,
remember three things. It must be simple, done consistently until you
overcome the challenge and it must help you overcome the problems you
have at any given time, Runic rituals work, and there are many testimonies
about the power of these simple yet effective runic activities.
Tips on Taking up Ritual Runes
Runic rituals can be performed individually or as a group. Whichever route
you take, the results depend on many factors key among them being your
own belief on the power of runes. If you don't believe it, then there may be
no need to try all these experiments and practices. However, if after
learning, you finally understand and see the power that exists in runes, then
taking them up or putting in practice can change your life completely.

If you want to try runic rituals for your very first time, you need to have a
small guide to act as your traffic lights. Proceeding without anything to
warn or caution you on how to go about different activities can be a
challenge. Fortunately, runic rituals are not very complicated as they are
made to appear sometimes by those who have a negative view of it. Here
are simple guidelines on performing runic rituals:
Outline Your Reasons For
You definitely have reasons that are propelling you to consider resorting to
runic rituals. It is, therefore, good to put them down before you even start
thinking of which runic rituals you'll perform. Writing them down and
checking often will drive you to learn and perform rituals to accompany
your study of runic language and signs.
Decide the Time and How You'll Perform Your Rituals
Different rituals are suited to different times. Before you start using runic
rituals to help you meet the needs of your life, it is important to understand
the best times to use them. Most importantly, make sure you know how to
perform them and connect to their power.
Find Out If You Have All Materials of Requirements
Runic rituals can only be performed successfully if you have all the
necessary materials or requirements for the rituals you are considering. If
you do not have, then find a way of getting them before you start the
experiments
Decide How You Will Go About Your Runic Ritual Sessions

Will you perform one by one or combine a couple of rituals at once? How
you organize your rituals has an impact on the possible outcome that you
will experience. It is always good to do them one by one, so you give full
attention and harness full energy from each. If you combine many, the
chances are that you might get mixed up and fail to concentrate fully.
Remember that runic rituals are spiritual tools that work depending on the
power of your imagination.
Take Up the Rituals
Finally, after learning and making sure that everything you need to perform
runic rituals is available, the next big challenge is to do the actual job. As
illustrated in the five examples of some common runic rituals, performing
them may not be complex. However, the environment, and how you
perform them is what determines the kind of results you will get at the end.
In some instances, it may be good to perform some runic rituals as a group
rather than working alone as an individual. In such instances, you need to
get like-minded individuals, preferably those facing the same challenges
you have, so you work together. You should also note that group rituals
might be a bit different from those that you can perform alone. That,
therefore, calls for more research and learning about the difference between
individual runic rituals versus those that can be done in groups.
In a nutshell, learning runes should not just be about reading about how
they work and the situations they can help. It is good to go another extra
mile to practice a few as you advance to the next higher stages. Runic
rituals are highly versatile and tend to vary depending on what they are used
for by those who understand them. Those who have taken the time to learn
about them and their power have moving stories. If you want to give them a

try, you need to understand them well and get the truth about the many
misconceptions about them. You might end up realizing that all you needed
to turn around your life was the power of runes and runic rituals.
 


Chapter Eight: Facts about the Blank Rune and
Whether You Should Read It
One interesting question that rune enthusiasts often ask is what's up about
the blank rune, and can anyone use it? Well, indeed, there is a lot to learn
about this kind of rune, especially for beginners who would like to have a
complete understanding of the runes before using them. It is also quite
interesting to note that some rune users argue that the blank rune was not
there in the past, and it was just introduced recently. Is it true? Did it ever
exist in the past? What exactly does it mean? Well, these are the questions
that this chapter will answer. If you ever had questions about this rune, you
now have the best and most comprehensive answers.
Who Came Up With the Blank Rune?
A new age author by the name Ralph Blum is believed to be the inventor of
the blank rune. Until the year 1982, he was famous for being a novelist of
Jewish origin. His critics argue that until then, Blum had no knowledge of
runes, Norse culture, history, or mythology. His decision to shift his
attention to the new area might have been influenced by the growing
demand for knowledge and insights about runes. In his admission, he agrees
that, indeed, the new-age goldmine is what beckoned him to the art of
reading runes and writing about it. He, therefore, enjoyed the new waters to
the point of inventing something that no one had ever thought would exist
in the world of runes.
Ralph Blum argues that he happened to get a set of runes from England that
contained a 25th blank tile, probably a bonus rune or a spare just in case

one of the 24 is not that good. Since he didn't know anything about the
blank 25th rune, he took it and attached a new meaning to it. He referred to
it as a blank, mysterious rune with a deep mystical meaning. After
examining it for a while, he went ahead to write a book called The Book of
Runes that explored all the runes in his set, including the 25th mysterious
one that had never appeared in any book before or historical facts about
runes as well as their origins.
Readers of Blum's book and especially the critics argue that the inclusion of
the 25th tile is the biggest fraud ever invented in the history of runes. They
further argue that even the 24 others, as explained in his book, had the
wrong explanations too. However, that did not deter Ralph Blum from
continuing to deepen his mind and pen in the world of runes. He went ahead
to promote his book and especially the new invention; 25th tile. His view is
that there was something great worth knowing about it, especially for
purposes of blending it with culture.
Since the invention, there have been many other developments as well as
controversies regarding the existence of the blank rune and its role. For
those who are seriously interested in the old number of runes and meanings,
the 25th is nothing. On the other hand, for the advocates of the new age
runic knowledge, this is something great to explore. As a reader, you can
choose whether you should stick to the old number or embrace the new age
meanings. The fact, however, is that the blank rune was never in the initial
24 runes of Odin, the God of true and wise runic knowledge.
What Exactly is the Blank Rune?
Also called Odin's rune or the Wyrd rune, the blank rune is a new age thing
that came into the limelight around the 1980s when it was marketed by

some rune enthusiasts as an alternative form or a divination method that is
only applicable in specific situations. It is regarded as a new thing or an
introduction since there is no historical as well as archaeological evidence
that the blank rune was ever among the original 24 runes of god Odin.
So what exactly is the blank rune if there is no historical evidence that it
existed in the past? Well, the blank rune is the zero, or silence that is void of
infinite possibility. Some writers or books describe it as the breath before a
speech or the space between words. Besides, it is an element of air whose
Tarot equivalent is the fool. This fact about the blank rune is the reason
behind the debate on whether the blank rune is a good or bad omen. It is the
reason behind the many talks and the debate about its use.
Essentially, the blank rune opens up a new chapter or space for discussion
to a student or any learner of runes to put their wisdom into the questions
often raised about runes. Those who have delved into this topic argue that
the blank rune represents a situation of not knowing what is happening.
Before the runemaster (god Odin) received the 24 runes, he was in a state of
bot known as simply a state of ignorance. It, therefore, invites everyone to
ponder on how it feels to be in the state of not knowing or awaiting the
intervention of the giver of power and knowledge to provide the missing
information.
Should You Use the Blank Rune for Divination?
Well, there is no straight answer to this question that continues to puzzle
many and especially those still learning about runes. Some object it for
technical reasons, and some are opposed to the blank rune because of their
conservative nature. As a reader, you can, therefore, decide whether or not
you are going to include it when casting or drawing your runes.

Some readers argue that including a blank rune in your set opens up a new
page of complications, especially in interpretations. They say that it
amounts to reading the air, meaning that there is nothing serious or tangible
worth interpreting. On the other hand, some have used it, and they believe
that including it opens up your mind for a conversation.
Rune teachers do also have varied opinions on whether one should include
or exclude the blank rune. However, there seems to be a consensus in one
thing regarding the use of this rune. They agree that things evolve with
time, and as a result, having the 25th rune can as well be an indication that
things have changed since Odin, the runemaster, introduced the 24 runes.
Many teachers, therefore, advise their students to use intuition when
deciding whether or not to include the 25th rune in their set. It is interesting
to note that some even argue that it should be included since runes may not
have been finished by the time Odin received them. In the same measure,
there are those teachers that say that it is not right to have something that
does not stand for anything.
Well, from the analyses of those who care for and those against it, one can
conclude that there is no consensus on this. It is, thus, a matter of personal
preference. You can have it, but whether to use it or not is purely a matter of
personal choice. For runic studies, there is no doubt that learning about the
blank rune is very vital. Most importantly, knowing it helps you get facts,
so when you decide to give it a try, you know exactly what you are using
and where it came from since it was not in the original 24 runes given to
Odin.
Assuming You Use, What Does It Mean When a Blank Rune
Appears In Your Reading?

If you finally decide to have a set of 25 instead of 24 and you get the blank
one a part of those you should read and interpret, what does it mean to have
it? Well, this is where the knowledge of how to interpret the blank rune
comes in. It has a meaning for your divination, and it might help you get the
true picture of the situation that you are trying to solve. It has an implication
though there is no uniform meaning of it.
Different rune teachers and users attach different meanings to the blank
rune. But generally, what many of them tend to suggest is that having a
blank rune suggests that there are complications in your divination
practices. It can be a suggestion that your formulation of the question is ill-
informed, or it is simply not right. Besides, it might be a call for you to
meditate and wait before you can finally uncover the problem that you are
facing.
To help you understand more about the blank rune, here are some of the
responses that some authors or books have to say:
According to Farnell (2006), in his book about runes, a blank rune
indicates that some sort of change is about to take place, but there is no
clarity on whether the change is positive or negative. You may, therefore,
have to do further reading to understand what exactly awaits you or what
kind of change is going to happen to you sooner or later.
Peschel (1989) asserts that when a blank rune appears, it means that
something you did not expect is going to come your way. However, whether
it is good or a bad thing depends on your past behavior. If you did good
things in the past and your behavior warrants it, then you should expect
good, and the vice versa is also true.
Blum (1983), the inventor of the blank rune, also has his interpretation of
this interesting rune. He argues that the appearance of this rune in a cast or
a drawing can portend death. However, he does not simply mean that you

are going to die if you cast or draw your runes, and a blank one becomes
part of those that you should read. Death, in his explanation, is relative to
any part of your life. It could mean the end of a relationship, business, or
any other thing that has been alive and happening in your life.
According to Holmes (2013), the appearance of a blank rune indicates that
there is some good progress in one's spiritual development. It also implies
that one's knowledge is greater and even far much stronger than it was ever
imagined. It is this a reminder that life is not that bad as one tends to
imagine or think about, especially in times of hardships or some sort of
desperation.
Vital Things to Remember About the Blank Rune
Having explored details about the blank rune, how it came to being, and
whether or not you should use it, there are vital things to remember about it.
Knowing them can help you, especially when you are faced with a situation
where you have to decide whether or not you should include the additional
blank rune in your set. You should note that as already, the decision on
whether or not you should add it depends on what you intend to achieve.
Precisely, there is no restriction or permission on whether or not you should
use it.
Additionally, the other thing worth remembering is that the blank rune was
not originally among the twenty-four that were given to Odin. It is
something that came up much later in the 1980s from Ralph Blum.
However, his invention was not intentional but rather something that arose
from the runes he received from England that included an extra blank one.
Instead of using it as a spare, he decided to give it a meaning, and it has
since been used and included in many other recent publications about runes.

It is also worth noting that there are several other authors apart from Ralph
Blum, who have also looked at the aspect of the blank rune and given it a
meaning. As already shown on what it means to have blank runes, there are
lots of things that can be associated with the rune. If you decide to use it,
you need to understand the different views that some authors and runic
teachers have about it. You might also have to read and interpret it if you
cast or spread leads you to it or brings it up as one of your runes to
interpret. Finally, there is no consensus on whether it is good or bad to
include the blank rune in your set.


Chapter Nine: Runic Spreads
Runes are often arranged in different patterns for divinatory purposes. The
patterns they form when cast or arranged are the "Runic Spreads." These
spreads vary a lot, and they can range from as few as only two runes put in
a sequence to as large as a full 24 runic layout pattern. In a spread, whether
large or small, the most important thing is the sequence. It determines not
only the position but the significance as well.
Different people make use of different spreads depending on their
circumstances and the kind of information that they would like to obtain.
More specifically, some people have one or a few chosen spreads, while
others make use of different spreads. It is also interesting to note that
spreads change from time to time, and they also vary from one place to
another. If you love using runes to get information or knowledge of the
unknown, you can also invent your unique spread that matches your needs.
But to get a picture of what others usually do, you might have to learn and
master some common spreads.
Common Runic Spreads
Single Spread
The single runic spread is the easiest and the simplest of all. It is often done
when the situation at hand is not complex or when one needs a quick insight
into what drives a particular situation. You can also apply when you want to
get the most concise summary of a situation. In all these situations, a single

rune spread provides an overview of what lies ahead and any guidance that
one needs to tackle the problem at hand.
The procedure for drawing a single rune is also simple and straightforward.
Hold your bag or runes then think about the situation that you are facing.
For instance, you can say that you would wish the rune to give you a picture
of the day ahead, comment upon an endeavor, or a problem. Once you
clearly state what you expect to achieve after spreading, pick a rune then
meditate while holding it. You can then look up its meaning, and you'll be
done. Indeed, it is without any doubt the quickest, simplest, and most
importantly, effective.
Three Spread
If you want to place an issue in its content and get an overall picture of it,
then the three runic spread is all you need. It uncovers vital details about an
event and what awaits you going forward. More specifically, it shows what
led to an event, the issue itself that you are currently facing, and any
possible outcomes that you should anticipate. In a nutshell, a three runic
spread shows you three important things:
● Your past and circumstances that led to it
● Your present situation
● Your future, so you prepare
You need three runes to do this spread, but you will draw them one by one,
each of them representing the three highlighted scenarios. Think about an
issue, and when it is clear on your mind, draw your first rune. Have a
flashback of the events that led to it while focusing on the drawn rune.

Draw the second one while focusing on your current situation. Finally, draw
the last one while focusing on what is likely to happen in the future. One
thing you need to remember is that deep focus is very vital at all these
stages.
Fork Spread
This kind of spread is often preferred by people who want to understand the
dynamics of a given situation. It uses three runes that represent three
different aspects of an important decision that is about to be made. If you
are at a critical point where you are expected to make a decision, then this
can be the runic spread to consider.
Drawing the three runes for fork spread is also a simple exercise. Each of
the three runes you draw explains something about your decision. The left
rune stands for the best possible outcome. On the other hand, the right one
represents the second-best possible outcome, and lastly, the third one stands
for the underlying critical factor that determines the outcome of your
situation.
Diamond Spread
When something happens or a situation changes to something that was not
anticipated, people believe that forces are acting or influencing it. However,
understanding those forces, especially when one is looking for a solution,
can be a challenge. Fortunately, there are runic spreads that can help reveal
the forces acting on a given situation at hand. Such runes are, therefore, the
best when you want to understand a hidden conflict.
Diamond rune spread is one type that can help reveal the hidden or dynamic
forces acting on a given situation. You can thus opt to use this spread if

there is a serious hidden conflict that is affecting you, and there is a need to
reveal it. It is a four-runic spread with each rune representing a given aspect
of a situation at hand. The four runes and what they represent in a given
situation are given as:
Bottom rune: the basis of the issue of the problem
Left rune: one of the forces behind a given conflicting situation
Right rune: the other force that is acting on the situation you are facing
Top rune: what you can finally achieve by taking a given route
One thing that makes this kind of spread popular among many people is the
fact that it can be used in a variety of situations. It doesn't matter the
situation or conflict that you are facing. Provided you know how to draw it,
you can, without any hassle, use it and get to understand the forces acting
and what your remedial actions are likely to yield.
Norn Spread
The Norn spread is used when one wants to plot elements, including those
of the past, the current ones, and even those expected in the future. It
essentially helps in getting an understanding of the evolution of a situation
over time. To perform this spread, you need three runes, namely, the left,
right, and middle runes. Here are the three crucial elements that these three
runes represent:
● Left: an important element of the past
● Middle: a deciding element of the present time
● Right: a critical element of the future

Relationship Spread
People relate, and there are usually many questions and issues involved in
relationships. The relationship spread, therefore, helps people who want to
understand the purpose of the relationship as well as what to expect going
forward. More specifically, it explains the role of each partner and, most
importantly, the direction that the relationship is likely to take it the future.
The relationship spread uses three runes, each representing an important
aspect of the relationship. The first rune represents the attitude towards the
relationship that the person drawing the rune has as well as their energy.
The second rune represents the attitude and energy of the partner towards
the relationship. Lastly, the third rune shows the reason the partners are in
the relationship.
Elemental Spread
The elemental spread uses four runes with each rune representing a certain
quality. The runes are namely, the top (Earth), the right, the bottom, and the
left rune. In this arrangement, the top rune, which is also called the Earth,
represents lessons that one can learn on the physical plane. The right rune
represents lessons that are to be learned on the mental plane or those that
one is thinking about with regards to the situation at hand. The bottom rune,
which is sometimes known as the fire, represents lessons that one can learn
from the spiritual realm. Finally, the left rune; water stands for emotional
lessons.
Celestial Spread
Unlike all other spreads, the celestial spread takes the longest time and uses
more runes. Ideally, it takes a whole year, and one needs a total of thirteen

runes to do this kind of spread. Those who draw this spread often use it to
get a glimpse of the kind of influence that the year has on their life. The
thirteen runes are arranged in a diamond shape with the first one being the
right rune to the last one, which is rune twelve.
It is, however, worth noting that since the celestial rune does not have to
start in January since it is a whole year practice. It can start at any month,
and the first or the right rune represents the month that you are in. If you,
thus, start in June or say August, all you need to do is to follow the diamond
shape every month until the twelfth rune. Finally, when you are done, the
last one, which is the thirteenth, will give you the influence that the year
had on your life or the situations you had over time.
Celtic-Cross Spread
If you are well versed in star crosses or the patterns they form, then
understanding the Celtic cross spread is pretty simple for you. This kind of
spread is applicable in situations where you want to gain a complete view of
the situation that is affecting your life. You can use it to plot the arc of your
life, so you get a complete view of what is happening and where you are
likely to be headed to in the future.
Celtic cross is a ten-rune spread. When drawn, they all form a right, left,
and center pattern that represents various times. All runes to the left side
represent the past with the furthest giving details of the distant past. On the
other hand, all runes to the right represent all future times with the furthest
giving details to the distant future. The rune at the center represents the
current situation.
Odin's Spread

Named after the Norse god, Odin, this is a five rune spread that helps in
understanding the past, present, and future. Two left runes; the far left and
left represent distant past and recent past, respectively. Two right runes; far-
right and right represent distant future and near future, respectively. Finally,
the one remaining rune at the center or top represents the present time.
It is good to note that unlike the other rune spreads that are also used to get
information about the past, present, and future, Odin's spread is a bit
detailed. Precisely, it looks at these vital things deeply as it gives you an
option to understand distant times. It is, therefore, the best when you want
to get a complete understanding of a given situation with regards to times,
especially the distant past, as well as the future.
Medicine Wheel Spread
If you ever find yourself in a situation where you do not know exactly
which path you should follow, the medicine wheel spread can help you. It
gives guidance on a specific issue that the person drawing or casting has at
hand. Many times, this spread is utilized when there is a need to understand
which path is likely to lead to the desired destination.
To draw the medicine wheel spread, you need to have five runes, namely
the left, right, bottom, top, and center. The bottom rune provides details
about the flow of energies or the future specifically. The top deals with or
shows you the challenge at hand. The left rune uncovers the source of the
problem. On the other hand, the right rune represents the current situation.
Finally, the fifth rune stands for the power that you can call upon to
intervene and fix the situation that you could be facing.
Other runic spreads exist, and some people even come up with their spreads
that reflect their different situations. Provided you understand the art of

drawing runes, there is nothing that can prevent you from coming up with
your own unique spread that is specific to the situation that you are facing
at hand. It is, however, recommended that when beginning,, you start with
those commonly used and simple ones before progressing to the
complicated types.
 


Chapter Ten: Hidden Runic Roots
While the history of runes reveals much information about how runes came
to use, there are other interesting hidden roots that every reader should
know. For instance, the Shamans in Scandinavia used runes as their
protective symbols. They carved them into stones, woods, and bone, and
there were lots of mysterious stuff about runes. Other than that, there are
lots of other things that a student or anyone learning about runes should
explore. In this chapter, we take a look at a couple of those hidden runes.
The Hidden Process of How Odin Got the Runes
Odin consistently sought new knowledge, and the process that he used to
gain the knowledge of runes is quite interesting, yet it is not fully disclosed.
Other than being the inventor of runes and many other things related to it,
he is also known as the god of magic or wisdom. Indeed, his wisdom is
what made it possible for him to attain knowledge that would otherwise be
impossible in human ways. To gain absolute knowledge, Odin had to
renounce an eye. That's, in fact, how he managed to drink from the rarely
known spring of wisdom that not everyone makes to reach or even know
where it is found.
To surrender himself to the world of wisdom and drink from what others
could not, Odin had to hurt himself even after removing his eye seriously.
He pierced himself using a spear and hang down from a tree for two days.
All these activities happened far away in a cold place where no one could
see what he was doing. When he was almost dying, 18 magical runes were
revealed to him, and they were rapidly spread throughout the world. They

were later increased to 24 after he successfully managed to cheat death
narrowly. He had successfully conquered death and managed to drink from
the spring of wisdom that no one else had eve tested.
Since their introduction and spreading across the land by the powerful god
who conquered death, runes have kept their magical properties over the
years. Most importantly, they have been successfully used for many
different purposes. For instance, they have been used over the years for
protection, flight, and even contacting death. Besides, they have been used
as a way of making contact with other plains of existence through
divination. To date, runes still play a very vital role in the daily lives of
many people, mainly runic enthusiasts.
Hidden Connection between Runes and Wood
Wood is the most commonly used material for making runes. Although
many other materials can be used, including stone, shells, bones, and paper,
wood remains the highly used material. This is, however, not just a mere
coincidence, but it is attributable to many facts about wood in runes
mythology. In all honesty, wood has great importance and is treated as a
sacred element in rune mythology.
Two reasons can explain the importance of wood in rune mythology. The
first one is the fact that the universe is structured in a way that looks like a
tree. More specifically, a sacred tree by the name Yggdrasil is the one that
holds everything in the world. It is believed that all other worlds hang from
its branches. From the perspective of Norse mythology, nine worlds are
brought together by the sacred tree. The nine worlds are:
Asgard: the heaven of gods

Muspellheim: the land of fire
Midgard: the land of human beings
Nifelheim: the land of ice
Jotunheim: the land of giants
Helheim: the land of the dead
Svartalfheim: the land of spirits of the night
Ljosalfheim: the land of the spirits of light
Vanaheim: the land of the spirits of water
Generally, as already said, all these nine worlds are held together by a tree,
and hence, that explains why wood is a very vital material for runes. In the
past, runes used to be carved into wood and stones for sacred reasons.
Things have, however, changed over time, and other materials these days
are also used. The striking reality that shows that, indeed, times have
changed is how runes are now in papers, especially among modern rune
enthusiasts. Notwithstanding the changes and many developments that have
altered the original runes, wood remains connected to runes. It remains the
most common material for making runes, especially among communities
that have tried their best to retain the original meaning of runes and how
they are used.
Healing of the Wound and How Odin Learned the 18 Chants
Having braced the cold and hurt himself to learn the secrets of runes, Odin
took another step to learn more and more from the world of spirits. He
climbed the Yggdrasil tree that holds the worlds. He got to the top, and after

three days, the serious wounds he had started to heal by itself without Odin
doing anything to aid the healing. It is believed that apart from getting the
healing, Odin also learned a couple of other important secrets that he later
spread to the world.
The number nine in rune mythology has great significance, and it was also
used greatly while Odin was still in the tree. After staying there for nine
days and nine nights, when he was almost to die, he had a strange voice.
Two women were chanting as they engraved runes on pieces of wood.
Hearing the sweet songs, Odin joined them and also started to recite the
nine chants. The chants were, however, not to accompany the engraving of
runes into woods, but they also served other different purposes. According
to runic mythology, the nine chants helped Odin in the following ways:
● Protect him from any danger
● Put out fires
● Protect against the painful wounds
● Protect him against the right ropes
● Stop the spear in the fight
● Make sadness go away
● Stop any storm
● Protect against arrows
● Call upon the death of his enemy

The first nine chants were essentially for protection against the nine
different perils already highlighted. After the first nine chants, nine others
followed. These next nine were for resurrecting the god who died by
hanging, making the giants to go away, calling the sun to rise, stealing the
heart of a beautiful girl, stealing a woman's love, bring the happiness to a
newborn baby, stop the witch in flight and to protect the friend in battle by
making him invincible. After all these, Odin changed the 18th powerful
one. It was, in fact, the strongest chant, but he never revealed it to anyone.
It is said that Odin escaped when he chanted the 18th one, and that is how
he survived the death he had seen approaching him.
The rope that Odin had used to tie himself to hang from the tree was
removed, and as he fell on the ground, he got the nine initial pieces of wood
that had runes engraved on them. He took them together with the new
knowledge he acquired and later imparted it on humans. This process and
time away in the cold region hanging on a tree is what is said to be the
beginning of the story of runes. In his knowledge and wisdom, Odin
increased the runes to 24 and revealed vital information about it to humans.
The knowledge has since been handed down from one generation to another
to date.
Secret Knowledge of Three Gods
The story of the three gods explains how the world was created by the three
gods who worked together to bring life and new things to the new world.
But even before delving into the process of creating the world and its
components, there are lots of interesting facts about the first inhabitants of
the world. More specifically, it is interesting to note that some came into
being through unique natural processes.

According to rune mythology, a mixture of black poisoned ice and fire is
what gave birth to Ymer. Another mixture of fire and clear ice is what gave
birth to Audhulma. It is further written in runic books that Audhulma licked
some blocks of ice to give birth to Bure. Bure had a son that was called Bur,
who married Bestla. They together had three children who are the three
great gods of the world, namely Odin, Vile, and Ve. These are the three
gods that created the world and passed on the knowledge of runes.
The three gods killed Ymer and used his body to create the world. Each god
took a piece or part of Ymer's body, and they together used it to create the
world by makings hills, mountains, and plains from Ymer's body. Besides,
the blood from his body was used to form the oceans, seas, and rivers. Also,
from runic mythology, the hair from Ymer's body formed the forests. All
other features or components of the world were all created from the body
parts of Ymer, who was killed by the three gods.
After creating the world and it was beautiful with flowing rivers and good-
looking mountains, the three gods who created it gave it different parties.
The land that had eyebrows surrounding it was given to humans to live in
and use it. The land that had water surrounding was given by the gods to the
giants. To sustain the sky and make the world safe, the three gods used four
dwarfs, namely Soder, Vaster, Norr, and Oster, to sustain it in its rightful
place.
How Humanity Came Into the Newly Created World
The three gods who took part in the creation of the world are also the same
gods who are behind the beginning and appearance of humanity. It is said
that one evening, while Odin and his two brothers were taking a walk, they
came across two logs that caught their attention. They stopped for a while

to have a look at the logs and see what could be done with them. It is said
that Odin saw the shadows of his two brothers cast on the two logs, and he
decided to breathe life into the two shadows on the logs. One log,
specifically the ash one became a man. On the other hand, the other log by
the name elm became the woman.
After Odin created the first two humans from the logs, the other gods also
participated in the creation process by improving their characters. Ve is said
to have given them the power of speech or the ability to communicate with
each other. Vile, on the other hand, also gave them senses to help in their
interaction. He also endowed them with judgment or the ability to make a
decision when faced with a situation where one has to decide something or
arrive at a conclusion based on the situation or issues at hand. From the first
two humans, the world then increased, and the population grew as time
went by. The three gods continued to help humans by giving them
knowledge and wisdom of runes to assist them in uncovering daily hidden
realities.
A Wrap Up of the Secrets
Indeed, there are lots of interesting kinds of stuff worth exploring the
secrets of rune mythology and how the runes were handed down from Odin
to other people in the world. All the happenings right from the time Odin
was away in the cold region where he received the 18 chants to when
humans were created took quite some time. The world has since developed,
and it is believed that Odin, the god, and the inventor of runes still has his
control over his people and those who keep using the knowledge and
wisdom of runes that he left.


Chapter Eleven: Uncomfortable Truths about
Norse Mythology
It goes without any saying that Norse Mythology has a lot of interesting
facts. As a reader or student of it, you probably have learned a lot about it.
To date, it remains one of the most popular mythos owing to its uniqueness
and richness. The days of the week are named after the gods as well as
goddesses of Nordic Mythos. In this chapter, we take you through another
side of this mythology. You'll realize that, indeed, there are lots of things
that many books written about runes do not tell you.
Apart from the many good things that many of us know about runes, there
is a dark side that is rarely published or taught by runic teachers. Some
episodes and uncomfortable truths about runic myths can spark your sixth
sense and a desire to learn more about it. Very few people are aware of this
since most stories written or taught about Norse Mythology often focus on
the good side, leaving some other facts, yet they are also worth exploring.
Although there is a lot, we have picked just ten to give you the true picture
of the other side of Norse Mythology:
#1: Loki and the Horse
Something that many books and authors do not reveal is the strange love
affair between Loki and a horse. It is said that after creating the world, the
gods needed a home of their own where they would enjoy their time away
from the world. They, therefore, built a kingdom and called it Asgard.
Among the gods who lived there was Loki, a trickster god who was in
between god and evil. He was the son of a giant god who spent most of his

time helping Thor and Odin. He was not bad, but along the way, something
unusual happened that most books do not report since it could potentially
taint the image of gods.
It is believed that somewhere while with the gods in Asgard, Loki made
love to a horse, and the act made the gods hostile to him. They even
threatened him with cruel death not only for his affair with the horse but
also for other issues he had with the gods in their home. He, therefore, went
away with the horse and spent nine months of pregnancy together in one
nest. He continued sharing his love with the horse, and after the period, he
returned to the gods with an eight-legged horse baby. While there is a lot
written about the home of gods and those who lived there, not many books
expose this uncomfortable truth about some gods like Loki.
#2: The Incredibly Delicious Boar
Saehrímir, one of the Norse gods, was not an ordinary member of the
kingdom of gods. He had a special role to play that no one else would in his
absence. He was the god or boar cursed with immortality and the ability to
get delicious. He had no end, and no even the presence of many people to
be fed would threaten to bring him to an end.
Every morning, Snorri, the chef who took care of the needs of the members
of the kingdom of gods, sliced off some pieces of flesh from saehrími's
body. That was the order of every single day. Surprisingly, there is no day
when food missed to be served in the kingdom even though there was only
one supplier of the needed pieces of meat.
While many stories talk about the home gods and what they did while there,
especially regarding the creation of humans, not all of them talk about
saehrímir. He was a great member of the kingdom with a special role to
play. Although his ability to grow and fill parts cut off from his body was
seen as a curse, it appears that it was a blessing to the kingdom. However,

not many books or stories written about Norse gods expose this interesting
fact.
#3: Odin's Strict Adherence to All-Liquid Diet
It is said that there was a time when saehrímir, the boar grew bigger and
tastier than ever in the past. The gods, therefore, decided to chop off more
parts of the body than ever before and enjoyed the meal. All other Norse
gods enjoyed the meat except Odin. However, Odin did not take it not
because it was not served to him, but it is because he always ensured that
his principles are adhered to without any deviation. He always insisted on
taking his all-liquid diet.
Odin took his share of the meat and threw it to the dogs. He did not need for
since, to him, the wine was both a drink as well as food. However, there
was something strange about saehrímir's meat. He was never allowed to die
even when a chunk of flesh was taken away as food from his body by the
goods. Every time a section of his body was cut off, it would rapidly grow
again and make the boar look okay with no missing parts of his body.
History has it that there was a time when chef Snorri decided to cut down
the boar to his bone and removed almost all parts to the extent that no one
would imagine that he would live again. To his surprise, the chef watched
saehrímir's flesh grow again to its full status. On all these occasions, Odin
never joined his fellow gods in enjoying the meat from the boar. He always
made sure that he stuck to his liquid diet, and any meat is given to him
finally ended to his dogs that were at all times waiting to feast on it.
#4: Odin's Wife Cheated on Him

One of the strangest stories you will not easily find in many books about
Norse Mythology is the fact that Frigg, the wife of Odin, slept around with
other gods. According to stories from ancient legends, there was a time
when Odin went on a trip and delayed to come back home. His wife, by the
name Frigg, assumed that Odin was probably dead or had been killed
somewhere while he was away. She, therefore, quickly made up her mind
that it was time to start having extra-marital affairs with other gods.
When Frigg could not wait any longer, she decided to give out Odin's
possession to his brothers, Vili and Ve. The two gods took turns in sleeping
with her, not knowing that Odin was on his way back home. The story does
not, however, explain how Odin arrived home and whether he found the on
the act. What is only explained is the fact that Frigg did not manage to keep
her faithfulness to her husband while he was away.
The story is not only uncomfortable for a highly regarded Norse god, Odin,
but it also raises other questions about Frigg and the powers associated with
her. Some stories talk about Frigg's gift of prophecy. If at all she had it, then
maybe it was not always strong at all times since she would have used it to
know that Odin was not dead. She quickly decided to sleep around only to
end up embarrassing his husband and his brothers, who took turns in
making love to her while Odin was away.
#5: Odin Did Nothing to His Brothers Who Stole His Wife
One would have expected something terrible to happen when Odin arrived
home and found that his brothers had taken away his possessions, including
the wife. The whole affair simply ended without anything strange
happening. Odin took back his possession, and that was the end of the story.

There is nothing mentioned about his reaction or anything he did to Frigg or
his brothers for taking away his share while he was away.
Odin did not seem to have been even miffed up by the awkward and
embarrassing situation occasioned by his absence for a while. Moreover, he
did not learn any lessons from happening since his behavior did not change
much. Life went on as usual, as though nothing happened. It is not known
whether the aftermath was not recorded or if it's true that the tale ended on
an anticlimax note. With that said, the whole affair and how Odin behaved
on his arrival back home is something that is not exposed in the Norse
mythology.
#6: Baldur's Death
Odin had a second son called Baldur. From the time he was born, lots of
good things were said about him. He had always been praised as the best
and brightest son of Odin. Well, while that was the case for a long time,
there is something else that is not often disclosed about him in the Norse
mythology. They only say that he was a great and great son of Odin, but
something worth knowing is hidden about him.
His destiny had been prophesied long ago, in fact, immediately from the
time he was born. His character was all known, and his death had also been
foreseen. He would die, and his death wasn't going to be a normal one. His
death would mean the end of the world or what was known in runic
language as Ragnarok, meaning the end of the world. However, Nordic
stories do not reveal why he was regarded as the best son, yet contrary to
the expectation, his death would again mean the end of the world. That is
also another truth that is not put plainly in many books and tales about
Norse gods and their lives.

#7: A Big Snake Holds the World Together
From the story of the creation of the world, it is said that the world is held
together by the branches of a tree. There is also another version of the story
that alleges that love is what holds together the world. Well, these are the
most common accounts given about how the world is held together.
However, there is another reality that many books and stories about runes
and Norse Mythology do not bring to the attention of readers.
One of Loki's monster children, a giant serpent by the name Jormungandr
holds the world together. Nordic tales report that the giant snake was taken
away from his mother and father since there was no way that the gods
would allow a giant snake to live with them in the kingdom of gods,
Asgard. He was, therefore, thrown away. He lives in the ocean and be bites
his tail as he holds the Earth together while waiting for his turn to fight
back.
It is further said that the big giant will one day strike the gods that threw
him away from his parents and his place in the kingdom of the Norse gods.
More specifically, his target is to strike hard on Thor, whom he hates a lot.
Come the time of Ragnarok or the end of the world; it is believed that the
giant snake will slay Thor. While this is an interesting tale, it remains
concealed in many runic books. That could be the case since it departs from
what is always said about the nine worlds as told by Odin and how they are
held together.
#8: There is A Squirrel that Just Loves Gossip in the Tree of
Life
From Norse tales, everything in the world exists in the tree of life,
Yggdrasil. All creations, including animals, all have places in the tree. For

instance, there is an eagle in the branches of the tree and other roots; there
is a dragon. It is said that these two creatures hate each other a lot, although
they live in different parts. Possibly, they might not have even met at one
time. So what could be the cause of their hatred?
It is believed that the squirrel is the reason for all the hatred that exists
between the eagle and the dragon. Squirrel loves to gossip, and he moves up
and down the tree all the time, conveying information and views that each
animal has towards the other. For instance, when the eagle says something
nasty about the dragon, it's the squirrel that runs down to tell the dragon. He
also does the same when the dragon at the root part of the tree utters
something or insults the eagle.
Funny enough, there is a tale that the squirrel, also called Ratatosk, loves
the gossip and the job he does so much that whenever it cools, he always
makes sure that there is something to carry up or takedown. His behavior is
what has contributed to the prolonged hatred between these two creatures,
yet they live differently in different territories of the world. Indeed, this is
an interesting story, but this fact has remained hidden for long.
#9: Domaldi, the Swedish King, Did Not Enjoy His Life
One would have expected that by being a legendary king, Domaldi must
have enjoyed his life during his reign. Contrary to this, it is said that
sometimes, being a king is not a ticket to happiness, and neither does it
guarantee one quality life. But what would someone of his stature fail to
enjoy life, and he was the king? Well, it is said that the circumstances that
led to his rise to the position of being a king are the reasons behind is
trouble during his reign and even until his death.

Domaldi became the king because his two brothers killed their father.
Although it was not his plan to have his father killed for him to get the
throne, the whole act was seen as a curse. Since it was not cleansed and he
as the king did not even bother to appease the angry gods, his reign was
marked with great sorrows that deprived him of happiness. Famine and
plague were the major problems that he had to deal with all the time. His
people starved, and there were desperate times when desperate measures
had to be taken to salvage the situation. There times, even when human
beings had to be sacrificed in a bid to reduce the intensity and frequency of
adversities.
Despite the many terrible things that happened during the reign of Domaldi,
many books tend to paint him as the greatest Swedish king. The fact,
however, is that he was never a happy king until his death. One last thing
that is not always reported is that his county only saw great times after
Domaldi's blood had been splashed on the altar. That is the time when
Sweden's fate changed for good and calamities that had tormented her
people stopped. The year that followed the death of Domaldi saw excellent
harvests, and that marked the changed from constant sorrows to happiness.
#10: Odin's Magic Was Considered Unmanly
Norse mythology promotes Odin as the most important god among all other
gods. He is attributed to the development or invention of runes, among
many other things. However, that is not all that ought to be disclosed about
him. Many uncomfortable truths are often not said about this god. Although
they may not be as scary as others already discussed, it is good for any
student and anyone else interested in learning runes to know these facts.

The first disturbing thing about Odin is his tendency to hoard knowledge.
This is contrary to what one would have expected of him, bearing in mind
that he spent days away and even hurt himself to acquire wisdom and
knowledge of runes. On acquiring it and surviving even when he had almost
died, he continued to search for knowledge but never dispersed it all to his
fellows and even to humans. It is said that he often sent his servants to go
and collect as much information from the universe as possible. However,
instead of disseminating it, he hoarded it and never wanted anyone to know
all the secrets he had learned firsthand and even those relayed to him by his
servants.
Some popular literature also asserts that Odin was an unpopular god and his
cult did not widespread as much as is often said or praised in many
writings. Moreover, the kind of magic that he practiced called seidr was
considered unmanly. Some literature and tales even go on to name him as
the god of death and betrayal. He also had to stab himself to understand
runes or the magical writings he taught to his people, but, of course, after
hoarding some secrets or parts, he knew alone. From his act of stabbing
himself, it is further said that any sacrifice made to him was killed in the
same manner. The killings were also extended to some kings who were his
subjects, especially those considered as failures.
Why These Truths Are Hidden in Norse Mythology
Reading books and tales about Nordic goes, and their lives reveal that most
of these truths are hidden. Besides, only a few teachers and runic tales
expose these facts that somehow tend to twist the story said about runic
gods and their roles in creating the world and influencing the lives of
human beings. It is not that most pieces of literature praise runes, but the
striking reality is the fact that some of these facts are quite interesting, and

they just depict the reality of human life and what happens when people
interact.
Apart from these uncomfortable truths, runes and Norse mythology remain
interesting to explore for anyone interested in acquiring facts and more
knowledge about runes. It is also worth noting that these truths do not, in
any way, change the effectiveness or usefulness of runes among enthusiasts.
They remain useful in dealing with daily challenges and situations that are
often hard to solve without help. We can thus say that these uncomfortable
truths only serve as an eye-opener and a call to take a look at the other
interesting side often not made public.


Chapter Twelve: Runes and Naming of the Seven
Days of the Week
Origins of the names that are given to the days of the week are attached to
and traced to different sources, including runes. If you have explored this
topic in the past, you will agree with us that, indeed, there are many and
misleading stories about the names given to the days of the week. In this
chapter, we give you details of the link between these days and Norse
mythology. Indeed, there is a close link and many Norse Runes associated
with the days of the week.
Apart from the days of the week being named after runic gods, there are
also rules regarding the best times to cast or draw some specific runes. It is,
therefore, very vital to understand this as part of your journey to mastering
runes. If you intend to be casting them as often as possible, then this is the
section that you need to give a lot of emphasis to. Without further ado, here
are the days of the week and the secret knowledge about the connection
between these days and various runes:
Sunday
Sunday is named after the sun, and it is a symbol of life and creation as well
as renewal. Today, many people view this day as an excellent day of social
approval and activities. People attend parties, weddings, churches, short
trips, and even rejuvenation. Also, promotions for health, wellness, and
related activities are normally done on this day. All these activities are best
suited for the day since it is a day of warmth and self-confidence.

SOWELU is the rune associated with Sunday. It is a symbol of energy and
success; hence, it is a strong and powerful rune that is associated with many
good things. If you want to use runes for prosperity and good, then the best
day to cast your types are on Sunday since it is the day of good. Used well,
SOWELU can help you get rid of negativity and sadness that could be
affecting your life. It is this great to seek the true and real meaning of this
day named after the sun as well as the rune of great achievement.
Monday
Monday means moon day or the body that wanes and moves the tides as
well as reflects light from the sun. Based on its meaning, it is a day of quiet
meditation, talking to friends and relatives. You can also use it to read,
record your dreams, write a few things, and other related activities. The
most important one here is to have quality time with your loved ones and
especially family members.
LAGUZ is the rune associated with Monday. This rune is associated with
rain, water, sea, and lakes, among other water or fluid bodies. In a nutshell,
this rune is associated or used when one wants an intervention with seeking
true value and meaning. The rune is also used or is an indication of the
renewal of the land through rain and plenty of life. Water is life hence the
association. You can give it a try, and you'll, indeed, enjoy renewal and
newness in all your activities.
Tuesday
Tuesday is also called Tyr's day or the day of the god known to make great
sacrifices for others and especially those who believe in him. He is also a
great warrior but not for physical battles or those involving killings. Instead,

he fights spiritual battles, and he has never been reported to have lost
anywhere. Many people associate him with doing good causes or sacrificing
for others to benefit. If you are a Tuesday person, you need a great heart.
Most importantly, you need courage, self-conquest, and readiness to face
fear and take calculated risks.
TEIWAZ is the rune that is associated with Tuesday. Rune readers and users
often use it when they want leadership or mastery of something associated
with a worthy cause. Tuesday is, therefore, a good day for doing
fundraisings, seeking justice, resolving serious issues and other tasks geared
towards helping others. People of goodwill and who understand runes often
organize humanitarian activities on this day. Sport parades and military
activities are also good for this day.
Wednesday
Odin features greatly in runic tales and Norse mythology for many amazing
reasons and especially his role. Therefore, Wednesday is Woden's or Odin's
day. He is the wise elder and the wisdom behind the runes. He wandered
away in a cold region to look for an opportunity to drink from the spring of
wisdom. He, however, had to endure pain to succeed and get new
knowledge that he wanted. Finally, after days of suffering and hurting his
body, he was able to get the 18 initial runes.
The rune associated with Wednesday is ANSUZ. In simple terms, ANSUZ
is the staff of Odin who links up the Earth with Heaven. The appearance of
this rune in your casting is a clear spiritual message of coming blessings. It
is almost an element of a powerful surprise. For this reason, Wednesdays
are the best for meetings, interviews, seminars, and workshops. Promotions

and advertisements also fit this great day. Finally, film, music, and poetry
are some of the things you can schedule to do on this big day of Odin.
Thursday
Thursday is Thor's day, the god who symbolizes great power, influence, and
victory over any form of opposition. If you are facing fear and there is
something that you seriously want to conquer, then this is the day you need
to consider for your tasks. If you believe, have the courage and readiness,
then you can easily strike like Thor or lightning to make it a bit clearer.
Thor is known to motivate, especially at instances where one has to face
fear.
Rune associated with Thursday is EHWAZ, the rune of movement. For this
reason, Thursday is the best day for energetic drives. Some rune readers and
teachers call it the day of the horse to imply that it is a day that is associated
with great movements. It is a great day to declare your moves, plans, and
innovative pursuits. It is time to work on those major projects that you have,
and you need to triumph despite all odds.
Friday
Name after Frigg, the wife of Odin, Friday is generally a day of unity and
relationship. It is all about giving, receiving, and engaging in activities of
mutual benefits. If you plan to give someone a special gift, then the best day
to do so is on Friday. It is also a day to unite and exercise mutual respect,
especially with special parties. It is the day when people cement their loving
relationships or make great business offers to their partners.
GEBO is the rune associated with Friday. The name of this rune means a
gift hence explaining why this is a gift day. Based on this, some of the

activities usually organized or carried out on this day include but are not
limited to birthday outings, engagement parties, romantic dinners, dating,
and other meetings. The day is also favorable for artistry, jewelry, and
beauty works. It is, indeed, a great day for great times.
Saturday
Saturday stands for self-discipline, and it is a day that is named after Saturn.
It is a day of duty and karmic obligation. More specifically, it is a day of
rewards, although people no longer give it the seriousness it deserves as
witnessed by the many and busy activities that people do on this day that
would otherwise be of rest. In Hebrew, it is the Sabbath day or the day
when God rested after finishing his works of creation. Some still observe it,
and they keep it as a holy day to serve God and stay away from the usual
heavy duties and tasks often carried out on other days.
JERA is the rune that is associated with Saturday. It implies harvest or
guaranteed success after days of serious work. It is the cycle of a harvest
that comes after planting and working hard to keep the plants good. Based
on this, Saturdays are good for harvest celebrations, a graduation dinner,
and traditional ceremonies. It is, therefore, a day that deserves those
activities that require a serious tone but should not be taxing a lot when it
comes to energy and time, as well.
As illustrated, all the days of the week are associated and named after
different Norse gods and the different activities that they were known for
during ancient times. Besides, each day has a rune that is associated with it.
What this means is that when you cast or do a runic exercise and you get
any of those that are related to the days of the week, the chances are that the

outcome of the activity that you are pondering is related with the tasks and
events highlighted as best suited for each of those days.
Are there Bad and Good Days?
From the discussion on the days of the week, it is not right to say that some
days are bad or worse than others. As illustrated, there are different
activities that one can do on any of the days of the week. Your decision on
what to do should, therefore, be guided by the event that you are planning
or the situation at hand. If you pick the right day, then you will, without any
doubt, achieve the best. All events, according to the Nordic calendar and
runes associated with the different days of the week, were chosen for
specific reasons. Those should be your guidelines when making your
calendar of events.
If you want to organize a birthday party, you now know which day best it
suits. Weddings, harvests, gifting, doing charity work, resting, and all other
events have days set aside for them based on the Nordic calendar and runes
related to them. If you are a rune student or teacher, you now have a reason
to reconsider how you plan events if you want to experience the joy and
happiness that comes with following the runic calendar. Each day is best for
something, and that is the most important thing to note.
 


Chapter Thirteen: Runes and the Power Plants'
Flowers
Over the years, there has been an increase in the use of flowers to represent
the different runes. It is not, therefore, surprising to find someone with 24
different plants with flowers that represent the runes and their associated
properties. Although it is a practice that wasn't too widespread, its use
began a long time ago, and it has improved over time with different runic
enthusiasts giving it a new meaning altogether. However, unlike other
plants grown in the garden, those associated with runes are unique in many
ways. They are planted in specific places of the garden and in certain
patterns depending on the runes that they represent. Indeed, great care has
to be taken to stop the energies from clashing in the garden.
The idea of planting flowers in the garden with runic attachments is to bring
out the desired life changes to help solve common problems that need runic
intervention. It, therefore, follows that not all runic flowers should be
grown in one garden. One can just concentrate on those that are of interest
or can bring the desired change. Once the appropriate runes are chosen,
they can be planted or placed in specific places of interest. For instance,
some flowers can be grown in pots and placed near the bedside or any other
place where runic energies are desired.
Runes and Their Corresponding Flowers
EOLH: Often used when seeking protection from enemies and evils that
may be out to cause unexpected harm or any misfortune. It is also
associated with luck, strength, and energies required to go about life

activities. There is a plant that has these features, and it is often grown to
represent this rune.
Flower: rush plant commonly grown in the east
SIGEL: rune often associated with healing, success, victory in a battle,
clear thinking, and self-confidence. If these are the things you need in life,
then you can plant a flower that is associated with this rune and its energies.
Flower grown to represent this rune exhibits these features, and hence, it is
chosen to represent this rune in the garden.
Flower: St John's wort grown in the east
TIR: rune of quick recuperation often used in times of trouble where quick
recovery is desired. It also aids a lot when there are competitions, and
victory is an important factor. It can be termed as rapid response rune in
times of struggle and need for quick recovery or victory. Do you know a
plant that has this feature? That's what is often grown to represent it.
Flower: red hot poker grown in the east
BEORC: rune often used to help when there are fertility issues, domestic
problems, or family affairs that need intervention to resolve. Apart from
being used when aid is needed in the family, this rune can also be used for
protection against matters that threaten family life. If interested, you can
choose to get wood with an inscription of this rune or grow a flower that
has the features and the energies associated with this rune.
Flower: night-scented stock grown in the north
EOH: if you even experience transport problems and you need aid, then
this is the rune you should try. It is normally used to bring swift and specific

changes that one desires. Most importantly, all problems related to
movement or transport can easily be solved by this run when used well. If
you are traveling and you want something in your garden to remind you
about this rune, then there is a flower you can plant.
Flower: forsythia grown in the north
FEOH: if you want an increase in wealth and all your property, then this is
the rune you should consider using. It not only helps in increasing them, but
it also helps in protecting all your valuables. In some instances, people also
seek the help of this rune when they want to hasten things from one level to
another. You can have a flower that reminds you if this great need and how
you can move faster to get to the levels you desire.
Flower: lily of the valley grown in the south and also in the north
UR: want to initiate new circumstances into your life? UR is the rune to
use. It is also useful in the maintenance of good health and protection from
all kinds of health issues. Flowers planted to represent this rune are,
therefore, those associated with new life and keeping of good health,
especially in hard times. Similarly, and like the other runes, you can have a
flower to represent the rune in your garden and what it can offer you.
Flower: nasturtium flower grown in the north
THORN: when this fall out of hand or turn out to be the opposite of what
you expected, then the rune you can use is THORN. You can also use it
when you need luck in your life or to overcome circumstances that are
beyond your control. A flower in your garden can help you get these favors
if you grow the right one and in the right place in your garden.
Flower: honesty plant grown in the south

ANSUR: often used to gain wisdom and especially the knowledge and
courage that is needed for one to tackle an exam successfully. If you also
want to master public speaking, communication, and related skills, then this
is the rune you should consider using to get needs. Want a flower instead of
the real rune? It's there, and you can try it.
Flower: morning glory plant is often grown in the south
RAD: used for safety in all travel means including planes, cars, bikes,
buses, and trains among all others. It does not only facilitate safe travel, but
it also provides comfort throughout the journey. You can thus use it if you
need to travel by any of these means. It works, and many travelers often
seek the aid of this rune.
Flower: snapdragon that's grown in the east
MANN: used when looking for assistance or to win goodwill from others.
It is also generally helpful in group activities or any cause that is aimed at
improving mankind. If you also want a boost in mental power, then this is
the rune to consider. You can have a plant to remind you of this amazing
runic power near you and especially in your garden.
Flower: foxglove plant grown in the east
ING: brings a sudden release of energy, and it is often used when a
satisfactory conclusion is needed. It has also been used severally when there
are fertility issues to be solved. It also fixes issues and helps in satisfactorily
ending them. Instead of getting the rune itself, a flower in your garden can
still do the same work.
Flower: gentian plant grown in the north or west

LAGU: do you have artistic endeavors, and you need help? This is the rune
you can use to get what you want. It helps in creating inner awareness and
boosting vital life-force energies. It also greatly helps intuition. What type
of flower or plant can you grow to represent this rune at home? Here's it.
Flower: water lily plant that is grown in the west
OTHEL: used in protecting the land, house, and all other possessions,
including long-term investments. One can also use it when asking for good
health for the elderly and good co-existence among people. It encourages
humility and respect for one another.
Flower: snowdrop plant grown in the south or the east
DAEG: struggling to change attitude, but it is becoming a bit challenging?
This is the rune you should consider giving a try. It can help you change
your attitude, so you completely take a new direction altogether and
renounce any paths that you are not okay with. It is also used in re-
evaluations and when you want an increase in finances.
Flower: marigold plant often grown in the north
GEOFU: sex, love, and anything involving partnerships between people of
the opposite gender can be aided by this rune. If you also happen to have
lost mental stability and you would like to restore equilibrium, then this is
the rune you should consider using. The flower associated with it is also
believed to have energies related to these areas.
Flower: lad's love plant grown in the east
WYNN: if you love your career and you want to bring fulfillment in it, then
this rune can help you achieve that goal. Some runic enthusiasts also use it

for success in their travels or adventures, especially to places unknown to
them. It, however, works well in the area of career development and
fulfillment.
Flower: larkspur plant grown in the north
KEN: used for stability of love and when seeking a fresh start after a
happening. If you also need to boost your passion in a relationship, then this
is the rune to use. The plant that is associated with it is, therefore,
associated with this kind of problem and human needs, including healing.
Flower: wild rose grown in the south
HAGALL: this rune is used for protection, and also when one is venturing
in a gambling situation where luck is needed. If these are the things you
need, then you should consider using this rune. The flower associated with
it is known to have a feature and scent that relates to these needs.
Flower: fern plant grown in the south
PEORTH: this rune is used when searching for lots of things that have
become a little bit hard to trace. It also helps with all sorts of psychological
problems that one could be facing and need immediate help. Finally, it
promotes mental health and healing. There is a plant that has been selected
to represent these properties, and you can have it in your home.
Flower: chrysanthemum plant grown in the west
JARA: this rune is used when one desires tangible results or an outcome
from a situation. More specifically, it is applicable when you put in effort,
money, or time, and you want something great out of it. Also, people often
call this rune when they need help in legal matters that are a bit challenging

or can easily change one's life. You can plant a flower and successfully
bring these changes or help in your life.
Flower: the cornflower plant is grown in the north
IS: you've probably heard of the association between this rune and sweet
pea. Indeed, this rune is used for sweet causes or in freezing things or when
there is a need to halt undesirable forces. Also, the flowers often planted to
represent this rune, and its energies have a characteristic feature of these
needs.
Flower: sweet pea that's grown in the west
YR: if you are facing so many obstacles and you do not know how you can
remove them, then this rune can help you fix them. It not only removes
obstacles, but it can also help you turn them into stepping stones to the level
of success that you desire to achieve. You can also use it when you want
more power to help you overcome the challenges that you are facing. The
flower often has grown to represent this rune, too, has these features.
Flower: a lilac plant that's often grown anywhere
NIED: if you have long-term goals and achieving them is becoming a bit
difficult, then you can use this rune to achieve them. NIED helps aid in
causes that take long, such as a long search for a lover or when one has a
relationship that has stood for years and needs to be spiced up to keep it
alive. The flower associated with it represents these energies.
Flower: crocus plant grown in the south
The idea of using plants or flowers to represent runic properties is, indeed, a
reality in many places where runes are valued and used to help in meeting

daily needs. It is, however, good to know which plants represent which
runes and where can you appropriately grow them at home, so you enjoy
their benefits. You can only enjoy the energies if you plant the right flowers
and, most importantly, in the right places in your garden or other places that
you choose.
 


Chapter Fourteen: Going Deeper
Thinking about taking up a course in runes? Well, learning it, especially
with no prior experience in it, requires a clear approach, especially if you
want to master it in the shortest time possible. Also, while learning on your
own can be the best option, there are a couple of things you need to know
first before you can start your classes. Most importantly, you need to find a
way that will make it easy for you to master it and apply it correctly, like
the runic natives.
Why Learn Runes?
Even before delving into the effective techniques of learning runes, you
would ask yourself why you need it in the first place. Having good reasons
before you start will propel you to take up the challenge and be a
runemaster sooner or later. Your motivation to learn runes will also
determine the best approach that you can use to learn runes. Away from
that, here are great reasons why you may want to learn runes if you already
do not know this ancient practice that has stood the test of time:
● To Get Pieces of Advice Regarding Life
In life, everyone is often faced with situations where making a decision can
be a bit challenging. In such instances, having a method that helps you
make a prediction is great as it helps you save time as well as get the best
advice. Besides, life is not all about making such a decision. You should
also have a basis for every decision that you make.

Runes are a great tool that can aid in decision making if used well. You can
use them to get advice as well as the best way forward when you are faced
with a situation where you need quick help. More specifically, runes can
advise you on matters of friendship, relationship, love, business, next move,
and many other areas. You simply need to learn how you can use them to
get a piece of advice on anything that could be giving you a headache.
● For Protection against Negative Influences
It's been said many times that the world is full of negative influence, evil,
curses, and many other things that tend to affect human life negatively.
Some of these happenings occur openly, while others can be things that are
secretly being tested and directed towards your life without your
knowledge. One, therefore, needs a way of protection against all these vices
since their effects can be severe and with far-reaching consequences.
Runes can be used for protection as many of them are associated with
protection and have been used ever since their invention with amazing
testimonies of their effectiveness. More specifically, there are powerful
runic talismans that not only offer protection but can also help you attract
good to your life. You can thus learn runes for this purpose, especially if
you feel that your life is a bit not heading in the right direction due to
negative influences.
● To Foretell the Future
If there was a way of uncovering what is likely to happen in the future,
everyone would no doubt want to know what the future holds for them.
While it cannot be possible to expose what is going to happen completely,
there are ways in which one can use to get a rough idea of what is most

likely to happen. Some runes and castings can be used for this purpose if
you really what to make a reliable prediction about your future. You may,
therefore, want to learn runes for this specific task of exploring the
likelihood of the future.
● Just for Fun
Learning Norse Mythology can be fun, especially if you can relate and
compare what you learn with what other myths have to say about the world.
Some aspects of runic language, its invention, stories about the runic gods,
and many other topics can be entertaining. Many people learn runes for this
purpose. You, too, can join them by exploring the interesting facts about
Odin and how the world came into being.
You should, however, note that learning runes for fun should be approached
in a way that is interesting and fun as opposed to when learning it for use.
Most importantly, your course should focus on the interesting parts only
without having to venture into the technical areas that sometimes seem to
be hard. Precisely, your reading and learning should be fun throughout
without anything technical.
● Intellectual Joy of Learning a New Thing
Runes are powerful magical symbols that, if you successfully learn how to
use them, you are most likely to experience some kind of joy. People take
several months and even years in some cases to master runes completely. If
you are sharp enough to complete the job on time and master it, you will no
doubt feel that you've accomplished something that some people often take
a long time to accomplish.

For people who are not from Europe, learning runes and how to use them
can be a chance to have a taste of western mythologies. For instance, runic
alphabets differ from those used in English and other languages. As a result,
exploring it can help you appreciate the differences that exist between them
and the possible reasons behind the difference. All these are not simple
tasks to do, but if one successfully takes runic classes, that in no doubt
amounts to a big achievement.
Any Prerequisites
You do not need any prerequisites to take up a course in runes successfully.
All you need is a ready mind and the preparedness to learn new things.
Although prior experience is always an added advantage to any student, no
proof that is not having it is going to make it impossible for you. You just
need to know that you are exploring something that is quite extensive and
with different explanations of things you possibly already know.
The Most Effective Ways to Learn Runes
Unlike in the past, when one had to attend class physically, these days, there
are effective methods that one can use to learn runes. It doesn't matter your
location or background. Most of these methods are easy, and anyone can
use them effectively to learn runes. Without further ado, here are some
ways that you can consider:
Online Classes
With the growing internet of things, you can easily and without any hassle
effectively take online classes on runes. All you need is an internet-enabled
device and readiness to enroll with a reliable provider of runic courses and

start as soon as you can to take up the classes. This method works well,
especially if you have other commitments that limit you to specific free
times only. With online classes, you do not have to stick to any time since
they give you the convenience and flexibility that you need to be successful.
You may, however, need to exercise some bit of care with online classes
since there are many providers out there, and choosing a few from them can
be an uphill task. The best way to pick the best is to take the time to assess
their course, how long they have offered it, and what other students have to
say about it. That will help you get the right picture of whether the online
provider you are considering is the best among your many options.
Buy a Book and Read on Your Own
If you want to just enjoy full convenience without even using the internet,
then your other option of learning runes can be buying and reading books
about it. With this option, you do not even need an internet-enabled device.
You just need to acquire the right books, and you are set to continue
learning your stuff. Provided you have the right books and other materials,
learning runes can be simple, especially if you are sharp enough to grasp
concepts without explanations or tutorials.
One thing worth noting about reading on your own is that you need first to
make sure that your resources are the right ones. Today, a simple search on
the internet on some of the best runic books brings a lot of options. If you
want reliable ones that are of good quality, then purchase from leading
platforms known for quality products and great customer care. Most
importantly, find out what other readers of the books you are considering
have to say about it.

Hire a Friend or a Known Runic Teacher
If you have someone near you that you are sure is a master of runes and can
guide you through the process, then that can also be another great option.
Many people have learned runes, and some have mastered the art and are
ready to help those learning it. If you are lucky to have some in your place,
then you can use them to teach you Norse Mythology, and the art of using
runes for different purposes.
Having your runic teacher, especially who loves the job and knows what it
takes to master it is the best option successfully. It makes learning real, and
you are more likely to move faster as opposed to learning alone. You
should, however, be careful to make sure that the person you are hiring
understands as many aspects of runes as possible. Also, get someone who is
interested in the topic and does not incline towards any side, especially
when it comes to some Norse tales and myths.
Join Groups that Teach Runes
Groups do exist that teach runes, and that too is an option that you can
explore if you are interested in learning and mastering runes. In European
and especially Germany and other counties, there are groups that even
practice group casting and other runic practices. If you are in any of these
areas or other places where such groups exist, then that is a great way to
realize your dream of being a runemaster.
When you join a group, the likelihood of mastering runes faster increases
since you are more likely to compete with peers or be encouraged by their
moves, it is, therefore, one of the most effective ways to learn runes and put
into practice the concepts that you learn. Also, working alone can be tough,

especially when it gets to the technical aspects of the course. That can,
however, change if you approach the work as a group, so you share ideas on
how to go about any challenging areas.
Watch Videos and Tutorials about Runes
With the increased demand for runic lessons, some teachers have developed
methods that use videos to teach runes and related stuff. This is, therefore,
one of the ways that you can use to learn runes. It is effective in the sense
that you see what to do right from the introduction to the end. If you search
online, you will find a couple of videos that are related to runes. Some sites
also provide tutorials on runes to interested learners who would like to
understand what runes mean and how they can be used in day to day living.
If you pick a couple of them or just a few that are reliable, then you are
likely to master the topic.
One great advantage of videos and online tutorials is the fact that you get to
see exactly what you are supposed to do, especially when it comes to
exercises. It is a method that works, and many people have applied and are
now serious users of runes in their daily living activities. Some are free,
while others are for a subscription. What is important for you is to choose
the best, so you learn easily and without taking too long. Provided you have
the best and especially those don in the language that you understand, you
are going to eventually understand how runes work and how you can use
them for different purposes.
Not Sure If You Need a Class or Runic Teacher
As you have seen from the subsections above, there are many great reasons
why learning runes is a good experience. Most importantly, you now know

some of the most effective ways that you can use to make learning easy. It
can still be a difficult task to make a decision even with the great
information provided here. So what can you do in such a situation of
indifference or indecision? It is better to seek advice. You probably need
one more reason to start the journey to learning runes and even using them.
As a way of concluding this chapter, it is great to bring to your attention
that Norse runes can help you experience a wonderful sense of
empowerment to take your everyday activities. Using them, especially to
connect with nature, can be uplifting. It can be the only support you
eventually need to experience a breakthrough in life. As already
highlighted, there are many amazing reasons to take up rune classes and
learn how these ancient practices can be applied for different purposes in
your daily life.
Experimenting and testing it before actually getting deeper into it can also
be a motivation. Some things may just sound good, but without a taste or
picture of what it is to use them, one can doubt whether there is any need
even to start learning them. If you want a taste, learn the simple ones and
give it a try. If it works and you enjoy the experience, go ahead to apply
them as much as you want. With that said, there is, indeed, evidence that
learning runes are a great thing if you have been thinking about it but
haven't gotten a chance to start the learning process.
 

Conclusion
Runes have been of great importance not only to the Germanic people but
also to others in different parts of the world who have over time learned
runes. Although a lot has changed regarding the practice of runes, the fact
remains that they hold a dear place in many people's hearts. They are used
for spell casting, divination, seeing the future, and connecting to nature and
the spirit world. While most of these are ancient practices, runes still have a
role to play in the modern-day society. That's why there are tremendous
improvements in runic language, signs, and exercises to accompany the
learning process.
Contrary to the many misconceptions that have been peddled for years
about runes, it is a fascinating topic. There are many people who understand
what runes and activities related to it are all about. They have thus invested
in learning and perfecting thins like rune casting, rune exercises and
interpreting signs, divination, and other interesting stuff to explore about
runes. Others, as shown in the book, even write poems about runes to
describe the various runic signs and connect with them. All these and many

other efforts not discussed are a clear indication that runes have an
important place in the daily lives of those who know the amazing benefits
of runes.
The goal of this book was to simplify the process of learning runes and
make it interesting to anyone interested in them. Most importantly, it has
explained what runes are, their history, origin, gods, and goddesses
associated with them and the evolution of the runic alphabet to its current
status. Indeed, there is a lot to learn about runes and their place in the ever-
changing world. As we come to the end of this book, we hope that this book
has helped you learn the amazing things you probably did not know about
runes.
 

Thank you for taking the time to read the book. What did you think of,
Norse, Celtic Mythology & Runes: Explore The Timeless Tales Of
Norse & Celtic Folklore, The Myths, History, Sagas & Legends + The
Magic, Spells & Meanings of Runes?
I know you could have picked any number of books to read, but you picked
this book and for that I am extremely grateful. I hope that it added at value
and quality to your everyday life. If so, it would be really nice if you could
share this book with your friends and family.
If you enjoyed this book and found some benefit in reading this, I’d like to
hear from you and hope that you could take some time to post a review. I
want you, the reader, to know that your review is very important and so, if
you’d like to leave a review, all you have to do is click here and away you
go. I wish you all the best in your future success!
Thank you and good luck!
Sofia Visconti 2021

Resources
Antonsen, E. H. (2011). Runes and Germanic linguistics (Vol. 140). Walter
de Gruyter.
Barnes, M. P. (2012). Runes: a handbook. Boydell Press.
Blum, R. (1983). The Book of Runes: A Handbook for the Use of an Ancient
Oracle.
Farnell, K. (2006). Simply Runes
Holmes, K. (2013). Pagan Portals: Runes.
Imer, L. (2010). Runes and Romans in the North. Futhark: International
Journal of Runic Studies, 1, 41-64.
Joseph, F. (2010). Gods of the Runes: The Divine Shapers of Fate. Simon
and Schuster.
Krasskova, G. (2010). Runes: Theory & Practice. New Page Books.
MOUNTFORT, P. (2015). Rune casting: Runic Guidebooks as Gothic
Literature and the Other Gothic Revival. Popular Gothic, 16.
Page, R. I. (2006). An introduction to English runes. Boydell Press.
Paxson, D. L. (2005). Taking Up the Runes: A Complete Guide to Using
Runes in Spells, Rituals, Divination, and Magic. Weiser Books.
Peschel, L. (1989). A Practical Guide to the Runes: Their Uses in
Divination and Magick. Llewellyn Worldwide.
Robertson, J. S. (2012). How the Germanic futhark came from the Roman
alphabet. Futhark: International Journal of Runic Studies, 2, 7-26.

Saille, H. (2009). The Spiritual Runes: A Guide to the Ancestral Wisdom. O
Books.‌
 
 

 
Click Here


