
Microsoft Office 365 Bible for
Non-Tech Savvy
[10 in 1]: From Beginner to Pro
with This Full Illustrated Guide–
Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Access,
Outlook, Skype, Teams, OneDrive,
OneNote and Publisher
Alan Norwood

© Copyright 2023 - All rights reserved.
The content contained within this book may not be reproduced,
duplicated or transmitted without direct written permission from the
author or the publisher.Under no circumstances will any blame or
legal responsibility be held against the publisher, or author, for any
damages, reparation, or monetary loss due to the information
contained within this book, either directly or indirectly.
Legal Notice:
This book is copyright protected. It is only for personal use. You
cannot amend, distribute, sell, use, quote or paraphrase any part, or
the content within this book, without the consent of the author or
publisher.
Disclaimer Notice:
Please note the information contained within this document is for
educational and entertainment purposes only. All effort has been
executed to present accurate, up to date, reliable, complete
information. No warranties of any kind are declared or implied.
Readers acknowledge that the author is not engaged in the rendering
of legal, financial, medical or professional advice. The content within
this book has been derived from various sources. Please consult a
licensed professional before attempting any techniques outlined in this
book.
By reading this document, the reader agrees that under no
circumstances is the author responsible for any losses, direct or
indirect, that are incurred as a result of the use of the information
contained within this document, including, but not limited to, errors,
omissions, or inaccuracies.

Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Introduction
Shortcut Features
Section 1: Microsoft Word
Starting With the Fundamentals
The Ribbon
The Status Bar
Starting Off
Using a Template
Formatting the Text
How to Work With Words
How to Format Paragraph
Viewing and Formatting the Document
Margins and Page Settings
Making and Utilizing Tables
Create Graphs and Formulas
Pictures, Shapes, and SmartArt
Pictures
Shapes
SmartArt
Creating a Table of Contents and References
Table of Contents
Inserting Footnotes
How to Inserting Captions
Bibliography
Review, Translation, and Spell Check

Keyboard Shortcuts
Section 2: Microsoft Excel
Let's Start with The Basics
Set Layout and Visualization
Reading View Mode
Print Preview Mode
Formatting Cells
Style and Numbers
How to Set Conditional Formatting
Other Formatting Tips and Tricks
Formulas and Functions
AutoSum
Financial Formulas
Logical Formulas
Text Formula
Date and Time Formulas
Reference Formulas
Data Validation, Transforming Text, and Filtering
Data Validation
Transforming Text
How to Sort and Set Filter
Create Pivot Tables
Keyboard Shortcuts
Section 3: Microsoft PowerPoint
Creating a Presentation
Shifting objects around
Applying Themes
Themes
Templates
Building a Master Presentation

Manage and Insert Pictures, Cliparts, and Videos
Inserting Pictures
Inserting Videos and Sound
Inserting Charts
Animating and Transitioning a Presentation
Inserting Transitions
Inserting Animations
Comments and Notes
How to Present and Print
Printing
Recording a Presentation
Keyboard Shortcuts
Section 4: Microsoft Access
Let’s Start with The Basics
Creating a New Database
Renaming Fields
How to Filter and Sort
Learn Other Functionalities
Adding Tables
Formatting Fields
Visualizing and Moving Fields
Relations and Queries
Establishing Relations
Queries
Creating Reports
Keyboard Shortcuts
Section 5: Microsoft Outlook
Let’s Start by  Setup Your Account
Setting a Signature
Creating and Sending Emails

Delayed Delivery
Determining Importance for each E-Mail
Polling Through Email
Adding Attachments and Images
Automatic Out-of-Office Messages
Inbox Folders
Contacts
Calendar
Scheduling an Appointment or a Meeting
Tasks
Keyboard Shortcuts
Section 6: Skype
Let’s Start from the Basics
Checking the Audio and Camera Settings
Personalizing the Account
Personalizing Messages
Adding Contacts
Messaging
Create a Group Chats
Formatting the Messages
Keyboard Shortcuts
Section 7: Microsoft Teams
Create Your First Teams
Creating Channels
Uploading/Attach Documents
Chats and Calls
Sending Messages and Files in the Chat
Message Features
Meeting Features
Scheduling and Starting a Meeting

During the Meeting
Leave the Meeting
Section 8: Microsoft OneDrive
Let’s Start with Log-In
Managing Files
Creating and Modifying a File
Uploading and Downloading Documents
Other Options
Synchronization
Storage and Backup
Storage
Account Settings
Bonus  Section: Microsoft Forms
Creating a Form
Section 9: Microsoft OneNote
Creating a Notebook
Creating and Editing Sections and Pages
Using Templates and Other Formats
Page Settings
Taking and Formatting Notes
Searching for Tags
Customizing Tags
Creating Links
Drawing and Sketching
Recording
Sharing and Synchronizing
Keyboard Shortcuts
Section 10: Microsoft Publisher
Setting Up the Page
Inserting Elements to Your File

Creating Catalogs
Creating Mailing Lists
Editing Business Information
Design Checker
Conclusion

GET YOUR FREE BOOK
BONUSES NOW!  
(DOWNLOAD FOR FREE WITH THE BELOW
INSTRUCTION!)
Do you want to unlock complete knowledge
about Microsoft Office Suite?
Bonus 1:  300+ Excel Templates:
Business ǀ  Personal ǀ  Project ǀ
Tracker ǀ  Chart ǀ  Invoice ǀ  List ǀ
Calendar ǀ  Analysis ǀ  Schedule ǀ
Budget
Bonus 2: A Guide to Time
Management
Bonus 3: A Guide to Productivity
Management

Bonus 4: Advice on How to
Prepare for a Job Interview
Bonus 5: How to Quickly Improve
Your Office 365 Skills
SCAN THE QR CODE BELOW AND
UNLOCK THE FULL POTENTIAL OF
OFFICE 365 SUITE!
Scan Me!

INSTRUCTION ON HOW TO
UNLOCK 
YOUR 
FREE
BONUSES
Only 2 simple steps to unlock
your free bonuses:
1) Scan the QR code on the previous
page to gain full access to the Office
365 Suite. Begin now to expand your
knowledge!
2) Tell me how excited you are about
all of the contents! I eagerly await your
thoughts on the book and the bonus
content!
SCAN THE QR CODE BELOW AND
LEAVE A QUICK REVIEW ON AMAZON

TO SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS ON THIS
BOOK.
What is the best way to go about it? Simple! You can
include your thoughts in a brief video. I would
greatly appreciate an unbiased review of the book!
Do you not want to make a video? Don't be
concerned! You can do a brief review with photos or
you can photograph the most beautiful parts of the
book.
NOTE: You don’t have to feel obligated, but it would be highly
appreciated!

Introduction
Have you ever contemplated the hypothetical scenario of a computer
lacking the presence of software applications such as Word, Excel,
or PowerPoint? If an individual's birth year falls after 1990, it is
unlikely that they would have encountered the suite, given it was
introduced by Microsoft specifically for use with the Windows
operating system during that time. Since its first launch, the software
applications have been distributed through various mediums, including
floppy disks, CD-ROMs, and more recently, via internet downloads
accompanied by a unique serial number. The programs have
undergone several updates and modifications over time, resulting in
the current iteration that is in use today.
After introducing the aforementioned three primary programs,
Microsoft proceeded to expand its software offerings to cater to
many domains of operation. The program has transitioned from a

hardware-based system to a cloud-based platform, facilitating online
integration between each component. The interconnectivity across the
many tools within the Microsoft Suite is a significant attribute,
facilitating the seamless integration and utilization of their respective
functionalities. One such use is utilizing an Excel spreadsheet to
visually represent a computation within a Word document or a
PowerPoint presentation that is being developed.
Due to the myriad capabilities and inherent advantages offered by
these programs, they have served as the foundation for subsequent
software applications now in use, exemplified as Google Documents.
Upon careful examination of the accessible buttons inside each of
these comparable apps, it becomes apparent that they have a
striking resemblance to one another. The rationale behind this
phenomenon may be attributed to the widespread adoption and
dominance of the Office Suite, which served as the prevailing and
exclusive software option for a considerable period. Consequently, it
set the framework and defined the benchmarks for further
developments in the field. The ribbon, which is currently recognized
as the toolbar located at the top of the page, has established itself as
the prevailing standard for navigating and utilizing these software
applications.
Nevertheless, although the purpose of this discussion is not to go into
the historical background of Microsoft Office, it is crucial to
emphasize its significance due to the fact that nearly every
contemporary occupation necessitates proficiency in using these
software applications. Although some individuals are able to navigate
these fundamental processes effortlessly, many of their intricacies
often go unnoticed unless one commits to thoroughly investigating
each of them. However, there is no need for concern since this book
will provide comprehensive instruction on how to acquire expertise in
utilizing these technologies.
It is worth noting that Excel possesses a vast array of over 1,000
calculating operations, with several other capabilities. Similarly, Word

extends beyond its conventional perception as a document authoring
application, offering users a multitude of additional options. In
addition, it is worth noting the potential for generating dynamic
presentations in PowerPoint and developing user-friendly applications
in Access. The Microsoft Suite offers a wide range of options to
users and continues to maintain its dominance in the market due to its
enhanced capabilities. It remains the most widely utilized software
package for both corporate and personal purposes.
Shortcut Features
The successful implementation of shortcut functions played a pivotal
role in contributing to the benefits that Microsoft Office enjoyed. Prior
to their implementation, users were required to input code in order to
format their papers using a software application known as
WordPerfect. Additionally, it should be noted that a significant number
of computer users did not possess a mouse, since this peripheral
device was very expensive and not widely accessible. The
introduction of the shortcut function at the product launch was highly
successful due to its ability to provide users an alternative to the
mouse and streamline processes through automation, resulting in
significant customer interest.
It is noteworthy that these apps offer a wide range of keyboard
shortcuts, exceeding a total of 100. When utilizing Microsoft Windows
on a personal computer, the operating system may be accessed by
depressing the Ctrl key on the keyboard in conjunction with other
supplementary keys, depending on the desired operation to be
executed. In the case of owning a MacOS, the method of accessing
shortcuts differs slightly, since it involves hitting the Cmd or Command
button in conjunction with the corresponding key associated with the
desired function. In all scenarios, the supplementary keys have the
potential to encompass numerical digits, alphabetical characters, or
even modifier keys like Shift.

If one lacks awareness or understanding of the subject matter at
hand, there is no need for concern. Upon perusing each area, a
compilation of the most prevalent shortcuts for the respective
software will be encountered. In addition to that, one will get
knowledge on the distinctive attributes that distinguish each program,
encompassing both fundamental and advanced aspects, so providing
a comprehensive learning experience. Are you prepared to begin your
educational journey and acquire expertise in the field of program
management?

Section 1: Microsoft Word
If you want to generate a paper, compile a report, or produce
printable labels, Microsoft Word is the recommended software suite
to employ. One often employed instrument among students is utilized
for the purpose of conducting a thesis, among other applications, and
for the creation and modification of text-based documents.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that this capability is not limited just
to this function. This application provides users with a wide array of
options that include several purposes, including professional
endeavors such as crafting resumes and promotional materials for
restaurants, as well as personal endeavors like designing invites,
scheduling books, and generating party posters.
If one was previously uninformed of the capabilities of Microsoft
Word, there is no need for concern. The initial chapter provides
instruction on optimizing one's circumstances. The course will start by
covering fundamental concepts before progressing to more complex
functionalities. Continue reading to acquire further knowledge about
the subject matter.
Starting With the Fundamentals Upon initiating the software, the user
will be presented with a window prompt inquiring about their desired
action. The available choices encompass the initiation of a fresh,
unformatted document, as well as the provision of many suggested
templates. Additionally, this feature will enable users to conveniently
access recently accessed papers and make reference to any pinned
documents. The initial crucial aspect that necessitates attention is as
follows: If this document is often accessed, it is advisable to choose
the pin icon located adjacent to the most recent change date of the
document. This action will ensure that the document remains visible
on the list at all times. The primary rationale for this is because, when
the number of documents accessed increases, only the most recently
accessed ones are displayed on the opening screen. Consequently, it

would be advantageous to include a hyperlink to the often utilized
documents.
There will be the following choices on the blue vertical bar on the left:
You are currently on the page known as "Home," You can use the
buttons New to start a brand-new blank document and Open to look
for compatible files on your computer. You will find three further links
at the bottom of this bar: Account, Feedback, and Options. You
can see your account settings and determine whether any
adjustments are required by clicking on the first link. Minor
configuration options are also available, such as the ability to modify
the theme and backdrop.

Subsequently, there is the feedback connection, characterized by its
straightforward nature. The feature permits users to express their
approval, disapproval, or offer suggestions for enhancing the
program. Ultimately, the choices button will afford you the opportunity
to personalize your settings pertaining to the utilization of Word. In
this interface, users have the option to input their personal
identification, specify their desired proofing methods for document
review, select their language preferences, and designate the default
file extension for saving purposes. An additional benefit is the ability
to customize the ribbon, referred to as the toolbar located at the
uppermost section of the window. However, further elaboration on
this topic will be provided shortly.

We will choose the 'new' document option for this initial illustration.
When you do, a toolbar will be visible at the top of a blank page. This
is how making a new file will get started. Let's start by looking at the
so-called ribbon and all the things that may be done with it.
The Ribbon
Now that you know what each section of the Word ribbon contains,
you can quickly go there. As each of them will be fully discussed in
the following sections of this chapter, this will only serve as an
introduction. It is also crucial to note that the majority of the features
you will see throughout the chapter have shortcuts, and you can find

instructions on how to utilize them at the end of the chapter for
quicker reference.
When you first open the new document, you'll see a bar at the top
with many options. If this does not appear, move your cursor over the
blue menu at the top of the page, and it should slide down. You may
adjust this in Word so that it is always visible. Simply click on the pin
in the ribbon's upper-right corner to accomplish this. If you prefer the
opposite and want to hide it, click on the arrow in the same location.
The first choice you'll have is related to the file. Although it has more
options, the page that will open is similar to the main page. It will give
users the option to begin, open, save, export, or print a document.
We will move on to the next features as we already looked at these
options in the previous section.

The next option on the ribbon is the home section. This will allow you
to format the document according to your preferences. It is typically
divided into five sections: clipboard, font, paragraph, and styles.
You can paste, cut, copy, or use format painter in the clipboard
area. The last one is a tool that allows the user to format any portion
of text and make it consistent with the rest.
While writing, you can format your font in the font section. This
section permits the selection of the desired font. You can also change
the font's boldness, italics, underlining, and highlighting, as well as its

color and size. The paragraph feature enables you to create
numbered or bulleted lists, adjust the text's indentation, arrange it
in alphabetical order for lists, determine the line spacing, and even
configure table design. The section that follows is the style section
that will allow you to standardize the titles and subtitles of your text
and will also be a valuable resource when creating tables of contents.
In the final section, the editing area, the user will be able to search
for words or phrases, replace content, and select specific words
from the text.
Insert is the next item on the tab. As the name suggests, this
allows you to add specific elements to documents. This includes
images and shapes, as well as a header and footer. It is separated
into ten sections, including pages, tables, illustrations, add-ins,
media, links, comments, header and footer, text, and symbols.
The user will be able to edit links and add videos to their documents.
It also enables the creation and editing of equations without the need
for hand calculations. This feature is useful for those looking to add
value to their document by incorporating non-native software
elements.
In the design feature, Word will allow you to create a file that has a
specific design based on its set standards. Without having to format
the document by hand, you can do so quickly here. The option to add
color to the page background or borders is another bonus feature.

Finally, this tab offers the watermark feature, which is helpful for
those who want to distribute controlled documents. Here, the user
can choose what information should be included in the watermark and
the format it should take, adding value for drafts, for instance.
All the settings you want to make for the page of your document are
referred to by the layout item on the menu. The user can choose the
precise length they want for the indentation or how much space
should be provided between the lines, and you can choose whether
you want it to be in a landscape or portrait layout and whether you
want to divide your text into columns. This feature adds more
detail to the paragraph section that we first saw in the home button.
When adding an image to the text, you can choose here where it
should be aligned and whether it should appear in front of the text or
in the background.

If you intend to write a book or a thesis, for instance, the references
section will facilitate your work. This section contains a table of
contents, footnotes, research, citations, and bibliography,
captions, an index, and a table of authorities. As you will see later
in this chapter, it will be easier to create a table of contents if you use
the title feature presented in the home area. It will also format your
citations and bibliography in 12 distinct formats, including APA and
Harvard. It also permits the addition of indexes, the creation of a
table of authorities on the subject, and the insertion of captions within
the document.
If you intend to use Word as a business tool, the next feature,
mailing, can be particularly intriguing. This is because it will assist
you in creating mailing lists and labels to facilitate your process. This
section of the ribbon is separated into create, begin mail merge,
write and insert fields, preview results, and complete. Imagine
being able to print labels with the addresses of every friend to whom

you wish to send a Christmas card. With Microsoft Word, this will be
much simpler and faster; simply print and paste!
Assuming you have completed the document, the next item in the
toolbar will assist you in editing and reviewing it. This section contains
tools for proofreading, accessibility, language, comments,
tracking, 
changes, 
comparing, 
protecting, 
inking, 
and
integrating content with OneNote. Using the tools in this tab, you
can, for instance, proofread a document and make tracked changes
so the author can see where you've made changes, add comments
without altering the text, and even translate it into your preferred
language. The ability to compare two documents is an additional
feature that makes this site appealing. This means that if the person
who read and edited the file you sent them did not track their
changes, you will be able to identify them by comparing the original
and the received document.

The view option is the final option on the tab before the help option.
This will allow you to customize the document's appearance on your
computer. It is divided into seven sections for this purpose: views,
page movement, show, zoom, window, macros, and SharePoint
integration. In this section, the user can also choose whether or not
to display the ruler on the top and sides of the page, how much zoom
to apply to the document, and whether or not to split the view into
two windows to simultaneously view two parts of the same file.
Despite the fact that these are the functional elements of the ribbon,
there is one more element that is self-explanatory: the help button.
It gives the user the option to contact support, provide feedback, and
ask questions regarding program usage or how to perform specific
tasks. In case you have any questions about how to use certain
features, you can also access a small training feature. This is the final
item on the toolbar at the top. However, you may have noticed that
when you open the document, a thin gray line with some information
appears at the bottom. Let's investigate its meaning.

The Status Bar
This section is known as the status bar, and it provides access to
some of the most important document information. The number of
pages will be the first item displayed. You will be informed not only of
the total number of pages in your document, but also of the current
page in the format page x of x. This allows the user to quickly
determine the document's size.
[FF1]
The following piece of information is also quite useful, especially for
those who are writing within a word limit: the document's total word
count. Initially, you may believe that this is a simple function that
displays the number of words you have written. Nonetheless, knowing
how many words are contained in a section relative to the entire
document will provide additional insight. If you highlight an entire
section of text with your cursor, for instance, this information will
change from the total number of words to x of x words, which
indicates how many words the highlighted section has relative to the
entire file.
Following this is an image of a small book containing either a
checkmark or a 'x'. This is the indication from the editor. If it has a

checkmark, the document contains no errors that need to be
corrected. As you might expect, an x signifies that corrections are
necessary. You can view the necessary corrections by clicking this
book twice at the bottom of the page. However, this is related to the
next thing you will see, which is the language used by the program to
correct your document. This will appear with the language and
country it refers to between parentheses, as the grammar and
spelling of some words may vary by country, even among speakers
of the same language. To modify this, simply double-click it, and a
window will appear from which you can select the desired idiom.
Starting Off
Let's start a new document now that you know what each tool is for.
If you're already in Word and want to start a new file, simply click the
File button and select New Document. This is the same button that
you would use to save the document or Save As if you wanted to
save it with a different extension, such as.pdf, or with a different
name.
If you want to open a previously saved document, you can go to the
file tab, where you will see a list of recent documents that have been
opened as well as those that have been pinned. You can choose a
document from this list or use the Open button on the left-hand
toolbar to search your computer for the desired document.
When you open the file tab or the software, you'll notice that the top
of the page gives you the option of using a template. These are pre-
defined standards that Word will provide to help you create useful
documents. If you want to start one that fits in the list, you could use
the models and make only minor changes once the file is open.

Using a Template
When you go to the home page, Word will automatically identify the
documents you use the most and suggest them to you. If your
desired action is not on the list, you can always click on the far-
right link that says More Templates. The software will then display
a list of all the template models it has categorized. They range from a
basic resume and cover letter to party invitation flyers and certificate
templates. If you don't want them to be displayed, you can always
use the search bar at the top to look for online templates. Even if the
option you're looking for, such as a business card model, is available,
you can always look for more—the software's online database has
several options that it will bring you based on your preferences.

Formatting the Text
When you write a document, you can present it in a variety of ways,
ranging from the color of the font to the alignment of the text. This
can make a significant difference in the presentation of a resume, for
example; therefore, it is critical to make all necessary changes before
submitting it to someone else. This chapter will teach you how to
format text for the best results when defining your document.
How to Work With Words
Assume you've started a new document. You may want to specify the
type of font, size, and color you want to use here. All of this can be
done in the font section's Home tab. There are two approaches you
can take here: You can type the text, select each section to change,
click the buttons, or start from scratch with the formatting. As you can

see, there is a small box with an arrow next to the word font; by
clicking on it, you will gain access to additional font tools for your
document.
The advantage of clicking on this button and using the feature is that
you will see a preview of what will happen to your text based on your
selection. The user can see the font in the selected text and
change the style (bold, italic, or underlined), font size, color, and

special effects (superscript, all caps, or strikethrough). Because
the majority of these features are also available in the ribbon, either
option could be used.
When you open the dialogue box, the advanced text features that are
not on the ribbon are displayed in a tab next to the Font. This section
also allows the user to preview how each of the changes will look
when applied to the text, similar to how the font tab works. However,
you will be able to adjust the spacing between characters, their
position, and the style you want to apply to the selected portion of the
file here.
If you don't want to use the dialogue box, Word simplifies the letter
selection by showing what each of these fonts looks like in the drop-
down menu. The same fonts are available in both locations, but using
the ribbon is faster and easier. The font size will also be available in a
drop-down menu, from which you can choose a size or type the
number directly to see how much the text will expand. Other font size
options include clicking on the 'A' with an arrow pointing up to
increase font size or clicking on the 'A' with an arrow pointing down to
decrease font size.
The button with an uppercase and lowercase 'A' will determine how
your sentence is capitalized. For example, suppose you wrote
something in normal sentence case but now want to emphasize it by
making it all uppercase. It is not necessary to delete it in order to
change it. Simply select the part of the text you want to change, click
this button, and then select UPPERCASE to make them all capital.

The highlighting function (the 'ABC' with a yellow bar), font color (the
'A' with a red bar), superscript, under script, and strikethrough are
also easily accessible. However, you may have noticed that one
button was not mentioned. This is the letter 'A' with a small pink
square next to it—it is one of the most useful tools! It is the format
delete button. Assume you've formatted a text and don't like it or
want to change it. You can clear the formatting and start over by
selecting the text you want to change and clicking on this button. This
is a more convenient and faster way to undo your actions than
pressing the button.
Pro Tip: You'll notice a paintbrush in the ribbon's home tab.
This paintbrush is used to format sections of the document in a
manner similar to the one selected. To use it, first select the text
from which the style should be copied. Then, you select the
paintbrush and navigate to the section of text that you want to
format. When you're finished, you'll notice that the text has been
formatted in the same way. This saves you from having to
manually format all of the document's sections. However, once
you've finished making your selection, the paintbrush will be
deactivated automatically. If you want to format more than one
section this way, click on the paintbrush twice; it will only
deactivate when you click on it again.
How to Format Paragraph The next step is to format the paragraph
after you have already formatted the words to your preferences. It is
possible to change the default left alignment that Word uses for text.

The paragraph function, like the font function, has a box with an
arrow next to it that activates a dialogue box with additional options.
You can access other tools using the dialogue box even though the
buttons on the ribbon are more user-friendly. This box will allow you
to see, at the bottom, what will happen to the selected text
depending on the option you select, much like the font function does.
Pro Tip: Use the paragraph symbol button in the top right
corner of the paragraph section to adjust the spacing and see
how many spaces you used to separate each paragraph. This is
only for visual representation and won't print or show up in your
document if you save it as a PDF. This is only for visual
reference while using the document and may be useful if you
have concerns about the formatting. You can visualize the page

breaks you add, the number of tabs you add, and other changes
you make to the file using this tool.
For instance, suppose you are writing a letter and wish to place the
address in the upper right-hand corner. In this situation, you would
select the correct option. To center a title, you would use the
centered feature, and to align text on both sides, you would use
the justified option. The ribbon contains all of the available options,
with lines representing what would happen to the text if that option
were chosen.
You can also choose to indent the first sentence of a paragraph by
clicking the indent button or adjusting the line spacing. To determine
the spacing between the lines, you must click the button with
one arrow pointing up and one arrow pointing down. From there,
you can choose whether you want a simple 1 pixel space, 1.5 pixels,
and so on. You will click line spacing options to customize the
distance between lines of text or to add a single space before or
after a paragraph.

This is particularly useful for authors of scientific articles, theses, and
other documents requiring a particular format. If your document will
be uniform throughout, you can click the set as default button in the
dialogue box to apply this setting to the entire document. To make it
even simpler, after clicking it, you will be asked if you want to define
this style only for this document or for all files based on the default
template. In this instance, it is up to you to determine your
preference.
This section also provides the option to generate lists using bullet
points or numbers. On the ribbon, these are denoted by numbers or
squares followed by lines. The good news is that you can choose the
format for these as well. By clicking on the arrow next to these
boxes, you will be able to choose the type of bullet point marker or
the format for your numbered list's numbers and letters. The
multilevel list is an additional feature that is available.
Pro Tip: If you're using a numbered list or a bulleted list, write one
sentence using it and hit enter on the following line to
automatically add a new bullet point or number to the list. You
have to press backspace and wait until the next sentence's margin to
delete it. You have two choices if you want to keep going with the list:
either keep writing and hit enter so that the bullet points are
generated automatically, or make a list with levels. Simply click the
tab before you begin writing to create a list with levels. The bullet

point or number will then move and be automatically updated to the
new format.
A list can be arranged alphabetically by selecting it and selecting the
button with the letters "AZ" and an arrow pointing down in the
paragraph formatting. By selecting the square button on this section
of the ribbon, you can also decide to surround the text or lines with a
box on either side, above, or below. Use the paint bucket to choose
the color you want, and it will be filled in automatically, to add color to
the paragraph, section, or line.

Last but not least, imagine that you are writing a news article that
calls for the use of columns. Did you know Word has a feature for
that as well? Simply choose the text you want to convert to this
format, navigate to the layout tab, and click the columns button.
The user can choose how many columns to separate the text into in
this basic setting. The arrow at the end of the list will open a dialogue
box that will help you decide (and visualize) the width of the columns,
whether you want a line to separate them, and where you want to
apply the configuration, but if you want more information on how it is
formatted.

Viewing and Formatting the Document It's time to make changes to
your document after the text has been formatted. Word offers the

user a number of features to customize the document however they
want. Once more, those who must write in a specific format or who
are subject to strict requirements regarding the appearance of the
document may find these tools to be of particular benefit. Continue
reading to learn how to define the parameters for your file and
customize it to your specifications.
Pro tip: Choose the print layout view from the view tab of your
ribbon to better see the document changes and settings. This
will give you a clearer idea of how the file appears and
make it simpler for you to picture changes. The read mode
and draft view are two additional options in this view. To make
reading easier, the read mode fills the entire screen and hides
the toolbars, and the draft view hides the content margins. The
most comprehensive view for those who want to see how their
document will appear once it is finished is the print layout view.
Margins and Page Settings
The first thing you can do is choose whether the page will be
landscape or portrait to specify the configuration of the page. To do
this, click the down-pointing arrow on the orientation button while in
the layout tab of the ribbon, then choose the one you want to use.
The layout of the page will change immediately as a result of this
relatively easy change.

The margins that you want the document to have can then be
customized. While you're still in the ribbon area, click the margins
button and choose from the pre-built formats or customize them as
you like. A dialogue box will open when you click the customize
margins button at the bottom of the list, allowing you to enter the
measurements as needed.
Pro tip: You can always use the ruler to manually see or move
the margins for yourself. Go to the view tab, where you can

check the box labeled "ruler" to make the ruler appear or
disappear. The ruler will appear in your document window (but
won't print or be saved) if it is checked; if it is not, it will vanish.
Use the double arrows on the ruler to reposition your
document's margins and paragraph indents. Move the gray
areas of the ruler to choose the margin size you want to
manually change.
Additionally, you can decide whether your document will have a book
fold using this dialogue box, saving you from having to configure it
further, and you can choose the paper size you want to use. The user
can select the paper size from a list or enter custom measurements
for the paper's width and height by selecting the paper tab on the
second tab of this dialogue box. The user can decide whether the
style they chose will be the default for both the document and all new
files, just like it was in the font section.
Let's say you've finished writing a section and want to begin a new
section on the following page. The enter key doesn't need to be
depressed until you get to it. The document can have page breaks,
which will take you directly to the next page. To use this tool, navigate
to the insert tab of your ribbon. There, under the pages section, you'll
find the options to add a cover page (you can choose from a number
of different styles), and a break will be placed automatically to allow
you to add a blank page to the document at any time. Another option
is to merely insert a page break.

You will automatically add a page after the one where your cursor is
if you click the page break button. However, it is also possible to
create a page break and carry on writing on the same page. To do
this, select the arrow from the breaks button in the page setup
section of the layout tab. Here, the user can specify whether they
want a page break that goes to the following page, a column break,
or a text-wrapping break. If what you want to do is define a section,
you will need to decide whether to move the text to the following
page, keep it on the current page, or move it to an even or an odd-
numbered page.

It's time to delve a little deeper now that you have seen some of
Word's fundamental features and how to operate some of its key
tools. Next, we'll look at some of the extra features and functions that
can be added to your document to give it more value. Let's look at
how we can use tables to get things going.
Making and Utilizing Tables When writing a document, we
occasionally feel the need to better organize our content. To do this,
we need to make a table. This is incredibly simple to do in Word
documents. The tool allows you to choose the number of rows and
columns as well as whether or not to combine any of the resources.

You must select the insert tab and look for the second section, which
is labeled "table," in order to insert a table. You can choose the
squares that represent the number of fields for each row or column
by clicking on the arrow that points down. The configuration you have
chosen is displayed at the top of the drop-down menu as you make
your selection. If you'd prefer to choose the number of columns and
rows manually, you can click the insert table button. This will bring up
a dialogue box where you can enter the desired number of columns
and rows, the width of each column (which is predetermined as
fixed), and whether you want the table to automatically fit the
page. You can decide right here if this is the standard you want for
upcoming tables.
Additionally, you can draw the table yourself using this menu and add
a really useful feature by including an Excel spreadsheet in your
document. Making use of all the features of the spreadsheet will

make it simpler to add calculations without running the risk of making
a mistake. As you'll see in the section below, you can also create
graphs and charts to include in your document. For more details on
using Excel, please refer to Chapter 2.
Pro tip: After inserting a table, a new tab titled "table tools" will be
added to the top menu. You can choose the table layout and design
here, as well as the style of the line, whether you want to add or
remove rows, whether you want to add a specific style, how to sort
the columns alphabetically, how to color a particular cell, and how to
merge or split cells. Keep in mind that all the other aspects of the text
you have already learned still apply!
Create Graphs and Formulas
Imagine you are creating a business report that needs to include
graphs and statistics. In that case, you can include these in your
document using Word. The option to add illustrations, including
graphs, can be found by selecting the "insert" tab. There is no need
to be concerned if the data is not in an Excel spreadsheet. A dialogue
box will open after you click the button to add a chart, allowing you to

select the type. In the preferences, you can choose from histograms,
pie charts, and column charts.

Once the desired chart type has been chosen, an image of the choice
and an Excel spreadsheet will both appear. The cells that will hold
the information will already be visible, naming everything that needs to
be entered into each box to produce the desired image, making it
even simpler for you. Using your knowledge, fill in the labels and
series as necessary. But this spreadsheet won't show up in your
document. Your chart should automatically update once you have
finished entering the data; you will then need to click the x button to
close it. Your modifications won't be ignored.

Pro Tip: Click Edit Data to make changes to the information in the
Excel spreadsheet. If the data for the table you want to create is
already present in another file, you can choose where it will come
from by clicking on Select Data. This will launch a dialogue box to
look for the file on your computer.
As an added bonus, the Chart tools tab will always open whenever
you want to work with the chart, just like with the table feature. The
user can add chart elements, modify the layout, and even choose the
style they want to be used by clicking on it. Additionally, you can pick
the colors for the bars. You can make these adjustments manually in
the Format tab of the chart tools if you don't want to use any of the
predefined styles.
You can resize your chart by dragging one of the image's tips, where
a circle is present, up or down, or you can enter the size in the height
and width boxes on the ribbon. Imagine that you want the text and the
image of this graph or chart to be aligned so that the image is on one
side and the text is on the other. Then, you must use the wrap text
function to accomplish this. The arrange tab will open up a number of
options when you click on the downward-pointing icon, each with a
visual representation of where you want the image to be placed.
Pictures, Shapes, and SmartArt

Images shouldn't pose too much of a challenge for you if you are
already an expert at using graphs and charts and formatting them
within your document. You will notice that there are connections
between each of the categories mentioned in this section, despite the
fact that each is a world unto itself. When writing a document that
requires visual aids to help the reader better understand your point,
all of these components will be useful. Let's start by discussing
images.
Pictures
Although you can insert a picture using the keyboard shortcut (see
shortcut keys at the end of this chapter), you can also do so by using
the ribbon. You can add a picture from your computer or an online
source by selecting the "insert" tab. Your preference and whether
the desired image is already on your device will determine how you
proceed.
After you've added the image, a brand-new toolbar for picture
settings will show up on the ribbon. Use the corrections button in the
adjust section if your selected image needs any adjustments. You can
edit the photo or make any other necessary changes using this
section of the ribbon. Additionally, if there is something you want to
undo, you have the option of resetting it.

Pro tip: You can click on the image and then select the
compress image button if you don't want your image to be too
large and expand the document. Here, you can select the
resolution you want and decide whether you want the
compression applied only to these images or to all of the
images in the document (click or unclick on the box). Word will
provide a brief explanation of each resolution so you can choose
more intelligently which one to use.
Manually adjusting the image is yet another option. You can do this by
dragging it or moving it to the desired size in the box. You will also be
able to crop the image in this section. The ability to rotate the image,
choose its location, and specify the placement of the text next to it
are additional features.

Pro tip: Since most of us have limited control over how to
maintain the width and length of the image, it often happens that
when we manually adjust the picture size, it becomes
distorted. All you need to do when manually moving the image is
keep the shift button depressed to preserve the proportions of
the original image. By maintaining the ratio between length and
width and preventing distortion, this will allow the image to retain
its original qualities.
Shapes
It's similar to adding a picture to your document to insert a shape.
You must access the ribbon and select the insert tab's shapes button.
A section of all the available shapes will show up by category once
you click the arrow pointing down. The shape format tab that will
appear allows you to easily change the default shape, which has a
painted interior and colored borders.

By clicking on the circular arrow that appears when you click on the
shape, you can also change the orientation of the object. You can go
to these buttons on the ribbon and select the line and fill colors, if you

so desire, or you can choose from one of the predetermined styles
the software provides. Since a shape can perform most of the same
operations as a regular picture, it should be very simple.
If you want to write inside the shape, you can also do that! You only
need to click it and begin typing. Use the text formatting options in the
ribbon to format it how you like. The text wrap box that will appear
once you click on it will also show you where the shape should be
placed in relation to the text.
Pro Tip: A number of circles will start to appear on the arrow's
borders once you click it. This enables you to format the shape
in any way that you choose. However, the yellow circles that
appear are something to be aware of. The objects that are
highlighted in white can be resized, whereas the objects that are
highlighted in yellow can have their format changed. Two yellow
circles, one at the start and one at the head of the arrow, will
show up, for instance, if you use the arrow shape. While the
rest of the arrow stays the same, if you move the one at the
head, you can choose whether you want it to be narrower or
wider. Use the same method of pressing the shift button for
resizing problems.

SmartArt
Making the document simpler to work with is the one thing Word can
do to benefit the user. You can add processes, hierarchies, pyramids,
and cycle images using the SmartArt feature. As with the previous
two items, go to the insert tab on the ribbon to add one of these
based on your needs. When you choose SmartArt, a dialogue box
with options will appear for you to select from. You should select the
option here that best fits your project.
Once you've selected the option that works best for your file, it will
show up already colored and with options for where to add text. The
additional features are offered by a SmartArt tab that will appear on
the ribbon, and the user can choose what to write in this area. You
will be able to alter the structure's colors, move it around, and add
new shapes. As usual, the text must be specified in the Font toolbar.
Pro Tip: Let's say you want to expand the structure you just made
with a form. Choose with your cursor which of the boxes (or forms)
you want the extra element to be added to so that it isn't added at
the end. It will be added at the end if you simply leave the structure

clicked without choosing a specific shape. The shape will
automatically be added after the selected element if you choose add
shape while selecting a specific element in the middle of the format,
saving you the time and effort of having to redo the entire format.

Creating a Table of Contents and References
One of Word's best features is the ability to format a table of
contents and add references automatically without the need for any
manual work. You can automatically create and format your
document with just a few clicks and a few formatting pointers. Can
you believe it even does your bibliography preparation for you? You
will spend much less time writing down your sources if you do this.
Let's look at it!
Table of Contents
A table of contents is simpler to make than you might imagine. The
Styles section of the ribbon under the Home tab is the first thing you
should keep in mind. Let's say you want to write a technical book with
a number of chapter headings and subtitles. If so, Heading 1 would
be the title of the chapter, Heading 2 the subtitle of the chapter's
sections, Heading 3 the section below that, and so on. You will select
and click each of the headings that you feel are appropriate for your
section as you create the sections and titles for your chapters and
sections.
You should continue doing this until every page of the book has a
style assigned. You can check the format feature to see if each
section title has a small square and an arrow next to it to make sure
the style has been applied. You will be able to tell if they have been
applied correctly thanks to this. For your convenience, Word will let
you rename each heading structure in accordance with what it will

represent in your file. It can be changed to a section, chapter,
subtitle, or anything else you deem fit.
Pro Tip: You can modify the style of each of these headings!
Simply place your right mouse or touchpad button on top of it to
bring up a dialogue box where you can select Modify and make
the desired changes. Another method is to format the text by
hand in the document. To do this, select the text you want to
change, click on the style to bring up a dialogue box, and then
choose Update Heading x to match selection. This will
automatically change the style of all of your headings of that
type.
You must navigate to the reference tab in the ribbon after
formatting the file and adding the desired headings. The Table
of Contents button is located in the bottom left corner. Select
the option you want to use for your document by clicking the
button and choosing it from the drop-down menu. It will all be
automatically displayed with the headings you chose. Please
leave room in your document for the table of contents, if
applicable.

You can work with the document normally after the table of contents
appears without having to worry about updating it. If you choose, you
can click on it to bring up an update option with a red exclamation
point. The ribbon also has this choice available. Use the font-change
buttons on the ribbon to format the table of contents font.
Inserting Footnotes
There may be times when adding footnotes as references is part of
the writing process. Word will let you add them and number them for
you automatically. When the cursor is placed next to the word that the
footnote will refer to, select Insert Footnote from the reference tab.
The document will take you to the end of the page, where you can
type in what you need, and a small superscript number will
automatically appear next to the text.

If you need to include a footnote somewhere in the document, do not
be concerned. The numbers and the order will be updated for you
automatically by the software. In accordance with the location of the
reference word, it will also move the footnote to the appropriate
page. Simply click the Next footnote button on the ribbon to jump to
the next footnote in the document if you want to browse through all
of them.

How to Inserting Captions
For the images you are applying, you might also need to add
captions. Word has a feature for this as well. You must choose the
photo or image you want to use as a reference before clicking the
Insert caption button on the ribbon. When you do, a dialogue box
will appear where you can name it and select whether you want it to
be displayed as a figure, equation, or table. The correct information
must be entered because doing so will later allow you to insert a
table of figures into your document.
With this feature, you can either use the chapter numbers or a
straightforward chronological order to number the figures. Everything
will be done based on your preferences. When you're finished,
choose where you want the table of figures to be created and press
the corresponding button to have it done for you. When you are still in
the draft stage of the file, there is not much need to worry about the
order or page numbers being correct because you will be able to
update it automatically just like the table of contents.

Bibliography
If it's not your habit, making a bibliography can be time-consuming
and difficult. As a result, Word will make your work easier by
performing it for you as you enter the data. The format you want to
use—APA, Vancouver, ISO, or another—must be chosen first. Once

this is configured, you can click the Insert Citation button to add the
necessary information. A dialogue box will then open. Once you've
finished entering all the necessary information, simply click the
Bibliography button, and a reference section will be generated for
you based on the style you've chosen.

Review, Translation, and Spell Check
If you want to present a credible document that is error-free, you
must use the spell check feature. By selecting your preferred
language from the status bar at the bottom or by going to the review
tab on the ribbon, Word will let you proofread the document in that
language. Additionally, you can select a specific section of the
document and use the appropriate language to only spell check that
section.

However, you will use the software's online features if your goal is to
translate a particular passage. You can choose to translate the entire
document, a specific section, or just a single word while editing the
document. A mini translation will appear if you keep the mouse arrow
over the word. Depending on your goals for the document, this will
vary. After translating the document, you can use spell check to make
sure everything is accurate.
Finally, but certainly not least, imagine that you are currently editing a
document for a friend and want them to see the changes you made.
Although it is not required, some people choose to highlight these in
the file. By choosing the Tracking option, you can keep track of all
the changes that have been made and decide whether or not to
accept or reject them. Depending on your preference, you can
complete these one at a time or all at once. Use the Compare
function to see all the changes made to the original file if the reviewer
did not track changes for you to see.

Keyboard Shortcuts
Function
Shortcut on PC
Shortcut on Mac
Start a new document
Ctrl + N
Command + N
Open a new document
Ctrl + O
Command + O
Save the document
Ctrl + S
Command + S
Cut content
Ctrl + X
Command + X or F2
Paste content
Ctrl + V
Command + V or F4
Copy content
Ctrl + C
Command + C or F3
Make font bold
Ctrl + B
Command + B
Underline selection
Ctrl + U
Command + U
Make font italic
Ctrl + I
Command + I
Undo previous action
Ctrl + Z
Command + Z or F1
Print
Ctrl + P
Command + P
Move cursor to top
Ctrl + Alt + Page Up
Command + Page Up
Move cursor down
Ctrl + Alt + Page Down
Command + Page Down
Select whole document
Ctrl + A
Command + A
Insert page break
Ctrl + Enter
Command + Return
Insert line break
Shift + Enter
Shift + Return
Insert column break
Ctrl + Shift + Enter
Command + Shift + Return
Insert copyright symbol
Ctrl + Alt + C
Not available
Insert trademark symbol
Ctrl + Alt + T
Option + 2

Section 2: Microsoft Excel
Microsoft Excel is a software application that forms an integral
component of the Office Suite. It is primarily employed for performing
calculations, generating reports, and facilitating the organization of
financial data. In addition to facilitating the utilization of formulas for
intricate 
computations, 
the 
software 
offers 
a 
plethora 
of
supplementary functionalities, including the creation of forms,
incorporation of graphical representations, and the ability to conduct
data analysis. While the topic of Excel's versatility in program creation
is beyond the scope of this book, it is noteworthy to acknowledge
that certain individuals employ Excel for this purpose.
Prior to delving into the specific details of the program, it is important
to take note of a small disclaimer. The ribbon interface across the
majority of Office applications exhibits uniformity, thus obviating the
need for a comprehensive examination of its constituent elements in
subsequent chapters. Given that the majority of features exhibit
uniformity and share identical commands, including the utilization of
equivalent shortcut keys, the forthcoming chapters will concentrate on
the distinctive tools. This approach aims to enhance the reading
experience by offering supplementary insights and facilitating the
acquisition of novel functionalities inherent to each individual program.
If there are any features that you require assistance with, please
consult Chapter 1 for further clarification.
Are you prepared to acquire a comprehensive understanding of the
essential functionalities of this remarkable software?
Let's Start with The Basics Upon launching Excel for the initial time
and creating a new file, users will observe the appearance of a
document comprising grids, commonly referred to as spreadsheets.
These spreadsheets serve as the fundamental structure within the
software that users will employ for various purposes. By default,
Microsoft Excel will open a single worksheet, representing the

project on which you will be working. In the event that your project
necessitates division into multiple interconnected spreadsheets, it is
possible to generate several worksheets by selecting the ‘+’ button
adjacent to the sheet information, as opposed to generating separate
files for each individual spreadsheet. Excel provides the capability to
incorporate a substantial quantity of interconnected elements.
Pro Tip: A useful strategy for enhancing control over the
contents of individual sheets involves personalizing their names
and tab colors. To modify the name of a worksheet, the user
can simply double-click on the existing name, typically denoted
as Worksheet 1, and proceed to enter the desired name. To
arrange the tabs based on their color, users can achieve this by

right-clicking on the tab name and selecting the "Tab Color"
option. In addition to its primary function, the right button also
provides several additional options, including the ability to move,
protect, or hide the current sheet. Nevertheless, caution should
be exercised when considering the deletion of either one of
them. Once this action is completed, it becomes irretrievable.
The spreadsheet is partitioned into columns denoted by letters and
rows denoted by numbers. It is crucial to bear in mind this information
when employing formulas, as they will be expounded upon in
subsequent sections of the chapter. In order to adjust the dimensions
of a column or row, it is necessary to position the mouse cursor
directly above the line associated with the numerical or alphabetical
identifier that follows the specific element requiring resizing.
Subsequently, a double arrow symbol will become visible. By
adjusting its position horizontally or vertically, you can ascertain the
desired size.
Pro Tip: A useful technique is to resize the cell containing
content in order to accommodate the written text within a single
line, thereby eliminating the need for manual adjustment of the
column. To achieve the desired outcome, simply perform a
double-click action on any location within the column line. This

action will trigger an automatic adjustment process, wherein the
column will adapt its width to accommodate the content with the
greatest length.

We will now move on to the other unique features of the program
since the formatting tools for these rows and columns are
comparable to those you have used in Word.

Set Layout and Visualization
You can view the spreadsheet you are working on using Excel's
layout and visualization features, which will also help you use some
of the program's secret features more effectively. The working,
reading, and print layout views are all visible in the bottom right
corner of the document, just like in Word. The working view is fairly
concise, so we'll move on to examine the features offered by the
other visualization options since they are more comprehensive.
Reading View Mode
This view of the file you are currently editing will allow you to both
work with it and view the document's header and footer, allowing you
to edit their appearance if the file is saved as.pdf or printed. As with
similar views, you can move and resize this view. Using the page
layout tab, you can view the document in portrait or landscape
mode, as well as the margins and page breaks that will be applied.
To edit the header and footer of the spreadsheet, you will only need
to click on it once. Each will be divided into three sections that will
remain constant regardless of the number of columns you have. Excel
provides this feature to better organize the document. When you click
on either of these, a tab for header and footer will appear on the
ribbon, allowing you to add the page number, the current time,

and the sheet name, which will all be printed on every page of
the document.
Pro Tip: You cannot add an image to the header or footer in
Excel by using the keyboard shortcuts Ctrl (or Command) C and
Ctrl (or Command) V. To insert an image in either of these
locations, you must use the Picture tool on the ribbon. It is also
important to note that you will be unable to manually resize it.
The user will need to resize the image by trial and error using

the Format Picture toolbox, which will be accessible after
clicking the &[Picture] field.
Print Preview Mode
The print preview option is useful for determining which worksheet
sections should be printed. If there is content on your table, it will all
be surrounded by blue lines indicating what will be printed if you
choose to do so. If there is no content, however, the screen will
appear gray. You must move the blue lines to determine what will be
printed or saved as a PDF. After it has been calculated automatically
based on the margins, you will be able to do so manually in this
document.
This will allow you to, for example, adjust the content to fit on one
page or divide the content across multiple pages. The program's

recommendation will be represented by a blue dashed line that can
be repositioned. To confirm the configuration you've set, simulate
printing from the home tab. Remember that anything outside the
blue lines will not be printed or saved.
Pro Tip: If you use multiple worksheets, you can configure each
one individually and then print them all at once. To print
worksheets, you must press the Ctrl or Command key on
your keyboard and then click on the worksheet's name. Once
you navigate to the print view on the File tab, they will all be
displayed in the print option. To cancel the selection, move the
mouse to one of the worksheet names and click on it; the
selection will be removed automatically.
Formatting Cells

One of the most important Excel skills to have is the ability to format
cells so that they work for you. You have already seen in Chapter 1
how to change the cell's format and color, so we will proceed directly
to the program's specifics.
Style and Numbers
There is a section titled number on the home tab. There will be a
drop-down menu for quick formatting, or you can click the arrow in
the section's upper right-hand corner to open the dialogue box. We
recommend beginning in this manner so that you can visualize your
options. Remember that the cell must be selected in order to be
formatted. Depending on your needs, you can format a single cell or
multiple cells simultaneously.
After opening the dialogue box, you will be able to choose the format
for the cell's contents. This is significant because it will have a direct
impact on the calculations you perform. You can select from various
formats, including a time format and a custom one. In order to
become more familiar with the program, it is suggested that you
explore each of them. In addition to alignment, font, border, and fill,
this menu also provides options for cell protection and cell protection.

Pro Tip: If you intend to share your spreadsheet with others but
do not want them to modify a specific cell or group of cells, you
can lock the cell. As soon as you select this option on the
Protection tab of the dialogue box, the program will recognize
that this cell requires protection. To complete the process, go to
the review tab and select the protect sheet option. A new
dialogue box will appear where you can select the data you wish
to lock, and a password will be required if the user attempts to
modify the locked data.

How to Set Conditional Formatting
This is one of the most useful functions once you begin performing
calculations. It will enable Excel to automatically format cells
containing a specific value. Click the conditional formatting button
on the home tab and select a new rule to use it. A dialogue box will
appear, allowing you to select what you wish to format, such as the
option to format cells containing specific attributes. Suppose you
select the following option: You will be able to set the rule for your
entire worksheet or for selected cells, rows, or columns. Once you've
set the rules based on the assistant, you can click the format button
to customize the appearance of these cells. Remember to select the
cells to which this will be applied prior to doing so.

If you want to delete certain rules or view which ones are currently
being used in the spreadsheet, you can return to the conditional
formatting button and select the appropriate options. In addition to
color scales, icons, data bars, and ranking, you can also apply
conditional formatting to your worksheet by using color scales, icons,
and rankings. All of these are accessible via the function's drop-down
menu and have assistants to help you choose which style to apply.
Other Formatting Tips and Tricks
Once you have mastered cell management, everything else will
become simpler. Here are some helpful formatting suggestions:
●     Use the paintbrush: Utilize the paintbrush tool to format all of
your cells in the desired style. If you need more information on
how to use it, please refer to Chapter 1, Formatting.
●      
●     Series or repetition: If you want to copy the same content to
the next line or row, you do not need to copy and paste it
manually. When you move the mouse to the bottom-right corner
of the cell containing the original text, a cross symbol will

appear. Click on it with the mouse and drag until you reach the
desired location for the series or repetition to continue, and the
system will do it automatically. Once you are finished, a small
box will appear next to it, from which you can select the desired
action, such as filling in the series or simply repeating the
formatting.
●      
●         Moving a cell: You can also relocate a cell from its initial
position. In this instance, instead of bringing the mouse to the
bottom right corner, you select the cell and then click on any of
its lines. The screen will display a cross with four arrows.
Then, you should click on it with the mouse and drag it to the
desired location. The formatting will accompany it.
●      
Pro tip: When moving or duplicating cells, keep in mind that any
formatting or formulas will remain intact. Nevertheless, if your

cell is part of a formula, this may alter the results, and you may
need to modify the information in the row and column where the
calculation is being performed.
●     Date formatting: Date formatting advice is the most perplexing
of all the guidelines. If your cell is not set to either the general
or date format, a number will appear when you enter data. This
is due to the fact that the software recognizes the date but
returns the number of days since January 1, 1900. Don't be
concerned if your cell is formatted for numbers and you enter
text and a number appears; simply format the cell and it will
appear in the correct format. The software's standard format

will be day/month/year. To modify this, go to the dialogue box
below the number and change it to the desired order.
●      
●     Line break: Excel enables you to do so if you are entering text
and do not want it to be a continuous line, but rather a broken
one. On top of the worksheet, you will see a line that reads fx,
which indicates where the cell's text (or formulas) are placed.
Use the Alt+Enter key combination to determine where you
want to break the text across multiple lines. This will move the
cursor to the next line automatically. You may proceed as you
see fit.
●      

Pro tip: You can also use the Wrap text function in the
Alignment section of the home tab to have the cell
automatically adjust to its content. This will automatically adjust
the content to the current column width of the spreadsheet and
increase the line spacing. If you use the tip in the line break
section, the cells will format themselves automatically.
Formulas and Functions
Formulas are one of the most important aspects of Excel and the
primary reason it is used. As you already know, they are written using
the bar at the top of the spreadsheet. You can use formulas in three
distinct ways: by manually entering the formulas, as we will see in a
moment; by going to the function library in the functions tab and
selecting the type of formula you want to use; or by clicking the fx

button, which will open a dialogue box with an assistant to help you fill
in the formulas.
If you enter the formula manually, you must be aware that it must
always begin with a mathematical symbol. The most common method
is to begin with the equal sign (=), but you can also use the plus (+)
or minus (-) signs. The asterisk (*), which will be used for
multiplication, and the forward slash (/), which will be used for
division, cannot be used to initiate manual functions.
Pro tip: Consider that you are writing a text that begins with a
'+', '-', or '=.' As you have seen, the software will automatically
recognize this as a formula if you enter it. To prevent this and
make the symbols visible, you must add an apostrophe (') to
the start of the text. This will not appear on the text or printed
document, but will indicate to the program that the formula
should not be considered.
Hint: Although Excel provides a variety of formulas, you may
wish to create the formula manually without referencing other
cells. There is no difficulty involved. You can create a formula
using the mathematical symbols on your keyboard as long as

the formula begins with an equal sign (=). For instance, you may
need to manually add 5, 7, and 9 by hand. There is no need to
place each item in a separate cell. You only need to type
=5+7+9.
AutoSum
AutoSum will be the first set of formulas and functions examined.
This button can be found in the editing section of the home tab as
well as the first button on the formulas tab. The user will have access
to the five most common Excel functions: sum, average, count
number, minimum, and maximum. Let us examine each of them in
detail.
Consider the following list of jumbled numbers: 6, 15, 1, 27, 9, 3, 65,
87, 41, 2, and 7. They are located in column B, on lines 1 through
11. Therefore, line B1 contains the number 6, line B2 contains the
number 15, etc. Although it may not seem crucial at first, the
significance of each number's location will become clear in the
following sections.

●         Sum: The first thing we'll do is add these numbers together.
Select the cell where you want the result to appear and click on
the AutoSum icon's Sum element. If the cell you chose is
directly beneath the numbers or on cell B12, it will automatically
select the interval directly above it, or B1-B11. If the system
does not select it automatically, you can do it manually. Keep in
mind that the following formula will appear on the top bar:
=sum(B1:B11). This will result in the following: Excel will
compute the sum of the values in cells B1 through B11. When
you've finished selecting the cells you want to add, press enter,
and the result will appear automatically: 263.
●      

●         Average: The average function will have the same selection
requirements as the sum function. However, in this case, the
formula that will appear is: =average(B1:B11). This will result in
the following once more: Excel will compute the average of the
numbers in cells B1 through B11. You will click Enter once
more (as you will for all formulas) and the result will appear:
23.90909.
●      
Pro tip: As you might expect, the number in our average result
is an ongoing decimal that will always be between 9 and 0. You
can control how many decimal points appear in each cell. To do
so, select the relevant cell and navigate to the number section
in the home tab. The last two buttons have two zeroes written
on them, each with an arrow pointing to the left and right. These
are the buttons for reducing (arrow pointing left) or
increasing (arrow pointing right) the number of decimal points
displayed.

●     Count number: This function will count the number of numbers
in your selection. It is convenient to see the number of
occurrences without having to manually count or perform
calculations. =count(B1:B11) will be the formula. In this case,
the answer is 11.
●      

●      Maximum: Using the formula =max(B1:B11), this determines
the number with the highest value within the specified range.
The answer in our case is 87.
●      

●         Minimum: This, like the previous example, determines the
minimum value within the range. The formula is as follows:
=min(B1:B11). The answer to the proposed example is 1.
●      

Pro tip: Although we only used one column and one set of
numbers in the previous examples, this can be done with
multiple sets. As you may have noticed, the interval of B1:B11 is
shared by all of the formulas. Now suppose you want to do the
same thing with a range of numbers from lines 7 to 13 in column
D. Both number selections must be entered into the formula.
You can do this by holding down the Ctrl or Command key and
selecting the other range. This will be reflected in the formula as
a comma (,) separating both ranges. In this case, you will enter
the formula's name and the range that you want it to calculate.
The maximum function will be written as =max(B1:B11,D7:13).
Important! When typing formulas, no spaces should be
used.
Financial Formulas

Excel is widely used in business to manage finances. The same thing
happens to some people who prefer to manage their own money and
investments. The software provides several formulas that can be
used to accomplish this, and we will look at the five most important
ones. All you have to do to see more financial formula options is go
to the formulas tab and click on the financial button.
●     Yield: This formula calculates the return on an investment over a
specified time period. It can be used for either periodic or one-
time payments.
●      

The first item you'll need to include is the settlement, which is
the date of the investment's settlement. This number, however,
must be stated as a serial date. Remember how we said that
dates that aren't configured to appear as dates bring in a whole
number? That is the number you will require. Assume the
settlement date is January 5, 2022; in this case, the serial
number is 44,566.
You will now enter the maturity date. This must be expressed
as a serial date number as well. Assume the date is 08/01/2024
in our scenario. This date's matching serial number is 45,299.
The yearly rate of the coupon, which we can suppose is 6% or
0.06, should then be added. The software will next prompt you
to enter the pr, which is the price of the security per $100 face
value. In this scenario, we can multiply by $105. Finally, add the
redemption, which will be the redemption value divided by the
investment's face value of $100. Let's utilize $140 in this
example.

Now that we have the basic information, we must determine the
frequency of the payments. Excel will present you with
shortcuts based on the frequency that you specify. We'll use
two in this case to indicate a semiannual return. Finally, we will
choose the number of days, or the basis, that will be used as
the day count basis. In this situation, the number three will be
used.
Your yield computation will provide a result of 20%. The final
formula will be as follows:
=YIELD(44566,45299,0.06,105,140,2,3)
Remember that, while you can manually enter these numbers,
you can alternatively create a table that looks like this:
K
L
14
Settlement date:
05/01/2022
15
Maturity date:
08/01/2024
16
Rate of interest:
6%

17
Price per $100 FV:
105
18
Redemption value:
140
19
Payment terms
Semi-annual
The formula would look like this:
=YIELD(L14,L15,L16,L17,L18,2,3)
Pro tip: When applying this formula, you may receive the
‘#NUM!’ or ‘#VALUE!’ error. This indicates that something was
not properly inserted in the formula. The ‘#VALUE!’ issue could
be caused by one of the parameters not being a number or by
the settlement or maturity dates being invalid. If you receive the
‘#NUM!’ error, it could be because the settlement date is greater
than or equal to the maturity date, or because erroneous
numbers were entered for an argument.
●     Price: Let's imagine you have the yield but don't have the price
of a securities. Excel can also assist you in determining this.

We'll use the same numbers as in the last example. Only now,
instead of utilizing the face value, which is what we want, we will
include the yield in the table. The formula should be as follows:
●      
=PRICE(44566,45299,0.06,0.2,140,2,3)
​This calculation yields $105, which is the same as the number
we had for face value in the first case. As a result, we may
safely trust that our calculation is correct. We can put the
information in a table once more. It will seem as follows:
K
L
14
Settlement date:
05/01/2022
15
Maturity date:
08/01/2024
16
Rate of interest:
6%
17
Yield:
20%
18
Redemption value:
140
19
Payment terms
Semi-annual
​And the formula will be this:
=PRICE(L14,L15,L16,L17,L18,2,3)
●     Rate: Assume you want to apply for a loan but are unsure of
the interest rate. Perhaps you'd like to know how much interest
you'll have to pay over a set length of time for the amount you're
asking for. In this scenario, the rate formula will be used. The
first item you must include is the Nper. This is the number of
loan or investment payment periods. Assume you will pay it off
in two years, or 24 months. Then, write the Pmt, which is the
payment that must be made throughout each month or the

standard pay without interest. This figure will not change during
the loan's term. Let's say the fixed figure in this scenario is
$351. Because this is a loan, it is critical that a negative (-) sign
appear in front of the number.
If you are requesting a loan, the pv field will need you to enter
the loan amount into the formula. The amount in this scenario
will be $6,000. The loan's future value is the next piece of
information that must be included. It would not be used in this
situation for a loan—it would be more appropriate to determine
the interest rates of an investment, for example. As a result, we
shall omit the value and enter zero. The same is true for the
type—you will only be able to place it if you apply the
investment formula. If this were the case, you'd have one for
payment at the start of the term and zero for payment at the
end. We shall use zero for our exercise.
Finally, Excel will allow you to guess the rate. This will be
represented with a decimal point denoting a percentage. You
can omit the rate by guessing 0.1 (10%).
The final formula will look like this, and the answer will be 3%:
=RATE(24,-351,6000,0,0,0.1)
Once again, this information can be placed in a table.
K
L
10
Payment:
Monthly
11
Loan amount:
6,000
12
Monthly payment:
351
13
Number of months:
24
14
Payments per year:
12
​In this case, the formula would stay like this:

=RATE(L13,-L12,L11,0,0,0.1)
●     Nominal: The nominal function is a basic financial calculation
that determines the annual nominal interest rate of an
application or loan. This formula is relatively basic and requires
only two inputs. The first is the Effect rate, which is the
application's effective interest rate. For this example, let's
choose 16%, or 0.16. Following that, we must enter the Npery
number, which represents the number of compounding periods
per year. If the number we wish to know is relevant to one year,
we enter the number 12. The ultimate figure will be 15%.
●      
●         Variable Declining Balance (VDB): The VDB formula is
especially useful for calculating the depreciation of an asset
over time. Assume you want to buy a car but first want to know
how much it will depreciate each day. The VDB formula should
be used to determine how much value it will lose.
The first thing you need to include in the formula is the cost, or
in our case, the price of the vehicle. Assume the car is worth
$10,000. Following that, you will determine how much it would
sell for after a year, possibly by searching for prices on the
internet or asking the dealer. In our case, the car will be worth
$13,000 at the end of a year—or the salvage will be worth this
amount. The asset's life value will be determined by the
estimated time of use. We can say ten years in this case.
The start period will be zero because it is the day you
purchase the car, and the end period will be zero because we
want to know the asset's daily depreciation. The factor is the
rate of decline of the asset. You can leave it out entirely. The
final result will be $8.22, and the formula will be as follows:
=VDB(15000,13000,10*365,0,1)
As a result, your answer will be that the car will depreciate at
the rate of $8.22 per day from the day you buy it. Consider the

following when looking at it in a table:
K
L
10
Initial cost:
15.000
11
Salvage:
13.000
12
Life:
10 years
=VDB(L10,L11,L12*365,0,1)
Logical Formulas
Logical formulas are especially useful when attempting to combine
two or more formulas. Excel gives the user a plethora of options for
making calculations easier, so they don't have to keep adding multiple
formulas to different cells. Let's look at a few of them.

●     AND: The AND formula will be used to join two or more logical
references. This formula will allow you to determine whether a
particular argument is TRUE and, if so, whether the response is
TRUE. If you type 1>2, for example, the result will be FALSE
because the assumption is incorrect. However, if you put that
2>1, the answer is correct. If you use the formula
=AND(1>2,2>1) to combine these two assumptions, the answer
will be FALSE because one of them is incorrect. However, if the
formula is written as =AND(3>2,2>1), the result is TRUE
because all of the assumptions are correct. This formula allows
the user to validate a series of logical issues within their

spreadsheet and return the correct answer. As is customary,
inputs can be made manually or by selecting specific cells.
●     OR: The arguments for the OR formula are similar to those for
the AND formula. In this case, however, you will be using that
different formulas can occur in distinct instances: this OR that.
The OR function will also return TRUE or FALSE depending on
the arguments. If one of the statements is true and the other is
false, the outcome is TRUE. On the other hand, the answer will
be FALSE only if all of the results are FALSE.
●      IFERROR: You can use this formula to determine whether or
not the value of the expression contains an error. It is typically
used to validate answers when your formula results are
'#NUM!', '#VALUE!', '#REF!', '#NAME?', or other similar
characters. This is a logical function that can be incorporated
into a formula or cell. Assume we add the formula =12/0 to a
cell. Excel will give us the answer #DIV/0!. We use IFERROR to
figure out what went wrong with the formula. If there is an error
in the formula, we want it to tell us that it is 'incorrect.'
The formula will be as follows: =IFERROR(L15,"incorrect"). In
this case, L15 is the cell containing the error, and 'incorrect' is
what we want the program to return if the result is incorrect.
The cell response should be false.
Pro tip: When entering letters into a formula, make sure to put
them between quotation marks (" and ") so that the result is
text.
●     COUNTIF: The COUNTIF function can be highly advantageous
when attempting to determine the quantity of elements
contained within a specified range. For instance, consider a set
of arbitrary numerical values, wherein certain numbers occur
more than once, as illustrated in the subsequent sequence: The
sequence of numbers provided by the user is as follows: 6, 15,

1, 27, 9, 1, 3, 65, 87, 1, 41, 2, and 7. It is evident that the
number one appears multiple times in the sequence, and it is
necessary to determine the frequency of its repetition. Let us
consider the hypothetical scenario where the entities in question
are situated within the range of cells B4 to B17. In order to
utilize the countif formula, the syntax will be as follows:
=COUNTIF(B4:B17,1)
The range of cells from B4 to B17 contains the numerical
values, while the number 1 is the target value being sought. In
this particular instance, the correct response would be three, as
the numeral one is observed to occur thrice within the given
sequence. This formula is particularly advantageous when
dealing with a substantial volume of data that is not amenable to
reorganization, and the objective is to determine the frequency
of information occurrences. This tool has the capability to be
utilized with both textual data and numerical values.
●     IF: The IF formula is widely recognized and frequently utilized in
Microsoft Excel. The tool has multiple applications, one of which
involves verifying the data that has been inputted into the
spreadsheet. Let us consider a straightforward example that
has been previously encountered. Assuming a lack of
knowledge regarding the solution to the inequality 1>2. In this
particular scenario, we will incorporate this logical reasoning into
the formula. In the logical_test, the expression "1>2" will be
written. The subsequent procedure involves specifying the
expected output of the program in the event that the given
condition is satisfied. For illustrative purposes, the term
'CORRECT' will be employed. The final step involves specifying
the desired return value in the event that the answer is
determined 
to 
be 
FALSE. 
In 
this 
case, 
the 
term
'RECALCULATE' will be designated for this purpose.
●     The formula will be represented as follows:
=IF(1>2,"CORRECT","RECALCULATE")

As a result of Excel's conclusion that 1>2 is incorrect, this will
be the solution. If we were to reverse the answer—2>1—the
following formula would be used:
=IF(2>1,"CORRECT","RECALCULATE")
The computer would then display the word "CORRECT" in the
cell. This formula can be used in other cells, where the other
values will be determined by your preference and the cell
number will serve as the location of the logical test.
Pro tip: Did you know that if you select and drag a formula that
is already present in a cell, it will be duplicated? Additionally,
this implies that the references will be repeated. However, there
are times when we prefer one cell to remain the same
throughout all calculations while the others change. This can be
accomplished by using the $ symbol to "lock" the cell number
you want to stay the same. Say, for instance, that you want to
copy the same formula from cell B1 to cells B2 to B5. You
would naturally want to drag the information, am I right? What if
the formula on B1 reads =ADD(A1:A7)?
The formula would also change if you moved the cell. It would
be of the form =ADD(A2:A8) on B2, =ADD(A3:A9) on B3, and
so forth. In this instance, you would put the cells in B1:
=ADD($A$1:$A$7) to 'lock' them. This indicates that both the
column and the line number are locked. You would only use the
$ symbol in front of the letters if you only wanted to keep the
columns, and you would only use it in front of the numbers if you
only wanted to keep the line numbers.
Text Formula

●      CLEAN: Clean is a function that gets right to the point. It will
eliminate all of the text's non-printable characters from your
spreadsheet. Consider removing all the spaces from a text that
you pasted into Excel. Simply enter (or press return) after typing
a space in the text field. The worksheet's spaces will then all be
automatically deleted by the program. The equation would be as
follows:

=CLEAN(" ")
●         CONCATENATE: Consider that you are entering a number
range in a spreadsheet with each number being entered in a
different cell. You do, however, want them to be kept together in
a single cell for whatever reason. Not to worry! You won't need
to type them out one at a time. The CONCATENATE formula
can be used. You can choose these in the order you want to
arrange them if, for instance, your data is in cells C4 to C16.
Perhaps all you want to do is group cells C4, C7, and C11
together. In this situation, your formula will appear as follows:
=CONCATENATE(C4,C7,C11)
The same holds true when using words or constructing
sentences. Consider that the words CAR, DRIVE, and ROAD
are present. The formula is as follows if you choose the cells
where they are located:
=CONCATENATE(“CAR”,“DRIVE”,“ROAD”)
The outcome will be as follows: CARDRIVEROAD.
Have you observed that, in this particular instance, there is an
absence of a space? In order to include punctuation or spaces,
it is necessary to incorporate them within the formula. Let us
examine the formula with the aforementioned modifications, all
of which have been implemented within the confines of the
quotation marks.
=CONCATENATE(“CAR ”,“DRIVE. ”,“ROAD!”)
The outcome, in this particular instance, will be the operation of
a motor vehicle. The term "road" is used to refer to a paved or
unpaved pathway designed for As evident, one has the capacity
to employ their imaginative faculties to interconnect any desired
information, whether it pertains to cellular structures or arbitrary
lexical units.

●         REPLACE: The replace formula is precisely as its name
implies. The user will initiate a request for Excel to replace a
specific value with another value by utilizing a formula. Initially,
the user is required to designate a specific textual element, such
as the term "FALSE," that necessitates the substitution of
certain constituent characters. Subsequently, the user will
designate the position within the word, denoted by a numerical
value, at which the desired character is to be substituted,
referred to as the start_num. In this particular scenario, our
objective is to replace the letter 'E'. In this particular instance,
the numerical value that is required for placement is 5.
Subsequently, the num_chars parameter will be ascertained,
representing the quantity of characters within the original text
that are intended to be substituted, specifically one character in
the given illustration. Finally, the subsequent step involves the
insertion of the desired additional text, specifically, the third
piece of text in our particular scenario. The formula should be as
follows:
=REPLACE(FALSE,5,1,3)
The outcome of our analysis will be denoted as 'FALSE.' This
feature is highly advantageous for the replacement of numerous
characters within an extensive text or a dataset that is already
present within a spreadsheet.
●     SEARCH: The search algorithm will provide the user with the
desired value within a specified cell or a designated range of
cells. The formula employed in this context is insensitive to case,
thereby disregarding any differentiation between uppercase and
lowercase characters. The initial requirement in the equation
necessitates the inclusion of the find_text, which denotes the
specific text that is sought after. In the present illustration, the
letter A will be employed. The text in question, from which we
aim to identify the element, is "THE CAR IS DRIVING DOWN
THE ROAD." The aforementioned element will be positioned in

the field designated as within_text. In the final stage, it is
desired that the software provides the positional index of the
letter 'A' from the initial position. Consequently, the user will
input '1' or leave the field blank, as the absence of an alternative
will default the starting position to 1.
The formula can be represented as follows:
=SEARCH("A","THECARISDRIVINGDOWNTHEROAD",1)
And the result will be 5 because the first letter A is in position 5
in reference to the sentence.
●         FIND: In contrast to the search formula, the find function
exhibits 
case 
sensitivity, 
thereby 
distinguishing 
between
uppercase and lowercase characters. The initial requirement in
the equation necessitates the inclusion of the find_text, denoting
the specific text that is sought after. Let us consider the
utilization of the letter A once more. The text in which we aim to
identify the element is "The car is driving down the road." The
aforementioned element will be positioned in the field
designated as within_text.
The formula will be represented as follows:
=FIND("A","THECARISDRIVINGDOWNTHEROAD",1)
The outcome will be 5 as the initial letter "A" is situated in the
fifth position relative to the sentence. However, in the event that
we were conducting a search for the lowercase letter 'a,' the
outcome would yield an error denoted as '#VALUE!'. This is due
to the absence of the lowercase letter 'a' within the sentence
under examination.
Date and Time Formulas

The utilization of date and time formulas may appear straightforward
when performed manually, yet their practicality becomes evident
when working with data organized in rows and columns that are
categorized by years, months, and days. Additionally, there are
several advantageous functionalities that facilitate the automatic daily
updating of your document, eliminating the need for manual
intervention. The following items are included.
●     DATE: This formula will be particularly helpful in the situations
mentioned above where you have multiple rows of data with

year, month, and day separations. Actually, the formula is quite
straightforward:
=DATE(YEAR,MONTH,DAY)
In this instance, fill in the year in the first cell, the month in the
second, and the day in the third. Your solution will be returned if
you drag it down without locking the cells, and it will include all
three columns in date format. Assume that the day is on B5, the
month is on C5, and the year is on B5. Your formula will then
appear as follows:
=DATE(B5,C5,D5)
●      TODAY: You don't need to add anything to the parenthesis in
the formula of today. Instead, you can add a formula to your
table that will update each time you open the worksheet. The
calculation is easy:
=TODAY()
When you do this, the worksheet will display the current date
and update to the next day's date when you open it. If you have
a document that you update every day and print, this formula is
especially helpful. Using this formula, you can have a dated
document printed every day without having to manually change
the date each time you open it.
●     TIME: The time formula above and the time formula are very
similar. The hour, minute, and second should be added here in
place of the day, month, and year. The formula is
straightforward once more:
=TIME(HOUR,MINUTE,SECOND)
The steps you entered into the date formula are the same ones
that will be used, so if you have one, you also have the other.

Pro tip: Keep in mind to format the cells in this manner before
using the date or time formulas. There are a number to pick
from, and your decision will be based on your preferences and
intended uses. Just select all the cells you want to change at
once, then click the drop-down menu next to the number
section on the home tab to format them all at once.
●     NETWORKDAYS: This is the formula to use if you want to know
how many workdays you will have in a given period of time. You
can specify the start_date you want to start with and the
end_date of the period by using the networkdays function. For
the software to recognize them, these must be expressed as
serial numbers. Following the placement of both entries, you can
add the serial number that refers to the holidays on which you
will not be working in the field below. You will see the total
number of labor days for that time period after pressing enter.
The equation will appear as follows:
●      
=NETWORKDAYS(START_DATE,END_DATE,(HOLIDAYS))
●     YEAR: If you need to convert a group of years that have been
formatted as serial numbers, this formula will be especially
helpful. You only need to enter the serial number in reference for
the formula to return the year to you. It goes like this:
●     =YEAR(SERIAL_NUMBER)
Reference Formulas

If you are employed in a corporate setting, you have probably already
heard someone mention using a "VLOOKUP" formula. Although
some people may think this is difficult, rest assured that it is not. One
of Excel's many reference formulas, this one enables you to search
for data across one or more sheets. Continue reading to learn more
and you will be able to get all of your questions about this well-known
formula and others answered.

●     HLOOKUP: We can say that the hlookup function is the less
well-known sibling of the vlookup function. The user of this
formula can search for a value in a data table and have it
returned in the line that you specify. Let's say the name of a
month from the year is on line 1 in each of the columns from A
to L. As a result, the fields A1:L1 will be filled in, and we will be
searching only within these fields.
The lookup_value, which in this case will be "March," must be
put in first. The next step is to instruct Excel where to look for
the data or table you require. Let's assume that the information
needed for this exercise is present in all the lines up to 10. This
indicates that the table_array, or the table in which we will be
looking for the information, will be A1:L1o.
Finally, using the row_index_num, we will inform the system of
which line we want the reference to appear. Line 3 contains
numbers from 1 to 12, which we will use in this situation to
indicate that we want the information provided to us. Not to
mention, we will decide whether we want an exact match to be
discovered (FALSE) or a rough result based on ascending order
(TRUE). The formula should appear as follows:
=HLOOKUP("March",A1:L10,3,FALSE)
The result that should come back to you is number 3.
●         VLOOKUP: Now let's examine the well-known vlookup. This
formula enables the user to look for a value, just like the hlookup
does. The difference is that it will take into account the
information in a table of values and return it in the column that
you specify. To make things clear, let's use the same illustration
as before.
Consider that each month's name from rows 1 to 12 is in column
A. This indicates that the fields we will be searching within, A1–
A12, will be filled in.

The lookup_value, which in this case will be "March," must be
entered first. The next step is to instruct Excel where to look for
the data or table you require. Let's assume for the sake of this
exercise that information is present in every column up until the
letter L. This indicates that the table or table_array in which we
will look for the data will be A1:L12.
The system will then be informed of the line in which we want
the reference to appear, in this case the column_index_num. In
this case, we want to receive the data from column E (or
column 5), which contains numbers from 1 to 12. Not to
mention, we will decide whether we want an exact match to be
discovered (FALSE) or a rough result based on ascending order
(TRUE). The formula should appear as follows:
=HLOOKUP("March",A1:L12,5,FALSE)
The result that should come back to you is number 3.
Pro tip: If the vlookup and hlookup functions seem difficult to
comprehend, perhaps this additional explanation will help. In
both situations, we are interested in knowing the results that a
specific row or number will give us when we search for a
particular value. In the examples we used, we looked for the
month of March, but in reality, we were more interested in
learning what number this month stood for overall.
If you need to search through a large data table for a specific
piece of information, these formulas will be especially helpful.
Another illustration would be if we had a table with the grades
students received for a test that covered seven different
subjects. We're interested in the outcomes of a student by the
name of Claire. For instance, depending on the information's
format, we could use a vlookup or hlookup formula to bring all of
Claire's grades into evidence without filtering. Only the row or
line number will change in this scenario; the formula will remain
unchanged.

●     MATCH: The position of an item within a dataset that matches
a particular value you are looking for within a specific order is
returned by the match function. Identifying the lookup_value is
the first step you must take. The table_array will then be put in
place. Last but not least, you'll need to enter a value—1, 0, or
-1—to indicate what you want to return.
The largest value that is less than or equal to the value you're
looking for will be found using a number 1 or a match. If you add
a 0, the match will find the value that is exactly the same as the
one you are looking for—the order of the table is irrelevant. If
you add a -1, the match will find the smallest value that is
greater than or equal to the value you are searching for—as
long as the information table is arranged in descending order.
●         TRANSPOSE: You can organize your data by using the
transpose formula. Let's say you want to change the
information from being all in one column to being in a line format.
Simply choose the range in which the information is located,
click on the line where the change is to be made, and then press
enter to complete the change. The same applies if you want to
change a line into a column in the opposite circumstance. This
formula can also be used in this situation to turn the horizontal
data vertical.
●     FORMULATEXT: One of the most helpful formulas and crucial
ones to remember was saved for last. This is how the
formulatext works. This function's task is to identify the formula
used in a given cell. Have you ever received a spreadsheet
where the formula was unclear or the information's source was
unclear? You won't have this issue any longer, then. If you click
on an empty cell and then use the formulatext, you can choose
the cell that contains the calculation you're having trouble
figuring out and then press enter to receive the answer right
away—it's like magic!

Data Validation, Transforming Text, and Filtering
The chapter's next section will cover the use of filters, data validation,
and text transformation—all helpful features when sharing Excel with
multiple users. You can use these to organize and find the data you
have in your spreadsheet by filtering it.
Data Validation
You can restrict the user's options when filling out a specific cell using
the data validation tool. You can choose whether the item to be
placed is going to be a whole number, a decimal, a list, a date, a
time, a text message of a certain length, or a personalized message.
Assume you want to make a list with a predetermined range of
numbers that a third party can only select from. In this scenario, you
would choose the list from the drop-down menu and then choose the
list's source.
You must have the list in a location where Excel can read from it,
either in the same spreadsheet or a different one, for this feature to
function. When the mouse is over the source, you can select the data
set to which you want to limit the user and then press enter. When

the user clicks on that cell, the list is then generated and appears as
a drop-down menu. The only permitted values will be those that are
contained there.
If you choose to use any of the other options, you can also add your
own messages, such as the one that should appear if the wrong text
is entered or one that will be displayed when you click on a cell. The
data validation button, which is found on the data tab of the ribbon,
will be where all of these features are established.
Transforming Text
To make use of your Excel spreadsheet more effectively, there may
be a time when you want to copy the data that is stored elsewhere.
The majority of the time, though, this information will be misconfigured
after being pasted. For instance, if you copy a table from a.pdf file
into the program, it probably won't recognize the original document's
columns that distinguished the information and will instead combine
everything into a single line. You shouldn't worry, though. For this,
Excel has a feature called text to columns.
This button can also be found on the ribbon's data tab, in the data
tools section. Selecting the text you want to transform is the first step
in using it. After choosing, select the drop-down menu by clicking the
text-to-column button. You must choose just one column because this
tool can only be used for one table at a time.
You must identify the information when the dialogue box opens. You
must decide whether the fields are delimited, in which case commas
and spaces are used to demarcate them, or if they have a fixed

width, in which case the text is neatly aligned with spaces between
each field. Let's say your data is disorganized and the semicolons
serve as dividers. You will be directed to a different screen on the
dialogue box after choosing this option, where you must choose the
common separator between each field. You have the option of adding
your own options in addition to the ones the program provides.
Excel will ask where you want this data to be placed after you
choose the separator and click next (remember to leave empty
columns after this so there is room for the information), and then you
can click finish. The information will once more be divided into
columns and used in the same way as the original document.

Pro tip: The remaining spaces can be filled in using the find
and replace tool or the clear formula.

How to Sort and Set Filter
Excel filtering involves much more than just choosing the particular
data you want to see. There are a variety of options available when
filtering, including filter by cell color, number the filters, filter by cell
format, and more. Click the header of the information in your
spreadsheet and select the Sort & Filter option from the Home tab of
the ribbon to apply a filter. After selecting the filter option, each of the
top data-containing cells will have a tiny arrow in a gray box appear
on its corner. From there, you can sort your data and apply filters
based on values or empty values.
Pro tip: It is crucial to have headings when using a filter so that
the tool can take into account all of the data. This will also be
necessary for making a number of other tools, such as graphs
and pivot tables, as you will see in the following section. In light
of this, it is typically a good idea to have a heading before
entering the data on the worksheet.

Create Pivot Tables
The final Excel tool you should be aware of is creating Pivot Tables.
If you have never used or seen one, they are fairly simple. Large data
sets can be organized using pivot tables, which also produce a
dynamic visualization of your data that is more approachable. They
will be useful, especially if your table contains thousands of data
points that you cannot comprehend or relate. With the aid of this tool,
you can sort the data and even make interactive graphs.
The pivot table button must first be selected by going to the insert
tab on the ribbon. When a drop-down menu with options appears,
choose PivotTable from the table or range. The dialog box will
open, and the cursor will move to the table/range bar. You will then
be able to choose the data table you want to work with. Next, you
must choose whether the newly created pivot table belongs in the
current worksheet or in a new worksheet (recommended if there is
information on the other worksheets). After that, all you have to do is
click "OK" to get a table with all the data you require.
The workspace of the new worksheet will have room for the table,
and a bar labeled PivotTable Fields will be visible to the left of the
workspace. Here, the headings demonstrate their value because
using them will make it simple for you to locate the information in the

table that you are looking for. The list of all the fields you can select is
located in the first and largest square. You only need to drag them to
each of the four fields—filters, columns, rows, and values—on the
bottom of the task panel to decide whether or not you want to use
them. From there, you can play around with, test, and move the data
that will be displayed in the workspace automatically.

Pro tip: Excel will give you the option to make additional
calculations with the data displayed in the values field. The
data can be combined, averaged, counted, or even used to find
the product. The options for summarizing and displaying the field
will be displayed in a dialogue box when you click the black
arrow that appears on the line's extreme right and select Value
Field Settings. The data can be formatted in the workspace to
resemble a typical spreadsheet.

Keyboard Shortcuts
Function
Shortcut on PC
Shortcut on Mac
Undo action
Ctrl + Z
Command + Z
Center align cell contents
Alt + H, A, C
Command + E
Edit cell
F2
F2
Lock formula
F4
F4
Add line or column
Ctrl + +
Command + +
Delete line or column
Ctrl + -
Command + -
Hide selected row
Ctrl + 9
Command + (
Hide selected column
Ctrl + 0
Command + )
Go to formula tab
Alt + M
Command + Shift + U
Move cells in worksheet
Arrow keys
Arrow keys
Move to beginning of sheet
Ctrl + home
Command + home
Zoom in
Ctrl + Alt + =
Not available
Zoom out
Ctrl + Alt + -
Not available
Extend selection
Ctrl + Shift + Down arrow
Shift + Command + down
arrow
Fill selected range with
current entry
Ctrl + Enter
Command + return
Repeat last command
Ctrl + Y
Command + Y
Display function arguments
Ctrl + A
Command + A
Refresh data
Ctrl + F5
Command + F5

Section 3: Microsoft PowerPoint
You might spend a significant amount of time each day preparing
presentations. Even though there are currently a number of tools
available to do this, Microsoft PowerPoint is still the method of
choice for many. This tool still offers the most resources for such
presentations, whether they are for business or personal use. Let's
look at some of the software's main features and how they can be
applied. As was already mentioned, some of the formatting and
inserting tools it offers are comparable to those in Excel and Word;
therefore, if you have any questions, please refer to the book's first
two chapters.
Creating a Presentation
Powerpoint will automatically open a blank slide when you open a
new file, allowing you to add a title and a subtitle. This will be the
start of a presentation that you will design for yourself using the
required text, images, and other resources. The page's initial design
is straightforward as you can see: The options slide is in the center of
the screen, and a scroll bar to the left allows you to view every slide
in your presentation.

You have three choices if you want to add new slides.:
1. Click on new slide on the slides section of the ribbon in the
home tab.
2. Click on new slide on the slides button of the insert tab of
the ribbon.
3. Click on the slide thumbnail panel (to the left) of the
presentation with the right button and select new slide.

A predefined slide with space for adding titles and text will
automatically appear when you add a new slide. To style them
appropriately, use the text formatting tools on the ribbon's home
tab.

But let's say you want to alter the slide's design because you don't
like it. There are two ways to alter this design in PowerPoint: The
first is by selecting the layout button in the home tab's slides
section. The alternative is to use your mouse's right button to select
a layout by clicking on the window containing the slide you wish to
change. The software will give you a variety of layouts if you apply a
style, which is covered in more detail in the following chapter.
Powerpoint will just give you different boxes to apply the format you
want if there isn't a style applied.

Pro tip: By selecting the location you want to insert the slide in
the thumbnail panel, you can add new slides anywhere in your
presentation, including the middle. All you have to do to start a
new slide is click the right mouse button when a red line
between the slides should appear.
Shifting objects around It's simpler than you might think to manage
the slides in Excel because everything is done through the thumbnail
panel on the left side of your screen. You must first be aware that
this panel can be scrolled up and down so you can see which slides
make up your presentation. As a result, all you have to do to move a
slide is click on the slide you want to move and drag and drop it
between the other slides that will appear. You won't have to worry
about deleting or starting over, which will make managing the
presentation easier.

The procedure is essentially the same to remove a slide. The slide
you want to delete should be selected in the thumbnail panel by
clicking its right button. When a menu appears, choose delete slide
from it. Selecting the slide and pressing the delete key on your
keyboard are additional options. If you accidentally did it, don't be
concerned. You can undo something by pressing the undo key on
your keyboard or using the undo feature on the ribbon.

Pro tip: When you open a PowerPoint template, you will notice
that the slide has a dotted line. This line will not be included in
your presentation. It is instead used to define the area to which
you will add text, images, or whatever other content you
choose. By clicking on the line and dragging it to the desired
size, you can increase or decrease the size of this work area.
To add a dialogue box to insert text, simply click the text box
button in the text section of the insert tab of the ribbon.

Applying Themes
Companies will sometimes provide a template for all employees to
use in their presentations. If this is not the case for you, don't worry:
PowerPoint allows users to apply one of its available themes and
templates in situations like these. Continue reading to learn about the
differences between them and how to choose the best one for your
presentation.
Themes
When you decide to begin a presentation, you can choose a theme
for it. This means that PowerPoint will automatically select a set of
fonts, colors, styles, and visual effects for your presentation. These
options are available in the ribbon's design tab, under the themes
section. There, you will find several standard presentation styles and
their potential variations.

While the program already includes some options, you can search the
internet for others by clicking on the down arrow to the right side of
the theme box. As you add new slides, you'll notice that the
formatting remains consistent. However, if you want to change the
layout but are afraid of making changes, don't worry. If you use one
of the above steps to add a new layout, the program will
automatically present you with pre-formatted layout options from
which to choose.
Essentially, using a theme is appropriate when you already know
what you want to include in your presentation and do not require any
guidance on what and how to include. It will allow you to add your
ideas creatively and freely by establishing a standardized format.
Using the theme tool, as opposed to the template function, will give
you some direction while allowing you to establish the flow of the
presentation.
Templates

The templates in PowerPoint can be found in the document's file
tab. The software displays several options to the user and allows you
to select one online. Keep in mind that these are not determined for
each situation that the user may desire, but rather for how you want
the presentation to look. Please keep in mind that while some of
these themes have over 20 slide options, others have fewer. It is also
worth noting that some of these styles will provide you with a clear
outline for your presentation. You don't have to follow them exactly,
and you can change them to suit your needs.
Building a Master Presentation
Assume your company has assigned you to create a standard
template for the entire company to use, or that you want to create
one for your business or school. By enabling the master slide feature
in PowerPoint, you can achieve the same result. When you include a
new slide, everything is already set up for you if you use a template
or a style. This is the master slide feature in action.

You can design a template for your company that includes a logo,
font, colors, chart styles, and image placeholders for other users. To
access the master view, navigate to the view tab on the ribbon and
then click the slide master button within the master view section.
When you do this, the ribbon changes and all of the features that
appear are solely related to the master slides.
Here you can customize the appearance of the opening slide, create
different designs for the remaining slides, add page numbers and
dates, and even add specific themes from the PowerPoint library.
Remember that everything you do on the ribbon while the master
view is open will be related to the master slides. To return to the

presentation, go to the slide master tab and click the close master
view button.
Pro tip: Once you've styled the master view to your liking, every
new addition you make to the presentation will be based on it,
including the layouts, font, and overall appearance. You can
either create a new master template from scratch or modify an
existing one, depending on your preferences.
Manage and Insert Pictures, Cliparts, and Videos
When creating a presentation, you may need to include a picture, an
icon, or even a video to illustrate your point. This is not a problem for
PowerPoint users because the software allows them to include a
variety of objects within the presentation and make them interactive
while presenting. If you open a new slide other than the first one in
the newer versions of Powerpoint, you will see eight small icons
available in the text box from which to choose. They are made up of a

table, a graph, a form, a 3D object, images, online images, or an
icon.
Inserting Pictures
Inserting a picture into a presentation is as simple as using the copy
and paste options, keyboard shortcuts, or ribbon options. When you
add an image, PowerPoint allows you to select a file from your
computer or from the internet.
The same procedure is followed when adding shapes or SmartArt.
Remember that these will be initially placed within the slide's work
area. Increase the work area or click on the image to drag and
resize it, using the shift button to maintain its proportions, to resize
them and have them auto-adjust.
Another option provided by the software is the ability to attach a
photo album to a specific slide. These are useful when you need to
illustrate a slide with more than one image but don't want to show

them all at once. In the images section of the insert tab, you can
insert one of these albums.
When you click the button, a dialogue box will appear, allowing you to
select which images to include. In this case, they must be saved on
your computer so that the program can locate them. To look for these
images, navigate to the file/disk option. You can include as many as
you want depending on the size of your presentation. There will also
be options for how to fit the images to the slide, whether or not to
add captions, and the shape of the album.

When you add an album, it will appear in the selected slide. You must
click or press enter to make the images appear and change during
the presentation. These image features will allow you to make your
presentation friendlier and less text-heavy, capturing the attention of
those in attendance and adding a colorful element to the picture.
Inserting Videos and Sound
Inserting video and sound into your presentation may appear
difficult, but it is actually quite simple. You can add videos from the
internet without having to download them to your computer, or you
can add a video from your hard drive. Sound files must be saved on
your computer before they can be uploaded when you select them.
Let's start with videos, which are a fantastic way to add more life to
your presentation. You cannot use the copy and paste feature in
these cases. Instead, use the insert video feature in the media
section of the insert tab. When you click the down-pointing arrow, you
will be asked whether you want to upload a video from your device or

use an online source. The process will be similar to adding a picture if
you use a media feature stored on your computer.
If you prefer to source the video directly from the internet, you can do
so through a variety of platforms, including YouTube, Vimeo,
SlideShare, Stream, and Flip. Because the software only supports
these platforms, they are the only ones from which you can choose.
You must use your default browser to find the video in one of the
supported channels. Once you've found it, copy the address that
appears in your browser's navigation bar and paste it into the field
with a magnifying glass that appears when you click add online
video in PowerPoint. Before you add the video, you will be able to
preview it. Simply press enter, and it will appear in the currently
selected slide.

In both the presentation and editing modes of the presentation, a
play button will appear to play the video. You can also choose which
features to apply to the video by clicking on it and noticing that the
ribbon changes to include an additional bar labeled video tools.
Change the borders of the image, apply image corrections, and add
effects using this bar.

Sound will be added in a similar manner. In the insert tab, the button
to add these media files is located next to the video button. You can
add audio from your computer files or select a file using record and
audio from your device. However, in order for the software to accept
the function of recording your voice directly into the presentation, you
must have the recording device connected and recognized.
Inserting Charts

Inserting charts and graphs into a presentation is simple, and the
process is similar to doing so in Word. You will select the chart or
graph you want to add, and the chart as well as an Excel file will
open for you to enter the data. After adding the data, you can close
the Excel window, and the chart will automatically refresh and update
with the new information. If your graph is in Excel, you can also
choose to copy and paste it to the presentation to avoid having to
type in all of the information again.
Pro tip: You can paste a graph from another program into Word
or PowerPoint as a picture or as an interactive feature. When
you paste a graph, the toolbox that appears immediately to the
side of the graph will give you several options for how to paste it

—as a picture, with links, or as a simple object. When you paste
it as a picture, the elements do not move and remain the same.
If you paste it with links, however, every time you modify the
origin file, the chart will be modified as well, necessitating the
opening of both programs so that the information can be
updated once it is completed.
Animating and Transitioning a Presentation
If you've ever been to a presentation where the presenter used some
nice special effects, you might be wondering how you can incorporate
these into your own. These are useful for promoting an interactive
feature of your presentation. While transitions describe the process
of animating what happens to the slide when you switch from one to
the other, animations describe what happens to the elements within
the slide.
Inserting Transitions
When applying a transition to your slides, you can time them and
choose whether or not they will have a sound. This tool is located in
the transitions tab of the ribbon and allows you to select from a
variety of transition methods. The first step is to determine which
slide will receive the transition. In most cases, the slide that appears
in your workspace will be the one to which it is applied, but you can
choose another by selecting it from the thumbnail panel.

When you select an effect, it will initially display what it will look like
when you present. To preview it multiple times, click the preview
button on the far left of the ribbon.
The timing section is located to the far right of the same tab, where
you can specify how long you want this transition between slides
to last and whether or not you want a specific sound to play.
PowerPoint has a set of default sounds that you can use, or you can

select another one of your options by clicking on the drop-down
arrow.
Finally, to round out the transition options, you can have the slide
move to the next one with a mouse click or after a predetermined
amount of time. The first option is ideal for those who want to control
the presentation and what is displayed while they speak. The second
option is best suited for recorded presentations, as we will see in the
following section. It will allow others to read your presentation without
the need for them to click to change the slide.
Inserting Animations
Adding animations to presentation elements is similar to adding a
transition to the slide. Instead of inserting them into the entire slide,
you can customize what happens to each part you present. This could
be useful, for example, if you don't want your audience to be
distracted by seeing all of the information at once.
To add an animation, navigate to the Animations tab in the ribbon. It
will have a similar layout to the transitions tab and will contain many
of the same features. To add an animation to an element, first select
it by clicking on it and then choose the type of animation you want to
use. You will also be able to determine how long this will take and
what the trigger will be, such as a mouse click. You can, however,
time the animations to appear at a specific time if you prefer.

One of the best things about the animation feature is that you have
access to a facilitator called the animation pane because you may
have to manage so many of them in one slide. This will show all of the
features you've added to this slide on the right side of your work
area. You can determine the order in which each animation will occur,
whether they will transition to each other with or without a specific
trigger, how long they will take, and play them all to see how your
slide will look. This is also available in the preview button on the far
left of the ribbon.
Comments and Notes
When planning a presentation, make some notes about what you
want to say while speaking. You can accomplish this by making notes

on the slide you're working on. To add a note that only you will see
during the presentation, click on the click to add notes box at the
bottom of the slide. Whatever you add will be visible on your
presentation screen and may be useful in helping you remember
important topics to cover.
If you send this presentation to another person, you can also add a
comment to the slide to include information that was not included in
the file. To add one, go to the review tab in the ribbon and click the
add comment button. To see all of the comments in the file, select
the show comments tab, and they will all appear with the relevant
slide displayed when you click on the relevant comment. These will
not be visible during the presentation and will not appear in it.
How to Present and Print

Now that your presentation is finished, you may be wondering, "What
should I do to visualize how it will look?" PowerPoint includes a
feature that allows you to view the final result. On the bottom right-
hand corner of your screen, there are four options to the left of the
zoom bar. They are as follows: working view, layout view, reading
view, and presentation view.
The first option is the one we've been using so far, and it's the best
one for editing and working on your presentation.
The second allows you to see the thumbnail image of every slide in
your presentation outside of the thumbnail panel. This feature is
known as the slide sorter, and it allows you to move slides around but
not change their content. Following that is the reading view, which
allows you to see how the presentation will appear to the viewer.

The final and most important view is the presentation view. When
you select this option, you will see a minimized version of the current
slide, a preview of the next slide, and the notes you have added. This
is only useful if you are presenting from a computer or device that can
display this information. If you are standing, for example, and do not
have access to a computer to see what happens next, this view may
be less useful.
Printing
Assume you want to print your presentation and see how it looks on
paper. You can do it as well, and in a variety of ways. You can select
the format for printing by clicking on the print function in the file tab. If
you are giving a presentation to a client or in a course, you can
choose to print one slide per page.

Another option is to print notes pages with one slide at the top and
several lines to write on at the bottom. You can also choose to print
only the presentation outline, which will filter your headings and titles
and print only those.
Finally, if you want to save printing space and paper, you can print
more than one slide on one page. PowerPoint allows you to use up to
nine slides per page, and you can select the orientation you want in
the third box of the settings tool, which says print only one sided.
Recording a Presentation
Last but not least, you should become acquainted with the recording
feature that PowerPoint has made available to its users. If you are a
teacher, for example, and want to give an automated class into which
you have prerecorded your voice, this tool will come in handy. It could
also be an online course that you intend to publish on the internet and
distribute to other users.

The record feature is accessible via the ribbon's record tab. You can
choose whether to begin recording from a specific slide or to begin
recording from the beginning. Once the recording is complete, you
can add your own audio to it (for example, a narration or a song), and
then export it to video. The software will allow you to save in the
format you believe is best for sharing with those who have access to
it.

Keyboard Shortcuts
Function
Shortcut on PC
Shortcut on Mac
Start a presentation from the
beginning
F5
Command + Shift +
Return
Show presenter view
Alt + F5
Option + Return
Close presenter view
Esc
Esc
Move slide during presentation
Arrows or enter
Arrows or return
Go to last slide
End
End
Go to first slide
Home
Home
Go to next slide
Page down
Not available
Go to previous slide
Page up
Not available
Hide pointer and navigation
Ctrl + H
Not available
View computer taskbar
Ctrl + T
Not available
Add new slide
Ctrl + M
Command + Shift + N
Open Zoom dialogue box
Alt + W, Q
Command + (+) or (-)
Open recording feature
Alt + C
Not available
Expand or collapse the ribbon
Ctrl + F1
Command + F1
Select all objects in a slide
Ctrl + A
Command + A
Copy animation painter
Alt + Shift + C
Not available
Insert a text box
Alt + N, X
Not available
Insert WordArt
Alt + N, W
Not available
Group a selected group
Ctrl + G
Command + Option + G
Expand all groups
Alt + Shift + 9
Not available

Section 4: Microsoft Access
Despite the prevalent lack of proficiency among individuals in utilizing
the Microsoft Access software within the suite, it is indeed regarded
as one of the most effective tools for constructing an information
database. Although users have the option to create a document from
scratch, the program provides multiple templates that can be used as
a starting point for their work. These functionalities encompass the
ability to establish a comprehensive repository of contacts, maintain a
ledger, facilitate project management, oversee task allocation, and
provide customer service, among a multitude of other features. This
tool exhibits particular efficacy for businesses lacking proprietary
software for managing their daily operations, necessitating a swift
and dependable system for this purpose.
Let’s Start with The Basics
Access has a ribbon that enables the user to perform the majority of
the functions, as you might have inferred from previous chapters, and
Excel is the program that Access is most similar to. It is safe to say
that if you are familiar with some of Excel's tools, you will be able to
work with Access, especially if you are proficient with the pivot table
function.
All of the options on the Access ribbon—create, external data, and
database tools—are associated with databases. The system will let
you filter, create reports, edit, and even import data from other files
you might have on your computer after you've created your own file.
The text formatting features of the program are less crucial in this
case because we are discussing a control tool. In any case, they are
accessible for those who want to format their documents using the
same style as what we have seen in other chapters in the home tab
of the ribbon.

Creating a New Database
A new database can be created when you launch Access for the first
time or from the file tab in the ribbon, just like it can with the other
programs you have already read about in this book. Options ranging
from an empty database where you can start from scratch to
templates that Microsoft has already formatted will be among the
options that will appear. The requirement to name your database
before working on it, in contrast to other programs where you can
choose to name the file after starting the file, is one of the distinctions
you'll notice here.

We will concentrate on building a new database from scratch
because the procedures for using Access' templates are fairly simple.
When you select this option, a straightforward table with rows and
columns and no named fields will appear. The first thing to understand
is that if you don't fill out the existing lines in the tables, Access won't
let you add more. For instance, a second line will appear for you to
add the information after you complete the first line of the table.

Renaming Fields
You might need to rename the fields for each column depending on
your needs because the blank database comes with standard names
and data. Double clicking on the names of the columns will make
them editable, so do that first. The same will apply to any fields
you've already filled out with data. You can edit the data in a cell by
double clicking on it, which causes it to automatically highlight and
become highlighted.
Pro tip: Additionally, you will only be able to add new columns
to your datasheet once you have decided on the names of the
ones that already exist. When you've finished, your work area
will automatically include the option to add a new column.
How to Filter and Sort

As soon as you have entered the pertinent data into the table, Access
will enable you to filter it in the manner of your choice. You will be
able to sort your data alphabetically or numerically in either
ascending or descending order in addition to filtering it according to
your data. You will quickly recognize these features if you recall our
lesson from the Excel chapter because they function similarly.
Although the report will also present you with this information in a
grouped manner, doing so may make it easier for you to visualize the
data.

Learn Other Functionalities
Access has a number of other options for creating files with media,
dialogue boxes, check boxes, a blank form, and other features, even
though its primary function is to store data. By selecting the
appropriate button—application parts or blank form—under the
create tab in the ribbon, you can add them. With the help of all this
information, the data can be mapped in a database so that it can be
analyzed after being added. Others will be able to add data to the
database without having to see all of its content or standardize what
the input will be by using the features of application parts or blank
forms.
Access also has functions like finding and replacing, adding
equations, and spell checking. We won't go over these again since
we did so in the earlier chapters. However, as they apply to all
Microsoft Suite softwares, please refer to them if you have any
questions about how they operate.

Adding Tables
Since managing Access is its main purpose, adding tables will be its
most crucial feature. When you add a table, you'll notice that Table 2
is listed as a tab at the top of the work area. Let's say you want to
give these tables a new name to make them easier to remember. You
must use the right button to click on the navigation pane to the left
of the workspace to access it. You can select what you want to do
with this table from a drop-down menu, including deleting,
renaming, and viewing the table's properties.

The features of the second table will also apply to the table you just
added, so you'll need to add the data row by row and column by
column to build it. This should be viewed as a brand-new document
that you can later connect to the initial database. Another option is to
choose to import data from another file so that it appears in the
program. You must click the new data source button under the
external data tab in the ribbon to accomplish this.

Following that, you can choose whether to add a file from your
computer, an online source, another database, or other sources.
Access will present you with the options to import the data to a new
database, add it to an existing database, or create a table
maintaining the link to Excel once you have decided what type
of file you want to upload. In the final scenario, if you decide to
create the link, the database will be updated each time you change
the original file. If it does not do so automatically, you can refresh the
page by clicking the refresh button found in the ribbon's home tab.
Pro tip: The table name tabs may not be used right away or
they may not be needed at all when they are placed on top of
the workspace. The information won't be lost if you click the x
button to close them. To see the table in your workspace once
more, click on its name in the left pane.
Formatting Fields
You might not need to manually configure the table as you would in
other software, which is one of Access' best features. You can set
the column or field you want to be short text, number, currency,

date and time, or yes and no check boxes with just a few clicks on
its quick tools. If none of these fit your requirements, you can also
use the more fields button, which has an arrow pointing downward
next to it and will bring you to a list of additional, less precise options.
Some of the options that this tool will automatically provide to
configure your table include addresses, where all pertinent fields will
be added to the table; payment type, which provides you with a
number of payment options as well as a data validation menu; or
even a status bar, which enables you to set the project's progress,
for instance. These are just a few of the options available to you that
will help you better organize and set up your database.
Pro tip: The quick formatting buttons will automatically add new
fields rather than replacing existing ones when adding new fields
to the database. Remember to always set the cursor to the last
available column so that this information is inserted to the end or

to have it on the column before where you want the new data to
be placed in order to prevent your table from being incorrectly
configured as a result of adding a field in the middle of your
information.
The option to use calculated fields is the last formatting tool
available in Access. These will enable you to apply to your database
the same functionality as an Excel spreadsheet.
When you click on the column's header, the table fields tab will
appear on the ribbon, allowing you to add one of these fields. The

next step is to select more fields, and the last choice is to add a
calculated field. Choose the option that you want to use. A number
is one example.
You can choose the calculation you want to use by selecting it in a
dialogue box that will open. The fields you want to calculate can now
be selected and entered in the text box. The calculated item ([field 1]
+ [field 2] + [field 3])/3 is an illustration. Access will compute the
data automatically and compute the average of the fields you've
chosen.
Pro tip: Keep in mind that the formatting of these fields will
depend on the kind of function you want to run. They would all
need to be number fields in the example above so that they
could be calculated properly.
Visualizing and Moving Fields
You can move your column using the drag and drop options provided
by Access, even if you unintentionally misplace it. Click on the field's
title with the cursor to select it. A black line will then appear to the

field's left. This line will specify the location of the column. You can
decide where to leave it based on your needs and preferences.
Pro tip: Similar to how you would in Excel, manually determine
the width of your columns and lines.
You can also access a drop-down menu with a number of options by
clicking on the column's title with the right mouse button on your
computer. These consist of inserting fields, hiding or revealing
fields, copying and pasting content into columns, and even freezing
the pertinent column. If you need to scroll through a table with many
columns in order to view the information, the freezing option is
especially useful.

Consider a scenario in which you are working with a student list from
a school and you need to produce a report on their grades. One
student would be represented by each line, and their class would be
represented by each column. Your goal is to compile a database of
all the grades that 9th graders have earned. Even if the teacher's
reports are all in the same alphabetical order, it helps to have a point
of reference for the student's name as you scroll through the 20+
columns so that you don't miss anything.
In this scenario, you would select freeze fields from the right-click
menu after moving to the names-containing column. By doing this, the
column will move automatically to the database's first column and the
names of the students will always be visible as you scroll sideways.
In contrast to Excel, you can select to freeze individual columns
in Access, and the data will be presented in the order you have
chosen. Go back to the drop-down menu with the right button and
select Unfreeze Fields to return to the standard visualization.
Pro tip: All of the frozen fields will be reset to their original
positions once you unfreeze them. After working on the pertinent
information, you will need to manually move the cells back to
their original positions if you want to change the order.
Relations and Queries
The two most important tools in Access are relations and queries;
these are essentially what set it apart from Excel. These enable you
to generate reports later on, conduct quick searches, and create
connections between the data you have added to your database.
Let's examine each of their respective roles.
Establishing Relations

We should return to your example of the students and the grades to
illustrate the significance of establishing relationships in Access.
Consider that after making a table with all of their grades, you now
want to make another table with their personal data. You'll make a
table, and it's critical that it share at least one field with the first table.
It is possible to accomplish this by creating a student ID number or
perhaps by using their first and last names. It will all depend on your
preferences, but always choosing to give the database a special ID
number is the best choice. To make it simpler to identify the student,
keep in mind that this information must be specific to them.
Then, you will create a new database and populate it with all the
pertinent details about their personal information, including their
address, phone number, name of their teacher, and any other
information you deem pertinent. You must now select the
relationships button under the database tools tab of the ribbon in
order to create the relationship between the two tables. With a pane
on the right listing every table in your database, this will open a new
view in your workspace.
To access the work view, double click on the table's name. As
soon as you do, a fresh box will appear, each of which has a name
and a key next to it. These show what your table's primary key is.
Drag the appropriate name to the one in the other box to establish
their connection. When you do this, Access will ask you to specify
their relationship in a new dialogue box that appears.

You're all set once you've completed this! You can work with both
tables simultaneously because the relationship between them has
been established. The software will ask you if you want to save the
relationship when you click the x on the relationship tab. It should
have a name and be saved. When you return to the database view
after doing so, a relationship table option with the name you specified
will show up in the left hand pane.
Queries
You can filter the data in your database using queries, using the
information you already have. Using this tool, you can create some
extremely complex queries that might aid in helping you visualize the
data in accordance with your needs. You'll need to select the create
tab from the ribbon in order to create a query. This option will be
accessible in the queries section, where you can create queries with
the wizard's assistance or independently using query design.

Let's use the students and their grades as an example for this
chapter. Let's say that after entering all the necessary details and
creating the necessary connections, you now want to view all of the
people who received a math grade lower than 80%. The new query
button will be the first thing you should click. Once more, the
workspace will appear differently to you, and the left pane containing
the names of the tables will once more be visible. Double-click on the
names of the tables you want to use to select them, or drag and drop
them onto the workspace. They will also be noted if there is a
relationship between these tables. It is the student ID number in our
situation.
Double-click on the table box containing the fields you want to include
in your query to select them. As you proceed, you'll notice that they'll
appear in the same order in the table below the workspace. You can
decide what will happen to the fields after you have chosen all of the
pertinent ones to include in the query. As was already mentioned, we
only want students whose math grades are lower than 80% to show
up. As a result, we will select the column containing this data and
type =>80% in the criteria line.

 
 
 

 
 
 
When finished, save the query and give it a new name (you can also
do this by clicking the x button on the tab). The query will have the
same effect as the relationships did in the left-hand pane. Your query
is finished when you see all of the students who meet this
requirement in your workspace view. According to the criteria you
require, you can create as many queries as you like. For each subject
where the students have a grade below 80%, for instance, you could
create a single query.

Creating Reports
How to create reports is the final crucial aspect of Access that you
need to understand. You've already built the databases you want,
built the connections, and now you need to produce reports based on
this data. Given that the previous steps completed all of the difficult
work, this is the final and most straightforward step. The reports also
give the user access to some very innovative features, such as the
ability to choose a style and an aesthetic. You can either make your
own style or use one of the predetermined ones the software
offers for this.
Let's say you want to create a report card with the students' grades,
using our example of their grades one last time. These must include
their names, contact information, course information, and grades. You
must select the report button under the create tab in the ribbon in
order to create a report. A new window will open, and the ribbon will
reveal a toolbar for report design layout.
Pro tip: You have a report wizard that will help you create the
report to meet your needs, just like most of the other features in

Access. You can use this tool to define the best approach for
your report if you are unsure of how it will appear once you are
finished.
Here, you can select the details you want included in the report based
on your requirements. This report gives you the option of including
your logo, a title, page numbers, and even an image. After choosing
every field that will be available, simply click the x to close the view,
save it with the name of your choice, and you're done! This report will
once more be visible in the program's left hand pane. To determine
whether the report satisfies your needs, use the print preview
option.

Keyboard Shortcuts
Function
Shortcut on PC
Shortcut on Mac
Go to home tab
Ctrl + H
Command + H
Open existing database
Ctrl + O
Command + O
Switch views of database
F5
Not available
Switch from edit to view mode
F2
Not available
Move to other datasheet view
Tab key or Shift +
Tab
Tab key
Exit Access
Alt + F4
Not available
Go to create tab
Alt + C
Not available
Go to table tab
Alt + J, T
Not available
Go to database tools tab
Alt+Y, 2
Not available
Go to external data tab
Alt + X
Not available
Show or hide property sheet
F4
Not available
Move to beginning of entry
Home
Home
Move to end of entry
End
End
Move between lines
Arrow keys
Arrow keys
Move to next field
Tab key
Tab key
Move to previous field
Shift + Tab
Not available
Select a column
Shift + arrow key
Shift + arrow key
Remove the selected column
Spacebar or (-) sign
Not available

Section 5: Microsoft Outlook
Email correspondence is widely recognized as a prevalent mode of
communication in contemporary times. To facilitate this process,
Microsoft offers a dedicated application for email management as
part of its suite, namely Microsoft Outlook. In contrast to other
applications, the utilization of this software necessitates the
establishment of an appropriately configured user account.
Let’s Start by  Setup Your Account
For those with personal emails who have accounts on services like
Gmail, Yahoo, or Hotmail, we'll use the most typical example because
there are several ways to set up an account in Outlook. A welcome
screen with instructions will appear when you first launch the
program. If it's not the first time, you'll need to manually search for
the appropriate location.
First, select account settings from the file tab of the ribbon. You
should navigate to the first tab, labeled "Email," in the dialogue box
that will open. To add your account, click the new button, which has
a tiny envelope on it, there. Then you should enter your address in the
new box that will appear. Next, click the connect button and enter the
necessary data the system requires, including your name, email
address, and password. When finished, press the following button.
Your password might need to be entered once more. Otherwise,
press finish, and your account will be created.

When you are finished, you will be directed to your inbox, where you
can manage and view all of your messages. The majority of the
message-related features are accessible from the home tab of the

ribbon. In actuality, there are only four tabs on the Outlook ribbon,
excluding the help and file ones.
Setting a Signature
When using Outlook, one of the main tasks a user will want to
complete is creating a signature. Open a new message to start one.
Although you won't always be typing one, it will allow you to choose
the signature you want to use. The option signature is located in the
include section of the message tab of the ribbon once the message
has been opened. Select signatures by clicking the button. You
should see a new dialogue box appear where you can enter the
desired information.

To begin a new signature and give it a name, select new. In the
event that you decide against adding signatures automatically, this
name will show up in the drop-down menu. You should enter your
desired signoff for your messages in the bottom box—the biggest of
all—where it says edit signature. Font, color, and other style
information that is shared by other Suite applications can be
formatted here.

You can then decide under what circumstances this signature will
appear after you're finished. If you have more than one signature, you
can choose which one to use by selecting the option for default
signature in the right-hand menu. In this section, you can
designate a signature for each email account you want to add, decide
which one to use for new messages, and decide which one to use for
replies and forwards.

Despite having a signature set, you have the option of leaving these
fields empty and only adding the signature to the messages you
choose. You must set the signature and click "OK" without configuring
these features in order to accomplish this. You can return to the
signature button whenever you are getting ready to send a message
and choose the one you want to use for that particular message.
Creating and Sending Emails
In order to create a signature, you have already seen how to begin a
new message. By selecting the new email button, you can access
this function. You type your message into the message box that will
then appear. You can format it however you like by using the text
formatting tools in the ribbon, but keep in mind that not all recipients
may be able to see the formatting. Their viewing capabilities and the
program they have will determine this.

The bcc (blind carbon copy) is not automatically added; you must
manually add it. The message's to and cc (carbon copy) are readily
available. To do this, click the to or cc buttons to bring up a dialogue
box with the bcc option. Enter just one address, then click "OK" to
proceed. Going to the options tab in the ribbon and selecting the
options bcc and from under the show fields section are other ways
to make the bcc field visible. To view the referred field and make
any desired changes to what you can see, click on each of these
buttons.
Additionally, you can ask the recipient to send a confirmation that they
have received or read the message from the options tab. To choose
what will happen to the messages you send, click on each of these

boxes. A notification will be sent to you each time a message is read
and received if you decide to apply these to all of your messages.
Delayed Delivery
You may choose, for example, to have a message delivered the
following morning when sending it if you don't want it to arrive right
away. The configuration of the message can also be set up to
accomplish this. You can choose to use the delay delivery option in
the more options section of the options tab. A dialogue box will open
after you select this choice, allowing you to enter the necessary
details. You can choose when you want the message to be delivered,
who you want to receive the responses from, and how long you want
the message to last before it expires.

Determining Importance for each E-Mail
The ability to assign a message a high or low priority is one of the
features that come with Outlook. You can do this by clicking on the
exclamation point to set a high priority or the blue arrow pointing
down to set a low priority for emails.

By clicking on the red flag, you can also determine whether the
message needs to be followed up on. When you do, a drop-down
menu will appear, allowing you to specify the time frame for the
program's follow-up reminder. Although the program gives you a few
standard options to choose from, you can also create your own
reminder by changing the date.
Polling Through Email
We occasionally email groups of people to get their approval on a
project. Did you know that Outlook has a polling tool you can use to
get answers sent to you? Additionally, you can specify this while
writing the message in the options tab.

There will be a button labeled "use voting buttons" in the tracking
options. The recipients of the message can choose between
accepting or rejecting the message as well as between yes, no,
and maybe by clicking on it, which will open a drop-down menu.
You can also add your own customizations to these buttons in the
dialogue box by separating the available choices with a semicolon.
Adding Attachments and Images
Did you know that images and pictures can be included in message
body instead of as an attachment? But once more, it's crucial to be
aware that not everyone may receive it as a message but as an
attachment. This will depend on how they are set up. Use the
features on the ribbon to make the appropriate additions; they'll
function similarly to what we saw in the earlier chapters.

However, the size that your service provider permits will determine
whether you can add an attachment. For instance, Gmail only
permits attachments up to 5GB in size. By selecting the attach file
button, which is present on both the home and insert tabs of the
ribbon, you can include the file(s) in the message if they fall
within the permitted range. When you click the button, a list of the
most recent files you've opened will appear, or you can browse your
computer to find more.

There are two additional ways to send files with your message. Drag
and drop the file(s) into the message window as a first step. By
doing this, the file will be automatically inserted into the message you
will send. Copying and pasting files into the message window is the
alternative method of adding files. You can send files to the recipient
using either method, and both are acceptable.
Pro tip: Simply click on the files you have attached and press
the delete key on your keyboard to remove them. They will be
automatically deleted as a result, and if you decide to put them
back, they must be attached once more.
Automatic Out-of-Office Messages
An automatic reply that recipients will see if you are temporarily
unavailable to read your emails is one of the most practical features
to have. These, also referred to as a "out of office message," will
be set up so that whenever you leave the office, for example, to go
on vacation, people will be alerted and informed that they cannot
reach you, that you cannot access your messages, or any other
message that you would like to convey.
You must select the automatic replies (out of office) option under
account information on the file tab in order to apply the message.
When you get there, you can choose to send automated
responses. Toggle this box.
Setting a date is not necessary if the message is one that users will
receive regardless of how they get in touch with you. However, select
the only send during this time range option if you want to specify a
specific time frame for when senders will receive this message.

You can type the message and put your signature in the box that
appears next. You will still be able to access your messages normally
even though those who send you messages will receive these

messages. After you have finished writing your message, click "ok" to
activate the feature.
Pro tip: When you open your Outlook page, a yellow banner will
appear. If you want to turn off the out-of-office messages, click
on it. You can either click the turn off button that will be there,
or you can go to the file tab and click the turn off button in the
automatic replies section.
Inbox Folders
If you don't automatically file your messages, they will show up in
your inbox. You have the option of organizing your messages into
folders or leaving them all in your inbox.

Selecting the inbox icon in the taskbar's left side and pressing the
right button on it will create a folder. You must choose create new
folder from the menu that will then appear. You can drag and drop
the messages you want to place inside it into a folder that you can
name according to your needs.
You can search for messages in your mailbox using the blue
"search" bar at the top of the window. When you enter the search
term there, Outlook will look through all of the relevant messages in
the inbox and folders.
Pro tip: The entire contents of your email box will be searched
for if you conduct a search while Outlook is on the inbox page.
However, the program will only look for emails that are located
in the same folder if you are already inside of it.
Contacts

You can easily create contacts within your Outlook inbox, which will
help you send emails faster. For the contacts you choose to add, the
software has a section specifically for creating what they refer to as
business cards. You must click on the icon with two people on it at
the left-hand bottom of the taskbar to access this software feature.
The contacts section of Outlook will open once you click on it.
Here, you can decide whether to create a single contact or a
collection of contacts. Click on the new contact button in the home
tab, which is located on the far left of the ribbon, to add a new
contact. When you have finished, it will appear in the contacts
section. A new window will open where you can fill out all the
necessary information.

Pro tip: When a contact is added to your address book,
Outlook will automatically search for them if you only type their
name in the to or any of the receiver fields of the message
rather than the full address. As a result, it is simpler to send
messages and ensure that the information is accurate. If you
only typed the contact's first name when writing the message,
click check name to confirm the contact, and the software will
search your contacts for them.
Calendar
The calendar is another tool offered by Outlook to the user for
scheduling appointments and meetings. It also has a quick shortcut
for inviting guests to events or registering for meetings. The
calendar-like icon located at the bottom of the task panel can also be
used to access this area of Outlook. When you do, a window with a
calendar-like layout will appear. You can scroll through this page to

see your upcoming appointments by day, week, or month. To choose
the calendar view you want, use the arrange feature on the home
tab of the ribbon.
Scheduling an Appointment or a Meeting
Double click on the date you want to book an appointment or a
meeting in order to start it right away on your calendar. When you
do, a new window with the option to enter the event's specifics will
appear. Write a title that will appear as the author's name in the
calendar. Additionally, you can choose whether the event will last all
day or just have a start and end time. To ensure that the right time
is set when working with teams from different time zones, check the
time zones box.

Pro tip: If you have Microsoft Teams installed on your
computer (more on this will be covered in Chapter 7), you can
click the Team Meeting icon to automatically add a link to your
appointment, which will send it to all attendees and give them
access to it for the meeting.
By selecting the recurring button, you can specify the days on
which the event will repeat itself, as in the case of a recurring
training schedule. The features that are available on the ribbon can
also be used to set up additional features, such as the reminder, the
significance of the meeting, and how your day will appear in the
calendar.
Tasks
You can create tasks in Outlook that you can then follow up on as
necessary. An icon of a flag is used to represent this tool. You can

activate the flags in the tags section of the home tab in the ribbon if
you have an email that you want to mark for later follow-up. Once you
click the button, you'll be given the option to select the time you
want to be reminded of this task. These should be used for emails
that require an attachment and that you want to keep track of.
Click on the clipboard with a checkmark at the base of the inbox
pane to view all of your outstanding tasks. It will then display your
current tasks and to-do list. Eliminate the flag by clicking on the
message with your right mouse button to remove a task from your
list. You can choose to either mark the task as complete or to
delete it for this. Pick the option that best suits your requirements.
Pro tip: There is a connection between Outlook and OneNote,
as you will see in Chapter 9. Setting up tasks in OneNote and
sending them to Outlook will be possible. You can also send
something from Outlook to OneNote in the opposite direction. To
do this, choose the item to send to a notebook and click the

send to OneNote button on the home tab of the ribbon.
Following your click, a dialogue box asking you which notebook
you want to add the data you are exporting from Outlook to will
appear. For more information on using the OneNote program,
please see Chapter 9.

Keyboard Shortcuts
Function
Shortcut on PC
Shortcut on Mac
Close a window
Esc
Command + W
Create new message
Ctrl + Shift + M
Command + N (in mail
window)
Send a message
Alt + S
Command + Return
Insert a file
Alt + N, A, F
Command + E
Search for an item
F3
Option + Command + F
Reply to a message
Alt +H, R, P
Command + R
Forward a message
Alt + H, F, W
Command + J
Reply all
Alt + H, R, A
Shift + Command + R
Check for new messages
Ctrl +M or F9
not available
Mail view
Ctrl +1
Command + 1
Calendar view
Ctrl + 2
Command + 2
Contacts view
Ctrl + 3
Command + 3
Tasks view
Ctrl + 4
Command + 4
Notes view
Ctrl + 5
Command + 5
Shortcuts
Ctrl + 7
Command + 7
Next open message
Ctrl + .
Command + ~
Previous open message
Ctrl + ,
Shift + Command + ~
Create appointment
Ctrl + Shift + A
Command + N
Create contact
Ctrl + Shift + C
Command + N
Create note
Ctrl + Shift + N
Command + N

Section 6: Skype
In contrast to the remaining applications featured in this publication,
Skype is a chat and messaging software that did not originate
from Microsoft in its initial development stages. In 2011,
Microsoft acquired the aforementioned entity as a replacement for
Microsoft Live Messenger, which had been introduced in 2003. Skype
users have the capability to engage in voice calls, video calls, or text-
based chats. The transmission of files and audio is facilitated as well.
The aforementioned software can be downloaded by users onto
various platforms, including computers, mobile devices, tablets, and
gaming consoles.
Let’s Start from the Basics
To utilize Skype, the initial step entails downloading the program onto
your device. This can be accomplished by conducting a search for the
desired application on the respective app store or utilizing a search
engine. After completing this step, it will be necessary for you to
authenticate your credentials by logging in. In the event that an
individual possesses a Microsoft account, specifically one with a
@outlook.com or similar domain, there is no necessity to undertake
the process of creating a new account. Additionally, it is possible to
utilize one's personal email address in order to establish the account
in a suitable manner. In the event that an account is not already in
possession, it is recommended to utilize the create account tool in
order to establish a new account for personal use.
Pro tip: Remember to check the box that says, "Start Skype
as soon as the computer logs on" to avoid having to enter
your password each time you use your device if you want to be
connected at all times. Use the remember me option to avoid

having to enter your password each time you want to log in,
which is another helpful tip.
Checking the Audio and Camera Settings
Make sure the microphone, audio, and video settings are functional
before using the program. Since there is a feature to test the audio—
microphone and speakers—before you start using, you can do this
when you first log in. Do not worry if you skipped this step during
setup. Once you are connected, you can continue to do it.
Click on your photo icon above the contacts bar to test and set the
settings for your account. There will be a drop-down menu where
you can select your settings. You can view the necessary information
by choosing the audio and video option in the settings.

Personalizing the Account
You can further customize your account by adding details like your
birthday, the name you want to use, and a picture in the settings
menu. Access the menu item for "account and profile" to find this
information. When you log into the account, you can also choose
whether you want to turn off Skype's automatic login feature.
Additionally, you can choose your notification preferences, control
how the chat menus look, and set your privacy preferences.
Personalizing Messages

Still in the settings section, you can choose a few default actions
you want Skype to take when you use it. You might not want the files
you receive to be downloaded to your computer automatically for
security reasons, for instance. You might also want the chat
messages you copy and paste to be marked as quotes. By choosing
the appropriate options in the messaging section of the application's
settings, all of this is possible.
Adding Contacts
You'll need people you can communicate with if you want to install a
messaging app on your device. Adding contacts can help with this. It
is simple to locate people who have Skype accounts thanks to the
software's user-friendly interface. You can use the search feature to
look up people you know who might be registered by clicking the
search button and entering their name or email address.

When you enter a name, Skype will instantly display a list of the
names of those who have accounts in the directory and are the
closest to you. The name of the person, the number of connections
you share with them, and their location will all be on this list. Since
you are just creating an account, it is unlikely that you have had any
previous conversations with this person, but you can find all of those
conversations under the group chats.
You can invite friends to sign up for a Skype account if you want to
talk to them on the service but they don't already have one. The
information invite to Skype will appear at the bottom of the results
bar if you search for a person's name but are unable to locate them.
You enter the person's email address there, and they will get an
invitation to sign up for the platform.

      
Additionally, you should be aware that Skype will notify you if a user,
including yourself, is online or changes their status. A colored circle
will appear next to your icon or the icon of your contact to indicate
this. Click on your image (or the circle with your initials in the top left
corner where your name is) to change your active status. Your status
is the first choice directly below. You can choose to be inactive
(white), active (green), away (yellow), do not disturb (red) when
using Skype. Even though you are online when in an invisible status,
nobody can contact you unless you first message them.

Messaging
When using Skype, you can have one-on-one or group conversations
by making video or audio calls and sending messages through chat. It
is simple to start a conversation with your pertinent contacts now that
you have added them. A new window will open when you click on
someone's name in your contacts list to begin a private conversation
with them. You can begin typing your message in the field labeled
"Type a Message" at the bottom.

In addition, you can start a video message, send an audio message,
send a location, schedule a call, create a poll, and send this person a
contact that you might have. While speaking with your contact, you'll
notice that the window's top has two blue buttons—one with a
camera and the other with a phone receiver. To switch from
messaging to a video or phone call, click on these buttons.
Clicking on the icon next to the contact's name is another way to
share this data. You can choose the course of action you want to
take in relation to them from a menu that will appear. Additionally,
you'll see that a pencil icon is present next to their name. By clicking

on it, you can change the contact's name as it appears on your list,
add a phone number, take them off, or even block them.

        

Pro tip: The only way to unblock someone who has been
blocked from your contact list is to access the blocked
contacts option under the contacts tab in the settings section of
your Skype account. After that, you can speak to them once
more after unblocking them.
Create a Group Chats
It's possible that you'll want to talk to or message more than one
person at once while using Skype, and the program actually makes it
very simple to do so. There are primarily two ways to accomplish
this. The first involves choosing a contact you want to be a part of the
group chat, and then inviting others to join by clicking on the person's
icon with a plus sign next to it. This is especially helpful if, for
instance, you are talking about a project and would like someone
else's opinion or input.
The contacts pane's chats button is where you can also do this.
When you do, the options to meet now or start a new chat will
appear. The type of chat you want to start can be chosen from a
drop-down menu that appears when you click the "new chat"

button. Since this is a group chat, choose this option and include the
team members you want to include.
Formatting the Messages
The messaging feature's format and use are the final thing you need
to understand. In terms of formatting, Skype does not permit many
changes to the text: Use only bold, italic, or strikethrough to
change what you've written. Additionally, links may be added (and
if you select this option, you may view a preview of the content that
will appear in the link). The program will permit you to write code in
the message text box if you are a more experienced user. Simply
click on the letter A with a pen that is situated to the right of your
message box to gain access to these tools.

Like many of the contemporary messaging services available today,
Skype offers a selection of emojis that can be used in various
contexts. By selecting the happy face to the left of the message box,
you can get to them. When you do, a menu containing a number of
available figures will appear, and you can select the one that best
suits your needs. If you already know what you want to type, you
might also want to use the program's enabled configuration of
parenthesis-action-close parenthesis, like (happy), in which case it

will automatically figure out what you want to say and return an
image.
Pro tip: The return (Mac) or enter (PC) keys are typically
set up to send messages when Skype is installed. By
pressing the shift key followed by enter or return, you can jump
directly to the next line without having to start a new message if
your goal is to begin a new line of text within the same
communication rather than send a message.

Keyboard Shortcuts
Function
Shortcut on PC
Shortcut on Mac
View keyboard shortcuts
Ctrl + /
Command + /
Open settings
Ctrl + ,
Command + ,
Open themes
Ctrl + T
Command + T
Open or close dark mode
Ctrl + Shift + T
Command + Shift + T
Search contacts
Ctrl + Shift + S
Command + Shift + S
Next conversation
Ctrl + Tab
Command + Tab
Previous conversation
Ctrl + Shift + Tab
Command + Shift + Tab
Zoom in
Ctrl + Shift + +
Command + Shift + +
Zoom out
Ctrl + -
Command + -
Quit Skype
Ctrl + Q
Command + Q
Start new conversation
Ctrl + N
Command + N
Open contacts
Alt + 2
Not available
Add people to conversation
Ctrl + Shift + A
Command + Shift + A
Send a file
Ctrl + Shift + F
Command + Shift + F
Mark as unread
Ctrl + Shift + U
Command + Shift + U
Search within conversation
Ctrl + F
Command + F
Start video call
Ctrl + Shift + K
Command + Shift + K
Mute or unmute conversation
Ctrl + M
Command + M

Section 7: Microsoft Teams
Microsoft Teams was selected as the optimal option by the
corporation to enhance online collaboration and communication
among individuals inside organizational settings. While bearing
similarities to Skype in terms of functionality, this platform also
facilitates online file collaboration, provides the capability to record
meetings, and allows for the formation of working teams. Despite the
inclusion of the Microsoft Suite in the program, there exists an option
to obtain a free download for individuals who choose to acquire it.
Microsoft Teams is accessible for utilization on both personal
computers and mobile devices.
Upon successfully logging into Microsoft Teams, a chat window will
be shown, facilitating communication between the user and other
members inside the teams. Adjacent to the window, a set of six
buttons can be observed, including activity, chat, teams, calendar,
calls, and files. The provided buttons facilitate user access to many
functions of the program and enable seamless integration with other
software applications. In the subsequent chapter, an examination will
be conducted on each of these elements and their respective
utilization techniques.
Create Your First Teams
The first thing you need to learn is how to assemble a team. This
team will consist of individuals who work together on the same
project or are on the same team within the organization. Click the
team button in the window's left hand panel to start a team. When
you've finished, head to the bottom of the window where you'll see a
join or create team icon.

You have the choice to either start a new team or join one once you
click on this icon. If you have a code to join a team, you just need to
enter it in the window that appears, and you’ll be added to the team
right away. To start a new team, however, you can either do so from
scratch or model it after an existing one. Along with these two
options, Teams will also give users the option to build a team using a
template for something like project management, employee
onboarding, or event management.
You must first choose whether this team is a public or private one.
Anyone can join a team that is open to the public, but if the team is
private, those who want to join will need a code or authorization to
enter. You must then choose a name for the team, add a description,
and add a data classification after this has been decided.


   

After everything is finished, you can begin inviting people to join the
team you created. Click on the ellipsis next to the names of the
people you want to add to your team, then select "Add Member." If
the person you want to invite to a team is not already on your contact
list, simply enter their email in the appropriate field, and they will get
an email notifying them of the invitation. Sending a user the link to
the group that is created after clicking the ellipsis button for the team
is another way to invite them to join.

Pro tip: You can identify team owners and their primary
authorizations when using Teams. A group may have multiple
owners, who may then add or remove members, invite
guests, or modify the team's settings. The group owners will
decide on the permissions for the members' and guests'
categories of individuals within the group.

Creating Channels
The team members will be able to communicate about a specific
subject through channels. For instance, if you are a teacher, you can
set up a channel where your class can discuss homework, another
for subject-related questions, and a final one for questions. All
members of the groups will have access to these channels, which will
enable a better organization of the topics of interest.
Additionally, you will be able to upload files, work together on them,
and chat within the channels. Every channel will have a separate chat
and file tab, making communication more orderly.
Pro tip: The activity icon in the left hand panel will turn
highlighted whenever there is a new activity on a channel. If
you click on it, notifications of the groups that have activity or
new information will show up. Don't worry if you are unsure of
the source of the notification. The details will be highlighted in
the window, and you can also see earlier notifications.
Uploading/Attach Documents

Once the channel has been established, you can upload files to it so
that other users can view them. You can either do this by adding the
details to the chat, in which case the document will be uploaded to
the files tab automatically, or you can go to the files tab and add it
directly from there. Along with the option to upload files, this area
also gives you the chance to start a brand-new document on which
users can collaborate.
If the files do not appear automatically, you can click the sync button
to ensure that everyone has access to the same data. Finally, users
of this channel will have the option to download the files or create
links to them if they so desire. Users will be able to share or
download the document to their devices as a result.
Chats and Calls
Private messaging is also possible, despite the software's primary
goal being to foster teammate interaction. Additionally, you can chat
with more intimate groups of people. Simply click on the person icon
next to them in the chat window's top right corner if you want to add
someone else to a conversation you are having with someone in
private, for instance.
You can also start a video message from this screen (camera
icon), call the person (telephone icon), or share the screen (icon
with the square and the upward-pointing arrow). To avoid
switching contacts in the chats while working with multiple windows at

once, you can also close a window by selecting the final button on the
top bar next to the icon for inviting people.
Sending Messages and Files in the Chat
If you are familiar with other messaging services, sending messages
in the chat is very simple. Teams offers many more options for text
formatting than other tools, which is one of its main advantages. The
standard bold, italic, and underline features are available when you
start typing a message, but you can also change the font's color and
style, highlight a particular passage, and even insert numbers and
bullet points.
Since they are common across the Microsoft Suite, the majority of
the icons are simple to recognize. Using the exclamation point on the
tool button to gauge the message's importance is another option. The

message box also gives you the option to delete everything at once if
you change your mind and decide not to send the message by
selecting the trash can icon at the very end of the formatting toolbox.
Message Features
You can mention someone or draw their attention when you message
them in Teams by using the '@' symbol. You only need to type
"@Anna" in the message field if you want Anna to respond to your
message while you are in a channel, for instance. As soon as you
click the icon, a list of all the users will appear, and as you start
typing their names, the program will filter the contacts until the right
person is found. You can click reply just below the message to carry
on the threaded conversation while keeping the conversation on topic.
You can follow the progression of information because all of the
responses to that message will be shown underneath it.
Pro tip: Click the "@" button and type the channel name to
message and alert everyone in the channel. The message will
be broadcast to all users. Instead of choosing each member
individually in your message, you can choose all of them at
once.
Sharing files within the message area in Teams is another quick and
simple hack. For instance, you must drag and drop the file you wish
to share into the message in order to send it in a conversation. All
users will be able to see it in the message board, but as an added
bonus, it will also be visible in the channel's file section.

Meeting Features
The meetings feature of the Teams software is one of its most
comprehensive and intricate components. There are many options
available to you when running a meeting through the platform, as you
will see in this section. You will discover how to invite attendees, add
people, share your screen, change your background, record
meetings, and use a variety of other features. Discover what
Microsoft Teams can provide for online meetings as you continue
reading.
Scheduling and Starting a Meeting
Because Outlook and Teams are a part of the same suite, you can
synchronize the data between the two programs to keep your
calendar up to date with the meetings you'll be attending. In most
cases, when you schedule a meeting in Teams, Outlook is
automatically updated, making it simpler to manage your agenda.
However, since Teams allows you to do it, you are not required to
schedule a meeting through the email service.
You only need to access the calendar icon on the program's left bar
for it to display your availability. To set up a meeting, select the + new
meeting button at the top of the window and enter the necessary

details. We won't go into great detail because the procedure is very
similar to the one you would perform in Outlook. However, you should
be aware that you will require a name for the meeting, the attendees,
a date and time, and, if applicable, a specific channel. Although it is
optional, you can add a personalized text to the invitation.
Pro tip: On the meeting invite's top menu, you can manage the
meeting's time zone information and response options. This
feature is especially helpful if you are working with people who
are located in different regions because it allows you to specify
how the invitees can respond and the time for the meeting.

Once the meeting is near, you will be alerted by the system that it is
about to start. If you can, enter the meeting and, if you are the
organizer, allow people in the lobby to join the meeting. Once the user
clicks on join, they can establish the setting for their video and audio
options. They can choose to join without camera and audio. If any of
these choices are made, and you want to change it during the
meeting, do not worry, You are able to do so once you have entered
the room.
If you are in a setting which does not have an adequate background
for the meeting, you can also change what the other participants will
see. To do this, click on the background filters option at the bottom
of the screen where you can see your image. Once you do, you will
be able to choose between blurring the background or choosing some
of the standard templates that Teams offers you. Once you have set

all this information, it is time to join the meeting by clicking on the join
now button on the far right of the screen.
Pro tip: If you use Teams in a professional setting, you can
choose to customize your background by adding, for instance,
the company logo. To add a new background, select the "add
new" option at the top of the background list, then design a
unique background using your own template.
You can decide how long the meeting should last and what each
participant's role will be while setting it up. You can, for example,
allow some users to share their files and screen while preventing
others. Manage every option in the calendar's meeting options
button. It will be easier to establish what each person can do during
the presentation, such as removing participants, admitting users in the
lobby, and starting or stopping recording, by deciding who will be the
organizer, co-organizer, presenter, and attendee.
During the Meeting
The participants can use a number of features while the meeting is
taking place. Numerous icons that represent various actions can be

seen in the window's top bar. The first button will display a list of
everyone in the meeting, and the second will show you the chat view.
These tools are crucial because you could find yourself wanting to
speak up during a presentation, and you could choose to type it out
to ensure that you don't forget. As we saw on the chat, the next
button is to raise your hand during a meeting, which is followed by the
option to pop open the window.

The ellipsis buttons are an essential component of the software, as
you may have noticed. If you click on them during a meeting, you will
be able to take a number of actions, but only if you are the meeting's
organizer. You have the option of recording the meeting as one of
these options. When the meeting is over, the information will be
accessible in the chat files of the conversation and both the video and
the audio can be recorded.

  
You can share this externally by downloading the file and uploading it
to OneDrive, for example, or you can send the link to other Teams
users.
The program's accessibility is another nice Team feature. You can
use the ellipsis button to enable a real-time caption to what is being
said because there may be attendees in the meeting who have
trouble understanding what is being said. When you turn on this

feature, the program will automatically record what is said and
display it for the other users to read. Some languages can also be
translated in real time in a similar manner, allowing attendees who
do not speak the language to participate in the meeting.
It is also possible to change a team member's role in the middle of a
meeting. The changes will be made instantly while the meeting is
taking place if you simply go to meeting options. By selecting the
option for meeting notes, you can also take notes. You will still have
access to these in the chat options after the meeting is over.
The features made possible by the share button are the final ones
that need to be covered in a meeting. By selecting it, you can share a
window that is currently open on your computer, a PowerPoint
presentation, or a whiteboard where you can communicate and
draw. Users can access all of these features for simpler interaction
with the content.

Pro tip: Users will be able to view and scroll through a
PowerPoint file that you decide to share while you are
presenting. The users will only be able to see what you are
presenting, however, if you share the file directly from your
computer.
Leave the Meeting
Teams will give you the option to download a list of attendees
before you leave the meeting. But before the session is over, this has
to be done. There is a distinction between adjourning and adjourning
the meeting. The meeting will come to a close when you adjourn,
and the session will be over. However, the other attendees will be
able to carry on without you after you leave the meeting.


Section 8: Microsoft OneDrive
Microsoft OneDrive serves as the corporate entity's designated
platform for cloud-based storage. The cloud storage service
facilitates the user in storing various forms of media, such as images,
documents, and audio files, thereby enabling seamless accessibility
across multiple devices. Upon obtaining the Microsoft Suite package,
users are granted automatic access to OneDrive, a cloud storage
service, which initially provides a storage capacity of 1 terabyte (TB).
One benefit of the program is that it allows for seamless integration
with the user's computer settings, enabling the direct storage of
created documents or files in OneDrive without the necessity of
saving them locally on the computer.
OneDrive operates in a manner akin to other cloud storage platforms,
such as Google Drive, while also incorporating certain integrated
functionalities specific to Office programs. Continue reading to
discover the primary benefits and strategies for leveraging cloud
computing to enhance your operations.
Let’s Start with Log-In
To access OneDrive, you can type the program’s name in your
search engine browser and click on the link once it appears. To login,
you will be asked for the email with which you have signed up and the
password. This should be the same one you use for all the other
Microsoft programs so that it can identify the account and upload the
relevant documents.

If you have previously logged in, your password is likely already
saved, so you only need to click on continue. You can choose to
enable two-step security so that each time you log on, a different
number will be sent to your phone as an added layer of security. It is
not required, but it is advised because you will probably store all of
your important files there and may not want others to have access to
them.
Pro tip: Don't worry if you don't set the initial information as you
would like. Your account information is always accessible,
allowing you to change any of the contents, including the
security details and account settings.
Managing Files
OneDrive will take you to the initial screen when you launch it, where
you can see your main folders, files, and other essential data. You
can access your files, view recently uploaded or modified items, view
photos, open shared documents, and use the recycle bin on the left
pane. There is a shortcut to Microsoft's online software for your use
on the blue bar directly above it. A task bar that gives the user

access to some of the main features of the cloud program can be
found directly beneath the blue bar.
Creating and Modifying a File
You can find a button labeled + new on the window's top in a position
that is highlighted in blue. You can use this button to create
documents and files and then instantly upload them to the cloud.

OneDrive provides you with the option to organize your files by
creating a Word document, Excel workbook, PowerPoint
presentation, 
OneNote 
notebook, 
Forms 
survey, 
plain
document, or folder. You can access the online version of the
selected software and edit it online by selecting one of these
programs. Although there may be some differences between the
online version of the software and the version that is actually installed
on your computer, the majority of the commands are the same, so
you do not need to be concerned. See the illustration below!
For instance, once the document has been created, it will appear in
the workspace's list of my files.

It's crucial to keep in mind that you can create a file in both the
workspace and inside of a folder. Click on the file's title (or the
hyperlink option) with the right mouse button to bring up a drop-down
menu with additional options for this file, including renaming.

You have the option to preview or open the document here, download
or delete it, move, copy, or rename it, as well as view its details and
modification history. All of the features in OneDrive allow you to click
with the right button, and each file or folder will present you with a
variety of options.
Pro tip: Know the pertinent details concerning your documents
and folders. The last time the file was modified, its size, and
whether it is a shared or private document are all listed next to
the file name.
Uploading and Downloading Documents
Despite the fact that OneDrive is a program targeted at Microsoft
applications, there are no limitations on the types of data you can
upload. You can select whether you want to upload a file or a folder
to your storage by clicking the button next to the + New button on
the home page.
There is a quicker way to do this, though using this feature will let you
search your computer for the necessary data before uploading it. You
can just drag and drop the item into the first page or the appropriate
folder if it is already available and ready to upload. You will soon be
able to use the archive online as well, and a status bar will show
whether it has been uploaded or not.
Pro tip: The drag and drop functionality is accessible across the
board in OneDrive. You can use this functionality to rearrange what

you have if you want to move files between folders or change the
location of something you've stored.
On the other hand, if you want to download a document or do the
opposite, you must first select it by clicking the button next to its
name. After selecting the document by checking the circle, you'll see
that the status bar has been automatically updated with more
choices. One of them is the choice to download. When you select it
and choose to download it, a dialogue box asking where you want to
save the file will appear. According to your needs, choose the
appropriate location on your computer.
Other Options
You've probably noticed that the status bar at the top will offer you
extra features once you've chosen your desired file. The share
button is one of them. In the dialogue box that appears when you
click it, you can type the email addresses of the people you want to
share the file with, add a personalized message, or copy the link to
send it through a message. You will notice that the file's private
setting will change to shared after it has been shared, indicating that
other people now have access to modify and view it.

You will be responsible for determining the other user's access to the
document. It is initially editable when you send the invitation, but it is
also editable after the document has been shared. To decide on the
fly who will have access to what, click the pen next to the field where
you will type the other user's email address and choose between the
can edit and can view options.

Pro tip: There is always the option to choose more than one
document or folder when choosing. If this is the case, you will
observe that the options change once more and that only a
limited number of things can be done. When you choose a
combination of files and folders, folders and files, or files
and files, the status bar will display various action options.
The </> embed function is the final choice that you will see in the
status bar. You can directly link the data in your OneDrive to any
website, personal or professional. The file or folder must be chosen
before clicking the embed button. This will bring up a box to the right
of your screen where you can add HTML code to the page. If you
embed a file or folder into a blog post or website, anyone who visits it
will be able to view the content without having to sign in. As a result,
only publish documents that are secure for you and your company.

Synchronization
As was already mentioned, OneDrive is probably already installed on
your computer if you have the Microsoft Suite. When you create a
new document, file, or save something on your computer, it will be
automatically synchronized with your device if it has been configured
with the correct information. Since you can manage these documents
online as well, if you choose to do so, you will be able to see the
changes when you open the file on your device. With the help of this
feature, you can manage your documents remotely and work on them
even if your primary device is not with you.
Pro tip: Three blue dashes will appear next to the document's
name in the list if there is a new document or a new modification
in an existing document in OneDrive.
Storage and Backup

The files in OneDrive are already a backup of the data on your
device, so you shouldn't need to backup those files. Even if you don't
want to regularly have access to air, you can still use it for this. Even
if you delete a file from your computer, it will still be accessible in the
cloud trash can thanks to this software's intriguing feature.
Let's say you wanted to permanently delete a file from your device,
so you chose it and pressed shift + del. But when you did that, you
accidentally added a file that wasn't meant to be deleted. You won't
typically need to worry if the item was stored on your device. Simply
visit the OneDrive website and select the recycle bin icon on the left.
There, you will have access to all the details of deleted files, and by
choosing them, you will be able to upload and download them again
to your device and the cloud.
Storage
For new users, OneDrive typically offers 1 TB of storage. Check the
progress bar at the bottom of the task pane to the left to see how
much of this memory you have used. The amount of space you have
used relative to the total that is available is shown as a blue line. You
will be able to estimate your storage capacity because the

information will be both written in words and measurably displayed in
the bar.
Pro tip: If you've grown to love OneDrive and would like to
purchase more storage for your files, you can do so by going
to the options menu and selecting how much extra space you'll
require. The recurring payment will be automatically charged
each month to the account's linked credit card. Go to the
manage and storage icon in the options menu if you'd like more
specific information about your storage settings.
Account Settings
Your OneDrive account settings are readily available in the program
window if you want to view or change them. You can see this view in
the top right corner of the window, where your initials are enclosed in
a circle. Click this button and choose "my Microsoft account" to
access the account information.
You can change your password in this section, check which of your
devices have the Microsoft Suite installed, manage your account's
privacy settings, including turning on two-step verification, and
manage security options. This section also gives you the option to

change or enable different payment methods and view the Microsoft
products you have purchased.
Last but not least, the user will be able to access this area of
OneDrive to include family members in their plan, manage Outlook
online (without having to access the original device), and learn about
other services that the business provides.
Bonus Section: Microsoft Forms
You've probably noticed that there is one program that we did not
mention in the book when you go to OneDrive and are looking to start
a new file. Microsoft Forms is one such tool. Don't worry if you're
wondering what this is. We'll go over this right away in this section.

The company's alternative for making online surveys and tests is
Microsoft Forms. To conduct a study, for instance, you can
personalize your questionnaires here and distribute them to other
users. You will always have access to the results because they will
be stored in your OneDrive. Although you can choose a start and end
date for the survey or quiz to take place, these will also be updated in
real time as the users respond to the questions.
Creating a Form
On OneDrive, click the + New button and choose the forms option to
begin creating a form. You'll be taken directly to the software's start
page in a brand-new window that will open. Despite the fact that
using the program is very intuitive, you will learn about some of its
key features here so that you can maximize your chances of success.
A new form's first page serves as its blank canvas, where you can
enter the form's title and optional description. You can explain the
purpose of the survey, for instance, to those who will access the form
through the description. To edit this data, simply click the Untitled
Form name.

The construction of your form will then begin. You can choose what
you want the survey's first field to be by clicking the button labeled
"add new." Choice, text, rating, and date are all possible variations
of this.
Let's assume that you went with choice, the first option. The first
numbered question on Microsoft forms is generated automatically.
What you want to under the options should be added in the question
field. After deleting the text, type in the response options you want
people to have. If your question has more than two possible answers,
click the + Add option button to add more options, or choose this
option to add another button.

Regardless of the question, by selecting the appropriate button at the
bottom of the box and determining whether this is a mandatory
question, you will also be able to determine if the users can select
more than one option. All questions will have access to these choices.
If you think the question needs more clarification, for instance, you
will also have the option of adding a subtitle.

Using the ellipsis button at the bottom, you can reorder the questions
as you add new ones to suit your needs. Click the preview button at
the top of the page to see a preview of your document. By selecting
this option, you can also choose a specific survey theme.
When you are finished, click the send button to retrieve a link that
you can send to people you want to participate in the survey. The tab
labeled "responses" will be located next to it and contain the results.
Pro tip: You will be able to download the responses to Excel to
further manipulate the data after they appear in graph format.


Section 9: Microsoft OneNote
OneNote is a feature of the Microsoft Suite that lets you keep a
notebook and sync your notes with Microsoft Outlook. You can
use this software to organize your information in notebooks,
including everything from recipes to work or school-related
details. The program's ability to draw allows you to use your device
as a drawing board for any designs you want to create, which is
another intriguing feature.
But let's start at the beginning: how to make a notebook and arrange
them in the way you like.
Creating a Notebook
OneNote will prompt you to choose between opening an existing
notebook or starting a new one once it has launched. Let's say we
want to start a new one; the first step would be to give it a name.
The program will launch to a blank page without the ribbon as soon
as the name is decided. The home tab of the ribbon should be
expanded and pinned to the top of the table by clicking on it.
Even though we saw this in the first chapter, let's review: Click on the
thumbnail in the task pane's far right corner to pin the ribbon to the
window after it has been expanded.

The ribbon is again similar to other programs in the Microsoft Suite,
as you will see when you view it for the first time, making it much
simpler to navigate. You can paste, cut, and use bullet points or
numbered lists in OneNote in addition to the standard font formatting
tools. The review pane, which provides the user with translation and
spellcheck options, is another feature that is the same.
When you open your first notebook, you will notice that it has a color
and a line where you can type the page name. This color tab
indicates that this page will be contained within a section. Double-
click the section's name and enter the new name in the appropriate
field to suit your needs. In this situation, you might want to type in
recipes if you are creating a kitchen notebook.
You must type the title of this page on the first line to appear on the
page. You can include the name of a dish in the title, to stick with our
example. You can add as many pages as you'd like to this section of
the notebook by clicking the "add page" button at the top of the
pane to the right of your screen. You can add pages to the relevant
section by selecting this button.

Pro tip: You don't need to worry about renaming the pages
because one note will do it for you when you type the page title
on the first line that is present.
Creating and Editing Sections and Pages
Let's say you want to add more to this notebook than just recipes,
but you don't want the pages mixed together. This can be
accomplished by adding a new section. Click the + button next to
the first color-coded tab to add a new section. A new section will
be created automatically, and the color will be chosen for you. The
right button can be used to click on top of the tab and choose the
preferred color if you don't think this is the best option or want to
change it.
You can also delete the newly created section, export it, or create a
new section group by selecting the right button. You can add all of
the sections related to a particular area to a new group if you decide
to do so. Initially, we were making a notebook for the kitchen, but
suppose you want one to keep track of everything about your house.
The various areas of the house can be divided into groups, and each

group can contain its own specific set of sections. This will show up
as a new section group on top of the canvas. By selecting the right
button, you can rename it as well.
Using Templates and Other Formats
On occasion, you might want to add a particular format to the page
you are making. This could be an index card, a to-do list, or perhaps
some lecture notes. OneNote has a special feature for this that
enables you to use one of the pre-made templates to fit your needs.
You must navigate to the insert tab on the ribbon and select the page

templates button from the pages section in order to access the
available templates. The software will let you select from a number of
options, and the moment you click your choice, the page will be
updated automatically.
You can add a spreadsheet, a picture, a video, a table, or even
equations, symbols, and stickers if you prefer to customize the
format on your own. On the insert tab of the ribbon, each of these
options can be found in the appropriate section. You can work inside
some of these options, including the table and the Excel spreadsheet.

Some, like the stickers, are just for show and cannot be modified
inside the canvas areas.
Pro tip: You might not initially be able to edit a picture that you
add to the canvas area if it has text on it. OneNote, on the other
hand, has a feature that lets you edit and extract data from
images. Copy and paste the image into the work area to get
started. Once you've done that, use the right mouse button to
select the text-copying option by clicking on the image. The
extracted text will be moved to another area of the canvas when
you click on it, where you can edit it as necessary.
Page Settings
Editing your page to remove the title or add lines to the canvas, for
example, is not only possible but also has its own section in the
ribbon. You can alter the page's color, add rule lines to it (you have a
few options to choose from), and even hide the page title under the
view tab of the ribbon's page setup section. You can switch the

canvas's color to dark mode using the switch background button,
which some users frequently prefer.

 
 
 

Consider for a moment that you want to print these notes or a portion
of the notebook. You can change the paper's layout to prevent
writing outside the printing area. Go to the paper size button to
choose the size of the paper you want to see. A pane will show up to
the side of your window once you click on it. It will allow you to select
the paper size, landscape or portrait orientation, and whether or not
margins should be used.
You can decide whether or not your choice is intended to be a
template by using the checkbox at the bottom of the options. You
must choose a name before saving if you want it to be. You can also
decide whether this page format should be the norm for all the pages
in the section using OneNote.
Taking and Formatting Notes
You can begin recording your notes once you've chosen the page's
title. While regular text is appropriate for the pages, you might want
to use some of the tags to improve the usability of your document. All
of the text's quick formats are listed in the home tab of the ribbon,
along with a keyboard shortcut for each one in parenthesis. There
are options to highlight your text, write to-do checkboxes, and include

icons for passwords, addresses, and phone numbers.
When you choose one of these, it will appear where your cursor was
when you last clicked, but you can move it anywhere on the canvas.
You can move each option to where you think it is more appropriate
by clicking and dragging it. Since this is an open area for your
creations, you are free to put them wherever you think is most
appropriate.
A box will surround the icon after you select it. For more quick
formatting and editing options, click on the ellipsis at the top of the
text. The dialogue box can be sized to your preference by using the
movement arrow. You can either select the quick tag you just made
and hit delete, or you can simply click the X button in the basic text
section of the home tab, to remove it.
Searching for Tags
You can use OneNote to search through your notebooks for any tags
you might be looking for. You must access the find tags button in
the tags section of the home tab in order to do this. You can search
for tags by name, section, title, date, or note text in the pane that
appears on your screen after you click it. There will be a list of
potential tags, and you can select one.

Unless a different option is chosen, the program will automatically
look up all of the associated tags in the specified notebook. On the
tags summary pane's bottom, however, this data can be modified.
Here, you can choose to search by time of creation, such as tags
created in the last week or yesterday's notes, or by part, such as the
notebook, sections, and pages.
Lastly, it is also possible to have an editable list of every tag you have
created in one of your notebook pages. You must first decide which
page you want to place the list on. To add a list of all the tags within
the selected area to this page, go to the tags summary pane and
select the create summary page button. The details of when or where
you want the tags to be from must once more be specified.
Customizing Tags
You can customize and make your own tags if you believe the ones
that are already available are not the best fit for your project. To do
this, navigate to and select the find tags button from the home
pane. The option to customize tags is located at the bottom of the

pane. You will see that a dialogue box opens when you click the link.
Choose between adding a new tag or changing an existing one
here. You can click the button if you choose to add a new tag.

You must choose a name for it, decide if you want to use a particular
symbol from the list of options, the font color, and whether or not you
want it to be highlighted. You can see a preview of your tag in the
window at the bottom of this dialogue box. When you are happy with
the outcome, click "ok," and the tag will be generated for you
automatically.
Creating Links
The ability to link from one section to another is one of OneNote's
best features. The create links section that appears when you click

the right mouse button makes this possible. The first step is to
choose the location on the canvas where you want to put the link.
Next, use the mouse to perform a right-click and choose the option
link. When you do, a dialogue box displaying every one of your
notebooks and sections will appear.
 
 
 
 

You must type the text that you want to appear in the display. Next,
you'll have a choice between two options. The first step is to select a
file or website to link to. This means that you can create links to
anything on your device or the internet rather than just adding them to
content that was in your notebook. The alternative is to include a link
from a different section of an already existing notebook.
To do this, look through the sections until you locate the one you want
to use. A page or section from the current notebook or another
notebook can be linked here. Only because you will have access to
all of your OneNote notebooks in this view is this feature permitted.
Once you've made your choice, click the "OK" button, and the link will
be created automatically. Use the drag and drop functionality once
more to position it where you believe it to be pertinent.

Drawing and Sketching
When using OneNote on a mobile device, like a tablet, for instance,
you'll benefit from the program's drawing and sketching features in
a number of ways. You can find specific tools to assist you in drawing
on the canvas if you click the draw tab in the ribbon. It will be
especially simple to convert your hand-made designs into something
you can register on OneNote when using a pen and your mobile
device.
You can manually draw shapes in addition to adding the ones that are
already there in the shapes section. You can customize the line's
color, thickness, and even whether you want it to be highlighted using
the software. Click the eraser button, which also gives you the

option to select the size you want to use, to remove something you've
drawn.
Pro tip: You can use the ink to shape, text, or math features to
digitalize anything you've manually drawn or written. When you
select one of these choices, a new window will open where you
can draw the desired shape, type the desired text, or write
the desired equation. The software will then convert it to a
digital format.
Recording
The ability to record audio or video using OneNote is one of its
additional features. When you do, the notebook will contain these
recordings. Go to the insert tab in the ribbon to access this feature.
The recording option will then appear, allowing you to choose
between an audio and a video recording. Consider making an audio
recording. In this scenario, the information you want to record will be
captured by the device's microphone.
The moment you click the record audio button, an audio recording
thumbnail will show up on your canvas. However, there's a catch! This
merely indicates that the recording has begun, not that it has ended.

As long as you don't press the pause or stop buttons on the ribbon,
the device will keep recording. This is important to keep in mind
because it is uncommon for the icon to be accessible before the
process is complete.
You may have noticed that a new tab with the label "playback"
appeared on top of the status bar in the ribbon when an audio or
video file was generated. This taskbar is specifically designed for
using OneDrive's audio and video files. You can choose to view or
hear the playback, forward the media, and set the settings here. If
you clicked on the file tab and scrolled down to the options menu, you
would find the same settings menu there. The only difference is that
you can access the device's audio and video settings directly here.
Make sure the camera and microphone are turned on so you can
record effectively.

Pro tip: The page and section pane will be to the right of your
canvas when you first launch OneNote. To make it easier for
you to work with, you can access the display option in the
OneNote options menu and choose to move the page list to
the left.
Sharing and Synchronizing
OneNote can communicate with other programs in the Microsoft
Suite, particularly Outlook, which is the last thing you need to know
about it. You could, for instance, create a task that syncs with your
email software tasks automatically. You must click the outlook tasks
button in the tags section of the ribbon to accomplish this.

Here, you can choose when the task should be completed (and you
can see the keyboard shortcuts for doing so, too). When you select
an option, the canvas will create a flag for the associated tag, where
you can enter the task that needs to be followed up on. After doing
this, the same task will be present when you open the Outlook
program and select the tasks button. Additionally, a link to the
OneNote page where the task was created will be provided.
Pro tip: You can create a task from OneNote to Outlook in the
same way that you can from Outlook to OneNote. Create one
using the OneNote button found in Outlook's ribbon, and the two
programs will share the same information.

You can also email a notebook page to someone else using OneNote.
This means that they won't have to read the entire notebook, which
might contain sensitive information, in order to see what is written
there. Click the email page button in the ribbon's home tab to email a
notebook page. Once you've done that, you'll notice that an email
page will open with the page's content in the text body. Use any other
Outlook features that you have learned about in Chapter 5 of this
book, and type in the names of the recipients.

Pro tip: Go to the review tab of the ribbon to password-protect
your notebook and stop people from reading private information.
There is a yellow padlock with the word password here. To
display a password protection pane on your screen, click this
button. Click set password to add a password to the page, and
it will then be secured. It's crucial to note that if a page or
section is protected, you won't be able to search within it until it
has been unlocked.

The ability to synchronize your meetings between OneNote and
Outlook is the final feature that you might want to be aware of when
using these two programs. When OneNote is open, it will instantly
update the meetings you have scheduled in Outlook. The last button
in the meetings section of the home tab, meeting details, is where
you can find these meetings.

When you click the button, it will either display the meetings you have
scheduled for that day or give you the option to look up other
meetings. After choosing the meeting you want to record notes for,
click on it to bring up a dialogue box where you can add information.
As was already mentioned in this chapter, you will use the OneNote
program here with the added advantage that you can, for instance,
take notes and email them to every participant.

Keyboard Shortcuts
Function
Shortcut on PC
Shortcut on Mac
Create a link
Ctrl + K
Command + K
Search all notebooks
Ctrl + E
Command + E
Search the current page
Ctrl + F
Command + F
Type a math equation
Alt + +
Not available
Create a new page
Ctrl + N
Command + N
Align paragraph to the left
Ctrl + L
Command + L
Align paragraph to the right
Ctrl + R
Command + R
Show or hide line rules
Ctrl + Shift + R
Command + Shift + R
Insert a line break
Shift + Enter
Option + Return
Start a math equation
Alt + =
Control + =
Close current notebook
Ctrl + Shift + W
Command + Shift + W
Synchronize all notebooks
Ctrl + S
Command + Shift + S
Enter full screen mode
F11
Command + Control + F
Review list of open notebooks
Not available
Control + G
Open other notebooks
Ctrl + O
Command + O
Switch between sections
Ctrl + Tab
Command + Shift + { or }
Insert emoji
Alt + N, S
Command + Control + Space
Insert current date
Alt + Shift + D
Command + D

Section 10: Microsoft Publisher
As demonstrated in the initial chapter, Microsoft Word has been
identified as the optimal software for document creation and text
editing. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that Word is deficient in a
particular aspect that is effectively addressed by Microsoft Publisher:
the capability to customize the page layout in accordance with the
desired format. The primary purpose of the creation of Publisher is to
assist users in configuring invitations, business letters, and cards, as
well as facilitating the setup of the page in the appropriate format.
Additionally, it presents itself as a cost-effective alternative to other
software solutions with comparable functionality but higher price
points. This tool enables users to create magazine layouts and format
documents according to their envisioned specifications. Let us
examine the methodology by which this task can be accomplished.
Setting Up the Page
When Publisher is launched and a new document is opened, a blank
page with blue margins will appear. Your document will use these
margins, so anything you want to type or paste in needs to fit inside
of them. You will find it simpler to decide where to put the text box
and the images if you use these. In contrast to Word, you must
access the margins button on the page design tab of the ribbon in
order to change the margins of this document. You can also modify
the paper size and page orientation in the same section where it is
located. Before beginning, configure your page using these buttons.


The grid lines are another thing you might want to set up before you
begin working on the file. In order to put it into practice, imagine that
you are making a flyer with information that you want to distribute
throughout your neighborhood. You must set it up so that it looks like
a magazine page if you want it to have that format. You can use the
guides button to properly utilize the layout tools that are offered and
avoid having to determine the size of the intervals.

This button will provide you with the appropriate spacing so that you
can diagram your page, and it can be found in the layout section of
the page design tab. Select the type of guides you want to use in
your page by clicking the button. To simplify the design process,
Publisher provides a number of options and will let you select one of
them. Here, it's crucial to keep in mind that you shouldn't worry about
the margin lines and guidelines printing together because they won't.
You should only use this information as a guide.
Pro tip: Keep in mind that using guides will restrict what you
can do inside of them. For instance, text boxes must be
contained within them for Publisher to allow you to create one
without sending you to the page's edge.
Although Publisher offers a pre-established format for placing the grid
lines, you can also adjust the grid lines to suit your needs. You must
click on the ruler at the top or to the left of the page margins to
display a grid line. Click with your cursor on the top ruler and drag it

down to your page to create horizontal grid lines; do the same in
the left tab to create vertical grid lines.
You will notice that the grid line has been positioned once you have
completed this. By clicking on it and dragging and dropping it to the
desired location, you can move this line. To better format your
document, you can add as many grid lines as you like. If you
accidentally added a grid line, you can remove it from the file by
clicking on it once more and dragging it out of the page.
Inserting Elements to Your File
The page needs to be set up before you can begin creating. Click on
the draw text box button located in the home tab of the ribbon to
add text to your document. After choosing it, you will have the
choice of selecting the size that you want for it. To ensure that this
box can be properly saved or printed when the time comes, keep in
mind that it must be within the grid and margin lines.
When you release the mouse button after selecting the area where
the text should be placed, you will notice that the box has been

adjusted to fit the page. Now all you have to do is start typing!
To view the other components that can be added to your publication,
go to the insert tab on the ribbon. A calendar, a bookmark to a
specific page, a header and footer, specific page borders, and a
placeholder for a picture are a few of the standard features that the
program offers to the user. Both images from online sources and
those on your computer can be added to the document. You can add
a placeholder for a picture if you don't yet have the one you want to
use.
Pro tip: The majority of the features that Publisher allows you
to add are editable. This means that even though it gives you a
specific format, you can modify it to suit your preferences and
style it with, for instance, the colors of your company or school
by clicking the right button on top of these elements.
You'll see that the text formatting choices on the home tab are the
same as those found in other programs. You can format the text
there to suit your tastes and the way you want to view it. Additionally,
you will have a thumbnail view of your pages, just like in PowerPoint.

The steps to add a new page are comparable: Select "add page" by
clicking with the right mouse button on the thumbnail pane. One of the
differences in this situation is that Publisher enables you to view a
double page when necessary.
The other method is to navigate to the insert tab in the ribbon, select
the page button in the pages section, and then add a single or
double page to your document.    
Once you click on it, you can decide whether you want a single page
or two pages. A dialogue box asking where you want to add this new
page will open if you choose the insert page option (the last one).
Click "OK" after making your choice. Although the margins will be set
as before for these new pages, you must insert the guides.

 
 

Pro tip: Go to the view tab on the ribbon and select the single
page or two-page spread buttons to see a single page or a
double page view.
Publisher allows you to enter master pages in accordance with the
layout you want for your design, just like PowerPoint does. By
selecting the master pages button from the page design tab of the
ribbon, you can format the default master page, which is a blank
page, however. Once you've formatted the master pages, every new
page you add will adhere to this same standard, giving your
document consistency.

You can drag each page in the thumbnail view, which is akin to
PowerPoint, to change the order of the pages in your document, or
you can access the page design tab and click the move button in the
pages section. A page may also be deleted or given a new name in
this section. When you select one of the choices, a dialogue box
asking how you want to rearrange your document will appear. Even if
you are unsure, keep in mind that you can change it manually later.
Inserting tables, Word Art, headers and footers, and page
numbers are additional similar features that you will notice
between Publisher and the other softwares you have already read
about. To add images or files to your document, the same steps must
be taken. Additionally available in a variety of languages are the spell
check and translation features.
Creating Catalogs
A specific tool in Publisher can be used to create a catalog of the
products you sell if you are a business owner. You should select the
catalog pages button under the insert tab of the ribbon to begin
creating one. A catalog format page will be automatically inserted as
a result, and a new tab called catalog format will also appear in the
ribbon. Create the page you want and add the data you want to your
file using this tab.

You can place your products in boxes on these pages to better
organize the information and present it in a user-friendly way. You can
choose the design you want for your file in the layout area.
Depending on how many products you have, you can choose how
many spaces to give each product. You can make a list of the
products that will be included in these pages so that you can keep
track of your information even more easily.
Use the add list button on the catalog format tab of the ribbon to
create the list. All of the entries for the products you want to place
will go here. You can easily add, remove, and customize entries
using this tool. You can include the product name, a description, an ID
number, a price, and a picture in this list. Publisher will automatically
generate a list for you to save and use in your future files once you
click the "Save" button.

Pro tip: You will be able to add products to the dialogue boxes
you create for the catalog in accordance with the built-in product
list once you have done so. The data box containing the
pertinent information you want to include will be made up of the
list you created. Go to the edit list button on the ribbon to
make the necessary adjustments if the list needs to be modified
to better suit your file.
If you're making a catalog of items that are on sale, Publisher may be
all you need to use to add specific stickers. Look for the
advertisements button under the insert tab on the ribbon. When
you click on it, a number of sticker options that can be used in your
file for sales and other events will appear.
These stickers offer quick access to highlighting a product, though
you can still search the internet for other fashionable options.
Additionally, by clicking on the image with the right button and
customizing it to your liking, you can change its color, font, and style.

Creating Mailing Lists
Making an effective mailing system with Publisher is just one of the
many advantages of using it for your documents. Your publication's
information can be personalized or you can add mailing addresses
using the mail merge tool. You can use the mail merge tool to include
both the first and last names of your clients in the document, for
instance, if you have a list of their first and last names.
You can either choose to use an existing list from Excel or an Access
database, contacts from your Outlook, or you can enter a new list.
Once you've decided on one of these alternatives, all that's left to do
is decide where to place the information in your document. You will be
given a list that has been personalized so that each of your recipients
will receive a message that is specifically tailored to their name. If
you have any trouble doing this, you can use the mail merge wizard,
which will walk you through the process step-by-step.
The creation of an email merge is the alternate choice. While using
the recipient's emails, the procedure will be similar to creating a
mail merge. The same procedure should be followed, and when it's
finished, the program will take you directly to Outlook. Additionally, a

wizard tool is included with this feature to assist users in managing its
use.
Pro tip: Publisher will let you type in a list of the message's
intended recipients if you don't already have a list of sources
you can use. Click the select recipients button on the mailings
tab and select the type a new list option to enter a list by
hand. Selecting the edit recipient list button will allow you to
make any necessary changes to the list.

Editing Business Information
In case you need to print the document you are creating for a
business, you might want to update the relevant information in the
software. Click the file tab on the ribbon to edit your information to
make it more accessible.
When you finally do, a layout resembling the window that first
appears when the software is launched will show up. You can edit the
business information when you click the info button. You can add
the pertinent data you want displayed in a dialogue box that will open.
A company logo is one of the features that can be included. Once
finished, simply click the save button to finish.

Pro tip: When you finally do, a layout resembling the window
that first appears when the software is launched will show up.
You can edit the business information when you click the info
button. You can add the pertinent data you want displayed in a
dialogue box that will open. A company logo is one of the
features that can be included. Once finished, simply click the
save button to finish.
Design Checker
The final Publisher feature worth mentioning is one that will enable
you to print or save your design without making any mistakes. The
file tab section of the ribbon's info section has this feature available.
Click the design check button to verify your design. When you do, a
pane to the right of the window will appear and you will be returned to
the canvas where you were working. You can run general design
checks, publishing checks, website checks, and email checks from
this window; the last option is only available for the current page.
Pro tip: The errors will automatically update in the dialogue box
as you check each box.

A dialogue box displaying everything that needs to be fixed in your
project will appear below the options from which you can choose the
type of check you want to run. Items that are not on the page, for
instance, will be highlighted along with the page number where the
error is located. White spaces on the page and text that extends
beyond the margins are two additional errors that can be highlighted.
Pro tip: Go to the dialogue box's bottom and select the design
checker options to customize the design check's settings. You
can select the page range you want to check, the error type you
want to be highlighted, and how the errors are sorted in the
dialogue box that will appear. After finishing, you can run the
design checker once more.


Conclusion
The completion of this tutorial signifies the acquisition of
comprehensive knowledge required for proficient utilization of the
Microsoft Office suite. Throughout the course of this literary work,
readers have been exposed to the techniques and procedures
involved in generating and structuring textual content using the
Microsoft Word application, as well as the principles and strategies
for effectively handling data within the Microsoft Excel software. The
acquisition of skills in designing impactful presentations using
PowerPoint and effectively managing email correspondence through
Outlook has been achieved. The utilization of these four fundamental
tools is imperative for individuals seeking to advance their proficiency
with the software, particularly within a corporate setting.
However, that was not the extent of the matter. The user has
demonstrated proficiency in database creation using Microsoft
Access, as well as communication skills through chat and call
functionalities in Skype and Teams. Furthermore, the user has
exhibited knowledge in utilizing secure storage solutions such as
OneDrive for document management. In addition, the user has gained
insight into the fundamental aspects of constructing forms within
Microsoft Forms and the potential benefits they offer for conducting
polls and surveys. In conclusion, the aforementioned discussion has
elucidated the process of managing notes in OneNote and
constructing proficient layouts in Publisher.
Congratulations on your achievement! Your understanding of the
functionality of these tools appears to be commendable. It is
important to note that when using various software applications, many
of them exhibit similar organizational structures and utilize identical
icons for their respective tools. This commonality facilitates ease of
navigation across different software platforms. The ribbon interface is
a ubiquitous feature found in nearly all software applications, and

acquiring proficiency in its usage can greatly enhance one's
productivity and effectiveness in accomplishing various tasks.
I trust that this book has proven to be beneficial in resolving any
uncertainties you may have had concerning these programs.
Furthermore, as an additional advantage, the keyboard shortcuts
associated with each program are presented at the conclusion of
each section. Nevertheless, similar to numerous other functionalities
found in these software applications, the majority of them will exhibit
a commonality, including the widely recognized copy and paste
feature (Ctrl + C and Ctrl + V). Utilize these tools to optimize your
user experience and streamline the file creation process, thereby
saving valuable time.
Ultimately, it is my desire that you retain this book as a valuable
reference guide, readily accessible for consultation as the need
arises. The primary objective of this book was to serve as a
comprehensive resource for learning and reference purposes,
particularly to address uncertainties or lapses in memory. In the event
that one finds it necessary to revisit a particular section of text for the
purpose of comprehension or clarification, it is advisable to consult
the corresponding chapter and engage in a rereading exercise
without hesitation. The majority of the information is expected to
remain unaltered despite potential software updates.
It is expected that users will experience a sense of security when
utilizing this software, and the knowledge acquired through its usage
is anticipated to be beneficial for their future pursuits, whether in
personal or professional domains.
If readers have found this book to be enjoyable and believe that its
content has enhanced their comprehension of program management
in their everyday lives, we kindly request that they share their
thoughts and feedback by leaving a review and comment. These
contributions will be highly valued and will contribute to the
enhancement of forthcoming content.
Wishing you the best of luck!

[FF1]QUI POSSIAMO CAMBIARE IL PRINT?

