Gregory Fell & Mike Barlow
Balancing Risk and Reward  
in a Data-Driven Economy
Not All Data Is  
Created Equal




Gregory Fell and Mike Barlow
Not All Data Is
Created Equal
Balancing Risk and Reward in a
Data-Driven Economy
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-94331-1
[LSI]
Not All Data Is Created Equal
by Gregory Fell and Mike Barlow
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Courtney Allen
Production Editor: Kristen Brown
Copyeditor: Kristen Brown
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
April 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-03-30: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Not All Data Is
Created Equal, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly
Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the authors have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is sub‐
ject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.

Table of Contents
Not All Data Is Created Equal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
What Your App Isn’t Telling You                                                            2
Combining Data Can Be Risky Business                                               4
A Calculated Risk                                                                                      5
Privacy Isn’t Dead; It’s on Life Support                                                  6
Are Your Algorithms Prejudiced?                                                          7
Seeking the Goldilocks Zone for Data                                                   8
Consider How the Data Will Be Used                                                    9
Knowing Which Data Needs the Most Protection                            11
The C-I-A Method                                                                                  12
What’s the Downside?                                                                            13
Risk versus Rewards                                                                               14
Data Is Not a Commodity                                                                      16
v


Not All Data Is Created Equal
When you’re driving through a blizzard, all the snow on your wind‐
shield looks the same. If you were to stop and examine the individ‐
ual snowflakes more closely, you would discover an astonishing
variety of shapes and formations. While linguists and anthropolo‐
gists bicker over how many words the Eskimos really have for snow,
the simple truth is that there are many different kinds of snow.
Like snow, data comes in a wide variety. There’s personal data, dem‐
ographic data, geographic data, behavioral data, transactional data,
military data, and medical data. There’s historical data and real-time
data. There’s structured data and unstructured data. It often seems as
if we are surrounded by rising mountains of data.
The big difference between snow and data is that unless you own a
ski resort, snow isn’t perceived as economically valuable. Data, on
the other hand, is increasingly seen as a source of power and wealth.
If you live in a region where winter snowstorms are common, then
your town probably has a fleet of snowplows and a snow emergency
plan. Very few companies, however, have developed comprehensive
policies and robust practices for categorizing and prioritizing their
data.
“The main challenge in creating policies and practices for managing
data effectively is the limited ability of most businesses to identify
data assets and categorize them in terms of criticality and value,”
says Chris Moschovitis, an IT governance expert and chief executive
officer at tmg-emedia, an independent technology consulting
company.
1

Most organizations lack the skills and experience required for iden‐
tifying and valuing data assets. “The task of asset identification alone
can render even the most well-meaning employees helpless,” says
Moschovitis. As a result, many companies find themselves wrestling
with thousands of “orphan assets,” which are assets that have no
clearly identified business owner. That’s like owning a warehouse
full of items, but not knowing how many or what kind of items are
in it.
“Data is a business asset, which means it’s owned by the business
and the business is responsible for managing it. Business owners
should perform regular audits of their data so they have a good
grasp of what they own and understand its current value,” he says.
The failure to audit and categorize data can be harmful to a compa‐
ny’s health. “The downside is significant,” says Moschovitis. In most
companies, for example, low-value data far outnumbers mid-value
and high-value data. Spending the same amount of money protect‐
ing all kinds of data, regardless of its value, can be financially
crippling.
“If low-value data assets are distributed across systems, then pro‐
tecting them with controls designed for higher-value assets violates
the basic principle that the value of an asset must exceed the cost of
the controls,” he says. “Otherwise, you’re wasting your money.”
Most companies find it difficult to assess the current value of their
data assets. Different companies place different values on similar
assets. Additionally, the value of data changes over time. Data that
was highly valuable two years ago might have depreciated in value—
or its value might have risen. In either case, the level of control
should be adjusted accordingly.
“In the worst case, underprotecting critical data leaves it exposed. If
that critical data is lost or compromised, the company may be out of
business,” says Moschovitis.
What Your App Isn’t Telling You
Monica Rogati is an independent data science advisor and an equity
partner at the Data Collective, a venture capital fund that invests in
big data startups. Ideally, she says, companies should develop data
acquisition strategies. “You want to capture all the signals contribu‐
2 
| 
Not All Data Is Created Equal

ting to the process of understanding your customer, adapting to
changes in markets and building new products,” Rogati explains.
For many digital companies, the challenge is imagining the world
beyond the edges of their apps. “Let’s say you make food and deliver
it. Your customers use your app to order the food. You capture the
data about the order. But what about other data, like the items the
customer looked at but didn’t order? It’s also important to capture
data about the choices and the pricing, in addition to seeing what
the customer finally ordered. It’s important to know how people are
reviewing your food and what they’re saying about it on Twitter. Or
if they’re emailing you,” says Rogati.
Knowing what your customers considered ordering can be “nontriv‐
ial” data that would help your business, she says. “Most companies
don’t log that information. There are many signals from the physical
realm that you’re not collecting.”
Weather data, for example, can be extremely useful for many kinds
of businesses, since most people are heavily influenced by the
weather. “You should also be looking at commodity prices, census
data, and demographic data,” says Rogati. If you’re in the food or
restaurant business, you need to know the competitive landscape.
Do you have many competitors nearby, or only a few?
“There’s a lot of emphasis on coming up with great algorithms, but
the data itself is often more important. I’m a big fan of keeping the
algorithm simple and thinking creatively about the quality and vari‐
ety of signals you’re pulling in,” she says.
Rogati believes we’re on the verge of a paradigm shift in which “digi‐
tal natives” are superseded by “data natives.” If she’s right, organiza‐
tions will have to significantly ramp up their data management
skills.
“Digital natives are people who are comfortable with computers and
who cannot imagine a world without the Internet,” she says. Data
natives, on the other hand, are people who expect the digital world
to adapt to their preferences. They’re not satisfied with smart devi‐
ces. They want apps and devices that continuously adapt and evolve
to keep up with their behaviors.
“They’re thinking, ‘Why do I have to press the same 10 buttons on
the coffee machine every morning? Why can’t it remember how I
like my coffee?’ They’re thinking, ‘Why doesn’t the GPS remember
What Your App Isn’t Telling You 
| 
3

my favorite way to get somewhere?’ They expect their apps and
devices to be capable of learning,” says Rogati.
Combining Data Can Be Risky Business
The self-learning machines of tomorrow will require lots more data
than today’s smart devices. That’s why forward-looking companies
need formal data acquisition strategies—merely trying to guess
which data will be important or valuable won’t be enough to stay
competitive.
“Everybody realizes that if you want to be competitive, you’ve got to
have a data-driven organization,” says Jeff Erhardt, the CEO of
Wise.io, a company that builds machine learning applications for the
customer experience market. “At the same time, it’s extremely hard
to predict who will need access to which types of data to make good
decisions.”
Moreover, some of the most profitable decisions are often made by
combining data in novel or unexpected ways. Retailers combine
econometric data with weather data to predict seasonal demand. Oil
producers combine geological data with political data to predict the
cost of drilling new wells. Banks combine data on interest rates with
data on personal income to predict how many people will refinance
their homes.
From Erhardt’s perspective, the primary challenge is enabling deci‐
sion makers to merge various types of data without compromising
an organization’s ability to protect and manage its data. “It’s not just
a question of who is using the data, it’s also what the data is being
used for,” says Erhardt. “What’s the impact of the data if it gets into
the wrong hands?”
Creative combinations of ordinary data can spawn entirely new uni‐
verses of unknown risks and unexpected consequences. Combining
two or three pieces of seemingly innocuous data creates second-
order constructs that can easily serve as proxies for race, gender,
sexual preference, political affiliation, substance abuse, or criminal
behavior. Data that might be harmless in isolation can become dan‐
gerous when mixed with other data.
Laws, rules, and guidelines devised to prevent discrimination will be
circumvented—intentionally or accidentally—as organizations use
4 
| 
Not All Data Is Created Equal

increasingly sophisticated analytics to carve out competitive advan‐
tages in a global economy fueled by data.
Remaining anonymous will become virtually impossible. It’s become
relatively easy to unmask the identities of anonymous sources, as
demonstrated nearly a decade ago when Arvind Narayanan (then a
doctoral candidate at the University of Texas at Austin) and his advi‐
sor, Vitaly Shmatikov, developed techniques for finding the identi‐
ties of anonymous Netflix users. Latanya Sweeney, professor of
government and technology at Harvard University and former chief
technology officer at the U.S. Federal Trade Commission, has shown
that 87 percent of the US population can be personally identified by
using their date of birth, gender, and zip code.
In The Algorithmic Foundations of Differential Privacy, Cynthia
Dwork and Aaron Roth write that “data cannot be fully anonymized
and remain useful ... the richer the data, the more interesting and
more useful it is.” That richness, however, invariably provides clues
that can be exploited to uncloak hidden identities.
For example, when Professor Sweeney was a graduate student at
MIT, she used anonymized public data to identify the medical
records of the Massachusetts governor. As a result, medical privacy
rules were tightened, but the underlying principles of information
science remain unchanged.
“Saying ‘this data is sensitive’ and ‘this data isn’t sensitive’ or ‘this
data is identifiable’ and ‘this data isn’t identifiable’ is completely mis‐
guided, especially when there is lots of other data available,” says Tal
Malkin, associate professor in the Department of Computer Science
and the Data Science Institute at Columbia University. “You just
can’t say, ‘this data doesn’t reveal any information about you, so it’s
safe to disclose.’ That might be true in isolation, but when you com‐
bine the data with other data that’s publicly available, you can iden‐
tify the person.”
A Calculated Risk
The easiest solution would be to stop publishing research data, but
that would essentially bring scientific research in critical areas such
as healthcare, public safety, education, and economics to a dead halt.
“A binary approach won’t work. There are lots of gray areas,” says
A Calculated Risk 
| 
5

Malkin. “A lot depends on the data and the types of questions you
ask.”
In some instances, the best course might be publishing some of the
data, but not all of it. In some situations, it’s possible to sanitize parts
of the dataset before publishing results. Researchers might choose to
keep some of their data secret, while allowing other researchers to
pose simple queries that won’t reveal the identities of their subjects.
“Maybe you would provide answers to queries from authorized peo‐
ple. Or maybe it’s something more nuanced, like adding noise to the
answers for some types of queries and only answering a limited
number of queries,” she says.
The idea of intentionally adding noise to potentially sensitive data
isn’t entirely new. We’ve all seen intentionally blurred faces on vid‐
eos. There’s even an urban legend about the US Air Force “spoofing”
GPS signals to confuse opponents during combat.
Privacy Isn’t Dead; It’s on Life Support
Malkin does not believe we should just throw in the towel and give
up on the idea of personal privacy. She sees several possible ways to
reduce the risk posed by collecting personal data. “We can be more
explicit about the risk and what we’re doing with the data. The big‐
gest danger is ignorance. Realizing the data isn’t harmless is an
important step,” she says. “And we can try to keep as little of the data
as necessary. I know that companies don’t want to hear that, but it’s a
practical approach.”
For example, it makes sense for the Metropolitan Transportation
Authority (MTA), North America’s largest transportation network,
to collect ridership data. But does the MTA, which serves a popula‐
tion of 15.2 million people in a 5,000–square-mile area including
New York City, Long Island, southeastern New York State, and Con‐
necticut, really need to know which subway station you use to get to
work every day?
You could argue that it’s important for the MTA to track ridership at
each of its 422 subway stations, but the MetroCard you use to get
through the turnstile is also a handy device for collecting all kinds of
data.
6 
| 
Not All Data Is Created Equal

“I understand why the MTA wants to know how many people are
riding the subway,” says Malkin. “But do they also have to know
everywhere I’ve traveled in New York? What are their goals?”
Instead of simply vacuuming up as much data as possible in hopes
that some of it will prove useful, it would be better for organizations
to collect the minimum amount of data necessary to achieve specific
goals, says Malkin.
Are Your Algorithms Prejudiced?
As mentioned earlier in this report, combinations of data are more
potentially dangerous than data in isolation. In the near future, it
might seem quaint to even think of data in isolation. All data will be
connected and related to other data. We won’t just have data lakes—
we’ll have data oceans.
In that version of the future, the data we collect will be less impor‐
tant than the algorithms we use to analyze and process it. Even if an
organization’s rules and policies expressly forbid using data to dis‐
criminate against people, the algorithms they use could be discrimi‐
nating, either accidentally or unintentionally.
“That’s why companies need to be responsible for looking at the
algorithms they’re using and making sure the algorithms aren’t dis‐
criminating against individuals or groups of people,” says Roxana
Geambasu, an assistant professor of computer science at Columbia
University whose research spans broad areas of computer systems,
including distributed systems, security and privacy, operating sys‐
tems, databases, and applications of cryptography and machine
learning to systems.
“As human beings, we understand ... there are written rules in many
circumstances for not discriminating against certain populations on
purpose,” says Geambasu. “But I’m not sure that too many compa‐
nies are actually analyzing the impact of their algorithms on their
user populations. It’s a huge responsibility and I don’t think compa‐
nies are taking it seriously.”
Geambasu and colleagues from Columbia, Cornell, and École Poly‐
technique Fédérale de Lausanne have developed a program called
FairTest that enables companies to test their algorithms for nondis‐
crimination. She believes that similar tools will become more com‐
Are Your Algorithms Prejudiced? 
| 
7

mon as more people become aware of the potential for accidental
discrimination by seemingly “innocent” algorithms.
Seeking the Goldilocks Zone for Data
When you consider that many of today’s products are built from
data and that it’s relatively inexpensive to store data, it seems waste‐
ful to just throw it away. That said, it’s hard to tell how much data is
too much, and how much is too little. You can’t operate software
without data—it would be like trying to drive a car with no gasoline
in the tank.
“Everyone collects data and everyone stores data,” says Peter Sko‐
moroch, a San Francisco-based entrepreneur and former principal
data scientist at LinkedIn. “Just because you don’t know exactly how
you’re going to use data doesn’t mean you should delete it. That’s a
bad idea. It slows down the development of new or better products
that would benefit users.”
Skomoroch believes that companies “are being shortsighted” when
they discard data that doesn’t seem immediately useful. For example,
some companies have arbitrary rules about how long they keep
emails. In a system that’s used mostly for transactions, it probably
makes sense to automatically delete emails after a certain period of
time.
But those same emails might contain information that could be
mined to reveal customer preferences or uncover reliability issues
with products. Deleting the emails would effectively destroy valua‐
ble information that could be used to help the company improve its
offerings.
The lesson here is that since it’s often hard to determine which data
will prove valuable, it doesn’t make sense to toss it in the garbage
because it has no immediate use or because it might overload a par‐
ticular system.
“That’s the rationale for hiring a chief data officer,” says Skomoroch.
“Then you have one person who is clearly responsible for making
good decisions about managing data across the enterprise.”
Chief data officers oversee data management issues and resolve dif‐
ficult questions such as:
8 
| 
Not All Data Is Created Equal

• Which data should be stored and for how long?
• Which data needs the most protection and which needs the
least?
• Which data is most valuable to the company today?
• Which data will be most valuable in the future?
The chief data officer would also weigh in on a basic question that
every company should ask before deciding whether to keep or delete
data: is this decision in the best interests of our customers?
“That should be the guiding light,” says Skomoroch. “If you deter‐
mine there’s no intrinsic value in the data, then you probably don’t
want to keep it. But if you think it will help you build something that
will be good for your customers, then collect it and save it.”
Consider How the Data Will Be Used
But who determines the “intrinsic value” of data? Most companies
don’t have chief data officers. Most companies don’t have formal
rules for categorizing data. Unless they compete in tightly regulated
industries such as healthcare and financial services, most companies
have weak or immature policies for dealing with data.
“Lots of companies just dive in without thinking it through,” says Q
Ethan McCallum, a data strategy consultant. “Many companies don’t
really know what kinds of data they have; nor do they know what
they can do with data. From the standpoint of data strategy, they are
immature. They’re more likely to gather data ‘just in case,’ lump
their data into one big pile, and sort through it later. But that means
they might be holding on to data that could harm them, or missing
out on potentially useful data they could have collected if they’d
made a plan upfront.”
As a result, those companies find it challenging to create policies
and practices for organizing data. That, in turn, makes it difficult for
them to manage data effectively and make use of its potential busi‐
ness value. In Business Models for the Data Economy (O’Reilly, 2013),
McCallum and coauthor Ken Gleason offer seven core strategies for
monetizing data:
Consider How the Data Will Be Used 
| 
9

Collect/Supply
Gather and sell raw data
Store/Host
Hold onto someone else’s data for them
Filter/Refine
Strip out problematic records or data fields or release interest‐
ing data subsets
Enhance/Enrich
Blend in other datasets to create a new and interesting picture
Simplify Access
Help people cherry-pick the data they want in the format they
prefer
Obscure
Inhibit people from seeing or collecting certain information
Consult/Advise
Provide guidance on others’ data efforts
The authors’ basic premise is that once you have an idea of how you
will be using your data, it will be easier to organize and manage it.
It’s hard to argue with their logic, and the list provides a good start‐
ing point for getting a handle on your data.
It’s also important to know the “5Ws and 1H” of data usage, since
different users will perceive the value of data differently, depending
on who is using it, what it’s being used for, as well as where, when,
why, and how it’s being used.
10 
| 
Not All Data Is Created Equal

Figure 1-1.  
“The data that you think is valuable might not be valuable to me,”
says McCallum. “It’s very important to understand that certain data
is more valuable to certain people than to others, and you need to
package it accordingly, depending on the people using it.”
Knowing Which Data Needs the Most
Protection
Many large companies now employ a chief information security
officer (CISO) to manage data risks and oversee data security. One
of the first questions every CISO needs to ask is: which data needs
the most protection?
The CISO also needs to know the business value of the company’s
data. The value of data depends on many variables, including accu‐
racy, age, and source. If the data is related to a secret formula that
creates an important competitive advantage for the company, it will
have more value than data that’s related to the company’s organiza‐
tion chart. Knowing the value of data allows the CISO to allocate the
appropriate level of protection.
The “golden rule” of corporate data security is simple: don’t spend
more than the data is worth to protect it. Data is an asset and com‐
panies are expected to manage their data responsibly. If a certain
piece of data is valued at $1,000, then spending less than $1,000 to
protect it is okay and spending more than $1,000 is not okay. That’s
why the CISO needs to know the value of the company’s data.
Knowing Which Data Needs the Most Protection 
| 
11

The C-I-A Method
It’s common for CISOs to employ the C-I-A method for managing
data risk. In this instance, C-I-A stands for confidentiality, integrity,
and availability. Here are quick explanations of each:
Confidentiality
The degree of secrecy required for the data. A list of your cus‐
tomers’ zip codes, for example, would be considered less confi‐
dential than a list of their Social Security numbers.
Integrity
The degree of consistency and accuracy of the data. Your com‐
pany’s sales data, for example, needs to be accurate so the sales
execs know precisely how many more deals they need to close
to meet their goals.
Availability
The level of uptime or reliability required for systems or appli‐
cations that are storing or processing the data. If the data is crit‐
ical to the business, its level of availability needs to be high. For
example, if the data is required for your ecommerce site, down‐
time would result in lost sales revenue.
The C-I-A method makes assessing risk and weighing value rela‐
tively easy. The first step is setting up a 3×2 risk profile matrix, like
this:
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
 
 
 
Then you assign values on a scale of three to one (three being the
highest and one being the lowest) to the second row under each col‐
umn. For example, the matrix for your company’s financial data
(which requires high confidentiality, high integrity, and high availa‐
bility) looks like this:
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
3
3
3
12 
| 
Not All Data Is Created Equal

The matrix for planning and budget forecast data (which requires
high confidentiality, medium integrity, and low availability) looks
like this:
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
3
2
1
The matrix for operating data (which requires low confidentiality
but high integrity and availability) would probably look like this:
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
1
3
3
Let’s look at another example: data for your external website must be
readily available, but since much of it is already public, confidential‐
ity isn’t a priority. On the other hand, a lot of the data will change
from moment to moment. So the C-I-A matrix for your external
website will probably look like this:
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
1
2
3
Since your ERP (enterprise resource management) system requires
the highest levels of confidentiality, integrity, and availability, its
matrix will look like this:
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
3
3
3
What’s the Downside?
Setting up the C-I-A matrices and assigning values to the three
attributes is Step 1. Step 2 is calculating the downside/risk—in other
words, how much will it cost if the data is lost or compromised?
Let’s look at the example of the external website. We rated the need
for availability at 3, the highest level, because we don’t want the site
going down when customers are trying to use it. But now we need to
ask ourselves two more questions:
1. What are the odds that the site will crash?
What’s the Downside? 
| 
13

2. If the site crashes, what’s the impact on the company?
If the website generates $100 million in business for your company
and it costs $500,000 to back it up, then the answer is easy: spend
the money to back up the system.
But if the risk of a crash is very low and the website generates only a
small portion of your company’s annual sales revenue, then maybe it
makes more sense to invest your money in something else.
Here’s a mathematical way of reaching the same decision: multiply
the dollar value at risk by the probability of something bad happen‐
ing.
For the website, the value at risk is $100 million and the risk of a
crash is probably in the neighborhood of .5 percent. Here’s the math:
100 million × .005 = $500,000.
Is it worth spending $500,000 to insure the company against a
potential loss of $100 million? We would say yes, but with a qualifi‐
cation. Even if the site crashes, the likelihood of it remaining down
for more than a few hours is very low. So you need to really drill
down into the sales data and see how much money the website gen‐
erates on an hourly basis, and during which hours of the day.
A crash at 11 a.m. during a regular weekday will result in more lost
sales revenue than a crash at 3 a.m. on a weekend. The deeper you
drill down into the data, the more likely you are to make a good
decision. It takes a certain amount of discipline to do the math, but
it’s better than relying on pure guesswork.
Risk versus Rewards
Toby J.F. Bishop is an independent anti-fraud strategy advisor and
former director of the Deloitte Forensic Center. He is coauthor of
Corporate Resiliency: Managing the Growing Risk of Fraud and Cor‐
ruption (Wiley, 2009) and a related article, “Mapping Your Fraud
Risks”, which appeared in Harvard Business Review.
Bishop is a forensic accountant, not a data scientist, but he sees les‐
sons from his anti-fraud work that can be applied to managing risk
associated with data. One way for visualizing the risk/reward trade‐
offs of data, he suggests, would be mapping it on a quadrant grid, as
in this diagram:
14 
| 
Not All Data Is Created Equal

Figure 1-2.  
The quadrant grid approach creates a map that can be grasped easily
and intuitively. Generally speaking, you would probably want to
keep data in the top-left quadrant (high rewards, low risk) and jetti‐
son data in the lower-right quadrant (low rewards, high risk).
For data in the upper-right quadrant (high reward, high risk), you
would probably want to explore adding strong controls to mitigate
or reduce risk. And for data in the lower-left quadrant (low reward,
low risk), you might explore ways of improving profitability or
reducing costs, which would nudge the value of the data closer to
the top-left quadrant.
Imagine, for example, a large financial services firm with thousands
of dormant credit accounts. From a risk perspective, it makes sense
for the firm to close down the accounts and delete the customer data
associated with them, since they are easy targets for fraudsters who
obtain information from call center employees with access to the
account data.
But historically, a certain number of those accounts are reactivated
by their legitimate holders, and the reactivated accounts generate
profits for the firm. “The accounts are highly vulnerable to fraud,
but you want to hang onto them because they also represent poten‐
tial sources of profit,” says Bishop.
Rather than closing the accounts and deleting the customer data, the
firm could set up a special group to handle the dormant accounts.
Access to data about the dormant accounts would be limited to
members of the special group, reducing the risk of identity theft or
other misuse of the data by call center employees.
“In the event that a customer decides to reopen his or her account,
the call would be transferred to the special group and they would
Risk versus Rewards 
| 
15

handle the reactivation,” says Bishop. “The business objective—pre‐
serving both the customer relationship and the potential for addi‐
tional profit—has been achieved.”
From a risk/reward perspective, the customer data has been shifted
from the lower-right quadrant to the lower-left quadrant. The firm’s
decision makers can tell at a glance that the dormant account data
poses a low risk. Although the potential rewards are moderate, they
would be considered worthwhile since the level of risk has been low‐
ered.
In many instances, it’s hard to accurately predict the risk of storing
data. For example, it was common practice for industrial companies
to store old shipping documents for decades. In some cases, those
documents were used by the US Environmental Protection Agency
to identify companies as “Potentially Responsible Parties” (PRPs)
with substantial liability for Superfund cleanup costs. In hindsight, it
would have made more sense—and been perfectly legal—for the
companies to have discarded the data after a certain period of time.
“To me, those examples demonstrate the value of not treating all
data the same way,” says Bishop. “You’re dividing the data into sub‐
populations and exploring various risk management strategies that
can be applied to different types of data.”
Data Is Not a Commodity
Several years ago, industry analysts compared big data to oil. Like
oil, big data would fuel an economic revolution and transform the
world. In retrospect, it seems clear that treating data as some kind of
commodity is misguided and dangerous. Data isn’t oil—it’s us. It’s
our lives, our behaviors, and our habits. It’s where we go, what we
eat, where we live, how much money we earn, which people we like,
and which people we don’t like.
We can’t treat data like oil because data is infinitely more precious. A
better understanding of data starts by accepting that data, like snow,
comes in a variety of forms. And for better or worse, it’s not all
created equal.
16 
| 
Not All Data Is Created Equal

About the Authors
Greg Fell is a general partner in The Investors Collaborative, a
Boston-based venture capital group. He is the former chief strategy
officer at Crisply, an enterprise SaaS company that pioneered the
algorithmic quantification of work. Previously, he served as vice
president and chief information officer of Terex Corp., a global
manufacturer of industrial equipment.
Before joining Terex, Fell spent nearly 20 years with Ford Motor
Company. He started as a developer, and worked his way through a
variety of management roles supporting the global Engineering and
Manufacturing functions of the company. He has domain expertise
on CAD/CAM/CAE systems, lean manufacturing, and control
systems.
Fell is a graduate of Michigan State University, and spent several
years on staff in the College of Engineering as a senior research pro‐
grammer and instructor.
Fell is active in the CIO community. He is the former chairman of
the Fairfield Westchester Society of Information Managers, a former
board member with Junior Achievement, and has mentored high
school students through the First Tee Program.
His book, Decoding the IT Value Problem (Wiley, 2013), is used
widely by CIOs to calculate the economic value of IT projects.
Mike Barlow is an award-winning journalist, author, and communi‐
cations strategy consultant. Since launching his own firm, Cumulus
Partners, he has worked with various organizations in numerous
industries.
Barlow is the author of Learning to Love Data Science (O’Reilly
Media, 2015). He is the coauthor of The Executive’s Guide to Enter‐
prise Social Media Strategy (Wiley, 2011), and Partnering with the
CIO: The Future of IT Sales Seen Through the Eyes of Key Decision
Makers (Wiley, 2007). He is also the writer of many articles, reports,
and white papers on numerous topics such as collaborative social
networking, cloud computing, IT infrastructure, predictive mainte‐
nance, data analytics, and data visualization.
Over the course of a long career, Barlow was a reporter and editor at
several respected suburban daily newspapers, including The Journal

News and the Stamford Advocate. His feature stories and columns
appeared regularly in The Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune,
Miami Herald, Newsday, and other major US dailies. He has also
written extensively for O’Reilly Media.
A graduate of Hamilton College, he is a licensed private pilot, avid
reader, and enthusiastic ice hockey fan.

