
NUCLEAR
WEAPONS AND 
NONPROLIFERATION

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Adoption, Barbara A. Moe
Capital Punishment, Michael Kronenwetter
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Conﬂ icts over Natural Resources, Jacqueline Vaughn
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Euthanasia, Martha L. Gorman and Jennifer Fecio McDougall
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Genetic Engineering, Harry LeVine, III
Gun Control in the United States, Gregg Lee Carter
Human Rights Worldwide, Zehra F. Kabasakal Arat
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Intellectual Property, Aaron Schwabach
Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution, 
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and 
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly 
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting 
point for research by high school and college students, scholars, 
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, 
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an 
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical 
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies, 
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series 
will ﬁ nd the information they need in order to have a better 
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and 
economic issues facing the world today.


NUCLEAR
WEAPONS AND 
NONPROLIFERATION
A Reference Handbook
Second Edition
Sarah J. Diehl
James Clay Moltz
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California
Denver, Colorado
Oxford, England

Copyright 2008 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except for 
the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission in 
writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Diehl, Sarah J.
 Nuclear weapons and nonproliferation : a reference handbook / 
Sarah J. Diehl and James Clay Moltz. — 2nd ed.
  p. cm. —  (Contemporary world issues)
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN-13: 978-1-59884-071-1 (hard copy : alk. paper)
 ISBN-13: 978-1-59884-072-8 (ebook)
1.  Nuclear weapons. 2.  Nuclear nonproliferation.  I. Moltz, James
Clay. II. Title.
U264.D53 2008
355.8’25119--dc21
 
2007017651
13 12 11 10 09 08 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an ebook. Visit 
http://www.abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper ∞
Manufactured in the United States of America

vii
Contents
Preface, xi
1 Background and History, 1
 
Early Scientiﬁ c Developments, 2
 
Military Uses of Nuclear Fission, 4
 
U.S. Use of Nuclear Weapons against Imperial Japan, 5
 
Early Efforts to Control Nuclear Weapons, 7
 
Expanding the Nuclear Club and Weapon Arsenals, 8
 
Renewed Efforts at Control under Eisenhower, 9
 
 Development of Delivery Systems: Bombers, Missiles, 
  and Submarines, 10
 
 The Cuban Missile Crisis and the Limited Test Ban 
  Treaty, 12
 
 New Nuclear Powers and the Evolution of the Nuclear 
  Non-Proliferation Treaty, 14
 
 The Early 1970s: Détente and the Beginnings of U.S.-Soviet 
  Nuclear Arms Control, 16
 
Efforts to Halt Horizontal Proliferation to New Countries, 17
 
 The Late 1970s and 1980s: From Arms Racing to Negotiated 
  Reductions, 18
 
 New Threats to the Nonproliferation Regime: Iraq and North 
  Korea, 20
 
 Successes in International Nonproliferation Efforts in the 
  Early to Mid-1990s, 22
 
 New Tensions in the Nonproliferation Regime: The Late 
  1990s to Early 2003, 23
 
Post–Iraq Invasion Nonproliferation Efforts, 27
 
 Attempts to Curb North Korea’s Nuclear Program: 
  2003–2007, 30

 
New Debates over Nuclear Arsenals, 31
 
Conclusion, 33
 
References, 34
2 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 37
 
Nuclear Weapons and Their Role during the Cold War, 39
 
What Is the Role of Nuclear Weapons Today?, 41
 
Are Nuclear Weapons Safe?, 43
 
How Many Nuclear Weapons Are “Enough”?, 46
 
How Serious Is the Threat of Nuclear Terrorism?, 50
 
 Environmental and Health Effects of Nuclear Weapon 
  Production, 53
 
 Why Haven’t Nuclear Weapons Spread to More 
  Countries?, 56
 
 The Debate on the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban 
  Treaty, 59
 
 Civilian Nuclear Energy Promotion versus Nonproliferation 
  Goals, 61
 
Efforts to Eliminate Nuclear Weapons, 65
 
Final Considerations, 70
 
References, 71
3 Special U.S. Issues, 75
 
The Status of the U.S. Nuclear Weapons Complex, 77
 
 U.S. Nuclear Weapons Policy, 79
 
 Treaties and Veriﬁ cation, 84
 
 U.S. Missile Defenses and Efforts to Defend against 
  Nuclear Attacks, 86
 
 Intelligence, Nuclear Proliferation, and 
  Counterproliferation, 90
 
 U.S. Policy toward New Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones, 92
 
 U.S. Public Opinion and Nuclear Weapons, 94
 
 Conclusion: U.S. Politics and Nonproliferation, 95
 
 References, 96
4 Chronology, 99
5 Biographical Sketches, 171
 
Hans Bethe, 171
 
Homi Jehangir Bhabha, 173
 
Hans Blix, 174
viii Contents

 
Niels Bohr, 175
 
Helen Broinowski Caldicott, 177
 
Mohamed ElBaradei, 178
 
Klaus Fuchs, 179
 
Leslie Groves, 180
 
Werner Heisenberg, 182
 
Abdul Qadeer Khan, 183
 
Igor Kurchatov, 185
 
Ernest Lawrence, 187
 
Nie Rongzhen, 188
 
J. Robert Oppenheimer, 190
 
Linus Pauling, 191
 
Joseph Rotblat, 193
 
Andrei Sakharov, 195
 
Lewis L. Strauss, 197
 
Leo Szilard, 199
 
Edward Teller, 201
 
Mordechai Vanunu, 203
6 Data and Documents, 205
 
Data, 205
 
Nuclear Materials and Technologies, 206
 
 
 Nuclear Energy and Nuclear Weapons: An Introductory 
  Guide, 206
 
 
Nuclear Reactions, 207
 
 
Nuclear Reactors, 208
 
 
Nuclear Weapons, 209
 
 
Fusion (Thermonuclear) Devices, 210
 
 
Weapon-Grade Fissile Materials, 211
 
 
Worldwide Nuclear Weapon Stockpiles, 212
 
 
Nuclear Testing, 213
 
 
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones, 216
 
Documents, 218
 
 
Letter from Albert Einstein to President Roosevelt, 218
 
 
 The U.S. Military Order to Drop the Atomic Bomb 
  on Japan, 220
 
 
 Ofﬁ cial U.S. Report on the Atomic Bomb’s Effects in 
  Hiroshima and Nagasaki, 222
 
 
 The Founding Document of the Nonproliferation 
  Regime, 229
Contents
ix

 
 
 The U.S.-Russian Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty 
  (Moscow Treaty, 2001), 235
 
 
UN Security Council Resolution 1540 (2004), 237
 
 
 UN Sanctions on North Korea (2006), 243
7 Directory of Organizations, 249
 
International Organizations, 249
 
U.S. Government Agencies, 260
 
Nongovernmental Organizations, 269
8
Resources, 275
 
Books, 275
 
 
Nuclear Weapon Issues: United States, 275
 
 
Nuclear Weapon Programs: Worldwide, 285
 
 
 Nuclear Weapon Proliferation and Nonproliferation: 
  General Topics, 296
 
Periodicals, 302
 
DVDs and Videos, 304
 
CD-ROM, 310
 
Web Sites, 311
Glossary, 319
Index, 327
About the Authors, 337
x Contents

xi
Preface
A
s of 2007, nine countries possess approximately 27,000 nuclear 
weapons. The United States, Russia, China, the United King-
dom, France, India, Pakistan, Israel, and North Korea are 
known to have nuclear arsenals; a tenth country, South Africa, 
built and then dismantled six atomic bombs in the early 1990s. 
Other states, such as Iran, are suspected of pursuing clandestine 
weapon programs. However, approximately thirty nations with 
the technological capability to build nuclear weapons have not 
done so for various practical and political reasons, although their 
calculations may change if the international security environment 
shifts and more states test such weapons. Finally, nonstate groups, 
such as al Qaeda and Aum Shinrikyo have tried to acquire nuclear 
or radiological weapons. While states seek nuclear weapons for 
military deterrence and as status symbols, terrorists pursue them 
as the ultimate means of causing destruction, fear, and panic. 
Although nuclear weapons have not been used in war since 
1945, the large nuclear arsenals still held, particularly by the United 
States and Russia, continue to inﬂ uence not only international 
relations but also human culture and psychology. The frightening 
power of nuclear weapons holds out the lure of ultimate security 
and status to national leaders, but the presence of nuclear weap-
ons brings with it the risk of possible nuclear accidents, terrorism, 
war, and annihilation. This duality of nuclear weapons encom-
passes the deterrent role supporters believe they play, as well as 
the global threat they represent to those who seek their elimina-
tion. This book covers the development of nuclear weapons and 
the various efforts aimed at controlling and eliminating them. 
Chapter 1 provides a history of the development and spread 
of nuclear weapons, ranging from the U.S. Manhattan Project to 

North Korea’s 2006 nuclear test and the ongoing International 
Atomic Energy Agency investigation of Iran’s nuclear program. 
It describes the still-covert Israeli nuclear program, as well as the 
programs of countries (including Iran, North Korea, and Libya) 
supplied by the illicit network in nuclear technology master-
minded by Pakistan’s A. Q. Khan. The chapter also covers efforts 
to control nuclear weapons and the dissemination of nuclear-
related technology. It highlights the dualistic nature of nuclear 
developments historically: Nuclear weapon states sought to 
aggran dize their power even while negotiating international ini-
tiatives to control nuclear technologies and preserve peace. 
Chapter 2 discusses problems and controversies in the 
nuclear weapon and nonproliferation ﬁ elds, raising a series of 
policy questions and providing viewpoints from a variety of 
perspectives. The desirability of eliminating nuclear weapons, 
for example, may depend on one’s views of the value of nuclear 
weapons for deterrence or, alternatively, one’s concern about the 
global environmental costs of nuclear weapon production or the 
chances of inadvertent nuclear war. Other issues addressed in 
the chapter include the desirable size of future nuclear arsenals 
(if they are going to exist), the threat of terrorist acquisition of 
nuclear weapons, and the issues surrounding a proposed ban on 
all nuclear tests. It also examines the effectiveness of the nuclear 
nonproliferation regime, the utility of sanctions, and the reasons 
why states don’t always play by the rules. 
Chapter 3 delves into policy issues concerning the U.S. 
nuclear complex, future U.S. nuclear weapon development, and 
Washington’s evolving stance on international nonproliferation 
agreements. In December 2001, the United States concluded a 
Nuclear Posture Review that set the guidelines for the develop-
ment and possible use of its nuclear arsenal. This chapter looks 
at the debates raised by that review and by recent U.S. programs 
and initiatives. In addition, it analyzes changes in U.S. policies 
toward nonproliferation treaties and questions of international 
veriﬁ cation under the Bush administration, including its empha-
sis on more ﬂ exible, voluntary approaches to combat nuclear 
proliferation. 
 
Chapter 4 provides a chronological summary of the key events 
in the building of nuclear weapons, as well as in national and inter-
national efforts to halt their spread. It charts the competing nuclear 
xii Preface

weapon programs in several countries during World War II, the 
success of U.S. efforts, the role of espionage in the Soviet nuclear 
program in the 1940s, and the subsequent development of bomb 
programs in Britain, France, China, Israel, South Africa, India, Pak-
istan, and North Korea, some of them with knowing or unwitting 
foreign partners. The chronology includes the key nuclear tests, 
nuclear accidents, signiﬁ cant nonproliferation negotiations, treaty 
signings, and notable protest events. 
Chapter 5 offers short biographies of the key players in 
worldwide nuclear proliferation and disarmament efforts. Inter-
estingly, some of the very scientists who designed the weapons, 
once having seen their terrible force, became leaders of organiza-
tions advocating their abolition. Others remained strong support-
ers of a nuclear buildup and even urged the development of new, 
more powerful bombs and advanced missile defenses. Some, like 
the Soviet spy Klaus Fuchs and the Pakistani nuclear technology 
salesman A. Q. Khan, signiﬁ cantly spurred proliferation.
Chapter 6 includes facts and data on nuclear weapon tech-
nology, the growth of nuclear arsenals, and the international 
treaties aimed at halting further nuclear development and test-
ing. It explains the differences between simple ﬁ ssion weapons 
and more powerful thermonuclear bombs, as well as the different 
materials (highly enriched uranium, plutonium, and tritium) used 
to produce them. The chapter also contains the texts of primary 
documents, such as a U.S. report on the damage from the ﬁ rst 
atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and recent United 
Nations resolutions. 
Chapter 7 provides a selective list of national, regional, and 
international organizations and agencies that work on issues 
related to the spread of weapons of mass destruction, especially 
nuclear weapons. Some of these organizations oversee the imple-
mentation of particular treaties or other arrangements designed 
to control the spread of nuclear technology, prevent nuclear acci-
dents, or limit nuclear testing. Others are nongovernmental orga-
nizations that provide information to the public about nuclear 
developments. The summaries describe the organizations’ mis-
sions and provide contact information.
Chapter 8 offers a carefully selected list of print and nonprint 
resources for pursuing nuclear weapons and nonproliferation 
Preface
xiii

issues in greater depth. The information ranges from video docu-
mentaries on the U.S. Manhattan Project to histories of nuclear 
weapons efforts in various countries to Web sites with debates on 
current nonproliferation controversies. Chapter 8 also provides a 
guide for educators and others who are interested in ﬁ nding pub-
lished materials and multimedia products suitable for classroom 
and research purposes. 
xiv Preface

1
1
Background and History
T
he number of nuclear weapons in the world and the ability of 
national leaders to prevent their use have been critical mea-
sures of global security since 1945. Fortunately, the “enthu-
siasm” of states for acquiring nuclear weapons has risen and 
fallen over time. Early on, it appeared that any country that could 
acquire nuclear weapons would do so. But such varied inﬂ uences 
as economic trade-offs, security guarantees from nuclear weapon 
states, and political factors caused many nuclear-capable states to 
give up nuclear weapon programs and others to not start them 
in the ﬁ rst place. Six of the nine states that currently possess 
nuclear weapons had already either acquired them or had gone a 
long way toward that goal by the time of the signing of the Non-
Proliferation Treaty (NPT) in 1968. Since then, only four countries 
have deployed nuclear weapons and one, South Africa, disman-
tled its arsenal unilaterally by 1991. 
But challenges to the NPT have increased in the era of global-
ization. Controlling information has become more difﬁ cult since 
the advent of fax machines, electronic mail, and the Internet. 
Similarly, the rise of non-state actors with an interest in acquir-
ing nuclear know-how, materials, and weapons poses a threat not 
addressed by the state-targeted restrictions within the NPT. For 
example, the NPT regime only belatedly discovered A. Q. Khan’s 
nuclear black market, which was centered in Pakistan but reached 
out to multiple production sites and trans-shipment points. At the 
same time, attitudes among the founders of the NPT regarding 
the acceptability of nuclear proliferation by democracies outside 
the regime or by important trading partners make it even more 
difﬁ cult to enforce NPT restrictions. In these respects, the NPT 

2 Background and History
regime—which weathered the Cold War relatively successfully—
now faces an unprecedented crisis of credibility in dealing with 
states like Iran, India, Pakistan, Israel, and North Korea and may 
be at risk of collapse.
Despite these problems, however, strong support still exists 
globally for new arms control treaties to reduce and reverse nuclear 
proliferation, if leadership can be found within the weapon states. 
Information received from studies completed after the U.S. inva-
sion of Iraq in 2003 shows that safeguards and inspections can be 
effective, despite U.S. beliefs to the contrary in the run-up to the Iraq 
war. Moreover, new nonproliferation mechanisms—including the 
U.S.-led Proliferation Security Initiative and United Nations (UN) 
Security Council Resolution 1540—have been added to the nonpro-
liferation toolbox since 2003 to help plug past loopholes in NPT and 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) controls for non-state 
actors. Finally, twenty-ﬁ rst-century technologies for veriﬁ cation 
and enforcement make cheating increasingly difﬁ cult, particularly 
as nongovernmental organizations now routinely obtain access 
to satellite data and other critical intelligence, via purchases from 
either commercial providers or member governments. Thus, there 
are grounds for believing strengthened international nonprolifera-
tion efforts—despite the new challenges of globalization—may be 
increasingly effective. 
This chapter discusses the history of nuclear weapons and 
efforts to control proliferation. It highlights the tension inherent 
in the fact that efforts to both build and control nuclear weap-
ons were initiated by the two superpowers during the Cold War. 
Since 2001, nuclear arsenals globally have declined substantially. 
But the increased fear of terrorism since the September 11 attacks 
has created new priorities in the United States and elsewhere that 
sometimes conﬂ ict with nonproliferation goals. Thus, as during 
the Cold War—when nuclear construction went hand in hand 
with efforts to halt proliferation—nonproliferation efforts in the 
twenty-ﬁ rst century are affected by other national objectives as 
states pursue new deﬁ nitions of security. 
Early Scientiﬁ c Developments
The scientiﬁ c concepts behind nuclear ﬁ ssion—the notion that 
atoms of certain elements can be split and thereby emit energy—

began to be developed in the ﬁ rst decade of the twentieth century 
from the work of British physicist Ernest Rutherford and others. 
Although Rutherford personally was skeptical that such energy 
could ever be controlled, some scientists were excited by the pos-
sibility that a limitless supply of nuclear energy might eventually 
be harnessed for peaceful purposes, including naval propulsion 
and the generation of electric power. At the same time, however, 
scientists recognized that nuclear power would possess a darker 
side: the potential to unleash unprecedented explosive power for 
military purposes. In 1903, British physicist Frederick Soddy dis-
cussed the potential of releasing vast amounts of energy draw-
ing on forces within atoms. In a 1914 novel inspired by Soddy’s 
work, entitled The World Set Free, science-ﬁ ction writer H. G. Wells 
described a future in which the civilized world beneﬁ ts from an 
abundant supply of nuclear energy yet is laid to waste in a war 
in which nuclear weapons are used extensively. But the practi-
cal challenges of moving from the potential of nuclear energy 
to the realities of its production and use proved signiﬁ cant. Sev-
eral obstacles faced scientists: identifying the right materials and 
chemical elements, developing technologies, allowing experi-
mentation, and constructing equipment capable of harnessing the 
power of the reactions. None of these steps was trivial.
One central prerequisite to the practical development of 
nuclear ﬁ ssion—either for weapons or civilian uses—was the cre-
ation of a device capable of splitting the atom. Experimental phys-
icists like Ernest Lawrence of the United States developed these 
concepts, leading to the construction of the ﬁ rst cyclotron at the 
University of California–Berkeley in the early 1930s. The cyclo-
tron sent streams of protons (positively charged particles) crash-
ing at high speeds into the nuclei of uranium atoms, with the aim 
of splitting off neutrons and thereby changing the physical prop-
erties of the original material. Hungarian Leo Szilard outlined the 
principle of a “chain reaction” in 1934, one of the essential pro-
cesses required for a nuclear explosion. Building on this informa-
tion, other scientists in Europe and the United States expanded 
knowledge about subatomic processes in a stream of scientiﬁ c 
papers published during the 1930s, gradually ﬁ lling in pieces of 
the puzzle. In Sweden in late December 1938, Austrian physi-
cists Lise Meitner and her nephew Otto Frisch—both Jews who 
had been forced to leave laboratories in Nazi Germany—became 
the ﬁ rst to explain the mechanics of nuclear ﬁ ssion, drawing on 
Early Scientiﬁ c Developments 3

4 Background and History
experiments conducted by their colleague Otto Hahn back in Ber-
lin. By this time, however, many nuclear physicists had begun to 
express fears about the implications of this work, given the rise of 
dictatorships in Nazi Germany, fascist Italy, and imperial Japan 
and the likelihood of war.
Military Uses of Nuclear Fission
In the late 1930s and during the ﬁ rst part of World War II, efforts 
to analyze the feasibility of nuclear weapons for military purposes 
took place in several countries, including the United Kingdom, 
Germany, Japan, France, the Soviet Union, and the United States. 
Several challenges remained. Scientists needed to manufacture 
an adequate quantity (critical mass) of ﬁ ssionable material (either 
plutonium or highly enriched uranium) to create a self-sustain-
ing chain reaction. This necessitated either irradiating uranium 
in a reactor and separating the small amounts of plutonium cre-
ated (reprocessing) or culling rare uranium 235 isotopes from large 
amounts of natural uranium in a centrifuge or through other proce-
dures (enrichment). Finally, scientists needed to learn how to con-
ﬁ gure an explosive device that could implode plutonium or force 
together small masses of uranium 235 to create nuclear ﬁ ssion, 
thereby giving off tremendous energy. The speed and intensity of 
the ﬁ ssion process would determine the kind of reaction and the 
yield: either a sudden powerful explosion or simply heat capable of 
driving a steam turbine for generating electricity or for propulsion. 
Several countries organized teams of physicists to discuss the rel-
evant issues and to advise their governments regarding the likely 
availability of a usable weapon before the war’s end.
Western intelligence sources believed the German nuclear 
weapon program under Nobel laureate Werner Heisenberg had 
made considerable progress by 1942. Although this information 
later proved false, the threat that Nazi Germany might beat the 
Allies to this terrible weapon induced ﬁ rst the United Kingdom 
and then the United States (in a far larger program) to pursue seri-
ous efforts to develop nuclear weapons. The two countries eventu-
ally combined their programs into the U.S.-led Manhattan Project. 
Although this work remained highly classiﬁ ed, it ultimately 
spanned numerous facilities across the United States at the Uni-
versity of Chicago, Hanford (Washington), Oak Ridge National 

Laboratory (Tennessee), and Los Alamos National Laboratory 
(New Mexico) and included as key participants dozens of skilled 
foreign scientists and engineers who had ﬂ ed Europe and fascism. 
Japan also pursued a serious (but underfunded) program during 
World War II, including the development of a cyclotron. But the 
results proved too little, too late, and the key facilities burned in 
the Allied bombing of Tokyo in April 1945 (Rhodes 1986, 612).
The U.S.-led effort was by far the largest and best funded, 
drawing on a nearly limitless budget and enjoying safe conditions 
without fear of enemy bombs. Under the scientiﬁ c direction of a 
dynamic young physics professor named J. Robert Oppenheimer 
from the University of California–Berkeley and with the admin-
istrative supervision of Army Brigadier General Leslie Groves 
(in charge of personnel, construction, and organization), the U.S. 
team successfully overcame the many logistical, conceptual, and 
engineering obstacles and produced the ﬁ rst atomic bomb in the 
spring of 1945. They detonated this device in the predawn hours 
of 16 July 1945, at the so-called Trinity site in Alamogordo, New 
Mexico, creating a blinding ﬂ ash and the largest man-made explo-
sion in history. It sent a searing wave of heat and radiation from 
its epicenter, killing or contaminating everything for several miles. 
Before the blast, some of the scientists had feared that New Mex-
ico itself might be completely vaporized. After the explosion, a 
purple cloud of radiation spread across the desert, killing exposed 
farm animals and wildlife that had not already perished after the 
initial detonation. Given the nearly $2 billion spent on the secret 
bomb program (a huge sum in 1945 dollars), those in charge felt 
pressure to use the bomb quickly, even if it ended up shortening 
the war by only a few weeks or months.
U.S. Use of Nuclear Weapons 
against Imperial Japan
Nazi Germany, the main wartime enemy that had threatened to 
dominate Europe and that had motivated most of the U.S. and 
European scientists to work on the weapon project, surrendered in 
May 1945. The remaining task for the United States and the Allies 
was to defeat the now isolated but still very dangerous and deﬁ -
ant Japanese empire, whose forces had killed hundreds of thou-
U.S. Use of Nuclear Weapons against Imperial Japan 5

6 Background and History
sands of Allied forces in Asia and millions of Chinese, Filipinos, 
and other subjected people. In their brutal campaign through East 
Asia, Japanese forces had committed many atrocities against cap-
tured soldiers and civilians and had used biological and chemical 
weapons in China. However, more than a few scientists involved 
in the U.S. weapon program (particularly those who had ﬂ ed Nazi 
oppression in Europe) expressed reservations about using nuclear 
weapons against Japan on humanitarian grounds. As an alternative, 
they suggested that a demonstration shot be scheduled to warn the 
Japanese and give them a chance to surrender ﬁ rst. But President 
Harry Truman faced a dilemma. The United States had only a small 
amount of ﬁ ssile material available at the time. Ofﬁ cials feared that 
a test shot might fail to detonate and would reduce the availability 
of possibly needed weapons. Moreover, Japan had resisted surren-
der even in the face of extensive ﬁ rebombing of its cities, which 
had destroyed much of Japanese industry and killed hundreds of 
thousands of its people. With large numbers of U.S. soldiers still 
ﬁ ghting in the Paciﬁ c, President Truman decided to authorize the 
use of the two atomic weapons the United States had under con-
struction—nicknamed Little Boy and Fat Man, because of their 
different shapes and designs—against Japanese cities. Little Boy 
was a gun-type bomb consisting of a core of two masses of highly 
enriched uranium set to collide into one another to cause a ﬁ ssion 
chain reaction. Fat Man—like the original Trinity test device—used 
a single plutonium core and an implosion mechanism to generate 
a ﬁ ssion chain reaction. Seeking cities with large industrial enter-
prises serving the Japanese military that had thus far avoided sig-
niﬁ cant damage from conventional bombing, the United States 
dropped the Little Boy bomb on Hiroshima on August 6 and the Fat 
Man bomb on Nagasaki on August 9, obliterating much of the two 
cities (Takaki 1995). With these actions, the complex international 
politics of nuclear weapon production and nonproliferation efforts 
began in earnest.
Although analysts continue to debate how long imperial Japan 
could have continued the ﬁ ght absent the U.S. use of atomic weap-
ons (Hasegawa 2005), few doubt that the bomb shortened the war 
and thereby saved many thousands of U.S. lives. Given the mas-
sive civilian casualties from the ongoing ﬁ rebombing of other cities, 
as well as the staggering Japanese military losses being suffered in 
the brutal island-to-island battles against U.S. forces in the Paciﬁ c, 

the shortening of the war undoubtedly saved Japanese lives as 
well. Yet other factors ﬁ gured centrally in the eventual U.S. deci-
sion to use the atomic bomb, including fears in Washington about 
the Soviet Union’s possible further advance in East Asia if the war 
continued another several months. Moscow had clear designs on 
Japanese territory, including numerous islands and parts of Japa-
nese-controlled China and Korea. The Soviet Union’s long-planned 
entrance into the Paciﬁ c theater of operations occurred the day after 
the Hiroshima bombing. Nevertheless, the bomb’s devastating 
effects and the terrible radioactive sickness it inﬂ icted on thousands 
of Japanese survivors in the targeted cities sent a chilling message 
to the world about the implications of such weapons and the neces-
sity of preventing their future use. The U.S. demonstration of the 
power of the bomb also accelerated the ongoing nuclear weapon 
program in the Soviet Union, which beneﬁ ted from an extensive 
network of informers within the United States—even spies within 
the bomb program itself (Rhodes 1986).
Early Efforts to Control 
Nuclear Weapons
Initial efforts to halt the spread of the atomic bomb quickly devel-
oped in the context of the newly formed United Nations. Soon 
after the Japanese surrender in mid-August 1945, Oppenheimer 
began to mobilize efforts to see that the program he had super-
vised did not lead to an international arms race and further death 
and destruction. In March 1946, under the rubric of the so-called 
Acheson-Lilienthal Commission established by President Tru-
man, Oppenheimer’s scientiﬁ c committee issued a report call-
ing for an international authority to govern all nuclear activities 
and to ensure, through a system of international inspections, 
that such programs remained oriented toward peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. The report also called for the eventual elimination 
of nuclear weapons once the new international authority was in 
place and ﬁ rmly established.
At the United Nations, U.S. representative Bernard Baruch 
delivered a speech in June 1946 that oulined a toughened version 
of the proposal and called for immediate penalties on any states 
Early Efforts to Control Nuclear Weapons 7

8 Background and History
that might violate its principles of peaceful use of atomic energy 
(Bunn 1992, 59–61). To Oppenheimer and others, however, it was 
clear that the Soviet Union would take exception to these discrim-
inatory measures and reject the plan altogether. As expected, the 
Soviet Union countered that the United States should ﬁ rst elimi-
nate its nuclear weapons as a prerequisite for any discussion of an 
international authority governing peaceful uses. Skeptics in the 
United States had only limited faith in Oppenheimer’s original 
concept and expressed great wariness about Soviet intentions. As 
if to conﬁ rm these fears, Moscow eventually stiffened its oppo-
sition even further, arguing that its independence in the nuclear 
realm could not be limited. The Baruch Plan eventually died 
because of a failure to reach a workable compromise for starting 
the process of international control (Bundy 1988, 158–167; Rhodes 
1986, 239–240).
Expanding the Nuclear Club 
and Weapon Arsenals
Behind these limited efforts at peacemaking, the United States, 
the Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom all accelerated their 
nuclear programs in the late 1940s. While the United States exper-
imented with different sizes of weapons and tested them in the 
South Paciﬁ c, the Soviet Union rushed to complete a sprawl-
ing nuclear complex of laboratories, reprocessing facilities, and 
nuclear weapon test sites in an attempt to catch up to the U.S. 
program. Under the guidance of physicist Igor Kurchatov—who 
had access to an extensive Soviet intelligence network and large 
reserves of forced labor from prison camps—the Soviet bomb pro-
gram succeeded in testing its ﬁ rst nuclear device in September 
1949 at the Semipalatinsk site in Soviet Kazakhstan (Holloway 
1994). The arms race now had two ofﬁ cial members—and much 
sooner than most Americans had expected. Soon both countries 
had launched crash programs to develop a much more powerful 
three-stage (ﬁ ssion-fusion-ﬁ ssion) weapon, the so-called hydro-
gen (or thermonuclear) bomb. The working of a hydrogen bomb 
would begin with the ignition of a plutonium or uranium ﬁ ssion 
device (the primary assembly), which would fuse heavy hydrogen 
isotopes of deuterium and tritium gas enclosed in the assembly. 

This fusion reaction would release energy and neutrons, causing 
additional ﬁ ssions of the primary’s material and the fusion of 
lithium and deuterium (in solid lithium deuteride) in a second-
ary assembly, releasing even more energy and neutrons. Finally, 
before the whole bomb blew itself apart, uranium in the second-
ary assembly would also ﬁ ssion, yielding much greater overall 
explosive power than a single ﬁ ssion bomb. Spurred by physicist 
Edward Teller, the United States developed the ﬁ rst such experi-
mental device (a bus-sized apparatus called Mike) and exploded it 
at Eniwetok Atoll in the South Paciﬁ c on 1 November 1952, vapor-
izing the small island of Elugelab in a ﬁ reball 770 times more pow-
erful than the Hiroshima blast. The size of the explosion shocked 
even the scientists who constructed the device (Rhodes 1995, 
482–512; Gardner 1994, 8). Ironically, the “advantage” gained by 
the United States proved short-lived, as the Soviet Union tested 
a smaller but deliverable hydrogen bomb (developed by physi-
cists Igor Kurchatov and Andrei Sakharov) at Semipalatinsk on 
12 August 1953, proving that the arms race was now nearly even 
as to technology. Throughout the 1950s, the two countries tested 
hundreds of nuclear weapons of increasing power. These explo-
sions took place on land, in the oceans, in the air, and in space. 
They created fallout that exposed millions of people to varying 
levels of radiation, particularly those living closest to the test sites 
in the South Paciﬁ c, Nevada, and Kazakhstan, as well as soldiers 
involved in post-explosion military exercises. In the continental 
United States, trace amounts of radioactivity appeared in foliage 
across the country and entered the human food chain. In October 
1952, the United Kingdom joined the nuclear club by testing a 
plutonium ﬁ ssion bomb off the coast of Australia.
Renewed Efforts at 
Control under Eisenhower
In the early 1950s, Oppenheimer continued his behind-the-scenes 
efforts to put the nuclear genie back into the bottle, or at least 
to reduce the number of countries that might acquire the bomb. 
Fearful of the possible widespread proliferation of nuclear weap-
ons, the Truman administration in its last year (1952) convened an 
expert committee under Oppenheimer to consider the implications 
Renewed Efforts at Control under Eisenhower 9

10 Background and History
of such an arms race. Their report expressed great pessimism and 
urged a candid explanation of the risks involved in the continuation 
of nuclear armament policies by various countries, including the 
United States. Incoming President Dwight Eisenhower was sympa-
thetic to the concerns raised in the report and believed some positive 
steps must be taken. He proposed making a certain amount of U.S. 
and Soviet ﬁ ssile material accessible under international controls to 
states that would agree to engage in exclusively peaceful uses. In 
December 1953, President Eisenhower announced before the UN 
a proposal calling for the removal of such material from U.S. and 
Soviet weapons stockpiles and for the expansion of peaceful nuclear 
cooperation internationally. An unspoken beneﬁ t of the concept for 
the United States was that the Soviet Union was believed to pos-
sess far less ﬁ ssionable material, meaning that its weapon program 
could be expected to suffer more. Eisenhower’s so-called Atoms 
for Peace proposal received widespread international support, par-
ticularly from states interested in nuclear assistance (Bundy 1988, 
287–295). Yet the original arms control intentions mentioned by 
President Eisenhower were not realized, as the United States and 
Soviet Union simply replenished their weapon stocks by producing 
more and more ﬁ ssile material.
In practical terms, Eisenhower’s speech and the Atoms for 
Peace program expanded U.S. ties with many countries seeking 
access to peaceful nuclear technology. Over time, these trends sup-
ported the creation of the IAEA, which was established in Vienna in 
1957. In most cases, the net result remained limited to the promotion 
of civilian nuclear power plants and locked recipient countries into 
dependence on controlled international supplies of ﬁ ssile material, 
thus giving them few incentives to go to the great cost of develop-
ing the technology for their own nuclear fuel facilities. However, in 
a few cases (such as in India), nuclear cooperation resulted instead 
in furthering domestic nuclear weapon programs.
Development of Delivery 
Systems: Bombers, Missiles, 
and Submarines
A dilemma for U.S. and Soviet weapon producers during this 
period was the limited availability of delivery vehicles. Aircraft 
in the 1940s and 1950s lacked the necessary range to travel across 

the oceans without refueling, meaning that bombers either could 
not reach their targets or had to be based in friendly countries 
nearby. The establishment of the North Atlantic Treaty Organi-
zation (NATO) in 1949 created formal postwar links among the 
United States, Canada, and most Western European countries, as 
well as a framework of mutual security that required U.S. pro-
tection of these allies, including through nuclear means. In 1954, 
the United States also deployed the world’s ﬁ rst nuclear-powered 
submarine, the USS Nautilus, gaining an unprecedented ability 
to cruise stealthily through the world’s oceans without having 
to surface or refuel, as previous diesel-powered submarines did. 
Within six years, the U.S. Navy would deploy the ﬁ rst nuclear-
powered submarine capable of launching nuclear-tipped ballistic 
missiles (the USS George Washington), providing a mobile delivery 
system that could be deployed close to Soviet shores. In addition, 
by 1955, the United States had begun to position nuclear weapons 
at military air bases in Western Europe for possible use against the 
Soviet Union. Moscow responded by creating the Warsaw Treaty 
Organization (or Warsaw Pact), which obligated the Soviet Union 
to come to the defense of communist states in Eastern Europe and 
gave it the right to deploy nuclear weapons on their territories for 
use against NATO forces in Western Europe. Lacking allies close 
to the United States, the Soviet Union also accelerated its develop-
ment of intercontinental-range missiles.
In October 1957, the successful Soviet launch of the world’s 
ﬁ rst long-range ballistic missile with a “peaceful” artiﬁ cial satel-
lite (Sputnik I) eliminated this vulnerability by giving Moscow the 
capability of delivering a nuclear weapon to the United States. 
Despite U.S. military advantages in other areas and the limita-
tions of the liquid-fueled Soviet R-7 rocket as a weapon system, 
U.S. fears of vulnerability and the general U.S. lag in missile tech-
nology eventually became a political issue in the late 1950s. This 
so-called missile gap entered the 1960 U.S. presidential debate, 
and candidate John Kennedy claimed that the United States risked 
annihilation if it did not greatly increase its defense budget and 
rectify this shortcoming. By this time, the United States had only 
recently deployed its ﬁ rst intercontinental-range ballistic missile 
(the liquid-fueled Atlas D), after several test failures. Unknown 
to the U.S. public and belying the braggadocio of Soviet leader 
Nikita Khrushchev, surveillance ﬂ ights by high-ﬂ ying U-2 aircraft 
and reconnaissance satellites over the Soviet Union had already 
revealed that Moscow had built at most only a few dozen missiles 
Development of Delivery Systems 11

12 Background and History
(Schwartz 1998, 232–238). Kennedy won the election and then 
felt obligated to pursue a buildup to protect his reputation and 
U.S. intelligence sources. The size of the U.S. nuclear stockpile 
reached 18,638 warheads by 1961, and 27,100 the following year 
(Rhodes 1995, 562). The United States also began formal adoption 
of the “triad” structure (land, sea, and air) for its nuclear deliv-
ery vehicles, eventually building a force with 1,000 land-based, 
solid-fueled Minuteman missiles, 656 solid-fueled Polaris missiles 
deployed on nuclear submarines, and some 500 nuclear-capable 
bombers (Bundy 1988, 352).
Other countries had also begun to develop independent 
nuclear weapon programs, including India, Israel, and China. 
France became the fourth state with an actual device when it tested 
its ﬁ rst nuclear weapon in February 1960 in the Sahara Desert. 
In 1958, Washington also began deploying nuclear-tipped cruise 
missiles on Taiwan and in South Korea for possible use against 
China, North Korea, and the Soviet Union.
The Cuban Missile Crisis and 
the Limited Test Ban Treaty
Public protests regarding the effects of atmospheric nuclear test-
ing reached their peak in the late 1950s and early 1960s (Wittner 
1997). Soviet support for certain left-leaning protest organizations 
in the West weakened some of this pressure, but the inﬂ uence on 
the U.S. Congress and media could not be denied because of the 
medical data that supported the claims. A key turning point in the 
nuclear arms race between the United States and Soviet Union 
came in 1962, after U.S. spy planes detected Soviet efforts to sta-
tion nuclear weapons on Cuba. Cuba’s revolutionary leader, Fidel 
Castro, had recently turned the island from a U.S. protectorate 
into a socialist ally of Moscow. The Cuban Missile Crisis moved 
the two sides to the brink of nuclear war, as advisers to President 
Kennedy urged military action against this Soviet incursion into 
the Caribbean. Both countries hastily conducted nuclear tests in 
outer space during the crisis to show their resolve and to see if 
such blasts might be effective in stopping missiles from the other 
side, despite the risk that such launches might be misinterpreted 
as actual nuclear attacks. But it was Kennedy’s measured policy of 

relying on U.S. naval superiority in the local waters around Cuba 
and a combined strategy of blockade and negotiation that even-
tually succeeded in settling the crisis. The Soviet Union agreed 
to withdraw its missiles in exchange for a secret U.S. pledge to 
remove nuclear-tipped missiles it had earlier placed in Turkey. 
The very real nuclear danger that the crisis exposed, however, led 
to the ﬁ rst serious efforts by the two sides to limit the arms race 
and improve their ability to manage future crises.
One of the ﬁ rst accomplishments stemming from the Cuban 
Missile Crisis was a response aimed at calming popular fears of 
nuclear conﬂ agration and reducing the chances of inadvertent 
U.S.-Soviet nuclear war. The signing in June 1963 of the so-called 
Hot-Line Agreement established direct radio and telegraph links 
between the U.S. and Soviet capitals to facilitate more rapid and 
effective communications and prevent misunderstandings in case 
of any further nuclear crises. Later in the summer, the two super-
powers took steps aimed at stabilizing the arms race and reducing 
environmental damage by banning atmospheric, sea-based, and 
space-based nuclear weapon tests (several of which took place 
during the Cuban Missile Crisis) in the Limited Test Ban Treaty of 
1963, signed initially by the United States, the Soviet Union, and 
the United Kingdom (Bunn 1992, 32–48). All future tests would 
have to be conducted under less provocative and more controlled 
conditions below ground. The treaty was opened for signature 
and ratiﬁ cation by other countries in the fall of 1963 at the United 
Nations in New York.
The United States and the Soviet Union also continued to 
meet periodically on other nuclear issues, showing that despite 
ﬁ erce political differences the two sides recognized the impor-
tance of new efforts to reduce the nuclear danger.
During this period, a unique nonproliferation development 
occurred in Latin America: the creation of the ﬁ rst nuclear-weapon-
free zone in a populated part of the world. After the Cuban Missile 
Crisis, Latin American states recognized the threat they faced if 
one of their territories again became a staging ground for foreign 
nuclear weapons or, indeed, if a country in the region developed 
its own bomb. Thus, after several years of negotiations, these states 
opened the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America and the Caribbean (also known as the Treaty of Tlatelolco) 
for signature in 1967. The treaty members pledged not to develop 
or accept nuclear weapons on their territories and agreed to 
The Cuban Missile Crisis and the Limted Test Ban Treaty 13

14 Background and History
restrict themselves only to peaceful uses of atomic energy, under a 
regionally based system of inspections. A set of protocols for those 
outside states then possessing nuclear weapons banned their use 
(or threat of use) against regional parties, as well as their station-
ing on territories that they may own in the region. The United 
States signed this protocol in 1968 and the Soviet Union in 1978. 
Although technical and political factors limited full implementa-
tion of the treaty until the 1990s, the agreement set an important 
precedent for later nuclear-weapon-free zones in the South Paciﬁ c 
(Treaty of Rarotonga, 1986), Africa (Pelindaba Treaty, signed in 
1996, but not yet entered into force), Southeast Asia (Treaty of 
Bangkok, 1997), and Central Asia (Semipalatinsk Treaty, signed in 
2006, but not yet entered into force).
Elsewhere, however, many states continued to pursue or 
consider acquiring nuclear weapons, including Australia, India, 
Israel, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and Yugoslavia, among 
others. India, for example, had acquired a 40-megawatt research 
reactor from Canada in 1955 without formal mechanisms to pre-
vent the diversion of the ﬁ ssile material it produced. India later 
acquired reprocessing technology that allowed it to begin separat-
ing plutonium from the spent fuel, thereby opening the door to a 
bomb program (Perkovich 1999). Elsewhere, the development of 
smaller-yield weapons by the existing nuclear weapon states also 
started a reconsideration of possibilities among developed coun-
tries in Europe that had previously given up bomb programs. 
Thus, the late 1960s did not seem promising for chances to halt 
further proliferation.
New Nuclear Powers 
and the Evolution of the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty
After the test-ban treaty, however, the two superpowers began 
to push internationally for an agreement to prevent the spread 
of nuclear weapons to other countries. The 1964 test of a nuclear 
weapon by China—a country hostile to both the United States 
and the Soviet Union—catalyzed nonproliferation efforts already 
under way between the two superpowers as well as within the 
United Nations, of which communist China was not yet a member 

(Lewis and Xue 1991). Similarly, Washington’s inability to stop the 
Israeli nuclear weapon program became a sobering reminder that 
even U.S. friends and allies could not be counted on to restrain their 
nuclear capability. Under President Lyndon Johnson, the United 
States thought that it had reached a tacit agreement with Israel to 
supply Tel Aviv with conventional arms in return for a cessation 
of Israeli efforts to develop nuclear weapons. However, using a 
French-supplied reactor and reprocessing plant (at Dimona) and 
their own scientiﬁ c know-how, the Israelis pushed forward with 
the design and acquisition of the key building blocks for a nuclear 
weapon by 1966. After the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, Israel completed 
its program and is believed to have deployed its ﬁ rst weapon 
by around 1968 (Cohen 1998, 278, 298). However, Israel publicly 
denied any nuclear weapon capability and pursued a deliberate 
policy of nuclear opacity, a strategy later followed by South Africa 
and, until 1998, by India and Pakistan. Indeed, suspicions about 
Israeli intentions during the early to mid-1960s helped animate 
U.S. interest in pursuing more formal international arrangements 
to prevent future nuclear weapon proliferation.
The negotiations at the United Nations on a formal treaty took 
several years, and the United States and Soviet Union played lead-
ing roles (Bunn 1992). Eventually, these efforts came to fruition in 
the signing of the 1968 Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (known as the Non-Proliferation Treaty, or NPT), which 
entered into force two years later. The NPT divided countries 
into two groups: the ﬁ ve states that had already tested nuclear 
weapons (the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, France, 
and China), and the rest of the world that had not yet deployed 
these weapons. The basic concept underlying the NPT involved a 
bargain in which non–nuclear weapon states that agreed to give 
up their right to possess nuclear weapons would receive security 
guarantees against nuclear attack and access to peaceful nuclear 
technology for the production of energy, pharmaceuticals, and 
other civilian products. The nuclear weapon states agreed not to 
transfer nuclear weapons and related technology to non–nuclear 
weapon states and to transfer peaceful nuclear technology only 
under international safeguards. Signiﬁ cantly, they also pledged 
to work to reduce their arsenals and eventually dismantle them 
completely. Although France and China would remain nonsigna-
tories to the NPT for two decades, the agreement for the ﬁ rst time 
provided a solid foundation for future nonproliferation efforts, 
Evolution of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty 15

16 Background and History
enlisting an increasing number of states (including countries 
capable of producing nuclear weapons) in pledges to engage only 
in peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
The existence of the regime put new pressure on states that 
had long contemplated deploying nuclear weapons. Now, if they 
remained outside of the NPT, they would be treated as “suspect” 
by other countries in a way that they had avoided before the agree-
ment. Signing up with the regime, however, meant a decision to 
forgo what many had previously sought to preserve as a back-
burner option in case of the emergence of new threats to their secu-
rity. The early success of the NPT regime could be measured by the 
number of states that had begun nuclear weapons programs, then 
stopped them and signed the NPT as non–nuclear weapon states 
in 1968: Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and Yugoslavia. 
The Early 1970s: Détente 
and the Beginnings of 
U.S.-Soviet Nuclear Arms Control
To redress its humiliation after the Cuban Missile Crisis, the Soviet 
Union had engaged in a major nuclear buildup. By the end of the 
1960s, it had reached approximate parity with the United States 
in deployed strategic weapons (about 2,000 delivery vehicles for 
each country). Meanwhile, Washington faced increasing budget-
ary pressure from costs associated with the Vietnam War and 
sought to slow what it now saw as an “unwinnable” U.S.-Soviet 
arms race. Under President Richard Nixon, National Security 
Advisor Henry Kissinger masterminded a series of negotiations 
that led to the ﬁ rst arms control agreements and a brief period 
of détente in U.S.-Soviet relations. In 1972, the two sides reached 
agreement on offensive and defensive weapon limitations under 
the terms of the bilateral Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT). 
The so-called SALT Interim Agreement for the ﬁ rst time put an 
aggregate ceiling on the total number of U.S. and Soviet nuclear 
launchers, although neither side had yet reached this ceiling. 
Under the companion Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty, the 
two sides banned nationwide missile defenses and allowed only 
limited site defenses. The aim of the ABM Treaty was to prevent 
a costly new arms race in defensive technologies while reducing 

incentives for either side to expand its offensive arsenal further as 
a counter to such defenses. The ABM Treaty allowed each side to 
construct two defensive sites, one for a major population center, a 
second for a missile complex (although a 1974 treaty amendment 
reduced this to one per side).
Unfortunately, behind the smiles and handshakes, both states 
were continuing to develop new weapons, albeit within the new 
restrictions. The United States had already begun to test a new 
type of offensive weapon with multiple, independently targetable 
reentry vehicles (MIRVs); the Soviet Union would soon follow 
suit, avoiding treaty limits on launchers by adding more war-
heads. Ironically, these systems would make it more likely that 
any future ABM system could be overwhelmed. Thus, the treaty 
may have dampened some pressures, but it failed to halt the arms 
race as originally intended.
Efforts to Halt Horizontal 
Proliferation to New Countries
Although many states welcomed the NPT and the beginnings of 
U.S.-Soviet arms control, a few countries shunned international 
nonproliferation efforts and continued on paths toward creat-
ing their own nuclear forces. Thus, just when it appeared that 
increases in the superpowers’ nuclear arsenals (vertical prolifera-
tion) might be contained, the threat of another country developing 
its ﬁ rst nuclear weapon (horizontal proliferation) became a reality. 
In 1974, India shocked the world by testing a nuclear device, high-
lighting serious problems in prior Western efforts to share nuclear 
technology with developing countries. These events stimulated 
Pakistan to accelerate the acquisition of nuclear weapon technol-
ogy at full speed.
Until 1974, the primary organization restricting international 
exports of nuclear technology was the NPT Exporters Committee 
(better known as the Zangger Committee, after its ﬁ rst chairman, 
Swiss ofﬁ cial Claude Zangger). This group was a loose afﬁ liation 
of nuclear supplier states that had developed a so-called trigger 
list of sensitive exports. It required that states receiving these tech-
nologies accept safeguards and periodic inspections of these tech-
nologies to ensure their peaceful use in accordance with the NPT. 
Efforts to Halt Horizontal Proliferation to New Countries 17

18 Background and History
But the treaty did not explicitly require that other national nuclear 
facilities be accessible to international inspection. India’s test, as 
well as evidence that Canadian technology had been used to pro-
duce materials used in its secret weapon program, galvanized 
support for stronger mechanisms. In 1974, a new organization 
called the Nuclear Suppliers Group brought together states from 
both inside and outside the NPT (such as France) to strengthen 
export controls and safeguard requirements, which now included 
enrichment and reprocessing technologies. This requirement 
would help ensure that materials produced at facilities receiving 
international assistance, as well as other materials from unsafe-
guarded facilities, could not be made into weapons.
The Late 1970s and 1980s: 
From Arms Racing to 
Negotiated Reductions
Although the two superpowers continued to cooperate on nuclear 
nonproliferation to keep nuclear weapons from additional states, 
the détente era of the early 1970s dissolved over nuclear and 
other issues in the late 1970s. Soviet deployments of new, high-
yield MIRVed missiles (known as SS-18s) and tests of antisatellite 
weapons in space led to U.S. accusations of Soviet intentions to 
undertake a disarming ﬁ rst strike. The Soviet Union’s invasion of 
Afghanistan in 1979 and its deployment of mobile SS-20 missiles 
in Eastern Europe added to U.S. anxiety. These events pushed 
the United States into alliance with Pakistan to train and support 
Islamic rebels to ﬁ ght against the Soviet occupation. However, 
this policy also led the United States to turn a blind eye toward 
Pakistan’s increasing efforts to build a nuclear weapon by draw-
ing on technology acquired from abroad, especially Europe.
The election of President Ronald Reagan in 1980 ushered in 
a period of intense U.S. nuclear saber rattling and an extended 
nuclear buildup. Public fears over the implications, however, 
combined with lingering effects from the 1979 Three Mile Island 
nuclear plant accident in Pennsylvania, led to the grassroots efforts 
in the United States (the so-called nuclear freeze movement) to 
halt U.S. and Soviet nuclear deployment at existing levels (Meyer 
1990). The Reagan administration provided new funding to sev-

eral controversial weapon systems, including the expensive B-1 
bomber and the rail-based MX missile, while pushing forward 
with deployment of the intermediate-range Pershing II missile 
in Western Europe. In 1983, President Reagan also announced 
the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), a plan aimed at nullifying 
the Soviet advantage in nuclear explosive yield through the con-
struction of a massive, multilayered missile defense system that 
would use thousands of space-based interceptors and dozens of 
high-tech lasers to shoot down thousands of Soviet MIRVed mis-
siles in their boost phase (before they could deploy their multiple 
warheads). However, besides violating the ABM Treaty, the SDI 
system (dubbed “Star Wars” by critics) proved far too expensive, 
and the technology was inadequate to the task. With changing 
Soviet foreign and defense policies under Mikhail Gorbachev 
(1985–1991), a new era of arms control emerged in the late 1980s. 
First, the two sides signed the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces 
Treaty in 1987, banning a whole class of missiles—including the 
SS-20 and the Pershing II—with ranges from 500 to 5,500 kilome-
ters. Then, Presidents George H. W. Bush and Gorbachev signed 
the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) in July 1991, provid-
ing for the ﬁ rst actual reductions (rather than ceilings) in long-
range nuclear armaments, setting a limit of 6,000 warheads. After 
the Soviet breakup in December 1991, the United States pursued an 
agreement with the Soviet successor states to continue the START 
reduction process, signing the Lisbon Protocol in May 1992 with 
Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia, and Ukraine. A START II agreement 
was negotiated in January 1993 between the United States and 
Russian President Boris Yeltsin, calling on the two sides to reduce 
their arsenals further to 3,000–3,500 warheads each. Unilateral 
declarations by the Bush and Gorbachev/Yeltsin administrations 
in 1991–1992 also removed tactical (short-range) nuclear weapons 
from U.S. and Russian surface ships, submarines, and aircraft.
Elsewhere, proliferation pressures ﬂ ared in South America 
in the late 1970s and early 1980s, where military governments in 
Argentina and Brazil remained locked in a ﬁ erce bilateral rivalry, 
as well as a secret competition to become the ﬁ rst to achieve 
nuclear weapon status, drawing on technology provided by sev-
eral Western suppliers. Both states refused to sign the NPT, thus 
heightening international concerns. Meanwhile, in Pakistan, evi-
dence of a nuclear weapon program had become undeniable by 
the mid-1980s. Concerns in Congress about tacit U.S. support for 
The Late 1970s and 1980s 19

20 Background and History
such proliferation led to the passage of the 1985 Pressler Amend-
ment (named for U.S. Senator Larry Pressler of South Dakota), 
which strengthened existing U.S. export control laws to require 
the president to provide certiﬁ cation each year that Pakistan 
did not possess a bomb and that U.S. assistance would reduce 
(not increase) the possibility of Pakistan acquiring one. Despite 
mounting evidence after 1985 of a Pakistani nuclear weapon pro-
gram, however, the Reagan and Bush administrations continued 
to certify Pakistan’s non–nuclear weapon status under the new 
law rather than lose the U.S. base of support for aiding anti-Soviet 
resistance forces in Afghanistan. Finally, after Gorbachev’s deci-
sion to withdraw the Soviet military from Afghanistan in 1989, 
President Bush denied certiﬁ cation to Pakistan and terminated all 
U.S. aid.
New Threats to the 
Nonproliferation Regime: 
Iraq and North Korea
The 1990–1991 Gulf War had a major impact on international non-
proliferation by exposing just how far a state could go toward 
building a bomb despite being a member of the NPT. Inspections 
only of declared nuclear facilities had proven inadequate in the 
case of Iraq. As a result of suspicions raised during the Gulf War 
and the passage of special UN resolutions aimed at eliminating 
Iraq’s potential to manufacture weapons of mass destruction 
(WMD), the UN Special Commission on Iraq (UNSCOM) began a 
series of more thorough postwar inspections of Iraqi military and 
scientiﬁ c research facilities aimed at certifying the full destruc-
tion of any WMD capabilities. Although the existence of an Iraqi 
chemical weapons program had been widely known before 1990, 
UNSCOM inspections revealed that Iraq had also developed bio-
logical weapons, and had nearly developed a nuclear weapon, 
despite having allowed required IAEA inspections of its declared 
nuclear facilities. Documents revealed that careful subterfuge 
and the creation of an extensive procurement network of dummy 
companies operating in Europe and the Middle East had allowed 
the Iraqi government to operate a large, secret nuclear weapon 
program in undeclared facilities inaccessible to the IAEA. These 

revelations led to tightening of export control mechanisms in 
many countries in Europe and to decisions under IAEA Director 
General Hans Blix to assert the IAEA’s rights of special inspection 
in cases where it had reason to believe there might be important 
undeclared nuclear facilities in a country.
These new mechanisms were tested soon afterward in the 
case of North Korea. Pyongyang had signed the NPT under Soviet 
pressure in 1985 (as a condition of the intended sale of a nuclear 
power plant) but had delayed providing the IAEA with an ofﬁ -
cial declaration of its nuclear facilities until 1992. IAEA inspectors 
soon discovered irregularities in North Korea’s declarations 
regarding refueling activities at a 5-megawatt electric research 
reactor in Yongbyon. New sampling data provided evidence that 
two illegal refuelings had been conducted and that plutonium 
had been diverted for a secret weapon program. U.S. intelligence 
data gathered by spy satellites and provided to the IAEA also 
revealed the presence of two suspicious facilities believed to be 
undeclared spent fuel sites. After six inspections during 1992–
1993, the IAEA took its report to the UN Security Council in early 
1993 and demanded special inspections. North Korea responded 
by announcing that it would withdraw from the NPT, giving the 
required three months’ notice. After heated negotiations with the 
IAEA and the United States, North Korea suspended its with-
drawal (one day short of its effective date) but continued to block 
inspections at several sensitive facilities. Finally, after North 
Korea renewed its threat to withdraw from the NPT and in a 
tense environment where some U.S. observers had begun calling 
for preemptive attacks to prevent development of a North Korean 
bomb, former U.S. President Jimmy Carter went to Pyongyang 
and convinced President Kim Il Sung to agree to a deal. The draft 
agreement would require North Korea to shut down its existing 
proliferation-prone nuclear facilities in exchange for two prolifera-
tion-resistant light-water reactors and shipments of heavy fuel oil 
for energy production until the reactors could be completed. The 
two states codiﬁ ed this arrangement in the “Agreed Framework” 
of October 1994, after South Korea and Japan agreed to pay for the 
project by pledging some $4 billion in loans. The deal averted a 
crisis but raised questions about the NPT’s ability to prevent pro-
liferation within its own structures and processes when a country 
attempts to subvert treaty restrictions, refuses to comply with spe-
cial inspections, or threatens to leave the treaty.
New Threats to the Nonproliferation Regime 21

22 Background and History
Successes in International 
Nonproliferation Efforts in the 
Early to Mid-1990s
Despite the problems in Iraq and North Korea, there were sev-
eral positive developments in nuclear nonproliferation during 
the early 1990s. In 1991, South Africa, a longtime holdout from 
the NPT, declared that, as part of the move toward free elections 
and a black majority government, it would join the NPT as a 
non–nuclear weapon state. (South Africa would later reveal that 
it had built and then destroyed six nuclear weapons.) In 1992, 
two key nonsignatories—France and China—ratiﬁ ed the NPT 
as weapon states, thus pledging themselves to eventually elimi-
nate their nuclear arsenals and, in China’s case, adopt new export 
control obligations (which France had already adopted as part of 
its membership in the Nuclear Suppliers Group). As a result of a 
political rapprochement, longtime holdouts Argentina and Brazil 
agreed to become full members of the Treaty of Tlatelolco in 1994 
(thereby renouncing nuclear weapons); Argentina also became an 
NPT member in 1995, and Brazil joined in 1998.
Perhaps more signiﬁ cant, during the early to mid-1990s there 
were successful efforts, particularly by Russia and the United 
States, to encourage three Soviet successor states that had inher-
ited nuclear weapons on their territories (Belarus, Kazakhstan, 
and Ukraine) to return them to Russia and to join the NPT as 
non–nuclear weapon states, thereby renouncing future posses-
sion of nuclear weapons. Through the Nunn-Lugar Cooperative 
Threat Reduction Program (named for its two Senate sponsors), 
the United States pledged ﬁ nancial assistance and technology to 
aid in the process of dismantling weapons and to help secure the 
vast Soviet stockpile of weapon-usable nuclear materials. It also 
created innovative programs to employ former nuclear weapons 
scientists in civilian research efforts in cooperation with other 
Western countries.
Additional positive news for the cause of nuclear nonprolif-
eration came as a result of the NPT Review and Extension Confer-
ence held in April–May 1995. This crucial twenty-ﬁ fth-anniversary 
gathering faced the decision of whether (and, if so, for how long) 
to extend the NPT’s duration. Because of the perceived slow pace 
of U.S.-Russian arms reductions, the failures of the inspections 

regime in Iraq and North Korea, and questions about the long-
term willingness of the ﬁ ve declared nuclear weapon states to 
dismantle their nuclear arsenals, serious doubts had been raised 
about the chances for the NPT’s indeﬁ nite extension. The decision 
would require a consensus, involving the support of more than 
170 non–nuclear weapon states. However, high-level lobbying by 
the United States and other key countries, such as South Africa 
and Canada, resulted in a compromise: indeﬁ nite extension in 
return for additional pledges by the nuclear weapon states to 
address issues of concern to the non–nuclear weapon states. One 
of these measures included the long-sought goal of early prog-
ress toward negotiating a complete ban on further nuclear testing. 
A second pledge involved concerted efforts to complete a treaty 
banning further production of weapons-grade uranium and plu-
tonium, thereby reducing the global availability of bomb-making 
materials. Although much work remained to be done, the results 
of the meeting cemented the presence of the treaty as an enduring 
factor in international nonproliferation policy.
In September 1996, after a controversial series of nuclear tests 
by France in the South Paciﬁ c, the weapon states moved to imple-
ment part of their 1995 pledge by signing the Comprehensive 
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Although the agreement required the 
ratiﬁ cation of forty-four nuclear-capable states to enter into force, 
this treaty represented a serious effort to eliminate nuclear testing 
once and for all and a moral obligation on the part of the signato-
ries (which included the United States, Russia, China, France, and 
the United Kingdom) not to test during the prolonged ratiﬁ cation 
process, which was still ongoing in 2007.
New Tensions in the 
Nonproliferation Regime: 
The Late 1990s to Early 2003
Despite this progress in nonproliferation efforts, the late 1990s 
witnessed the ramping up of nuclear tensions in South Asia, 
where India and Pakistan had remained outside the NPT but had 
refrained from testing weapons since the lone Indian explosion 
in 1974. With the election of Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee 
and his Hindu Nationalist Party in 1997, India set itself on a course 
New Tensions in the Nonproliferation Regime 23

24 Background and History
toward nuclear testing. Despite policy documents making Vajpa-
yee’s intentions clear, all the major powers expressed shock when 
he conducted multiple nuclear weapon tests in May 1998, bring-
ing India’s latent nuclear potential into public view and shifting 
India’s policy from nuclear opacity to overt weaponization. India 
conducted six tests in a period of a few weeks. Pakistan hesitated, 
and then responded by testing its ﬁ rst nuclear device on 28 May 
1998 and conducting ﬁ ve additional tests in a few days’ time to 
match its rival. Although the United States and other countries 
sharply criticized these moves and placed economic and military 
sanctions on both countries, the weakness of the effort frustrated 
many of the non–nuclear weapon states (like Japan) that believed 
the international community should have enacted stronger mech-
anisms in the face of such blatant proliferation.
The decision of the U.S. Senate to reject the recommenda-
tion of the Clinton administration and defeat the Comprehensive 
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in 1999—on the grounds that it could 
not be adequately veriﬁ ed and that future U.S. weapons testing 
might be required—delivered another serious setback to support-
ers of nuclear nonproliferation. Internationally, many countries 
strongly condemned the U.S. Senate’s action, stating that the net 
effect would be to encourage further testing by other states. Nev-
ertheless, France, Britain, and Russia moved ahead to ratify the 
agreement.
George W. Bush took ofﬁ ce in 2001, and his administration 
announced plans to conduct unilateral U.S. arms reductions, 
with draw from the ABM Treaty, and construct national missile 
defenses. The administration acted on all of these pledges, despite 
the opposition of numerous foreign governments, including many 
within NATO. The Bush administration also used the terrorist 
attacks of September 11, 2001 to end remaining U.S. sanctions 
on India and Pakistan, stating its preference for a new policy of 
positive engagement. The move rewarded Pakistan, in particular, 
for offering its territory as a key staging area for U.S. forces ﬁ ght-
ing the Taliban in Afghanistan. In addition, U.S. policymakers 
voiced new fears about the possibility that terrorist groups (like 
Osama bin Laden’s al Qaeda organization) might acquire access 
to weapons-grade nuclear materials and either build a nuclear 
device or, more likely, use conventional explosives to spread more 
easily obtainable radioactive waste using a so-called dirty bomb.

In the area of arms control, the Bush administration announced 
that as part of its new relationship with Russia it would enact uni-
lateral cuts in the U.S. nuclear arsenal to 1,700–2,200 deployed 
strategic warheads (not counting those in reserve or on launchers 
undergoing repair). It also gave notice of its intended withdrawal 
from the ABM Treaty, effective in June 2002, to begin fulﬁ lling its 
plan to build nationwide missile defenses. Russian President Vlad-
imir Putin expressed his dissatisfaction with the U.S. withdrawal 
from the ABM Treaty, stating that amending the agreement would 
have been the preferable course of action. He also called for con-
tinued U.S.-Russian discussions toward a formal treaty to verify 
arms reductions and eliminate warheads on both sides.
The Bush administration announced in late 2001 in its 
Nuclear Posture Review that it would keep many of the nuclear 
weapons removed from its arsenal in a strategic reserve rather 
than destroying them. The administration also included in its 
2003 budget request funds to make it easier for the United States 
to resume nuclear testing if such a decision were to be made in 
the future. Defense Department spokespersons defended these 
actions by saying that U.S. nuclear weapons needed to be ready 
to be redeployed, if conditions required it, and that new nuclear 
weapon designs (especially ground-penetrating, “bunker buster” 
versions) might be needed for the ﬁ ght against rogue states and 
terrorists. But the moves brought considerable negative reactions 
from foreign governments that questioned U.S. commitments to 
disarmament and the test ban. China, in particular, indicated its 
frustration with new U.S. policies on reversible arms control and 
on missile defenses, which it considered threatening to its small 
nuclear arsenal.
U.S.-Russian negotiators agreed by the May 2002 summit 
in Moscow to allow the signing of an ofﬁ cial pact pledging both 
sides to reach ceilings of 1,700–2,200 deployed strategic warheads 
by 2012. But this basic framework left unaddressed U.S.-Rus-
sian differences in the areas of reserve stockpiles and weapons 
elimination. Following the U.S. exit from the ABM Treaty, Russia 
withdrew from the START II agreement and has opted to keep its 
land-based MIRVed missiles, rather than build new, single-war-
head missiles. 
New collective approaches to proliferation challenges in the 
former Soviet Union resulted from the meeting of the leading 
New Tensions in the Nonproliferation Regime 25

26 Background and History
industrialized countries, the Group of Eight (G-8), in Kananaskis, 
Canada, in June 2002. In response to the 9/11 attacks, attention 
now began to focus on the importance of securing ﬁ ssile material 
at its source. With this in mind, the G-8 states pledged a total of 
$20 billion over the next ten years—half from the United States 
and the rest from the other G-8 countries (including Russia)—to 
heighten the security of nuclear and other WMD-related materi-
als in the former Soviet Union and to continue the work of the 
U.S. Nunn-Lugar program. The new effort became known as 
the Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons of Mass 
Destruction.
In the fall of 2002, the long-simmering nuclear crisis on the 
Korean Peninsula bubbled over once again with U.S. charges 
about Pyongyang’s prior acquisition of uranium centrifuge tech-
nology from Pakistan in violation of the 1994 Agreed Framework.
In the U.S. view, North Korea was now seeking to subvert the 
freeze on its plutonium program by developing a secret uranium 
enrichment effort to pursue a nuclear weapon. In a spiral of ill 
will and mistrust, the brinkmanship of the Kim Jong Il regime and 
the Bush administration led to the abandonment of diplomacy, 
the breakup of the Agreed Framework, and North Korea’s with-
drawal from the NPT. North Korea ordered all IAEA inspections 
and monitoring to end and restarted its plutonium-producing 
reactor in early 2003. Some critics charged that the Bush adminis-
tration was too preoccupied with making its case for the invasion 
of Iraq and therefore had failed to focus enough attention on pre-
venting a nuclear breakout in North Korea.
U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell’s speech to the UN Gen-
eral Assembly in January 2003 put together the administration’s 
most convincing case for invading Iraq using controversial evi-
dence suggesting that Iraq was pursuing nuclear weapons and 
other WMD. Despite the lack of a speciﬁ c UN resolution in sup-
port of the war (most countries opposed intervention), the United 
States, the United Kingdom, and a token force of allied states 
invaded Iraq in March 2003. The Iraqi army failed to put up seri-
ous resistance, and the coalition forces quickly overwhelmed all 
organized opposition within a matter of weeks. In a foreshadow-
ing of future events, however, the surprising presence of irregu-
lar forces and religiously inspired non-Iraqi ﬁ ghters offered some 
of the ﬁ ercest opposition to U.S. and British forces. Subsequent 
events, studies, and revelations from Iraqis themselves would 

show that the administration’s case regarding Iraq’s WMD pro-
grams had been seriously ﬂ awed. 
Post–Iraq Invasion 
Nonproliferation Efforts
Before the invasion of Iraq, new evidence appeared that Iran, a 
non–nuclear weapon state and member of the NPT, had been less 
than candid about its nuclear program. In August 2002, a group 
that opposed the Iranian government revealed that Iran had two, 
possibly weapons-related, facilities that had not been disclosed 
to the IAEA: a pilot facility to produce highly enriched uranium 
at Natanz, and a heavy-water facility at Arak. Later, in December 
2002, the U.S.-based Institute for Science and International Secu-
rity published satellite photos of the suspected site at Natanz, and 
a series of inspections by the IAEA conﬁ rmed that Iran had delib-
erately concealed several facilities that were active in its nuclear 
program. Iran subsequently denied the IAEA access to a facility 
in Tehran, setting up the beginning of a prolonged cat-and-mouse 
game regarding a possible nuclear weapon program. Most trou-
bling, continuing IAEA inspections at other sites revealed traces 
of highly enriched uranium, although possibly not of Iranian 
origin. The IAEA determined that Iran had failed to disclose the 
full extent and purposes of all its various nuclear activities, as 
required. Although Iran temporarily halted its uranium enrich-
ment activities pursuant to a deal with European nations, Tehran 
later announced that it would never give up its right to a complete 
nuclear fuel cycle and resumed enrichment activities.
Concerned about the possibility that Iran, other proliferant 
states, and terrorist groups may have acquired nuclear and other 
WMD-related technologies, the United States announced a coop-
erative program called the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) in 
May 2003. The PSI consisted of a voluntary group of states com-
mitted to using diplomatic, military, intelligence-related, and other 
measures to prevent shipments of WMD and associated technolo-
gies by land, air, and sea. The new program encouraged inspections 
of suspect cargoes. For ocean cargo, such efforts would be facili-
tated by boarding agreements with countries such as Liberia and 
Panama that register many commercial vessels. The organization 
Post-Iraq Invasion Nonproliferation Efforts 27

28 Background and History
quickly grew to more than ﬁ fteen core member states and more 
than sixty cooperating states. Major countries such as Russia, Japan, 
the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and Australia began coor-
dinated naval exercises with the United States aimed at enforcing 
the PSI, thus providing an important new deterrent against pos-
sible transit of WMD technologies and delivery systems.
In December 2003, Libya, an NPT member but long consid-
ered a rogue state because of its secret WMD programs and record 
of past support for terrorism, announced that it would abandon 
its WMD efforts and associated delivery systems. This successful 
case of nonproliferation persuasion resulted from joint efforts by 
the United Kingdom and the United States and led to the com-
plete inspection and full dismantlement of Libya’s secret WMD 
facilities, as well as its acceptance of the IAEA’s Additional Pro-
tocol. Inspectors discovered that Libya had procured advanced 
centrifuge technology and designs from Pakistan’s Khan Labora-
tories, as well as blueprints for a nuclear weapon. Although some 
U.S. ofﬁ cials hinted that the war in Iraq had convinced Libya that 
it had to cease its WMD efforts, most evidence pointed to Libya’s 
desire to end its wasteful spending on such materials and tech-
nologies and enjoy the beneﬁ ts of trade and investment that had 
long been denied it by the international community. However, 
in the course of Libya’s negotiations on the ﬁ nal dismantlement 
terms, considerable new information came out about the role of 
Pakistan, and particularly its chief nuclear scientist, A. Q. Khan, 
as an illicit supplier to Libya’s nuclear program. These revelations 
put increasing pressure on the government of Pakistan to press 
charges against senior nuclear ofﬁ cials. 
After the IAEA identiﬁ ed traces of highly enriched uranium 
on equipment found in Iran (now believed to be from Pakistan) 
and Libya disclosed its nuclear procurement activities involv-
ing Pakistani intermediaries and suppliers, the Pakistani gov-
ernment ﬁ nally took action against its leading nuclear scientist 
in early 2004. After a series of interrogations, Khan admitted his 
role as a major illicit nuclear supplier with a worldwide network 
stretching into Southeast Asia, Europe, Africa, and the Middle 
East. Although he lost his government position and was put 
under house arrest, Khan’s national reputation as the father of 
the Pakistani bomb allowed him to avoid jail. The U.S. and other 
intelligence networks had long known of Khan’s activities, but 
Pakistan’s public acknowledgment of Khan’s activities was both a 

major accomplishment of the nonproliferation regime and a major 
blow to its credibility. Although Pakistan had remained outside 
the regime during the time of Khan’s activities, the IAEA’s failure 
to identify and halt his network—which was supplying technol-
ogy to a number of NPT states, including Iran, North Korea, and 
Libya—presented a major embarrassment that undermined the 
regime’s credibility and pointed to the importance of strength-
ening export control mechanisms internationally. The extent of 
Khan’s proliferation network and the role of the Pakistani gov-
ernment and military in promoting (or at least turning a blind 
eye to) Khan’s activities remain open questions. In May 2006, the 
government closed its investigation of Khan and refused to make 
him available for questioning by international inspectors. 
But the IAEA found the value of its work partially redeemed 
by evidence coming out of postwar Iraq. Speciﬁ cally, the release 
of the ﬁ ndings of the U.S. Iraq Survey Group in the so-called 
Duelfer Report in October 2004 conﬁ rmed the effectiveness of 
IAEA sanctions and the UN special inspections regime in Iraq 
(Duelfer 2004). The report stated that the U.S. investigators could 
ﬁ nd no evidence of Iraqi reconstitution of its nuclear program 
after 1991. The Duelfer Report directly contradicted and, in many 
respects, disproved the Bush administration’s case for the war in 
Iraq. The IAEA and its U.S.-maligned Director General Mohamed 
ElBaradei reaped the rewards of their efforts in October 2005 
when they jointly received the Nobel Peace Prize for their work to 
promote nuclear nonproliferation.
Stung by the Khan revelations and seeking international sup-
port for the PSI, the United States sought to work within the UN 
framework to strengthen formal nonproliferation mechanisms. 
Speciﬁ cally, Washington’s concerns about the threat posed by 
non-state actors in proliferation black markets led the U.S. gov-
ernment to propose a binding resolution of the Security Council 
to require states to enact legislation to make it illegal for non-state 
actors within their borders to possess WMD materials and tech-
nologies. Adopted in April 2004, UN Security Council Resolution 
1540 also requires states to heighten security at state-controlled 
facilities with WMD materials and technologies and to report their 
progress to the United Nations. While compliance remains imper-
fect, the resolution has received widespread praise as a coopera-
tive effort to increase nonproliferation compliance within existing 
international organizations. In addition, it has focused new global 
Post-Iraq Invasion Nonproliferation Efforts 29

30 Background and History
attention on the non-state actor and terrorist problems facing the 
nonproliferation regime.
As part of the new global understanding of post–September 11 
proliferation challenges, international organizations, governments,
and nongovernmental organizations have initiated parallel efforts 
to remove highly enriched uranium from the civilian fuel cycle. 
These have included the U.S.-funded Global Threat Reduction 
Initiative (GTRI), announced in May 2004, linking U.S., IAEA, and 
Russian efforts. Speciﬁ cally, the GTRI seeks to reverse the process 
whereby both the United States and the Soviet Union had once 
provided research reactors and highly enriched uranium fuel 
to developing countries (for such purposes as producing medi-
cal isotopes). The initiative set up a schedule to retrieve nuclear 
fuel of U.S. and Soviet origin from more than 100 sites around 
the world or, where the reactors are still in operation, to replace 
the fuel cores with more proliferation-resistant low-enriched ura-
nium. Also, in July 2006, the United States and Russia announced 
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, a new effort 
to set national standards for protecting and detecting nuclear 
weapons and materials and to facilitate international cooperation 
in technical means of combating nuclear terrorism. This initiative 
complements the UN International Convention for the Suppres-
sion of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, which was opened for signa-
ture and signed by ﬁ fty countries in September 2005. 
Attempts to Curb North Korea’s 
Nuclear Program: 2003–2007
China has emerged as a more signiﬁ cant actor in Northeast 
Asian nonproliferation activities because of its concern about the 
implications of the worsening North Korean nuclear crisis. In 
spring 2003, it sponsored trilateral talks with North Korea and 
the United States that were aimed at resolving the dispute and 
returning Pyongyang to the NPT. Responding to U.S. demands 
for wider talks, Beijing successfully organized the so-called Six-
Party Talks in August 2003, which brought together the three 
original parties plus neighbors South Korea, Russia, and Japan. 
After several fruitless rounds and in the face of increasing North 
Korean progress toward a nuclear weapon, the talks resulted in 

a seeming agreement on denuclearization in the fall of 2005. But 
North Korean–U.S. differences over recently tightened ﬁ nancial 
sanctions and the question of whether the deal included nuclear 
power assistance led to its rapid collapse. This series of events 
and mutual ﬁ nger-pointing over fault ﬁ nally culminated in North 
Korea’s October 2006 test of a plutonium ﬁ ssion bomb with a half-
kiloton yield. According to experts, North Korea’s bomb ﬁ zzled. 
Nonetheless, North Korea became the tenth state to demonstrate 
a nuclear capability and the ﬁ rst nuclear state to have withdrawn 
from the NPT. The UN Security Council announced strong and 
unanimous sanctions against the North Korean regime in Novem-
ber, aimed speciﬁ cally at military and WMD-related technologies 
and means of funding such programs. But early evidence sug-
gested that incomplete implementation of cargo inspections, even 
by such U.S. allies as South Korea, would weaken their effective-
ness. In late 2006, North Korea again agreed to return to the Six-
Party Talks, under pressure from China. Finally, in February 2007, 
North Korea agreed to a deal in which it would shut down its 
nuclear facilities and allow the return of IAEA inspectors within 
sixty days in exchange for a phased package of ﬁ nancial, diplo-
matic, and energy-related incentives. Further steps were supposed 
to be negotiated, whose speciﬁ c content and sequencing remained 
unclear as of April 2007. Notably, the February agreement left 
undecided the fate of North Korea’s nuclear arsenal and ﬁ ssile 
materials.
New Debates 
over Nuclear Arsenals 
Among the major nuclear powers, divergent trends had become 
more pronounced. Within the United States, Congress began to 
reassert itself by canceling funding for the bunker buster bomb. 
The Bush administration announced deeper unilateral cuts in its 
reserve stockpile, but made no mention of plans to cut into the 
deployed force beyond existing treaties. The Russian Federation, 
by contrast, called for resuming talks aimed at further reduc-
tions in a follow-on agreement to the Moscow Treaty, which is 
scheduled to expire in 2012. Washington remained opposed to 
such talks, preferring to stick to unilateral measures. This debate 
New Debates over Nuclear Arsenals 31

32 Background and History
highlighted differences of opinion as to whether nuclear weapons 
themselves or the intentions of states represented the most seri-
ous threat. The Bush administration sparred with other nuclear 
countries over whether international agreements should govern 
dismantlement or, according to the U.S. preference, such pro-
cesses should be controlled only by national governments. In the 
United Kingdom, meanwhile, a major debate ﬂ ared during 2006 
over whether or not to continue deploying nuclear weapons at 
all, given the changes in the global security environment and the 
extremely high costs of building a new generation of nuclear sub-
marines to carry them. In March 2007, however, the Parliament 
heeded Prime Minister Tony Blair’s advice and approved a $40 
billion nuclear modernization program. France maintained a ﬂ at 
trajectory in its nuclear arsenal, but had already begun plans for 
next-generation systems and showed few signs of further reduc-
tions. China’s policy remained opaque, although experts noted 
no signiﬁ cant effort to engage in a nuclear arms race with other 
powers. One of the biggest question marks surrounded the inten-
tions of smaller nuclear powers: Israel, India, Pakistan, and North 
Korea. These states remained outside NPT controls. Another grow-
ing concern was whether the emergence of new nuclear weapon 
states in particular regions might encourage long-standing NPT 
members to rethink their non-nuclear policies.
In 2006, the United States proposed a radical policy shift 
in offering to provide India nuclear technology in exchange for 
the latter’s declaration of a range of civilian nuclear facilities 
that would henceforth be subject to IAEA inspections. The Bush 
administration argued that India’s role as a democracy, the fact 
of its existing nuclear arsenal, and its responsible nonprolifera-
tion behavior merited a change in U.S. policy, despite India’s non-
membership in the NPT. Critics argued that the deal represented a 
dangerous undermining of the NPT regime and stemmed mainly 
from the coincidence of U.S. business interests and the administra-
tion’s desire for continued Indian support in the war on terrorism. 
The deal placed no restrictions on India’s future nuclear arsenal, 
although Congressional amendments required India to refrain 
from future nuclear testing. Ironically, it remained unclear as to 
whether India would accept such “meddling” in its nuclear policy, 
despite the possible beneﬁ ts of U.S. acceptance of its nuclear pro-
gram and its new willingness to provide civilian nuclear technol-
ogy. As many expected, announcement of the deal led to broader 
international implications. Russia quickly announced an expan-

sion of its nuclear cooperation with India, despite prior Nuclear 
Suppliers Group restrictions. China later moved ahead with a 
similar nuclear trade pact with longtime ally Pakistan, despite the 
latter’s nonmembership in the NPT. Non–nuclear weapon states 
in the NPT complained that these actions weakened the treaty 
and the incentives of states within it to continue refraining from 
developing nuclear arsenals of their own. Critics also argued that 
adding subjective criteria to the determination of proliferation 
threats would weaken international solidarity for dealing with 
problem cases like Iran, where a settlement on shutting down 
Tehran’s continuing uranium enrichment program remained 
elusive, despite trade and technological incentives offered by 
the European Union and the United States in June 2006. In April 
2007, Iran’s President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad claimed that Iran 
would soon be able to enrich uranium on an industrial scale, and 
would reconsider its membership in the NPT if Western countries 
continued to sanction Iran for pursuing a complete nuclear fuel 
cycle. Spurred by Iran’s nuclear pursuit, Egypt, Jordan, and other 
Middle Eastern countries have announced plans to pursue their 
own nuclear energy programs. 
One development provided more positive news regarding 
international nonproliferation efforts. The ﬁ ve states of former 
Soviet Central Asia—Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turk-
menistan, and Uzbekistan—signed a treaty in September 2006 
creating a nuclear-weapon-free zone in their region. The agree-
ment prohibited nuclear weapons from being stationed in Central 
Asia and established a mechanism for enhanced cooperation in 
nuclear cleanup from Soviet-era nuclear testing and associated 
uranium milling and mining operations. This agreement con-
siderably expanded the regions of the world now covered by 
nuclear-weapon-free zones and placed a new buffer in the middle 
of Asia helping to separate nuclear-armed India, Pakistan, Russia, 
and China. 
Conclusion
Since 1945, the world has witnessed a dramatic proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. However, their absolute numbers have declined 
signiﬁ cantly since the end of the Cold War. But a range of prob-
lems still remain. Despite the end of the Cold War, the existing 
nuclear weapon states have thus far failed to dismantle their 
Conclusion
33

34 Background and History
nuclear arsenals as required by the NPT. Within the treaty, several 
non–nuclear weapon states (including Brazil, Iran, and Japan) 
continue to assert their NPT right to develop technology to pro-
duce enriched nuclear fuel for power plants, even though this 
same technology can be used to create weapons-grade material 
for bombs. Finally, four nuclear weapon states (India, Pakistan, 
Israel, and North Korea) remain outside the regime and there-
fore pose a challenge to the NPT and its associated non-nuclear 
norms. Whether these states can be incorporated into the non-
proliferation regime without weakening the consensus that holds 
the NPT and its associated export control system together remains 
to be seen.
In the context of the post-1945 period, much has also been 
accomplished to limit the spread of nuclear weapons. An over-
whelming majority of countries, as well as many nongovernmen-
tal and international organizations, have committed themselves 
to the objective of nuclear disarmament. In the presence of new 
terrorist threats since 2001, many states have also undertaken new 
domestic, regional, and international measures to improve the 
security of nuclear weapon materials, strengthen export controls, 
and prevent possible diversions. 
Looking ahead, greater transnational cooperation in solving 
regional security problems—which largely drive the “demand” 
for proliferation—is likely to be the most reliable route to future 
success in nonproliferation policies. Improving veriﬁ cation mech-
anisms to implement restrictive agreements will play a critical 
role too, particularly if states are going to make progress toward 
eventual nuclear elimination—if indeed that goal is achievable. 
Overall, a struggle is likely to continue for at least the next few 
decades between those who support a deterrent role for nuclear 
weapons and those who see nuclear weapons as heightening 
global tensions and placing the world’s population at risk.
References
Bundy, McGeorge. 1988. Danger and Survival: Choices about the Bomb in 
the First Fifty Years. New York: Random House.
Bunn, George. 1992. Arms Control by Committee: Managing Negotiations 
with the Russians. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Cohen, Avner. 1998. Israel and the Bomb. New York: Columbia University 
Press.
Duelfer, Charles. 2004. Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to 
the DCI on Iraq’s Weapons of Mass Destruction. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Ofﬁ ce. https://www.cia.gov/cia/reports/iraq_
wmd_2004.
Gardner, Gary T. 1994. Nuclear Nonproliferation: A Primer. Boulder, CO: 
Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Hasegawa, Tsuyoshi. 2005. Racing the Enemy: Stalin, Truman, and the 
Surrender of Japan. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Holloway, David. 1994. Stalin and the Bomb. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Lewis, John W., and Litai, Xue. 1991. China Builds the Bomb. Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press.
Meyer, David S. 1990. A Winter of Discontent: The Nuclear Freeze and 
American Politics. New York: Praeger.
Perkovich, George. 1999. India’s Nuclear Bomb. Berkeley, CA: University 
of California Press.
Rhodes, Richard. 1986. The Making of the Atomic Bomb. New York: Simon 
and Schuster.
Rhodes, Richard. 1995. Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb. New 
York: Simon and Schuster.
Schwartz, Stephen I., ed. 1998. Atomic Audit: The Costs and Consequences 
of U.S. Nuclear Weapons since 1940. Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution Press.
Takaki, Ronald. 1995. Hiroshima: Why America Dropped the Atomic Bomb.
New York: Little, Brown.
Wittner, Lawrence S. 1997. Resisting the Bomb: A History of the World 
Nuclear Disarmament Movement, 1954–1970. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
References
35


37
2
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
T
he continued presence of large numbers of nuclear weapons 
in various states today raises several important questions, 
including how best to manage the threat of nuclear war, how 
to contain the risks of possible nuclear acquisition by additional 
states or by terrorists, and what tools to use to promote nuclear 
nonproliferation and work toward possible nuclear elimination. 
But there is little consensus on the answers.
To some ofﬁ cials and experts, the risk of nuclear weap-
ons represents a cost worth paying if possessing these weapons 
can provide effective deterrence against potential enemies and 
thereby prevent war (Waltz, in Sagan and Waltz 2002). They 
believe no rival state will be so foolhardy as to attack a country 
with nuclear weapons and risk annihilation. This seemed to have 
been the thinking of North Korea’s leadership when it tested its 
ﬁ rst nuclear weapon in October 2006. 
Other world leaders and policy analysts, however, believe 
nuclear weapons are inherently risky, making war, accidental con-
ﬂ ict, and environmental disasters more likely (Sagan, in Sagan 
and Waltz 2002). They also argue that nuclear weapons do not 
deter because they cannot realistically ever be used because of the 
damage they are likely to bring on their possessors in terms of 
retaliation. Thus, they believe nuclear weapons should be elimi-
nated globally and countries should rely instead on cooperative

38 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
security mechanisms (drawing on alliances and treaties) and 
conventional weapons. The views of many other ofﬁ cials and 
experts fall somewhere between those backing nuclear possession 
and those supporting nuclear elimination, and all have varying 
assessments about the feasibility of nuclear nonproliferation and 
disarmament efforts, the effectiveness of international treaties 
and organizations, and what constitutes an “acceptable” number 
of nuclear weapons for purposes of deterrence.
Given the fact that nuclear weapons have not been used in 
conﬂ ict since 1945, however, beliefs about their role in today’s 
world and in security relations among states remain largely mat-
ters of faith. For example, no one knows for certain if nuclear 
weapons are required for military deterrence among great powers 
today. Other factors may be promoting peace among major states, 
such as shared commitments to democratic values or market eco-
nomics and growing disinterest in seizing territory as a means of 
increasing national power and inﬂ uence. Even so, many political 
leaders in the nuclear weapon states are very hesitant to give up 
their nuclear arsenals. Some leaders believe nuclear weapons are 
needed to protect against unpredictable future conﬂ icts. Others 
see them as central to deterring rogue states and rising powers, 
which may themselves be seeking weapons of mass destruction. 
Still others may believe nuclear weapons are required to main-
tain great power status. Naturally, this increases incentives for 
other states to develop them. As George Perkovich (2006, 357) 
argues, “Demand for nuclear weapons . . . will not diminish if the 
states that already possess the weapons continue to ﬂ aunt them 
as emblems of national power.” For the aforementioned reasons, 
some analysts fear that we are nearing the dissolution of the 1970 
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). Experts say that urgent collective 
action is needed to strengthen compliance, shore up challenged 
nonproliferation norms, and make more substantive progress 
toward the NPT’s goal of total nuclear disarmament by all states. 
This chapter surveys some key questions surrounding the role 
of nuclear weapons internationally and discusses a range of per-
spectives and possible solutions. It begins by examining the his-
torical development, role, and problems associated with nuclear 
weapons from both strategic and practical viewpoints. It then 
examines how nuclear weapons relate to today’s security chal-
lenges and how the presence of large quantities of nuclear mate-
rial poses risks in regard to possible terrorist activities. Finally, it 

considers the international dilemma of trying to expand nuclear 
power generation while seeking simultaneously to prevent and 
reverse nuclear weapons proliferation. How these questions will 
be answered in the coming years will have a signiﬁ cant effect on 
global security, public health, and environmental safety. Coopera-
tion among states and the peoples of the world will be necessary to 
address emerging proliferation threats, but increasingly divergent 
trends among the world’s leading powers on how best to proceed 
pose a major challenge to the future success of these efforts. 
Nuclear Weapons and Their 
Role during the Cold War
To place today’s issues in context, it is useful to start by asking how 
nuclear weapons affected the Cold War. Although nuclear forces 
played a central role in the security policies of both the United 
States and the Soviet Union, the two sides managed to avoid 
nuclear conﬂ ict throughout the period from 1945 to 1991, despite 
several crises and frequent disputes. But the price tag of Cold War 
nuclear efforts was enormous. In the United States, the bill has 
been estimated at $5.5 trillion in a detailed study conducted by 
the Brookings Institution (Schwartz 1998). These costs included 
expenses for weapons development, deployment of delivery 
systems, and operational service, as well as subsequent costs for 
weapons dismantlement and environmental cleanup. The latter 
two activities are still ongoing in many former nuclear facilities 
across the United States and abroad. It is assumed that the Soviet 
Union spent somewhat less on its vast nuclear arsenal (given its 
widespread use of forced labor) but that its effort constituted a 
much greater proportion of the Soviet gross national product. 
Still, many argue that the price of these arsenals was worthwhile, 
for they believe nuclear weapons played a key role in preventing 
a major U.S.-Soviet war.
Indeed, experts as varied as historian John Lewis Gaddis, 
physicist Edward Teller, and political scientist Kenneth Waltz 
argue that nuclear weapons were at least mainly responsible for 
preventing direct superpower conﬂ ict during the Cold War. First, 
they point out how the horror of the bombing of Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki, as well as the ability of Washington and Moscow to 
Nuclear Weapons and Their Role during the Cold War 39

40 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
threaten each other with total annihilation using nuclear weap-
ons, created conditions of military deterrence. Second, they argue 
that once both sides possessed a minimum number of weapons 
that could be expected to survive a surprise ﬁ rst strike and be 
ready to ﬁ re back (weapons on airborne bombers, on submarines, 
or in hardened land-based silos), conditions of so-called mutually 
assured destruction could be said to prevail. In such circumstances, 
according to this argument, neither side dared risk attacking the 
other because of the unacceptably high cost even if it ﬁ red ﬁ rst, 
making any meaningful victory impossible. As analyst Thomas 
C. Schelling wrote during the height of the Cold War on the role 
of nuclear weapons, “Deterrence rests today on the threat of pain 
and extinction, not just on the threat of military defeat” (Schelling 
1966, 23). Waltz (1981) makes the case that nuclear weapons made 
strategies for preventing war much cheaper and at the same time 
much more credible than earlier policies of deterrence with con-
ventional forces. Facing the threat of possible annihilation, Waltz 
argues, U.S. and Soviet leaders became highly conservative about 
warfare rather than aggressive and opportunistic. From these per-
spectives, nuclear weapons played a positive and stabilizing role in 
the Cold War.
Looking at the same evidence, however, other experts, such 
as author Jonathan Schell, antinuclear activist Dr. Helen Caldicott, 
and physicist Hans Bethe, make the opposite case about the Cold 
War experience. First, they point out that Cold War relations were 
anything but stable. They note that the U.S.-Soviet arms race spun 
out of control, judging by the huge nuclear stockpiles number-
ing in the tens of thousands of weapons built by both sides—far 
in excess of what was needed for effective minimum deterrence. 
Second, they argue that nuclear weapons may have exacerbated
tensions between the two sides, fomenting greater distrust and 
risking mutual annihilation in events like the Cuban Missile Cri-
sis of 1962. Third, they highlight that the global consequences of 
stumbling into a nuclear war, unlike in a prenuclear age, became 
catastrophic and possibly deadly for all of humankind. As Schell 
observed about nuclear weapons and human civilization in his 
best-selling book, The Fate of the Earth, “We hold this entire terres-
trial creation hostage to nuclear destruction, threatening to hurl 
it back into the inanimate darkness from which it came” (Schell 
1982, 181). These critics conclude that only careful diplomacy—

and some level of luck—kept the world from stumbling inadver-
tently into a devastating World War III.
Finally, a third group of analysts makes the case that nuclear 
weapons neither prevented war between the superpowers nor 
exacerbated tensions during the Cold War. Instead, the weapons 
simply represented a peculiar military experiment carried out by 
both sides at great cost during the Cold War. Political scientist John 
Mueller argues that the terrible devastation caused by World War I 
and World War II was more than adequate to deter any World War 
III between the United States and Soviet Union—and it remains a 
powerful deterrent to great power warfare today. He concluded a 
provocative article on this subject by predicting that the nuclear 
arms race would eventually end from “atrophy” and “a dawning 
realization that, since preparations for major war are essentially 
irrelevant, they are profoundly foolish” (Mueller 1988, 79).
Although the U.S.-Soviet nuclear arms race did begin to wind 
down by the late 1980s and ended unexpectedly in 1991 with 
the internal breakup of the Soviet Union, thousands of nuclear 
weapons remain in the United States and Russia, hundreds in 
four countries (France, Britain, China, and Israel), several dozen 
each in India and Pakistan, and a handful in North Korea. Thus, 
despite Mueller’s late–Cold War prediction, states do not seem to 
have accepted his lesson that building nuclear weapons and pre-
paring for their possible use is “profoundly foolish.” Notably, sev-
eral states that either developed (South Africa) or once possessed 
nuclear weapons on their soil (Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine) 
have given them up voluntarily, setting an important precedent 
for future nonproliferation possibilities. However, even a small 
use of nuclear weapons would still constitute a “major war.” 
Therefore, questions related to the role and effects of nuclear 
weapons remain highly relevant. 
What Is the Role of Nuclear 
Weapons Today?
Although nine countries possessed nuclear weapons as of 2007, 
there has been little speciﬁ c justiﬁ cation provided for many of 
these arsenals (beyond the very general concept of deterrence) 
What Is the Role of Nuclear Weapons Today? 41

42 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
since the end of the Cold War. In the years before 1991, Britain, 
France, and the United States regularly referred to the need to 
deter a Soviet attack as the rationale for the existence of their arse-
nals, whereas the Soviet Union and China regularly pointed to the 
U.S. threat and (during certain periods) to each other’s weapons to 
justify their own arsenals. With the Cold War’s demise, however, 
it is unclear what purpose nuclear weapons serve among countries 
that now frequently refer to one another as “partners” rather than 
“adversaries.” In this context, critics argue that the U.S. and Rus-
sian maintenance of arsenals with several thousand nuclear weap-
ons makes no sense. Supporters of these levels, however, point to 
the necessity of targeting existing military forces in possibly hostile 
countries (including those with nuclear weapons) and maintaining 
a hedge against the possible future deterioration of relations. 
In the context of some of the smaller, regionally focused nuclear 
arsenals—as in India, Israel, Pakistan, and North Korea—deterrent 
concepts seem somewhat more credible, given the presence of real-
istic local military concerns. Israel points to the Arab countries sur-
rounding it and a hostile Iran nearby, whereas India and Pakistan 
point at each other and, in India’s case, at China as well. National 
pride and prestige seem to play considerable roles in the Indian 
and Pakistani cases, where cheering crowds greeted their nuclear 
tests in 1998. North Korea points to the rival government in Seoul 
and the presence of U.S. military forces in South Korea. 
Nevertheless, even in cases of regional rivalries, it is not 
always clear what role nuclear weapons would play in foresee-
able conﬂ icts, which often hinge on internal ethnic, religious, and 
political issues or localized territorial disputes where nuclear 
weapons would be unusable. Signiﬁ cant changes in the world 
since 2001 also make some critics wonder about the continued 
relevance of nuclear deterrence against the threat many states 
worry about most: international terrorism. As Middle Eastern 
scholar Kaveh Afrasiabi asked in a 2007 Asia Times essay about 
the need for nuclear disarmaments, “Given the stateless nature of 
international terrorism, how is . . . nuclear deterrence supposed 
to operate against terrorists, and what possible scenario for such 
deterrence can be fathomed?” 
But supporters of the nuclear arsenals argue that their role as 
an ultimate deterrent helps keep conﬂ icts in check and, when they 
do break out, limited in scale because of a fear that they will esca-
late to the nuclear level. Indeed, some recent analysts have argued 

that the United States has achieved such an overwhelming supe-
riority in operational readiness and technological capabilities that 
its arsenal puts it in a position of strategic superiority over other 
nuclear countries. Keir A. Lieber and Daryl G. Press (2006) make 
the case that the previous situation of mutually assured destruc-
tion between the United States and Russia has now shifted to con-
ditions under which Washington could contemplate being able to 
conduct a successful ﬁ rst strike against its erstwhile enemy. They 
note that while both U.S. and Russian numbers have declined since 
the end of the Cold War, Russia’s arsenal has “eroded” while U.S. 
forces “have become more lethal,” mainly because of increased 
accuracy. China’s forces, meanwhile, have failed to catch up and 
remain too tiny to pose much of a threat to the United States. 
Lieber and Press call this situation one of U.S. “nuclear primacy,” 
harkening back to conditions at the dawn of the nuclear age.
While technically the United States may or may not have 
achieved such primacy, an argument can be made that political con-
ditions—particularly the domestic and global taboo against nuclear 
use—make it impossible for the United States to achieve signiﬁ cant 
beneﬁ t from the situation. Moreover, history shows that states that 
other countries perceive as threatening will eventually face coali-
tions of adversaries or new technologies that put their advantages 
into question. Finally, there are those who would say—recalling 
early nuclear theorists—that numbers still don’t matter and that 
no country would ever attack another country that might be able 
to ﬁ re back with at least one nuclear weapon, something certainly 
the United States cannot be sure of in regard to a host of possible 
future adversaries.
Are Nuclear Weapons Safe?
One issue that was frequently raised throughout the Cold War and 
remains salient today is nuclear safety. Even strong supporters of 
nuclear weapons want to be sure that they do not go off acciden-
tally and that they are used only in the most carefully prescribed 
circumstances after exhaustive government deliberation. Fortu-
nately, to date there have been no cases of an acci dental launch 
of a nuclear weapon and no incidents of an accidental nuclear 
detonation. However, as more declassiﬁ ed information becomes 
available on the experience of past decades, there is considerable 
Are Nuclear Weapons Safe? 43

44 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
new data on a number of troubling accidents involving nuclear 
weapons.
Political scientist Scott Sagan (1993) has studied the past 
nuclear experience of the United States, which has arguably spent 
the most money and resources of any country to ensure the safety 
of its nuclear arsenal. Yet Sagan’s work documents numerous 
dangerous incidents involving false nuclear alerts. In one case, a 
ﬂ ock of birds set off a nuclear early warning radar; in another a 
computerized test tape of a nuclear attack was mistaken for sev-
eral minutes as real. Confusing messages sent from personnel 
at far-off early warning sites have occasionally been misread as 
well. Still other incidents uncovered by Sagan include accidents 
involving B-52 aircraft near Thule Air Base, Greenland, and at Pal-
omares, Spain, where nuclear weapons were mistakenly dropped 
and their conventional explosives ignited, dispersing dangerous 
radioactive material. Sagan argues that such evidence provides 
good reasons to oppose further nuclear proliferation and to try to 
reduce arsenals to an absolute minimum level, with a premium 
being put on safety.
Also supporting Sagan’s arguments is the large body of evi-
dence involving accidents aboard U.S., Russian, and other nuclear-
powered ships and submarines, as well as those with nuclear 
weapons aboard. Although much of this information is still being 
declassiﬁ ed in various countries, there are dozens of conﬁ rmed 
cases of collisions with civilian vessels, hostile ships and subma-
rines, and even friendly forces in the course of military exercises, 
and others in which nuclear weapons and/or nuclear reactors 
went to the sea bottom. In 1967, for example, a Soviet Golf II–class 
diesel submarine and the U.S. nuclear submarine Scorpion sank 
in accidents that killed all 179 Soviet and U.S. crew members and 
resulted in the loss of nuclear weapons aboard. A number of other 
such accidents occurred during the Cold War. To cite another 
example, two U.S. surface ships carrying nuclear weapons col-
lided in a nighttime exercise in 1975, rupturing the fuel lines on 
the larger ship, spilling gasoline on the small one (the cruiser USS 
Belknap) and setting it on ﬁ re. Fortunately, the Belknap’s nuclear 
weapons did not explode during the two-hour blaze, but the risk 
was extremely high. In 1989, the Russian nuclear submarine Kom-
somolets suffered a serious ﬁ re and sank with forty-two crew mem-
bers in the White Sea, taking three nuclear-tipped torpedoes to the 

ocean ﬂ oor. These incidents highlight the security and environ-
mental risks of broad proliferation of sea-based nuclear weapons, 
similar to the history of accidents with aircraft and ground-based 
systems. While military personnel certainly endeavor to handle 
nuclear weapons safely, technical problems, weather, and human 
error sometimes result in dangerous events, putting human lives 
and the environment at risk. 
Finally, other authors, such as former U.S. missile ofﬁ cer 
Bruce Blair (1995), have discussed the related problem of inad-
equate command-and-control mechanisms in states with unstable 
or transitional political systems, as in South Asia and the Middle 
East. His work has highlighted the development of a dangerous 
automatic launch system by the Soviet Union, which might have 
been used in case of a ﬁ rst strike by the United States to ensure 
that a counterattack would be launched even if the top leadership 
in Moscow were killed, cut off, or disabled. To prevent the threat 
of an automatic nuclear war, Blair has urged all nuclear weapon 
states to de-alert their nuclear forces by separating warheads 
from missiles, thereby preventing inadvertent war through the 
possible malfunctioning of early warning networks, command 
mechanisms, and computers. To date, however, this has still not 
occurred.
In regard to the possible unauthorized use of nuclear weap-
ons, it is important to note that nuclear weapons in the more 
advanced militaries (including those in the United States, Russia, 
France, and Britain) have so-called permissive action links (PALs) 
built into them. PALs require that operators provide a special 
launch code from their nation’s capital to activate the warheads. 
Without the code, the weapons are unable to detonate themselves. 
Certain weapons also have additional safeguards against unau-
thorized use involving onboard environmental sensors that track 
altitude data and prevent the weapons from being detonated in 
situations for which they were not designed. Yet such technolo-
gies are not foolproof and could be overcome by sophisticated 
insiders, if not by hostile forces, given enough time. Moreover, 
countries like North Korea, Pakistan, India, and possibly Israel 
lack such devices, suggesting risks of nuclear command-and-con-
trol breakdowns in crisis situations, where unauthorized military 
or political leaders might be tempted to take matters into their 
own hands.
Are Nuclear Weapons Safe? 45

46 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
How Many Nuclear 
Weapons Are “Enough”?
Among those who accept the notion that the continued presence 
of nuclear weapons is inevitable now that they have been devel-
oped, debates over the number of nuclear weapons needed to deter 
another state from attacking vary greatly. During the Cold War, it 
was common practice for the United States and Soviet Union to 
match each other missile for missile, believing the enemy might 
interpret any sign of weakness as providing a window of oppor-
tunity to engage in coercion or outright attack.
By 1965, the United States, with more than 32,000 nuclear 
weapons, still had a signiﬁ cant lead over the Soviet Union. By 1985, 
however, the Soviet Union had caught up and then surpassed the 
United States with a total of 39,000 nuclear weapons. Ironically, in 
the political science and strategic literature, arguments about high 
numbers of weapons enhancing overall security—once a certain 
minimum level is reached and a state has a reliable second-strike 
capability—ﬁ nd little support. Cold War strategist Bernard Brodie 
wrote about the irrelevance of numbers, “Deterrence ... does not 
depend on superiority” (Brodie 1971, 274). Since the dawn of the 
nuclear age, many analysts have described deterrence as being 
possible with very few nuclear weapons. After all, they argue, 
what state would be willing to risk being hit in retaliation even by 
a single nuclear weapon?
However, state leaders have rarely followed this advice. The 
experience of the United States and Soviet Union during the Cold 
War showed how internal political forces tended to intensify pres-
sures to build arms rather than reduce them. At the same time, 
however, Britain, France, Israel, and China generally managed 
to limit their arsenals to fewer than 500 weapons each. Among 
this group, Britain recently announced its plans to keep its arse-
nal under 200 weapons; yet, in March 2007, the British Parlia-
ment rejected going non-nuclear with a vote to replace its ﬂ eet 
of four nuclear-armed submarines. But the presence of the U.S. 
military alliance with Britain and France and its U.S. partnership 
with Israel have clearly played a role—along with cost and the 
perception of threats—in encouraging these three countries to 
keep fewer nuclear weapons than they might otherwise possess. 
In China, there was no such assurance, given its lack of a secu-

rity guarantee from any other country after 1961 (when the Soviet 
Union broke ties with Beijing). Economic weakness may have 
been one restraining factor in the past. But China also appears 
to have embraced notions of minimal deterrence more fully than 
other states as a matter of policy and today still ﬁ elds only some 
200 strategic and tactical nuclear weapons, according to recent 
estimates. It remains to be seen if the continued expansion of the 
Chinese economy and its reaction to India’s and Japan’s military 
modernization programs will cause it to shift its past policies and 
undertake a signiﬁ cant nuclear buildup.
Certain Cold War nuclear dynamics seem to be repeating 
themselves in South Asia today. Immediately after their respec-
tive nuclear tests in May 1998, India and Pakistan both announced 
that they would not repeat the mistakes of the superpowers in 
building ever-larger nuclear arsenals. Since then, however, India 
has enunciated a nuclear triad doctrine that will require the devel-
opment of additional nuclear weapons to be deployed on aircraft, 
submarines, and land-based missiles. Pakistan has stated it will 
try to match India’s deployments. In practice, then, it seems that 
state leaders frequently believe an enemy will not ﬁ nd their pos-
session of a few dozen nuclear weapons—however deployed—
credible as a deterrent. Whether this is an accurate perception of 
the enemy’s thinking or more of a psychological projection is, of 
course, debatable. But given the ability of nuclear states to pro-
duce more ﬁ ssile material (plutonium and highly enriched ura-
nium) and their desire to maintain the support of their nuclear 
scientists (who want to continue experimentation) and their mili-
taries (each branch of which often wants its own nuclear force), 
pressures to develop larger and more dispersed arsenals can be 
very strong. These forces, in turn, make the process of reversing 
direction and engaging in arms reduction very difﬁ cult once the 
weapons are deployed.
In 2006, deployed strategic nuclear weapons (meant for use 
against enemy nuclear and military forces, industries, and popu-
lation centers, as distinguished from short-range tactical nuclear 
weapons meant for use on the battleﬁ eld) among the world’s nine 
nuclear powers consisted of about 9,000 warheads altogether. 
This estimate includes 5,236 strategic warheads for the United 
States; 3,500 for Russia; 348 for France, 192 for Britain; about 130 
for China, fewer than 100 each for Israel, India, and Pakistan; and 
about 4 for North Korea (Norris and Kristensen 2006).  But beyond 
How Many Nuclear Weapons Are “Enough”? 47

48 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
these numbers, various countries (particularly the United States 
and Russia) also have several thousand additional strategic and 
tactical warheads in their reserve stockpiles, numbering approxi-
mately 18,000 weapons. Approximately 480 U.S. tactical nuclear 
weapons remain deployed in North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO) countries, representing the only weapons now stationed 
outside their country of origin.
Current plans under the Moscow Treaty call for the United 
States and Russia to reduce their strategic weapons to 1,700–2,200 
deployed warheads, excluding those in the reserve stockpile and 
on delivery systems (including bombers, missiles, and subma-
rines) undergoing repairs, thus putting the actual ceiling at around 
2,500. These parallel reductions pledged by presidents George W. 
Bush and Vladimir Putin are to be achieved over a period of years 
and represent only a minor reduction from the levels of 3,000–3,500 
warheads agreed to in the now-bypassed second Strategic Arms 
Reduction Treaty. However, it is likely that the two sides, either 
together or unilaterally, will seek to deploy fewer weapons after 
the Moscow Treaty’s implementation date of 2012. The opposite is 
also possible, given the absence in the treaty of a requirement for 
warheads taken out of service to be dismantled (at U.S. insistence, 
given Washington’s uncertainty about its future strategic plans). 
Although these ﬁ gures indicate progress toward deep reduc-
tions compared with Cold War numbers, some critics question 
whether these levels are low enough. A document issued by the 
Natural Resources Defense Council in 2001 reported on a detailed, 
independent study of the casualties that could be inﬂ icted on Rus-
sia by one U.S. nuclear submarine carrying 192 nuclear weapons. 
The assessment estimated that 50 million Russians would be 
killed or injured, suggesting that a U.S. arsenal of fewer than 200 
warheads alone could accomplish the U.S. goal of effective deter-
rence. Yet the report generated little public or congressional sup-
port for such dramatic reductions. Why should that be the case?
Given the uncertainty of exactly how many nuclear weapons 
are enough to deter, combined with the pressures within Congress 
and the U.S. military to uphold their responsibility to defend the 
country, U.S. leaders thus far have tended to err on the side of 
caution, meaning more than 1,500 deployed weapons. Such 
nuclear policies, however, seem to contradict statements by 
administration ofﬁ cials that the most serious threats to U.S. secu-
rity are posed by states such as Iran and North Korea and terror-

ists groups that are believed to be “undeterrable” with nuclear 
weapons. Similarly, despite Russia’s transition away from com-
munist rule, its adoption of a more representative government, 
and its improved relations with both the United States and China 
over the past ﬁ fteen years, Moscow continues to base its security 
on the possession of large numbers of nuclear weapons. In fact, 
Russia is relying even more heavily on its nuclear forces than dur-
ing the Cold War because of problems in maintaining large con-
ventional forces and accompanying military personnel. Russian 
President Vladimir Putin has stated that terrorism represents the 
most serious security threat facing his country today. Yet Russia’s 
continued possession of large numbers of nuclear weapons and 
dozens of sites with ﬁ ssile material, ironically, only worsens that 
threat. 
Given current, deeply ingrained beliefs about nuclear weap-
ons and only limited interest in deep reductions within the United 
States and Russia, the challenge of moving to levels below 1,000 
nuclear weapons in either country—let alone less than 100—will 
require the establishment of new national and possibly interna-
tional security frameworks and understandings. In the absence 
of these conditions, there is likely to be only incremental progress 
toward nuclear reductions, as there has not been a fundamental 
shift in thinking regarding the acceptability of nuclear weapons. 
But this poses nonproliferation dilemmas, whether the weapon 
states admit it or not. As journalist and historian Selig Harrison 
writes, “Why should other countries forswear the nuclear option 
if the existing nuclear powers are upgrading their nuclear arsenals, 
talk openly of using them in future wars, and no longer even give 
lip service to the goal of phasing out nuclear armaments...?” (Har-
rison 2006, 1).
But several factors could change the calculations of the cur-
rent weapon states. The ﬁ rst might be the accidental or intentional 
use of a nuclear weapon somewhere in the world. The shock 
of such an event, after more than sixty years without such hor-
rendous damage, could provide the necessary spur to action 
among the world’s population and governments. A second factor 
that may lead to greater nuclear cuts could be a decrease in the 
prestige or perceived utility of nuclear weapons. In the United 
States, for example, the increasing effectiveness of convention-
ally armed precision-guided munitions (particularly those using 
Global Positioning System signals) has made the U.S. military 
How Many Nuclear Weapons Are “Enough”? 49

50 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
increasingly capable of substituting “smart” conventional weap-
ons for previous nuclear weapon missions, such as destroying 
an adversary’s military command-and-control centers. As other 
states acquire these types of weapons, nuclear arms may begin 
to appear as backward and increasingly abhorrent weapons and 
therefore less desirable. Other analysts, however, have speculated 
that advanced conventional weapons in the hands of some states 
may instead increase the desire of other states to develop nuclear 
weapons as an insurance policy against precision attacks. Finally, 
the possible seizure of a nuclear weapon or materials for a radio-
logical dispersion device (RDD) could greatly accelerate states’ 
efforts to reduce their stockpiles of weapons and ﬁ ssile material. 
Given the seriousness of this threat, the factors involved are worth 
further investigation.
How Serious Is the Threat 
of Nuclear Terrorism?
Although many analysts have downplayed the possibility that a 
terrorist group could acquire and/or develop a nuclear weapon, 
there are good reasons to think this is not only a possible but also 
an attractive option for terrorists. An even more serious threat is 
terrorists acquiring radioactive source material for use in an RDD 
(or so-called dirty bomb), which could contaminate large areas of 
a major city and create locally signiﬁ cant health risks (Ferguson et 
al. 2004). Several speciﬁ c factors migh spur terrorist interest in a 
nuclear device.
 
First, there is global fear of nuclear weapons and their devas-
tating destructive capabilities, as well as of the suffering and death 
caused by the radiation they release. These factors may increase 
the allure of nuclear devices to terrorists. Second, although theft 
of a nuclear weapon might seem unlikely because of the extreme 
precautions exercised by most governments, the current existence 
of thousands of nuclear warheads of various sizes and yields in 
the United States, Russia, and seven other countries under varying 
conditions of protection makes the theft or diversion (such as by a 
paid insider) of one bomb a possibility that cannot be discounted. 
Third, even though constructing a complicated nuclear weapon of 
the compact size and enormous yield of the most sophisticated 

U.S. and Russian bombs would be impossible for terrorists, devel-
opment of a crude nuclear weapon from highly enriched uranium 
(HEU) would not be extremely difﬁ cult, even without a team of 
bomb physicists. Constructing an RDD would be relatively sim-
ple, although immediate casualties would likely be limited to the 
effects of the conventional explosive attached to it. 
What materials are most worrisome? Current stockpiles of HEU 
in the world are abundant, representing some 1,900 metric tons of 
material (or enough for about 38,000 nuclear weapons) (Albright 
and Kramer 2004). The “good news” is that the vast majority of 
this material consists of HEU in military hands in the United States 
and Russia, meaning that it is generally under higher security than 
at civilian sites. However, stockpiles of this material continue 
to increase and move into the civilian fuel cycle as weapons are 
dismantled. Civilian HEU stocks consist of about 175 tons world-
wide, including some 125 tons declared as excess to military uses. 
HEU is used as fuel in some 140 civilian nuclear reactors around 
the world. Fresh HEU fuel is highly reactive and can be made to 
explode simply by forcing two small spheres of the material into 
one another using a metal tube and a simple conventional explo-
sive. A rogue state or terrorist would only need to divert about 50 
kilograms of HEU to create a crude, gun-type device. The yield 
of this weapon could be enough to vaporize many city blocks. If 
detonated at ground level in a truck, it would spread clouds of 
radioactive particles for miles from the epicenter, contaminating 
and killing additional thousands of people. Because the security 
of Russian HEU has been a particular concern, the United States 
has spent an average of several hundred million dollars yearly 
since 1991 to help secure Russian ﬁ ssile material through the 
Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction Program. Fortunately, 
conditions have improved, as has Russia’s own capacity to fund 
protective measures. More recently, the Global Threat Reduction 
Initiative, a combined U.S., Russian, and International Atomic 
Energy Agency (IAEA) project, works to convert HEU reactors 
worldwide to low-enriched uranium and to repatriate fresh and 
spent fuel of U.S. and Russian origin to upgraded storage facilities. 
A second material of concern is plutonium. There are an 
estimated 1,855 metric tons of plutonium in global civilian and 
military stockpiles (or enough for 225,000 weapons) (Albright and 
Kramer 2004). Unlike HEU, the bulk of available plutonium (some 
1,600 metric tons) is at civilian facilities. Fortunately, most of this 
How Serious Is the Threat of Nuclear Terrorism? 51

52 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
plutonium is not in separated (bomb ready) form, but instead is in 
radioactive spent fuel. Thus, it would need to be reprocessed (usu-
ally via arduous and toxic chemical methods). A smaller quantity 
of plutonium is contained in mixed-oxide (MOX) reactor fuel for 
use in light-water power reactors. It would be difﬁ cult for a ter-
rorist group to seize either spent or MOX fuel and to separate out 
the plutonium for a bomb, but certainly not impossible. Perhaps 
the most vulnerable period is in the transit of these materials from 
reactors to reprocessing facilities, sometimes via ship. With pluto-
nium, only about 8 kilograms of material would be needed to fab-
ricate a bomb of the approximate yield of the Nagasaki weapon. 
But the engineering challenges of building a plutonium implosion 
device are considerably more complicated than building an HEU 
bomb, given the need for sophisticated triggering devices to cre-
ate a symmetric implosion of the material. 
As mentioned previously, a much easier and possibly more 
attractive option for terrorists might be to build a radiological 
weapon, or dirty bomb. An RDD involves the use of radioactive, 
but not weapons-grade, nuclear material, such as spent nuclear 
fuel, or even medical isotopes, packaged with a conventional 
explosive. A dirty bomb would not cause a nuclear explosion but 
could spread radioactive material across a wide area, contaminat-
ing a large city and spreading fear among its citizens. Besides the 
conventional blast’s effects, hundreds of people could fall sick 
from radiation poisoning (if the material became airborne and was 
inhaled), and sections of the city affected by the radioactive dis-
persion would have to be decontaminated at very high cost, given 
the necessary precautions for handling radioactive debris. Unfor-
tunately, radioactive material is available in signiﬁ cant quanti-
ties at thousands of sites worldwide under varying conditions 
of security, as well as in trace amounts in many widely available 
commercial products. Because of their radioactive properties, the 
materials of greatest concern are americium 241, californium 252, 
cesium 137, cobalt 60, iridium 192, plutonium 238, radium 226, 
and strontium 90 (Ferguson et al. 2004, 262). The risk that these 
materials could be diverted and used in an RDD has stimulated 
a number of government actions to mitigate chances of their sei-
zure by terrorists and their transit across borders. IAEA, U.S. gov-
ernment, and other technical programs to increase safeguards at 
nuclear facilities, expand the number of states possessing portal-

monitoring equipment (such as radiation detectors), improve port 
security, and provide training to border guards and other ofﬁ cials 
are working to reduce these threats. But such actions are still inad-
equate, given the large scale of the threat. Terrorist groups such as 
the Aum Shinryko cult in Japan and Osama bin Laden’s al Qaeda 
network are known to have tried to acquire nuclear material for 
these purposes in the past.
Finally, besides explosive devices, terrorists might also use 
radioactive material to contaminate water or food supplies or harm 
an ofﬁ cial or member of a target organization. Although the num-
ber of casualties would be much lower, public fears could be raised 
exponentially by such attacks, spreading chaos, disrupting com-
munities, and harming local and national economies. Fortunately, 
gaining access to nuclear materials is more complicated for terror-
ists than acquiring or manufacturing chemical or biological agents, 
which have already been used in terrorist attacks (such as with 
anthrax after 9/11). But the use of radioactive polonium 210 to kill 
former Russian intelligence ofﬁ cer Alexander Litvinenko in Lon-
don in late 2006 may be the ﬁ rst indicator of a wider effort to use 
such materials. Nonﬁ ssile materials such as polonium are also eas-
ier to obtain legally than substances that could be used for a bomb. 
Indeed, states with nuclear industries (or individuals within them) 
with some sympathies to the aims of terrorist groups or criminals 
might help them acquire radioactive substances for the purpose of 
contract killings or spreading fear. For these reasons, greater coop-
eration is needed among states possessing nuclear facilities of all 
types and local, national, and international law enforcement orga-
nizations. Efforts to move in this direction include the U.S.-led Pro-
liferation Security Initiative, United Nations (UN) Security Council 
Resolution 1540, and the 2005 International Convention for the 
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
Environmental and Health Effects 
of Nuclear Weapon Production
The large nuclear weapons complexes in the United States and 
Soviet Union were created at great speed and under the belief that 
attack from the other side could occur at any moment. Both had 
Environmental and Health Effects of Nuclear Weapon Production 53

54 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
their roots in World War II facilities, but these sites expanded dra-
matically during the late 1940s and 1950s. Indeed, building nuclear 
weapons became one of the major postwar economic undertakings 
of both countries, requiring vast investments of money, energy, per-
sonnel, land, and material. (In 1956, for example, facilities under 
the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission consumed 12 percent of the 
total electricity produced in the United States [Schwartz 1998, 356].) 
But the priority in both countries—as well as in other countries that 
developed the bomb—was ﬁ rst and foremost national security; 
thus, environmental and health consequences took a distant second 
place in the ranking of priorities. As environmental expert Arjun 
Makhijani (2005, 20) writes, “It is a remarkable fact of nuclear weap-
ons history and radiation risk that every nuclear-weapon state has 
ﬁ rst of all harmed its own people in the name of national security. 
For the most part, they have done so without informed consent.”
As a result of this attitude, the handling of hazardous radio-
active waste was often casual and poorly planned, leading to 
widespread contamination of signiﬁ cant areas of both countries. 
Materials were stored in leaky containers or simply dumped in 
landﬁ lls with no protection from the elements; radionuclides often 
migrated with rain down into the local water table. At the Han-
ford nuclear facility in eastern Washington State (where the United 
States produced much of the plutonium used in its early nuclear 
weapons), plant operators intentionally dumped more than 120 
million gallons of liquid radioactive waste into the ground from 
1946 to 1966 (Schwartz 1998, 361). Similarly, the long-term effects 
of handling radioactive and other hazardous materials were often 
not explained fully to workers at nuclear plants or residents in 
the surrounding areas, resulting in many health problems and 
higher rates of cancer. In the Soviet Union, prison camp laborers 
were sometimes forced to conduct hazardous activities (such as 
uranium mining) with no protection whatsoever; many died in a 
matter of months and were simply replaced by other prisoners.
The general populations in both countries and, indeed, 
much of the rest of the world received above-background doses 
of radioactivity as a result of fallout from widespread aboveg-
round nuclear testing from 1945 through 1963. Ironically, the U.S. 
government secretly warned the Eastman Kodak Company of 
impending nuclear tests to avoid commercial lawsuits for dam-
age to unexposed ﬁ lm thousands of miles away from the Nevada 

test site, but the general public received no such warnings regard-
ing radiation that passed into their systems from airborne fall -
out or by ingesting milk or other animal products from livestock 
that had consumed plants contaminated with radioactivity. One 
study estimates that between 70,000 and 800,000 people will die 
prematurely from cancers caused by atmospheric nuclear test-
ing before the signing of the Limited Test Ban Treaty in 1963, 
which required the United States and Soviet Union to halt above 
ground nuclear testing (Schwartz 1998, 395). It is clear that both 
governments knew about these problems, yet strict state secrecy, 
maintained in the name of national security, kept public opposi-
tion relatively limited until the late 1950s. After 1963, global anti-
nuclear protests based on health concerns diminished, although 
many local communities near nuclear facilities continued to 
wrestle with leaks and other releases of radioactivity into their 
groundwater and surrounding airspace. The record in the Soviet 
Union was far worse in this regard given the greater lack of public 
information and opportunities for meaningful protest.
Even in the United States, however, ignorance remained a key 
reason for the lack of more public opposition and calls for oversight. 
Part of the reason for limited public knowledge was the failure of 
Congress to exercise adequate oversight of the nuclear infrastruc-
ture. During the 1950s, for example, it was considered unpatriotic 
to do so, and members who questioned the Atomic Energy Com-
mission’s nuclear policies risked criticism as communist sympa-
thizers. In certain U.S. communities surrounding nuclear plants, 
moreover, the largesse expended by government agencies made 
citizens leery of opposing the activities at local plants, fearing that 
the shutdown of facilities would mean the loss of high-paying jobs. 
Even after two serious ﬁ res at the plutonium-processing facility at 
Rocky Flats, Colorado, in 1957 and 1969, workers remained rela-
tively quiet, and the Atomic Energy Commission was able to keep 
information about the gravity of incidents from the general public 
(Ackland 1999). Thus, a situation of relative neglect of environ-
mental and health concerns characterized most nuclear facilities 
even in the United States until the mid-1970s, when environmen-
tal legislation began to force the government to provide more 
information to the public.
The result is a legacy of improperly stored nuclear waste at 
many facilities that U.S. taxpayers are now paying to clean up. 
Environmental and Health Effects of Nuclear Weapon Production 55

56 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
At the Hanford facility, for example, efforts to halt leaks of liq-
uid radioactive wastes from storage tanks and the remediation of 
buildings cost the government some $400 million annually, part 
of a multibillion-dollar national cleanup bill each year. In the for-
mer Soviet Union, remedial action has been much more limited 
because of the lack of ﬁ nancial resources, although some foreign 
assistance has been received from, for example, the United States, 
Norway, and Japan. Most surviving victims of U.S. radiation poi-
soning, ranging from Paciﬁ c Islanders affected by nuclear testing 
to ranchers living near the Nevada Test Site to workers who han-
dled nuclear materials at Rocky Flats to orphans given doses of 
uranium in secret government tests during the 1950s, have only 
recently begun receiving compensation. Victims in the former 
Soviet Union are still waiting.
Why Haven’t Nuclear Weapons 
Spread to More Countries?
During the 1950s, national leaders (together with many politi-
cal scientists and strategists) assumed that whatever states could
master nuclear power technology would also develop nuclear 
weapons in due course. In 1961, a secret report to President John 
Kennedy predicted that there would be as many as ﬁ fteen nuclear 
weapon states by 1975. But these predictions were not realized. 
Why is this so? Analysts provide differing assessments.
Among the so-called realist school, there was widespread 
belief during the Cold War that the main reason for nuclear 
restraint was the nuclear security guarantees provided by the 
United States and Soviet Union to their allies and friends. With 
the end of the Cold War, this argument still has resonance for 
many NATO countries as well as U.S. allies in Asia (such as Japan 
and South Korea).
A second perspective on this issue, however, argues that 
most states simply do not want to possess nuclear weapons, even 
though they could. These authors, such as Mitchell Reiss (1995), 
note that nuclear weapon possession comes with a great many 
diplomatic, ﬁ nancial, and environmental costs. It also exposes 
countries to possible military attack during the years it takes to 

make their ﬁ rst bomb and subsequently makes those countries 
more likely targets of other nuclear weapon states. In 2003, Libya 
decided to dismantle its nuclear weapon program largely, it 
appears, because of the ﬁ nancial and political trade-offs it faced 
for pursuing weapons of mass destruction compared with receiv-
ing foreign investment and developing its economy. South Africa 
seems to have made a similar decision.
Finally, a third perspective on this issue is that international 
treaties have helped slow or halt the development of nuclear 
weapons in many states. Regimes such as the NPT raise the costs 
of proliferation by making weapons technology much more dif-
ﬁ cult to obtain because of export controls and the challenges of 
trying to cheat on international inspections. For example, the 
results of U.S. intelligence studies conducted after the 2003 Iraq 
war showed that, to the surprise of many critics, the system of 
UN sanctions and on-site inspections had effectively ended Iraq’s 
nuclear program after 1991. Other states are more concerned 
about their international reputations and the political impact of 
violating the international antinuclear taboo.
Although it is difﬁ cult to assert deﬁ nitively which of the var-
ious schools of thought is correct, one observation can be made: 
Only 10 states—out of some 190 in the world today—have ever 
developed nuclear weapons (one, South Africa, no longer has such 
weapons). Thus, many countries with the scientiﬁ c know-how to 
build nuclear weapons have chosen, for whatever reason, not to 
do so. Whether the number of nuclear weapon states will increase 
or decrease over time is difﬁ cult to predict. Beyond the countries 
already known to possess them, international suspicions have been 
raised about the long-term intentions of some countries, such as 
Iran, in regard to nuclear weapons. However, nuclear weapon pro-
grams generally require many years to develop the material, tech-
nology, and design information needed to deploy actual weapons. 
Normally, a plutonium bomb also needs to be tested because of 
the greater complexity of its design. This is usually a highly trans-
parent event, as evidenced by the widespread detection of North 
Korea’s very-low-yield (estimated at half a kiloton) plutonium 
bomb test in October 2006. For an HEU weapon, testing may not 
be required to ensure that a weapon design will work, but evidence 
of the large-scale uranium reprocessing facilities needed to create 
enough weapons-grade material is difﬁ cult to keep hidden. Still, 
Why Haven’t Nuclear Weapons Spread to More Countries? 57

58 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
deception is conceivable. But the status of a country’s bomb pro-
gram will generally remain ambiguous without a nuclear test. It 
is not clear, for example, whether South Africa (which gave up its 
nuclear weapons) or Israel (which is believed to have possessed 
nuclear weapons since the late 1960s) ever conducted a test. The 
absence of such an obvious event helped both countries maintain 
deniability of nuclear weapon capability for years. For a thermo-
nuclear weapon, however, a test is normally required to verify 
that a particular design will work.
Another possible restraint on proliferation is the fact that 
all other countries today (with the exception of India, Pakistan, 
Israel, and North Korea) maintain legal obligations not to develop 
nuclear weapons as part of their membership in the NPT. If such 
states abide by the NPT, they have to provide at least three months’ 
notice of any future intention to withdraw from the treaty. Crit-
ics, pointing to the covert weapon development activities of NPT 
members Iraq, North Korea, and Iran, argue that such agreements 
are made to be broken and that existing measures to verify the 
peaceful nature of civilian nuclear programs are inadequate to 
uncover secret weapon facilities. Following the ﬁ rst Gulf war, 
for example, inspectors with the UN Special Commission on Iraq 
discovered that Iraq had built nuclear facilities underground and 
sought to camouﬂ age other facilities through a variety of means.  
The IAEA’s failure to uncover Iran’s Natanz facilities before satel-
lite photographs publicly revealed its clandestine nuclear activi-
ties shows the continued ability of states to conceal underground 
facilities, at least in some circumstances. The fear of discovery 
seems to decrease among states that are already isolated from the 
international community and doubt the ability of the regime to 
improve their security.
Supporters of the NPT regime argue that the norm against 
nuclear development is still strong today among the vast majority 
of states. Although Japan has faced strong pressures recently—
in the wake of North Korea’s nuclear test—to move in the direc-
tion of a nuclear weapons program, concern about international 
political censure, trade and economic costs, and the disruption 
of Japan’s military alliance with the United States all act as deter-
rents to any decision to withdraw from the NPT and develop 
nuclear weapons. Many other states, as long as international non-
proliferation norms are maintained, continue to be affected by 
similar factors.

The Debate 
on the Comprehensive 
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Although the Limited Test Ban Treaty halted nuclear testing in 
the atmosphere, at sea, and in space by the early 1960s, the major 
nuclear powers continued nuclear testing underground until the 
mid-1990s. Hoping to slow proliferation and limit the develop-
ment of new classes of nuclear weapons by those already possess-
ing such bombs, in 1996 the key nuclear powers (including the 
United States and Russia) negotiated the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) in Geneva. The CTBT seeks to halt nuclear 
testing once and for all, banning underground testing and estab-
lishing a worldwide veriﬁ cation system that uses multiple-sensor 
technologies (including seismic monitors and hydro-acoustic sta-
tions) to detect any suspect explosions. The Vienna-based CTBT 
organization is supervising these activities. Stations around the 
world are already sending veriﬁ cation data, which is available 
to signatory countries. Russia, France, and Great Britain, among 
dozens of other states, have now signed and ratiﬁ ed the treaty. 
Other key signatories have not ratiﬁ ed it, however, including 
China, Iran, Israel, and the United States. Several other states with 
nuclear weapons (India, Pakistan, and North Korea) have failed 
even to sign the agreement. Taken together, forty-four nuclear-
capable states are required to sign and ratify the agreement before 
it becomes legally binding. As of early 2007, only thirty-four had 
done so. 
 
Supporters of the agreement argue that the CTBT will make 
it nearly impossible for any additional nuclear power to arise by 
preventing states from testing their prototype weapon designs. 
According to this logic, if states cannot test they will be impeded 
from developing nuclear weapons, particularly more sophis-
ticated designs that are small and light enough for delivery on 
long-range missiles. In addition, supporters argue that existing 
nuclear states will be unable to develop new kinds of weapons 
without additional testing, thereby furthering progress toward 
the NPT’s goal of eventual nuclear disarmament.
However, in 1999 the U.S. Senate voted to reject the CTBT on 
the grounds that it was not veriﬁ able and that the United States 
The Debate on the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 59

60 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
might want to test in the future to ensure the reliability and safety 
of its nuclear arsenal as it ages. Speciﬁ cally, some U.S. scientists 
and military leaders testiﬁ ed that the United States would prob-
ably be unable to detect very-low-yield nuclear tests. This deﬁ -
ciency might allow China and Russia to maintain and improve 
their arsenals and allow new states to conduct ﬁ rst tests while 
the United States continued to honor its no-test commitment. 
Supporters argued that challenge inspections permitted under 
the CTBT could be made against China and Russia; they also 
pointed out that new nuclear states would not be sophisticated 
enough to develop small nuclear weapons at the outset. But the 
dissenters won the day in what was an abbreviated debate led by 
Senate Republicans opposed to President Bill Clinton’s foreign 
policy objectives. Ironically, the United States had already devel-
oped supercomputers to model nuclear tests and had shared 
this technology with Britain and France to help secure their rati -
ﬁ cations. Given the importance of the CTBT to global nonprolif-
eration and the marginal beneﬁ ts of further testing, a committee 
appointed by President Clinton and headed by retired General 
John Shalikashvili concluded in a January 2001 report that ratify-
ing the treaty would serve U.S. security interests.
In the latest U.S. debate about revisiting the treaty vote, how-
ever, the George W. Bush administration stated that it opposed the 
treaty. Its rationale was based less on veriﬁ cation problems than on 
the claim that the CTBT would limit future U.S. weapon options. 
Given the shift in U.S. attentions from the established nuclear 
powers to small nuclear programs in so-called rogue states and 
terrorist groups using underground facilities, the Bush admin-
istration wants to hold open the future option of testing small 
nuclear devices, including new, more reliable warhead designs 
and possible earth-penetrating weapons for counterproliferation 
and counterterrorist missions. Critics of keeping this option open 
argue that this sends the wrong signal to the world community 
regarding nuclear weapons and will encourage future testing by 
other states (such as India, Pakistan, and North Korea), as well as 
possible defections by states that have already ratiﬁ ed the treaty 
(such as Russia). The Bush administration also cites concerns about 
the age of the stockpile and the loss of technical skills in the U.S. 
nuclear laboratories needed for bomb making if testing is forever 
halted. The United States currently maintains a nuclear test mora-
torium, although it continues to conduct periodic subcritical tests 

of nuclear bomb components (i.e., explosions without a nuclear 
yield) allowed under the letter (if not the spirit) of the treaty. Thus, 
it appears that any further U.S. consideration of the CTBT will not 
occur until at least 2008. Given the continued unwillingness of 
other states—such as China, India, Pakistan, and North Korea—to 
ratify the treaty, its legal entry into force is effectively blocked, at 
least under existing rules. However, the monitoring system estab-
lished under the treaty is functioning and successfully detected 
the seismic activity associated with North Korea’s low-yield test 
in October 2006.
Civilian Nuclear Energy 
Promotion versus 
Nonproliferation Goals
Since the time of the U.S. Atoms for Peace program in the 1950s, 
an ongoing dilemma for nuclear nonproliferation efforts has been 
how to prevent states from developing nuclear weapons while 
allowing them to enjoy the beneﬁ ts of civilian nuclear technol-
ogy. President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s Atoms for Peace program 
helped some 40 countries develop nuclear power and research 
programs, while receiving pledges from all that such materials 
and technologies would not be diverted to weapons uses. But the 
inadequacy of safeguards and the willingness of some countries 
to cheat on their obligations led to weapons proliferation in a few 
cases, such as with India. Similar principles, albeit with stricter 
safeguards requirements, ended up as one of the main principles 
of the NPT “bargain” in 1968: that all states willing to give up 
their right to nuclear weapons should be granted access to peace-
ful nuclear technology, particularly for power generation. Indeed, 
Article IV of the NPT makes this right explicit, stating, “Nothing 
in this Treaty shall be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right 
of all the Parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and 
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimi-
nation.” The treaty therefore allows states in good standing to 
acquire the full nuclear fuel cycle—including nuclear enrichment 
and reprocessing facilities—as long as they accept safeguards 
and do not attempt to divert material or technology to a nuclear 
weapon program. 
Civilian Nuclear Energy Promotion versus Nonproliferation Goals 61

62 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Unfortunately, by acquiring such technologies, non–nuclear 
weapon states can develop the capability to produce weapons-
grade material, creating conditions of “virtual” nuclear weapon 
proliferation. Some analysts argue that Japan is in this posi-
tion today, given its large stockpile of civilian plutonium (about 
40 tons), which could be diverted to bomb-making purposes if 
Japan were to decide to withdraw from the treaty. Much of this 
material was reprocessed by companies in France and Belgium 
from Japanese spent reactor fuel and shipped back to Japan. But 
today Japan has its own reprocessing facilities and can conduct 
such work on its own. Iran is another country that has sought to 
achieve a full nuclear fuel cycle capability—the ability to create 
enriched nuclear fuel. It is still far behind Japan in terms of its 
ability to create weapons-grade material, and its stockpile of even 
low-enriched material is still tiny, but Iran’s support for terror-
ist organizations in the Middle East and its president’s continued 
threatening statements about Israel make many countries wor-
ried that Iran might act aggressively if it succeeded in building 
a bomb. The IAEA has noted on several occasions Iran’s failure 
to provide full declarations of its nuclear facilities and access to 
suspected sites. For this reason, many NPT member states want 
Iran’s nuclear program limited to having to purchase enriched 
reactor fuel from outside the country. Iran, however, has asserted 
its right to enrich uranium and develop a full nuclear fuel cycle 
to ensure its future energy independence. Iran’s government 
has denied any weapons intentions, thus putting NPT members 
in a quandary. States like Russia want to continue to trade with 
Iran, as it is an NPT member and cannot be discriminated against 
according to Article IV of the treaty. The United States and other 
countries believe providing enrichment technology to Iran raises 
its capability to produce nuclear weapons. Most NPT states have 
agreed with the U.S. approach, which is why they—along with 
Russia—supported a set of political, economic, and military sanc-
tions against Iran in 2006 over gaps in its NPT declarations and 
its insistence on building a full nuclear fuel cycle. However, the 
narrow focus of the sanctions allows Russia to continue its ongo-
ing nuclear trade and fails to address activities not directly related 
to a possible nuclear weapon program. Within the NPT, Brazil 
is another state that has periodically asserted its right to enrich 
nuclear fuel, raising concerns among some NPT members regard-
ing its intentions. Thus far, however, Brazil has avoided sanctions 

on its activities because of its willingness to cooperate with the 
IAEA.
How exactly are IAEA sanctions agreed upon and applied?  
According to the NPT, the IAEA can appeal to the UN Security 
Council to sanction states found in violation of their nuclear safe-
guards or other NPT agreements (such as diverting material or 
operating undeclared sites). The dilemma for NPT states is that 
the denial of technology even to states with blemishes on their 
safeguards records can weaken the consensus that underlies the 
treaty among non–nuclear weapon states. But the risk of such trade 
is that it can bring a potential proliferator closer to the capability 
of building nuclear weapons. Supplier states (like Russia) have 
insisted that Iran’s rights outweigh the minor violations in its past 
declarations of its nuclear facilities. Of course, such nuclear trade 
provides signiﬁ cant cash to Russia’s nuclear industry, providing 
an obvious conﬂ ict of interest. 
Still, a question arises: Why not amend the NPT to remove 
the language from Article IV guaranteeing the right of all mem-
bers to nuclear technology? Why not alter the language to exclude 
reprocessing and enrichment technologies, or guarantee access 
only to power-generation technology (which could, in some cases, 
be non-nuclear)? Negotiating a revision of the treaty to close this 
loophole, unfortunately, would be very complicated politically, 
as some countries are already well advanced and are deemed 
trustworthy. Their activities would have to be grandfathered 
in, while future capabilities would have to be denied. This sets 
up another double standard in an agreement that non–nuclear 
weapon states already believe to be fundamentally discrimina-
tory, because it fails to specify when the nuclear weapon states 
must give up their nuclear arms. In all likelihood, opening up 
the NPT for amendment would lead to efforts by non–nuclear 
weapon states to close what they see as a loophole in Article VI 
(dealing with nuclear disarmament requirements) and assigning 
a time-bound framework for states to give up their nuclear weap-
ons. Given the differing interests of states, such difﬁ cult negotia-
tions might spell the death-knell of the NPT itself. For this reason, 
such a route to strengthening the treaty has been avoided thus far. 
Another option, which has been raised by a number of states and 
non governmental organizations alike, would be to open up an 
international nuclear “fuel bank” to provide low-enriched reactor 
fuel on demand to states in good standing with the NPT. Such an 
Civilian Nuclear Energy Promotion versus Nonproliferation Goals 63

64 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
initiative would remove incentives for national nuclear fuel pro-
grams. Unfortunately, some of the critical states whose behavior 
the proposal is meant to inﬂ uence (such as Iran) have opposed 
this effort as a means of limiting their nuclear independence, set-
ting up a double standard, and violating their stated rights to a 
full fuel cycle under the NPT. 
Another area where the NPT has been challenged in recent 
years is that of trade by NPT members with parties outside the 
treaty. However, Russia is not alone in acting in what it sees as 
its broader strategic and commercial interests in trading with 
countries such as India. After years of taking a hard line against 
nuclear trade with nonmembers of the NPT—as required by the 
treaty—the Bush administration changed U.S. policy to allow 
nuclear trade with India (provided certain conditions are met) 
in December 2006. The U.S. government stated that India’s sta-
tus as a democracy and its past good behavior in the area of non-
proliferation merited such a shift, although some observers saw 
this move as motivated more by its desire for commercial gain 
from sales of nuclear technology and political support for its 
war on terrorism. Russia readily embraced the U.S. shift by 
expanding its nuclear trade with India. France and other nuclear 
suppliers welcomed the move as well, thus calling into question 
the exclusionary clauses of the NPT by making available pre -
viously denied nuclear technology. China responded by announc-
ing a similar deal with non-NPT member Pakistan. Given the 
nuclear tests in both India and Pakistan in 1998, these moves may 
simply represent an effort to deal with nuclear reality in these 
countries, but the willingness of major NPT nuclear suppliers 
to go around the treaty puts its core nonproliferation values and 
mission in jeopardy. A related problem is the ability of new sup-
pliers outside the NPT, such as Pakistan’s A. Q. Khan, to subvert 
the NPT by trading in bomb-related technologies with NPT mem-
bers (Corera 2006).
If the recent past is any indication, the NPT faces consider-
able future challenges. The 2005 NPT Review Conference ended 
without a consensus document among states on how well the 
treaty is being implemented and how to move forward to promote 
nonproliferation objectives in the future (Simpson and Nielsen 
2005). Various ﬁ ssures exist. One is a difference in interpretation 
between states that want near-term nuclear disarmament by the 
weapon states and those countries (including the United States) 

that want stricter controls against new proliferants. Another is a 
variance between those who want the inalienable right to a full 
fuel cycle and those who believe such capabilities put states too 
close to a nuclear weapon. The next NPT Review Conference will 
take place in 2010, although Preparatory Committee meetings to 
be held in 2008 and 2009 will likely give some indication of the 
prospects for success at that conference of members. One solution 
to avoid future disputes among the parties to the treaty might be 
to get all of the weapon states (NPT and non-NPT members) into 
discussions about how to move forward with actual nuclear dis-
armament (Harrison 2006).
Efforts to Eliminate 
Nuclear Weapons
Over time, state actors and various nongovernmental organiza-
tions have led periodic efforts aimed at complete nuclear disar-
mament. In the 1950s, leading activists and celebrities headed a 
strong movement to ban the bomb, focusing public attention on 
the health threats posed by extensive aboveground nuclear tests 
being conducted at the time. After the Limited Test Ban Treaty 
restricted nuclear testing by the United States, the Soviet Union, 
and Great Britain to underground explosions, the threat of air-
borne radiation dropped signiﬁ cantly. As a result, the popular 
movement for nuclear abolition waned.
During the 1960s, state efforts led to the negotiation and sign-
ing of the NPT in 1968, which entered into force in 1970. As part 
of their membership in the NPT, all non–nuclear weapon states 
pledged to refrain from acquiring and developing nuclear weap-
ons; the ﬁ ve states that had already tested nuclear weapons by 
1968 (the United States, Russia, China, France, and Great Britain) 
pledged to work toward ending the arms race and eventually 
eliminate their nuclear stockpiles. (France and China, however, 
refrained from entering the treaty until the 1990s.) The agreement 
encouraged many states that had once considered developing 
nuclear weapons (including Australia, Switzerland, and Swe-
den, among others) to give up past nuclear weapon programs 
and accept non–nuclear weapon status. Yet there was no enforce-
ment mechanism for the disarmament pledge of the weapon 
Efforts to Eliminate Nuclear Weapons 65

66 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
states, except for the weight of world public opinion and the pos-
sible threat of dissatisﬁ ed member states to give three months’ 
notice and withdraw from the treaty. Recent efforts to sanction 
North Korea for its nuclear weapons activities, for example, have 
resulted mainly in compromise gestures among critical trading 
states (such as China and South Korea), thus limiting the eco-
nomic impact of the intended nonproliferation sanctions.
Besides the NPT, perhaps the most signiﬁ cant progress toward 
nuclear elimination during the Cold War was the development of 
several nuclear-weapon-free zones. These state-led regional efforts 
created entire continents or other areas where nuclear weapons 
could not be built, stationed, or tested. These efforts included the 
Antarctic Treaty (1961), the Outer Space Treaty (1967), the Treaty 
of Tlatelolco (1967, covering Latin America), and the Seabed 
Treaty (1971).
During the early 1970s, the détente era between the United 
States and the Soviet Union led to arms control agreements and 
the creation of several measures to increase nuclear safety as 
well as stability during crises. This progress kept protests against 
nuclear weapons to a minimum during the 1970s, although 
increasing environmental concerns in the United States led to 
signiﬁ cant localized efforts to ban nuclear activities at highly 
contaminated facilities like the Nevada Test Site and the plutonium-
processing plant at Rocky Flats, Colorado. 
In the 1980s, however, the renewed buildup of U.S. and Soviet 
nuclear forces stimulated the development of a much broader, pop-
ularly led nuclear freeze movement. This effort revived many of 
the themes of earlier test-ban protests but focused more attention 
on halting the U.S.-Soviet arms race than on eliminating nuclear 
weapons entirely. Many religious organizations sup ported this 
movement, which received considerable public attention and even-
tually inﬂ uenced policymaking in the U.S. Congress. Elsewhere, 
the continuation of French nuclear testing in the South Paciﬁ c 
revived interest in banning the bomb. In 1985, shared opposition 
among the countries of this region created the Treaty of Rarotonga, 
a nuclear-weapon-free zone covering Australia, New Zealand, 
and a number of island countries, including the surrounding seas. 
Although the nuclear weapon states did not immediately recog-
nize the zone, continued pressure helped limit nuclear testing 
and raised international awareness of this ongoing problem. The 
nuclear freeze movement eventually made some headway in con-

gressional resolutions and restrictions on testing of the Strategic 
Defense Initiative to prevent a countervailing Soviet buildup. But 
changes in the Soviet Union under Mikhail Gorbachev began to 
reduce the need for such a movement, as the thaw in U.S.-Soviet 
relations that he engineered with President Reagan ushered in 
a new period of arms control. In the late 1980s, the two super-
powers agreed to eliminate their intermediate-range nuclear 
weapons in Europe and began negotiating deep cuts in strategic 
nuclear arsenals. However, a ﬂ eeting chance to agree to a timeta-
ble on total nuclear disarmament at the Reagan-Gorbachev sum-
mit in Reykjavik collapsed because of U.S. insistence (and Soviet 
rejection) of its right to test space-based missile defenses.
After the breakup of the Soviet Union in December 1991, a 
new movement arose, aimed at complete nuclear elimination. 
The voluntary nuclear disarmament of South Africa, Belarus, 
Kazakhstan, and Ukraine gave added support to the concept 
that the spread of nuclear weapons was not an inevitable process 
and could indeed be reversed. States in Southeast Asia (Treaty of 
Bangkok, signed in 1995), Africa (Treaty of Pelindaba, signed in 
1996), and Central Asia (Semipalatinsk Treaty, signed in 2006) cre-
ated nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties, indicating the continued 
interest of many countries in establishing regional arrangements 
to eliminate nuclear weapons and to prevent outside states from 
introducing them into their areas. Members of the NPT agreed to 
extend the treaty indeﬁ nitely in 1995, obtaining a pledge from the 
nuclear weapon states that they would make enhanced efforts to 
reduce their nuclear arms and work toward disarmament. 
Other calls for nuclear elimination came from the 1996 Can-
berra Commission of international experts who drafted a ﬁ nal 
document spelling out how step-by-step progress by the nuclear 
weapon states could achieve eventual nuclear disarmament. Soon 
after, a group of retired U.S. and Russian military leaders, led by 
retired U.S. generals Andrew Goodpaster and Lee Butler, issued a 
letter calling for the phased elimination of nuclear weapons. But 
the South Asia nuclear tests in May 1998 and the failure of the 
CTBT to enter into force took the wind out of such popular move-
ments. Similarly, the rise of new terrorist threats since 2001, the 
North Korean nuclear test, and Iran’s apparent progress toward a 
full nuclear fuel cycle seem to have reduced the number of nuclear 
weapon states interested in pushing the issue forward on a prior-
ity basis. Only in the United Kingdom did a serious debate on 
Efforts to Eliminate Nuclear Weapons 67

68 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
the possible phasing out of its nuclear arsenal take place in 2006, 
although largely because of the high cost of building a new gener-
ation of nuclear submarines to replace vessels that are nearing the 
end of their service lives. In late 2006, Prime Minister Tony Blair 
recommended a plan to go forward with the nuclear moderniza-
tion program; and, in March 2007, Parliament overwhelmingly 
voted to rebuild Britain’s ﬂ eet of four nuclear-armed submarines. 
At present, there is no mainstream consensus in the United 
States about the desirability of near-term nuclear weapon elimi-
nation, and few within government circles or the congressional 
delegations of either the Republican or Democratic parties are 
pushing for such action. However, as noted previously, some 
senior retired ofﬁ cials from both parties have called for the United 
States to back nuclear elimination. Internationally, several states 
have called for greater progress toward nuclear disarmament and 
the need to move ahead with the CTBT and a ban on ﬁ ssile mate-
rial production worldwide. To date, however, there has been a 
lack of consensus to carry out such measures. 
Efforts in the early twenty-ﬁ rst century to stimulate wide-
spread popular activism for nuclear weapon elimination have 
not yet gained momentum. Among the populations of the major 
nuclear weapon states, the issue of nuclear elimination has failed 
to rank as a high-priority issue, compared to preventing terror-
ism, reducing crime and corruption, improving national econo-
mies, and other issues. Why is the nuclear issue not higher on 
people’s agendas?
Beyond the impact of the terrorist attacks of 11 September 
2001 and the war in Iraq in turning international attention else-
where, there may be several reasons. First, unlike in the early 
1960s, underground nuclear testing does not threaten human 
health. Second, unlike in the 1980s, a massive buildup of nuclear 
weapons is not taking place in the United States or in Russia. 
Instead, reductions are moving ahead. What proliferation is taking 
place—in countries like North Korea and possibly Iran—seems to 
some observers to merit the retention of nuclear weapons, given 
the extremist nature of these governments. Others argue that these 
regimes are not sensitive to deterrence, which reduces the need 
for nuclear weapons, but, from some vantage points, raises their 
importance for potential warﬁ ghting. The main group calling for 
nuclear elimination consists of non–nuclear weapon states in the 
NPT that believe the continued  presence of nuclear weapons in 

some states in and of itself continues to promote proliferation in 
other countries. 
Skeptics of the practicality of nuclear disarmament argue 
that further proliferation is inevitable, now that the technology 
has been developed. Indeed, authors like Kenneth Waltz have 
even argued that some horizontal nuclear proliferation to other 
countries may be a good thing if it induces caution on these pos-
sessor states (Waltz 1981). Once states acquire nuclear weapons, 
Waltz reasons, they will no longer be insecure and therefore will 
not need to attack enemies to ensure their security. Of course, this 
assumes that such states are by nature nonaggressive and their 
leaders rational. The spread of nuclear weapons to additional 
countries, moreover, may facilitate the access of nuclear materi-
als to global terrorist organizations, which do not share the vul-
nerability of nuclear-armed states and therefore may use nuclear 
materials with abandon. 
Despite the lack of serious efforts toward nuclear disarma-
ment among current nuclear weapon states, many former ofﬁ cials 
and analysts continue to discuss and propose plans for sharp 
nuclear reductions or even complete nuclear elimination. In look-
ing at ﬁ rst steps, former Johnson, Nixon, and Clinton administra-
tion ofﬁ cial Morton H. Halperin suggests, “I would argue that it 
is impossible to come up with a scenario in which we would want 
to ﬁ re anything like 100 nuclear warheads. Therefore, a posture 
that gives us the capacity to ﬁ re up to 100 warheads…is a sufﬁ -
cient number of warheads to have in a posture where the missiles 
could be ﬁ red in hours or days [as opposed to hair trigger alert]” 
(Kimball 2002, 19).  Halperin’s plan calls for a “hedge” force of 
900 warheads in a reserve stockpile, down from many thousands 
today. Other analysts suggest a different approach. Nuclear scien-
tist Sidney D. Drell and former U.S. arms control negotiator James 
E. Goodby propose a plan of reductions that would move Rus-
sia and the United States to 500 warheads immediately (with a 
500-warhead reserve) and then bring the number of operational 
weapons down to 250 weapons within a decade, with all tacti-
cal forces being eliminated (Drell and Goodby 2005). Notably, 
former secretaries of State George P. Shultz and Henry Kissinger, 
former Defense Secretary William Perry, and former Senator Sam 
Nunn go even farther. In a Wall Street Journal column they argue 
that “reliance on nuclear weapons for [deterrence] is becoming 
increasingly hazardous and decreasingly effective” (Shultz et al. 
Efforts to Eliminate Nuclear Weapons 69

70 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
2007). For this reason, they suggest instead establishing the objec-
tive of “a world free of nuclear weapons and working energeti-
cally on the actions required to achieve that goal.”  Former Soviet 
leader Mikhail Gorbachev agrees, stating, “It is becoming clearer 
that nuclear weapons are no longer a means of achieving secu-
rity” (Gorbachev 2007). He calls for a dialogue involving both 
the nuclear weapon states and the non–nuclear weapon states to 
develop a “common concept” for eliminating nuclear weapons. 
At the policymaking level, however, critics of nuclear disar-
mament speak of the difﬁ culty of ensuring that nuclear weapons 
and related technology could be completely destroyed in a man-
ner that would be veriﬁ able. They argue that one could never be 
sure that someone, somewhere, is not hiding a bomb in the base-
ment that could be used to coerce other states. It is also impossible 
to eliminate knowledge of nuclear weapons, which means that 
the risk of a new bomb program would always exist. Supporters 
of nuclear abolition, however, make the case that veriﬁ cation by 
satellite and by airborne radiation detection has greatly improved 
over the years. They also add that states that attempt to cheat 
would face great risks of extraordinary international condemna-
tion (and possible collective military action) if they were detected. 
Still, doubts about veriﬁ cation make state leaders nervous and 
have therefore prevented progress toward nuclear elimination. In 
addition, some states continue to believe nuclear arsenals grant 
them prestige that would vanish if they no longer possessed such 
powerful weapons. But such considerations may pale if terrorists 
manage to seize and use one of the weapons that states developed 
for deterrence against each other.
Final Considerations
Given the unwillingness of any of the existing nuclear weapon 
states to consider seriously nuclear disarmament in even the inter-
mediate future and the threats posed by new nuclear states, ques-
tions about the longevity of the NPT and the international norm 
against nuclear proliferation have recently been raised by experts 
and former ofﬁ cials (Campbell, Einhorn, and Reiss 2004). Some 
are concerned that without greater leadership by major states to 
strengthen existing nonproliferation mechanisms and to increase 
veriﬁ cation mechanisms necessary to catch cheaters, much of the 

progress that has been achieved in nonproliferation will begin to 
unravel. Skeptics of treaties counter that devoted proliferators 
will always be able to avoid detection and therefore such agree-
ments only hamstring honest states that comply with the rules. 
Treaty supporters counter that nonproliferation measures like the 
NPT have been helpful in raising the costs of proliferation, delay-
ing access to technology, and thereby making it less likely for pro-
liferation to occur.
These debates are likely to continue for several decades. The 
aim of this chapter has been to outline the main arguments of 
supporters and opponents regarding different policies and initia-
tives while offering some solutions for consideration by readers. 
Overall, a better-informed and more active population could help 
stimulate more responsible national nuclear policies, fuller dis-
cussion in the media, and greater attention by international orga-
nizations to these important issues.
References
Ackland, Len. 1999. Making a Real Killing: Rocky Flats and the Nuclear 
West. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Afrasiabi, Kaveh L. 2007. “Iran and the Crisis of Disarmament.” Asia
Times Online (January 9). http://www.atimes.com/atimes/Middle
_East/IA09Ak07.html.
Albright, David, and Kimberly Kramer. 2004. “Plutonium Watch: 
Tracking Plutonium Inventories.”  Institute for Science and Global 
Security (June). http://www.isis-online.org/global_stocks/plutonium
_watch2004.html#table1.
Blair, Bruce. 1995. Global Zero Alert for Nuclear Forces. Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution.
Brodie, Bernard. 1971. Strategy in the Missile Age. 1959. Reprint. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.  
Campbell, Kurt M., Robert J. Einhorn, and Mitchell B. Reiss, eds. 2004. 
The Nuclear Tipping Point: Why States Reconsider Their Nuclear Choices.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Corera, Gordon. 2006. Shopping for Bombs: Nuclear Proliferation, Global 
Insecurity, and the Rise and Fall of the A.Q. Khan Network. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
References
71

72 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Drell, Sidney D., and James E. Goodby. 2005. What Are Nuclear Weapons 
For? Recommendations for Restructuring U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces.
Washington, DC: Arms Control Association.
Ferguson, Charles D., William C. Potter, Amy Sands, Leonard S. 
Spector, and Fred L. Wehling. 2004. The Four Faces of Nuclear Terrorism.
Monterey, CA: Center for Nonproliferation Studies, Monterey Institute 
of International Studies. 
Gorbachev, Mikhail. 2007. “The Nuclear Threat.” Wall Street Journal,
January 31.
Harrison, Selig S. 2006. “The Forgotten Bargain: Nonproliferation and 
Nuclear Disarmament.” World Policy Journal 23 (Fall), pages 1–13.
Kimball, Daryl G. 2002. “Parsing the Nuclear Posture Review.” Arms
Control Today 32 (March), pages 15–21.
Lieber, Keir A., and Daryl G. Press. 2006. “The End of MAD? The 
Nuclear Dimension of U.S. Primacy.” International Security 30 (Spring), 
pages 7–44.
Makhijani, Arjun. 2005. “A Readiness to Harm: Health Effects of the 
Nuclear Weapons Complexes.” Arms Control Today 35 (July/August), 
pages 16–20.
Mueller, John. 1988. “The Essential Irrelevance of Nuclear Weapons: 
Stability in the Postwar World.” International Security 13 (Fall), pages 
55–79.
Norris, Robert, and Hans Kristensen. 2006. “Global Nuclear Stockpiles, 
1945–2006,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 36 (July/August), pages 
64–66.
Perkovich, George. 2006. “The End of the Nonproliferation Regime?” 
Current History 105 (November), pages 355–362.
Reiss, Mitchell. 1995. Bridled Ambition: Why Countries Constrain Their 
Nuclear Capabilities. Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center.
Sagan, Scott D. 1993. The Limits of Safety: Organizations, Accidents, and 
Nuclear Weapons. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Sagan, Scott D., and Kenneth N. Waltz. 2002. The Spread of Nuclear 
Weapons: A Debate Renewed. 2nd ed. New York: W. W. Norton.
Schell, Jonathan. 1982. The Fate of the Earth. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Schelling, Thomas C. 1966. Arms and Inﬂ uence. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Schwartz, Stephen I., ed. 1998. Atomic Audit: The Costs and Consequences 
of U.S. Nuclear Weapons since 1940. Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution Press.

Shultz, George P., William J. Perry, Henry A. Kissinger, and Sam Nunn. 
2007. “A World Free of Nuclear Weapons.” Wall Street Journal, January 4.
Simpson, John, and Jenny Nielsen. 2005. “The 2005 NPT Review 
Conference: Mission Impossible?” Nonproliferation Review 12 (July), 
pages 271–301.
Waltz, Kenneth N. 1981. “The Spread of Nuclear Weapons: More May 
Be Better.” Adelphi Papers 171 (Autumn).
References
73


75
3
Special U.S. Issues
A
s the country with the world’s largest economy, most advanced 
military, and most battle-ready nuclear arsenal, the United 
States is currently the most inﬂ uential actor in global nuclear 
proliferation and nonproliferation affairs. While U.S. ofﬁ cials 
sometimes downplay the importance of this role, Washington’s 
nuclear policies are scrutinized closely abroad and have a major 
impact on nuclear efforts elsewhere. One reason is the United 
States also has a great deal of political clout. What U.S. leaders 
say about proliferation threats and nonproliferation opportunities 
is listened to in the rest of the world. Another reason, however, 
is that some foreign countries and their militaries view the U.S. 
nuclear arsenal as a potential threat that must be deterred. Not 
all countries, of course, view U.S. nuclear weapons negatively. 
Indeed, countries allied with the United States have traditionally 
trusted U.S. nuclear weapons to be the ultimate guarantors of 
their own security, which has helped reduce proliferation pres-
sures in these countries. 
Historically, the United States has led or been a major partner 
in almost all international nonproliferation efforts, including the 
formation of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in 
1957, the signing of the Limited Test Ban Treaty in 1963, the imple-
mentation of the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) in 1970, the sign-
ing of the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention, the formation of 
the Missile Technology Control Regime in 1987, the negotiation 
of the 1993 Chemical Weapons Convention, and the signing of 
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in 1996. Without the 

76 Special U.S. Issues
United States, international nonproliferation mechanisms would 
be nowhere near as advanced as they are today. 
This chapter seeks to explain the many facets of the current 
U.S. approach to nuclear weapons and nonproliferation. While 
the United States has done more than any other country to halt 
the spread of such weapons, it also continues to show the rest of 
the world how much it values its nuclear arsenal for purposes of 
defense and deterrence. This contradiction poses challenges to the 
effectiveness and credibility of U.S. nonproliferation efforts. 
This chapter begins with a brief summary of the current status 
of the U.S. nuclear arsenal and U.S. policies toward nuclear weap-
ons, including the question of deterrence. It then discusses con-
temporary U.S. nonproliferation efforts, examining both domestic 
and international aspects. Such topics as intelligence, veriﬁ cation, 
missile defenses, nuclear-weapon-free zones, and the role of pub-
lic opinion are also covered.
Since 2001, policies followed during the George W. Bush 
administration have put less of an emphasis on formal interna-
tional treaties. Instead, the administration has backed more ﬂ ex-
ible approaches such as the Proliferation Security Initiative and 
other voluntary mechanisms. It has also supported unprecedented 
nuclear cooperation agreements with countries like India, which 
remain outside the NPT. The question remains whether recent 
U.S. actions will enhance or undermine global nonproliferation 
regimes, as many other countries continue to prefer stronger 
and more comprehensive nonproliferation treaties, despite the 
required effort to negotiate and verify them. 
For Americans, nonproliferation issues are not listed on 
national election ballots. But U.S. elected representatives are often 
required to take a stand on nuclear issues. Members of the U.S. 
Congress, for example, must vote on yearly budgets that pay for 
the U.S. nuclear infrastructure, including its production facili-
ties, laboratories, and military bases. The U.S. Senate must also 
approve any formal treaty the president negotiates in the nonpro-
liferation ﬁ eld. Finally, the president is the ultimate authority who 
would decide about the possible use of nuclear weapons in a time 
of war and who, with the help of top civilian and military leaders, 
sets U.S. policy regarding the size of the nuclear stockpile and the 
doctrine governing its use. Thus, it is important for all citizens, 
especially those of voting age, to understand these issues, form 

opinions, and support candidates who represent their particular 
views about what kind of nuclear policy they would prefer to see.
The Status of the U.S. Nuclear 
Weapons Complex
The U.S. nuclear infrastructure is a vast and geographically dis-
persed network of facilities. Although smaller than during the 
Cold War, it still includes several major production and design 
locations, a range of nuclear weapon storage sites, and about a 
dozen military bases in the United States and abroad where 
nuclear weapons are deployed in submarines, on bombers, and 
atop ballistic missiles. 
The main U.S. nuclear weapon design facilities are the Los 
Alamos National Laboratory and Sandia National Laboratories, 
both in New Mexico, and the Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory in California. They employ 26,000 people and have 
a combined budget of nearly $6 billion. Other key facilities in the 
current nuclear complex include production facilities (such as 
the Y-12 Plant at Oak Ridge in Tennessee and the Savannah River 
Site in South Carolina) and weapons assembly and disassembly 
plants (such as Pantex in Texas, for nuclear components, and the 
Kansas City Plant for nonnuclear assemblies). Large U.S. nuclear 
weapons storage facilities include the Bangor nuclear submarine 
base in Washington State, the Kings Bay nuclear submarine base 
in Georgia, the Minot Air Force base in North Dakota, the Barks-
dale Air Force base in Louisiana, and the Kirtland Air Force base 
in New Mexico (Schwartz 1998).
The overall cost of operating the U.S. nuclear arsenal is 
approximately $40 billion per year (Norris, Kristensen, and Paine 
2004). Much of the cost relates to expenses for the military per-
sonnel, scientists, and technologies required to keep the weapons 
safe, secure, and deliverable (if needed). A critical issue being 
discussed today within the U.S. nuclear complex is the future of 
the arsenal and its associated workforce, both of which are aging. 
Accordingly, there has been an extensive effort to assess the reli-
ability of U.S. nuclear weapons. Known as the Stockpile Steward-
ship Program, its associated activities have spent an average of 
The Status of the U.S. Nuclear Weapons Complex 77

78 Special U.S. Issues
$5 billion per year since the mid-1990s on maintaining the U.S. 
weapons stockpile—in fact, more than was spent each year during 
the Cold War. These costs are expected to increase dramatically if 
the United States moves forward with a controversial program 
known as the Reliable Replacement Warhead (RRW) program. 
The purpose behind the RRW program is threefold: (1) to increase 
the reliability of older-generation nuclear weapons, (2) to allow 
the United States to reduce its arsenal further by “modernizing” 
its remaining weapons, and (3) to provide work for a new gen-
eration of nuclear weapons complex employees, thus keeping the 
nuclear laboratories open. 
Recent technical studies have shown that U.S. nuclear weap-
ons are safe and reliable. What does deteriorate over time within 
these weapons, however, is their supply of tritium: the hydro-
gen isotope that “boosts” the power of thermonuclear weapons. 
Critics argue that some of the work to enhance the reliability of 
U.S. warheads is unnecessary, as there is no question that older 
weapons will detonate, albeit at a slightly lower yield (Norris, 
Kristensen, and Paine 2004).  However, increased accuracy of the 
missiles makes the yield less important. Nevertheless, two pro-
grams are in the works to address the tritium issue. First, tritium 
is being made available during the process of dismantling some 
older weapons, providing a ﬁ ve-year tritium reserve as of 2007. 
Second, there is a new U.S. program to create more tritium by irra-
diating materials at the Watts Bar nuclear plant in Tennessee. This 
process is underway, and a processing plant will be built in South 
Carolina to separate and create new tritium for future weapons. 
The goal of the proposed RRW program is to remove all old 
warheads from service and create a single, more modern warhead 
design that could be easily serviced and modiﬁ ed to the speciﬁ c 
nuclear yield (or force) needed. Laboratory supporters argue that 
this will increase the arsenal’s safety and reliability, while also 
training a new generation of nuclear workers. In March 2007, 
the Department of Energy announced that a contract for the ﬁ rst 
phase of the RRW program—design of a new submarine-based 
warhead—would be based at Lawrence Livermore National Lab-
oratory (Koch 2007).  But rival Los Alamos National Laboratories 
may still be in the running for other contracts, as Congress seems 
interested in trying to prevent the closure of either laboratory by 
dividing the work between them (Broad, Sanger, and Shanker 
2007). Critics argue that the total program—estimated to cost at 

least $100 billion—is too expensive and militarily unnecessary, 
given the potency of the nuclear material in existing weapons. 
Questions also remain as to whether the ﬁ nal design will require 
further nuclear testing (or not) to prove its own reliability.  
Questions that remain for the U.S. nuclear arsenal include the 
following: How long should the United States maintain multiple 
weapon-design facilities now that the Cold War is over? How 
should the United States deal with the declining availability of 
scientists and technicians who are capable of constructing nuclear 
weapons? What are the advantages (or possible disadvantages) 
of further consolidating U.S. nuclear weapons into fewer sites 
(including repatriating tactical nuclear weapons in Europe)? 
Should absolute nuclear yield or simply assurance of a nuclear 
detonation be the future measure of reliability for the U.S. arse-
nal? And might the United States use advanced, precision-guided 
conventional munitions to eventually replace nuclear arms?
U.S. Nuclear Weapons Policy
U.S. policies on nuclear weapons at any given time represent a 
number of competing inﬂ uences. These include the preferences of 
the White House, the U.S. Defense Department, the Department 
of Energy (including the weapons laboratories), the State Depart-
ment, the intelligence community, Congress, the expert commu-
nity, and, to a lesser extent, the American public. During the 1960s, 
Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara established the U.S. policy 
of mutually assured destruction, meaning that the country should 
maintain the ability to ensure that it could ﬁ re a devastating sec-
ond strike after any Soviet attack that would make a ﬁ rst strike 
unthinkable to Moscow. The policy eschewed the notion of U.S. 
(or Soviet) strategic superiority and instead adopted the under-
lying rationale of nuclear deterrence: deploying nuclear weap-
ons to prevent their use by any other country against the United 
States. For this purpose, the United States maintained thousands 
of nuclear weapons during the Cold War on a ready-alert status 
for possible use against the Soviet Union or China. 
Fortunately, after 1945, the United States never used any of 
these weapons. Today, the United States continues to possess 
more than 9,000 nuclear weapons of various sizes, although cur-
rent plans will cut this number approximately in half by 2012. 
U.S. Nuclear Weapons Policy 79

80 Special U.S. Issues
More than 5,000 are long-range strategic weapons deployed in a 
ready-to-use status, although this number will drop to between 
1,700 and 2,200 to meet the terms of the 2002 Moscow Treaty. 
Outside the continental United States, several hundred U.S. 
tactical nuclear weapons are stationed at air bases in Belgium, Ger-
many (two locations), Italy (two locations), the Netherlands, Tur-
key, and the United Kingdom (Woolf 2006). These weapons have 
been the subject of debate because of the perceived unlikelihood 
of a major war in Europe that would require nuclear weapons. 
There is also a lack of clarity as to which side (the United States or 
its North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] allies) wants these 
weapons retained in Europe. During the Cold War, the argument 
was that these weapons were needed to protect Western Europe 
against a major Soviet land offensive, given Moscow’s superiority 
in large battle tanks. Tactical nuclear weapons, it was believed, 
would stave off such an attack until larger numbers of U.S. troops 
could arrive on the continent. Since the overthrow of Eastern 
Europe’s communist governments in 1989 and the breakup of the 
Soviet Union in 1991, the rationale for these U.S. tactical nuclear 
weapons seems to have disappeared—yet the weapons remain. 
Supporters argue that they help provide NATO with a deter-
rent capability against possible aggression by any state, includ-
ing Russia or others, or non-state actors that might be tempted 
to use weapons of mass destruction (WMD). They also believe 
these weapons help keep U.S. allies in Europe from developing 
their own nuclear weapons. Opponents say these forces have no 
military utility, present a danger in case of terrorist attack on their 
storage facilities, and prevent an agreement with Russia to dis-
mantle its even larger stockpile of tactical nuclear weapons, now 
estimated at around 6,000 warheads. Critics also argue that U.S. 
precision-guided conventional weapons now make these smaller 
nuclear forces redundant and unnecessary (Gormley 2006). 
Despite the presence of thousands of nuclear weapons in 
the U.S. arsenal, the United States has pledged itself to eventual 
nuclear disarmament according to the NPT (speciﬁ cally, Article 
VI). In addition, the U.S. government under both presidents Bill 
Clinton and George W. Bush has stated that nuclear nonprolifera-
tion is one of its top national security priorities. For these reasons, 
there are some inherent tensions in U.S. nuclear policies, which are 
similar to the policies of the other four states that are members of 

the NPT and yet still possess nuclear weapons (Russia, China, Brit-
ain, and France). 
 
Ofﬁ cial U.S. nuclear weapons policies are regularly enunci-
ated by the U.S. government in nuclear posture reviews and in the 
ofﬁ cial national security strategy. During the Clinton administra-
tion, the government issued a 1994 review that was intended as a 
means of reassessing the role of nuclear weapons after the end of 
the Cold War. However, internal feuds between reform-minded 
civilian ofﬁ cials and more conservative uniformed military per-
sonnel resulted in a compromise document that merely reasserted 
the need for nuclear weapons and the existing nuclear triad for 
deterrence (and possible use in conﬂ ict), albeit with lower num-
bers than before. Attempts by civilian ofﬁ cials to review the U.S. 
nuclear war plan—or the Single Integrated Operational Plan—
were rebuffed, suggesting that, even in the United States, there 
are limits to civilian control over the military, at least in regard 
to the speciﬁ cs of nuclear war planning (Nolan 1999). A civilian 
proposal to consider moving from a triad of nuclear forces (based 
on submarines, bombers, and missiles) to a smaller monad force 
(based only on submarines) also failed to move forward.
In 2001, the Bush administration undertook a much more 
ambitious review of U.S. nuclear forces and their role, although 
with a different focus and intention. The December 2001 Nuclear 
Posture Review announced a shift from the traditional triad to a 
new “triad” of defenses, offenses (both nuclear and conventional), 
and a reinvigorated defense research and development infrastruc-
ture (including for nuclear weapons). The document noted U.S. 
efforts to reduce reliance on nuclear weapons, although critics 
argued that the speciﬁ cs of the report lowered the bar for nuclear 
use, setting off a stormy debate. Unlike past posture reviews, 
which named no speciﬁ c adversaries that might be targeted with 
nuclear weapons besides Russia and China, the 2001 Nuclear Pos-
ture Review listed ﬁ ve other states (Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, 
and Syria) even though—at the time—none of these states was 
believed to possess nuclear weapons. This shift in the announced 
U.S. targeting strategy broke with NPT principles stating that coun-
tries within the treaty that do not possess nuclear weapons should 
not be targeted by nuclear states (a so-called “negative” secu-
rity guarantee) (Kimball 2002). Indeed, the 2001 Nuclear Posture 
Review reasserted a number of scenarios in which Washington 
U.S. Nuclear Weapons Policy 81

82 Special U.S. Issues
might actually use such forces and stated, “These nuclear capabil-
ities possess unique properties that give the United States options 
to hold at risk classes of targets important to achieve strategic 
and political objectives” (GlobalSecurity.org 2002). However, the 
document also recognized the increasing role of precision-guided 
conventional munitions in replacing nuclear weapons for some 
missions and the growing role of missile defenses in improving 
deterrence and making some forms of nuclear retaliation unnec-
essary (particularly when missile defenses are used against short- 
to medium-range missiles). 
But the document disappointed those critics looking for some 
clearer U.S. commitment to eventual nuclear disarmament. Instead, 
the new policy noted that a “responsive nuclear sector” is “indis-
pensable” for the United States. Part of the rationale for the revi-
talized infrastructure was the lower number of deployed nuclear 
weapons, compared with Cold War numbers, and the need to keep 
a “hedge” force and reconstitution capability in place should rela-
tions with existing adversaries or friends deteriorate and new 
nuclear deployments become necessary. The 2001 Nuclear Pos-
ture Review described nuclear weapons as having four funda-
mental missions: assurance (of friends and allies), dissuasion (of 
adversaries), deterrence (of attacks on U.S. and allied forces), and 
defeat (of the adversary, in case of war). 
One of the early elements of the Bush administration’s strategy 
was the planned development of nuclear bunker buster bombs for 
attacking deeply buried WMD targets in facilities operated by rogue 
states or terrorist groups. The administration argued that conven-
tional weapons lacked the power to destroy such sites and called for 
research on low-yield nuclear options. Opponents of the plan cited 
the risk to the nonproliferation regime of U.S. development of new 
nuclear weapons, the lowering of the threshold to future nuclear 
use, and the unlikelihood that a low-yield weapon could do the 
job. Scientists who examined the problem indicated that high-yield 
nuclear weapons—which would release large amounts of radioac-
tive fallout—would likely be needed and that new nuclear testing 
might also be necessary to prove the design. For these reasons, and 
because of concern over international political implications if the 
United States deployed such weapons, the U.S. Congress stopped 
the program by denying critical funding. Instead, funding was pro-
vided for a similar effort using powerful conventional weapons.

The most recent U.S. National Security Strategy—an overarch-
ing document required of the government every four years—out-
lines a number of speciﬁ c roles and missions for nuclear weapons, 
while emphasizing the simultaneous importance of nuclear non-
proliferation and, if necessary, counterproliferation to U.S. national 
interests (White House 2006). The document reemphasizes the 
Bush administration’s policy to “act preemptively in exercising 
our inherent right of self-defense,” although it notes U.S. prefer-
ence for “nonmilitary actions.” In addition, the 2006 policy state-
ment outlines the need for “proactive counterproliferation efforts to 
defend against and defeat WMD and missile threats before they 
are unleashed.” Some of the speciﬁ c means noted in the National 
Security Strategy include ballistic missile defense, the Proliferation 
Security Initiative (aimed at intercepting international shipments 
of WMD materials), and implementation of United Nations (UN) 
Security Council Resolution 1540 (aimed at enhancing domestic 
WMD protections worldwide and criminalizing WMD possession 
by non-state actors).
 
But the Bush administration’s support for stricter nuclear 
controls has contained an important exception: states that are 
friendly to the United States. India, Israel, and Pakistan, key allies 
in the U.S. war on terrorism, have been exempted from pressure 
to disarm. In India’s case, the administration has recently gone a 
step further to allow and encourage U.S. technical cooperation, 
at least in the nuclear power sector, despite the violation of the 
NPT that this action represents. Although long critical of past 
Russian sales of nuclear technology to India, the Bush administra-
tion signed new legislation in December 2006 allowing the same 
kind of cooperation the United States had once criticized. The U.S. 
government argued that it was only recognizing the reality of the 
Indian nuclear arsenal and pointed to India’s strong nonprolifera-
tion record and its status as the world’s largest democracy. It put 
the nuclear deal in the context of a new “strategic partnership” 
with India (Carter 2006). This shift in policy, however, goes directly 
against established principles under the NPT regime, which treat 
nuclear weapons and proliferation as the problem, not the poli-
tics of particular regimes. The NPT’s universalist approach, crit-
ics of the deal argue, is crucial to rallying international opinion 
against all proliferators and states that attempt to remain outside 
the NPT. Philosophically, the new U.S. approach coincides with 
U.S. Nuclear Weapons Policy 83

84 Special U.S. Issues
broader concepts such as “democratic peace theory,” which posits 
that democracies are responsible actors and don’t go to war with 
one another; therefore, they can be trusted with nuclear weapons 
(Perkovich 2006). From this perspective, the Bush administration 
has argued, there is no risk in tacitly accepting India’s nuclear 
arsenal and allowing U.S. nuclear trade with this former pariah 
state to the NPT. Some analysts make the point in this regard that 
the negative impact of the deal on the nonproliferation regime has 
been overstated (Carter 2006). Members of Congress agreed over-
whelmingly with this perspective in voting for the deal, although 
largely to promote stronger economic and military ties with India. 
Critics, however, argue that this double standard weakens the 
regime and incentives by nuclear-capable states within it to main-
tain their antiweapons pledges.
 
To make the nuclear deal more palatable within India, the 
Bush administration agreed that only selected “civilian” facili-
ties would be subjected to IAEA safeguards. Thus, the agreement 
exempted a large number of designated “military” facilities, as in 
the NPT nuclear weapon states, from safeguards. This means India 
can continue to produce as much enriched material as it wants for 
weapons purposes from the non-safeguarded facilities. However, 
the United States will have to seek a waiver from the groups to 
go forward with any transfers of nuclear technology to India if it 
wants to do so without violating the group’s guidelines, which 
require full-scope safeguards (and inspection rights) on all of a 
recipient country’s nuclear facilities. While critics of the agreement 
have condemned its weakening of the NPT regime, many nuclear 
supplier countries have either supported the U.S.-Indian deal or 
at least failed to criticize it, likely because of their own desire to 
get a share of India’s expanding nuclear energy market. Russia, for 
example, has announced plans to build four new nuclear reactors 
in India. But the contradiction between nonproliferation and other 
national interests makes the U.S.-Indian deal another example of 
a case in which broader policy concerns have trumped efforts to 
combat proliferation. 
Treaties and Veriﬁ cation
As noted previously, a key shift under the Bush administration 
has been an effort to move away from formal treaties in the realm 

of international nonproliferation policy and instead to rely more 
on ﬂ exible, informal arrangements involving “coalitions of the 
willing” (or countries sharing U.S. perspectives on particular 
proliferation problems). This preference can be seen in the U.S. 
withdrawal from the Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty, its deci-
sion to quit talks on a strengthened inspection protocol for the 
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention in 2001, its policy of 
refusing to consider ratifying the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty, and its decision to leave any weapons elimination 
requirements (and associated veriﬁ cation measures) out of the 
2002 Moscow Treaty. These policies mark a sharp break with past 
U.S. practices. 
This does not mean the Bush administration is opposed to 
international cooperation or multilateral nonproliferation efforts. 
However, its aim has been to streamline the process of agreement 
and to create action-oriented mechanisms that do not require 
cumbersome multinational bureaucracies, lengthy negotiations, 
and difﬁ cult decision-making structures where a small number 
of states can block productive and timely action. Some of the new 
organizations and measures supported by the Bush administra-
tion have included the Proliferation Security Initiative (to inter-
cept WMD materials and technologies in transit), the Group of 
Eight–led Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons of 
Mass Destruction (to safeguard nuclear facilities and consoli-
date material), the Global Threat Reduction Initiative (to limit 
and secure highly enriched uranium worldwide), the Six-Party 
Talks (with North Korea), and UN Security Council Resolution 
1540. Although some of these U.S.-led efforts have been criticized 
by traditional supporters of more formal international arrange-
ments, on balance, these initiatives have helped plug a number 
of gaps in existing nonproliferation regimes. At the same time, 
weakened U.S. support for international treaties and veriﬁ cation 
mechanisms has made some countries skeptical of U.S. intentions 
regarding universalist (as opposed to selectively applied) nonpro-
liferation objectives. 
Since the 1990s, one of the main goals of the U.S. government 
in the ﬁ eld of international nonproliferation policy has been nego-
tiating a ﬁ ssile material cutoff treaty. This measure would halt pro-
duction of plutonium and highly enriched uranium (HEU) as a 
means of preventing the further construction of nuclear weapons 
and reducing possible terrorist access to bomb-making material. A 
Treaties and Veriﬁ cation 85

86 Special U.S. Issues
number of countries with smaller nuclear arsenals (such as India 
and China) have long opposed such a treaty, in part because most 
proposals would allow large, existing U.S. and Russian stock-
piles of ﬁ ssile material to be maintained, giving them a permanent 
nuclear advantage. One of the more complicated aspects of the 
treaty’s negotiation has long been how the shutdown of production 
would be veriﬁ ed. In 2004, the Bush administration announced a 
major shift in U.S. policy by dropping all requirements for veriﬁ -
cation (Arms Control Association 2004). The rationale behind this 
change in approach was to avoid the long negotiation process nec-
essary for such rules to be agreed upon, the costs of inspections 
in countries where there was no concern about proliferation, and 
the possibly complex politics of access to sites requiring inspec-
tion. Moreover, even without international measures, the United 
States could still provide a reasonable level of veriﬁ cation using its 
own national technical means (e.g., satellites, air sampling). Many 
foreign governments rejected these arguments as weakening inter-
national enforcement mechanisms and lessening means of putting 
collective pressure on states violating international agreements. 
U.S. Missile Defenses 
and Efforts to Defend 
against Nuclear Attacks
Since the dawn of the nuclear age, in part because of its faith in 
the power of technology, the United States has been one of the 
leaders in pursuing missile defenses in the hope of constructing 
a shield against potential attacks. In 1962, the United States and 
the then Soviet Union tested nuclear-tipped ABM defenses in 
space. While these weapons proved capable of destroying incom-
ing missiles, they also had highly damaging effects on satellites 
and on ground-based radars. One such test, Starﬁ sh Prime in July 
1962, shorted out the power grid on the island of Oahu and per-
manently disabled at least six orbiting satellites, including U.S. 
communications and photo-reconnaissance spacecraft, as well as 
British and Soviet satellites. The electromagnetic pulse radiation 
from the blasts also made whole regions of space dangerous for 
human spaceﬂ ight. Thus, in 1963, the United States and the Soviet 

Union ceased nuclear testing in space as part of the Limited Test 
Ban Treaty.
But the treaty did not make it illegal to deploy defenses using 
nuclear weapons. The United States moved forward with devel-
oping and deploying both nuclear-tipped antisatellite weapons 
on Johnston Island (an atoll located between the Hawaiian and 
the Marshall Islands) and a nuclear-tipped ABM system, as did 
the Soviet Union. Tests of their warheads, however, had to be 
conducted underground. One ABM-related test (called Cannikin) 
in November 1971 exploded a huge 5-megaton nuclear weapon 
under the island of Amchitka off the coast of Alaska (Kohlhoff 
2002). The blast caused a major seismic tremor and considerable 
environmental damage to the island, stimulating antinuclear 
activists to form the Greenpeace organization. By the early 1970s, 
the United States decided to dismantle its antisatellite system, 
given the costs and its likely collateral damage to valuable space 
assets, such as reconnaissance and communications satellites. In 
1975, however, the U.S. Air Force deployed 100 nuclear-tipped 
ABM interceptors at Grand Forks, North Dakota, in the so-called 
Safeguard system. The original goal of this project was to stop the 
few existing Chinese nuclear-tipped missiles as well as possible 
limited Soviet strikes. However, the massive numbers of Soviet 
nuclear weapons by the mid-1970s, the high costs of the system, 
and the likelihood that detonating nuclear weapons above Safe-
guard’s radars would “blind” them with electromagnetic pulse 
radiation caused Congress to cancel the system just a few months 
after it achieved operational status, despite the U.S. expenditure 
of $12 billion (Schwartz 1998).
Although interest in missile defenses waned for the next sev-
eral years, the rise of Soviet deployment of multiple warhead mis-
siles (especially the large SS-18 missile) caused some U.S. political 
ﬁ gures and military leaders to worry about a possible Soviet ﬁ rst 
strike against the United States. By the early 1980s, advances in 
computer technology and real-time space tracking and communi-
cations led some scientists and the Ronald Reagan administration 
to begin a major push in 1983 to develop missile defenses via the 
so-called Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), popularly known as 
“Star Wars.” The idea was to build a space-based missile shield 
that would intercept more than a thousand Soviet missiles in their 
boost phase and destroy them before they could deploy their 
U.S. Missile Defenses and Efforts to Defend against Nuclear Attacks 87

88 Special U.S. Issues
multiple warheads. President Reagan pledged to share the sys-
tem eventually with the Soviet Union and use it to work toward 
the total elimination of nuclear weapons. (Indeed, the president’s 
strong commitment to test and deploy the SDI system prevented 
a deal for complete nuclear disarmament from being reached 
with the Soviet Union at the Reykjavik summit in 1986.) But the 
technological hurdles in terms of weapons, sensors, and space-
launch capabilities, as well as the system’s extremely high cost, 
prevented it from moving forward. Congressional Democratic 
leaders were also concerned about the implications of U.S. viola-
tion of the ABM Treaty, which might have resulted in a further 
buildup of Soviet offensive arms. In the end, changes in Soviet 
foreign policy under Mikhail Gorbachev rendered a Soviet attack 
much less likely, reducing the perceived need for the defensive 
system. The effort was ﬁ nally scaled back under President George 
H. W. Bush and limited to a small continuing research program.
In the 1990s, missile defense supporters (primarily conserva-
tive Republican members of Congress and some scientists in the 
U.S. weapons laboratories) again began to push for renewed fund-
ing and deployment. First, in the wake of the 1990–1991 Gulf War, 
supporters lobbied successfully for further research on shorter-
range theater missile defenses to protect U.S. allies and U.S. troops 
in the ﬁ eld. Second, in 1999, the Republican-led Congress approved 
legislation requiring the deployment of national missile defenses 
against the possible threat of a North Korean, Iraqi, or other rogue-
state attack using ballistic missiles as soon as the technology was 
available. The goal was no longer the interception of more than a 
thousand Soviet missiles, as envisioned during the Reagan years, 
but only tens of missiles that a small, new nuclear power might 
launch. Although critics pointed out that such countries still lacked 
long-range missiles, supporters cited the possibility that they might 
buy foreign technology to speed up their programs, thus leaving the 
United States unprepared. However, in 2000, the Clinton adminis-
tration decided that the technology to “hit a bullet with a bullet” 
had still not been proven and opted not to deploy such a system.
The George W. Bush administration came into ofﬁ ce with a 
different philosophy in 2001. Bush’s advisers believed the serious-
ness of the emerging missile threat merited immediate deploy-
ment of missile defenses in Alaska and California, whether or not 
the technology had been fully tested. They argued that the United 
States needed some defense and could learn as it went along, 

despite the higher ﬁ nancial costs of such an approach. After with-
drawing from the ABM Treaty in 2002, the Bush administration 
moved forward to deploy a handful of interceptors in Alaska and 
California by the end of the president’s ﬁ rst term in January 2005. 
These were supplemented by additional Aegis-system intercep-
tors stationed on U.S. destroyers at sea. Although the Pentagon 
had declined to declare the missile defense system operational 
by spring 2007—because of inadequate testing—the administra-
tion and Congress continued to provide signiﬁ cant funding for 
the program to continue its development. Eventually, the admin-
istration’s plan is to develop an integrated system of short-, 
medium-, and long-range defenses dispersed in forward locations 
on the territories of allies in Asia and Europe (including possibly 
Poland and the Czech Republic), at sea, in space, and in the United 
States. The cost of these deployments is still uncertain, and the 
technologies are still under development, particularly in regard to 
space-based systems. 
Critics of missile defenses point to the ability of adversarial 
states to use so-called penetration aids dispersed by their missiles 
(such as metal chaff, balloon decoys, and small submunitions) to 
trick the defenses, as well as the possibility of using alternative 
delivery means, such as smuggling a weapon into the United States 
or delivering it via ship or small aircraft, thus avoiding the missile 
defense system. They argue that the calculus will always favor 
the attacking side, especially in terms of cost. Moreover, critics say 
that terrorists are particularly unlikely to use expensive and easily 
traceable ballistic missiles as their delivery system of choice. The 
Bush administration has argued that missile defenses—even ones 
that currently have limited operational value—provide some level 
of deterrence and encourage potential adversaries to give up their 
missile programs. To date, despite the initial U.S. missile defense 
deployment, North Korea and Iran have continued to develop 
their missile systems. Meanwhile, China’s test of a kinetic-kill 
antisatellite weapon in January 2007 suggests that U.S. pursuit of 
robust missile defenses may have encouraged a reaction among 
foreign military space programs.
Overall, then, the prospect of making long-range offensive 
missiles obsolete through defenses seems remote. The best that is 
likely to be accomplished through existing missile defense efforts 
seems to be partial effectiveness against certain types of mis-
sile attack to supplement other forms of defense and diplomacy. 
U.S. Missile Defenses and Efforts to Defend against Nuclear Attacks 89

90 Special U.S. Issues
Of course, a more reliable route to improve chances for missile 
defense might be to achieve international agreements for further 
cuts in offensive weapons. But the level of trust necessary for such 
arms control agreements does not yet exist, and deep cuts are 
not being pursued seriously by leading world powers (Harrison 
2006). Thus, the short-term conclusion is that missile defenses will 
go forward, but are unlikely to transform existing U.S. vulner-
abilities to nuclear attack.
Intelligence, Nuclear 
Proliferation, and 
Counterproliferation
Experts agree that a critical component of any effective U.S. 
strategy to prevent nuclear proliferation is accurate and timely 
in telligence. Unfortunately, despite annual intelligence-gathering 
expenditures in the tens of billions of dollars, the United States has 
historically proven to have had a relatively poor record (Richelsen 
2006). An exhaustive 1,000-page report issued in October 2004 by 
Charles Duelfer, the Central Intelligence Agency’s (CIA) special 
advisor on Iraq’s WMD, examined the WMD evidence used to 
justify the 2003 U.S. invasion. The study concluded that Saddam 
Hussein’s government had no WMD on its territory before the 
invasion and had very little capability to reconstitute its pre-1991 
capabilities because of the effectiveness of UN sanctions and 
inspections (Duelfer 2004). In other words, despite rallying the 
U.S. government, the American public, and the international com-
munity around the immediate threat posed by Iraq’s WMD pro-
grams, the United States had gotten the facts wrong. Speciﬁ cally, 
regarding nuclear enrichment and weapons research, the Duelfer 
Report found “no evidence to suggest concerted efforts to restart 
the program” in more than decade. The Iraqi biological weapons 
program had also remained largely moribund. Only in the chemi-
cal weapons area did Iraq appear to have some intention of reviv-
ing the program, although the report stated (based on extensive 
interviews with Iraqi scientists and ofﬁ cials) that the purpose of 
that effort was for future defense needs against Iran, not for use 
against the United States. Thus, the CIA’s extensive search after 
the war to locate WMD in Iraq and to identify ongoing WMD pro-
grams had come up largely empty-handed. 

To come to grips with the problem of U.S. intelligence gath-
ering in the area of WMD technologies, the White House com-
missioned a special, bipartisan group of experts to examine U.S. 
intelligence collection practices. The commission’s report, issued 
in March 2005, had a number of troubling conclusions. In a sharp 
critique of the quality of U.S. intelligence it stated, “Across the 
board, the Intelligence Community knows disturbingly little 
about the nuclear programs of many of the world’s most danger-
ous actors” (Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the 
United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction 2005). 
Strikingly, it commented, “In some cases, it knows less now than 
it did ﬁ ve or ten years ago.” Overall, the commissioners (mainly 
former high-ranking government ofﬁ cials and members of Con-
gress) described the intelligence community (including the CIA, 
the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency, 
the National Reconnaissance Ofﬁ ce, and other organizations) as 
“fragmented, loosely managed, and poorly coordinated.” It called 
on the U.S. government to improve training of critical language 
and relevant area studies skills in organizations still populated 
heavily by Russian-language experts trained in Cold War tech-
niques. It cited the lack of rigorous analysis of data collected as 
well, partly because of the absence of relevant knowledge about 
the diverse set of regionally based threats the United States now 
faces. In addition, the report noted the need to improve the use 
of technology for dealing with a new and “ever-changing” threat 
environment, rather than relying on old signals intelligence and 
photo-intelligence techniques that were better suited for deal-
ing with the Soviet Union. The commissioners highlighted new 
computer-related technologies, WMD sampling mechanisms, and 
technical means of overcoming deception and denial strategies 
of adversaries trying to disguise or hide WMD facilities among 
areas requiring critical improvements. Some analysts argue, how-
ever, that reforms will not succeed unless senior U.S. ofﬁ cials 
stop “cherry-picking” intelligence data in a manner that empha-
sizes political criteria over factual accuracy (Pillar 2006).
 
Another reason for the increased importance of accurate and 
timely intelligence is the dispersed nature of the WMD threat 
in the twenty-ﬁ rst century, given the presence of new technolo-
gies for information distribution (such as fax machines, electronic 
mail, cell phones, and the Internet). New non-state actors, which 
are often harder to identify and track compared with nation-states, 
Intelligence, Nuclear Proliferation, and Counterproliferation 91

92 Special U.S. Issues
also play a more important role in the evolving threat environment 
than in the past. Nevertheless, state actors (such as Iran and North 
Korea) still remain objects of WMD concern and focus. Thus, vari-
ous aspects of this increasingly complex problem require continued 
attention from the intelligence community. At the same time, evi-
dence from the run-up to the 2003 Iraq war suggests that other U.S. 
political actors outside the executive branch (the White House and 
the government’s ofﬁ cial defense and intelligence agencies) need to 
ask more critical questions when assessing intelligence information 
provided to them. Many members of Congress and the U.S. media 
tended to support information coming out of the government 
uncritically, rather than analyzing it carefully. While this problem 
may continue, because of the inherent limits of using information 
in the political realm whose source and credibility remains (in some 
cases) classiﬁ ed, the experience of the Iraq War should provide a 
sobering reminder to U.S. policymakers of the importance of accu-
racy in matters of nonproliferation and, especially, military coun-
terproliferation. Otherwise, the United States will ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to 
lead other international efforts in the future. 
U.S. Policy toward New 
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones
One area of U.S. nuclear policy that has frustrated many foreign 
observers, as well as some domestic supporters of nonprolifera-
tion efforts, relates to the U.S. policies toward nuclear-weapon-
free zones. These regional treaties are typically agreements to 
adopt nonproliferation measures that are even stronger than 
those incorporated in the NPT. That treaty allowed foreign 
nuclear weapons to be stationed on a country’s territory (in part 
because U.S. and Soviet nuclear weapons were already deployed 
in many client states in 1968) and permitted nuclear devices to 
be tested for peaceful purposes (originally to allow possible civil 
excavation using nuclear weapons, a practice that is now widely 
discredited on safety grounds). Today, states are giving up these 
rights in a number of areas of the world to improve regional secu-
rity. Although the United States has pledged in various interna-
tional nonproliferation meetings, including the 1995 NPT Review 

and Extension Conference, to support the formation of nuclear-
weapon-free zones voluntarily arrived at by states in particular 
regions, in fact, under both the Clinton and current (at the time 
of publication) Bush administrations, Washington has placed its 
self-proclaimed rights to transit nuclear weapons internationally 
ahead of a number of zone treaties. The U.S. argument is that its 
nuclear forces are critical to the safety of allies and friends around 
the world and therefore it should be able to move weapons around 
the world’s oceans and airspace when they are needed in particu-
lar regions. In practice, this mostly involves the transit of nuclear 
submarines armed with ballistic missiles, as U.S. nuclear-armed 
bombers and missiles are rarely (if ever) deployed abroad now, 
with the exception of the U.S. weapons in Europe. This policy and 
a restriction against use of nuclear weapons in (or from) nuclear-
weapon-free zones has kept the United States (along with the other 
four NPT-recognized nuclear weapon states) from supporting the 
Bangkok Treaty in Southeast Asia. States in this treaty have given 
up the right to nuclear weapons and have pledged not to allow any 
foreign nuclear weapons to be stationed on their territories. They 
also retain rights under the treaty to deny foreign ships carrying 
nuclear weapons passage through their territorial waters. One such 
waterway within the Southeast Asian zone is the strategic Strait of 
Malacca, a key transit point for U.S. military vessels moving from 
the South China Sea to the Indian Ocean. Instead of welcoming this 
effort to prohibit nuclear weapons, Washington and other nuclear 
capitals continue to put their own nuclear rights above their non-
proliferation goals. 
 
The United States (joined by France and Britain) has also 
voiced its opposition to the 2006 Central Asian Nuclear-Weapon-
Free Zone (the Semipalatinsk Treaty). This zone brings together the 
ﬁ ve former Soviet states of Central Asia, which together suffered 
tremendous environmental and human health damage from Soviet 
nuclear mining, milling, and especially testing before 1991. It rep-
resents an important new buffer zone without nuclear weapons 
in a region of the world populated by a number of nuclear-armed 
states: India, Pakistan, China, and Russia. Nevertheless, Washing-
ton has opposed the agreement because of an ambiguous clause in 
the treaty that recognizes the existence of prior security agreements 
that might be interpreted to allow Russia to reintroduce nuclear 
weapons into the zone in the future. States in the region, however, 
U.S. Policy toward New Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones 93

94 Special U.S. Issues
say the clause was put in mostly for political reasons and that 
Russia’s redeployment of nuclear weapons is ruled out by cur-
rent national policies of the Central Asian governments. A clause 
allowing each state in the region to determine whether to allow 
the transit of nuclear weapons through its territory is already part 
of the treaty at the insistence of the United States and other NPT 
weapon states. Thus, despite U.S. support for international non-
proliferation objectives, Washington’s policies are sometimes at 
odds with these goals. 
U.S. Public Opinion 
and Nuclear Weapons
Public participation in nuclear decision making tends to be tied 
closely to fears of personal health and safety. When such con-
ditions are not acute, members of Congress, executive branch 
ofﬁ cials (including the president), and military leaders tend to 
dominate nuclear policies with relatively little outside inﬂ uence—
except international events. Accordingly, U.S. public participation 
in nuclear weapons policy has declined signiﬁ cantly from its high 
points in the late 1950s and early 1960s, when atmospheric nuclear 
testing threatened human health, and during the early 1980s, 
when fear of the resumption of the U.S.-Soviet nuclear arms race 
motivated thousands of Americans and a number of U.S. cities to 
join the nuclear freeze movement. While there is public concern 
about North Korea’s 2006 nuclear test and fear of future nuclear 
terrorist events, there does not seem to be any galvanizing issue to 
bring large numbers of people to try to inﬂ uence government pol-
icy through the exercise of popular democracy. This could change 
in the future if there is a nuclear accident or perhaps if there are 
growing fears of nuclear proliferation. 
Notably, current and many past U.S. nuclear policies appear 
to be at odds with beliefs of the average American voter. A sur-
vey conducted in March 2004 by a nonpartisan research organiza-
tion at the University of Maryland—the Program on International 
Policy Attitudes (PIPA)—asked questions of a scientiﬁ cally repre-
sentative sampling of 1,311 Americans regarding their attitudes 
toward nuclear weapons (Kull 2004). The ﬁ ndings showed that 
the U.S. public is largely ignorant of actual U.S. government poli-

cies in the nuclear ﬁ eld and is signiﬁ cantly more interested in dis-
armament than U.S. ofﬁ cials are. Regarding the Comprehensive 
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, for example, 56 percent of respondents 
believed the United States had already become a member of the 
treaty, even though the Republican-controlled Senate rejected U.S. 
membership in 1999. A large majority (87 percent) believed the 
United States should be a member. In regard to possible nuclear 
use against threats posed by chemical or biological weapons, the 
PIPA survey found that 84 percent of respondents opposed using 
nuclear weapons for this purpose, preferring to rely (if necessary) 
on conventional arms. The question of the alert status of nuclear 
weapons exposed another divergence of views between the pub-
lic and the U.S. government: Where current U.S. policy maintains 
large numbers of forces on hair-trigger alert in case of the need 
for a massive nuclear assault, 82 percent of respondents in the 
2004 PIPA survey argued that the United States should work with 
other countries (such as Russia) to reduce the number of forces on 
a high-alert status. Finally, views on the number of nuclear weap-
ons in the arsenal showed a major disconnect between ofﬁ cial and 
public views. When respondents were asked how many nuclear 
weapons the United States needs for deterrence, the median 
response was 100, compared with the current actual stockpile 
of more than 9,000 weapons and a planned number of around 
5,000.
A poll in March 2007 of 4,824 Americans found that nearly 80 
percent of respondents either “strongly” or “somewhat” agreed 
with the idea that the international community—as opposed to 
the United States only—should decide what countries should be 
allowed to have nuclear weapons (UPI 2007). But 64 percent of 
respondents in the same poll also supported U.S. participation in 
efforts to limit foreign nuclear weapon capabilities.
Conclusion: U.S. Politics 
and Nonproliferation
The debate on how best to pursue U.S. nonproliferation objectives 
continues to revolve around a number of choices: unilateral ver-
sus multilateral mechanisms, military hardware versus political 
cooperation, and informal arrangements versus formal treaties. 
Conclusion: U.S Politics and Nonproliferation 95

96 Special U.S. Issues
The Bush administration and more conservative politicians have 
generally sided with either unilateral or voluntary approaches, 
believing them to be more reliable, more ﬂ exible, and easier to 
implement. These approaches tend to place fewer restrictions on 
U.S. military actions, but they also leave similar options open to 
foreign militaries. For this reason, some Republicans and most 
Democrats have tended to opt for the second category of choices, 
believing multilateral treaties, principles of universality, and 
international enforcement will create greater long-term beneﬁ ts to 
U.S. security. However, this debate is likely to continue—in some 
form—well into the future. 
After the 2008 presidential election, the United States will 
again face a series of questions about the future direction of its 
nuclear complex. First, how will it deﬁ ne its nuclear security 
needs in relation to the NPT’s requirement of eventual disarma-
ment? Second, will the United States pursue active modernization 
of its nuclear arsenal (and renewed nuclear testing), or will it rat-
ify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and move instead 
to downgrade and devalue nuclear weapons? Finally, will the 
United States seek new international treaties and endorse interna-
tional veriﬁ cation mechanisms, or will it continue policies based 
on self-reliance and selectivity in its attitude toward international 
nonproliferation cooperation? The answers to these questions will 
likely go a long way toward deﬁ ning the direction of U.S. nuclear 
and nonproliferation policies in the next U.S. presidential admin-
istration. To have a voice in nuclear decision making, citizens need 
to educate themselves on these issues and on the positions of their 
local and national candidates.
References
Arms Control Association. 2004. “The Bush Administration and the 
Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty: Reversing Course on Veriﬁ cation.” 
Edited excerpts of roundtable discussion (September 2). http://www
.armscontrol.org/events/FMCT_Excerpts.asp.
Broad, William J., David E. Sanger, and Thom Shanker. 2007. “U.S. 
Selecting Hybrid Design for Warheads.” New York Times, January 7.
Carter, Ashton B. 2006. “America’s New Strategic Partner?” Foreign 
Affairs 85 (July/August), pages 33–44.

Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States 
Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction. 2005. Report to the President
(March 31). http://www.wmd.gov/report/.
Duelfer, Charles. 2004. Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to 
the DCI on Iraq’s Weapons of Mass Destruction. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Ofﬁ ce. https://www.cia.gov/cia/reports/iraq
_wmd_2004.
GlobalSecurity.org. 2002. “Nuclear Posture Review [Excerpts].” Partial 
contents of U.S. Nuclear Posture Review of December 31, 2001 (posted 
January 8). http://www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/library/policy/dod
/npr.htm.
Gormley, Dennis M. 2006. “Securing Nuclear Obsolescence.” Survival 48 
(Autumn), pages 127–148.
Harrison, Selig S. 2006. “The Forgotten Bargain: Nonproliferation and 
Nuclear Disarmament.” World Policy Journal 23 (Fall), pages 1–13.
Kimball, Daryl G. 2002. “Parsing the Nuclear Posture Review.” Arms
Control Today 32 (March), pages 15–21.
Koch, Andrew. 2007. “Livermore Wins Warhead Design Contest.” Jane’s 
Defense Weekly. March 14.
Kohlhoff, Dean W. 2002. Amchitka and the Bomb: Nuclear Testing in Alaska.
Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Kull, Steven. 2004. “Americans on WMD Proliferation.” Program on 
International Policy Attitudes (PIPA), University of Maryland, April 15. 
http://www.pipa.org/OnlineReports/WMDProliferation/WMD
_Prolif_Apr04/WMDProlif_Apr04_rpt.pdf.
Nolan, Janne E. 1999. An Elusive Consensus: Nuclear Weapons and 
American Security after the Cold War. Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution Press.
Norris, Robert S., Hans M. Kristensen, and Christopher E. Paine. 2004. 
Nuclear Insecurity: A Critique of the Bush Administration’s Nuclear Weapons 
Policies. Natural Resources Defense Council (September). http://www.
nrdc.org/nuclear/insecurity/contents.asp.
Perkovich, George. 2006. “Democratic Bomb: Failed Strategy.” Policy
Brief 49 (November), pages 1–7.
Pillar, Paul R. 2006. “Intelligence, Policy, and the War in Iraq.” Foreign 
Affairs 85 (March/April), pages 15–27.
Richelsen, Jeffrey T. 2006. Spying on the Bomb: American Nuclear 
Intelligence from Nazi Germany to Iran and North Korea. New York: W. W. 
Norton.
References
97

98 Special U.S. Issues
Schwartz, Stephen I., ed. 1998. Atomic Audit: The Costs and Consequences 
of U.S. Nuclear Weapons since 1940. Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution Press.
UPI. 2007. “UPI Poll: Control of Nuclear Weapons.” March 30.
The White House. 2006. The National Security Strategy of the United 
States of America. (March). http://www.whitehouse.gov/nsc/
nss/2006/.
Woolf, Amy F. 2006. “Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons.” CRS Report 
for Congress (January 13). http://fpc.state.gov/documents/
organization/61466.pdf.

99
4
Chronology
T
he development of nuclear weapons by ten countries since 
1945—the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, France, 
China, Israel, India, South Africa, Pakistan, and North Korea—
constituted military, scientiﬁ c, and political achievements. But 
these programs also involved tremendous domestic economic 
and environmental trade-offs. Internationally, nuclear weapons 
have radically changed how countries deal with each other and 
how the world’s population thinks about the potentially deadly 
and terrifying power of technology. This chapter provides an 
overview of the history of nuclear weapons in a number of coun-
tries, as well as the parallel efforts to control and eliminate them. 
1939 
 With the start of World War II in Europe, the U.S., 
British, and German governments separately begin 
to explore the possibility of building an atomic bomb. 
In the United States, Hungarian refugee and physicist 
Leo Szilard performs an experiment at Columbia Uni-
versity demonstrating the possibility of a chain reac-
tion of atoms that could be used in a weapon. 
 
   Physicists in Germany and the Soviet Union 
inform their governments about a paper published in 
Nature magazine by physicists in France stating that 
uranium could be used in a chain reaction, releasing 
tremendous amounts of energy. The German War 
Ofﬁ ce starts a government research program at the 

100 Chronology
Kaiser Wilhelm Institute of Physics, bans uranium 
exports, and begins hoarding uranium from Czecho-
slovak mines under its control. In the Soviet Union, 
physicist Igor Kurchatov alerts his government and 
organizes the ﬁ rst Soviet study of nuclear ﬁ ssion.
 
   In October, Alexander Sachs, a U.S. businessman, 
meets President Franklin D. Roosevelt and presents 
him with a letter drafted by Szilard and signed by 
Nobel Prize–winning physicist Albert Einstein warn-
ing of possible German acquisition of a nuclear ﬁ ssion 
bomb. Roosevelt decides to form the nine-member 
advisory Committee on Uranium, which recommends 
ﬁ nancial support for a thorough investigation of the 
possible uses of nuclear chain reactions. 
1940 
 German refugee physicists Rudolf Peierls and Otto 
Frisch at the University of Birmingham in England cal-
culate that fast-neutron ﬁ ssion of uranium 235 could 
create a nuclear explosion. Already at war with Nazi 
Germany, the British government sets up the secret 
Maud Committee to coordinate research on the pos-
sibility of building an atomic (nuclear ﬁ ssion) bomb. 
Separately, scientists at the University of California–
Berkeley begin building a cyclotron to study chain 
reactions under the direction of Professor Ernest O. 
Lawrence. The Soviet government creates a uranium 
committee to develop methods of isotope separation 
and to achieve a controlled chain reaction. Soviet spies 
begin to collect information on uranium research in 
Germany, the United States, and the United Kingdom, 
including German refugee physicist Klaus Fuchs. 
1941 
 Chemistry professor Glenn Seaborg and his colleagues 
at the University of California–Berkeley discover that 
neptunium emits electrons when irradiated, thereby 
forming a new element they call plutonium.
 
   In July, the British Maud Committee concludes in 
a secret report that it would be possible to make a ura-
nium bomb with the destructive force of 1,800 tons of 
TNT. Prime Minister Winston Churchill decides to pur-
sue the atomic bomb and contacts the U.S. government.
1939
(cont.)

Chronology
101
 
   As invading Nazi German forces sweep toward 
Moscow, President Roosevelt approves a U.S. atomic 
bomb program in October. Vannevar Bush, head of the 
National Defense Research Committee, calls a meeting 
of leading scientists, and funds are channeled to the 
top-secret so-called Manhattan Project. On December 
7, Japanese planes bomb U.S. Navy ships in Pearl Har-
bor, Hawaii; the United States declares war on Japan. 
On December 11, Germany declares war on the United 
States.
1942
In March, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin passes atomic 
spy reports to prominent Soviet scientists and says 
that his country should pursue an atomic bomb. In 
June, German physicist Werner Heisenberg secretly 
informs the Nazi high command that the Third Reich 
lacks the resources to produce an atomic bomb during 
the war. 
 
   The U.S. government assigns responsibility for 
its bomb program to the Army Corps of Engineers 
and puts Brigadier General Leslie Groves in charge 
of the Manhattan Project. Groves appoints Berkeley 
physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer as scientiﬁ c director. 
They select the remote Los Alamos Boys’ School in 
New Mexico as the main site for the project and begin 
recruiting leading scientists, including many European 
refugees, from across the United States. In September, 
Groves acquires 59,000 acres in eastern Tennessee to 
use for factories to separate rare uranium 235 from 
naturally occurring uranium in sufﬁ cient quantities 
to make a bomb. The U.S. government builds a new 
town named Oak Ridge, in addition to huge gaseous 
diffusion plants for uranium enrichment.
 
   At the University of Chicago on December 2, Ital-
ian émigré scientist Enrico Fermi and his colleagues 
produce the ﬁ rst controlled and sustained nuclear ﬁ s-
sion reaction in a jury-rigged laboratory built under the 
football stadium. Along with Szilard, Fermi designs the 
method of arranging graphite and uranium that makes 
the reaction possible; known as the “pile,” it is a proto-
type reactor composed of 771,000 pounds of graphite, 

102 Chronology
80,590 pounds of uranium oxide, and 12,400 pounds of 
uranium metal, costing $1 million to construct.
 
  In Japan, the navy commits to developing nuclear 
power for propulsion and forms a committee to track 
atomic bomb research to determine if Japan should 
build such a weapon.
1943 
 Six Norwegians working with the British military suc-
ceed in disabling the heavy-water plant at Vemork. 
When the Germans resume operating the plant weeks 
later under tighter security, the United States drops 
700 bombs on the plant, again setting back the German 
research program.
 
   To acquire more uranium, the United States and 
Britain sign the Combined Development Trust to search 
out and acquire existing world supplies. Also, Britain 
sends a delegation of scientists, including Soviet spy 
Fuchs, to work in the U.S. bomb program. To pursue 
an alternative route to the bomb using plutonium, the 
U.S. government buys 500,000 acres in eastern Wash-
ington State and instructs the Hanford Engineering 
Works to build plutonium production reactors there.
 
   The United States, Canada, and Great Britain sign 
the Quebec Agreement, providing for technical coop-
eration and pledging each side to refrain from using 
an atomic bomb without the consent of the other two.
 
   A study by the Japanese Army Aeronautic Tech-
nology Research Institute declares that an atomic 
bomb is feasible. Prime Minister Hideki Tojo starts a 
major bomb-building effort at a Tokyo laboratory run 
by physicist Dr. Yoshio Nishina. However, the Japanese 
program cannot secure an adequate supply of uranium 
ore. The Japanese Navy also sponsors a parallel bomb 
development project at the University of Kyoto.
 
   In the Soviet Union, physicist Igor Kurchatov 
directs the Soviet atomic bomb program at Laboratory 
No. 2 of the Academy of Sciences outside Moscow. 
1944 
 In February, the Allies learn that Germany plans to 
relocate the damaged Norwegian heavy-water plant 
1942
(cont.)

Chronology
103
to Germany, but Norwegian commandos working for 
the Allies blow up all of the heavy-water containers 
en route. In Japan, Nishina makes slow progress in his 
attempt to separate uranium isotopes. 
 
   In the fall, President Roosevelt rejects Danish 
physicist Niels Bohr’s suggestion that he notify Stalin 
of the U.S. atomic bomb project. 
1945 
 On April 12, President Roosevelt dies. Vice President 
Harry Truman succeeds him and for the ﬁ rst time 
learns about the Manhattan Project. On May 7, the war 
in Europe ends with the German surrender. Separate 
U.S. and Soviet teams in Germany seize atomic bomb 
materials (particularly uranium), relevant technology, 
and nuclear scientists from their respective occupation 
zones.
 
   In the predawn hours of July 16, the world’s ﬁ rst 
atomic bomb (nicknamed “the Gadget”) is exploded 
by scientists working under Oppenheimer at the so-
called Trinity test site near Alamogordo, New Mexico. 
The yield of the plutonium implosion device is equiv-
alent to 18,600 tons of TNT. On July 21 at the Potsdam 
summit, President Truman receives General Groves’s 
detailed report on the successful test; on July 24, he 
approves a draft plan to drop two bombs on possible 
target cities in Japan. On July 26, Truman gives the Jap-
anese an ultimatum to surrender unconditionally to 
U.S. terms or face destruction from a “new weapon.” 
The Japanese premier rejects the Potsdam ultimatum.
 
   U.S. bombing raids on Tokyo effectively halt the 
Japanese atomic bomb program by destroying the 
main research facilities. 
 
  On August 6, a U.S. B-29 bomber drops an atomic 
bomb on the Japanese port city of Hiroshima, obliter-
ating the city and killing an estimated 66,000 people. 
On August 9, the United States drops a second atomic 
bomb on the city of Nagasaki, killing some 39,000 peo-
ple and injuring thousands more. The Soviet Union 
enters the Paciﬁ c war on August 9. On August 10, 
Japan surrenders, ending World War II.

104 Chronology
 
   In August, the U.S. War Department, with Presi-
dent Truman’s approval, releases a report by Princeton 
University physicist Henry Smyth detailing the bomb-
building project. The Soviet Union receives a copy of 
the report, translates it, and distributes it to scientists 
working on the bomb project. Stalin orders an all-out 
effort to build an atomic bomb. 
 
   Soviet physicist Igor Kurchatov becomes scien-
tiﬁ c director of the bomb project under Lavrenti Beria, 
head of Stalin’s secret police. In November, the Soviets 
begin construction of a plutonium production com-
plex (Chelyabinsk-40) in the Urals. 
 
   India creates the Tata Institute of Fundamental 
Research to conduct nuclear research under physi-
cist Homi Jehangir Bhabha’s direction. France creates 
the Atomic Energy Commission to conduct military 
research. 
1946 
 In January, the United Nations (UN) General Assem-
bly establishes the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) 
and calls for the elimination of nuclear weapons. In 
mid-1946, U.S. representative Bernard Baruch presents 
a report calling for control over global nuclear activi-
ties to the UN AEC. The Baruch Plan would eventu-
ally place all nuclear facilities worldwide under an 
international agency that would inspect and license 
nuclear activities. But the Soviet Union argues that all 
U.S. nuclear weapons must be destroyed before any 
international control system is established, which the 
United States rejects. No plan is adopted.
 
   In April, Soviet scientist Yuli Khariton selects a 
remote site about 400 miles east of Moscow as the loca-
tion for a secret nuclear weapons laboratory dubbed 
Arzamas-16. With prison labor, the Soviets build the 
ﬁ rst uranium graphite production reactor in the Urals 
(Chelyabinsk-40). In December, the Soviet Union 
achieves its ﬁ rst nuclear chain reaction at a laboratory 
in Moscow.
 
   In July, the U.S. Congress adopts the Atomic 
Energy Act in an effort to maintain the U.S. monopoly 
over nuclear weapon activities and establishes its own 
Atomic Energy Commission to oversee nuclear activi-
1945
(cont.)

Chronology
105
ties. In October, the United States, the United King-
dom, and Canada form the Joint Development Agency 
to hinder foreign development of nuclear weapons by 
acquiring all of the uranium produced in the Congo, 
South Africa, and Australia.
 
   Scientists at Los Alamos discuss the feasibility of 
building a thermonuclear (ﬁ ssion-fusion-ﬁ ssion) bomb 
as championed by physicist Edward Teller. Soviet sci-
entists also begin to study such weapons. 
 
  In July, the United States tests a series of nuclear 
weapons at the Bikini Atoll in the Paciﬁ c Ocean in 
an exercise called Operation Crossroads. The United 
States forcibly relocates the inhabitants of Bikini Atoll 
to Rongerik, a smaller, less fertile atoll. On July 25, 
the United States detonates Shot Baker 90 feet below 
the water; the resulting plume drops a million tons 
of radioactive seawater, turning the pristine Bikini 
lagoon into a radioactive lake.
1947 
 In January, a six-member committee of the British cab-
inet secretly decides to proceed with the development 
of nuclear weapons. In May, the government asks 
British physicist and Los Alamos participant William 
G. Penney to head the bomb effort. In August, Britain’s 
ﬁ rst nuclear reactor begins operating at Harwell.
 
   In July, the National Security Act replaces the U.S. 
War Department with the Department of Defense and 
creates the U.S. Air Force, the National Security Coun-
cil (NSC), and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).
 
   In October, the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff estimate 
that 150 Nagasaki-type bombs would be sufﬁ cient to 
defend the United States and defeat the Soviet Union. 
The U.S. nuclear weapons stockpile now contains 
twenty to ﬁ fty weapons.
1948 
 Britain and Canada give up their veto on the U.S. use of 
nuclear weapons. In return for massive U.S. economic 
assistance, the United Kingdom ships two-thirds of its 
uranium ore to the United States and allows the United 
States to get all of the Belgian Congo’s uranium ore for 
two years. 

106 Chronology
 
   In July, as more Soviet troops are being stationed 
in Eastern Europe, President Truman sends B-29 bomb-
ers to Europe to show that the United States will defend 
Western Europe with nuclear weapons if necessary. The 
NSC approves directive NSC-30, “Policy on Atomic 
Warfare,” which authorizes the military to plan for the 
use of nuclear weapons in a war but reserves the deci-
sions to use such weapons to the president. 
 
   From April 15 to May 15, the United States tests 
a series of nuclear weapons at Eniwetok Atoll in the 
Paciﬁ c under Operation Sandstone, demonstrating 
that small amounts of ﬁ ssile material can be boosted to 
develop larger yields, thus allowing the United States 
to build more weapons with existing ﬁ ssile material. 
 
   Newly independent India establishes its Atomic 
Energy Commission to begin work directly related to 
the exploitation of nuclear energy. 
 
   The Soviet government authorizes thermonuclear 
weapons research at the Physics Institute of the Soviet 
Academy of Sciences under Igor Tam, who recruits 
physicist Andrei Sakharov to work for him.
1949 
 With tensions in Europe rising over the Berlin Crisis, 
President Truman states that the atomic bomb should 
provide the central element in U.S. security policy. In 
April, Western nations form a military alliance, the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), to coor-
dinate their defense against Soviet-bloc countries. The 
United States ofﬁ cially commits itself to the defense of 
Western Europe within NATO. Meanwhile, the Soviet 
Union begins to integrate the national armed forces of 
Eastern Europe. 
 
   In September, the Soviet Union tests its ﬁ rst 
atomic bomb at Semipalatinsk in Soviet Kazakhstan. 
The United States dubs the plutonium device—with a 
yield of 20–22 kilotons—Joe 1 after Stalin, although, at 
Beria’s insistence, the bomb is an exact copy of the U.S. 
Fat Man device used at Nagasaki. 
 
   After the Soviet test, which is detected by U.S. 
spy planes conducting air sampling over China, the 
United States expands production of uranium and 
1948
(cont.)

Chronology
107
plutonium. AEC Commissioner Lewis Strauss urges 
President Truman to give highest priority to develop-
ing a thermonuclear (hydrogen) bomb.
 
   On October 1, Mao Tse-tung, the communist 
leader of the newly formed People’s Republic of 
China, calls the nuclear bomb a “paper tiger” that the 
United States uses to scare people. But the Chinese 
government, through physicist Qian Sanqianq, begins 
purchasing nuclear technology in Europe.
 
   In Israel, the Weizmann Institute of Science is 
actively supporting nuclear research under the direc-
tion of Ernst David Bergmann. The institute’s scien-
tists collaborate with French nuclear scientists at the 
Saclay nuclear research facility.
1950 
 In February, the Soviet Union signs a treaty of alliance 
and mutual assistance with the People’s Republic of 
China. The Soviet Union promises to defend China, if 
necessary, with nuclear weapons.
 
   In June, the complex calculations for designing 
a U.S. hydrogen bomb are given to the ﬁ rst primi-
tive electronic computer, the ENIAC, at the Aberdeen 
Proving Ground in Maryland.
 
   In England, physicist Klaus Fuchs confesses that 
he has been passing nuclear secrets to the Soviet Union 
and is sentenced to fourteen years in prison. He pro-
vides evidence on other U.S. nuclear spies, including 
Julius and Ethel Rosenberg.
 
   In April, the NSC issues NSC-68, which warns of 
the Soviet threat to world peace and calls for increased 
conventional and nuclear defenses. The U.S. atomic 
stockpile contains approximately 300 bombs, and the 
United States possesses 250 nuclear-capable aircraft.
 
   On June 11, Truman authorizes sending eighty-
nine sets of non-nuclear components to Britain for 
nuclear bombs to support the Strategic Air Command 
bomber units there. At this time, bomb designs call 
for the nuclear core of plutonium or uranium to be 
kept separate from the non-nuclear assembly, until the 
president authorizes them to be assembled into a com-
plete bomb.

108 Chronology
1951 
 While developing the hydrogen bomb, the United 
States accelerates its nuclear test program. It also 
establishes the U.S.-based Nevada Test Site (or Nevada 
Proving Ground) to economize on costs. More than 
6,000 U.S. troops conduct maneuvers within 5–6 miles 
of the Nevada explosions, and many later develop 
health problems. 
 
   In the ongoing Korean War, Chinese troops sweep 
south to ﬁ ght U.S. forces nearing their border. In April, 
the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff authorize nuclear retalia-
tion against North Korean air bases in case of a major 
attack against UN forces in South Korea. President 
Truman approves the transfer of nine nuclear bomb 
cores to Guam. He also authorizes the use of nuclear 
weapons on Manchuria if large numbers of Chinese 
troops join in the ﬁ ghting or if bombers are launched 
from Chinese bases.
 
  In April, U.S. citizens Ethel and Julius Rosenberg 
are sentenced to death for passing U.S. nuclear secrets 
to the Soviet Union.
 
   Mathematician Stanislaw Ulam and physicists 
Edward Teller and Richard Garwin develop a new 
design for a U.S. hydrogen bomb. 
 
   On September 24, the Soviet Union explodes Joe-
2, a lighter and improved plutonium implosion bomb 
with a yield of 38–40 kilotons. 
 
   In Windscale (later renamed Sellaﬁ eld), England, a 
second reactor starts producing plutonium for nuclear 
weapons.
1952 
 The UN replaces the failed AEC with the UN Disarma-
ment Commission.
 
  The United States can now mass produce nuclear 
weapons, and various ﬁ ssion cores are interchange-
able among weapon assemblies. In January, the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff authorize the supreme allied com-
mander in Europe, General Dwight Eisenhower, to 
begin planning for the use of nuclear weapons bombs 
by Navy and Air Force units to be stationed in Europe. 
Tactical nuclear weapons, capable of being delivered 
by planes, missiles, and artillery, soon begin to be allo-

Chronology
109
cated for the defense of Western Europe against a pos-
sible Soviet invasion.
 
   In November, the United States detonates the ﬁ rst 
thermonuclear (hydrogen) bomb, the 10.4-megaton 
Mike device, in the Marshall Islands (which became 
UN Trust Territories administered by the United 
States after Japan’s defeat), vaporizing the island of 
Elugelab. The weapon is 500 times more powerful 
than the bomb dropped on Nagasaki but is too heavy 
to be deliverable as a bomb. President-elect Eisenhow-
er’s staff drafts the New Look defense policy, empha-
sizing nuclear weapons and long-range bombers. The 
United States opens a new nuclear weapons labora-
tory at Livermore, California. 
 
   On October 3, the United Kingdom conducts its 
ﬁ rst nuclear test, a plutonium bomb with a yield of 
25 kilotons, near Monte Bello Island off the coast of 
Australia. Because the British are worried about the 
effects of a ship-smuggled bomb, they explode the 
bomb inside the hull of a 1,450-ton frigate, creating a 
1,000-foot-long crater. 
1953 
 In the Soviet Union, First Secretary Nikita Khrush-
chev orders Stalin’s internal security and nuclear tsar, 
Lavrenti Beria, removed from ofﬁ ce and later executed. 
Vyacheslav Malyshev becomes head of the nuclear 
program, now code-named the Ministry of Medium 
Machine-Building.
 
   Beginning in March, the United States tests a series 
of weapons at the Nevada Test Site. An estimated 18,000 
military personnel participate in observer programs, 
tactical maneuvers, scientiﬁ c studies, and other activi-
ties. In June, the United States shifts its nuclear arsenal 
from civilian to military custody. In the event of hostil-
ities with the Soviet Union or China, NSC 162/2 states 
that the United States will consider nuclear weapons 
to be as available as other weapons.
 
  After announcing its possession of a hydrogen 
bomb, the Soviet Union detonates the device at the 
Semipalatinsk site in Soviet Kazakhstan. The mili-
tary evacuates tens of thousands of inhabitants from 

110 Chronology
the surrounding area in a last-minute effort to protect 
them from radioactive fallout; some of those evacu-
ated cannot return home for several months. Not a 
true thermonuclear (ﬁ ssion-fusion-ﬁ ssion) bomb, this 
device obtains nearly all its relatively modest 400-
kiloton yield from ﬁ ssion, but it can be readily made 
into a deliverable weapon. In October, Britain conducts 
two atmospheric tests of ﬁ ssion bombs with yields of 8 
and 10 kilotons at Emu Field in South Australia.
 
   In December at the UN, President Eisenhower 
proposes his Atoms for Peace plan, which allows 
the dissemination of nuclear energy for peaceful pur-
poses to all interested nations, but requires that they 
be willing to accept safeguards against military uses. 
He also calls for the creation of an international atomic 
energy organization. 
1954 
 In January, the Indian Atomic Energy Commission 
sets up the Atomic Energy Establishment at Trombay 
and transfers all scientists working on nuclear power 
there. Also, the Department of Atomic Energy is cre-
ated with Bhabha as its head, reporting directly to the 
prime minister. 
 
  The United States launches the world’s ﬁ rst 
nuclear-powered submarine, the USS Nautilus, and 
deploys nuclear weapons at U.S. bases in Morocco and 
Britain.
 
   On March 1, the 15-megaton hydrogen bomb Bravo 
detonated at Bikini Atoll causes the worst radiological 
disaster in U.S. history, as the bomb greatly exceeds its 
expected yield of 6 megatons. Although the weapon is 
tested from a stand, the lithium deuteride design allows 
the bomb to ﬁ t inside the bomb bay of a B-47 aircraft. 
Because of the U.S. failure to conduct pretest evacua-
tions, the Marshall Islanders on four surrounding atolls 
are covered with the fallout plume, and a Japanese 
ﬁ shing boat and its twenty-three crewmen are heav-
ily contaminated. In addition, many U.S. personnel are 
exposed to dangerously high radiation levels.
 
   In June, after secret hearings, the U.S. AEC revokes 
Oppenheimer’s security clearance over his past com-
munist connections and alleged untrustworthiness. 
1953
(cont.)

Chronology
111
 
   The Soviet Union undertakes a military exercise 
after a nuclear detonation in September at a test site at 
Totskoe in the Urals. Civilians within 7 kilometers of 
ground zero are evacuated while 44,000 troops gather 
on a battleﬁ eld with various defenses, weapons, and 
animals at ranges of 5–8 kilometers from the epicen-
ter. Although soldiers and the local population receive 
above-normal radioactive doses, a simulated battle is 
ﬁ lmed in an attempt to develop regulations for future 
nuclear wars.
 
   After the Chinese bombing of the Taiwanese-held 
islands of Quemoy and Matsu, the United States and 
Taiwan sign a security pact in December. President 
Eisenhower develops plans for the possible use of 
nuclear weapons against China. He secretly deploys 
nuclear weapons on the U.S.-held territories of Oki-
nawa, Chichi Jima, and Iwo Jima and sends a nuclear-
armed aircraft carrier to Taiwanese waters. He also 
sends nuclear bomb components to U.S. bases in Japan 
despite Japan’s ofﬁ cial non-nuclear policy. 
1955 
 In January, Chairman Mao announces that China will 
obtain its own nuclear arsenal to counter U.S. weap-
ons. The Chinese decision is inﬂ uenced by grow-
ing U.S. involvement in Indochina and past nuclear 
threats against China during the Korean War and the 
Taiwan Strait Crisis. The Soviet Union increases coop-
eration with China and provides it with a cyclotron, 
a nuclear reactor, and ﬁ ssile material for research. A 
smaller cooperative nuclear program is initiated by 
the Soviet Union with North Korea.
 
   The U.S. nuclear arsenal stands at 2,422 weap-
ons. In March, the United States begins stationing 
nuclear weapons in NATO countries, including West 
Germany, the presumed front line against a possible 
Soviet attack. A U.S. government agency concludes 
that the currently planned nuclear offensive against 
the Soviet Union would result in 77 million casualties 
in the Soviet bloc.
 
   On May 14, the Warsaw Treaty of Friendship, 
Cooperation, and Mutual Assistance establishes the 

112 Chronology
so-called Warsaw Pact, providing for a uniﬁ ed com-
mand of Eastern European armies with a headquar-
ters in Moscow.
 
   Despite talk of disarmament, the United States 
tests eighteen weapons and the Soviet Union tests 
six, including the world’s ﬁ rst air-dropped hydrogen 
bomb. One Soviet test kills three civilians when its 
shock wave destroys a distant building.
1956 
 In July, a U.S. bomber crashes into a storage site con-
taining three Mark 6 nuclear weapons in the United 
Kingdom. A ﬁ re damages the bombs but does not 
ignite their conventional explosives or their nuclear 
cores.
 
  U.S., Soviet, and British atmospheric nuclear test-
ing continues. In August, the Soviet Union agrees to 
provide aid to build Chinese nuclear industries and 
research facilities. Also, China starts a strategic mis-
sile program. Marshal Nie Rongzhen leads the organi-
zation that oversees both the nuclear and missile 
programs.
 
   In November, after the Suez Crisis, French lead-
ers hold a secret meeting with Israeli leaders in which 
they agree to provide Israel with a 24-megawatt (ther-
mal) research reactor along with plutonium separation 
technology, possibly for a bomb program.
1957 
 In July, the UN ofﬁ cially establishes the International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA); the new organization 
holds its ﬁ rst general conference in Vienna in October. 
This agency aims to help disseminate nuclear technol-
ogy for peaceful purposes, promote nuclear safety, 
and administer a system of international nuclear safe-
guards to prevent the diversion of materials.
 
  In April, the United States deploys nuclear weap-
ons in Italy.
 
  The United States conducts thirty-two nuclear 
tests, the Soviet Union conducts sixteen tests, and 
the United Kingdom conducts seven tests, including 
its ﬁ rst thermonuclear bomb off Malden Island in the 
Paciﬁ c.
1955
(cont.)

Chronology
113
 
   At Mayak, a Soviet nuclear weapon facility, a 
breakdown in the cooling system of a tank holding 
more than 70,000 tons of radioactive sludge causes an 
explosion and releases a plume of radioactive fallout.
 
   On October 4, the Soviet Union launches the 
world’s ﬁ rst artiﬁ cial satellite (Sputnik) aboard an R-7 
missile, spreading fears in the West that Moscow now 
possesses long-range nuclear-armed missiles. The 
Soviet Union and China sign the New Defense Techni-
cal Accord, whereby the Soviet Union agrees to sup-
ply China with a prototype nuclear weapon, as well as 
missiles and related technical information.
 
   Continued atmospheric nuclear testing prompts 
groups of scientists and citizens internationally to 
begin organized protests against the bomb. Tests are 
now spreading measurable amounts of radioactivity 
into plants and cows’ milk across the globe. In August, 
the ﬁ rst demonstration of civil disobedience against 
nuclear weapon testing takes place at the Nevada Test 
Site when eleven protesters are arrested. In November, 
the Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy is formed in 
New York to promote global nuclear disarmament. 
 
  In October, France and Israel sign a nuclear coop-
eration agreement. France agrees to help Israel design 
and build a nuclear facility in Dimona, which will 
include a plutonium-reprocessing plant that could be 
used to produce weapons-grade material. 
1958 
 In January, Nobel Prize–winning scientist Linus Paul-
ing and his wife, Eva Helen Pauling, present the 
UN secretary-general with a petition signed by 11,021 
scientists worldwide that calls for an end to nuclear 
testing.
 
   The United States moves to deploy nuclear-armed 
cruise missiles on Taiwan and in South Korea. In March, 
the German parliament approves deployment of U.S. 
nuclear weapons in West Germany. In August, the 
United States also deploys nuclear weapons in France.
 
   Social turbulence in China, including the Great 
Leap Forward’s heavy emphasis on popular partici-
pation in scientiﬁ c and technical matters, interferes 

114 Chronology
with China’s nuclear research program. But China 
begins constructing the Northwest Nuclear Weapons 
Research and Design Academy (Ninth Academy).
 
   Before announcing a nuclear testing moratorium 
at the end of the year, the United States tests a record 
seventy-seven nuclear devices. During Operation 
Hardtack I at the Paciﬁ c Proving Ground, the United 
States conducts a series of thirty-ﬁ ve tests to develop 
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) and subma-
rine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) warheads and 
high-yield strategic bombs. The Operation Hardtack 
II series of thirty-seven tests at the Nevada Test Site 
introduces underground testing as a routine procedure 
to help reduce fallout. After holding ﬁ ve tests during 
the year, the United Kingdom stops conducting its own 
independent nuclear tests and joins forces with the 
United States. After Britain demonstrates that it can 
develop thermonuclear weapons, the United States 
allows collaboration with Britain on weapons devel-
opment. All subsequent British nuclear weapons are 
based on U.S. designs. 
 
   The Geneva Conference of Experts agrees on the 
technical characteristics of a system to monitor nuclear 
tests in the atmosphere, underwater, and underground. 
The system would include land and shipborne control 
posts, overﬂ ights, and on-site inspections. Still the 
United States, Britain, and the Soviet Union can’t agree 
on a test ban, and the Soviets conduct a new series of 
thirty-four tests.
 
   The United States secretly stores four large thermo-
nuclear bombs (each with a yield of 9–10 megatons) at 
Thule Air Base, Greenland, a territory of Denmark, for 
approximately ten months, violating Denmark’s policy 
banning nuclear deployments within its borders.
1959 
 In February, the United States deploys nuclear weap-
ons in Turkey, a member of NATO.
 
   Because of a growing rift between Khrushchev 
and Mao regarding political, economic, and military 
policies, the Soviet Union tells China it will not supply 
a prototype bomb as promised. 
1958
(cont.)

Chronology
115
 
   In October, the United States deploys its ﬁ rst 
operational ICBM, the Atlas D. In September, France 
begins a program to develop ballistic missiles with a 
range of 3,500 kilometers for both land- and sea-based 
launches.
 
   Through the Atoms for Peace program, the United 
States has now entered into nuclear cooperation agree-
ments with forty countries.
 
   In December, the Antarctic Treaty is signed by 
forty-two countries. The treaty obligates member states 
to use Antarctica only for peaceful purposes and pro-
hibits all nuclear explosions, as well as the disposal of 
radioactive waste on the continent.
 
   At the end of the year, President Eisenhower 
announces an end to the voluntary U.S. moratorium 
on nuclear testing but promises the United States will 
not resume testing without advance public notice. 
1960 
 On February 13, France explodes its ﬁ rst nuclear 
weapon with a yield of 60–70 kilotons in the French-
owned Algerian portion of the Sahara Desert and later 
tests two more. France’s President Charles de Gaulle 
hails the ﬁ rst test as a great national achievement.
 
   After the U.S. State Department issues a state-
ment that Israel has a secret nuclear installation, Israeli 
Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion announces that 
Israel is building a 24-megawatt reactor “for peaceful 
purposes.”
 
   The Soviet Union refuses China’s demand for 
more technical information concerning nuclear weap-
ons and withdraws all of its advisers. China adopts 
an emergency plan to build an indigenous nuclear 
weapon. Construction of the gaseous diffusion plant 
at Lanzhou to produce weapons-grade uranium 
becomes a national crusade.
 
   At a rally by a protest group from the Committee 
for a Sane Nuclear Policy in Madison Square Garden 
in New York City, 20,000 people gather to hear Eleanor 
Roosevelt, Norman Cousins, and other speakers call 
for an end to the arms race. Five thousand demonstra-
tors then march after midnight to the UN in a sym-
bolic call for change.

116 Chronology
 
   In December, the U.S. Joint Strategic Target Plan-
ning Staff completes the Single Integrated Operational 
Plan 62; in the event of war, it calls for the launch 
of all U.S. strategic nuclear-delivery vehicles. It lists 
2,021 strategic targets to be hit in the Soviet Union and 
China, killing an estimated 360–425 million people. 
The United States deploys nuclear weapons in the 
Netherlands and Greece.
1961 
 In January, an explosion at an experimental military 
reactor in Idaho kills three technicians. The same month, 
a B-52 carrying two 4-megaton bombs crashes in North 
Carolina. On one of the bombs, only a single switch 
prevents an explosion that would have been 1,800 times 
more powerful than that of the Hiroshima bomb.
 
   In June, the Antarctic Treaty enters into force, 
making the southern polar region the world’s ﬁ rst 
nuclear-weapon-free zone.
 
   Just weeks after the construction of the Berlin Wall, 
Life magazine publishes its September issue devoted to 
how to survive radioactive fallout from a nuclear attack 
in which President John F. Kennedy states that the pos-
sibility of nuclear war is a fact of life. The group Physi-
cians for Social Responsibility is founded to address 
growing public concerns about the health effects of 
nuclear testing.
 
   On October 31, the Soviet Union explodes the larg-
est nuclear weapon ever detonated over the Novaya 
Zemlya Island testing range in the Arctic Sea. Sakharov 
designs the 100-megaton Tsar Bomba on the orders of 
Khrushchev, who wants to make a political statement. 
Although the test’s yield is reduced to 50 megatons 
for safety reasons, it proves that it is possible to build 
bombs of virtually unlimited power. Two weeks later, 
the United States begins its ﬁ rst underground nuclear 
test series at the Nevada Test Site, with approximately 
forty-four explosions.
 
   On September 20, the United States and the Soviet 
Union sign the McCloy-Zorin Accords, setting out 
principles for negotiations toward complete disarma-
ment. The accords call for the UN to supervise a dis-
armament process that would eventually eliminate all 
1960
(cont.)

Chronology
117
weapons of mass destruction (WMD), their delivery 
systems, and national armed forces in general. The 
UN General Assembly adopts the accords in Decem-
ber.
 
   The U.S. stockpile of nuclear weapons deployed 
in East Asia reaches 1,600; about half are located at the 
Strategic Air Command (SAC) base on Okinawa, 600 
in South Korea, 225 in Guam, 60 in the Philippines, 
and 12 on Taiwan.
 
   Using the innovation of satellite-based, photo-
reconnaissance technology, the United States obtains 
evidence that it has considerable superiority over the 
Soviet Union in numbers of nuclear weapons.
1962 
 The United States has an estimated 27,100 nuclear 
weapons, the Soviet Union 3,100, the United Kingdom 
205, and France a few test bombs.
 
   Beginning in July and running for a year, the 
United States conducts a series of nuclear tests for 
both military and nonmilitary uses at the Nevada 
Test Site. The largest test involves detonating a 104-
kiloton device in a crater to investigate the potential 
of using thermonuclear devices for industrial excava-
tion, such as canal and harbor construction. The test 
creates a crater 1,280 feet wide and 320 feet deep, but it 
is too contaminated to be accessible to human beings. 
Meanwhile, U.S. nuclear tests in space, launched from 
Johnston Island in the Paciﬁ c, disable several U.S. and 
foreign satellites. 
 
   Khrushchev decides that the Soviet Union should 
place intermediate-range, nuclear-armed missiles in 
Cuba to counter U.S. missiles in Turkey and to protect
Cuba, newly communist from a U.S.-sponsored inva-
sion. With Cuban President Fidel Castro’s approval, the 
Soviet Union begins building secret ballistic missile 
installations there. In October, in what becomes known 
as the Cuban Missile Crisis, Kennedy confronts Soviet 
denials of this construction and calls for the immedi-
ate dismantlement of the sites, beginning two weeks 
of tense diplomacy. Ultimately, war is avoided when 
Khrushchev agrees to dismantle the missile installa-
tions in return for a public U.S. pledge not to invade 

118 Chronology
Cuba and a secret U.S. agreement to remove its mis-
siles from Turkey.
1963 
 On April 29, at the initiative of the president of Mexico, 
the presidents of Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, and 
Mexico announce that they are prepared to sign a mul-
tilateral agreement to make Latin America a nuclear-
weapon-free zone. The Latin American nations begin 
negotiations to agree on language for a formal treaty.
 
   The United States and Soviet Union sign the so-
called Hot-Line Agreement on June 20 that establishes 
direct radio and telegraph links between the coun-
tries’ leaders to prevent future crises and miscommu-
nication. On August 5, the United States, the Soviet 
Union, and Britain sign the Limited Test Ban Treaty. 
The treaty allows only underground nuclear tests by 
the three countries beginning on October 10 and is of 
unlimited duration. The agreement is opened to signa-
ture by other states at the UN. France and China refuse 
to sign.
1964 
 In January, U.S. President Lyndon Johnson proposes 
a nuclear nonproliferation treaty before the Eighteen-
Nation Disarmament Committee. The Soviet Union 
refuses to join the U.S. proposal because the United 
States has discussed forming a multilateral nuclear 
force with its NATO allies.
 
   In July, the Organization of African Unity, conven-
ing its ﬁ rst summit in Cairo, formally calls for a treaty 
ensuring the denuclearization of Africa.
 
   On October 16, China explodes its ﬁ rst atomic 
bomb at the Lop Nor test site; the uranium implosion 
device has a 22-kiloton yield. After the test, Premier 
Zhou Enlai calls for elimination of all nuclear weap-
ons and pledges that China will not be the ﬁ rst to use 
nuclear weapons.
 
   The United States conducts approximately thirty-
nine underground nuclear tests, the Soviet Union nine, 
and Great Britain and France three apiece. 
1965 
 In March, China adopts guidelines for full-scale pur-
suit of long-range missiles capable of carrying nuclear 
1962
(cont.)

Chronology
119
warheads. In May, China tests its ﬁ rst atomic bomb 
from an airplane.
1966 
 On January 17, a U.S. B-52 bomber carrying nuclear 
weapons has a midair accident and drops four nuclear 
weapons on Palomares, Spain. No nuclear explosions 
occur, but conventional explosives in two of the weap-
ons scatter radioactive material over a populated area. 
The United States has to pay $182 million for recovery, 
cleanup, and compensation.
 
   In July, France tests a nuclear weapon at the Muru-
roa Atoll in the Paciﬁ c Ocean. China launches a guided 
missile armed with a nuclear warhead at its test site in 
Xinjiang in October. U.S. and other intelligence agen-
cies determine that Israel has now produced enough 
plutonium for a nuclear weapon at its Dimona facility. 
The Israeli government maintains that it will not be 
the ﬁ rst country to introduce nuclear weapons to the 
Middle East.
1967 
 The Outer Space Treaty is opened for signature at the 
UN in January. The treaty bans states from placing 
nuclear weapons (and other WMD) in orbit around 
the Earth or otherwise stationing them in outer space. 
It also limits the use of the moon and other celestial 
bodies exclusively to nonmilitary purposes. 
 
   At a regional meeting of Latin American countries 
in February, the ﬁ rst nuclear-weapon-free zone treaty 
covering a populated area is signed. The so-called 
Treaty of Tlatelolco pledges signatories to use nuclear 
materials and facilities exclusively for peaceful pur-
poses and to prohibit testing, storing, and deploying 
nuclear weapons. The treaty establishes the Agency 
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin Amer-
ica to monitor and ensure compliance with the treaty. 
However, numerous key states refuse to ratify the 
treaty, hampering its implementation.
 
   China tests its ﬁ rst thermonuclear bomb in June 
with a 3.3-megaton yield at its Lop Nor test site. China 
needed only thirty-two months to move from its ﬁ rst 
atomic test to a thermonuclear weapon, the shortest 
period yet.

120 Chronology
 
   In September, the United States announces that 
it will deploy a limited antiballistic missile system 
named Sentinel. The system is intended to counter a 
possible threat from China (believed to be immune 
from deterrence) and to add protection against the 
remote possibility of an accidental launch of an inter-
continental missile by the Soviet Union. 
 
   The combined number of tactical and strategic 
nuclear weapons in the U.S. arsenal peaks at 32,500. 
The U.S. stockpile of nuclear weapons in territories in 
the Paciﬁ c Ocean also peaks at approximately 3,200 
weapons. The Soviet Union has an estimated 8,850 
nuclear weapons, the United Kingdom 270, France 36, 
and China 25.
1968 
 In January, a U.S. B-52 bomber crashes on the ice 
near Thule, Greenland. The conventional explosives 
surrounding all four nuclear weapons aboard detonate 
and scatter plutonium on the ice, requiring a costly 
cleanup operation, although adequate safety measures 
to protect the local workers are not taken. In March, a 
diesel-powered Soviet Golf II–class submarine (K-129)
with three nuclear-tipped missiles aboard sinks off the 
coast of Oahu, Hawaii, killing its crew of eighty men. 
Two months later, the U.S. nuclear submarine Scorpion
sinks with two nuclear torpedoes aboard in the Atlan-
tic Ocean near the Azores, killing all ninety-nine crew-
men. A few days later, a liquid-metal reactor aboard a 
Soviet nuclear submarine (K-27) releases radioactive 
steam, killing ﬁ ve sailors.
 
   On June 12, the UN General Assembly approves 
the ﬁ nal text of the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty 
(NPT). On July 1, the United States, the United King-
dom, the Soviet Union, and ﬁ fty-nine other countries 
sign the NPT, which will become effective in 1970. 
China and France decline to sign. The ﬁ ve countries 
that have already tested nuclear weapons agree to 
eventual disarmament, and other signatories agree 
not to pursue such weapons in return for peaceful 
nuclear technology. The NPT requires that nuclear 
1967
(cont.)

Chronology
121
weapon states not transfer nuclear weapons or provide 
weapon-related assistance to non–nuclear weapon 
states and that non–nuclear weapon states conclude 
safeguards agreements with the IAEA. 
 
  On August 24, France tests its ﬁ rst hydrogen 
bomb from a balloon at the Fangataufa Atoll in the 
South Paciﬁ c, with a yield of 2.6 megatons. The blast 
blankets the atoll with radioactivity, rendering it off-
limits to humans for six years.
 
   Reportedly, Israeli Prime Minister Moshe Dayan 
approves nuclear weapons production of three to ﬁ ve 
bombs per year.
1969 
 In November, the ﬁ rst Strategic Arms Limitation Talks 
(SALT) begin between the United States and the Soviet 
Union in Helsinki, Finland. Differences between the 
two sides in the number of speciﬁ c types of delivery 
systems lead to disagreements at the SALT meetings 
over what should be the focus of a future treaty.
 
   The U.S. arsenal of strategic and tactical nuclear 
weapons declines—because old warheads are retired—
to 28,200; the Soviet Union has 11,000, the United 
Kingdom 308, China 50, and France 36.
 
   The Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee 
based in Geneva is enlarged and becomes known as 
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament.
1970 
 The NPT enters into force with the U.S. and Soviet 
ratiﬁ cations in March.
 
   The IAEA, having been tasked under the NPT to 
establish nuclear controls at speciﬁ c facilities, develops 
Document Information Circular 153, which becomes the 
basis for all bilateral safeguard agreements between the
IAEA and the individual non–nuclear weapon states 
that are party to the NPT. 
 
  In August, the United States deploys the ﬁ rst mis-
sile with multiple, independently targetable reentry 
vehicles (MIRVs), the Minuteman III.
 
   The United States conducts thirty-eight nuclear 
tests, the Soviet Union sixteen, France eight, and China 

122 Chronology
one. The U.S. tests include a series in which radioac-
tivity is deliberately vented out from underground for 
tracking purposes.
1971 
 Fifteen countries involved in nuclear technology exports 
form the NPT Exporters Committee (also known as the 
Zangger Committee for its chair, Swiss nuclear expert 
Claude Zangger). The committee seeks to establish 
consensus on the NPT clause requiring that nuclear 
equipment and material be under safeguards after 
export to a non–nuclear weapon state to ensure it is 
not diverted to a weapon program.
 
   France’s intermediate-range ballistic missile force, 
based in eighteen silos between Marseilles and Lyon, 
becomes operational in August. The missiles are armed 
with 120-kiloton MR-31 plutonium ﬁ ssion warheads.
 
   China deploys the Dong Feng-4 missile, which 
can carry a 1-megaton warhead to a maximum range 
of 4,800 kilometers. Spurred on by China’s nuclear 
tests, Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi secretly 
decides to proceed with the manufacture and test of a 
nuclear device.
 
   The number of nuclear weapons in NATO Europe 
peaks at 7,300; Germany stores approximately half of 
them.
 
   After Pakistan’s defeat in the 1971 Indo-Pakistan 
War, Pakistan launches a clandestine nuclear weapon 
program.
1972 
 In January, France’s ﬁ rst class of strategic missile sub-
marines begins to patrol armed with MR-41 boosted 
ﬁ ssion warheads with a yield of approximately 500 
kilotons.
 
   On May 18, the Seabed Treaty enters into force. 
The treaty prohibits parties from placing nuclear 
weapons and any other WMD on the seabed and the 
ocean ﬂ oor beyond a 12-mile coastal zone.
 
   On May 26 in Moscow, U.S. President Richard 
Nixon and Soviet General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev 
sign two agreements to slow the arms race: the Anti-
Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty and the SALT I Interim 
1970
(cont.)

Chronology
123
Agreement. The ABM Treaty limits antimissile systems 
to two sites and bans nationwide missile defenses to 
reduce incentives for further arms racing. The Interim 
Agreement puts ceilings on the number of strategic 
land-based and sea-based launchers on each side, but 
it fails to ban MIRVs. 
 
  In October, Egypt and Syria launch a surprise 
attack on Israel, starting the Yom Kippur War. Tempo-
rarily unprepared to defend itself with conventional 
forces, Israel reportedly readies its nuclear-armed 
Jericho missiles for launch. After Israel counterattacks 
and corners the Egyptian Third Army, Soviet leader 
Brezhnev threatens to introduce Soviet troops to help 
the Egyptians. This prompts President Nixon to put 
the United States on worldwide nuclear alert. Both 
superpowers ﬁ nally back down.
1973 
 Australia and New Zealand start proceedings in May 
at the International Court of Justice in The Hague, 
Netherlands, to prevent further French atmospheric 
nuclear tests in the South Paciﬁ c. The court states that 
France should avoid nuclear tests that cause radioac-
tive fallout in the South Paciﬁ c. France conducts ﬁ ve 
atmospheric nuclear tests anyway.
 
   On June 22, Nixon and Brezhnev sign an agree-
ment on preventing nuclear war. The parties agree to 
work to avoid military conﬂ icts and the outbreak of 
nuclear war between them and other countries, and 
to consult each other immediately if there is a risk of 
nuclear conﬂ ict.
1974 
 On May 18, India explodes a 12-kiloton plutonium 
bomb underground in the Rajasthan Desert near the 
town of Pokhran. The test, code-named Smiling Bud-
dha, is motivated in part by India’s concerns about 
nuclear-armed China and the two countries’ bor-
der disputes. The Bhabha Atomic Research Center 
designed the nuclear device using plutonium created 
in a Canadian-supplied research reactor, which had 
U.S.-supplied heavy water as a moderator. As a non-
member of the NPT, India claims that it violated no 

124 Chronology
international agreements. It says the test is a “peaceful 
nuclear experiment,” not a bomb.
 
   In July, the United States and Soviet Union revise 
the ABM Treaty to limit each side to only one ABM 
system, surrounding either the national capital or an 
ICBM base. The two sides also sign the Threshold Test 
Ban Treaty, which prohibits any underground nuclear 
weapon test having a yield exceeding 150 kilotons 
(or about 10 times the yield of the Hiroshima bomb). 
Under the agreement, the parties also agree to limit 
the number of tests to a minimum and to exchange 
technical data about underground nuclear tests.
 
   In response to the Indian nuclear test, the Zangger 
Committee publishes two memoranda in August—
together known as the Trigger List—specifying when 
IAEA safeguards should be required for exports of 
nuclear-related items to non–nuclear weapon states. 
The ﬁ rst memorandum covers nuclear materials that 
can signiﬁ cantly contribute to the manufacture of 
nuclear weapons, and the second covers equipment or 
material designed for processing, using, or producing 
ﬁ ssile materials.
 
   In November, U.S. President Gerald Ford and 
Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev sign the Vladi -
vostok Accord, establishing a framework for a future 
SALT II agreement. The accord suggests a ceiling 
of 2,400 total strategic offensive delivery systems 
(ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers) for each side, 
a further subceiling of 1,320 MIRVed systems, a ban 
on constructing new land-based ICBM launchers, and 
limits on deploying new types of strategic offensive 
weapons.
 
   South African Prime Minister John Vorster secretly 
approves a program to develop nuclear weapons as a 
deterrent. The initial plan is oriented toward peaceful 
nuclear explosions and constructing an underground 
nuclear test site.
1975 
 After India’s explosion of a nuclear device, seven 
major nuclear supplier countries meet with the goal of 
considering restrictions on nuclear trade in addition 
to those in the NPT and Zangger Committee memo-
1974
(cont.)

Chronology
125
randa. This group, known as the Nuclear Suppliers 
Group (or the London Club), consists of representa-
tives from the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, 
France (not an NPT member), West Germany, Canada, 
and Japan (not an NPT member).
 
   A single U.S. ABM deployment site with 100 inter-
ceptors and associated radars (the Safeguard system) 
is completed to protect ICBM silos at Grand Forks, 
North Dakota, at a cost of $12 billion. But Congress 
deactivates the site after only four months because 
of its high operating cost and the likelihood that its 
nuclear-tipped interceptors would “blind” the sys-
tem’s radars. 
 
   The ﬁ rst ﬁ ve-year NPT Review Conference is held 
in Geneva in May. The treaty now has ninety-one par-
ties. The ﬁ nal document reafﬁ rms strong support for 
the treaty, welcomes the various arms limitation agree-
ments reached (particularly SALT I), but expresses 
concerns that the nuclear arms race has otherwise con-
tinued unabated. The United States has 28,100 nuclear 
weapons, the Soviet Union 23,500, the United King-
dom 350, France 188, China 185, and Israel approxi-
mately 20.
1976  
 The South African Atomic Energy Board secretly tests 
a full-scale model of a gun-type device using nonex-
plosive natural uranium.
1977 
 France’s ﬁ rst thermonuclear warhead with a yield of 
1 megaton enters service on a strategic missile nuclear 
submarine.
 
   In July, the U.S. Jimmy Carter administration 
announces it has tested an enhanced radiation weapon 
(the so-called neutron bomb). The new weapon is a 
small hydrogen bomb with only one-tenth of the blast 
and heat (thus reducing damage to cities), but it pro-
duces high levels of radiation to kill troops and civil-
ians. International public reaction is overwhelmingly 
negative.
 
   In July, the Soviet Union informs the United States 
that one of its spy satellites has detected preparations 
for a nuclear test in the Kalahari Desert of South Africa. 

126 Chronology
International pressure forces South Africa to cover the 
test shafts with concrete and abandon the site.
 
   The Nuclear Suppliers Group adopts the Zangger 
Committee’s Trigger List in September and expands 
it to include other nuclear-related technologies that 
should also be restricted, such as heavy-water pro-
duction plants. The guidelines also introduce the term 
sensitive facilities (e.g., those undertaking plutonium 
reprocessing and uranium isotope separation) for 
which a transfer of technology should be handled par-
ticularly cautiously.
 
   In December, a grassroots U.S. organization, Mobi-
lization for Survival, holds its ﬁ rst national conference. 
This coalition of more than 280 afﬁ liated groups aims 
to eliminate nuclear weapons, ban nuclear power, and 
reverse the arms race.
1978 
 The U.S. citizens’ group Nuclear Weapons Facilities 
Task Force forms to support antinuclear organizing in 
communities near major nuclear weapon production 
sites.
 
   In January, the Nuclear Suppliers Group transmits 
its new guidelines to the IAEA. They are published 
as IAEA Document Information Circular 254 and call 
on states to require IAEA safeguards to be applied to 
plants built in non–nuclear weapon states and to refrain 
from transfers of reprocessing and enrichment technol-
ogy that could be useful in developing weapons.
  
   President Carter signs the Nuclear Non-Prolif-
eration Act in March to help ensure that U.S. materi-
als will not be diverted to the production of nuclear 
weapons either directly or in third-party countries. 
 
   Under Prime Minister P. W. Botha, the South Afri-
can government decides neither to acknowledge nor 
deny its nuclear capability. If threatened, however, 
the government will consider privately revealing its 
nuclear status to international powers such as the 
United States, possibly with a nuclear test, to compel 
international intervention on its behalf. 
 
   In June, the UN General Assembly, at the First 
Special Session on Disarmament in New York, pro-
1977
(cont.)

Chronology
127
vides a mandate to the newly reorganized Conference 
on Disarmament in Geneva to deal with nuclear arms 
control and general disarmament issues. 
1979 
 On March 28, an accident in the cooling system occurs 
at the Three Mile Island Nuclear Plant near Harrisburg, 
Pennsylvania, releasing radiation into the atmosphere 
and requiring evacuation of the area. The accident 
boosts public support for a freeze on the production of 
nuclear weapons.
 
   In June, Carter and Brezhnev sign the SALT II 
Treaty. It sets a ceiling of 2,400 strategic delivery sys-
tems and limits to 1,320 the number allowed to carry 
multiple warheads.
 
   South Africa secretly produces its ﬁ rst usable 
nuclear weapon. It develops plans to produce seven 
nuclear weapons. On September 22, a U.S. surveil-
lance satellite detects a brief, intense, double ﬂ ash of 
light off the southern coast of Africa. U.S. ofﬁ cials sur-
mise that the ﬂ ash could have resulted from the test of 
a nuclear device with a yield of 2–4 kilotons. There is 
speculation that South Africa, Israel, or the two coun-
tries working together conducted a test; the South 
African government denies the accusations.
 
   In November, a tape of a simulated missile attack 
mistakenly activates the U.S. early warning system. 
During the six minutes it takes to discover the attack 
is not authentic, ﬁ ghters from Canadian and U.S. 
bases take off, and missile and submarine installations 
worldwide are placed on alert.
 
   NATO ministers adopt a dual-track strategy in 
November to counter the Soviet deployment of highly 
accurate, multiple-warhead mobile SS-20 missiles that 
have a 5,000-kilometer range, permitting them to hit 
targets throughout Western Europe. One track calls for 
arms-control negotiations between the United States 
and Soviet Union to reduce all intermediate-range 
missiles; the other calls for deploying 464 single-
warhead U.S. ground-launched cruise missiles and 
108 Pershing II ballistic missiles in Western Europe, 
beginning in December 1983, in case talks should fail.

128 Chronology
1980 
 After the Soviet Union’s invasion of Afghanistan in 
December 1979, President Carter withdraws the SALT 
II Treaty from Senate consideration in January because 
of its expected defeat. Carter and Brezhnev both issue 
statements that their countries will comply with the 
treaty as long as the other side does.
 
   The Convention on the Physical Protection of 
Nuclear Material is opened for signature in March. 
The convention calls for certain levels of physical pro-
tection (e.g., controlled access, surveillance by guards 
and electronic devices) during international transport 
of nuclear material and while in domestic use. 
 
   In June, a computer chip in the North American 
Aerospace Defense Command system fails, causing the 
system to mistakenly indicate a Soviet missile attack. 
About 100 U.S. B-52 bombers, along with other aircraft, 
are readied for takeoff before the error is detected. In 
September, an accident in a silo of a Titan II ICBM sends 
a reentry vehicle with a 9-megaton warhead 600 feet 
into the air, killing one person and injuring twenty-one 
others, although the warhead does not detonate.
 
   The ten-year NPT Review Conference opens in 
August; the treaty now has 112 members. The par-
ticipants fail to agree on a ﬁ nal declaration, largely 
because nuclear weapon states allegedly have not 
worked hard enough to fulﬁ ll their obligation to nego-
tiate measures to halt the nuclear arms race. 
1981 
 Incoming President Ronald Reagan orders several 
new nuclear weapon delivery systems (MX missiles, 
Trident submarines, and B-1 bombers) to overcome 
what he calls a “window of vulnerability” versus the 
Soviet Union.
 
   In April, the U.S. nuclear submarine George Wash-
ington, carrying 160 nuclear warheads, collides with a 
Japanese freighter in the East China Sea while surfac-
ing. The freighter sinks in ﬁ fteen minutes, killing two 
Japanese crew members.
 
   On June 7, Israeli ﬁ ghter planes bomb the Tam-
muz-1 (Osiraq) nuclear research reactor near Baghdad 
to prevent Iraq from developing nuclear weapons. The 

Chronology
129
reactor, subject to IAEA safeguards, had not yet begun 
operating, but the Israeli attack reduces it to rubble. 
1982 
 The World Health Organization estimates that a major 
nuclear war would kill 2 billion people—half of the 
Earth’s population. 
 
   On June 12, almost 1 million people gather in New 
York City’s Central Park to protest the nuclear arms 
race, making it probably the largest political demon-
stration in history. Subsequent resolutions calling for 
a freeze on further deployment of nuclear weapons 
win in eight statewide elections (California, Mas-
sachusetts, Michigan, Montana, New Jersey, North 
Dakota, Oregon, and Rhode Island) and several major 
city elections. The freeze proposal is endorsed by 150 
national organizations, many major religious groups, 
and twenty-ﬁ ve of the largest U.S. trade unions. The 
referenda demonstrate a groundswell of disagreement 
with the Reagan administration’s policy of increasing 
the U.S. nuclear arsenal and preparing to win and sur-
vive a nuclear war.
1983 
 On March 23, President Reagan calls for the develop-
ment of a nationwide missile defense system drawing 
on proposed new technologies, including space-based 
interceptors, magnetic rail guns, and lasers. Ofﬁ cially 
known as the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), the press 
refers to the expensive military plan as “Star Wars.” 
 
   After the success of various states’ nuclear freeze 
referenda, the Democratic-controlled House of Rep-
resentatives passes a nonbinding resolution in May 
advocating a nuclear freeze. A few weeks later, how-
ever, some supporters of the freeze legislation join 
those approving new funding for the MX missile.
 
   Also in May, Roman Catholic bishops issue a pas-
toral letter, “The Challenge of Peace: God’s Promise 
and Our Response,” declaring support for an immedi-
ate U.S.-Soviet agreement to halt the arms race. More 
than 1 million copies of the letter are circulated, and it 
receives widespread press attention. The World Coun-
cil of Churches adopts a resolution stating that the 

130 Chronology
production, deployment, and use of nuclear weapons 
are crimes against humanity and must be condemned 
on ethical and theological grounds.
 
   Under its dual-track strategy, NATO deploys 
U.S. ground-based nuclear cruise missiles in the 
United Kingdom and Pershing II nuclear missiles in 
Germany. In October, 3 million people across Europe 
demonstrate against these deployments in the largest 
political rally in European history.
 
   The U.S. State Department determines that Paki-
stan—a key U.S. ally in the effort to back anti-Soviet 
Muslim ﬁ ghters in Afghanistan—is developing nuclear 
weapons with help from China, including the design 
for a nuclear bomb. 
1984 
 On March 21, the U.S. aircraft carrier Kitty Hawk, car-
rying several dozen nuclear weapons, collides with a 
Soviet Victor-class attack submarine carrying nuclear-
armed torpedoes in the Sea of Japan. The Soviet sub-
marine has to be towed to Vladivostok.
 
   In April, the United States and China sign a 
nuclear trade agreement after the Chinese government 
agrees to join the IAEA and to accept IAEA inspections 
of any exported nuclear material and equipment. 
1985 
 Pakistan secretly develops the capability to enrich ura-
nium to weapons grade. The U.S. Congress enacts the 
Pressler Amendment stating that U.S. military sales 
and yearly aid to Pakistan will be cut off unless the 
U.S. president can certify that Pakistan does not pos-
sess a nuclear explosive device. The Reagan admin-
istration continues aid to Pakistan, despite concerns 
about its nuclear program, because it seeks Pakistan’s 
help in ousting Soviet forces from Afghanistan.
 
  At the ﬁ fteen-year NPT Review Conference, the 
131 parties adopt a ﬁ nal declaration that pledges 
support for the treaty while calling for stronger 
nuclear disarmament measures. Under Soviet pres-
sure, North Korea joins the NPT and agrees to open 
an indigenously constructed research reactor to IAEA 
inspections, once it completes a formal safeguards 
agreement.
1983
(cont.)

Chronology
131
 
   The international organization Greenpeace sends 
a boat, Rainbow Warrior, to the South Paciﬁ c to protest 
French nuclear testing. While the boat is docked in 
Auckland, New Zealand, French secret service agents 
detonate a bomb on it, killing one person onboard and 
provoking international outrage.
 
   On August 6, on the fortieth anniversary of the 
Hiroshima bombing, the Soviet Union declares a uni-
lateral moratorium on nuclear testing after conducting 
ten tests in 1985. During this year, the United States 
conducts seventeen nuclear tests, France eight, and 
the United Kingdom one.
 
   Also on August 6, members of the South Paciﬁ c 
Forum, including Australia and New Zealand, open 
the South Paciﬁ c Nuclear-Free Zone Treaty (the Treaty 
of Rarotonga) for signature. Each party agrees not to 
build nuclear weapons, not to allow stationing of the 
weapons of other states, and to seek to prevent nuclear 
testing and the dumping of radioactive materials in 
the zone and territorial seas. Article V allows each 
party to decide whether to allow ships and aircraft 
with nuclear fuel or materials within its territory.
 
   South African President Botha decides that the 
nuclear weapon program will be limited to seven 
highly enriched uranium (HEU) ﬁ ssion devices. South 
Africa stops all work related to plutonium weapon 
development.
 
   In November, Argentina and Brazil sign the Joint 
Declaration on Nuclear Policy, stating their commit-
ment to develop nuclear energy exclusively for peaceful 
purposes and to undertake conﬁ dence-building mea-
sures, including eventual reciprocal visits to nuclear 
installations.
 
   In December, a Nobel Prize is awarded to the 
organization International Physicians for the Preven-
tion of Nuclear War. 
1986 
 U.S. intelligence agencies report that Pakistan has the 
capability to produce HEU and to assemble nuclear 
weapons. In September, Pakistan conducts cold tests 
(i.e., instrumented detonations of simulated nuclear 
bombs) at Chagai. China aids Pakistan’s nuclear 

132 Chronology
efforts; the two countries sign an agreement on the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy that includes the con-
struction and operation of nuclear power reactors. 
 
   On April 26, an uncontrolled power surge at 
reactor No. 4 of the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant 
in Ukraine causes sudden overheating and an explo-
sion that releases a highly radioactive cloud. The blast 
contaminates a large portion of the surrounding area 
and forces the emergency evacuation of workers and 
tens of thousands of people from nearby cities. Thirty-
one staff and emergency personnel are killed trying 
to shut down the reactor. The Soviet government at 
ﬁ rst denies the accident, causing an international furor 
when airborne radiation is detected in many European 
capitals.
 
   In October, a ﬁ re aboard a Soviet Yankee-class 
nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine (SSBN) 
in the Atlantic threatens to cause a reactor explosion. 
The crew prevents a reactor incident, but four sail-
ors die, and the submarine sinks along with sixteen 
nuclear weapons.
 
   Also in October, the Israeli government arrests 
Mordechai Vanunu, a former mid-level nuclear tech-
nician at Israeli’s Dimona nuclear facility, after he 
provides London’s Sunday Times with information 
showing that Israel possesses approximately 150 
nuclear weapons. 
 
   Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev calls for nuclear 
weapons to be eliminated by the year 2000. He pro-
poses that the two superpowers ﬁ rst reduce their 
strategic arsenals by half; then remove all weapons 
from foreign countries, halt testing/development, 
and enlist other nuclear states; and ﬁ nally, eliminate 
nuclear weapons altogether. In October, Reagan and 
Gorbachev almost reach an agreement to adopt a simi-
lar plan at the summit in Reykjavik, Iceland, but the 
U.S. commitment to pursue the SDI program scuttles 
the deal.
 
   On December 11, the South Paciﬁ c Nuclear-Free 
Zone Treaty enters into force when the eighth member 
ratiﬁ es it.
1986
(cont.)

Chronology
133
1987 
 The Soviet Union ends an 18-month nuclear test mora-
torium in February but announces that it is willing to 
resume the moratorium if the United States will do the 
same.
 
   In April, the Missile Technology Control Regime 
is established by seven industrialized countries: Can-
ada, France, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, the 
United States, and West Germany. The Missile Tech-
nololgy Control Regime is designed to reduce the risk 
of nuclear proliferation via limits on the export of bal-
listic and cruise missile technologies for systems capa-
ble of delivering a 500-kilogram payload (roughly the 
size of an unsophisticated nuclear warhead) a distance 
of 300 kilometers.
 
   In June, the New Zealand parliament bans any 
nuclear-powered ships and vessels carrying nuclear 
explosives from the country’s ports. The government 
refuses to accept the U.S. practice of neither conﬁ rming 
nor denying the presence of nuclear weapons onboard 
its warships.
 
   On September 15, U.S. Secretary of State George 
Shultz and Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevard-
nadze sign an agreement to open nuclear risk reduc-
tion centers in each country’s capital and to establish 
special bilateral communications links.
 
   On December 8, Reagan and Gorbachev sign 
the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, 
which requires the destruction of the countries’ 
ground-launched ballistic and cruise missiles with 
ranges between 500 and 5,500 kilometers within three 
years of the treaty’s entry into force. The INF Treaty 
contains stringent veriﬁ cation measures designed to 
ensure compliance with the ban, including on-site 
inspections and monitoring.
1988 
 In January, the United States creates the On-Site Inspec-
tion Agency to verify, on Soviet territory, Moscow’s 
fulﬁ llment of weapon elimination required under the 
INF Treaty and to fulﬁ ll its escort obligations for Soviet 
inspectors in the United States.
 
   In April, the Danish parliament passes a resolu-
tion instructing the government to notify visiting war-

134 Chronology
ships that nuclear weapons are banned from Danish 
territory in peacetime.
 
   In May, the United States and the Soviet Union 
sign the Agreement on the Notiﬁ cation of Missile 
Launches, which requires 24 hours’ advance notice 
before the test launching of an ICBM or SLBM. 
 
  On June 1, the INF Treaty enters into force. 
 
   In August, the Soviet Union monitors an under-
ground U.S. nuclear test, and in September, the United 
States monitors a Soviet test.
 
   In September, Brazil adopts a constitution provid-
ing that all nuclear activities within its territory will be 
for peaceful purposes and must be approved by the 
National Congress.
 
   In December, India and Pakistan sign an agree-
ment prohibiting attacks on each other’s nuclear instal-
lations and pledging to inform each other of their 
locations.
1989 
 In February, a U.S.-Soviet public organization link-
ing antinuclear activists—the Nevada-Semipalatinsk 
Movement—is founded. In October, the ﬁ nal Soviet 
underground nuclear test occurs at the Semipalatinsk 
test range in Kazakhstan.
 
   On April 7, the Soviet Union’s Mike-class nuclear 
submarine Komsomolets sinks in deep water 300 miles 
off the coast of Norway after an uncontrollable ﬁ re, 
killing forty-two crew members. The submarine is car-
rying three nuclear-tipped torpedoes, which are not 
recovered.
 
   In May, India successfully launches its Agni mis-
sile, which has a range of 2,500 kilometers and is capa-
ble of carrying small nuclear weapons. 
 
   In September, South Africa’s newly elected presi-
dent F. W. de Klerk, states in a secret meeting that to 
end South Africa’s isolation from the international 
community, the country must dismantle both its 
political system of apartheid and its nuclear weapon 
program. The Y Plant stops producing HEU, and the 
nuclear test site in the Kalahari Desert is abandoned.
1988
(cont.)

Chronology
135
1990 
 Early in the year, South Africa secretly begins disman-
tling its nuclear weapon stockpile.
 
  In June, U.S. President George H. W. Bush and 
Soviet leader Gorbachev sign protocols to earlier trea-
ties that provide for advance notiﬁ cation and on-site 
inspections of tests above 35 kilotons. In September, 
the United States ﬁ nally ratiﬁ es the 1975 Threshold 
Test Ban Treaty.
 
   In August, under the leadership of Saddam Hus -
sein, Iraq invades and occupies Kuwait. Iraq also engages 
in a crash program to develop a nuclear weapon by 
April 1991.
 
   The twenty-year NPT Review Conference is held 
with 140 members. Once again, the NPT parties strongly 
disagree on whether the nuclear weapon states have 
done enough to pursue their disarmament obligations. 
On November 28, the presidents of long-time NPT hold-
outs Brazil and Argentina sign the Joint Declaration of 
Common Nuclear Policy at Iguazú. Both countries 
agree to use nuclear energy only for peaceful purposes, 
to create a formal system of bilateral inspections, to give 
up the right to conduct peaceful nuclear explosions, and 
to adhere to a revised Treaty of Tlatelolco.
 
   On September 27, the last Pershing II missiles 
leave Germany, assisting the reuniﬁ cation of East and 
West Germany in early October.
 
   Having detected Pakistan’s assembly of at least 
one nuclear device, President Bush refuses to make 
the certiﬁ cation required by the Pressler Amendment 
and terminates military aid to Pakistan.
1991 
 In late February, U.S.-led coalition forces succeed in 
ending the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait. The UN Secu-
rity Council passes Resolution 687 in April, forcing 
Iraq to consent to the destruction of its WMD facilities 
and any ballistic missiles with a range greater than 150 
kilometers. The IAEA and the newly formed UN Spe-
cial Commission on Iraq (UNSCOM) begin inspecting 
Iraq’s undeclared weapon-related facilities. In Sep-
tember, IAEA inspectors discover a large number of 

136 Chronology
documents related to Iraq’s efforts to acquire nuclear 
weapons. Inspectors learn that Iraq had concealed its 
nuclear program by constructing buildings within 
buildings, designing weapon facilities to look like 
they had a peaceful purpose, hiding utility lines that 
would signal a nuclear facility, and placing facilities 
underground.
 
   In his State of the Union address, President George 
Bush announces a shift in the SDI program to the 
more modest Global Protection against Limited Strikes 
program. 
 
   France’s nuclear arsenal peaks at 538 weapons. At 
this time, the United States has an arsenal of 19,500 
weapons; the Soviet Union has 35,000; the United 
Kingdom has 300; China has 434; Israel has approxi-
mately 100; and India and Pakistan have an unknown 
number. 
 
   On July 31, after almost ten years of negotiations, 
the United States and the Soviet Union sign the Stra-
tegic Arms Reduction Treaty (START). Both countries 
agree to reduce their nuclear arsenals to 1,600 strate-
gic delivery vehicles and 6,000 deployed warheads, 
of which no more than 4,900 can be on ground-based 
ballistic missiles. Under START I, no more than 1,000 
warheads are permitted on mobile missiles. The 
reductions are to occur within seven years. Both presi-
dents also make additional unilateral pledges. Bush 
announces the withdrawal of all remaining ground-
based tactical nuclear weapons and ship-based tacti-
cal nuclear weapons worldwide. Gorbachev commits 
to destroying tactical land-based ballistic missiles, 
artillery shells, and mines and to removing all tactical 
nuclear weapons from the Soviet Navy. 
 
   The United States eliminates its last ground-
launched cruise and ballistic missiles covered by the 
INF Treaty, and the Soviet Union eliminates its last 
declared SS-20 missile. Pursuant to the INF Treaty, 
2,692 missiles have been eliminated.
 
  In July, South Africa joins the NPT as a non–
nuclear weapon state and, in September, signs a full-
1991
(cont.)

Chronology
137
scope safeguards agreement with the IAEA. Secretly, it 
ﬁ nishes dismantling its existing nuclear weapons.
 
   Also in July, the presidents of Argentina and Brazil 
sign the Agreement for the Exclusively Peaceful Uses 
of Nuclear Energy (also known as the Guadalajara 
Treaty). It prohibits the development, testing, and 
deployment of nuclear weapons. It calls for joint inspec-
tions of nuclear installations in the respective countries 
and sets up the Brazil-Argentine Agency for Account-
ing and Control of Nuclear Materials to administer
the inspection arrangement in coordination with the 
IAEA.
 
   In September, Pakistan Prime Minister Benazir 
Bhutto states that Pakistan could quickly produce a 
nuclear weapon in the event of a serious threat. 
 
   In October, the U.S. Congress passes the Nunn-
Lugar legislation (named for its Senate cosponsors), 
which will provide $400 million to help dismantle 
Soviet WMD and delivery vehicles slated for destruc-
tion under the START I agreement, to heighten nuclear 
safety, and to prevent proliferation. On December 25, 
Russian Republic President Boris Yeltsin leads the 
presidents of the other fourteen republics in dissolving 
the Soviet Union. Gorbachev signs over control of the 
Soviet nuclear arsenal to Yeltsin. All the new republics, 
except Georgia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia, agree 
to form a loose coalition known as the Commonwealth 
of Independent States (CIS). Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, 
and Kazakhstan have large numbers of the Soviet 
Union’s strategic nuclear weapons on their soil, and 
tactical nuclear weapons are still distributed through-
out former Soviet territory; the CIS leaders agree that 
all tactical nuclear weapons will be returned to Russia 
by July 1992.
 
   On December 30, the CIS members sign the Minsk 
Agreement on Strategic Forces, which creates a joint 
CIS command over the former Soviet Union’s nuclear 
arsenal. Russia, in consultation with Ukraine, Belarus, 
and Kazakhstan, will decide on the use of nuclear 
weapons.

138 Chronology
1992 
 In April, French president François Mitterrand initi-
ates a moratorium on nuclear testing. France ﬁ nally 
decides to ratify the NPT as a nuclear weapon state and 
stops producing plutonium for military purposes. 
 
   South and North Korea sign the Joint Declara-
tion for a Non-Nuclear Korean Peninsula. It bans 
both countries from testing, producing, acquiring, 
and deploying nuclear weapons and prohibits them 
from possessing facilities to produce weapons-grade 
ﬁ ssionable material. After a long delay, North Korea 
signs a safeguards agreement with the IAEA. The U.S. 
Department of Defense announces its removal of all 
nuclear weapons from South Korea.
 
   In May, North Korea reports to the IAEA that it 
has about 90 grams of plutonium subject to safeguards 
from a one-time reprocessing of defective fuel rods. 
However, chemical sampling from on-site IAEA inspec-
tions later in the year leads IAEA experts to conclude 
that North Korea has actually removed spent fuel on 
two or three other occasions since 1989, meaning that 
additional weapons-grade material could have been 
diverted to a bomb program. U.S. satellite photographs 
indicate a suspected reprocessing facility.
 
   The United States, Germany, and other Western 
countries help establish two international science and 
technology centers, one in Russia and one in Ukraine, 
to provide former Soviet nuclear scientists and engi-
neers with civilian research grants. 
 
   After the discovery of the advanced state of the 
Iraqi nuclear program, the IAEA’s governing body 
approves new measures granting the IAEA the right 
to demand special inspections of undeclared nuclear 
facilities. Also, the Nuclear Suppliers Group agrees 
to tighten export controls on thousands of dual-use 
items and to require importing countries to accept 
full-scope safeguards of all their nuclear facilities. An 
IAEA inspection team, aided by UNSCOM inspectors, 
completes the destruction of key facilities and equip-
ment at Al-Atheer, Iraq’s main nuclear weapon design 
and development complex.
 
   In March, longtime holdout China joins the NPT 
as a nuclear weapon state. However, two months later, 

Chronology
139
China conducts its largest nuclear test ever: a 1-mega-
ton device.
 
   Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia, and Ukraine sign 
the Lisbon Protocol to START in May, thereby becom-
ing legal inheritors of the Soviet Union’s obligations 
under the treaty. All but Russia agree to join the NPT 
as non–nuclear weapon states as soon as possible. 
Within the year, the parliaments of Kazakhstan and 
Russia ratify START.
 
  At their ﬁ rst summit in June, Presidents George 
Bush and Boris Yeltsin sign agreements to implement 
the U.S. Nunn-Lugar legislation approving unprece-
dented aid to the former Soviet Union for dismantling 
weapons and protecting ﬁ ssile material. In the Russian 
city of Podolsk, a thief is caught at a train station after 
making off with 1.5 kilograms of HEU from a nuclear 
facility, conﬁ rming the proliferation threat posed by 
poorly guarded Russian nuclear sites.
 
  The United States replaces its SAC with the U.S. 
Strategic Command, reducing its reliance on nuclear 
weapons. In July, as part of a general nonproliferation 
initiative, President Bush announces that the United 
States will no longer produce plutonium or HEU for 
nuclear explosives. In August, however, the United 
States launches its fourteenth Trident nuclear subma-
rine equipped with twenty-four multiple-warhead 
missiles.
 
   In June, Britain’s defense minister announces that 
the British Navy will no longer routinely carry nuclear 
weapons on surface ships. 
 
  In October, Russian police arrest an engineer at 
the Luch nuclear material production plant near Mos-
cow who is trying to sell 1.5 kilograms of HEU stolen 
from his employer.
1993 
 In January, Presidents Bush and Yeltsin sign START 
II. Once ratiﬁ ed, the treaty will require Russia and the 
United States to cut their deployed strategic nuclear 
arsenals to 3,000–3,500 warheads each. START II 
allows only single-warhead land-based ICBMs and 
only 1,700–1,750 SLBM warheads. Under START II, 
Russia will have to eliminate about forty submarines, 

140 Chronology
1,500 ballistic missiles, and 7,000 warheads. The United 
States will have to eliminate several submarines, doz-
ens of bombers, and hundreds of ground-based mis-
siles. The treaty cannot go into effect before START I is 
ratiﬁ ed by the U.S. Congress and Russia’s parliament.
 
   In February, the Russian Ministry of Defense 
reports that all tactical nuclear weapons have been 
removed from naval surface vessels, submarines, and 
aircraft and put into storage. Russia also agrees to sell 
the United States 500 tons of weapons-grade HEU 
from dismantled nuclear weapons over a twenty-year 
period for approximately $12 billion.
 
   Belarus ratiﬁ es START I and joins the NPT as a 
non–nuclear weapon state. By contrast, the Ukrainian 
Rada (parliament) adopts a new defense doctrine that 
designates as Ukrainian property the Soviet strategic 
nuclear weapons located on its territory. In October, 
the United States agrees to give Ukraine approxi-
mately $177 million to help eliminate its strategic 
nuclear arms. Ukraine conditionally ratiﬁ es START 
I—pending security guarantees and conﬁ rmation of 
$2.8 billion in foreign aid—but still refuses to join the 
NPT as a non–nuclear weapon state.
 
   In February, UNSCOM announces that Iraq’s 
nuclear weapon program has been destroyed but 
warns that long-term monitoring will be necessary to 
ensure that Iraq does not resume building WMD.
 
   In March, North Korea refuses to allow a special 
IAEA inspection and gives notice that it will withdraw 
from the NPT in three months. After secret negotiations
with the United States, Pyongyang suspends its with-
drawal in June, pending further negotiations with 
Washington.
 
   In a stunning public announcement, South Afri-
can President de Klerk admits in March that South 
Africa had a nuclear weapon program from 1974 to 
1990, during which time it constructed six nuclear 
bombs. But he declares that South Africa has elimi-
nated these weapons. In September, the IAEA accepts 
South Africa’s declarations that its weapons-related 
equipment and test shafts have been dismantled and 
destroyed. 
1993
(cont.)

Chronology
141
 
   In October, China conducts a nuclear test at its 
Lop Nor test site.
 
  In November, the UN General Assembly approves 
a resolution calling on North Korea to cooperate with 
the IAEA in the full implementation of its safeguards 
agreement. 
 
  In December, U.S. Energy Secretary Hazel O’Leary 
holds the ﬁ rst of several so-called Openness Initia-
tive press conferences to review recently declassiﬁ ed 
documents. Among other things, she discloses that 
the United States exploded 204 more nuclear devices 
than previously admitted publicly, and that the AEC 
conducted several hundred radiation experiments on 
unsuspecting U.S. citizens from the 1940s to the 1970s. 
Two new cases of HEU theft take place at Russian 
naval facilities; both thieves are caught. 
 
   As of December, the U.S. Department of Defense 
has pledged $789 million in weapon dismantlement 
and other nuclear-related assistance to the four former 
Soviet states with nuclear weapons. Russia promises 
to stop producing plutonium for nuclear weapons 
and to shut down the three reactors that produce 
weapons-grade plutonium. Kazakhstan joins the 
NPT as a non–nuclear weapon state, and the United 
States promises to give Kazakhstan more than $70 
million in dismantlement and nuclear facility safety 
assistance.
1994 
 In January, U.S. President Bill Clinton, Russian Presi-
dent Yeltsin, and Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk 
sign the Trilateral Statement on the Non-Proliferation of 
Weapons of Mass Destruction and the Means of Their 
Delivery. It commits Ukraine to rid itself of nuclear 
weapons and transfer its warheads to Russia. In 
return, the United States and Russia agree to guarantee 
Ukraine’s borders and to assist in its security as long 
as it joins the NPT as a non–nuclear weapon state. In 
February, the Ukrainian Rada ratiﬁ es START I without 
conditions, thus endorsing the Trilateral Statement.
 
   In February, states at the Conference on Disarma-
ment in Geneva begin negotiating a comprehensive 
nuclear-test-ban treaty.

142 Chronology
 
   The United States and Russia sign the Moscow 
Declaration stating that both countries agree to detar-
get their strategic nuclear missiles away from one 
another by 30 May 1994. 
 
   In May, North Korea begins unloading spent fuel 
rods from its plutonium-producing reactor, and the 
IAEA announces that Pyongyang is no longer in com-
pliance with IAEA safeguards. In June, former U.S. 
President Jimmy Carter goes to North Korea to try to 
break the impasse. On October 21, North Korea and 
the United States sign the so-called Agreed Frame-
work that calls for North Korea to freeze and even-
tually dismantle its existing nuclear reactor program 
in return for two proliferation-resistant, light-water 
reactors to be supplied by 2003. No sensitive nuclear 
technology will be turned over, however, until North 
Korea opens all of its facilities to IAEA inspectors. 
The United States agrees to compensate North Korea 
for potential lost power from its own planned power 
reactors by supplying 50,000 tons of heavy fuel oil per 
year. 
 
   Small amounts of additional Soviet-origin, weap-
ons-grade nuclear material are seized in Germany and 
Czechoslovakia, conﬁ rming that nuclear smuggling is 
a serious new threat.
 
   On November 24, after months of negotiations, 
the United States airlifts 600 kilograms of at-risk weap-
ons-grade uranium from the Ulba facility in Kazakh-
stan in a cooperative secret mission dubbed Operation 
Sapphire. The United States buys the uranium from 
Kazakhstan for an undisclosed amount of money 
(rumored in the tens of millions of dollars) plus tech-
nical assistance.
 
   In November, Ukraine’s Rada ﬁ nally votes to 
ratify the NPT as a non–nuclear weapon state. In 
December, the presidents of the United States, Russia, 
Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan certify that START I 
has entered into force.
 
   Argentina and Brazil ratify the Treaty of Tlatelolco, 
conﬁ rming their non–nuclear weapon pledges and 
accepting IAEA inspections of all nuclear activities.
1994
(cont.)

Chronology
143
1995 
 On January 25, a Norwegian-U.S. rocket designed to 
study the Northern Lights is launched from Norway’s 
coast; the Russian military brieﬂ y mistakes this launch 
for a nuclear attack. A radar station notiﬁ es central 
early warning stations of a possible nuclear missile 
attack and alerts the highest levels of the Russian com-
mand, including President Yeltsin, about the possibil-
ity of launching a counterattack, but it is quickly called 
off.
 
   On January 30, President Clinton decides to 
extend the U.S. moratorium on nuclear testing until a 
comprehensive test-ban treaty enters into force.
 
   In April, before the NPT Review and Extension 
Conference marking the treaty’s twenty-ﬁ fth anniver-
sary, all ﬁ ve nuclear weapon states renew their pledges 
not to use nuclear weapons against non–nuclear 
weapon state that are parties to the NPT (unless 
attacked by such parties in concert with a weapon-
possessing state) and to come to the aid of such parties 
if they are threatened with nuclear weapons. In May, 
NPT members decide (by consensus) that the treaty 
will be extended indeﬁ nitely and issue resolutions on 
principles and objectives for nuclear nonproliferation 
and complete nuclear disarmament. After the NPT is 
extended, however, China conducts two nuclear tests 
at the Lop Nor test site. 
 
   In June, newly elected French President Jacques 
Chirac decides to resume nuclear testing after a three-
year moratorium to prove the efﬁ cacy of France’s 
new TN-75 warhead and check the reliability of older 
French nuclear weapons. Despite worldwide protests, 
France conducts 20-, 30-, 40-, and 60-kiloton under-
ground nuclear weapon tests at the Mururoa Atoll and 
detonates a 110-kiloton SLBM warhead at the Fangata-
ufa Atoll. In July, about 150 French commandos storm 
and teargas a Greenpeace boat, the Rainbow Warrior 
II, after the ship enters the exclusion zone around the 
nuclear test site at Mururoa. The International Court 
of Justice rejects New Zealand’s bid to stop further 
nuclear testing by France in the South Paciﬁ c. But 
President Chirac reduces France’s nuclear posture by 

144 Chronology
dismantling its two ground-to-ground nuclear missile 
systems, capping a ﬁ ve-year, 15 percent reduction of 
its nuclear arsenal. 
 
   The Nobel Peace Prize is awarded to the Pugwash 
Conferences on Science and World Affairs and its 
president, Joseph Rotblat, for their efforts to eliminate 
nuclear weapons.
 
  On December 15, ten countries (Brunei, Indonesia, 
Cambodia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, 
Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam ) sign the Southeast 
Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty. Each party 
agrees not to develop, acquire, station, transport, or test 
nuclear weapons and not to dump any radioactive mate-
rial or wastes into the sea or atmosphere. Each party 
retains the right to refuse transport of nuclear weapons 
through its territorial waters, a clause opposed by some 
of the nuclear weapon states.
 
   In March, the United States, South Korea, and 
Japan sign an agreement formally establishing the 
Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization 
(KEDO), based in New York, to organize construction 
of two light-water power reactors in North Korea. 
Other countries (including Australia, Canada, New 
Zealand, the European Union, Singapore, Malaysia, 
the Philippines, Italy, Finland, Greece, the Nether-
lands, and Indonesia) join or contribute funding. In 
September, a group of U.S. Department of Energy tech-
nicians starts operations at Yongbyon to safeguard the 
spent fuel storage pond, including packing the 8,000 
nuclear spent fuel rods into watertight canisters. Also, 
the IAEA sends a team of inspectors to North Korea to 
monitor its compliance with the NPT and the Agreed 
Framework.
1996 
 In January, the U.S. Senate ratiﬁ es START II by an over-
whelming majority. But the Russian Duma still has not 
ratiﬁ ed it.
 
   North Korea bars IAEA inspectors from measur-
ing the plutonium levels in the 8,000 nuclear spent 
fuel rods being moved into storage at the Yongbyon 
facility. In October, the UN General Assembly passes 
1995
(cont.)

Chronology
145
a resolution urging North Korea to comply fully with 
the IAEA nuclear safeguards agreement.
 
  In January, France detonates a 120-kiloton device 
at Fangataufa Atoll in the South Paciﬁ c. French author-
ities admit a release of radioactive iodine 131. Fac-
ing massive international protests, French President 
Chirac declares that France has achieved its goal to 
guarantee its nuclear deterrent and announces a test-
ing moratorium. In March, France signs the protocols 
to the South Paciﬁ c Nuclear-Free Zone Treaty, together 
with the United States and the United Kingdom, and 
closes its national nuclear test site in the region.
 
   In April, forty-three African states sign the African 
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (or the Pelindaba 
Treaty). The treaty pledges members will not develop, 
manufacture, acquire, possess, control, station, or test 
any nuclear explosive device. It also prohibits research 
on nuclear weapons and the dumping of radioactive 
wastes within the zone. The treaty will become effec-
tive after it is ratiﬁ ed by twenty-eight African states. 
Egypt says it will not ratify the treaty until Israel joins 
the NPT.
 
   In July, China conducts its forty-ﬁ fth nuclear weap-
ons test at the Lop Nor test site, and then announces a 
testing moratorium.
 
   Also in July, the International Court of Justice 
issues an advisory opinion, responding to the UN 
General Assembly’s request for a ruling on the legal-
ity of nuclear weapons. The court holds that the threat 
or use of nuclear weapons, with their potential to 
destroy all civilization and the ecosystem of the planet, 
would generally be unlawful under the UN Charter’s 
humanitarian rules for armed conﬂ icts. But it accepts 
possible use in cases of extreme self-defense. Follow-
ing the opinion, the UN General Assembly adopts 
a resolution that calls on all states to begin multi-
lateral negotiations on a convention to ban nuclear 
weapons.
 
   On September 24, the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) is opened for signature; 71 
states sign, including all ﬁ ve nuclear weapon states. 

146 Chronology
Under the CTBT, each party agrees not to carry out any 
further nuclear tests in any environment. The treaty 
creates the CTBT Organization to oversee the imple-
mentation of the treaty and veriﬁ cation of compliance. 
For the treaty to enter into force, all forty-four states 
with existing nuclear infrastructures must ratify it.
 
   Ukraine and Belarus transfer their last Soviet-era 
nuclear weapons to Russia for destruction.
 
   In September, the United State receives shipments 
of spent nuclear fuel from research reactors in Chile, 
Colombia, France, Sweden, and Switzerland under its 
program to reduce the use of HEU internationally in 
civilian reactors. The Department of Energy promotes 
conversion of civilian reactors from HEU to low-
enriched uranium fuel, which is harder to convert to 
weapons-grade material.
 
   In December, former commander in chief of the 
U.S. Strategic Air Command, General Lee Butler, and 
the former supreme allied commander in Europe, 
General Andrew Goodpaster, release a joint statement 
emphasizing the diminished role of nuclear weap-
ons and calling on all nuclear weapon states to work 
toward the elimination of these weapons. Later, sixty-
one other retired generals and admirals from seven-
teen countries release a similar statement.
1997 
 In January, the United States adds to its nuclear arse-
nal a modiﬁ ed B61 thermonuclear bomb with yield 
options from roughly 10 kilotons to 340 kilotons and a 
limited earth-penetrating capability. 
 
   In March, the European Parliament calls on its 
members to support negotiation of an anti–nuclear 
weapon convention. At the UN on April 7, the 
Lawyers’ Committee on Nuclear Policy releases the 
Model Nuclear Weapons Convention. Drafted by an 
international group of lawyers, scientists, and disar-
mament experts, the convention sets out procedures to 
dismantle and destroy all nuclear weapons in a series 
of graduated steps, to safeguard weapon materials, 
and to ensure compliance with the requirement to 
abolish nuclear weapons. Abolition 2000, an interna-
1996
(cont.)

Chronology
147
tional network of more than 700 organizations, aims 
for the convention to be adopted by 2000.
 
   The IAEA’s board of governors approves more 
intrusive veriﬁ cation measures in May, known as the 
93+2 program. States can voluntarily agree to the new 
measures by adding to their existing safeguards agree-
ments through the so-called Additional Protocol. The 
IAEA will gain greater access to information about all 
aspects of a state’s nuclear fuel cycle facilities and use 
state-of-the-art technologies to trace nuclear activities 
through environmental sampling and remotely oper-
ated surveillance and monitoring systems.
 
   In July and September, the United States con-
ducts its ﬁ rst subcritical nuclear experiments in an 
underground tunnel at the Nevada Test Site, in which 
chemical explosives generate high pressure on nuclear 
weapon materials without causing a nuclear explo-
sion. Critics argue that the U.S. experiments violate 
the spirit if not the letter of the CTBT. 
 
   In August, the British Department of Health 
reports that it has found plutonium in children’s teeth 
throughout the United Kingdom. It concludes that the 
cause of the plutonium is radioactive discharges from 
the Sellaﬁ eld plutonium-reprocessing plant.
 
   In September, Russian Security Council Secretary-
General Aleksandr Lebed claims that 100 suitcase-
sized nuclear weapons, meant to be used by Soviet 
commandos in time of war, are now missing in Russia. 
Other ofﬁ cials deny the claim.
 
   France’s new socialist prime minister, Lionel 
Jospin, conﬁ rms that France intends to maintain 
its nuclear weapon capability as a deterrence mea-
sure. However, the French government continues to 
decrease spending on nuclear weapons, and the French 
nuclear arsenal falls to 450.
 
   The United States deploys the last of eighteen 
Trident nuclear submarines capable of carrying 192 
nuclear warheads on twenty-four missiles.
 
   In February, presidents from ﬁ ve Central Asian 
countries (Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turk-
menistan, and Uzbekistan) call for a nuclear-weapon-
free zone in their region. The United States and Russia 

148 Chronology
agree to extend the date for completing START II 
nuclear weapons reductions from 1 January 2003 to 
31 December 2007, given delays in ratiﬁ cation of the 
treaty in both countries, as well as economic difﬁ cul-
ties in Russia that will slow its compliance.
 
   Scientists at the U.S. National Cancer Institute 
estimate that bomb tests conducted in Nevada during 
the 1950s eventually may cause 10,000–75,000 extra 
thyroid cancers. 
 
   Over strong Russian objections, NATO members 
sign protocols in December making Poland, Hungary, 
and the Czech Republic full members of NATO and 
thus eligible for protection under the U.S. extended 
nuclear deterrent.
1998 
 As of January, the U.S. government, under the Radia-
tion Exposure and Compensation Act of 1990, has paid 
U.S. citizens approximately $225 million.
 
   In February, the European Parliament adopts a 
resolution calling on the United States and all govern-
ments to refrain from carrying out subcritical tests of 
nuclear weapons. Despite this plea, the United States 
conducts three more subcritical tests, and Russia con-
ducts ﬁ ve such tests at its Novaya Zemlya test range.
 
   In February, the UN and Iraq sign a memoran-
dum of understanding stating that Iraq will cooper-
ate fully with UNSCOM and the IAEA and provide 
unrestricted access to WMD-related sites. In August, 
however, Iraq decides to stop cooperating until the 
UN Security Council ends sanctions on Iraq. 
 
   In March, the United Kingdom completes its 
Strategic Defense Review and plans a major reduction 
in its nuclear arsenal. It removes all its air-delivered 
WE177 bombs from service and begins to dismantle 
them. Its only remaining nuclear delivery system, the 
Trident submarine, is also scaled back; the number of 
submarines on patrol is reduced to one, and the num-
ber of warheads per submarine is reduced to forty-
eight. The United Kingdom also announces that its 
total nuclear arsenal will be unilaterally reduced to 
fewer than 200 operationally available warheads.
1997
(cont.)

Chronology
149
 
   In April, Britain and France become the ﬁ rst 
nuclear weapon states to ratify the CTBT, banning all 
nuclear weapon tests. 
 
   In May, India’s newly elected government shocks 
the world by conducting a series of nuclear weapon 
tests. Indian ofﬁ cials state that on May 11 India con-
ducted three tests: a ﬁ ssion device with a yield of 
about 12 kilotons, a thermonuclear device with a yield 
of about 43 kilotons, and a subkiloton device. On May 
13, India detonates two more nuclear weapons. Indian 
Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee identiﬁ es China 
and Pakistan as the security reasons compelling the 
tests. Pakistan responds by conducting ﬁ ve nuclear 
weapon tests on May 28 in the Chagai Hills with an 
announced yield of 40–45 kilotons and an estimated 
yield of 6–13 kilotons. Two days later, it conducts one 
smaller test. (Using seismic and other monitoring 
information, U.S. experts conclude that both countries 
greatly inﬂ ated the yields and perhaps the numbers of 
tests, and the second stage of India’s thermonuclear 
test most likely failed.) In response to these tests, the 
United States imposes strict economic sanctions on 
India and Pakistan.
 
   In June, the UN Security Council condemns the 
Indian and Pakistani nuclear tests and urges the coun-
tries to become members of the NPT as non–nuclear 
weapon states. The so-called New Agenda Coalition 
(Brazil, Egypt, Ireland, Mexico, New Zealand, Slo-
venia, South Africa, and Sweden) issues a document 
calling for a nuclear-weapon-free world and outlining 
immediate steps that the nuclear weapon states can 
take to comply with their obligations under the NPT 
to pursue disarmament. 
 
   In August, North Korea tests a three-stage inter-
mediate-range ballistic missile (Taep’o-dong-1); it ﬂ ies 
for 1,380 kilometers over Japanese territory before 
landing in the Paciﬁ c Ocean after the third stage fails. 
In response to the missile launch and allegations that 
a nuclear facility is being constructed at Kumchang-ri, 
the United States and Japan suspend promised nuclear 
power assistance to North Korea.

150 Chronology
 
   In December, thirty-nine environmental and 
peace organizations led by the Natural Resources 
Defense Council achieve a settlement in a ten-year 
National Environmental Policy Act lawsuit involving 
the Department of Energy’s (DOE) $6 billion-per-year 
program managing radioactive waste and cleanup of 
environmental contamination caused by U.S. nuclear 
weapon production. Under the settlement, the DOE 
will create a publicly accessible database providing 
details about contaminated sites.
 
   Russia’s defense minister declares operational 
ten Topol-M ICBMs with a range of 10,500 kilometers. 
The Topol-M carries a single warhead, although it is 
capable of carrying three nuclear warheads and can be 
deployed in silos and mobile launchers. Russia plans 
for forty Topol-M missiles to be built by the end of 
2000 at a cost of $30 million apiece.
1999 
 In January, international terrorist Osama bin Laden 
tells reporters that acquiring nuclear weapons for the 
defense of Muslims is a religious duty, as Muslims 
would then be able to destroy the United States as a 
superpower.
 
   In February, India and Pakistan sign a memo-
randum of understanding to try to reduce the risks of 
accidental and unauthorized use of nuclear weapons 
in their countries. The two countries agree to notify 
each other immediately in the event of any accidental, 
unauthorized, or unexplained incident that could cre-
ate a fallout risk or an outbreak of nuclear war. Later, 
Pakistan-backed militants cross into the Indian-con-
trolled area of Kargil in the Kashmir region of the 
Himalaya Mountains and spark weeks of ﬁ ghting, 
including air strikes, raising fears of a nuclear confron-
tation.
 
   In April, NATO issues its new Strategic Concept, 
including air-delivered nuclear weapons and a small 
number of the United Kingdom’s Trident warheads. 
Several hundred U.S. B61 bombs, ofﬁ cially unacknowl-
edged, still remain at ten air bases in seven European 
countries (Belgium, Germany, Greece, Italy, the Neth-
erlands, Turkey, and the United Kingdom). 
1998
(cont.)

Chronology
151
 
  In March, Los Alamos National Laboratory ﬁ res 
a Taiwanese-born computer scientist (Wen Ho Lee) 
for allegedly stealing information related to the W-88 
nuclear warhead. In April, the DOE suspends all sci-
entiﬁ c work on computers containing sensitive nuclear 
weapon–related information at three national weap-
ons laboratories: Los Alamos, Sandia, and Lawrence 
Livermore. The DOE works to increase security in 
response to suspicions of Chinese nuclear espionage.
 
  In August, India’s National Security Advisory 
Board issues a draft report on an Indian nuclear doc-
trine calling for a nuclear arsenal deployed on a triad 
of air-, land-, and sea-based launchers.
 
  The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientist publishes an arti-
cle on a secret DOE report revealing that Israel, which 
has refused to sign the NPT, has enough weapons-grade
plutonium to build at least 250 nuclear weapons. Israel 
acquires the ﬁ rst of three Dolphin-class submarines 
from Germany as a possible nuclear delivery system 
(using cruise missiles).
 
   On October 18, the Republican-controlled U.S. 
Senate votes to reject the CTBT, citing questions about 
its veriﬁ ability. The U.S. rejection leads to widespread 
international criticism.
 
   For programs associated with the Nunn-Lugar 
legislation from 1991 to 1999, the United States has 
spent a total of $2.7 billion. As of December, these 
programs have helped deactivate 4,854 former Soviet 
nuclear warheads, destroyed 373 long-range ballis-
tic missiles, eliminated 354 missile silos, sealed 191 
nuclear test tunnels, and cut up twelve nuclear sub-
marines capable of carrying 160 strategic missiles.
 
   In April, India test ﬁ res a nuclear-capable, inter-
mediate-range ballistic missile, the Agni-2, from a rail 
platform. Pakistan responds by testing a medium-
range missile, the Ghauri, and a short-range ballis-
tic missile, the Shaheen-1. In August, China tests the 
DF-31 ballistic missile, which has a range of 8,000 
kilometers. These are land-based, road-mobile mis-
siles with launch preparation times of less than ﬁ fteen 
minutes. The United States conducts several tests of 
systems designed to intercept and destroy attacking 

152 Chronology
nuclear missiles. The United States also conducts three 
subcritical nuclear weapon tests.
 
   In December, the UN Security Council establishes 
a new inspection regime for Iraq—the UN Monitoring, 
Veriﬁ cation, and Inspection Committee (UNMOVIC)—
as a follow-on to UNSCOM. Iraq has refused to allow 
UNSCOM inspectors into the country since December 
1998 and has also dismantled UNSCOM automated 
video-monitoring systems at known and suspected 
WMD facilities. 
2000 
 In March, soon after the election of new Russian Presi-
dent Vladimir Putin, the Russian Duma ratiﬁ es both 
the CTBT and the seven-year-old START II, opening 
the way for talks to begin on further weapon reduc-
tions under a proposed START III. 
 
   The DOE announces that cleaning up environ-
mental contamination from the U.S. nuclear weapon 
program will cost $168–$212 billion. Some of the worst 
sites include the Hanford facility in Washington, the 
Savannah River plant in South Carolina, Rocky Flats 
in Colorado, and the National Engineering and Envi-
ronmental Laboratory in Idaho. At Hanford, about 54 
million gallons of liquid radioactive waste are left over 
from Cold War bomb making, of which 1 million gal-
lons has leaked into the soil. The U.S. National Acad-
emy of Science reports that many nuclear weapon 
sites will pose risks to humans and the environment 
for tens or even hundreds of thousands of years. 
 
   The ﬁ nal document of the May 2000 NPT Review 
Conference includes a pledge brokered by the eight-
country New Agenda Coalition for “an unequivocal 
undertaking by the nuclear-weapon states to accom-
plish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals,” 
and a commitment by all members to stop nuclear 
testing. The NPT now has 187 members. Only Cuba, 
India, Israel, and Pakistan remain outside the treaty.
 
   Former Los Alamos scientist Lee pleads guilty 
to a single charge of mishandling nuclear secrets; but 
the government drops 59 other charges, citing lack 
of evidence. The DOE announces that the world’s 
1999
(cont.)

Chronology
153
most powerful laser, which is being built at Law-
rence Livermore National Laboratory, will be delayed 
six years until 2008 and will cost at least $2.2 billion, 
double the original estimate. The laser project, known 
as the National Ignition Facility (NIF), will have 192 
laser beams focusing energy on a single target, allow-
ing nuclear scientists to simulate a thermonuclear 
explosion. It is a key component of the U.S. Stockpile 
Stewardship Program, which is designed to maintain 
nuclear warheads by using high-powered computers 
and the NIF laser to gauge weapon performance.
 
   In October, Russia conducts two underground 
subcritical weapon tests at the Novaya Zemlya test 
site. In December, Arms Control Today estimates that 
since 1990, when START I went into effect, the United 
States has reduced its deployed strategic nuclear war-
heads from 10,563 to 7,519 and Russia has reduced its 
forces from 10,271 to 6,464.
2001 
 In January, former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
John Shalikashvili releases his government-mandated 
CTBT study, which concludes that the United States 
must ratify the CTBT if there is to be an effective effort 
to halt the spread of nuclear weapons.
 
   India test ﬁ res its Agni-2 intermediate-range mis-
sile, which has a range of 1,375 miles and can carry 
a nuclear payload of up to 1 ton. The Pakistan Navy 
announces that it may put nuclear missiles on its sub-
marines; India has announced similar intentions.
 
   At Britain’s Faslane naval complex, 500 people 
protest the launching of the country’s fourth Trident 
missile submarine, the HMS Vengeance.
 
   In March, the CIA creates the Weapons Intelli-
gence, Nonproliferation, and Arms Control Center to 
bring together about 500 analysts, scientists, and sup-
port personnel to focus on nonproliferation and arms 
control issues. A newly declassiﬁ ed internal CIA study 
reveals that every major intelligence assessment from 
1974 to 1986 substantially overestimated the Soviet 
Union’s plans to modernize and expand its strategic 
nuclear arsenal.

154 Chronology
 
   Russian military ofﬁ cials report that, because of 
a ﬁ re at a ground relay station, they have lost control 
of four military satellites crucial to their network that 
provides early warning of a nuclear attack. 
 
   The eighty countries that have ratiﬁ ed the CTBT 
(including France, Russia, and the United Kingdom but 
not China, India, Israel, North Korea, Pakistan, and the 
United States) continue working on the organization 
that will verify treaty compliance. The International 
Monitoring System Committee has a 2001 budget of 
$83 million and a staff of more than 200. More than 100 
stations currently relay data by satellite and cable to the 
CTBT Organization headquarters in Vienna.
 
   In June, a detailed report released by the Natu-
ral Resources Defense Council shows that the nuclear 
weapons on a single U.S. Ohio-class nuclear subma-
rine (of which the United States has eighteen) could 
kill or injure 50 million Russians, or more than one-
third of the population. 
 
   On September 11, jets hijacked by terrorists ﬂ y 
into the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center in 
New York and into the Pentagon outside Washington. 
A fourth hijacked jet fails to reach its target and crashes 
in Pennsylvania. The prime suspect is Osama bin 
Laden’s al Qaeda network based in Afghanistan. 
Because of its need for assistance in the war on terror-
ism being carried out in Afghanistan, the United States 
drops its 1998 nonproliferation sanctions on Pakistan 
and India, resuming normal trading relations and 
the possibility for economic assistance. Documents 
obtained by the U.S. military conﬁ rm that Osama bin 
Laden has sought to acquire nuclear weapons. 
 
   On September 13, the Conference on Disarma-
ment concludes its annual session in Geneva without 
any nuclear disarmament accomplishments. Repre-
sentatives from many of the countries express disap-
pointment that the conference has failed to do any 
useful work in the past several years.
 
   In December, President George W. Bush provides 
formal notice to Russia that the United States will 
withdraw from the 1972 ABM Treaty in six months. 
2001
(cont.)

Chronology
155
2002
In January, the U.S. Defense Department provides an 
overview on the U.S. Nuclear Posture Review (NPR) 
that had been submitted to Congress on 31 Decem-
ber 2001. The NPR shows a shift in U.S. focus from 
deterring its former rival Russia to stopping the devel-
opment of WMD by terrorists groups and states of 
concern. Controversial sections of the NPR call for 
the United States to design and perhaps build new 
nuclear weapons, particularly offensive weapons to 
be used against reinforced, underground targets, and 
to consider renewed testing of nuclear weapons. 
 
   President Bush proclaims in his State of the Union 
address that the United States will not allow states in 
the “axis of evil”—North Korea, Iran, and Iraq—to 
acquire WMD. In March, the United States refuses to 
certify that North Korea is complying with its commit-
ments under the 1994 Agreed Framework. 
 
   In May, Russian President Putin and President 
Bush sign the Strategic Offensive Reduction Treaty 
(SORT, or Moscow Treaty). Each country agrees to 
reduce the number of its deployed strategic warheads 
to 1,700–2,200 by 2012. 
 
   In June, U.S. withdrawal from the ABM Treaty 
takes effect, allowing it to build a nationwide anti-
ballistic missile defense system. In response, Russia 
renounces the START II agreement and says it will 
maintain its multi warhead ICBMs that had been 
scheduled for deactivation. 
 
   In September, North Korean and Japanese leaders 
release the Pyongyang Declaration in which Korean 
leader Kim Jong Il reiterates North Korea’s intent to 
abide by all international restrictions on its nuclear 
program and to maintain a moratorium on its ballis-
tic missile testing through 2003. However, in October, 
the United States charges North Korea with secretly 
acquiring uranium enrichment technology from Paki-
stan. After Pyongyang fails to deny the charge, the 
United States refuses to hold further talks with North 
Korea until it completely dismantles its nuclear pro-
gram. KEDO halts monthly shipments of heavy fuel oil 
to North Korea in December. In response, North Korea 

156 Chronology
disables IAEA monitoring equipment at its nuclear 
facilities and insists that all IAEA inspectors leave the 
country.
 
   Informants and satellite images reveal that Iran 
has also been pursuing two paths that could lead to 
nuclear weapons in violation of its obligation as a 
member of the NPT. In August, the National Coun-
cil of Resistance of Iran, a group opposed to Iran’s 
government, announces that Iran has two potentially 
weapon-related facilities it had never declared to 
the IAEA: a pilot-scale facility to enrich uranium at 
Natanz and a heavy-water facility at Arak. Iran claims 
it is developing a nuclear power plant. Despite the 
concern of Western countries, Russia declares that it is 
increasing civilian nuclear cooperation with Iran. 
 
   In October, Congress approves a Bush adminis-
tration–backed resolution authorizing the use of force 
against Iraq, if needed, to stop its feared nuclear and 
other WMD programs. In November, the UN Secu-
rity Council adopts Resolution 1441, sponsored by 
the United States and Britain, which states that Iraq 
must dismantle any WMD programs or face serious 
consequences. Iraq accepts the UN resolution, and 
UNMOVIC inspectors return to Iraq to search for 
WMD for the ﬁ rst time in nearly four years. 
 
   Cuba becomes the 188th party to the NPT and 
ratiﬁ es the Latin America Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone 
treaty, which goes into effect as all Latin American 
states have now ratiﬁ ed it. 
 
   Citing terrorist concerns, the U.S. government 
deploys Special Forces teams around the country to 
detect possible nuclear and radiological weapons, and
the U.S. Postal Service procures potassium iodide pills 
to protect its 750,000 employees in case of a nuclear 
or radiological attack. In November, President Bush 
establishes the Department of Homeland Security to 
combine 170,000 employees from twenty-two differ-
ent agencies to help protect the United States from ter-
rorist attacks. 
 
   After spending fourteen years and $4.5 billion on 
studies, the DOE recommends, and the Bush admin-
2002
(cont.)

Chronology
157
istration agrees, that Yucca Mountain, about 90 miles 
from Las Vegas, be used to bury thousands of tons of 
highly radioactive waste created by nuclear weapon 
facilities and power plants. The projected cost of the 
storage facility is $40 billion. Nevada ofﬁ cials and envi-
ronmental groups challenge the safety of the plan.
 
   In June, the leaders of the Group of Eight coun-
tries introduce a new initiative, the Global Partnership 
Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass 
Destruction, to help prevent terrorists from steal-
ing or buying weapons-usable nuclear material from 
facilities in Russia or another former Soviet state. The 
United States pledges $10 billion over ten years, and 
the other countries combined pledge another $10 bil-
lion. In August, the United States, with the aid of Rus-
sian and Yugoslav authorities, transports more than 
5,000 fuel rods containing enough HEU to make two 
nuclear bombs from the Vinca Institute in Belgrade, 
Yugoslavia, to Russia where it will be down-blended 
for use in a commercial nuclear power reactor. 
2003
As recommended by the 2001 Nuclear Posture Review 
and requested by the Bush administration, the U.S. 
Congress votes to repeal the ban (in the 1993 Spratt-
Furse Amendment) on research into low-yield nuclear 
weapons (with a yield of less than 5 kilotons). But 
Congress requires a future vote before producing 
such weapons. The Los Alamos National Laboratory 
produces the ﬁ rst plutonium weapon pit built in the 
United States in fourteen years, part of a $1.5 billion 
modernization program to create several new pits for 
weapons each year. 
 
   The U.S. Senate and Russian Duma ratify the 2002 
Moscow Treaty. A joint U.S.-Russian effort removes 17 
kilograms of Russian-origin HEU from a Soviet-era 
research facility in Bulgaria and returns it to Russia to 
be down-blended and used in civilian nuclear plants.
 
   UNMOVIC Executive Chairman Hans Blix and 
IAEA Director General Mohamed ElBaradei state 
that although Iraq has not been entirely forthcoming, 
ongoing IAEA and UNMOVIC inspections have found 

158 Chronology
no convincing evidence that Iraq has been pursuing 
nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons. Neverthe-
less, President Bush and U.S. Secretary of State Colin 
Powell argue that Iraq is trying to build WMD and 
must be disarmed by force. On March 19, the United 
States, supported by Great Britain, begins air strikes 
and cruise missile attacks against Iraq, followed by 
a major ground offensive. On May 1, President Bush 
declares victory over Iraqi forces and says U.S. troops 
are searching for WMD. 
 
   In January, North Korea announces that it will 
withdraw from the NPT, effective immediately. The 
IAEA Board refers the North Korean crisis to the UN 
Security Council. North Korea says it will reprocess 
the 8,000 spent fuel rods at the Yongbyon Nuclear 
Complex, which experts say could yield enough plu-
tonium for ﬁ ve to six nuclear weapons. North Korea 
also starts operating its 5-megawatt electric (MWe) 
reactor at Yongbyon, which can produce enough 
plutonium for an additional bomb per year, and 
plans to resume construction of a larger plutonium-
producing reactor. China agrees to host three-party 
talks with North Korea and the United States in April 
in hopes of resolving the crisis. North Korea states that 
it already possesses nuclear weapons, but will aban-
don its nuclear program if provided with security 
guarantees, the removal of sanctions, and both eco-
nomic and energy assistance. The United States rejects 
the deal and demands that North Korea ﬁ rst dismantle 
its nuclear program.
 
   In February, the IAEA conducts inspections in 
Iran, during which Iranian ofﬁ cials admit that they are 
building two uranium enrichment plants at Natanz 
and a heavy-water production facility at Arak. 
 
   In June, Iran denies IAEA inspectors access to the 
Kalaye Electric Company in Tehran to take environ-
mental samples. The IAEA subsequently issues three 
reports concluding that for the past two decades Iran 
has breached its IAEA safeguards agreement. Speciﬁ -
cally, Iran violated NPT rules by secretly importing 
3,960 pounds of uranium from China, acquiring unde-
2003
(cont.)

Chronology
159
clared foreign technology, and attempting to develop 
undeclared uranium centrifuge and laser enrichment 
programs. 
 
   In May, President Bush proposes the Proliferation 
Security Initiative, a new cooperative international 
effort to stop shipments of WMD-related materials 
and technology by land, sea, and air. The Proliferation 
Security Initiative is an informal arrangement among 
an initial eleven countries (Australia, France, Germany, 
Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Spain, 
the United Kingdom, and the United States), although 
by year’s end ﬁ fty other states agree to cooperate with 
its WMD interdiction efforts. 
 
   In mid-summer, the North Koreans allow South 
Korea, Japan, and Russia to join new Six-Party Talks 
on the nuclear crisis. These states convene for the ﬁ rst 
time in August, but make no progress. 
 
   In October, David Kay, the director of the U.S. 
government’s Iraq Survey Group, testiﬁ es to Congress 
that no WMD have yet been located, and there is no 
evidence that Iraq took steps after 1998 to produce ﬁ s-
sile material for a nuclear weapon. He concludes that 
thirteen years of UN sanctions and inspections effec-
tively ended the nuclear effort.
 
   In October, Iran signs an Agreed Statement with 
Germany, Britain, and France declaring that it does 
not intend to build nuclear weapons and will cooper-
ate more fully with the IAEA in exchange for the Euro-
peans’ conﬁ rmation of Iran’s right to peaceful nuclear 
energy and provision of greater access to modern 
technologies and goods. Iran signs, but fails to ratify, 
the IAEA’s Additional Protocol, although it submits 
to further IAEA inspections, temporarily suspending 
enrichment-related activities at Natanz and providing 
additional information. 
 
   In the fall, U.S. and British intelligence ofﬁ cials 
seize thousands of centrifuge parts for enriching ura-
nium in transit from Malaysia to Tripoli; the equipment 
provides evidence that Libya, a member of the NPT, is 
pursuing a clandestine nuclear weapon program. On 
December 19, after this seizure, Libyan leader Colonel 

160 Chronology
Muammar Gadhaﬁ  announces that Libya will disclose 
and dismantle all its WMD programs and immediately 
allow IAEA inspectors to search nuclear sites in Libya, 
in exchange for the lifting of international sanctions, 
improved trade and security relations, and other eco-
nomic incentives. Gadhaﬁ  agrees to abide by the NPT, 
which Libya ratiﬁ ed in 1975. IAEA inspectors ﬁ nd that 
Libya’s nuclear weapon program is fairly rudimen-
tary, despite purchases of centrifuge components from 
Pakistan’s Khan network. 
 
   The U.S. DOE releases a report on radiological 
dispersal devices, commonly called “dirty bombs,” 
and recommends improved security measures. Mean-
while, in the former Soviet republic of Georgia, police 
ﬁ nd cesium 137 and strontium 90, materials that could 
be used in a dirty bomb, in a taxi cab en route to Tur-
key. Thai police arrest a man in Bangkok who is trying 
to sell cesium 137, and Russian authorities arrest the 
deputy director of Atomﬂ ot, the agency responsible for 
storing Russian naval reactor fuel, on charges that he 
was plotting to smuggle nuclear materials to a buyer 
in the Baltic region. At the Group of Eight summit, 
the leaders issue an action plan on securing sources of 
radioactive materials that could be used by terrorists 
in dirty bombs. 
 
   In November, the United States convinces the 
other KEDO board members (the European Union, 
Japan, and South Korea) to stop building two light-
water nuclear power reactors promised to North Korea 
under the 1994 Agreed Framework. 
2004
In January, Pakistani authorities admit that the founder 
of Pakistan’s nuclear program (A. Q. Khan) had pro-
vided unauthorized assistance to Iran’s nuclear pro-
gram. Khan then publicly confesses to having run an 
international nuclear black market from the late 1980s 
that encompassed companies and contacts in several 
countries, including Germany, Malaysia, Japan, South 
Africa, and the United Arab Emirates. After Khan’s 
televised confession, Pakistan’s President General 
Pervez Musharraf strips Khan of his cabinet position, 
but grants him a full pardon. 
2003
(cont.)

Chronology
161
 
   The ﬁ ndings of U.S. inspectors call into question 
the U.S. rationale for invading Iraq. In an extensive 
report dated September 30, the Iraq Survey Group 
(headed by chief U.S. weapons inspector Charles 
Duelfer) concludes that the 1991 Gulf War and sub-
sequent UN sanctions and inspections effectively 
destroyed Iraq’s nuclear weapon program and inven-
tory of missiles over 150 kilometers in range. The Brit-
ish government’s Butler Report similarly faults British 
intelligence for mistaken claims about Iraq’s WMD 
programs. 
 
   In Libya, IAEA teams continue inspecting, moni-
toring, and dismantling efforts. Libya agrees to sign 
the IAEA’s Additional Protocol and ratiﬁ es the CTBT. 
Russia, the United States, and the IAEA send 16 
kilograms of HEU fuel from Libya’s Tajura Nuclear 
Research Center to Russia to be down-blended into 
low-enriched uranium (LEU) fuel. 
 
   In April, the UN Security Council adopts Resolu-
tion 1540, which requires states to implement measures 
to prevent terrorist organizations and other non-state 
actors from acquiring or developing nuclear, chemical, 
or biological weapons. 
 
   The United States announces a new international 
cooperative effort in May known as the Global Threat 
Reduction Initiative (GTRI), designed to identify and 
secure HEU and spent reactor fuel worldwide. In a 
related effort, the United States and Russia also agree 
to retrieve Russian-origin fresh and spent HEU from 
research reactors around the world. The United States 
will fund the recovery efforts while Russia will supply 
experts and equipment. In September, ninety states 
endorse the GTRI; more than $400 million is commit-
ted to prevent global trafﬁ c in nuclear and radiological 
materials. By the fall, Russia’s atomic energy agency 
has recovered about 1,980 pounds of enriched ura-
nium from Libya and sites in Eastern Europe. 
 
   Throughout the year, IAEA inspectors visit nuclear 
facilities in Iran and request additional information. 
In June, the IAEA Board ﬁ nds that Iran, although 
somewhat cooperative, still has not answered ques-
tions about the origin and use of its advanced P-2 

162 Chronology
centrifuges, its laser enrichment tests, and sources of 
LEU and HEU trace materials found at various loca-
tions in Iran. Furthermore, the Board notes that Iran 
has not stopped all enrichment and reprocessing 
activities.
 
   Six-Party Talks on halting North Korea’s nuclear 
program are held in February and June, but reach no 
solution.
 
   On November 15, Iran concludes the Paris Accord 
with France, Germany, and the United Kingdom (the 
EU-3), in which Iran pledges again to temporarily sus-
pend a speciﬁ c list of enrichment and reprocessing 
activities and permit IAEA veriﬁ cation. In return, the 
EU-3 promises to give Iran access to certain nuclear 
and other technologies and to promote its member-
ship in the World Trade Organization. 
2005
The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute 
reports that eight countries still actively deploy a total 
of 13,470 nuclear weapons, while holding another 
14,000 weapons in reserve stockpiles. 
 
   In March, the chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs 
of Staff releases a draft “Doctrine for Joint Nuclear 
Operations,” which states that nuclear weapons may 
be used to preempt the use of chemical and biologi-
cal weapon programs by non–nuclear state or terrorist 
groups. More than 470 physicists sign a petition oppos-
ing the draft policy as it allows the United States to use 
nuclear weapons against non–nuclear weapon states. 
In October, Congress decides to cancel a controversial 
nuclear bunker buster program. 
 
   In a major policy shift, the Bush administration 
decides to initiate civilian nuclear cooperation with 
India, an overt nuclear weapon state that has never 
joined the NPT. The U.S. Nuclear Non-Proliferation 
Act, U.S. export regulations, and Nuclear Supplier 
Group guidelines currently prevent the United States 
from providing nuclear aid to a non-NPT nuclear 
weapon state; these regulations must be changed 
before U.S. nuclear trade with India can begin. But 
France also agrees to new nuclear cooperation with 
India.
2004
(cont.)

Chronology
163
 
   North Korea says it has ﬁ nished extracting 8,000 
additional spent fuel rods from its 5-MWe Yongbyon 
reactor to use to make plutonium for nuclear weap-
ons and is resuming construction of 50- and 200-MWe 
reactors. In July the Six-Party Talks resume. 
 
   Iran reaches an agreement with Russia to return 
spent fuel from the Russian-built Bushehr reactor, 
and to continue suspending its HEU program while 
it negotiates with the EU-3 and submits to further 
IAEA inspections. But in May, the Iranian Guard 
Council mandates continued nuclear development. 
Intelligence reports indicate that Iran received techni-
cal information and practical assistance from North 
Korean scientists and technicians on how to build 
civilian and military nuclear programs. 
 
   In May, the seventh NPT Review Conference ends 
without a joint statement after three weeks of debate 
among the 153 states participating. 
 
   In August, Iran removes the IAEA seals at the 
Isfahan Uranium Conversion Facility to resume ura-
nium conversion activities. On September 24, the IAEA 
announces that Iran has breached its agreement to 
comply with its safeguards obligations. 
 
   According to an expert panel that monitors UN 
Security Council sanctions on al Qaeda and the Tal-
iban, these groups still seek nuclear and radiological 
weapons. On September 15, ﬁ fty countries sign the UN 
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts 
of Nuclear Terrorism. This treaty outlaws the posses-
sion, use, or threat of use of radioactive material by 
any person who intends to cause physical injury, prop-
erty damage, or blackmail. Later, the IAEA reports that 
in 2004, there were 121 known cases of illicit trafﬁ ck-
ing of radiological and nuclear materials, a substantial 
increase from earlier years. 
 
   On September 19, the members of the Six-Party 
Talks seem to reach a breakthrough agreement in 
which North Korea commits to abandoning its nuclear 
programs and returning to the NPT and IAEA safe-
guards in return for a U.S. pledge that it has no inten-
tion to attack North Korea and the provision of energy, 
trade, and economic beneﬁ ts by other states. However, 

164 Chronology
almost immediately the parties disagree over whether 
the pledged assistance involves light-water reactors, 
which North Korea now openly demands. The United 
States rejects this condition. 
 
   In October, the IAEA and its head, Mohamed 
ElBaradei, are awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. 
2006
In February, the IAEA adopts a resolution calling on 
Iran to suspend enrichment-related activities, ratify 
and implement the Additional Protocol, and provide 
more information regarding its nuclear program. But 
Iranian ofﬁ cials demand instead that the IAEA remove 
all remaining seals and surveillance equipment at its 
nuclear facilities used to enrich uranium. In March, the 
UN Security Council demands that Iran end uranium 
enrichment within 30 days, but it sets forth no penal-
ties or sanctions for noncompliance. Iranian President 
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad announces that his country 
has a full-ﬂ edged uranium enrichment capability after 
a report that the Natanz plant has successfully created 
a small stock of LEU. 
 
   In March, President Bush and Indian Prime 
Minister Manmohan Singh formally sign an agree-
ment to cooperate on nuclear energy development 
and technology. 
 
   After the signing, Russia transfers fuel for two 
nuclear reactors to India in spite of a U.S. request to 
delay the transfer until after the Nuclear Suppliers 
Group alters its guidelines to permit it. 
 
   The May issue of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scien-
tists reveals that China has approximately 200 nuclear 
warheads, about half the 400 warheads previously 
estimated. The authors estimate that China actively 
deploys only some 130 nuclear warheads for delivery 
by land-based missiles, sea-based missiles, and bomb-
ers. The previously larger estimates had assumed that 
China had developed more tactical nuclear weapons, 
but the authors found no evidence for this. 
 
   In late spring, the IAEA discovers new HEU con-
tamination on vacuum pumps from the former Physics 
2005
(cont.)

Chronology
165
Research Center at Lavizan-Shian, which the Iranians 
razed in 2004 before the IAEA could inspect it. In June, 
the ﬁ ve permanent members of the UN Security Coun-
cil plus Germany offer Iran a more generous package 
of incentives for forgoing its uranium enrichment 
program, including help in constructing additional 
light-water reactors, a promise to lift U.S. sanctions, 
and an agreement to back Iran for membership in the 
World Trade Organization. Iran allows a deadline for 
its response to pass, saying it is still studying the pro-
posal.
 
   In June, the United States and Russia agree to 
extend the Comprehensive Threat Reduction pro-
grams for seven years, and in July, they announce the 
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, a new 
effort to identify nuclear terrorists, track and secure 
weapons-grade materials, and coordinate responses 
against terrorists. Also, the U.S. Customs and Border 
Protection and the National Nuclear Security Admin-
istration sign agreements with several countries to 
implement the Megaports and Container Security 
Initiatives, which involve help in installing radiation 
detectors and identifying suspicious cargoes. 
 
   As part of the U.S.-funded GTRI, a multinational 
team transfers 139 pounds of spent HEU research reac-
tor fuel from Uzbekistan to Russia. U.S. nonprolifera-
tion assistance programs in the former Soviet Union 
now total $9 billion since 1992. The funds have helped 
deactivate 6,828 former Soviet nuclear warheads, 
destroyed 485 ICBM silos, eliminated 155 long-range 
bombers, and cut up 29 ballistic missile nuclear sub-
marines.
 
   In Britain, a parliamentary debate starts over 
whether the country should move toward nuclear dis-
armament or undertake the great expense of replac-
ing its aging Trident submarines. In December, Prime 
Minister Tony Blair announces his plan to maintain a 
force of slightly less than 200 nuclear weapons with 
a new ﬂ eet of submarines. The French defense minis-
ter states that it is modernizing its nuclear arsenal and 

166 Chronology
maintains the right to use nuclear weapons against 
biological or chemical weapons facilities, even in a 
non–nuclear weapon state. 
 
   On July 4, North Korea conducts its ﬁ rst long-
range missile test since 1998, a Taep’o-dong-2 possibly 
capable of reaching Alaska. North Korea also launches 
six short-range missiles. But the Taep’o-dong-2 fails 
after less than a minute of ﬂ ight. On July 15, the UN 
Security Council imposes limited sanctions on North 
Korea for its missile tests and demands that it suspend 
its ballistic missile program. 
 
   On July 31, the UN Security Council, through 
Resolution 1696, calls on Iran to comply with its IAEA 
obligations and to suspend all enrichment-related and 
reprocessing activities within a month or face possible 
economic and diplomatic sanctions. Iran refuses to 
comply.
 
   In August, the U.S. National Nuclear Security 
Agency, under the umbrella of the 2004 Global Threat 
Reduction Initiative, transfers 45 kilograms of HEU 
that could be used for a nuclear bomb from a research 
reactor in Poland to Russia. 
 
  On September 8, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajiki-
stan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan sign the Central 
Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, thus agreeing never 
to acquire nuclear weapons nor permit them within 
their borders. The United States, Britain, and France 
object to the Central Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free 
Zone’s provision barring transport of nuclear weap-
ons through the region and an ambiguous provision 
that might allow Russia to redeploy nuclear weapons 
into certain states according to a joint security agree-
ment signed in 1992.
 
   On October 9, North Korea conducts an under-
ground nuclear weapon test. International monitoring 
experts determine that the plutonium-fueled bomb 
probably ﬁ zzled, as it had a yield of less than half 
a kiloton. On October 14, the UN Security Council 
adopts Resolution 1718 demanding that North Korea 
not conduct further nuclear tests, return to the NPT, 
2006
(cont.)

Chronology
167
and abandon its nuclear weapon program. In Decem-
ber, the Six-Party Talks resume but North Korea refuses 
to talk about giving up its nuclear weapons until the 
United States lifts restrictions on its ﬁ nancial dealings 
abroad. 
 
   Iran begins using a second cascade of centrifuges 
to expand its capacity to enrich uranium. On Decem-
ber 23, the UN Security Council adopts Resolution 
1737, which calls on Iran to suspend all proliferation-
sensitive nuclear activities, including those related to 
uranium enrichment, plutonium reprocessing, and the 
development of possible delivery systems for nuclear 
weapons. The UN mandates that all states refrain from 
transferring any equipment, technology, or ﬁ nancial 
assistance to Iran that could contribute to such capa-
bilities. The resolution urges a negotiated, diplomatic 
solution to bringing Iran into compliance with its 
IAEA obligations. 
 
   On December 19, President Bush signs legislation 
authorizing the United States to proceed with civilian 
nuclear assistance to India. 
2007
In January, the U.S. secretary of Energy ﬁ res the 
head of the National Security Agency, Linton Brooks, 
because of continuing security lapses at nuclear weap-
ons facilities. In February, North Korea agrees at the 
Six-Party Talks to begin closing its nuclear facilities 
and to allow IAEA inspections in exchange for fuel, 
food, and other aid. Also, the United States and Japan 
will discuss normalizing relations with North Korea 
and lifting trade and ﬁ nancial sanctions. The agree-
ment gives North Korea sixty days to take steps toward 
halting its nuclear program but leaves to later negotia-
tions the issues of whether and how Pyongyang will 
dispose of its nuclear weapons and ﬁ ssile material.
In March, the U.S. Department of Energy announces 
that the Nuclear Weapons Council has selected the Law-
rence Livermore National Laboratory to develop the 
ﬁ rst new nuclear warhead under the Reliable Replace-
ment Warhead program. In Britain, the Parliament ends 

168 Chronology
a debate over whether to go non-nuclear by approving 
an approximately $40 billion program to replace the 
country’s ﬂ eet of four nuclear-armed submarines.
 
   On March 24, the UN Security Council unani-
mously approves Resolution 1747 authorizing addi-
tional sanctions against Iran because of its continued 
uranium enrichment activities. The resolution bans the 
export of all weapons to Iran, asks countries to restrict 
loans and ﬁ nancial aid to Iran, and freezes the assets 
of institutions and ofﬁ cials with links to Iran’s missile 
and nuclear programs. In April, in deﬁ ance of the UN 
sanctions, Iranian President Ahmadinejad claims that 
his country can now enrich uranium on an industrial 
scale.
Sources
Arms Control Today: http://www.armscontrol.org/act.
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists: http://www.bullatomscithebulletin.org/
index.htm.
Chang, Gordon G. 2006. Nuclear Showdown, North Korea Takes on the 
World. New York: Random House.
Cirincione, Joseph, Jon Wolfstahl, and Miriam Rajkumar. 2005. Deadly
Arsenals: Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Threats. 2nd ed. Washington, 
DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Congressional Research Service Reports: http://fpc.state.gov/c4763
.htm.
Corera, Gordon. 2006. Shopping for Bombs. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Federation of American Scientists: http://www.fas.org.
Gardner, Gary T. 1994. Nuclear Nonproliferation: A Primer. Boulder, CO: 
Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Holloway, David. 1994. Stalin and the Bomb. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
International Atomic Energy Agency: http://www.iaea.org.
Lewis, John W., and Xue, Litai. 1991. China Builds the Bomb. Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press.
2007
(cont.)

Chronology
169
Monterey Institute of International Studies, Center for Nonproliferation 
Studies: http://cns.miis.edu. 
Natural Resources Defense Council: http://www.nrdc.org/nuclear.
Nuclear Age Peace Foundation, “The Nuclear Files”: http://www
.nuclearﬁ les.org/index.html.
Nuclear Threat Initiative: http://www.nti.org. 
Perkovich, George. 1999. India’s Nuclear Bomb. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.
Preston, Diana. 2005. Before the Fallout: From Marie Curie to Hiroshima.
New York: Berkeley Books.
Rhodes, Richard. 1986. The Making of the Atomic Bomb. New York: Simon 
and Schuster.
Rhodes, Richard. 1995. Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb. New 
York: Simon and Schuster.
Richelson, Jeffrey T. 2006. Spying on the Bomb. New York: W. W. Norton.
Schwartz, Stephen I., ed. 1998. Atomic Audit: The Costs and Consequences 
of U.S. Nuclear Weapons since 1940. Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution Press.
Welsome, Eileen. 1999. The Plutonium Files. New York: Dial Press.


171
5
Biographical Sketches
T
he nuclear weapons story cannot be told without understand-
ing the motivations and actions of a number of inﬂ uential 
scientists, policymakers, spies, and concerned citizens in the 
United States and other countries who have been involved in 
either building or attempting to ban the bomb. This chapter pro-
ﬁ les these individuals and provides essential biographical infor-
mation on their lives and work. In some cases, scientists involved 
in bomb making later played a major role in efforts to limit or 
reverse nuclear proliferation. 
 Hans Bethe (1906–2005)
Born in Strasbourg (then in Germany) on 2 July 1906, Hans Bethe 
demonstrated an early genius in math. In 1928, he received his 
Ph.D. in physics from the University of Munich. Bethe did post-
doctoral work at Cambridge and at Enrico Fermi’s laboratory 
in Rome. In 1933, the German government forced him to leave 
his teaching post at the University of Tubingen because his 
mother was Jewish. He ﬂ ed ﬁ rst to Great Britain, where he worked 
with physicist Rudolf Peierls. In 1935, Bethe moved to the United 
States, where he joined the Cornell University faculty. Bethe wrote 
a series of groundbreaking papers exploring how stars produce 
energy as well as important texts on the relatively new ﬁ eld of 
nuclear physics. When World War II broke out, Bethe helped the 
war effort by developing radar at the Massachusetts Institute of 

172 Biographical Sketches
Technology. In 1943, spurred by fears that Nazi Germany was 
building a nuclear weapon, he accepted J. Robert Oppenheimer’s 
request to move to Los Alamos and head the theoretical division. 
His group mathematically assessed the explosive properties and 
design speciﬁ cations of the proposed bombs. 
But Bethe was disturbed by the devastation of Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki in 1945. After the war, he returned to Cornell, became 
an adviser to the U.S. government, and organized atomic scien-
tists to urge controls on nuclear technology. In December 1945, 
he founded the Federation of Atomic Scientists (later the Federa-
tion of American Scientists) with other Manhattan Project person-
nel to advocate for international control of nuclear energy. Bethe 
also argued against the United States pursuing a crash program 
to develop a hydrogen bomb. Despite his stance, when Presi-
dent Harry Truman approved the hydrogen bomb program, Bethe 
returned to Los Alamos to once again head the theoretical divi-
sion. He claimed that he hoped to demonstrate that a hydrogen 
bomb wouldn’t work and to serve as a voice for disarmament at 
the weapons lab. 
While maintaining his post at Cornell, Bethe became a mem-
ber of the President’s Science Advisory Committee in 1956. In that 
capacity, he urged the negotiation of a treaty banning almost all 
nuclear weapon tests and chaired a committee that designed an 
international veriﬁ cation system (not adopted at the time) com-
posed of seismic stations. Bethe later worked to defeat a Penta-
gon proposal to put nuclear-armed antinuclear missile rockets 
around several major U.S. cities, arguing that such systems could 
be defeated easily. In 1983, Bethe opposed President Ronald Rea-
gan’s Strategic Defense Initiative, explaining its numerous ﬂ aws 
and noting possible countermeasures, such as low-tech decoys. 
Bethe won the 1967 Nobel Prize in Physics for his studies on 
how stars shine. He won several other scientiﬁ c honors, including 
the Max Planck Medal, the Eddington Medal of the Royal Astro-
nomical Society, and the Enrico Fermi Award. He wrote numerous 
articles and books on astrophysics, nuclear physics, and nuclear 
weapons programs. 
Source
Garwin, Richard L., and Frank von Hippel. 2005. “In Memoriam: 
Hans Bethe (1906–2005).” Arms Control Today 35 (April), http://www
.armscontrol.org/act/2005_04/Bethe.asp.

Biographical Sketches 173
Schweber, Silvan S. 2000. In the Shadow of the Bomb. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Homi Jehangir Bhabha 
(1909–1966)
Born to a wealthy and politically connected family in Bombay, 
Homi Bhabha entered Cambridge University in England at age 
16. At Cambridge, he took degrees in mechanical engineering and 
mathematics and then earned a Ph.D. in theoretical physics. He 
worked at the Cavendish Laboratories in Cambridge, primarily 
on cosmic rays (radiation from outer space), and toured Europe, 
meeting many leading physicists, including Niels Bohr and Enrico 
Fermi.
When World War II started in 1939, Bhabha returned to India 
to become a professor of theoretical physics at the Indian Institute 
of Science at Bangalore. To pursue his interests in cosmic rays and 
nuclear physics, Bhabha—with funding from a family trust—estab-
lished the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research in 1944. Bhabha 
became the ﬁ rst director of the institute and began promoting 
nuclear energy as a path to Indian industrial development.
The Indian government set up the Atomic Energy Commis-
sion in 1948, with Bhabha as its chair, and broke ground for the 
Atomic Energy Establishment at Trombay (renamed the Bhabha 
Atomic Research Center in 1966). In 1954, Bhabha became head of 
India’s newly formed Department of Atomic Energy, answering 
directly to the prime minister. In 1955, Canada supplied India with 
a heavy-water research reactor that produced plutonium. Bhabha 
designed the nuclear power program to maximize the production 
of plutonium that could be used for weapons fuel, although India 
ofﬁ cially opposed nuclear weapons.
After China exploded an atomic bomb in October 1964, Bhabha 
tried to convince the Indian government to change its position 
and pursue nuclear weapons. The compromise he reached with 
the prime minister permitted Bhabha to accelerate India’s nuclear 
power program and to work on peaceful nuclear explosions for 
possible industrial projects, such as building harbors and digging 
water reservoirs. In early 1965, Bhabha unsuccessfully sought to 

174 Biographical Sketches
acquire a U.S. nuclear explosive device (or the designs for one) to 
speed up India’s peaceful nuclear explosion program. He believed 
India needed to demonstrate a dramatic nuclear achievement to 
offset the prestige China gained by testing a nuclear device.
Although Bhabha died in an airplane crash in January 1966, 
eight years before India detonated its ﬁ rst nuclear device, the infra-
structure and training programs he had put into place provided 
the necessary building blocks for India’s bomb. He is now widely 
viewed as the “father” of the Indian nuclear weapon program.
Source
Perkovich, George. 2001. India’s Nuclear Bomb: The Impact on Global 
Proliferation. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Hans Blix (1928–)
Hans Blix was born in 1928 in Uppsala, Sweden. He attended the 
University of Uppsala, Columbia University, and Cambridge Uni-
versity where he earned a Ph.D. In 1959, he also earned a doctor-
ate in law at Stockholm University and became a professor there. 
From 1963 to 1976, Blix worked at the Swedish Ministry of For-
eign Affairs and served as its legal adviser on international law. 
In 1976, he became under-secretary of state in charge of interna-
tional development cooperation, and in 1978, he was appointed 
Sweden’s minister for Foreign Affairs. While at the Ministry for 
Foreign Affairs, Blix was a member of Sweden’s delegations to 
the United Nations (UN) General Assembly and the Conference 
on Disarmament.
In 1981, Blix became director general of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), a post he held until 1997. Dur-
ing his tenure, the extent of Iraq’s clandestine nuclear weapons 
program became apparent during the UN Special Commission 
on Iraq (UNSCOM) inspections after the 1991 Gulf War. In 2000, 
when UNSCOM was replaced by the UN Monitoring, Veriﬁ ca-
tion and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC), the UN secretary 
general appointed Blix to head the new organization and over-
see renewed inspections of Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction 
(WMD) programs. Before the March 2003 invasion of Iraq, Blix 
oversaw 700 inspections of 500 different sites in Iraq. He reported 
to the UN Security Council that UNMOVIC found no WMD and 

Biographical Sketches 175
argued that UNMOVIC should be allowed to continue inspections 
rather than withdraw before a U.S. invasion. Inspections after the 
U.S.-led invasion vindicated Blix and UNMOVIC; Blix publicly 
criticized the United States and Britain for exaggerating prewar 
intelligence on Iraq’s WMD program.
In 2003, the Swedish government established the indepen-
dent WMD Commission and appointed Blix chair. Under Blix’s 
direction, the thirteen international nonproliferation experts pro-
duced a major 2006 report, Weapons of Terror: Freeing the World of 
Nuclear, Biological and Chemical Arms. The report reviewed the cur-
rent state of WMD threats and responses and proposed sixty steps 
for reducing associated dangers.
Sources
Blix, Hans. 2006. “Repairing the Nonproliferation Regime.” http://
www.armscontrol.org/events/20060125_transcript_blix.asp.
Blix, Hans. 2005. Disarming Iraq. London: Bloomsbury Publishing. 
Niels Bohr (1885–1962)
Born in Copenhagen to a wealthy Jewish family, Niels Bohr com-
pleted his doctorate in physics at the University of Copenhagen in 
1911, where he then became a professor. Bohr published his theory 
of atomic structure in 1913. He proposed the existence of a series 
of discrete electron orbits around the nucleus, and that electrons 
could move from high energy states to low by emitting photons. 
For his work on quantum physics, Bohr received the Nobel Prize 
in Physics in 1922. 
 
Bohr founded the Institute for Theoretical Physics in 
Copenhagen, which would become the center of nuclear physics 
in Europe until the outbreak of World War II. In 1939, Bohr toured 
the United States for four months and discussed the new discov-
ery by scientists working in Germany that uranium 235 would 
allow for a ﬁ ssion chain reaction. Because of the rarity of the 235 
isotope of uranium (0.7% in nature), however, Bohr dismissed the 
idea of a ﬁ ssion weapon on the grounds that it would be too costly 
and difﬁ cult to make.
 
Germany occupied Denmark in April 1940, and Bohr 
found his freedom curtailed because of his Jewish ancestry and 

176 Biographical Sketches
anti-Nazi views. In September 1941, Bohr had a controversial 
meeting in Copenhagen with Werner Heisenberg, his former stu-
dent and now head of the German nuclear program. Although 
after the war Heisenberg claimed that his former teacher had mis-
understood his intentions, Bohr came away from the meeting con-
vinced that Nazi Germany intended to actively pursue an atomic 
bomb. This belief spurred Bohr to aid the U.S. bomb program. 
In September 1943, warned that he was soon to be deported 
to Germany, Bohr made a daring escape to Sweden with help 
from the Danish resistance. A few weeks later, Bohr was ﬂ own 
to London in the bomb bay of a British Mosquito ﬁ ghter bomber. 
Bohr became a consultant to the British bomb program and in 
December 1943 joined a delegation of British scientists on a trip to 
Los Alamos National Laboratory to review the U.S. bomb project. 
He sat on a committee that designed the implosion initiator for a 
plutonium bomb. However, his role was mainly advisory. 
To avoid a nuclear arms race, Bohr believed the United States, 
Britain, and the Soviet Union should establish international con-
trols on the use of atomic energy before the United States built and 
used a nuclear bomb. Bohr had his friend, U.S. Supreme Court Jus-
tice Felix Frankfurter, forward his arguments against secrecy and 
for openness on scientiﬁ c issues to President Franklin D. Roos-
evelt, who in turn said he would be interested in British Prime 
Minister Winston Churchill’s views. In 1944, Bohr met with both 
leaders, but both men expressed concern that the Soviet Union 
not be given any information about the bomb. In September 1944, 
Roosevelt and Churchill dismissed Bohr’s idea for international 
control of nuclear energy. In June 1950, Bohr wrote an open letter 
to the UN, calling for the free exchange of scientists and ideas in 
order to control nuclear weapons. Bohr helped establish the Euro-
pean Council for Nuclear Research and worked to keep it a civil-
ian scientiﬁ c organization, untouched by the military. Bohr wrote 
more than 100 scientiﬁ c publications and won the ﬁ rst Atoms for 
Peace Award in 1957.
Sources
French, A. P., and P. J. Kennedy, eds. 1985. Niels Bohr: A Centenary 
Volume. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Pais, Abraham. 1994. Niels Bohr’s Times: In Physics, Philosophy, and Polity.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Biographical Sketches 177
Rhodes, Richard. 1995. The Making of the Atomic Bomb. New York: Simon 
and Schuster.
Helen Broinowski Caldicott 
(1938–)
A native of Australia, Helen Caldicott graduated from the Uni-
versity of Adelaide Medical School in 1961 and became a pediatri-
cian. In 1971, she led protests against France’s atmospheric nuclear 
bomb tests in the South Paciﬁ c. As a doctor and the mother of 
three young children, she appeared on Australian radio and TV 
programs to explain the medical dangers of the tests’ radioactive 
fallout, which tainted drinking water and food. Her appearances 
galvanized a popular movement to stop the tests and eventually 
inﬂ uenced France to restrict itself to underground nuclear testing. 
Caldicott also challenged the Australian government’s plan to 
sell uranium—the raw fuel for nuclear technology—on the world 
market. By speaking to uranium miners about the harmful health 
effects of radiation, she helped convince the Australian Council of 
Trade Unions to adopt a ban on mining, transporting, and selling 
uranium from 1975 to 1982.
In 1977, Caldicott moved to the United States and became an 
associate professor of pediatrics at Harvard Medical School. Con-
cerned about the spread of nuclear weapons and power reactors, 
she revived the moribund group Physicians for Social Respon-
sibility (PSR) in 1978. Coincidentally, PSR’s ﬁ rst advertisement 
appeared the same day as the worst nuclear accident in U.S. his-
tory at the Three Mile Island reactor in Pennsylvania; more than 
500 physicians joined the group immediately, and hundreds more 
joined for several weeks thereafter.
In 1980, Caldicott resigned from Harvard to work full-
time against nuclear dangers. She traveled the world lecturing 
and inspiring the formation of groups similar to PSR. Caldicott 
cofounded the Women’s Party for Survival (later renamed the 
Women’s Action for Nuclear Disarmament) and the Interna-
tional Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, which won 
the Nobel Peace Prize in 1985. During the Reagan administra-
tion, Caldicott led PSR-sponsored symposia across the United 

178 Biographical Sketches
States on the nuclear threat. In 1982, PSR produced an Academy 
Award–nominated documentary, Eight Minutes to Midnight, based 
on these presentations. 
Caldicott resigned as president of PSR in 1983. In 1987, she 
returned to Australia, where she narrowly lost election to parlia-
ment. She returned to the United States in 1995 and has continued 
lecturing and writing on nuclear and environmental issues. Caldi-
cott has written several books and has received numerous awards 
for her nuclear disarmament and peace work.
Source
Caldicott, Helen. 1996. A Desperate Passion. New York: W. W. Norton.
Mohamed ElBaradei (1942–)
Born in Egypt in 1942, Mohamed ElBaradei attained a bachelor’s 
degree in law in 1962 at the University of Cairo. He began his dip-
lomatic career in 1964, serving in the Permanent Missions of Egypt 
in the UN in New York and Geneva; his responsibilities included 
political, legal, and arms control issues. ElBaradei earned a doc-
torate in international law at New York University of Law in 1974 
and later served as a special assistant to Egypt’s foreign minister 
and as a professor of international law at New York University. 
ElBaradei joined the IAEA Secretariat in 1984, taking on several 
high-level policy positions, including as IAEA’s legal adviser and 
later assistant director general for external relations. 
ElBaradei became director general of the IAEA in 1997. He 
has presided over an expansion of the agency’s original mission 
of tracking countries’ nuclear activities into investigations and 
negotiations with countries that have been secretly developing 
nuclear weapon programs and defying their IAEA obligations. 
During ElBaradei’s tenure, the IAEA has been confronted with 
North Korea’s withdrawal from the Non-Proliferation Treaty and 
its declaration of a nuclear weapons capability, Iran’s disclosure 
of a covert nuclear program, the revelations about A. Q. Khan’s 
extensive nuclear black market, and the debate over whether Iraq 
had nuclear weapons in 2003. Before the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq 
in March 2003, ElBaradei argued that ongoing IAEA inspections 
had found no evidence that Iraq had or was trying to build nuclear 
weapons. The positions of ElBaradei and the IAEA on Iraq was 

Biographical Sketches 179
vindicated after the U.S. invasion, as the Iraq Survey Group found 
no evidence that Iraq had a nuclear weapon program.
ElBaradei and the IAEA received the 2005 Nobel Peace Prize 
for their efforts to prevent nuclear weapons proliferation. When 
accepting the prize, ElBaradei urged the United States and other 
nuclear powers to reduce their weapons stockpiles sharply and to 
redirect their spending to funding international efforts to elimi-
nate poverty, armed conﬂ ict, and insecurities that prompt some 
countries to pursue nuclear weapons. In 2005, ElBaradei was 
appointed to a third term as director general.
Sources
“Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei: Director General.” IAEA Web site. http://
www.iaea.org/ABOUT/DGC/dgbio.html. 
Pomper, Miles A. 2005. “ElBaradei, IAEA Win Nobel Peace Prize.” Arms
Control Today 35 (November), http://www.armscontrol.org/act/2005
_11/NOV-Nobel.asp.
Klaus Fuchs (1911–1988)
Born and raised in Germany, Klaus Fuchs became an active mem-
ber of the Communist Party in 1932 while studying physics and 
mathematics at the University of Kiel. When Hitler’s Gestapo 
began rounding up communists in 1933, the 21-year-old Fuchs 
ﬂ ed to England. He received a Ph.D. in physics from Bristol Uni-
versity in 1937 and moved to Edinburgh to work with Max Born, 
one of the pioneers in quantum physics.
In May 1940, the British deported Fuchs to Canada for being 
an enemy alien. After spending seven months in a primitive army 
camp there, Born won Fuchs’s release, and he returned to Born’s 
lab. Soon thereafter, in May 1941, Rudolf Peierls, another German 
refugee, requisitioned Fuchs to aid British atomic bomb research 
in Birmingham. When he learned the nature of the work, Fuchs 
decided to inform the Soviet Union, establishing contact through 
another member of the Communist Party. Fuchs believed the 
Soviet Union, as a British ally ﬁ ghting Hitler’s Nazis, had a right 
to know about the atomic bomb research. He passed to his secret 
contact all the reports he prepared for Peierls on issues related to 
bomb fuel and design.

180 Biographical Sketches
Fuchs became a British citizen because of his bomb work, and 
in 1943 joined a group of British scientists sent to Los Alamos, New 
Mexico, to help design the plutonium-type U.S. bomb. Regarded as 
an excellent scientist and a genial colleague, Fuchs made signiﬁ cant 
contributions to the U.S. program, all the while regularly passing 
classiﬁ ed information to a Communist Party contact, Harry Gold. 
Fuchs provided the Soviets with a full description of the U.S. plu-
tonium implosion device, the results of the ﬁ rst bomb test at the 
Trinity site, and an explanation of how the United States designed 
and assembled the Fat Man bomb dropped on Nagasaki. 
After World War II ended, Fuchs remained at Los Alamos 
until June 1946 to aid Edward Teller’s effort to design a hydro-
gen (thermonuclear) bomb. Before he left, Fuchs ﬁ led jointly for 
a patent related to the super bomb’s ignition and reviewed every 
document in the archives on thermonuclear weapon design. He 
returned to England to work on a British atomic bomb at the Har-
well Atomic Research Facility, where he became the head of the 
theoretical division and continued his espionage through 1949.
In 1949, the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) began 
a full-scale investigation into Soviet espionage. When ﬁ nally con-
fronted by the FBI, Fuchs confessed. In March 1950, an English 
court convicted him of passing military secrets to a foreign coun-
try and sentenced him to fourteen years in prison. After serving 
nine years in Wakeﬁ eld Prison, Fuchs was deported to East Ger-
many. He became director of the Institute for Nuclear Research in 
Rossdorf, and died in 1988.
Sources
Conant, Jennet. 2005. 109 East Palace: Robert Oppenheimer and the Secret 
City of Los Alamos. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Rhodes, Richard. 1995. Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb. New 
York: Simon and Schuster.
Leslie Groves (1896–1970)
Leslie Groves, the son of an Army chaplain, grew up on military 
bases across the United States. After two stints at civilian colleges, 
Groves entered West Point, where he graduated fourth in his class 
in 1918. He then joined the Army Corps of Engineers, where he 

Biographical Sketches 181
served brieﬂ y in France at the end of World War I, completed his 
training in the United States, and then served in several U.S. and 
foreign posts. Eventually, he was assigned to the Corps’ headquar-
ters in Washington, DC. Groves rose quickly through the ranks, 
eventually joining the Army’s General Staff in 1940. In 1941, he 
became assistant chief of the Quartermaster Corps’ Construction 
Division and was responsible for Army building projects in the 
run-up to World War II, including the construction of the Penta-
gon in Arlington, Virginia. 
After his success in managing the Pentagon project, Groves 
sought overseas combat duty. Instead, he was promoted to briga-
dier general and, in September 1942, formally took charge of the 
Manhattan Project. Groves administered what became a $2 bil-
lion secret budget and a staff that grew to more than 125,000. 
A burly, gruff man, he governed by intimidation. Groves coor-
dinated an effort that involved some of the largest U.S. compa-
nies including Du Pont and Monsanto, the world’s most famous 
scientists, and several U.S. university laboratories, as well as key 
military personnel. Groves instituted the practice of having civil-
ian contractors manage large government projects, which is still 
used in many U.S. nuclear weapon facilities today. Despite his 
efforts to keep the Manhattan Project secret, spies such as Klaus 
Fuchs at Los Alamos kept the Soviet Union informed of technical 
developments.
After the war, Groves oversaw the Manhattan Project’s trans-
fer to the civilian Atomic Energy Commission (AEC). In 1946, 
he sat on a committee appointed by President Truman charged 
with developing a plan for international control of nuclear tech-
nology. This effort culminated in the Acheson-Lilienthal Report. 
Groves retired from the military as a major general in 1948, and 
he worked for Sperry Rand, a military equipment manufacturer, 
until 1961. In 1962, he published his memoirs Now it Can Be Told: 
The Story of the Manhattan Project.
Sources
Norris, Robert. 2003. Racing for the Bomb: General Leslie R. Groves, the 
Manhattan Project’s Indispensable Man. South Royalton, VT: Steerforth 
Press.
Rhodes, Richard. 1995. The Making of the Atomic Bomb. New York: Simon 
and Schuster.

182 Biographical Sketches
Werner Heisenberg 
(1901–1976)
Born into an intellectual family, Werner Heisenberg excelled in 
school and was very active in the New Boy Scouts, which instilled 
him with a strong sense of German patriotism. He entered the 
University of Munich in 1920, excelled in theoretical physics, 
received his doctorate in 1923, performed postdoctoral research 
with Niels Bohr at Copenhagen in 1924, and became a professor 
at the University of Leipzig in 1927.
Heisenberg developed his famous uncertainty principle in 
March 1927. He hypothesized that the position and momentum of 
a subatomic particle cannot be known simultaneously. This work—
which now forms the basis of quantum mechanics—resulted in 
Heisenberg’s receipt of the 1932 Nobel Prize in Physics.
As Adolph Hitler rose to power in the late 1930s, many Jew-
ish physicists left Germany because of persecution. Heisenberg, 
although he was not Jewish, was attacked in a Schutzstaffel (SS) 
newspaper for studying “Jewish physics,” interrogated several 
times by the gestapo, and denied a professorship at the University 
of Munich. Heinrich Himmler, the commander of the SS, ﬁ nally 
intervened to stop the attacks, and drafted Heisenberg into the 
German bomb project as head of the theoretical division of the Ger-
man nuclear program in 1939. Heisenberg produced several tech-
nical reports on the usefulness of atomic energy and the feasibility 
of producing a bomb, but he mistakenly rejected the use of carbon 
as a neutron moderator, focusing instead on heavy water, which 
slowed the bomb program signiﬁ cantly. Heisenberg also miscalcu-
lated that it would take tons of uranium 235 to build a bomb.
In September 1941, Heisenberg traveled to German-
occupied Copenhagen to meet with his mentor Niels Bohr. He 
later claimed that he planned to inform Bohr, and by proxy the 
Allies, that he understood how to induce nuclear ﬁ ssion, but 
that he wanted instead to create a physicists’ pact to slow weap-
ons research. Bohr was unconvinced. In June 1942, Heisenberg 
informed Albert Speer, the new armaments minister of the Third 
Reich, that Germany could not build a bomb without a massive 
expenditure that the war-torn economy could ill afford. Speer 
decided to invest in the V-2 rocket project instead, and German 
nuclear research never developed a reactor that could produce 

Biographical Sketches 183
weapons-grade material. After the fall of Nazi Germany, Heisen-
berg and other prominent German scientists were captured by 
the Allies in Operation Alsos and interned in England through 
December 1945. 
 
Whether Heisenberg helped or hindered the German atomic 
bomb program remains a subject of debate. Thomas Powers, in his 
book Heisenberg’s War, claims that Heisenberg deliberately slowed 
the German program. Others make the case that Heisenberg sim-
ply miscalculated and therefore argued against the feasibility of a 
German bomb program for technical (rather than moral) reasons.
After the war, Heisenberg directed the Max Planck Institute 
for Physics and Astrophysics from 1946 to 1976. He supported 
the peaceful use of nuclear energy and was the scientiﬁ c policy 
director for the European Center for Nuclear Research. In 1957, 
Heisenberg, along with eighteen other German physicists, signed 
a public declaration (the Gottingen Declaration) urging that Ger-
many renounce the future possession of atomic weapons of any 
kind and declaring that the signatories would not take part in pro-
ducing, testing, or designing nuclear weapons. He also opposed 
placing U.S. tactical nuclear weapons in West Germany. Through-
out his later life, Heisenberg wrote books and essays on the inter-
section of physics and philosophy and the role of science. 
Sources
“Werner Heisenberg (1901–1976).” American Institute of Physics Web 
site, http://www.aip.org/history/exhibits/heisenberg/p01.htm. 
Heisenberg, Jochen. “Who Was Werner Heisenberg?” http://werner-
heisenberg.unh.edu. 
Powers, Thomas. 2000. Heisenberg’s War: The Secret History of the German 
Bomb. Reprint ed. New York: Da Capo Press.
Abdul Qadeer Khan (1936–)
A. Q. Khan was born in Bhopal, India, and migrated with his 
family to Pakistan during the 1947 partition. Khan received a 
Ph.D. in metallurgy in Germany. Between 1972 and 1975, Khan 
worked in the Netherlands for Urenco, the British-Dutch–West 
German uranium-enrichment group. While there he gained access 
to sensitive data concerning the Urenco gas-centrifuge enrich-
ment plant. In mid-1975, Dutch authorities banned Khan from 

184 Biographical Sketches
enrichment-related work because they suspected he was send-
ing classiﬁ ed technology to Pakistan. Khan returned to Pakistan 
in 1976, where he used his personal knowledge of gas-centrifuge 
equipment and international industrial suppliers to develop Pak-
istan’s nuclear weapon program.
Khan led the uranium-enrichment program and worked on 
weapon designs at the Engineering Research Laboratories (later 
renamed A. Q. Khan Research Laboratories) at Kahuta near Islam-
abad. Khan built a gas-centrifuge uranium-enrichment plant at 
Kahuta based on designs he had obtained illegally from Urenco 
and equipment purchased secretly from Europe, Canada, and 
the United States. In 1976, Dutch authorities charged Khan with 
trying to steal secret designs from a former Urenco colleague. In 
1983, a Dutch court sentenced Khan in absentia to four years in 
prison for trying to steal enrichment secrets. Khan never served 
his prison sentence, and the court’s ruling was later overturned 
on procedural grounds. Khan apparently obtained a complete 
installation for improving weapons-grade uranium from a West 
German company and actively recruited Western-trained scien-
tists to work at Kahuta.
Until Pakistan’s nuclear tests in May 1998, Khan helped main-
tain Pakistan’s policy of deliberate ambiguity about its nuclear 
weapons capability. He claimed that the Kahuta reactor provided 
fuel for a power reactor being built with Chinese assistance in the 
mid-1990s, not for weapons. After Pakistan’s ﬁ ve nuclear tests in 
May 1998, Khan stated that India’s earlier tests had compelled his 
country to prove its nuclear capability and that Pakistan’s bomb 
would help guarantee peace. 
In January 2004, Khan publicly confessed that from the late 
1980s on he had provided Iran, North Korea, and Libya with the 
technologies, designs, engineering, and advice to build nuclear 
weapons. While advising the Pakistani government and heading 
Khan Laboratories, he had run a secret network that encompassed 
companies and contacts in several countries to sell nuclear tech-
nologies and know-how to many states and possibly to terrorist 
groups, such as al Qaeda. Khan was apparently motivated by a 
pro-Islamic, anti-Western personal ideology and by ﬁ nancial gain. 
Following his confession, Pakistan’s President, General Pervez 
Musharraf stripped Khan of his cabinet position, but pardoned 
him based on his scientiﬁ c contributions to the country. The Paki-

Biographical Sketches 185
stani government refuses to allow other nations or the IAEA to 
interrogate him, despite many unanswered questions about his 
nuclear proliferation network, including whether it was sup-
ported by the government.
Source
Corera, Gordon. 2006. Shopping for Bombs: Nuclear Proliferation, Global 
Insecurity, and the Rise and Fall of the A.Q. Khan Network. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Igor Kurchatov (1903–1960)
Born in the southern Urals, Igor Kurchatov graduated in three 
years from Crimea State University with a physics degree. He 
then went to the Polytechnical Institute in Petrograd (later Lenin-
grad, now St. Petersburg) to study shipbuilding and to work at the 
Pavlovsk Observatory. There he wrote his ﬁ rst scientiﬁ c paper on 
the radioactivity of snow. In 1925, he joined the Physical-Technical 
Institute and established his reputation as a physicist, research-
ing a phenomenon called ferroelectricity (the spontaneous electric 
polarization in crystals).
In 1932, Kurchatov became the head of a Leningrad research 
team investigating the new ﬁ eld of nuclear physics. During the 
1930s, Kurchatov actively participated in the international com-
munity of nuclear physicists, publishing many articles outside the 
Soviet Union. In the spring of 1937, Kurchatov began working on 
the Radium Institute’s cyclotron (a device that accelerates charged 
particles using magnets and electrical ﬁ elds), eventually taking 
charge of it. By the late 1930s, he was named to a government 
commission on nuclear research. After the Germans invaded the 
Soviet Union in July 1941, Kurchatov left Leningrad to help the 
war effort, working with a group that developed a means of pro-
tecting ships from magnetic mines (which earned him the Stalin 
Prize). In 1943, when the Soviet government realized that West-
ern scientists were working on an atomic bomb, the State Defense 
Committee named Kurchatov as the leader of a secret nuclear 
research program and elected him to the Soviet Academy of Sci-
ences. Kurchatov concluded that a plutonium bomb was the most 
promising approach and asked Soviet agents abroad to investigate 

186 Biographical Sketches
speciﬁ c questions related to that technology. By 1944, Kurchatov 
had about 100 researchers, engineers, and technicians working on 
the bomb project.
After the United States bombed Hiroshima on 6 August 1945, 
Stalin met with Kurchatov and ordered him to accelerate his 
work, no matter the cost. While secret police chief Lavrenti Beria 
retained overall responsibility for the atomic project, Kurchatov 
became scientiﬁ c director of the directorate set up to build the 
bomb. He became known as an exceptional leader, able to coordi-
nate political ofﬁ cials, managers, and scientists skillfully.
Kurchatov succeeded in testing the ﬁ rst Soviet atomic 
bomb (dubbed Joe-1 in the West and modeled on the ﬁ rst U.S. 
plutonium-type bomb) on 29 August 1949. For his efforts, Stalin 
named Kurchatov a Hero of Socialist Labor and awarded him a 
large ﬁ nancial bonus, a car, a country home, and other rare ben-
eﬁ ts in the Soviet Union. 
Throughout the late 1940s and early 1950s, Kurchatov oversaw 
the development of new bomb designs. In 1951, his team tested a 
new plutonium bomb that was about half the weight and twice 
the yield of Joe-1. Again, Stalin awarded him the country’s high-
est honor: Hero of Socialist Labor. Now in a race with the United 
States to produce a much more powerful fusion (thermonuclear) 
bomb, in August 1953 Kurchatov tested the ﬁ rst hydrogen bomb 
capable of being weaponized; it yielded a 400-kiloton force. After 
a November 1955 test of a 1.6-megaton bomb at Semipalatinsk 
that inadvertently killed three people, Kurchatov withdrew from 
weapon testing and turned his attention to the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. Greatly upset by the damage caused by the 1955 
thermonuclear bomb test, he began to lobby internally against 
future nuclear testing.
Kurchatov’s success brought him immense prestige in the 
Soviet Union. He was allowed to travel to England and visit phys-
icists and laboratories. But he later suffered two strokes and, in 
late 1957, was forced to take the blame for the explosion of a waste 
storage tank at a plutonium production plant that exposed tens 
of thousands of people to high levels of radiation and rendered 
the area uninhabitable. Kurchatov died in February 1960 and was 
given a special burial in the Kremlin Wall. In 1991, the Institute of 
Atomic Energy in Moscow was renamed the Kurchatov Institute 
in his honor.

Biographical Sketches 187
Sources
Holloway, David. 1994. Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet Union and Atomic 
Energy, 1939–1956. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Khariton, Yuli, and Yuri Smirnov. 1993. “The Khariton Version.” Bulletin
of the Atomic Scientists 49 (May), pages 20–31.
Ernest Lawrence (1901–1958)
Born in rural South Dakota to Lutheran schoolteachers, Ernest 
Lawrence was always fascinated by science. He entered St. Olaf 
College at 16, although he quickly transferred to the University 
of Minnesota. He completed a Ph.D. in physics at Yale University 
in 1924, writing his dissertation on the photoelectric effect—the 
emission of electrons from matter when struck by light. In 1928, 
after further research and teaching at Yale, Lawrence joined the 
faculty of the University of California–Berkeley, where he began 
building a device that would accelerate particles to extremely high 
velocities: the cyclotron. To ﬁ nance the much larger machines that 
he envisioned, Lawrence obtained funds from a combination of 
private, state, federal, and industrial donors. At his burgeoning 
Radiation Laboratory at Berkeley, Lawrence gathered an interdis-
ciplinary team of scientists and eventually built a cyclotron with 
a 5,000-ton, 15-foot-long magnet that required its own building. 
Lawrence won the 1939 Nobel Prize in Physics for inventing the 
cyclotron and for the results achieved with it, particularly the cre-
ation of artiﬁ cial radioactive elements. In 1940–1941, scientists in 
his laboratory discovered that irradiated uranium decayed into 
a new element, plutonium, which was ﬁ ssionable and could be 
used to generate nuclear energy.
 
In 1941, Lawrence (along with his Berkeley colleague, physi-
cist Robert Oppenheimer) joined the Manhattan Project to apply 
his cyclotron technology to enriching uranium, calling the result 
a “calutron” in honor of his home university. During the war, the 
Radiation Laboratory became a military facility with security 
guards and checkpoints, and Lawrence served as an adviser for 
the secret government facility at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, where 
industrial-scale calutrons produced enriched uranium for the 
bomb used on Hiroshima. Lawrence, as a scientiﬁ c adviser to the 
1945 U.S. Interim Committee, suggested that the United States 

188 Biographical Sketches
should demonstrate the atomic bomb before a delegation of Japa-
nese ofﬁ cials rather than use it on a city.
After the war, Lawrence continued to advise the U.S. gov-
ernment on nuclear matters and promote the Berkeley Radiation 
Laboratory as part of the nuclear weapons complex. Lawrence 
initially opposed the transfer of atomic energy matters to the civil-
ian AEC, but he withdrew from the debate when other scientists 
argued that the military should not control the direction of scien-
tiﬁ c research. 
Lawrence consistently argued that the United States should 
maintain a large stockpile of nuclear weapons and the large indus-
trial plants needed to produce them. After the Soviet Union tested 
a nuclear weapon in 1949, Lawrence supported a crash program 
to produce a hydrogen bomb. Lawrence built larger and larger 
accelerators at the Livermore Auxiliary Naval Air Station, which 
would become the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in 
1952, a second atomic research center to rival Los Alamos. In the 
late 1950s, Lawrence opposed a nuclear test-ban treaty, arguing 
instead for developing “clean bombs” with reduced fallout. In 
addition to the Nobel Prize, Lawrence won the 1957 Enrico Fermi 
Award, the highest scientiﬁ c award given by the United States. 
Sources
Heilbron, J. L., Robert W. Seidel, and Bruce R. Wheaton. 1981. 
“Lawrence and His Laboratory: A Historian’s View of the Lawrence 
Years.” Lawrence Berkeley Lab Newsmagazine. http://www.lbl.gov/
Science-Articles/Research-Review/Magazine/1981.
Herken, Gregg. 2002. Brotherhood of the Bomb: The Tangled Lives and 
Loyalties of Robert Oppenheimer, Ernest Lawrence, and Edward Teller. New 
York: Henry Holt & Co.
“Lawrence and the Cyclotron.” American Institute of Physics Web site. 
http://www.aip.org/history/lawrence.
Nie Rongzhen (1899–1992)
Nie Rongzhen was born into a prosperous Chinese family in 
Jiangjin Province and, in 1920, traveled to Europe to work and 
study. While a technical student in Belgium, he met Zhou Enlai, a 
leader in the Chinese communist movement. In 1923, Nie joined 
the Communist Party and traveled to Moscow for six months of 
military training. When he returned to China, he worked under 

Biographical Sketches 189
Zhou in a military academy. In 1927, when the Nationalist Party 
headed by Chiang Kai-shek began battling the communist Red 
Army, Nie escaped with Zhou and others to remote Jiangxi Prov-
ince in western China. In 1934–1935, Nie, along with Mao Tse-tung, 
Zhou, and 86,000 men and women, fought a series of battles across 
the country (known as the Long March) against Nationalist forces. 
Nie served as a leader of the First Front Army and supported Mao 
at the Zunyi Conference when Mao emerged as the leader of the 
Communist Party and the overall commander of the Red Army. 
Nie became famous as a senior battleﬁ eld commander during the 
communist victory over the Nationalist government. From 1950 
to 1953, he served as the acting chief of the General Staff, and in 
1955 Mao named him one of ten Chinese marshals. That same year, 
inﬂ uenced by U.S. involvement in the Korean War, Indochina, and 
the Taiwan Strait, China decided to obtain its own nuclear arsenal. 
Beginning in July 1955, Nie held several senior government posi-
tions with responsibility for organizing and mobilizing China’s 
resources to develop, test, and produce an atomic bomb within ten 
years. In 1957, Nie went to the Soviet Union to seek additional help 
with China’s nuclear weapon program. The two countries signed 
the New Defense Technical Accord in which the Soviets agreed to 
supply a prototype nuclear bomb, missiles, and related technical 
data. But the accord was never completely fulﬁ lled and, by 1960, 
the Soviets had withdrawn all help.
During 1958–1961, Nie’s program collected thousands of engi-
neers and technicians to work on the atomic bomb. As the effort to 
mine and process uranium progressed, Nie selected the site for Chi-
na’s ﬁ rst plutonium-production reactor in the Gobi Desert (Jiuquan 
Atomic Energy Complex) and began construction on the Northwest 
Nuclear Weapons Research and Design Academy (Ninth Academy). 
He also mobilized a group of scientists to design a prototype ﬁ ssion 
weapon. On 16 October 1964, China tested its ﬁ rst atomic bomb (a 
uranium ﬁ ssion device) at the Lop Nor test site. China tested its 
ﬁ rst hydrogen bomb in June 1967. Nie later took personal charge 
of China’s ﬁ rst test of a strategic missile armed with a nuclear war-
head. In 1984, Nie published his memoirs, in which he stated that 
China had pursued a minimum nuclear deterrent in order to be 
able to respond to a nuclear attack. 
Source
Lewis, John W., and Xue Litai. 1988. China Builds the Bomb. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press.

190 Biographical Sketches
J. Robert Oppenheimer 
(1904–1967)
Robert Oppenheimer was born into a wealthy German-Jewish 
family in New York. He was sickly and sheltered as a youth but 
became a precocious student of languages and science. He gradu-
ated summa cum laude from Harvard University in 1925 after 
excelling in coursework that included poetry and Greek as well 
as chemistry and physics. Oppenheimer gravitated to the centers 
of the scientiﬁ c world in Europe and completed his doctorate in 
physics at Germany’s Göttingen University in 1927. He published 
sixteen scientiﬁ c papers between 1926 and 1929, rapidly establish-
ing himself as a leading theoretical physicist. Back in the United 
States, he received numerous job offers but accepted a unique 
joint appointment at the University of California–Berkeley and 
the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.
During the 1930s, Oppenheimer became involved in some 
left-wing activities. Many of his close friends became members 
of the Communist Party of California. Eventually, he married a 
thrice-divorced German émigré, Kitty Puening, whose strong left-
ist leanings cast doubt on Oppenheimer’s trustworthiness to lead 
the U.S. bomb program. Nonetheless, in 1942, the U.S. govern-
ment appointed him scientiﬁ c director of its project to design an 
atomic bomb. Working with General Leslie Groves, Oppenheimer 
assembled a team of leading U.S. and émigré scientists and engi-
neers at Los Alamos, New Mexico, to work on this top-secret proj-
ect. Along with Groves, Oppenheimer eventually coordinated 
dozens of scientiﬁ c and industrial facilities across the United 
States and created two types of atomic weapons in a span of three 
years. His perseverance, ability to motivate his fellow scientists, 
and understated brilliance as an administrator and problem solver 
yielded success in the ﬁ rst atomic bomb test at the Trinity site in 
July 1945.
Oppenheimer supported use of the bomb against Japan, but 
he later became a leader in efforts to prevent the spread of nuclear 
weapons and the development of the hydrogen bomb. Having 
become immediately famous at the end of World War II, he used 
his reputation to explain to the U.S. public the dual-edged sword 
of nuclear weapons: a powerful deterrent to prevent future wars, 
but also a horrible destructive force that required strict limitations 

Biographical Sketches 191
and controls. Inﬂ uenced by Danish scientist Niels Bohr, Oppen-
heimer led several studies in the 1940s and 1950s calling for more 
openness about nuclear weapons issues and new means of pre-
venting their use. In 1952, Oppenheimer, fed up with the pronu-
clear weapons policies in Washington, resigned from the General 
Advisory Committee but remained as a consultant and agreed 
to sit on the State Department Panel of Consultants on Disarma-
ment. However, the rising anticommunist scare in the United 
States eventually caught up with him, reviving questions about 
his involvement in left-wing causes in the late 1930s and early 
1940s and shedding doubt on his reliability in the eyes of some 
ofﬁ cials. Oppenheimer’s opposition to the hydrogen bomb and 
belief in candor about nuclear matters led the U.S. AEC to revoke 
his security clearance in 1954.
Although Oppenheimer continued to be active in research and 
public policy questions as director of Princeton University’s Insti-
tute of Advanced Studies, he never again regained prominence in 
U.S. nuclear decision making. In December 1963, President John-
son awarded him the Enrico Fermi Prize for public service. Oppen-
heimer, a lifelong smoker, died of throat cancer in 1967.
Sources
Bird, Kai, and Martin J. Sherwin. 2005. American Prometheus: The Triumph 
and Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer. New York: Vintage Books.
Conant, Jennet. 2005. 109 East Palace: Robert Oppenheimer and the Secret 
City of Los Alamos. New York: Simon & Schuster.
McMillan, Priscilla J. 2005. The Ruin of J. Robert Oppenheimer and the Birth 
of the Modern Arms Race. New York: Viking.
Linus Pauling (1901–1994)
Linus Pauling was born in Portland, Oregon, and in 1922 grad-
uated with a bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering from 
Oregon Agricultural College (now Oregon State University). Paul-
ing received a Ph.D. in chemistry in 1925 from California Institute 
of Technology, and then joined the faculty in 1927. At Cal Tech, 
Pauling explored the structure and behavior of molecules and, 
in 1939, published The Nature of the Chemical Bond and the Struc-
ture of Molecules and Crystals. He won the 1954 Nobel Prize in 

192 Biographical Sketches
Chemistry for his research into the chemical structures of complex 
substances.
During World War II, Pauling refused Robert Oppenheimer’s 
request to head the chemistry section of the atomic bomb project 
at Los Alamos, but he worked on war-related projects at Cal Tech. 
After the 1945 U.S. atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, 
Albert Einstein asked Pauling to join his Emergency Committee 
of Atomic Scientists. As part of this group, Pauling participated in 
lecture tours to educate the public on the vast destructive power 
of the new weapons and the need to prevent future wars. He 
began researching the harmful effects of nuclear fallout on human 
health, including the likelihood of future congenital deformities 
resulting from nuclear testing. He opposed both the development 
of the hydrogen bomb and continued nuclear weapons testing. In 
response, the U.S. government accused Pauling of being pro-com-
munist and prevented him from getting a passport to attend some 
foreign scientiﬁ c conferences, even initially denying his request 
for a passport to travel to Sweden in 1954 to receive the Nobel 
Prize. In addition, the U.S. government denied grants for his sci-
entiﬁ c research. 
In 1958, Pauling and two other U.S. scientists circulated a 
petition demanding that atmospheric nuclear weapons testing be 
banned because such tests released radioactive fallout over the 
globe leading to an increase in birth defects, cancer, and other dis-
eases. In January 1958, Pauling and his wife presented a petition 
signed by approximately 11,000 scientists from around the world 
to UN Secretary General Dag Hammarskjöld. The same year, 
Pauling published the book No More War, which argued that a 
nuclear war could mean the end of the human race. Pauling also 
used his scientiﬁ c training and fame to lobby U.S., Soviet, and 
British leaders to halt nuclear testing. For example, in 1961, when 
attending a biochemical conference in the Soviet Union, Pauling 
spoke to a gathering of antinuclear demonstrators and sent a let-
ter to Khrushchev promoting a test-ban treaty. The Nobel Prize 
Committee awarded Pauling the 1962 Peace Prize. 
Pauling resigned from Cal Tech in 1963 because of pres-
sure from the university’s trustees against his antinuclear efforts. 
While remaining active in the antinuclear and peace movements, 
he focused his research and advocacy on the use of large doses of 
vitamin C for treating a range of diseases. He served as a chem-

Biographical Sketches 193
istry professor at Stanford University from 1969 to 1973, when he 
established the Linus Pauling Institute of Medicine and Science.
Pauling wrote or contributed to nearly ﬁ fty popular and 
scholarly books and more than 1,000 articles on chemistry, bio-
chemistry, nutrition, health, and nuclear disarmament issues. 
Sources
Academy of Achievement. 1990. “Interview: Linus Pauling.” http://
www.achievement.org/autodoc/printmember/pau0int-1.
Marinacci, Barbara, ed. 1995. Linus Pauling in His Own Words: Selections 
from His Writings, Speeches, and Interviews. New York: Touchstone.
Oregon State University, Linus Pauling Institute. “Linus Pauling 
Biography.” http://lpi.oregonstate.edu/lpbio/lpbio2.html. 
Joseph Rotblat (1908–2005)
Born in Warsaw, Poland, Joseph Rotblat initially became an elec-
trician when his father’s business failed. He studied physics at 
night, eventually earning an advanced degree from the Univer-
sity of Warsaw. In 1939, he moved to Liverpool, England, to work 
on nuclear physics with James Chadwick at Liverpool University. 
Like many physicists at the time, he sought to determine whether 
a self-sustaining chain reaction was possible. Rotblat realized that 
the release of energy from such a ﬁ ssion reaction could be used in 
a powerful bomb.
Afraid that Nazi Germany would develop an atomic bomb 
ﬁ rst, Rotblat began to work on nuclear designs in Liverpool while 
teaching. By 1944, he had helped establish that an atomic bomb 
was theoretically possible. A British scientiﬁ c delegation soon 
informed the United States of this ﬁ nding. In June 1944, Rotblat 
joined a group of British scientists sent to Los Alamos, New Mex-
ico, to aid the U.S. bomb program. But Rotblat quickly became 
disenchanted with the weapons project. He realized that war-
battered Germany lacked the massive resources necessary to 
build an atomic bomb and believed the United States wanted 
such a weapon mainly to intimidate the Soviet Union. In late 1944, 
after U.S. intelligence missions conﬁ rmed that Germany’s nuclear 
weapon program had largely ended, Rotblat asked to leave Los 

194 Biographical Sketches
Alamos after nine months on the project. U.S. security suggested 
that he was a spy and threatened him with arrest if he mentioned 
the real reasons for his departure.
Rotblat returned to England and from 1945 to 1949 was the 
director of physics research at Liverpool University. After the 
United States used nuclear weapons twice against Japan, he urged 
scientists to support a moratorium on nuclear weapon develop-
ment. In 1946, he cofounded the Atomic Scientists Association to 
help shape British policy on nuclear energy; later, he helped found 
the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. In 1950, he received a 
Ph.D. in physics from the University of Liverpool, and from 1950 
to 1976 he served as professor of physics at St. Bartholomew’s 
Hospital Medical College in London. He focused on the medical 
applications of physics and became an expert on the hazards of 
nuclear radiation.
In 1955, Rotblat signed the Russell-Einstein Manifesto, which 
urged an international meeting of scientists to discuss nuclear 
disarmament and means of abolishing war. With funding from 
Cyrus Eaton, an industrialist from Pugwash, Nova Scotia, Can-
ada, Rotblat helped organize the ﬁ rst such conference in July 1957. 
Attended by twenty-two world-renowned scientists and policy-
makers, the conference discussed the hazards of nuclear testing 
and recommended arms control measures. Rotblat held the posi-
tion of the Pugwash Conference’s secretary-general for fourteen 
years and its presidency from 1988 to 1997. The contacts between 
world leaders and scientists established through Pugwash meet-
ings and the background reports generated have been credited 
with inﬂ uencing international nuclear nonproliferation agree-
ments. In 1995, the Pugwash Conferences and Rotblat received 
the Nobel Peace Prize.
Rotblat also played a signiﬁ cant role in the World Health 
Organization’s comprehensive reports on the health effects of 
nuclear war issued in 1984 and 1987. He authored more than 300 
publications, including twenty books, and received numerous 
awards and honors, including the Albert Einstein Peace Prize in 
1992 and a British knighthood in 1998.
Sources
Landau, Susan. 1996. “The Road Less Traveled.” Bulletin of Atomic 
Scientists 52 (January/February), pages 46–54.

Biographical Sketches 195
Palevsky, Mary. 2000. Atomic Fragments: A Daughter’s Questions.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Rotblat, Joseph. 1985. “Leaving the Bomb Project.” The Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientist 41  (August), pages 16–19.
Andrei Sakharov (1921–1989) 
Andrei Sakharov was born in Moscow, where his father, a physi-
cist, served as his ﬁ rst teacher until the seventh grade. In 1938, he 
enrolled in Moscow State University, where the physics depart-
ment had been depleted by Stalinist purges. Sakharov’s mentor 
was the physicist Igor Tamm. After Nazi Germany invaded the 
Soviet Union in 1941, the university was evacuated to Central 
Asia, where Sakharov graduated with honors in 1942. The gov-
ernment assigned Sakharov to routine laboratory work at a muni-
tions factory; he declined Igor Kurchatov’s request to join the 
Soviet atomic bomb project. In 1945, Sakharov returned to Mos-
cow as a physics graduate student under Tamm’s supervision at 
the Physical Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences (FIAN) 
and earned a Ph.D. in 1947.
Once the Soviet Union learned about U.S. work on thermo-
nuclear weapons, it formed a similar group under Tamm’s super-
vision at FIAN (while simultaneously working toward the ﬁ rst 
Soviet ﬁ ssion bomb, which was tested in 1949). Sakharov agreed 
to join this group because he was convinced that the Soviet Union 
needed nuclear weapons to restore the balance of power. In 1948, 
Sakharov proposed his concept of placing alternate layers of 
thermonuclear fuel (deuterium, tritium, and their chemical com-
pounds) and uranium 238 in a ﬁ ssion bomb to make a ﬁ ssion-
fusion-ﬁ ssion reaction possible. In the spring of 1950, Sakharov 
moved with Tamm’s group to the closed, secret town of Arzamas-
16 (now known as Sarov), where the main theoretical and experi-
mental work on the hydrogen bomb took place. Using Sakharov’s 
design, the Soviet Union tested its ﬁ rst hydrogen bomb, which 
had a force of 400 kilotons, on 12 August 1953. The government 
honored Sakharov as a Hero of Socialist Labor and bestowed 
upon him the Stalin Prize with its many attendant privileges. He 
was elected to full membership in the Academy of Sciences at the 
exceptionally young age of 32.

196 Biographical Sketches
From 1953 to 1955, Sakharov developed additional weapon 
designs, including the design for the Soviet Union’s ﬁ rst air-
dropped thermonuclear bomb in November 1955. This device had 
a yield estimated at 1.6 megatons (scaled down from 3 megatons 
for the test), but the resulting devastation made him realize his 
responsibility for the weapon he had created. He later claimed 
that he became a dissident within the nuclear complex when he 
realized that although scientists, engineers, and workers had built 
powerful weapons, they had no say in how they would be used. 
Sakharov became increasingly concerned about the long-term 
biological consequences of nuclear tests and campaigned to stop 
them in the atmosphere.
While Sakharov continued to work on quantum physics 
and new weapons at Arzamas-16, he used his growing inﬂ uence 
with Soviet political leaders to try to stop the nuclear arms race 
and prevent human rights abuses under his country’s repressive 
communist government. In May 1968, Sakharov wrote an essay, 
“Reﬂ ections on Progress, Peaceful Coexistence, and Intellectual 
Freedom,” which was circulated in typewritten copies in the 
Soviet Union and printed by the New York Times. The essay alerted 
readers to grave threats facing the human race—including ther-
monuclear extinction—and argued for peace between the com-
munist and capitalist systems. After the publication, the Soviet 
government banned Sakharov from all military-related research.
In May 1969, Sakharov returned to FIAN to work on academic 
topics. In 1970, along with other Soviet dissidents (including his 
second wife, Elena Bonner), he founded the Moscow Human 
Rights Committee. They worked in defense of victims of politi-
cal persecution and discrimination. As Sakharov’s public stature 
grew, the government increasingly threatened him and had other 
prominent citizens denounce him in letters printed in the news-
paper. In 1975, Sakharov was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for 
his fearless commitment to the principles of peace and his ﬁ ght 
against the abuse of power. Bonner accepted the award in Sakha-
rov’s place because the Soviet government would not allow him 
to travel outside the country.
Sakharov strongly protested the 1979 Soviet invasion of 
Afghanistan. In retaliation, the Soviet Politburo exiled him to 
Gorky, a closed city on the Volga River, and stripped him of all 
his titles and awards. Sakharov remained in exile there for almost 

Biographical Sketches 197
seven years, where he was subject to continued police surveil-
lance. But he received support from Western physicists and wrote 
his memoirs and various essays, which were smuggled to the 
West for publication.
Finally, in December 1986, after General Secretary Mikhail 
Gorbachev began to initiate political reforms in the Soviet system, 
Sakharov was allowed to return to Moscow and resume his public 
activities. He became a leading ﬁ gure in demanding democratic 
changes, and in 1988 he was elected to the new Soviet Congress 
of People’s Deputies. Sakharov authored six books and, shortly 
before his death in December 1989, had started drafting a new 
constitution for the Soviet Union. 
Sources
Holloway, David. 1994. Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet Union and Atomic 
Energy, 1939–1956. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Lourie, Richard. 2002. Sakharov: A Biography. Hanover, NH: Brandeis 
University Press/University of New England.
Sakharov, Andrei. 1990. Memoirs. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Lewis L. Strauss (1896–1974) 
Lewis Strauss was born in 1896 in West Virginia. He excelled in 
high school but had to pass up a scholarship to the University of 
Virginia when he contracted typhoid fever. When he recovered, he 
became a successful traveling shoe salesman in his family’s busi-
ness. When the United States entered World War I, Strauss volun-
teered to be an administrative assistant to Herbert Hoover, who 
was then the acting U.S. food administrator, and worked to prevent 
starvation in Europe. He later became an investment banker and 
joined the U.S. Naval Reserves. In 1941, he began working for the 
Navy on a number of special projects related to the war effort, and, 
in 1944, he became special assistant to the secretary of the Navy. 
President Truman promoted Strauss to rear admiral in November 
1945, and appointed him one of ﬁ ve commissioners on the newly 
formed AEC in 1946. In August 1949, after the Soviet Union’s ﬁ rst 
atomic bomb test was detected, Strauss advocated that the United 
States respond with an all-out effort to build a thermonuclear 

198 Biographical Sketches
bomb. The chairman of the AEC, many of its other members, and 
the nine members of its General Advisory Committee (eminent 
nuclear scientists and engineers chaired by Robert Oppenheimer) 
opposed a thermonuclear bomb program on moral and technical 
grounds. Strauss reportedly used his Navy connections to inﬂ u-
ence Truman, who eventually approved the thermonuclear bomb 
program in January 1950. 
In 1953, President Dwight Eisenhower appointed Strauss to 
a new post as White House adviser on atomic energy and to the 
AEC chair manship. As AEC chairman, Strauss sought to curtail 
Oppenheimer’s inﬂ uence as a government adviser. Despite hav-
ing agreed to Oppenheimer’s security clearance in 1947, Strauss 
began to revive old allegations that Oppenheimer had communist 
contacts. He suspended Oppenheimer’s security clearance and 
ultimately voted with two other AEC commissioners to uphold a 
hearing panel’s decision to revoke Oppenheimer’s clearance per-
manently in 1954. In the process, Strauss resorted to illegal wire-
tapping of Oppenheimer and his lawyers and denied them access 
to classiﬁ ed documents introduced as evidence. 
Strauss opposed the negotiations that resulted in the Limited 
Test Ban Treaty in 1963. He worked to promote U.S. dominance 
in nuclear weapons but also supported the spread of civilian 
nuclear technology through Eisenhower’s Atoms for Peace Pro-
gram, which inadvertently assisted certain countries’ prolifera-
tion efforts.
In July 1958, after Strauss’s term as AEC chairman, President 
Eisenhower presented him with the U.S. Medal of Freedom for 
his service to the security of the United States. Eisenhower also 
appointed Strauss as secretary of Commerce in November 1958. 
However, in June 1959, after two months of contentious hearings, 
the Senate refused to conﬁ rm Strauss’s appointment, in part as 
retribution for his treatment of Oppenheimer. Strauss returned 
to the private sector and wrote his memoirs, Men and Decisions,
in 1962. 
Sources
McMillan, Priscilla J. 2005. The Ruin of J. Robert Oppenheimer and the Birth 
of the Modern Arms Race. New York: Viking.
Pfau, Richard. 1985. No Sacriﬁ ce Too Great: The Life of Lewis Strauss.
Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.

Biographical Sketches 199
Leo Szilard (1898–1964)
Leo Szilard was born in 1898 into a middle-class Jewish family 
in Budapest, Hungary. In 1916, after a year of engineering stud-
ies at Budapest Technical University, he served in the Austro-
Hungarian Army during World War I. In 1919, anti-Semitism in 
postwar Hungary forced Szilard to pursue his studies in engi-
neering and physics in Berlin, where he convinced Albert Einstein 
to tutor him. He received a Ph.D. in physics from the University of 
Berlin in 1922, and then worked as an inventor, a researcher, and 
an instructor. While in Berlin (1920–1933), Szilard was granted 
thirty-one patents, covering such inventions as a linear accel-
erator, a cyclotron, an electron microscope, and, in collaboration 
with Einstein, a home refrigerator without moving parts. In 1933, 
Szilard moved to London to escape persecution by the Nazis. In 
Britain, he helped other Jewish refugees and sparked the forma-
tion of the Academic Assistance Council. In 1934, Szilard ﬁ led a 
British patent for a neutron chain reaction and began to investi-
gate which elements would allow such a reaction. Sensing that a 
successful chain reaction could be used in a new weapon, in 1936 
he assigned his patent to the British Admiralty to keep it secret. 
Fearing the outbreak of World War II, Szilard moved to New 
York in 1938, and at Columbia University demonstrated that 
a chain reaction might be sustained in a lattice of uranium and 
graphite. Szilard tried unsuccessfully to keep his ﬁ ndings and 
those of other U.S. and European scientists secret to thwart Nazi 
Germany’s military research. Physicist George Pegram notiﬁ ed 
the U.S. Navy of Szilard’s ﬁ ndings and the possibility that they 
could be used to build a huge explosive. But the Navy showed 
little interest in the discovery. Szilard then enlisted fellow Hun-
garian scientists Edward Teller and Eugene Wigner to help him 
convince Einstein (then living in New Jersey) to draft a letter to 
President Roosevelt stating that the discovery of a chain reaction 
using uranium could be used in extremely powerful new bombs. 
They also noted that the Germans had taken over Czechoslova-
kia’s uranium mines. As a result, a nine-member Advisory Com-
mittee on Uranium, including Szilard, Teller, Alexander Sachs, 
and Army and Navy representatives, was formed. Szilard and 
other scientists received a small amount of government funding 
for bomb-related research. 

200 Biographical Sketches
On 2 December 1942, Szilard helped the Italian émigré sci-
entist Enrico Fermi create the ﬁ rst successful nuclear chain reac-
tion at the University of Chicago Metallurgical Lab. But Szilard 
clashed with General Leslie Groves, the head of the Manhattan 
Project, over freedom of scientiﬁ c speech and his right to patent 
uranium work. Groves distrusted Szilard and barred him from Los 
Alamos. Szilard occasionally worked as a consultant on reactor 
design for the U.S. bomb project, but by 1944 had become increas-
ingly fearful of a postwar nuclear arms race. In early 1945, Szilard 
sought a meeting with President Roosevelt to warn him that the 
use of the atomic bomb in Japan would start an arms race with 
the Soviet Union, but Roosevelt died before Szilard could meet 
with him. Szilard presented his arguments to President Truman’s 
Secretary of State–designate James Byrnes, who rejected them on 
the grounds that the U.S. bomb would help contain the growing 
Soviet empire. He then coauthored with James Franck, another 
Metallurgical Lab scientist, a report arguing that the United States 
should demonstrate the atomic bomb before bombing Japan. 
When Oppenheimer and others rejected this idea, Szilard circu-
lated a petition to President Truman, dated 17 July 1945, opposing 
the use of the atomic bomb on moral grounds; seventy Manhattan 
Project scientists eventually signed.
After the war, Szilard and Einstein founded the Emergency 
Committee of Atomic Scientists, and in 1950 Szilard publicly 
opposed the U.S. hydrogen bomb program. Upset by the weapon 
his physics discoveries had made possible, Szilard also switched 
his research to biology. In 1955, Szilard and Fermi won a joint pat-
ent for their invention of the nuclear reactor. Szilard continued to 
promote disarmament and peace by participating in the Pugwash 
Conferences, founding the Council for Abolishing War (now called 
Council for a Livable World), and undertaking national antiwar 
speaking tours. Szilard received the Atoms for Peace Award in 
1960 and became a member of the National Academy of Sciences 
in 1961. He died in 1964 in La Jolla, California, where he was a 
resident fellow at the Salk Institute. 
Sources
Lanouette, William, with Bela Szilard. 1994. Genius in the Shadows: A 
Biography of Leo Szilard, the Man behind the Bomb. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Leo Szilard Online. http://www.dannen.com/szilard.html.

Biographical Sketches 201
Edward Teller (1908–2003)
Edward Teller was born into a Jewish family in Budapest, Hun-
gary. The political turmoil that disrupted his early education in 
private schools during the short-lived Hungarian communist 
republic after World War I set him on a course of militant anticom-
munism throughout his life. In 1926, because of political upheaval, 
Teller left Budapest to study chemical engineering in Karlsruhe, 
Germany, but he soon transferred to the University of Munich to 
study physics. He received his Ph.D. in theoretical physics from 
the University of Leipzig while working under Werner Heisen-
berg, who would later head Nazi Germany’s atomic bomb pro-
gram. Teller worked as a research consultant at the University of 
Göttingen until Adolf Hitler’s rise to power. As a Jew, he was then 
forced to emigrate to Denmark, where he joined the institute of 
famed physicist Niels Bohr and met the Russian physicist George 
Gamow, also a political refugee. Teller then taught brieﬂ y in Lon-
don before joining Gamow at George Washington University in 
Washington, DC, in 1935. In 1941, Teller became a U.S. citizen 
and joined the Manhattan Project because he, like other refugees, 
feared that Hitler might develop the bomb ﬁ rst. After preliminary 
work in Chicago with Enrico Fermi and in Berkeley with Robert 
Oppenheimer, Teller moved to the new weapons lab in Los Ala-
mos, New Mexico. Teller worked in the theoretical division of the 
ﬁ ssion bomb project, but he remained ﬁ xated with the possibility 
of the far-more-powerful hydrogen bomb. His idea was to use the 
high heat of an exploding atomic bomb to ignite hydrogen fuel, 
fusing the atoms together and then releasing almost unlimited 
bursts of nuclear energy from a second ﬁ ssion.
In the autumn of 1943, Teller, along with Polish mathemati-
cian Stanislaw Ulam, began systematic theoretical studies toward 
a thermonuclear bomb; in January 1944, Teller began directing 
a small group studying the feasibility of building the so-called 
“super bomb.” Although Teller watched the Trinity test of the 
ﬁ ssion bomb in July 1945, he later claimed in published articles 
that he thought the lethality of nuclear weapons was a dangerous 
myth and that Hiroshima haunted scientists unduly, distorting 
the judgment of U.S. policymakers. After World War II, Teller con-
tinued to push for a thermonuclear bomb, issuing an optimistic 
report in the spring of 1946 that justiﬁ ed a large-scale theoretical 
and experimental thermonuclear bomb program. 

202 Biographical Sketches
Teller left Los Alamos in 1946 and went to the University of 
Chicago as a professor. He returned to Los Alamos, however, in 
July 1949, inﬂ uenced by the communist takeovers in Czechoslova-
kia and his native Hungary, the Berlin blockade, and the impend-
ing communist victory in China. In August 1949, the Soviet Union 
tested its ﬁ rst atomic device, and Teller sought support for a crash 
program to build a hydrogen bomb, arguing that it was critical 
to the survival of the United States. President Truman ﬁ nally 
approved a hydrogen bomb program in January 1950.
Teller worked on a design for the hydrogen bomb, but cal-
culations by Ulam and the new ENIAC computer conﬁ rmed that 
his initial concept was not feasible. He, Ulam, and young physi-
cist Richard Garwin ﬁ nally devised a workable hydrogen bomb 
design. In November 1951, Teller left Los Alamos and returned to 
the University of Chicago, when he failed to be named the head of 
the thermonuclear program.
Frustrated by his experiences at Los Alamos, Teller con-
vinced the U.S. government to establish a second weapons lab 
in Livermore, California, in 1952. Teller claimed that competition 
between laboratories would help develop better military technol-
ogy. From 1954 to 1958, Teller served as associate director of the 
new lab, then as its director from 1958 to 1960. From 1960 to 1975, 
he held a joint appointment as a professor of physics at the Uni-
versity of California and as associate director of Lawrence Liver-
more National Laboratory. In 1975, he became director emeritus 
of Lawrence Livermore and a senior research fellow at the Hoover 
Institution at Stanford University.
Teller was known for his controversial stances. Many Los 
Alamos scientists believed he betrayed Oppenheimer, the scien-
tiﬁ c director of the atomic bomb project, when he cast doubt on 
his reliability at a hearing in 1954 at which Oppenheimer’s secu-
rity clearance was revoked. In 1963, Teller also testiﬁ ed against 
the Limited Test Ban Treaty, which was eventually adopted, and 
in the 1970s he promoted the development of nuclear fusion as an 
alternative energy source. In the 1980s, he vigorously supported 
President Reagan’s Strategic Defense Initiative, or “Star Wars,” 
plan. Teller received numerous awards for his contributions to 
physics, including the Enrico Fermi Award, the National Medal 
of Science, and the Presidential Medal of Freedom. He wrote 
more than a dozen books, ranging from energy policies to defense 
issues to his memoirs. 

Biographical Sketches 203
Sources
Goodchild, Peter. 2004. Edward Teller: The Real Dr. Strangelove.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rhodes, Richard. 1995. Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb. New 
York: Simon and Schuster.
Teller, Edward, with Judith Shoolery. 2001. Memoirs: A Twentieth-Century 
Journey in Science and Politics. Cambridge, MA: Perseus Publishing.
Mordechai Vanunu (1954–)
Mordechai Vanunu was born on 13 October 1954 into a devout 
Jewish family in Marrakesh, Morocco. His parents emigrated to 
Israel with their eleven children in 1963. After completing school, 
Vanunu served three years in the Israeli Defense Forces and was 
honorably discharged as a sergeant. He then worked as a techni-
cian producing plutonium for bombs at the nuclear reactor center 
in Dimona from 1976 to 1985. He also studied philosophy at Ben 
Gurion University and became involved in radical politics, asso-
ciating with groups that sympathized with the Palestinian people. 
As he began to suffer a crisis of conscience for helping to produce 
nuclear weapons, Vanunu came under the scrutiny of security 
ofﬁ cials. Before being laid off from his job in 1985, Vanunu took 
approximately sixty secret photos of the Dimona nuclear plant 
and the hydrogen and neutron bombs that were being developed. 
With the undeveloped ﬁ lm, he left Israel for Australia with the 
intention of one day exposing its nuclear weapons capability to 
the world. 
While in Australia, Vanunu joined the Anglican church and 
there began to disclose some of what he knew about Dimona; a 
journalist urged him to tell his story and contacted the Britain-
based Sunday Times. In London, Vanunu divulged his knowledge 
about Israel’s nuclear weapons program and provided the sixty 
photos to the Times, which had the information reviewed by nuclear 
scientists. On 5 October 1986, the Times published “Revealed: The 
Secrets of Israel’s Nuclear Arsenal.” While the U.S. Central Intelli-
gence Agency had speculated that Israel had ten or ﬁ fteen nuclear 
weapons, the article with several photos taken by Vanunu revealed 
that Israel actually had produced 150 to 200 bombs using an under-
ground plutonium separation facility. Moreover, the story stated 

204 Biographical Sketches
that Israel had started to produce much more powerful hydro-
gen and neutron bombs. Before the article appeared, Vanunu was 
lured to Rome by a female Israeli secret service (Mossad) agent, 
where he was drugged, smuggled on a ship back to Israel, and 
imprisoned.
The Israeli government charged Vanunu with espionage and 
treason, charges that carried a potential death penalty. He was 
convicted at a closed trial, and sentenced to eighteen years in 
Shikmah Prison in Ashkelon, Israel. He has claimed that the 
Israeli security police tried to destroy his sanity by keeping him in 
solitary conﬁ nement for more than eleven years. Vanunu report-
edly refused Israeli government offers of better treatment or pos-
sible early release if he agreed to remain silent on everything 
relating to Dimona. Vanunu’s plight drew international attention, 
and his cause was supported by many antinuclear and human 
rights groups in several countries. The Israeli government ﬁ nally 
released Vanunu on 21 April 2004, but it imposed harsh restric-
tion on his speech and movements. He is not allowed to talk to 
foreigners—although he has broken that rule for periodic media 
interviews—or to travel outside of the country. Since his release, 
Vanunu has been arrested by the Israeli police at least twice for 
violating the restrictions and has been returned to house arrest. 
Sources
Cohen, Yoel. 2003. The Whistleblower of Dimona: Israel, Vanunu, and the 
Bomb. Teaneck, NJ: Holmes & Meier.
“Mordechai Vanunu.” http://www.serve.com/vanunu.
Richelson, Jeffrey T. 2006. Spying on the Bomb. New York: W. W. Norton.

205
6
Data and Documents
T
his chapter provides technical information and useful statis-
tics, as well as key historical documents, on nuclear weapons 
and nonproliferation. Its aim is to provide more detail on sub-
jects raised in Chapters 1 through 5 and to expose readers to some 
original-source documents from the nuclear age. The ﬁ rst section 
surveys data on nuclear weapons. It begins with a short techni-
cal overview of nuclear physics, reactor types, and the processes 
involved in creating ﬁ ssile material for weapons. Subsequent 
entries provide information on worldwide nuclear tests, global 
nuclear stockpiles (tracked over time), and nuclear-weapon-free 
zones in various parts of the world. The second section provides 
a sampling of important documents and reports from the nuclear 
age. These items range from the 1939 letter from Albert Einstein to 
President Franklin D. Roosevelt that ﬁ rst brought attention to the 
threat of Nazi Germany’s bomb program, to the bombing order 
authorizing the use of U.S. nuclear weapons against Japan, to the 
text of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), to the recent 
United Nations resolutions aimed at preventing terrorists from 
acquiring nuclear weapons or other weapons of mass destruction 
(WMD).
Data
This section summarizes key information about nuclear weapons tech-
nology, tests, and arsenals and provides a table with all nuclear-weapon-
free zones.

206 Data and Documents
Nuclear Materials 
and Technologies
The following description of nuclear energy and weapons drawn from a 
brieﬁ ng book by experts at the Programme for Promoting Nuclear Non-
Proliferation provides readers with critical information to understand 
reactor physics, the nature of weapons-grade materials, and basic bomb 
physics.
Nuclear Energy and Nuclear 
Weapons: An Introductory Guide
Nuclear Materials
A chemical element consists of basic building blocks, called atoms, 
which themselves contain “sub-atomic” particles. These particles 
are of three types: protons, neutrons and electrons. Protons (posi-
tively charged particles), together with neutrons (uncharged par-
ticles) make up an atom’s core or nucleus. Electrons (negatively 
charged particles) are identical in number to the protons, but are 
found outside of the nucleus of the atom. All chemical elements 
are deﬁ ned and distinguished from each other by the number of 
protons/electrons their atoms contain, termed their atomic num-
ber. Examples of atomic numbers are 1 for an atom of hydrogen 
and 93 for an atom of plutonium.
While all atoms of an element must have the same number 
of protons/electrons, they may contain differing numbers of neu-
trons. These variants are called isotopes of an element. They have 
different nuclear properties and masses/weights but their chemical 
properties are identical: thus they can only be separated by making 
use of their differing masses, and not by chemical means.
Isotopes are normally identiﬁ ed by the sum of their protons 
and neutrons. Thus “Uranium 235,” often shortened to the nota-
tion “U235” (or “U-235”) indicates the isotope of uranium that con-
tains 235 (92+143) protons and neutrons in the nucleus of each 
atom. “Plutonium 239,” or “Pu” (or “Pu-239”) indicates the iso-
tope of plutonium that contains 239 (93+146) protons and neu-
trons in the nucleus of each atom.

Nuclear Reactions
Fission
Nuclear ﬁ ssion is the splitting of the nucleus of an atom into two 
or more parts. This is a process which normally only occurs when 
heavy elements such as uranium and plutonium are bombarded 
by neutrons under favourable conditions. Not all isotopes of these 
elements ﬁ ssion under such circumstances; those that do are called 
ﬁ ssile materials. The most frequently used ﬁ ssile materials are the 
isotopes Uranium 235 (U-235) and Plutonium 239 (Pu-239).
These isotopes are not found in their pure form in nature. U-
235 forms only 0.7 per cent of natural uranium ore which is mostly 
made up of nonﬁ ssile U-238. Plutonium does not exist at all in 
natural form and has to be manufactured from uranium. This is 
done by placing it inside a reactor, where some U-238 nuclei will 
capture slow moving neutrons to form ﬁ ssile Pu-239.
When a ﬁ ssile material is bombarded with neutrons, it splits 
into atoms of lighter elements. This process releases large quanti-
ties of energy and neutrons. If these neutrons hit and split addi-
tional “ﬁ ssile” nuclei, more neutrons are released to continue the 
reaction. If there is a sufﬁ cient concentration of atoms of ﬁ ssile 
isotopes, known as a “critical mass,” this reaction will be self-
sustaining. This is a “chain reaction.”
A critical mass is the smallest amount of material required 
for a chain reaction. This may be affected by variables such as the 
concentration of the ﬁ ssile isotopes in the material; its density—if 
it is compressed the critical mass is reduced; and its physical con-
ﬁ guration—a sphere or some other shape.
Fusion
Fusion takes place when two nuclei of light elements such as 
hydrogen fuse together to make a heavier one. While this process 
releases much larger quantities of energy than the ﬁ ssion process, 
it also requires large amounts of energy to initiate it. For fusion to 
occur, the repellant forces that arise between the positively charged 
protons in the two nuclei have to be overcome, and temperatures 
of over 100 million degrees centigrade are normally required 
for this to occur. The most frequently used materials to generate 
fusion reactions are tritium (H-3), deuterium (H-2) and the solid 
Lithium-6 Deuteride, which when heated to the temperature of 
the fusion reaction, breaks down into tritium and deuterium.
Nuclear Materials and Technologies 207

208 Data and Documents
Nuclear Reactors
Fission Reactors
There are several features common to all ﬁ ssion or (as they are 
more usually termed) nuclear reactors.
The ﬁ rst of these is that they contain a core or mass of ﬁ ssile 
material (the fuel) which may weigh tens of tons, within which 
energy is produced by sustaining a regulated chain reaction. The 
ﬁ ssile material used varies between reactor types, but it may be 
natural uranium (which contains 0.7 per cent ﬁ ssile U-235) or ura-
nium which has been enriched to increase the percentage of U-235 
to around 3 per cent. Alternatively, Plutonium 239 produced by 
the irradiation of U-238 in a reactor, or Uranium 233 (U-233) pro-
duced from Thorium 232 (Th-232) may be used, or a combination 
of these mixed with uranium (mixed oxide fuels or MOX). This 
fuel is usually in rod or pin form, and is clad in a gastight contain-
ment material such as stainless steel.
A second related feature is the presence of a means of regu-
lating the chain reaction. This normally takes the form of control 
rods which absorb neutrons, and which can be inserted into the 
core to reduce the rate of ﬁ ssion or to shut down the reactor.
The ﬁ ssile core of a reactor is usually surrounded by a third 
common feature, a moderator. This material is chosen because it 
slows down some of the faster neutrons so that these can more 
easily hit nuclei and initiate ﬁ ssion, and thus maintain the chain 
reaction. The moderator can be ordinary (or light) water, heavy 
water (deuterium oxide) or graphite.
A fourth common feature is a means of removing the heat 
produced by the chain reaction from the core of the reactor. This 
cooling system can also provide the heat and steam to drive tur-
bines and thus generate electricity.
Finally, there is a containment vessel which serves to shield 
the radioactive core from other parts of the reactor system. Lin-
ing this vessel is a reﬂ ector which increases the efﬁ ciency of the 
ﬁ ssion process. In addition, a reactor will itself normally be sur-
rounded by a further thick containment structure, whose purpose 
is to contain any release of radioactivity and prevent it escaping 
into the surrounding environment.
Reactors have been built to serve four broad purposes. First, 
a signiﬁ cant proportion of the reactors in the world are large units 
designed to produce steam to drive turbo-generators, and thus 
to generate electricity for civil uses. Second, there are smaller 

units of a similar type which are used in naval vessels, especially 
submarines, to generate electricity for propulsion purposes or 
to drive turbines. Third, there are many small materials testing 
and research reactors, which usually have no turbo-generators 
attached and are used mainly for experimental purposes. Finally, 
there are large units used by the nuclear-weapon states to pro-
duce plutonium for military explosive purposes, some of which 
do not have turbo-generators attached to them.
Light Water Reactors (LWRs)
This is the most widespread power reactor type found in the world 
today. It uses low enriched (3%) uranium as fuel, which enhances 
its efﬁ ciency as an electricity generator by enabling the fuel to stay 
longer in the reactor. It also uses ordinary water as both a modera-
tor and coolant. There are two variants of this reactor, Pressurized 
Water Reactors (PWRs) and Boiling Water Reactors (BWRs), the 
chief difference between them being in their method of producing 
steam to make electricity. Small LWRs are also used to power sub-
marines and other naval vessels. LWRs are a costly and inefﬁ cient 
way of producing Pu-239.
Heavy Water Reactors (HWRs)
In these types of reactors, heavy water is used as both the mod-
erator and coolant. Heavy water absorbs so few neutrons that it 
permits the use of natural uranium as fuel. This type of reactor, the 
majority of which are called CANDUs [Canada Deuterium Ura-
nium], uses up so much of the ﬁ ssile U-235 in its natural uranium 
fuel that it is probably uneconomic to reprocess and recycle it, and 
the preferred option is to store it and dispose of it as waste. It is also 
a good producer of plutonium, and this type of reactor has been 
used in the United States without any turbo-generators attached to 
produce materials for weapon purposes. To produce Pu-239, rather 
than to minimize electricity generation costs, fuel re-loading takes 
place more frequently. Thus a distinction between civil and military 
use is the length of time the fuel remains in the reactor.
Nuclear Weapons
Fission Devices
A ﬁ ssion weapon or device is designed so that a critical mass of 
ﬁ ssile material can be assembled and held together before the 
device blows itself apart. The yield of the weapon is determined 
by the amount of ﬁ ssile material involved, the number of nuclei 
Nuclear Materials and Technologies 209

210 Data and Documents
ﬁ ssioned, and the number of generations of ﬁ ssions that can be 
achieved before disassembly takes place.
A simple ﬁ ssion weapon design, also known as a ﬁ rst-
generation nuclear weapon, can be of either the “gun barrel” or 
“implosion” type. A gun device involves bringing together rapidly 
two sub-critical masses of highly enriched uranium by propelling 
one of them with an explosive along a thick tube or gun-barrel so 
that it impacts with considerable velocity upon the other. This cre-
ates conditions for a chain reaction. This method is conceptually 
simple but the explosive power of the weapon tends to quickly force 
the ﬁ ssile material apart so that little of the material goes through 
the ﬁ ssion process. It is therefore relatively inefﬁ cient in its use of 
ﬁ ssile material. This method cannot be used with plutonium.
An implosion weapon works by compressing a sub-critical 
spherical mass of ﬁ ssile material until it becomes critical. The 
ﬁ ssile material is surrounded by a neutron reﬂ ector, usually of 
beryllium, and a heavy metal tamper of either U-238 or tungsten. 
Surrounding this assembly is a further hollow sphere of conven-
tional explosives. If the conventional explosive can be detonated 
so as to produce a uniform, symmetrical implosion, the tamper 
is propelled inwards into the sphere of ﬁ ssile material, and com-
presses it into criticality. The forces generated by the conventional 
explosives then contain the gaseous sphere of ﬁ ssile materials 
while many repetitions of the ﬁ ssile reaction occur, and the full 
yield of the device is produced.
Boosted-Fission Devices
A ﬁ ssion device can be “boosted” to increase its yield by placing 
within its core a small quantity of fusion material, such as tritium. 
At the great temperatures and pressures found within the gaseous 
core of an exploding device, this material fuses and releases an 
extra quantity of neutrons which, in turn, produce additional ﬁ s-
sions in the uranium or plutonium used in the device. More of the 
ﬁ ssile material is thus consumed than in a simple ﬁ ssion device, 
the efﬁ ciency of the ﬁ ssion process is improved and a higher yield 
produced.
Fusion (Thermonuclear) Devices
The energy released by such a device, also known as a second-
generation nuclear weapon, arises primarily from nuclear fusion 

in isotopes of hydrogen such as tritium and deuterium. A large 
energy source, such as a ﬁ ssion device, is needed to start a fusion 
reaction. A fusion weapon thus has at least two stages which con-
tribute to the yield, the ﬁ ssion trigger or primary device and the 
thermonuclear secondary device. In addition, these two devices 
may be contained in a shell of U-238 which constitutes a third 
stage of the device. This material, whilst it cannot maintain a self-
sustaining ﬁ ssion explosion, can be made to ﬁ ssion where there 
is a constant external supply of fast neutrons from other ﬁ ssion 
or fusion reactions. There can be any number of ﬁ ssion-fusion-
ﬁ ssion-fusion steps, and so no limit in theory to the size and yield 
of a thermonuclear weapon.
Weapon-Grade Fissile Materials
The size of a ﬁ ssion device is directly related to the concentration 
of ﬁ ssile isotopes in the material in the core. For purposes of pro-
ducing a practical weapon, the minimum enrichment required for 
uranium is about 50 per cent. However, to enable compact, light 
designs to be produced, the present nuclear powers are assumed 
to use in their weapons about 10–25 kilos [22–55 pounds] of ura-
nium enriched to over 90 per cent U-235. This enriched material is 
produced in an enrichment plant (see below).
Plutonium is often preferred to uranium in weapon designs, 
as less plutonium than uranium is required to produce a given 
yield—about 5–8 kilos [11–17.6 pounds] is assumed to be required 
for a simple device. Plutonium with 93 per cent or above Pu-239 
constitutes weapons grade material, though there are claims that 
devices have been exploded using plutonium with much lower 
concentrations of this isotope. Such weapons, however, tend to 
have uncertain yields and give off dangerous radiation, so the 
higher concentrations are preferred.
All ﬁ ssion reactors produce plutonium, but reasonably pure 
Pu-239 can only be obtained by withdrawing the uranium fuel 
after a short period (2–6 months) in the core. If the fuel is left 
in for a longer period, signiﬁ cant amounts of Pu-240 and other 
heavier isotopes are contained in the plutonium. Typically, Light 
Water Reactors (LWRs) will have plutonium in their used fuel 
which has a concentration of Pu-239 below 80 per cent. Plutonium 
is obtained from spent reactor fuel through a chemical process 
known as reprocessing.
Nuclear Materials and Technologies 211

212 Data and Documents
Enrichment
Uranium must be enriched if it is to be used in certain reactor 
types and in weapons. This means that the concentration of ﬁ ssile 
U-235 must be increased by physical, rather than chemical, means 
before it can be fabricated into fuel. The natural concentration of 
this isotope is 0.7 per cent, but a concentration of 3 per cent is nec-
essary in order to sustain a chain reaction in an LWR. Some 90 per 
cent enrichment is required before use in HTGRs [High Tempera-
ture Gas Cooled Reactors], the majority of submarine propulsion 
units or ﬁ ssion weapons. This process of enrichment is not linear, 
and as much enrichment effort, or “separative work” as it is usu-
ally termed, may be involved in achieving enrichment from, say 
0.7 to 1 per cent as from 10–90 per cent.
Reprocessing
This is a process whereby the uranium and the plutonium in spent 
fuel discharged from a reactor is separated from the other “ﬁ ssion 
products” by chemical means. It may then be recycled into reac-
tor fuel or, in the case of plutonium, may be used in weapons. 
Reprocessing is usually carried out using mechanical and solvent 
extraction techniques, and occurs in three steps [dissolving the 
fuel in solution, separating out nitrates of plutonium and ura-
nium, and purifying the recovered materials].
Source
Bailey, Emily, Richard Guthrie, Darryl Howlett, and John Simpson, 
Brieﬁ ng Book, Volume 1: The Evolution of the Nuclear Nonproliferation 
Regime, Chapter 2 (6th ed., 2000). Southampton, England: Programme 
for Promoting Nuclear Non-Proliferation, University of Southampton. 
© 2000 Programme for Promoting Nuclear Non-Proliferation. Used by 
permission.
Worldwide Nuclear Weapon 
Stockpiles
The expansion of nuclear weapon stockpiles during the Cold War 
represented an alarming trend, driven by the perceived need to 
develop new types of bombs and improve existing designs. The 
size of the U.S. nuclear stockpile, however, actually peaked in the 

late 1960s, as the U.S. military began to retire obsolete weapons 
and focus on survivable, second-strike forces instead of maintain-
ing a simple numerical advantage over the Soviet Union. Playing 
catch-up from a position far behind the United States, Moscow 
continued to expand its arsenal into the 1980s, when domestic 
political forces shifted Soviet policy aims toward achieving coop-
erative arms reductions with the United States. In 2002, despite 
arms control progress, the actual numbers of U.S. and Russian 
nuclear weapons in their respective stockpiles remained far above 
ﬁ gures commonly cited for deployed forces because of delays in 
eliminating retired weapons (especially in Russia) and decisions 
by both sides to retain a reserve in case of a deterioration in rela-
tions and a need to reconstitute their forces. Nuclear forces by all 
other states have remained in the hundreds or below. As noted, 
some of the ﬁ gures are estimates, as certain countries still hold 
these numbers as closely guarded state secrets. The ﬁ gures in 
Table 6.1 represent nuclear warheads of all types, both strategic 
and tactical.
Nuclear Testing
From 1945 to 1963, nuclear tests were conducted in the atmo-
sphere, in space, underground, and underwater, especially by the 
United States and the Soviet Union. Most of these explosions took 
place in the atmosphere, as such tests are easier to carry out and 
provide the opportunity to examine the effects of the weapon on 
real targets, such as buildings and vehicles. In 1963, the United 
States, the Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom signed the Lim-
ited Test Ban Treaty (LTBT), which prohibited nuclear tests in the 
atmosphere, in outer space, and underwater; the three countries 
then moved all their tests underground. France and China, not 
parties to the LTBT, conducted their last nuclear tests in the atmo-
sphere in 1974 and 1980, respectively. The greatest advantage 
of an underground nuclear explosion is that it does not release 
signiﬁ cant amounts of radioactive debris and allows the use of a 
greater amount of experimental apparatus close to the explosion 
spot. The 1996 Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) 
prohibited all nuclear explosions, including nuclear testing, but 
it has not been signed by all states, and it has not yet acquired 
enough ratiﬁ cations by national legislatures to become legally 
binding.
Nuclear Materials and Technologies 213

214 Data and Documents
Nuclear tests (see Table 6.2) have been conducted to achieve a 
range of objectives, including improving existing nuclear weapon 
designs and developing new weapons, understanding nuclear 
weapons’ effects, maintaining reliability and safety of a nuclear 
weapon arsenal, and ﬁ nding so-called peaceful uses for industrial 
purposes. This latter set of tests proved unsuccessful, as they con-
taminated the river canals and underground storage cavities they 
created with radioactivity, making them unusable. Nuclear tests 
TABLE 6.1
Estimated Worldwide Nuclear Stockpiles, 1945–2006
Country 
1945 
1955 
1965 
1975 
1985 
1995 
2006
United States1 
6 
3,057 
31,982 
27,826 
24,237 
12,144 
9,962
USSR/Russia1 
0 
200 
6,129 
19,055 
39,197 
27,000 
16,000
United Kingdom 
0 
10 
310 
325 
300 
300 
192
France 
0 
0 
32 
188 
360 
500 
348
China2 
0 
0 
5 
185 
200 
200 
200
Israel3 
0 
0 
0 
20 
40 
75 
85
India3 
0 
0 
0 
>0 
>0 
30 
50
South Africa4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
0 
0
Pakistan3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
10 
40
North Korea3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
>4
Total 
6 
3,267 
38,458 
47,599 
64,337 
40,259 
26,881
1According to data from the Natural Resources Defense Council, the United States has an estimated 5,021 deployed strategic 
warheads, 215 spares, 500 nonstrategic warheads, and 4,226 warheads in storage. Russia has an estimated 3,500 
deployed strategic warheads, 2,330 active tactical and air/missile defense warheads, and 6,000 strategic and 4,170 
tactical warheads in storage. 
2Chinese numbers are estimates based on observed deployments and suspected reserves. 
3The early ﬁ gures shown for Israel, India, Pakistan, and North Korea are the lower bounds of their capabilities based on 
estimated ﬁ ssile material production. Later ﬁ gures for Israel, India, and Pakistan are estimates of actual weapons production
based on expert reports (cited below). 
4South Africa had developed seven nuclear weapons by 1990, but destroyed them soon after and joined the NPT as a 
non–nuclear weapon state in 1991.
Sources: Robert Norris and Hans Kristensen, “Nuclear Weapons Data,” Natural Resources Defense Council, on the Web 
site of the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists at http://www.thebulletin.org/nuclear_weapons_data/; Robert Norris and Hans 
Kristensen, “Global Nuclear Stockpiles, 1945–2006,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists (July/August 2006), pages 64–66; 
“Israel’s Nuclear Stockpile,” Web site of the Federation of American Scientists, at http://www.fas.org/nuke/guide/israel/
nuke/;  Rodney W. Jones and Mark G. McDonough, Tracking Nuclear Proliferation: A Guide in Maps and Charts, 1998. 
Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 1998; David Albright, “India’s and Pakistan’s Fissile Material 
and Nuclear Weapons Inventory, End of 1999,” report on the Web site of the Institute for Science and International Security 
(ISIS) at http://www.isis-online.org/publications/southasia/stocks1000.html; and David Albright and Paul Brannon, “The 
North Korean Plutonium Stock Mid-2006,” report on the ISIS Web site at http://www.isis-online.org/publications/dprk/
dprkplutonium.pdf.

TABLE 6.2
Global Distribution and Geography of Nuclear 
Weapons Tests (1945–2006)
Country 
Location 
Number of Tests*
United States
Nevada Test Site
928
(Total tests: 1,054) 
Eniwetok Atoll, Marshall Islands  
  43
 
Christmas Island, South Paciﬁ c 
  24
 
Bikini Atoll, Marshall Islands 
  23
 
Johnston Island, South Paciﬁ c 
  12
 
Other Nevada sites 
   7
 
Paciﬁ c Ocean 
   4
 
Alaska 
   3
 
South Atlantic Ocean 
   3
 
New Mexico  
   3
 
Mississippi 
   2
 
Colorado 
   2
Soviet Union/Russia
Kazakhstan 
496
(Total tests: 715) 
Russia (various locations, especially Novaya Zemlya) 
214
 
Ukraine 
   2
 
Uzbekistan 
   2
 
Turkmenistan 
   1
France
Mururoa Atoll, French Polynesia  
181
(Total tests: 210) 
Algeria 
 17
 
Fangataufa Atoll, French Polynesia 
 12
United Kingdom
Nevada (jointly with United States) 
  24
(Total tests: 45) 
Australia 
  12
 
Christmas Island, South Paciﬁ c 
   6
 
Malden Island, South Paciﬁ c 
   3
China
Lop Nor, China 
 45
India
Pokhran, India 
    3*
Pakistan
Chagai Hills, Pakistan  
    2*
Unknown (possibly South
South Indian Ocean  
1
Africa or Israel)
North Korea
North Hamgyong Province, North Korea 
1
*In conformance with the counting rules of the U.S.-Soviet Threshold Test Ban Treaty of 1974, a “nuclear test” is deﬁ ned 
here as a nuclear explosion at a particular time, which may have included several nuclear individuals bombs (if detonated 
simultaneously). Thus, the ﬁ ve devices India tested in May 1998 are counted as only two here, as the tests took place in two 
simultaneous detonations (making three total tests for India, counting the test in 1974). Pakistan’s tests in May 1998 are 
counted as two. The total number of U.S. detonations is 1,149, compared with 1,054 tests, according to U.S. Department of 
Energy ﬁ gures. The ﬁ gures include so-called peaceful nuclear explosions used in experiments for various engineering purposes.
Sources:  U.S. Department of Energy, United States Nuclear Tests, July 1945 through September 1992, DOE/NV–209-REV 
15, December 2000. http://www.nv.doe.gov/news&pubs/publications/historyreports/default.htm; “Known Nuclear Tests 
Worldwide, 1945–1998,” Bulletin of Atomic Scientists 54 (1998); Abby A. Johnson et al., For the Record—A History 
of the Nuclear Test Personnel Review Program, 1978–1986, Defense Nuclear Agency, DNA 6041F, 1986. http://www.
fas.org/nuke/trinity/atmosphr/ustests.htm#Crossroads; and Tariq Rauf, “French Nuclear Testing: A Fool’s Errand,” 
Nonproliferation Review 3 (1995), pages 49–57.
Nuclear Materials and Technologies 215

216 Data and Documents
have also been carried out for political purposes sometimes, such 
as the huge 50-megaton explosion (the largest of all time) carried 
out by the Soviet Union in 1961, which was meant to intimidate 
the United States; and the Indian and Pakistani tests in 1998 and 
the North Korean test in 2006, which were meant in part to show 
their resolve and capabilities to rivals and the world.
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones
Several national, bilateral, and multilateral accords have estab-
lished nuclear-weapon-free zones (NWFZs) for various conti-
nents, geographical regions, and environments. Although not 
discussed here, some cities and localities have created NWFZs 
of varying legal status. The concept of establishing geographi-
cal zones free of nuclear weapons ﬁ rst emerged in the late 1950s 
in the context of a 1958 proposal by the Polish foreign minister 
for an NWFZ in Central Europe, which would have blocked U.S. 
nuclear weapons from being stationed in West Germany in return 
for a ban on Soviet nuclear weapons in East Germany, Poland, 
and Czechoslovakia. Although the plan failed, the concept lived 
on and eventually came into fruition in various parts of the globe. 
Indeed, NWFZ agreements now cover almost the entire Southern 
Hemisphere.
The aims of such arrangements include enhancing regional 
security, reducing the threat that nuclear weapons might be tar-
geted at countries in a particular region, strengthening global 
nonproliferation norms, encouraging nuclear disarmament, and 
preserving the environment.
The common element in all NWFZ agreements is a pledge by 
states not to develop, deploy, station, test, or use nuclear weap-
ons within the zone. This restriction goes beyond the NPT, which 
allows the possible stationing of nuclear weapons on the territory 
of non–nuclear weapon states by the nuclear powers and permits 
peaceful nuclear explosions for industrial purposes, even by non–
nuclear weapon states. Existing NWFZs ban these activities and 
often prohibit nuclear waste dumping, nuclear weapon research, 
and other activities. Regional inspection regimes are sometimes 
established to implement the treaties; in other cases, the Interna-
tional Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) plays the primary role of 
ensuring that nuclear materials will not be diverted from peace-
ful programs within a zone. Table 6.3 summarizes the key NWFZ 
agreements that currently exist.

TABLE 6.3
Existing Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones in Brief
 
 
 
Unique Provisions
 
 
Signed/Entered 
Beyond Ban on
Name of Zone (Treaty) 
Region Covered 
into Force 
Nuclear Weapons
Antarctic Treaty 
Antarctic continent 
1959/1961 
 Allows no military activities of any 
 sort on the continent
Treaty on the Prohibition of  
South America,  
1967/entry into  
Originally allowed “peaceful” 
 Nuclear Weapons in Latin  
 Central America,  
 force varies for 
 nuclear explosions, but has since
 America and the Caribbean  
 and the 
 each state 
 been amended
 (Tlatelolco Treaty) 
 Caribbean
Treaty on the Principles  
Outer space and  
1967/1967 
Bans all weapons of mass
 Governing the Activities of  
 the celestial 
 
 destruction in orbit; bans military
 States in the Exploration of  
 bodies 
 
 forces of all kinds on the moon
 Outer Space, Including the  
 
 
 and celestial bodies
 Moon and Other Celestial 
 Bodies (Outer Space Treaty)
Treaty on the Prohibition of the  
International  
1971/1972 
Veriﬁ cation is via observation by 
 Emplacement of Nuclear  
 waters and the 
 
 states (such as from submarines
 Weapons and Other Weapons   ocean ﬂ oor 
 
 or other submersibles in
 of Mass Destruction on the  
 
 
 international waters); kept U.S.-
 Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor   
 
 Soviet arms race from the
 and in the Subsoil Thereof  
 
 
 seabed
 (Sea-Bed Treaty)
South Paciﬁ c Nuclear-Free Zone  
South Paciﬁ c  
1985/1986 
Aimed at halting nuclear tests in the
 (Rarotonga Treaty) 
 (including various 
 
 South Paciﬁ c; protocols ﬁ nally
 
 small island  
 
 signed by France, Britain, and
 
 states, New  
 
 United States in 1996
 
 Zealand, and 
 
 Australia)
Joint North-South Declaration  
Korean Peninsula 
1992/1992 
Bans plutonium separation and
 on the Denuclearization of the   
 
 uranium enrichment; not yet
 Korean Peninsula 
 
 
 implemented because of political  
 
 
 
 disputes
Treaty on the Southeast Asia  
Southeast Asia 
1995/1997 
Allows countries to ban transit of
 Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone  
 
 
 nuclear weapons through the
 (Bangkok Treaty) 
 
 
 zone; has been opposed by the 
 
 
 
 nuclear weapon states
African Nuclear-Weapon-Free 
Africa 
1996/not yet  
Zone formed after South Africa’s
 Zone Treaty (Pelindaba 
 
 entered into force 
 voluntary denuclearization; 
 Treaty) 
 
 
  ratiﬁ cation by several North 
African states awaits an Israeli 
decision to join the NPT
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Status of  
Mongolia 
Declared by Mongolia,  World’s ﬁ rst United Nations–
 Mongolia 
 
 1992/accepted 
 recognized, single-state NWFZ; 
 
 
 by United Nations,  
 also bans transit of nuclear
 
 
 1998 
 weapons through Mongolia
continued

218 Data and Documents
Documents
This section provides actual documents from the history of nuclear weap-
ons and nonproliferation, drawn from a variety of sources, but primarily 
from declassiﬁ ed U.S. government ﬁ les. All documents are either in the 
public domain or are used by permission.
Letter from Albert Einstein 
to President Roosevelt
This document was arguably the key stimulus for the U.S. adoption of 
serious investigations into nuclear weapons on the eve of the U.S. entry 
into World War II. Nobel Prize–winning scientist Albert Einstein sent 
this letter to President Franklin D. Roosevelt on 2 August 1939 at the 
initiative of Leo Szilard and other émigré scientists who feared that Nazi 
Germany, with its extensive scientiﬁ c talents, would beat the Allies 
TABLE 6.3 (continued)
Existing Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones in Brief
 
 
 
Unique Provisions
 
 
Signed/Entered 
Beyond Ban on
Name of Zone (Treaty) 
Region Covered 
into Force 
Nuclear Weapons
The Central Asian Nuclear- 
Central Asian states  
September 2006/ 
Provision barring nuclear weapons
 Weapon-Free Zone 
 (Kazakhstan,  
 not yet entered 
 from being located in the
 
 Kyrgyzstan,  
 into force 
 region may not apply to Russia
 
 Tajikistan,  
 
 because of a separate 1992
 
 Turkmenistan, and  
 
 agreement. The United States, 
 
 Uzbekistan) 
 
  Britain, and France also object 
to member states’ option to bar 
transport of nuclear weapons 
through the CANWFZ. Members 
agree to rehabilitate territory 
contaminated by past nuclear 
activities.
Sources: Center for Nonproliferation Studies (CNS), Inventory of International Nonproliferation Organizations and Regimes: 
http://cns.miis.edu/pubs/inven/inven.htm; CNS, Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Tutorial: http://www.nti.org/h_learnmore/
nwfztutorial/index.html.

to the bomb and thereby achieve victory in World War II. Instead, the 
United States took up this race and, drawing on its immense material, 
ﬁ nancial, and scientiﬁ c resources, became the only country to develop an 
atomic bomb during World War II.
Albert Einstein
Old Grove Rd.
Nassau Point
Peconic, Long Island
August 2nd, 1939
F. D. Roosevelt,
President of the United States,
White House
Washington, D. C.
Sir:
Some recent work by E. Fermi and L. Szilard, which has been com-
municated to me in a manuscript, leads me to expect that the element 
uranium may be turned into a new and important source of energy in 
the immediate future. Certain aspects of this situation which has arisen 
seem to call for watchfulness and, if necessary, quick action on the part 
of the Administration. I believe therefore that it is my duty to bring to 
your attention the following facts and recommendations:
In the course of the last four months it has been made probable—
through the work of Joliot in France as well as Fermi and Szilard in 
America—that it may become possible to set up a nuclear chain reaction 
in a large mass of uranium, by which vast amounts of power and large 
quantities of new radium-like elements would be generated. Now it 
appears almost certain that this could be achieved in the immediate 
future.
This new phenomena would also lead to the construction of 
bombs, and it is conceivable—though much less certain—that extremely 
powerful bombs of a new type may thus be constructed. A single bomb 
of this type, carried by boat and exploded in a port, might very well 
destroy the whole port together with some of the surrounding terri-
tory. However, such bombs might very well prove to be too heavy for 
transportation by air.
The United States has only very poor ores of uranium in moderate 
quantities. There is some good ore in Canada and the former Czechoslo-
vakia, while the most important source of uranium is Belgian Congo.
In view of this situation you may think it desirable to have some 
permanent contact maintained between the Administration and the 
Letter from Albert Einstein to President Roosevelt 219

220 Data and Documents
group of physicists working on chain reactions in America. One possible 
way of achieving this might be for you to entrust with this task a person 
who has your conﬁ dence and who could perhaps serve in an unofﬁ cial 
capacity. His task might comprise the following:
a) to approach Government Departments, keep them informed of 
the further development, and put forward recommendations for Gov-
ernment action, giving particular attention to the problem of securing a 
supply of uranium for the United States;
b) to speed up the experimental work, which is at present being 
carried on within the limits of the budgets of University laboratories, by 
providing funds, if such funds be required, through his contacts with 
private persons who are willing to make contributions for this cause, 
and perhaps also by obtaining the cooperation of industrial laboratories 
which have the necessary equipment.
I understand that Germany has actually stopped the sale of 
uranium from the Czechoslovakian mines which she has taken over. 
That she should have taken such an early action might perhaps be 
understood on the ground that the son of the German Under-Secretary 
of State, von Weizsacker, is attached to the Kaiser-Wilhelm-Institute 
in Berlin where some of the American work on uranium is now being 
repeated.
Yours very truly,
(Albert Einstein)
Source: Available online on Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library 
and Museum Web site: http://www.fdrlibrary.marist.edu/psf/box5/
t64a01.html, and the U.S. Department of Energy, The Manhattan Project, 
An Interactive History Web site: http://www.mbe.doe.gov/me70/
manhattan/einstein_letter_photograph.htm.
The U.S. Military Order to Drop 
the Atomic Bomb on Japan
After being reviewed by President Harry Truman during the Potsdam 
summit of Allied leaders in defeated Germany in July 1945, this order 
authorized the U.S. military to drop the ﬁ rst atomic bomb and “addi-
tional bombs” on Japan sometime after 3 August 1945. Because of the 
delays in communications with the Paciﬁ c theater of military operations, 
uncertainties in the weather, and logistics related to handling the bomb, 
President Truman left considerable decision-making power in the hands 
of the U.S. Army in terms of selecting the exact date for the attacks and 

the targets. General Leslie Groves of the Manhattan Project drafted the 
bombing order for Truman, and Secretary of War Henry Stimson (also 
at Potsdam) reviewed the document as well.
TOP SECRET
25 July 1945
TO: General Carl Spaatz
Commanding General
United States Army Strategic Air Forces
1. The 509 Composite Group, 20th Air Force will deliver its ﬁ rst 
special bomb as soon as weather will permit visual bombing after about 
3 August 1945 on one of the targets: Hiroshima, Kokura, Niigata and 
Nagasaki. To carry military and civilian scientiﬁ c personnel from the 
War Department to observe and record the effects of the explosion of 
the bomb, additional aircraft will accompany the airplane carrying the 
bomb. The observing planes will stay several miles distant from the 
point of impact of the bomb.
2. Additional bombs will be delivered on the above targets as soon 
as made ready by the project staff. Further instructions will be issued 
concerning targets other than those listed above.
3. Dissemination of any and all information concerning the use 
of the weapon against Japan is reserved to the Secretary of War and 
the President of the United States. No communiques on the subject 
or releases of information will be issued by Commanders in the ﬁ eld 
without speciﬁ c prior authority. Any news stories will be sent to the War 
Department for speciﬁ c clearance.
4. The foregoing directive is issued to you by direction and with 
the approval of the Secretary of War and of the Chief of Staff, USA. It is 
desired that you personally deliver one copy of this directive to General 
MacArthur and one copy to Admiral Nimitz for their information.
(Sgd) THOS. T. HANDY
THOS. T. HANDY
General, G.S.C.
Acting Chief of Staff 
copy for General Groves
TOP SECRET
Source: Available online at the National Security Archive, “The Atomic 
Bomb and the End of World War II: A Collection of Primary Sources,” 
http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB162/index.htm. 
The bombing order is available at http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/
NSAEBB/NSAEBB162/41e.pdf.
The U.S. Military Order to Drop the Atomic Bomb on Japan 221

222 Data and Documents
Ofﬁ cial U.S. Report on the 
Atomic Bomb’s Effects in 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki
After the end of World War II and the use of the atomic bomb on Japan, 
the Manhattan Engineer District conducted a detailed on-the-ground 
study of the effects of the attacks. The purpose was to understand the 
signiﬁ cance of atomic weapons and their effects on buildings and human 
beings. This report provides detailed information on the impact of the 
attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, including the nature of the damage 
caused and the cause of death of tens of thousands of citizens in the two 
cities. The “X” mentioned numerous times in the report refers to the 
point of the respective bombs’ detonations, or ground zero.
The Atomic Bombings 
of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
by The Manhattan Engineer District, June 29, 1946
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF DAMAGE CAUSED BY THE 
ATOMIC EXPLOSIONS
In considering the devastation in the two cities, it should be 
remembered that the cities’ differences in shape and topography 
resulted in great differences in the damages. Hiroshima was all on low, 
ﬂ at ground, and was roughly circular in shape; Nagasaki was much cut 
up by hills and mountain spurs, with no regularity to its shape.
In Hiroshima almost everything up to about one mile from X was 
completely destroyed, except for a small number (about 50) of heavily 
reinforced concrete buildings, most of which were specially designed 
to withstand earthquake shock, which were not collapsed by the blast; 
most of these buildings had their interiors completely gutted, and all 
windows, doors, sashes, and frames ripped out. In Nagasaki, nearly 
everything within 1/2 mile of the explosion was destroyed, including 
heavy structures. All Japanese homes were destroyed within 1 1/2 miles 
from X.
Underground air raid shelters with earth cover roofs immediately 
below the explosion had their roofs caved in; but beyond 1/2 mile from 
X they suffered no damage.
In Nagasaki, 1,500 feet from X high quality steel frame buildings 
were not completely collapsed, but the entire buildings suffered mass 
distortion and all panels and roofs were blown in.

In Nagasaki, 2,000 feet from X, reinforced concrete buildings with 
10” walls and 6” ﬂ oors were collapsed; reinforced concrete buildings 
with 4” walls and roofs were standing but were badly damaged. At 
2,000 feet some 9” concrete walls were completely destroyed.
In Nagasaki, 3,500 feet from X, church buildings with 18” brick 
walls were completely destroyed. 12” brick walls were severely cracked 
as far as 5,000 feet.
In Hiroshima, 4,400 feet from X, multistory brick buildings were 
completely demolished. In Nagasaki, similar buildings were destroyed 
to 5,300 feet.
In Hiroshima, roof tiles were bubbled (melted) by the ﬂ ash heat out 
to 4,000 feet from X; in Nagasaki, the same effect was observed to 6,500 
feet.
In Hiroshima, steel frame buildings were destroyed 4,200 feet from 
X, and to 4,800 feet in Nagasaki.
In both cities, the mass distortion of large steel buildings was 
observed out to 4,500 feet from X.
In Nagasaki, reinforced concrete smoke stacks with 8” walls, spe-
cially designed to withstand earthquake shocks, were overturned up to 
4,000 feet from X.
In Hiroshima, steel frame buildings suffered severe structural 
damage up to 5,700 feet from X, and in Nagasaki the same damage was 
sustained as far as 6,000 feet.
In Nagasaki, 9” brick walls were heavily cracked to 5,000 feet, were 
moderately cracked to 6,000 feet, and slightly cracked to 8,000 feet. In 
both cities, light concrete buildings collapsed out to 4,700 feet.
In Hiroshima, multistory brick buildings suffered structural dam-
age up to 6,600 feet, and in Nagasaki up to 6,500 feet from X.
In both cities overhead electric installations were destroyed up to 
5,500 feet; and trolley cars were destroyed up to 5,500 feet, and dam-
aged to 10,500 feet.
Flash ignition of dry, combustible material was observed as far as 
6,400 feet from X in Hiroshima, and in Nagasaki as far as 10,000 feet 
from X.
[…]
Heavy ﬁ re damage was sustained in a circular area in Hiroshima 
with a mean radius of about 6,000 feet and a maximum radius of about 
11,000 feet; similar heavy damage occured [sic] in Nagasaki south of X 
up to 10,000 feet, where it was stopped on a river course.
In Hiroshima over 60,000 of 90,000 buildings were destroyed or 
severely damaged by the atomic bomb; this ﬁ gure represents over 67% 
of the city’s structures.
In Nagasaki 14,000 (or 27%) of 52,000 residences were completely 
destroyed and 5,400 or (10%) were half destroyed. Only 12% remained 
Ofﬁ cial U.S. Report on the Atomic Bomb’s Effects 223

224 Data and Documents
undamaged. This destruction was limited by the layout of the city. The 
following is a summary of the damage to buildings in Nagasaki as 
determined from a ground survey made by the Japanese:
[…]
As intended, the bomb was exploded at an almost ideal location 
over Nagasaki to do the maximum damage to industry, including the 
Mitsubishi Steel and Arms Works, the Mitsubishi-Urakami Ordnance 
Works (Torpedo Works), and numerous factories, factory training 
schools, and other industrial establishments, with a minimum destruc-
tion of dwellings and consequently, a minimum amount of casualties. 
Had the bomb been dropped farther south, the Mitsubishi-Urakami 
Ordnance Works would not have been so severely damaged, but the 
main business and residential districts of Nagasaki would have sus-
tained much greater damage casualties.
[…]
In general, the atomic bomb explosion damaged all windows and 
ripped out, bent, or twisted most of the steel window or door sashes, 
ripped doors from hinges, damaged all suspended wood, metal, and 
plaster ceilings. The blast concussion also caused great damage to 
equipment by tumbling and battering. Fires generally of secondary 
origin consumed practically all combustible material, caused plaster 
to crack off, burned all wooden trim, stair covering, wooden frames 
of wooden suspended ceilings, beds, mattresses, and mats, and fused 
glass, ruined all equipment not already destroyed by the blast, ruined 
all electrical wiring, plumbing, and caused spalling of concrete columns 
and beams in many of the rooms.
Almost without exception masonry buildings of either brick or 
stone within the effective limits of the blast were severely damaged so 
that most of them were ﬂ attened or reduced to rubble. The wreckage of 
a church, approximately 1,800 feet east of X in Nagasaki, was one of the 
few masonry buildings still recognizable and only portions of the walls 
of this structure were left standing. These walls were extremely thick 
(about 2 feet). The two domes of the church had reinforced concrete 
frames and although they were toppled, they held together as units.
Practically every wooden building or building with timber frame 
within 2.0 miles of X was either completely destroyed or very seriously 
damaged, and signiﬁ cant damage in Nagasaki resulted as far as 3 miles 
from X. Nearly all such buildings collapsed and a very large number 
were consumed by ﬁ re.
[…] Since the bombs were exploded high in the air, chimneys rela-
tively close to X were subjected to more of a downward than a lateral 
pressure, and consequently the overturning moment was much less 
than might have been anticipated.
[…]

The roads, and railroad and street railway trackage sustained 
practically no primary damage as a result of the explosion. Most of the 
damage to railroads occurred from secondary causes, such as ﬁ res and 
damage to bridges or other structures. Rolling stock, as well as automo-
biles, trolleys, and buses were destroyed and burned up to a consider-
able distance from X. Streets were impassable for awhile because of the 
debris, but they were not damaged. The height of the bomb explosion 
probably explains the absence of direct damage to railroads and roads.
A large part of the electric supply was interrupted by the bomb 
blast chieﬂ y through damage to electric substations and overhead trans-
mission systems. Both gas works in Nagasaki were severely damaged 
by the bomb. These works would have required 6–7 months to get into 
operation. In addition to the damage sustained by the electrical and gas 
systems, severe damage to the water supply system was reported by the 
Japanese government; the chief damage was a number of breaks in the 
large water mains and in almost all of the distributing pipes in the areas 
which were affected by the blast. Nagasaki was still suffering from a 
water shortage inside the city six weeks after the atomic attack.
The Nagasaki Prefectural report describes vividly the effects of the 
bomb on the city and its inhabitants:
“Within a radius of 1 kilometer from X, men and animals died 
almost instantaneously and outside a radius of 1 kilometer and within 
a radius of 2 kilometers from X, some men and animals died instantly 
from the great blast and heat but the great majority were seriously or 
superﬁ cially injured. Houses and other structures were completely 
destroyed while ﬁ res broke out everywhere. Trees were uprooted and 
withered by the heat.
“Outside a radius of 2 kilometers and within a radius of 4 kilome-
ters from X, men and animals suffered various degrees of injury from 
window glass and other fragments scattered about by the blast and 
many were burned by the intense heat. Dwellings and other structures 
were half damaged by blast.
“Outside a radius of 4 kilometers and within a radius of 8 kilome-
ters living creatures were injured by materials blown about by the blast; 
the majority were only superﬁ cially wounded. Houses were only half or 
partially damaged.”
[…]
The ﬁ re damage in both cities was tremendous, but was more 
complete in Hiroshima than in Nagasaki. The effect of the ﬁ res was to 
change profoundly the appearance of the city and to leave the central 
part bare, except for some reinforced concrete and steel frames and 
objects such as safes, chimney stacks, and pieces of twisted sheet metal. 
The ﬁ re damage resulted more from the properties of the cities them-
selves than from those of the bombs.
Ofﬁ cial U.S. Report on the Atomic Bomb’s Effects 225

226 Data and Documents
The conﬂ agration in Hiroshima caused high winds to spring up as 
air was drawn in toward the center of the burning area, creating a “ﬁ re 
storm.” The wind velocity in the city had been less than 5 miles 
per hour before the bombing, but the ﬁ re-wind attained a velocity of 
30–40 miles per hour. These great winds restricted the perimeter of the 
ﬁ re but greatly added to the damage of the conﬂ agration within the 
perimeter and caused the deaths of many persons who might otherwise 
have escaped. In Nagasaki, very severe damage was caused by ﬁ res, 
but no extensive “ﬁ re storm” engulfed the city. In both cities, some of 
the ﬁ res close to X were no doubt started by the ignition of highly 
combustible material such as paper, straw, and dry cloth, upon the 
instantaneous radiation of heat from the nuclear explosion. The pres-
ence of large amounts of unburnt combustible materials near X, how-
ever, indicated that even though the heat of the blast was very intense, 
its duration was insufﬁ cient to raise the temperature of many materials 
to the kindling point except in cases where conditions were ideal. The 
majority of the ﬁ res were of secondary origin starting from the usual 
electrical short-circuits, broken gas lines, overturned stoves, open ﬁ res, 
charcoal braziers, lamps, etc., following collapse or serious damage 
from the direct blast.
Fire ﬁ ghting and rescue units were stripped of men and 
equipment. Almost 30 hours elapsed before any rescue parties were 
observable. In Hiroshima only a handful of ﬁ re engines were available 
for ﬁ ghting the ensuing ﬁ res, and none of these were of ﬁ rst class 
type. In any case, however, it is not likely that any ﬁ re ﬁ ghting 
equipment or personnel or organization could have effected any 
signiﬁ cant reduction in the amount of damage caused by the tremen-
dous conﬂ agration.
[…]
TOTAL CASUALTIES
There has been great difﬁ culty in estimating the total casualties 
in the Japanese cities as a result of the atomic bombing. The extensive 
destruction of civil installations (hospitals, ﬁ re and police department, 
and government agencies) the state of utter confusion immediately 
following the explosion, as well as the uncertainty regarding the actual 
population before the bombing, contribute to the difﬁ culty of making 
estimates of casualties. The Japanese periodic censuses are not complete. 
Finally, the great ﬁ res that raged in each city totally consumed many 
bodies.
The number of total casualties has been estimated at various times 
since the bombings with wide discrepancies. The Manhattan Engineer 
District’s best available ﬁ gures are:

The relation of total casualties to distance from X, the center of 
damage and point directly under the air-burst explosion of the bomb, 
is of great importance in evaluating the casualty-producing effect of the 
bombs. This relationship for the total population of Nagasaki is shown 
in the table below, based on the ﬁ rst-obtained casualty ﬁ gures of the 
District:
TABLE B
Relation of Total Casualties to Distance from X
Distance from 
 
 
 
Total 
Killed per
X, feet 
Killed 
Injured 
Missing 
Casualties 
square mile
0–1,640 
7,505 
960 
1,127 
9,592 
24,700
1,640–3,300 
3,688 
1,478 
1,799 
6,965 
4,040
3,300–4,900 
8,678 
17,137 
3,597 
29,412 
5,710
4,900–6,550 
221 
11,958 
28 
12,207 
125
6,550–9,850 
112 
9,460 
17 
9,589 
20
No ﬁ gures for total pre-raid population at these different distances 
were available. Such ﬁ gures would be necessary in order to compute 
per cent mortality. A calculation made by the British Mission to Japan 
and based on a preliminary analysis of the study of the Joint Medical-
Atomic Bomb Investigating Commission gives the following calculated 
values for per cent mortality at increasing distances from X:
TABLE A
Estimates of Casualties
 
Hiroshima 
Nagasaki
Pre-raid population 
255,000 
195,000
Dead 
66,000 
39,000
Injured 
69,000 
25,000
Total Casualties 
135,000 
64,000
Ofﬁ cial U.S. Report on the Atomic Bomb’s Effects 227

228 Data and Documents
TABLE C
Per-Cent Mortality at Various Distances
 
Distance from X, in feet 
Per-cent Mortality
 
0–1000 
93.0%
 
1000–2000 
92.0
 
2000–3000 
86.0
 
3000–4000 
69.0
 
4000–5000 
49.0
 
5000–6000 
31.5
 
6000–7000 
12.5
 
7000–8000 
1.3
 
8000–9000 
0.5
 
9000–10,000 
0.0
It seems almost certain from the various reports that the great-
est total number of deaths were those occurring immediately after 
the bombing. The causes of many of the deaths can only be surmised, 
and of course many persons near the center of explosion suffered fatal 
injuries from more than one of the bomb effects. The proper order of 
importance for possible causes of death is: burns, mechanical injury, 
and gamma radiation. Early estimates by the Japanese are shown in D 
below:
TABLE D
Cause of Immediate Deaths
Hiroshima
 
Cause of Death 
Per-cent of Total
Burns 
60%
Falling debris 
30
Other 
10
Nagasaki
 
Cause of Death 
Per-cent of Total
Burns 
95%
Falling debris 
9
Flying glass 
7
Other 
7

Source: Excerpted for this use. The complete report is available on the 
Web site of the Avalon Project of Yale Law School: http://www.yale.
edu/lawweb/avalon/abomb/mpmenu.htm.
The Founding Document of the 
Nonproliferation Regime
The NPT is now one of the world’s most widely observed treaties, with 
188 state parties. All but four countries (India, Israel, North Korea, and 
Pakistan) are members. The NPT requires all states to observe interna-
tional controls on all transfers of nuclear technology and to seek to pre-
vent nuclear weapons proliferation through a variety of speciﬁ c means. 
Article VI of the treaty also requires states to work to end the arms race 
and to seek the eventual complete elimination of nuclear weapons. The 
treaty, signed in 1968, recognizes ﬁ ve temporary nuclear weapon states 
(the United States, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, France, and 
China), which had already tested nuclear weapons by that time. All 
other states are considered to be non–nuclear weapon states under the 
treaty. The IAEA in Vienna is charged with supervising the obligations 
of non–nuclear weapon states to maintain strict safeguards over all civil-
ian nuclear materials to ensure that they are not diverted for use in a 
weapons program. 
After twenty-ﬁ ve years, the NPT faced a review by its members in 
1995 on whether or not the treaty should be extended and, if so, for how 
long. Although experts raised concerns that the non–nuclear weapon 
states might be so dissatisﬁ ed by the progress of the nuclear weapon 
states toward complete disarmament that they might reject the treaty’s 
extension, a group of states, led by South Africa and Canada, crafted a 
compromise document that extended the treaty indeﬁ nitely in return for 
pledges by the nuclear weapon states to make concrete progress toward 
several long-sought nonproliferation objectives: a comprehensive nuclear 
test-ban treaty, a ﬁ ssile material cutoff treaty, and further reductions 
in their nuclear arsenals en route to complete nuclear disarmament. At 
the 2000 Review Conference the parties renewed their commitment to 
nuclear disarmament and a ban on nuclear testing. However, at the sev-
enth review conference in May 2005, the parties reached no agreement 
and left unanswered challenges to the NPT regime posed by North Korea, 
Iran, and Pakistan’s black market of A. Q. Khan in nuclear technology. 
The full text of the NPT follows below.
The Founding Document of the Nonproliferation Regime 229

230 Data and Documents
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons
Signed at Washington, London, and Moscow July 1, 1968
Ratiﬁ cation advised by U.S. Senate March 13, 1969
Ratiﬁ ed by U.S. President November 24, 1969
U.S. ratiﬁ cation deposited at Washington, London, and Moscow 
March 5, 1970
Proclaimed by U.S. President March 5, 1970
Entered into force March 5, 1970
The States concluding this Treaty, hereinafter referred to as the 
“Parties to the Treaty,”
Considering the devastation that would be visited upon all man-
kind by a nuclear war and the consequent need to make every effort to 
avert the danger of such a war and to take measures to safeguard the 
security of peoples,
Believing that the proliferation of nuclear weapons would seri-
ously enhance the danger of nuclear war,
In conformity with resolutions of the United Nations General 
Assembly calling for the conclusion of an agreement on the prevention 
of wider dissemination of nuclear weapons,
Undertaking to cooperate in facilitating the application of Interna-
tional Atomic Energy Agency safeguards on peaceful nuclear activities,
Expressing their support for research, development and other 
efforts to further the application, within the framework of the Inter-
national Atomic Energy Agency safeguards system, of the principle 
of safeguarding effectively the ﬂ ow of source and special ﬁ ssionable 
materials by use of instruments and other techniques at certain strategic 
points,
Afﬁ rming the principle that the beneﬁ ts of peaceful applications of 
nuclear technology, including any technological by-products which may 
be derived by nuclear-weapon States from the development of nuclear 
explosive devices, should be available for peaceful purposes to all 
Parties of the Treaty, whether nuclear-weapon or non-nuclear weapon 
States,
Convinced that, in furtherance of this principle, all Parties to the 
Treaty are entitled to participate in the fullest possible exchange of 
scientiﬁ c information for, and to contribute alone or in cooperation with 
other States to, the further development of the applications of atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes,
Declaring their intention to achieve at the earliest possible date the 
cessation of the nuclear arms race and to undertake effective measures 
in the direction of nuclear disarmament,
Urging the cooperation of all States in the attainment of this 
objective,

Recalling the determination expressed by the Parties to the 1963 
Treaty banning nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere, in outer space 
and under water in its Preamble to seek to achieve the discontinuance 
of all test explosions of nuclear weapons for all time and to continue 
negotiations to this end,
Desiring to further the easing of international tension and the 
strengthening of trust between States in order to facilitate the cessation 
of the manufacture of nuclear weapons, the liquidation of all their exist-
ing stockpiles, and the elimination from national arsenals of nuclear 
weapons and the means of their delivery pursuant to a Treaty on gen-
eral and complete disarmament under strict and effective international 
control,
Recalling that, in accordance with the Charter of the United 
Nations, States must refrain in their international relations from the 
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political inde-
pendence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the 
Purposes of the United Nations, and that the establishment and main-
tenance of international peace and security are to be promoted with 
the least diversion for armaments of the world’s human and economic 
resources,
Have agreed as follows:
Article I
Each nuclear-weapon State Party to the Treaty undertakes not to 
transfer to any recipient whatsoever nuclear weapons or other nuclear 
explosive devices or control over such weapons or explosive devices 
directly, or indirectly; and not in any way to assist, encourage, or induce 
any non-nuclear weapon State to manufacture or otherwise acquire 
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, or control over 
such weapons or explosive devices.
Article II
Each non-nuclear-weapon State Party to the Treaty undertakes not 
to receive the transfer from any transfer or whatsoever of nuclear weap-
ons or other nuclear explosive devices or of control over such weap-
ons or explosive devices directly, or indirectly; not to manufacture or 
otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; 
and not to seek or receive any assistance in the manufacture of nuclear 
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices.
Article III
1. Each non-nuclear-weapon State Party to the Treaty undertakes 
to accept safeguards, as set forth in an agreement to be negotiated and 
concluded with the International Atomic Energy Agency in accordance 
with the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the 
Agency’s safeguards system, for the exclusive purpose of veriﬁ cation of 
the fulﬁ llment of its obligations assumed under this Treaty with a view 
to preventing diversion of nuclear energy from peaceful uses to nuclear 
The Founding Document of the Nonproliferation Regime 231

232 Data and Documents
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. Procedures for the safe-
guards required by this article shall be followed with respect to source 
or special ﬁ ssionable material whether it is being produced, processed 
or used in any principal nuclear facility or is outside any such facility. 
The safeguards required by this article shall be applied to all source or 
special ﬁ ssionable material in all peaceful nuclear activities within the 
territory of such State, under its jurisdiction, or carried out under its 
control anywhere.
2. Each State Party to the Treaty undertakes not to provide: (a) 
source or special ﬁ ssionable material, or (b) equipment or material 
especially designed or prepared for the processing, use or production of 
special ﬁ ssionable material, to any non-nuclear-weapon State for peace-
ful purposes, unless the source or special ﬁ ssionable material shall be 
subject to the safeguards required by this article.
3. The safeguards required by this article shall be implemented in 
a manner designed to comply with article IV of this Treaty, and to avoid 
hampering the economic or technological development of the Parties 
or international cooperation in the ﬁ eld of peaceful nuclear activities, 
including the international exchange of nuclear material and equipment 
for the processing, use or production of nuclear material for peaceful 
purposes in accordance with the provisions of this article and the prin-
ciple of safeguarding set forth in the Preamble of the Treaty.
4. Non-nuclear-weapon States Party to the Treaty shall conclude 
agreements with the International Atomic Energy Agency to meet the 
requirements of this article either individually or together with other 
States in accordance with the Statute of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency. Negotiation of such agreements shall commence within 180 
days from the original entry into force of this Treaty. For States depos-
iting their instruments of ratiﬁ cation or accession after the 180-day 
period, negotiation of such agreements shall commence not later than 
the date of such deposit. Such agreements shall enter into force not later 
than eighteen months after the date of initiation of negotiations.
Article IV
1. Nothing in this Treaty shall be interpreted as affecting the 
inalienable right of all the Parties to the Treaty to develop research, 
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without 
discrimination and in conformity with articles I and II of this Treaty.
2. All the Parties to the Treaty undertake to facilitate, and have the 
right to participate in, the fullest possible exchange of equipment, mate-
rials and scientiﬁ c and technological information for the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. Parties to the Treaty in a position to do so shall also 
cooperate in contributing alone or together with other States or inter-
national organizations to the further development of the applications 
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, especially in the territories of 

non-nuclear-weapon States Party to the Treaty, with due consideration 
for the needs of the developing areas of the world.
Article V
Each party to the Treaty undertakes to take appropriate measures 
to ensure that, in accordance with this Treaty, under appropriate inter-
national observation and through appropriate international procedures, 
potential beneﬁ ts from any peaceful applications of nuclear explosions 
will be made available to non-nuclear-weapon States Party to the Treaty 
on a nondiscriminatory basis and that the charge to such Parties for 
the explosive devices used will be as low as possible and exclude any 
charge for research and development. Non-nuclear-weapon States Party 
to the Treaty shall be able to obtain such beneﬁ ts, pursuant to a special 
international agreement or agreements, through an appropriate interna-
tional body with adequate representation of non-nuclear-weapon States. 
Negotiations on this subject shall commence as soon as possible after 
the Treaty enters into force. Non-nuclear-weapon States Party to the 
Treaty so desiring may also obtain such beneﬁ ts pursuant to bilateral 
agreements.
Article VI
Each of the Parties to the Treaty undertakes to pursue negotiations 
in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear 
arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament, and on a Treaty 
on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective inter-
national control.
Article VII
Nothing in this Treaty affects the right of any group of States to 
conclude regional treaties in order to assure the total absence of nuclear 
weapons in their respective territories.
Article VIII
1. Any Party to the Treaty may propose amendments to this Treaty. 
The text of any proposed amendment shall be submitted to the Deposi-
tary Governments which shall circulate it to all Parties to the Treaty. 
Thereupon, if requested to do so by one-third or more of the Parties to 
the Treaty, the Depositary Governments shall convene a conference, to 
which they shall invite all the Parties to the Treaty, to consider such an 
amendment.
2. Any amendment to this Treaty must be approved by a majority 
of the votes of all the Parties to the Treaty, including the votes of 
all nuclear-weapon States Party to the Treaty and all other Parties 
which, on the date the amendment is circulated, are members of 
the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency. 
The amendment shall enter into force for each Party that deposits its 
instrument of ratiﬁ cation of the amendment upon the deposit of such 
instruments of ratiﬁ cation by a majority of all the Parties, including 
The Founding Document of the Nonproliferation Regime 233

234 Data and Documents
the instruments of ratiﬁ cation of all nuclear-weapon States Party to 
the Treaty and all other Parties which, on the date the amendment is 
circulated, are members of the Board of Governors of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency. Thereafter, it shall enter into force for any 
other Party upon the deposit of its instrument of ratiﬁ cation of the 
amendment.
3. Five years after the entry into force of this Treaty, a conference 
of Parties to the Treaty shall be held in Geneva, Switzerland, in order 
to review the operation of this Treaty with a view to assuring that the 
purposes of the Preamble and the provisions of the Treaty are being 
realized. At intervals of ﬁ ve years thereafter, a majority of the Parties 
to the Treaty may obtain, by submitting a proposal to this effect to the 
Depositary Governments, the convening of further conferences with the 
same objective of reviewing the operation of the Treaty.
Article IX
1. This Treaty shall be open to all States for signature. Any State 
which does not sign the Treaty before its entry into force in accordance 
with paragraph 3 of this article may accede to it at any time.
2. This Treaty shall be subject to ratiﬁ cation by signatory States. 
Instruments of ratiﬁ cation and instruments of accession shall be 
deposited with the Governments of the United States of America, the 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics, which are hereby designated the Deposi-
tary Governments.
3. This Treaty shall enter into force after its ratiﬁ cation by the 
States, the Governments of which are designated Depositaries of the 
Treaty, and forty other States signatory to this Treaty and the deposit 
of their instruments of ratiﬁ cation. For the purposes of this Treaty, a 
nuclear-weapon State is one which has manufactured and exploded a 
nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device prior to January 1, 
1967.
4. For States whose instruments of ratiﬁ cation or accession are 
deposited subsequent to the entry into force of this Treaty, it shall enter 
into force on the date of the deposit of their instruments of ratiﬁ cation 
or accession.
5. The Depositary Governments shall promptly inform all sig-
natory and acceding States of the date of each signature, the date of 
deposit of each instrument of ratiﬁ cation or of accession, the date of the 
entry into force of this Treaty, and the date of receipt of any requests for 
convening a conference or other notices.
6. This Treaty shall be registered by the Depositary Governments 
pursuant to article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Article X
1. Each Party shall in exercising its national sovereignty have 
the right to withdraw from the Treaty if it decides that extraordinary 

events, related to the subject matter of this Treaty, have jeopardized the 
supreme interests of its country. It shall give notice of such withdrawal 
to all other Parties to the Treaty and to the United Nations Security 
Council three months in advance. Such notice shall include a statement 
of the extraordinary events it regards as having jeopardized its supreme 
interests.
2. Twenty-ﬁ ve years after the entry into force of the Treaty, a con-
ference shall be convened to decide whether the Treaty shall continue in 
force indeﬁ nitely, or shall be extended for an additional ﬁ xed period or 
periods. This decision shall be taken by a majority of the Parties to the 
Treaty.
Article XI
This Treaty, the English, Russian, French, Spanish and Chinese 
texts of which are equally authentic, shall be deposited in the archives 
of the Depositary Governments. Duly certiﬁ ed copies of this Treaty shall 
be transmitted by the Depositary Governments to the Governments of 
the signatory and acceding States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorized, have 
signed this Treaty.
DONE in triplicate, at the cities of Washington, London and Mos-
cow, this ﬁ rst day of July one thousand nine hundred sixty-eight.
The full text of the treaty can also be viewed on the U.S. State 
Department’s Web site: http://www.state.gov/www/global/arms/
treaties/npt1.html#2.
The U.S.-Russian Strategic 
Offensive Reductions Treaty 
(Moscow Treaty, 2001)
The George W. Bush administration issued a unilateral statement at the 
Crawford, Texas, summit in November 2001 stating the U.S. intention 
to reduce its deployed strategic nuclear arsenal to between 1,700 and 
2,200 warheads. Having sought deeper cuts, Russian president Vladimir 
Putin consented to this level but asked President Bush to formalize the 
reductions in a legally binding treaty. Despite U.S. reluctance to agree 
to a treaty and U.S.-Russian disputes over whether the warheads would 
actually be destroyed, the two signed the treaty at the May 2002 Moscow 
summit, formalizing planned reductions to be accomplished by 2012. 
The treaty will then be subject to review and a decision about its possible 
The U.S.-Russian Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty 235

236 Data and Documents
extension. The U.S. Senate and Russian Duma ratiﬁ ed the treaty almost 
a year later, and it became effective on 1 June 2003. 
U.S.-Russian Strategic Offensive 
Reductions Treaty
The United States of America and the Russian Federation, hereinafter 
referred to as the Parties, 
Embarking upon the path of new relations for a new century and 
committed to the goal of strengthening their relationship through coop-
eration and friendship, 
Believing that new global challenges and threats require the build-
ing of a qualitatively new foundation for strategic relations between the 
Parties,
Desiring to establish a genuine partnership based on the principles 
of mutual security, cooperation, trust, openness, and predictability, 
Committed to implementing signiﬁ cant reductions in strategic 
offensive arms, 
Proceeding from the Joint Statements by the President of the 
United States of America and the President of the Russian Federation 
on Strategic Issues of July 22, 2001 in Genoa and on a New Relationship 
between the United States and Russia of November 13, 2001 in Wash-
ington,
Mindful of their obligations under the Treaty Between the United 
States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialists Republics on the 
Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms of July 31, 1991, 
hereinafter referred to as the START Treaty, 
Mindful of their obligations under Article VI of the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons of July 1, 1968, and 
Convinced that this Treaty will help to establish more favorable 
conditions for actively promoting security and cooperation, and enhanc-
ing international stability, 
Have agreed as follows: 
Article I 
Each Party shall reduce and limit strategic nuclear warheads, as 
stated by the President of the United States of America on November 
13, 2001 and as stated by the President of the Russian Federation on 
November 13, 2001 and December 13, 2001 respectively, so that by 
December 31, 2012 the aggregate number of such warheads does not 
exceed 1700-2200 for each Party. Each Party shall determine for itself the 
composition and structure of its strategic offensive arms, based on the 
established aggregate limit for the number of such warheads. 
Article II 
The Parties agree that the START Treaty remains in force in accor-
dance with its terms. 

Article III 
For purposes of implementing this Treaty, the Parties shall hold 
meetings at least twice a year of a Bilateral Implementation Commission. 
Article IV 
1. This Treaty shall be subject to ratiﬁ cation in accordance with the 
constitutional procedures of each Party. This Treaty shall enter into force 
on the date of the exchange of instruments of ratiﬁ cation. 
2. This Treaty shall remain in force until December 31, 2012 and 
may be extended by agreement of the Parties or superseded earlier by a 
subsequent agreement. 
3. Each Party, in exercising its national sovereignty, may withdraw 
from this Treaty upon three months written notice to the other Party. 
Article V 
This Treaty shall be registered pursuant to Article 102 of the Char-
ter of the United Nations. 
Done at Moscow on May 24, 2002, in two copies, each in the 
English and Russian languages, both texts being equally authentic. 
FOR THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
George W. Bush 
FOR THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Vladimir V. Putin
The full text of the treaty and supporting documents are available on 
the U.S. Department of State Web site: http://www.state.gov/t/ac/
trt/18016.htm.
UN Security Council 
Resolution 1540 (2004)
Traditionally, nonproliferation arrangements have sought to bar states 
from developing or distributing nuclear weapons or related technologies. 
Since the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, and the later revelations 
about A. Q. Khan’s global black market in nuclear technologies and know-
how, the international community has turned its focus to preventing ter-
rorist organizations, such as al Qaeda, from acquiring WMD. Pursuant 
to its mandate to maintain international peace and security, the United 
Nations Security Council adopted Security Council Resolution 1540, on 
28 April 2004, to address the threat of WMD terrorism. The resolution 
calls on all states to prevent non-state actors from developing, acquiring, 
transferring, or exporting nuclear or other WMD-related materials and 
to strengthen controls on any WMD technologies and materials. It also 
UN Security Council Resolution 1540 (2004) 237

238 Data and Documents
asks nations to cooperate to prevent WMD trafﬁ cking and to assist those 
states that need help adopting the necessary legislation and procedures 
to check WMD proliferation. The resolution establishes a Committee of 
the Security Council to oversee its implementation and to review states’ 
reports on measures they have taken to stop proliferation. In April 2006, 
the United Nations Security Council extended the committee’s original 
two-year mandate to 2008. While the resolution highlights the pressing 
need to prevent WMD terrorism, it does not specify exactly what mea-
sures must be taken, and it lacks an enforcement mechanism or a way to 
sanction states that fail to comply.
UN Security Council Resolution 1540 
(2004)
Adopted by the Security Council at its 4956th meeting,
28 April 2004
The Security Council,
Afﬁ rming that proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, 
as well as their means of delivery,* constitutes a threat to international 
peace and security,
Reafﬁ rming, in this context, the Statement of its President adopted at the 
Council’s meeting at the level of Heads of State and Government on 31 
January 1992 (S/23500), including the need for all Member States 
to fulﬁ l their obligations in relation to arms control and disarmament 
and to prevent proliferation in all its aspects of all weapons of mass 
destruction,
* Deﬁ nitions for the purpose of this resolution only:
Means of delivery: missiles, rockets and other unmanned systems capable 
of delivering nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons, that are specially 
designed for such use.
Non-State actor: individual or entity, not acting under the lawful authority 
of any State in conducting activities which come within the scope of this 
resolution.
Related materials: materials, equipment and technology covered by relevant 
multilateral treaties and arrangements, or included on national control lists, 
which could be used for the design, development, production or use of 
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their means of delivery.

Recalling also that the Statement underlined the need for all Member 
States to resolve peacefully in accordance with the Charter any prob-
lems in that context threatening or disrupting the maintenance of 
regional and global stability,
Afﬁ rming its resolve to take appropriate and effective actions against any 
threat to international peace and security caused by the proliferation of 
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their means of delivery, 
in conformity with its primary responsibilities, as provided for in the 
United Nations Charter,
Afﬁ rming its support for the multilateral treaties whose aim is to 
eliminate or prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical or biological 
weapons and the importance for all States parties to these treaties to 
implement them fully in order to promote international stability,
Welcoming efforts in this context by multilateral arrangements which 
contribute to non-proliferation,
Afﬁ rming that prevention of proliferation of nuclear, chemical and 
biological weapons should not hamper international cooperation in 
materials, equipment and technology for peaceful purposes while goals 
of peaceful utilization should not be used as a cover for proliferation,
Gravely concerned by the threat of terrorism and the risk that non-State 
actors such as those identiﬁ ed in the United Nations list established and 
maintained by the Committee established under Security Council reso-
lution 1267 and those to whom resolution 1373 applies, may acquire, 
develop, trafﬁ c in or use nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and 
their means of delivery,
Gravely concerned by the threat of illicit trafﬁ cking in nuclear, chemical, 
or biological weapons and their means of delivery, and related materi-
als,* which adds a new dimension to the issue of proliferation of such 
weapons and also poses a threat to international peace and security,
Recognizing the need to enhance coordination of efforts on national, sub-
regional, regional and international levels in order to strengthen a global 
response to this serious challenge and threat to international security,
Recognizing that most States have undertaken binding legal obligations 
under treaties to which they are parties, or have made other commit-
ments aimed at preventing the proliferation of nuclear, chemical or 
UN Security Council Resolution 1540 (2004) 239

240 Data and Documents
biological weapons, and have taken effective measures to account for, 
secure and physically protect sensitive materials, such as those required 
by the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials and 
those recommended by the IAEA Code of Conduct on the Safety and 
Security of Radioactive Sources,
Recognizing further the urgent need for all States to take additional 
effective measures to prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical or 
biological weapons and their means of delivery,
Encouraging all Member States to implement fully the disarmament trea-
ties and agreements to which they are party,
Reafﬁ rming the need to combat by all means, in accordance with the 
Charter of the United Nations, threats to international peace and secu-
rity caused by terrorist acts,
Determined to facilitate henceforth an effective response to global threats 
in the area of non-proliferation,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Decides that all States shall refrain from providing any form of support 
to non-State actors that attempt to develop, acquire, manufacture, pos-
sess, transport, transfer or use nuclear, chemical or biological weapons 
and their means of delivery;
2. Decides also that all States, in accordance with their national pro-
cedures, shall adopt and enforce appropriate effective laws which 
prohibit any non-State actor to manufacture, acquire, possess, develop, 
transport, transfer or use nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and 
their means of delivery, in particular for terrorist purposes, as well as 
attempts to engage in any of the foregoing activities, participate in them 
as an accomplice, assist or ﬁ nance them;
3. Decides also that all States shall take and enforce effective measures 
to establish domestic controls to prevent the proliferation of nuclear, 
chemical, or biological weapons and their means of delivery, including 
by establishing appropriate controls over related materials and to this 
end shall:
(a) Develop and maintain appropriate effective measures to account for 
and secure such items in production, use, storage or transport;

(b) Develop and maintain appropriate effective physical protection 
measures;
(c) Develop and maintain appropriate effective border controls and 
law enforcement efforts to detect, deter, prevent and combat, including 
through international cooperation when necessary, the illicit trafﬁ ck-
ing and brokering in such items in accordance with their national legal 
authorities and legislation and consistent with international law;
(d) Establish, develop, review and maintain appropriate effective national 
export and trans-shipment controls over such items, including appropri-
ate laws and regulations to control export, transit, trans-shipment and 
re-export and controls on providing funds and services related to such 
export and trans-shipment such as ﬁ nancing, and transporting that would 
contribute to proliferation, as well as establishing end-user controls; and 
establishing and enforcing appropriate criminal or civil penalties for 
violations of such export control laws and regulations;
4. Decides to establish, in accordance with rule 28 of its provisional rules 
of procedure, for a period of no longer than two years, a Committee of 
the Security Council, consisting of all members of the Council, which 
will, calling as appropriate on other expertise, report to the Security 
Council for its examination, on the implementation of this resolution, 
and to this end calls upon States to present a ﬁ rst report no later than six 
months from the adoption of this resolution to the Committee on steps 
they have taken or intend to take to implement this resolution;
5. Decides that none of the obligations set forth in this resolution shall 
be interpreted so as to conﬂ ict with or alter the rights and obligations 
of State Parties to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, the Chemical 
Weapons Convention and the Biological and Toxin Weapons Conven-
tion or alter the responsibilities of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency or the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons;
6. Recognizes the utility in implementing this resolution of effective 
national control lists and calls upon all Member States, when necessary, 
to pursue at the earliest opportunity the development of such lists;
7. Recognizes that some States may require assistance in implementing 
the provisions of this resolution within their territories and invites 
States in a position to do so to offer assistance as appropriate in 
response to speciﬁ c requests to the States lacking the legal and 
UN Security Council Resolution 1540 (2004) 241

242 Data and Documents
regulatory infrastructure, implementation experience and/or resources 
for fulﬁ lling the above provisions;
8. Calls upon all States:
(a) To promote the universal adoption and full implementation, and, 
where necessary, strengthening of multilateral treaties to which they are 
parties, whose aim is to prevent the proliferation of nuclear, biological 
or chemical weapons;
(b) To adopt national rules and regulations, where it has not yet been 
done, to ensure compliance with their commitments under the key mul-
tilateral nonproliferation treaties;
(c) To renew and fulﬁ l their commitment to multilateral cooperation, 
in particular within the framework of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and 
the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention, as important means of 
pursuing and achieving their common objectives in the area of non-
proliferation and of promoting international cooperation for peaceful 
purposes;
(d) To develop appropriate ways to work with and inform industry and 
the public regarding their obligations under such laws;
9. Calls upon all States to promote dialogue and cooperation on nonpro-
liferation so as to address the threat posed by proliferation of nuclear, 
chemical, or biological weapons, and their means of delivery;
10. Further to counter that threat, calls upon all States, in accordance 
with their national legal authorities and legislation and consistent with 
international law, to take cooperative action to prevent illicit trafﬁ cking 
in nuclear, chemical or biological weapons, their means of delivery, and 
related materials;
11. Expresses its intention to monitor closely the implementation of this 
resolution and, at the appropriate level, to take further decisions which 
may be required to this end;
12. Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Source: United Nations Web site: http://daccessdds.un.org/doc/
UNDOC/GEN/N04/328/43/PDF/N0432843.pdf?OpenElement.

UN Sanctions on North Korea 
(2006)
On 9 October 2006, North Korea announced that it had conducted an 
underground test of a nuclear weapon. Seismic monitoring and air sam-
pling determined that North Korea had tested a plutonium bomb that 
probably ﬁ zzled, as the yield was estimated to be half a kiloton or less, 
very small for a nuclear explosion. Nonetheless, the test represented a 
sharp blow to the nuclear nonproliferation regime and raised the ques-
tion of what, if anything, can be done to prevent devoted proliferators 
from building nuclear weapons. North Korea was a member of the NPT 
until it became the ﬁ rst party to withdraw from the treaty in 2003.
North Korea had previously threatened to withdraw from the NPT 
in 1993. However, in 1994, North Korea signed the Agreed Framework 
with the United States under which it agreed to remain in the NPT, allow 
the return of IAEA inspectors, and halt its plutonium-based nuclear pro-
gram if an international consortium provided two light-water nuclear 
power plants and oil supplies until the plants were operating. In October 
2002, the United States charged that North Korea had violated the deal by 
secretly acquiring uranium enrichment technology from Pakistan. The 
United States halted its provision of oil supplies. North Korea responded 
by expelling all IAEA inspectors, removing their monitoring equipment, 
and ﬁ nally announcing its withdrawal from the NPT. In August 2003, 
the United States and eventually South Korea, China, Japan, and Rus-
sia began a series of talks with North Korea that became known as the 
Six-Party Talks. On 15 September 2005, the parties reached a tentative 
agreement, according to which North Korea committed to abandoning 
its nuclear weapon program, returning to the NPT, and allowing IAEA 
inspections. But almost immediately, the parties disagreed on whether 
light-water power reactors would be provided under the agreement, and 
talks stalled. Slightly more than a year later, North Korea exploded a 
nuclear device.
On 14 October 2006, the UN Security Council adopted a resolution 
condemning North Korea’s nuclear test and demanding that it cease its 
nuclear weapon and ballistic missile programs and rejoin the NPT. The 
resolution bans countries from supplying North Korea with any WMD 
materials, conventional weapons, or luxury items (especially to the lead-
ership) and calls on states to inspect cargo to and from North Korea as 
necessary. China, Russia, and South Korea, however, put conditions on 
their willingness to enforce the inspection provisions.  
UN Sanctions on North Korea (2006) 243

244 Data and Documents
On 13 February 2007, North Korea agreed at the Six-Party Talks 
to halt its nuclear program, return to the NPT, and allow international 
inspections in exchange for the removal of sanctions, ﬁ nancial and energy 
aid, and talks on normalizing diplomatic relations with the United States 
and Japan. The agreement establishes ﬁ ve working groups to plan for the 
deal’s phased implementation and address such questions as the status of 
North Korea’s nuclear weapons and ﬁ ssile material. North Korea missed 
the 13 April 2007 deadline to shut down its reactors, disclose its nuclear 
activities, and invite International Atomic Energy Agency inspectors 
into the country. But negotiations continued.
An excerpted version of the October 2006 sanctions resolution 
follows.
United Nations Security Council 
Resolution 1718 (2006)
Adopted by the Security Council at its 5551st meeting, on 14 October 
2006
The Security Council,
[…]
Reafﬁ rming that proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weap-
ons, as well as their means of delivery, constitutes a threat to interna-
tional peace and security,
Expressing the gravest concern at the claim by the Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea (DPRK) that it has conducted a test of a nuclear 
weapon on 9 October 2006, and at the challenge such a test constitutes 
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to 
international efforts aimed at strengthening the global regime of non-
proliferation of nuclear weapons, and the danger it poses to peace and 
stability in the region and beyond,
Expressing its ﬁ rm conviction that the international regime on the non-
proliferation of nuclear weapons should be maintained and recalling that 
the DPRK cannot have the status of a nuclear-weapon state in accordance 
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Deploring the DPRK’s announcement of withdrawal from the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and its pursuit of nuclear 
weapons,

Deploring further that the DPRK has refused to return to the Six-Party 
talks without precondition,
Endorsing the Joint Statement issued on 19 September 2005 by China, 
the DPRK, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation and the 
United States,
[…]
Expressing profound concern that the test claimed by the DPRK has 
generated increased tension in the region and beyond, and determining
therefore that there is a clear threat to international peace and security,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, and tak-
ing measures under its Article 41,
1. Condemns the nuclear test proclaimed by the DPRK on 9 October 2006 
in ﬂ agrant disregard of its relevant resolutions, in particular resolution 
1695 (2006), as well as of the statement of its President of 6 October 2006 
(S/PRST/2006/41), including that such a test would bring universal 
condemnation of the international community and would represent a 
clear threat to international peace and security;
2. Demands that the DPRK not conduct any further nuclear test or launch 
of a ballistic missile;
3. Demands that the DPRK immediately retract its announcement of 
withdrawal from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weap-
ons;
4. Demands further that the DPRK return to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA) safeguards, and underlines the need for all States Parties 
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to continue 
to comply with their Treaty obligations;
5. Decides that the DPRK shall suspend all activities related to its ballistic 
missile programme and in this context re-establish its pre-existing com-
mitments to a moratorium on missile launching;
6. Decides that the DPRK shall abandon all nuclear weapons and existing 
nuclear programmes in a complete, veriﬁ able and irreversible manner, 
shall act strictly in accordance with the obligations applicable to parties 
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the 
terms and conditions of its International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 
Safeguards Agreement (IAEA INFCIRC/403) and shall provide the 
IAEA transparency measures extending beyond these requirements, 
including such access to individuals, documentation, equipments and 
facilities as may be required and deemed necessary by the IAEA;
7. Decides also that the DPRK shall abandon all other existing weapons 
of mass destruction and ballistic missile programme in a complete, veri-
ﬁ able and irreversible manner;
8. Decides that:
UN Sanctions on North Korea (2006) 245

246 Data and Documents
(a) All Member States shall prevent the direct or indirect supply, sale 
or transfer to the DPRK, through their territories or by their nationals, 
or using their ﬂ ag vessels or aircraft, and whether or not originating in 
their territories, of:
(i) Any battle tanks, armoured combat vehicles, large calibre artil-
lery systems, combat aircraft, attack helicopters, warships, missiles 
or missile systems as deﬁ ned for the purpose of the United Nations 
Register on Conventional Arms, or related materiel including spare 
parts, or items as determined by the Security Council or the Commit-
tee established by paragraph 12 below (the Committee);
(ii) All items, materials, equipment, goods and technology as set out 
in the lists in documents S/2006/814 and S/2006/815, unless within 
14 days of adoption of this resolution the Committee has amended 
or completed their provisions also taking into account the list in 
document S/2006/816, as well as other items, materials, equipment, 
goods and technology, determined by the Security Council or the 
Committee, which could contribute to DPRK’s nuclear-related, bal-
listic missile-related or other weapons of mass destruction related 
programmes;
(iii) Luxury goods;
(b) The DPRK shall cease the export of all items covered in subpara-
graphs (a) (i) and (a) (ii) above and that all Member States shall prohibit 
the procurement of such items from the DPRK by their nationals, or 
using their ﬂ agged vessels or aircraft, and whether or not originating in 
the territory of the DPRK;
(c) All Member States shall prevent any transfers to the DPRK by their 
nationals or from their territories, or from the DPRK by its nationals 
or from its territory, of technical training, advice, services or assistance 
related to the provision, manufacture, maintenance or use of the items 
in subparagraphs (a) (i) and (a) (ii) above;
(d) All Member States shall, in accordance with their respective legal 
processes, freeze immediately the funds, other ﬁ nancial assets and eco-
nomic resources which are on their territories at the date of the adoption 
of this resolution or at any time thereafter, that are owned or controlled, 
directly or indirectly, by the persons or entities designated by the Com-
mittee or by the Security Council as being engaged in or providing sup-
port for, including through other illicit means, DPRK’s nuclear-related, 
other weapons of mass destruction-related and ballistic missile-related 
programmes, or by persons or entities acting on their behalf or at their 
direction, and ensure that any funds, ﬁ nancial assets or economic 
resources are prevented from being made available by their nationals or 
by any persons or entities within their territories, to or for the beneﬁ t of 
such persons or entities;
(e) All Member States shall take the necessary steps to prevent the entry 
into or transit through their territories of the persons designated by the 

Committee or by the Security Council as being responsible for, includ-
ing through supporting or promoting, DPRK policies in relation to the 
DPRK’s nuclear-related, ballistic missile-related and other weapons 
of mass destruction-related programmes, together with their family 
members, provided that nothing in this paragraph shall oblige a state to 
refuse its own nationals entry into its territory;
(f) In order to ensure compliance with the requirements of this para-
graph, and thereby preventing illicit trafﬁ cking in nuclear, chemical or 
biological weapons, their means of delivery and related materials, all 
Member States are called upon to take, in accordance with their national 
authorities and legislation, and consistent with international law, coop-
erative action including through inspection of cargo to and from the 
DPRK, as necessary;
[…]
12. Decides to establish, in accordance with rule 28 of its provisional 
rules of procedure, a Committee of the Security Council consisting of all 
the members of the Council, to undertake the following tasks:
(a) To seek from all States, in particular those producing or possessing 
the items, materials, equipment, goods and technology referred to in 
paragraph 8 (a) above, information regarding the actions taken by them 
to implement effectively the measures imposed by paragraph 8 above of 
this resolution and whatever further information it may consider useful 
in this regard; (b) To examine and take appropriate action on informa-
tion regarding alleged violations of measures imposed by paragraph 8 
of this resolution;
[…]
(g) To report at least every 90 days to the Security Council on its work, 
with its observations and recommendations, in particular on ways to 
strengthen the effectiveness of the measures imposed by paragraph 8 
above;
13. Welcomes and encourages further the efforts by all States concerned to 
intensify their diplomatic efforts, to refrain from any actions that might 
aggravate tension and to facilitate the early resumption of the Six-
Party Talks, with a view to the expeditious implementation of the Joint 
Statement issued on 19 September 2005 by China, the DPRK, Japan, 
the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation and the United States, to 
achieve the veriﬁ able denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and to 
maintain peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula and in north-east 
Asia;
14. Calls upon the DPRK to return immediately to the Six-Party Talks 
without precondition and to work towards the expeditious implementa-
tion of the Joint Statement issued on 19 September 2005 by China, the 
DPRK, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation and the 
United States;
UN Sanctions on North Korea (2006) 247

248 Data and Documents
15. Afﬁ rms that it shall keep DPRK’s actions under continuous review 
and that it shall be prepared to review the appropriateness of the 
measures contained in paragraph 8 above, including the strengthening, 
modiﬁ cation, suspension or lifting of the measures, as may be needed at 
that time in light of the DPRK’s compliance with the provisions of the 
resolution;
16. Underlines that further decisions will be required, should additional 
measures be necessary;
17. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Source
United Nations Web site: http://daccessdds.un.org/doc/UNDOC/
GEN/N06/572/07/PDF/NO657207.pdf?OpenElement.

249
7
Directory of Organizations
N
umerous governmental and nongovernmental organiza-
tions work on nuclear weapon development, management, 
reduction, or elimination. This chapter is divided into three 
sections: international organizations, U.S. government bodies, 
and nongovernmental organizations. Some of the organizations 
described oversee weapon programs, others help implement trea-
ties designed to prevent the spread of nuclear technologies, and 
still others work through the media and other public information 
channels to promote nuclear nonproliferation. All of the organiza-
tions have Web sites that can be used to gather further information 
or contact the appropriate person to answer a speciﬁ c inquiry. 
International Organizations
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America and the Caribbean (OPANAL)
Schiller 326-5° piso
Col. Chapultepec Morales
Mexico D.F. 11570 Mexico
Phone: (52-55) 5255-2914, 5255-4198
Fax: (52-55) 5255-3748
E-mail: info@opanal.org
Web site: http://www.opanal.org
OPANAL is an intergovernmental organization created by the 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 

250 Directory of Organizations
and the Caribbean (known internationally as the Treaty of Tlate-
lolco), which was opened for signature in 1967. The treaty prohib-
its the use, manufacture, and acquisition of any nuclear weapons 
by parties in the region and large sections of the Paciﬁ c and Atlan-
tic Ocean. OPANAL seeks to ensure that the parties comply with 
the treaty’s obligations, such as concluding a safeguards agree-
ment with the International Atomic Energy Agency, and adhere to 
its veriﬁ cation or control system. OPANAL holds regular confer-
ences and consultations related to the treaty. All thirty-three states 
in the Latin American and Caribbean regions are now members 
of the organization. 
OPANAL’s Web site offers documents related to the Treaty 
of Tlatelolco, a tutorial on nuclear-weapon-free zones, speeches 
of its ofﬁ cials, and general background documents on disarma-
ment and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT).
Brazil-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of 
Nuclear Materials (ABACC)
Av. Rio Branco, 123, G515, Centro,
20040-005, Rio de Janeiro-RJ, Brazil
Phone: (55-21) 3171-1200
Fax: (55-21) 3171-1248
Avda. Del Libertador 8250 
Oﬁ cina 121 (C1429 BNO) 
Buenos Aires, Argentina
Phone: (54-11) 6323-1364
Fax: (54-11) 4704-1076 
E-mail: info@abacc.org.br
Web site: http://www.abacc.org
An agreement between Argentina and Brazil on peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy—signed in Guadalajara, Mexico, on 18 July 1991 
(the Guadalajara Agreement)—established ABACC. Under the 
Guadalajara Agreement, the two countries agreed to use nuclear 
materials exclusively for peaceful purposes and to prohibit the 
manufacture, production, and use of nuclear weapons on their 
territories. The ABACC administers and applies a full-scope 
safeguards system, known as the Common System for Account-

International Organizations 251
ing and Control of Nuclear Materials (SCCC), to account for all 
nuclear materials in both countries. The ABACC implements the 
SCCC by inspections targeted at various stages of the nuclear fuel 
cycle—production, processing, use, and storage. The organiza-
tion’s specialists conduct routine, ad hoc, and special inspections 
to verify the validity of information received from facilities.
The ABACC Web site contains a library of agreements, dec-
larations, and other documents related to regional nuclear policy. 
Annual reports, the virtual journal ABACC News, and papers on 
safeguards-related topics are also available. 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization 
(CTBTO)
CTBTO Preparatory Commission
Vienna International Centre
PO Box 1200
A-1400 Vienna, Austria
Phone: (431) 26030 6200
Fax: (431) 26030 5823
E-mail: info@ctbto.org 
Web site: http://www.ctbto.org
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) bans all 
nuclear explosions for military and civilian purposes; the CTBTO 
is the monitoring arm of the treaty. Although the treaty has been 
ratiﬁ ed by 132 states, it has not been approved by all of the 44 
nuclear-capable states whose ratiﬁ cations are required for the 
treaty to enter into force. (Of these 44 states, 34 have ratiﬁ ed, 10 
[including the United States] have not ratiﬁ ed, and 3 have yet to 
sign.) However, the CTBTO is already functioning in Vienna—
with links to more than 321 monitoring stations and sixteen radio-
nuclide laboratories worldwide—to begin implementing the 
CTBT’s provisions, particularly veriﬁ cation that countries are not 
testing nuclear devices. The CTBTO’s Provisional Technical Sec-
retariat began work in March 1997 and has an international staff 
of more than 200 members from sixty-four countries. It is coop-
erating with host countries to develop and maintain the interna-
tional network of monitoring stations that send their data to the 
International Data Center at the CTBTO. Since February 2000, the 
International Data Center has provided International Monitoring 
System data on a test basis to states that signed the CTBT.

252 Directory of Organizations
The CTBTO Web site describes how the organization oper-
ates and provides updated information on which countries have 
signed and ratiﬁ ed the treaty. It also provides more details on the 
CTBT’s veriﬁ cation regime, including the International Monitor-
ing System, on-site inspections, and conﬁ dence-building mea-
sures. In addition, the Web site includes CTBTO documents, a 
biannual newsletter (CTBTO Spectrum), legal resources, a database 
of Preparatory Commission documents, and media information.
Conference on Disarmament (CD)
8-14 Avenue de la Paix
Palais des Nations
CH-1211
Geneva 10, Switzerland
Phone: (41-022) 917 2100
Web site: http://www.unog.ch (click on Disarmament link, then 
on Conference on Disarmament) 
The United Nations (UN) General Assembly established the CD 
in 1979 as the one negotiating forum on multilateral disarmament 
for the international community. The original forty-member CD 
was a successor organization to other UN disarmament groups 
dating back to 1960. The CD currently has sixty-ﬁ ve member 
states. The CD reports to the UN General Assembly but adopts its 
own agenda and procedures.
The CD and its predecessors negotiated such multilateral 
nuclear nonproliferation treaties as the NPT and the CTBT. The 
CD’s nuclear agenda includes the following goals: cessation of the 
nuclear arms race and nuclear disarmament, prevention of nuclear 
war, prevention of an arms race in outer space, negotiations of 
arrangements to protect non–nuclear weapon states against the 
threat of nuclear weapons, and the prohibition of the production 
of ﬁ ssile material for nuclear explosive devices. The CD meets in 
three sessions per year: once for ten weeks and twice for seven-
week periods. For the past several years, political disputes have 
kept CD members from agreeing on a program of work, with the 
result that they have failed to pursue any nonproliferation or dis-
armament matters on their agenda.
The CD publishes annual reports, documents of the confer-
ences, and records of its meetings. The Web site provides an over-
view of the organization, a list of its members, annual reports, 
documents of the CD, and records of meetings.

International Organizations 253
European Union Directorate General for Energy and 
Transportation, European Atomic Energy Community 
(EURATOM) Ofﬁ ce
EURATOM Supply Agency
EUFO 4195–European Commission
L-2920 Luxembourg
Phone: (352) 4301-36738
Fax: (352) 4301-38139
E-mail: Esa-AAE@ec.europa.eu
EURATOM Web site: http://www.euratom.org
EURATOM Supply Agency Web site: http://europa.eu.int/
comm/ euratom/index_en.html
Established by the Treaty of Rome (or EURATOM Treaty) signed 
in March 1957, the European Atomic Energy Community governs 
and promotes the peaceful use of nuclear energy among twenty-
ﬁ ve members of the European Union (EU). EURATOM covers all 
civil nuclear activities in the EU, provides a common market in 
nuclear materials, guarantees a supply of nuclear fuels, and estab-
lishes standards to protect workers and the general population 
against radiation dangers. Nuclear energy provides one-third of 
the EU’s electricity. The treaty also allows EURATOM to contact 
other countries to promote progress in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. The members agree to ensure that nuclear materials are 
not diverted to weapon purposes and to comply with safeguards 
obligations. Also, they pledge themselves to the common develop-
ment of Europe’s nuclear energy resources by coordinating their 
nuclear research and development programs and by permitting 
the free movement of nuclear raw materials, equipment, invest-
ment capital, and specialists within the community. In June 2002, 
the EURATOM ofﬁ ce became part of the EU Directorate General 
for Energy and Transportation based in Brussels. The EURATOM 
Web site offers publications and reports on nuclear installation 
safety, radioactive waste management, and the decommissioning 
of nuclear facilities, as well as a video on nuclear inspections Half
a Century of Safeguards in Europe.
The EURATOM Supply Agency works to ensure a regu-
lar and equitable supply of nuclear fuels for EU members. The 
EURATOM Supply Agency is vested with wide powers, including 
the right to enter into contracts and obtain raw materials. It oper-
ates joint research centers at Ispra (Italy), Geel (Belgium), Petten 
(the Netherlands), and Karlsruhe (Germany). The EURATOM 

254 Directory of Organizations
Supply Agency Web site contains information on the founding 
treaty, annual reports, and various nuclear-related articles and 
documents.
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
PO Box 100
Wagramer Strasse 5
A-1400 Vienna, Austria
Phone: (431) 2600-0
Fax: (431) 2600-7
E-mail: Ofﬁ cial.Mail@iaea.org
Web site: http://www.iaea.org
In July 1957, eighteen states ratiﬁ ed the statute that created the 
IAEA as an independent organization under the UN. By May 
2007, the IAEA had 144 member states. According to its statute, 
the IAEA seeks to enlarge the contribution of nuclear energy to 
peace and prosperity throughout the world and to ensure that 
nuclear energy is not used to further any military purposes. The 
IAEA also works to combat nuclear terrorism in part by promoting 
adoption of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Materials. To fulﬁ ll its mission, the IAEA establishes and applies 
safeguards to the nuclear activities of non–nuclear weapon states, 
as required by the NPT and certain nuclear-weapon-free zone trea-
ties. The IAEA inspects nuclear-related facilities under safeguards 
agreements in member states and aids international nuclear dis-
armament efforts. IAEA inspections in North Korea, Iraq, and 
Iran uncovered violations of those countries’ NPT obligations 
and safeguards agreements. The Norwegian Nobel Prize Com-
mittee awarded the 2005 Peace Prize to the IAEA and Mohamed 
ElBaradei, its director general, for their efforts to prevent nuclear 
energy from being diverted to military purposes and for support-
ing nuclear nonproliferation.
The IAEA’s principal bodies are the General Conference of 
all IAEA member states and the board of governors. The Gen-
eral Conference provides broad reviews of agency activities and 
policy guidance. The board of governors, which generally meets 
ﬁ ve times per year, approves speciﬁ c safeguards procedures and 
agreements. Also, in cases of noncompliance with IAEA safe-
guards (as in Iran and North Korea), the board asks the violator 
to remedy the problem and reports the noncompliance to the UN 
Security Council and General Assembly for further action.

International Organizations 255
The IAEA publishes an annual report that covers global devel-
opments relevant to the safe and peaceful use of nuclear energy 
and highlights its activities. It also publishes information circulars 
on matters of interest to its members, as well as two journals, the 
IAEA Bulletin and the more technical Nuclear Fusion, newsletters, 
books, conference proceedings, and legal and technical docu-
ments. The IAEA Web site provides a wealth of information in 
several languages: a proﬁ le of the IAEA and its various duties; 
fact sheets on a wide range of issues; special sections on press-
ing issues such as Iran and North Korea; an image bank; photo 
essays; videos on nuclear history, safeguards, and inspections; 
and a database on illicit trafﬁ cking in nuclear materials. 
International Science and Technology Center (ISTC)
Krasnoproletarskaya 32-34
127473 Moscow, Russian Federation 
Phone: 7 (495) 982-3200
Fax: 7 (499) 982-3201 
E-mail: istcinfo@istc.ru
Web site: http://www.istc.ru
In 1992, the EU, Japan, the Russian Federation, and the United 
States agreed to establish the ISTC with the aim of providing sci-
entists from the Soviet successor states with opportunities to redi-
rect their scientiﬁ c talents from military to peaceful uses. Since 
then, Norway and South Korea have joined as parties, and Arme-
nia, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan have joined 
Russia as partner countries; the total membership is thirty-seven 
countries. Former weapons scientists submit about thirty scien-
tiﬁ c project proposals a month to the ISTC, which then reviews, 
approves, and funds appropriate initiatives. Projects ﬁ nanced by 
the center must be peaceful in nature and address the nonprolif-
eration objectives of the ISTC. The ISTC’s headquarters is in Mos-
cow, and it has six regional ofﬁ ces in other formerly Soviet states. 
On its Web site, the center publishes an annual report and 
maintains a public database of active and completed projects. 
ISTC projects that beneﬁ t nuclear nonproliferation involve the 
disposal of weapons-grade plutonium, ways to support the CTBT, 
and nuclear material control and accounting. The Web site also 
contains information about the center’s activities and resources 
for researchers and scientists.

256 Directory of Organizations
Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG)
The NSG is an informal group with no central point of contact. 
Web site: http://www.nuclearsuppliersgroup.org
Nuclear supplier countries formed the NSG after India’s surprise 
detonation of a nuclear device in 1974. The NSG ﬁ rst met in Lon-
don in November 1975 with the purpose of controlling the transit 
of sensitive nuclear materials and technologies. As of 2006, NSG 
had forty-ﬁ ve members (states capable of supplying nuclear tech-
nologies); the European Commission holds permanent observer 
status. The NSG attempts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons by implementing guidelines for nuclear exports and 
exchanging information on developments related to nuclear pro-
liferation. The ﬁ rst set of NSG guidelines governs the export of 
items that are especially designed or prepared for nuclear use, 
such as nuclear material; reactor equipment; equipment for the 
reprocessing, enrichment, and conversion of nuclear material; 
and technology for fuel fabrication and heavy-water production. 
The second set of guidelines covers the export of nuclear-related 
dual-use items and technologies, that is, items and technologies 
that have both nuclear and non-nuclear uses.
NSG members try to ensure that nuclear exports are made 
only under appropriate safeguards, physical protection, and non-
proliferation conditions. The NSG also seeks to restrict the export 
of sensitive items that can contribute to the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. The NSG requires IAEA safeguards, in addition 
to national control laws, as a condition of supplying any nuclear-
related item to a state. It limits assistance with enrichment and 
reprocessing plants to countries of concern while sharing among 
members a common control list to restrain trade with countries in 
unstable regions. The Guidelines for Nuclear Transfers were ini-
tially agreed upon by supplier states in 1977 and envisaged addi-
tional export control restraints beyond those provided for in the 
NPT. The NSG guidelines are implemented by the governments 
of member states according to their domestic laws and regula-
tions. The 1993 NSG meeting in Lucerne endorsed an amendment 
to the NSG guidelines that requires IAEA safeguards on all cur-
rent and future nuclear activities in a country as a condition for 
any signiﬁ cant new agreements to supply nuclear-related items to 
non–nuclear weapon states. 
In recent years, NSG members have endorsed the provi-
sions of the IAEA’s 1997 Model Additional Protocol, which 

International Organizations 257
provides for more intrusive safeguards; strengthened their guide-
lines to prevent diversion of nuclear materials to terrorists; and 
adopted guidelines to control items not on the trigger lists and 
to strengthen relationships with nonmembers. In 2005, the NSG 
agreed to a procedure to stop transfers of nuclear aid to coun-
tries that do not comply with their IAEA safeguards agreements 
(INFCIRC/254/Rev.7 Part 1, Feb. 05). In 2007, the NSG will likely 
address the question of whether members should be allowed to 
supply nuclear technologies to India, a country that has never 
signed the NPT or agreed to IAEA safeguards. 
The NSG Web site contains a description of the organization 
and its activities, the contact information of the export control 
agencies of its member states, and the text of its guidelines and 
other related documents.
United Nations (UN)
UN Headquarters
First Avenue at 46th Street
New York, NY 10017
E-mail: inquiries@un.org
Web site: http://www.un.org
Established in October 1945, the United Nations is committed to 
preserving peace through international cooperation and collec-
tive security. In 2007, membership totaled 192 countries and thirty 
afﬁ liated organizations that work under the UN umbrella. Several 
UN bodies and afﬁ liated organizations work to halt the spread of 
arms and to reduce and eventually eliminate all weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD).
All member states are represented in the UN General Assem-
bly. According to the UN Charter, the General Assembly considers 
general principles for maintaining international peace and secu-
rity, including the principles governing disarmament. In this role, 
it may make recommendations to members of the UN Security 
Council. With regard to nuclear weapons, the General Assem-
bly endorsed the NPT and the CTBT and has adopted numerous 
resolutions on nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation. The 
Disarmament and International Security Committee (the First 
Committee), a subsidiary body of the General Assembly, deals 
with all disarmament and nonproliferation questions. The Gen-
eral Assembly acts on draft resolutions and decisions presented 
by the First Committee on a yearly basis, usually in the late fall. 

258 Directory of Organizations
For example, the General Assembly has adopted resolutions con-
demning the 1998 nuclear tests by India and Pakistan, calling for 
the prevention of an arms race in outer space, and supporting the 
establishment of several nuclear-weapon-free zones. Other bodies 
under the General Assembly include the UN Disarmament Com-
mission, which is mandated to submit concrete recommendations 
on speciﬁ c disarmament issues; the Conference on Disarmament in 
Geneva, which is charged with negotiating international security 
treaties; the UN Institute for Disarmament Research in Geneva, 
which was established to undertake independent research on 
disarmament and related problems (see later entry); and regional 
centers for peace and disarmament located in Asia, Africa, and 
Latin America.
The UN Charter gives the Security Council the primary 
responsibility for maintaining international peace and security. 
The council consists of ﬁ fteen member states: ﬁ ve permanent 
members—China, France, the Russian Federation, the United 
Kingdom, and the United States—and ten members elected for 
two-year terms by the General Assembly. The Security Council is 
responsible for formulating plans to regulate weapons. The Secu-
rity Council’s mandate includes adopting resolutions on security 
assurances given by nuclear weapon states to non–nuclear weapon 
states, as well as urging all states to pursue nuclear disarmament 
in good faith. Organizations that fall under the Security Coun-
cil include the Military Staff Committee, which is responsible for 
advising the council on security and disarmament; the Sanctions 
Committees, which are charged with monitoring implementation 
of council-established sanctions; and the Monitoring, Veriﬁ cation, 
and Inspection Commission, the successor organization to the UN 
Special Commission on Iraq, which was mandated to monitor and 
verify ongoing disarmament issues in Iraq after the discovery of 
WMD in that country during the 1991 Gulf War. In April 2004, the 
UN Security Council adopted Resolution 1540, which requires all 
states to enforce laws and other measures to prevent non-state 
actors from acquiring nuclear weapons, other WMD, and means 
of delivering WMD. In 2006 and again in March 2007, the Security 
Council sanctioned Iran because it refused to suspend its uranium-
enrichment program after the IAEA provided evidence that Iran 
could be pursuing a nuclear weapons program in violation of its 
NPT obligations.
The UN publishes more than 400 titles every year, including 
the UN Yearbook and many works on nuclear nonproliferation and 

International Organizations 259
other disarmament-related treaties. The UN Web site contains infor-
mation on all its various programs, ofﬁ cial UN documents, a list of 
UN publications, and UN news and press releases. The Department 
for Disarmament Affairs’ portion of the site (http://disarmament
.un.org/dda.htm) includes comprehensive information on the NPT, 
the CTBT, other nonproliferation treaties, and terrorism.
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR)
Palais des Nations
1211 Geneva 10, Switzerland
Phone: 41-022-917-3186
Fax: 41-022-917-0176
E-mail: unidir@unog.ch 
Web site: http://www.unidir.org
Founded in 1980, UNIDIR is the primary research arm of the 
UN in the ﬁ eld of global and regional security and disarma-
ment. UNIDIR relies mainly on donations from governments 
and foundations. The institute pursues its mission by conducting 
research projects, meetings, conferences, and the Geneva Forum, 
an ongoing discussion series among government delegates, non-
governmental organizations, academics, media, and UN person-
nel. UNIDIR publishes a variety of books and reports on subjects 
ranging from global security (nuclear/chemical/biological weap-
ons, plus treaty implementation), regional security (conﬂ ict reso-
lution, political-economic sources of tension, and disarmament 
approaches), and human security (development, human rights, 
and small arms). Information about these publications can be 
found on the institute’s Web site along with its quarterly online 
journal, Disarmament Forum.
Zangger Committee
Point of contact: Mr. Graham Styles, Secretary of the Committee
First Secretary
UK Permanent Mission to the United Nations in Vienna
Jauresgasse 12
A-1030 Vienna, Austria
Phone: 43-1-716-13-4296
Fax: 43-1-716-13-4900
Web site: http://www.zanggercommittee.org
The Zangger Committee does not have a permanent headquarters 
but is operated by the chair and serviced through his ofﬁ ce. It is 

260 Directory of Organizations
an informal organization consisting of thirty-ﬁ ve member states, 
and the European Commission serves as a permanent observer. 
A group of ﬁ fteen countries that export nuclear materials formed 
the Zangger Committee (named for the ﬁ rst chair, Swiss professor 
Claude Zangger) in 1971. The committee meets to ensure consen-
sus on the NPT clause (Article III, paragraph 2) requiring nuclear 
equipment or material to be under safeguards after export to a 
non–nuclear weapon state. In 1974, the committee published two 
memoranda—the so-called “trigger list” (published as IAEA doc-
ument INFCIRC/209)—specifying when IAEA safeguards should 
be triggered for exports under the NPT of nuclear-related items to 
non–nuclear weapon state parties to the treaty. The ﬁ rst memo-
randum covers ﬁ ssionable material, and the second covers equip-
ment and material for processing, using, or producing ﬁ ssionable 
materials. The committee also agreed to share information among 
members on exports to any non–nuclear weapon state not a party 
to the NPT.
From 1974 to 2000, the Zangger Committee had six major 
reviews of its trigger list, continuously updating and amending 
it. The committee holds informal and conﬁ dential meetings in 
Vienna twice a year. Its decisions are not legally binding on its 
members but become effective through unilateral declarations 
from one member to another, with subsequent letters to the IAEA 
director general requesting him to publish these declarations in 
IAEA information circular updates (available on the IAEA Web 
site; see previous entry). The members also exchange conﬁ dential 
annual reports in April each year detailing actual exports and the 
issuance of export licenses to any non–nuclear weapon states not 
party to the NPT.
U.S. Government Agencies
Central Intelligence Agency, Director of Central Intelligence 
(DCI) Center for Weapons Intelligence, Nonproliferation, and 
Arms Control (WINPAC)
Ofﬁ ce of Public Affairs
Washington, DC 20505
Phone: 703-482-0623
Fax: 703-482-1739
E-mail: Contact form on Web site at https://www.cia.gov/
cgi-bin/comment_form.cgi

Web site: https://www.cia.gov/cia/di/organizationt_winpac_
page.html
Under the deputy director for intelligence, WINPAC ofﬁ cers pro-
vide intelligence to help protect the United States from foreign 
weapons threats. Established in 2001, WINPAC employs person-
nel with backgrounds in diverse subject areas, including engi-
neering, physics, mathematics, political science, economics, and 
computer science. WINPAC analysts study the development of 
the range of threats from foreign WMD, monitor strategic arms 
control agreements, and provide technical expertise in support 
of military and diplomatic operations. WINPAC does not pub-
lish any public documents. The Directorate of Intelligence Web 
site contains information on all of the organizations under its 
umbrella, and the history and key events of the organization. The 
Directorate of Intelligence also publishes The World Factbook of 
country proﬁ les, which is available online.
United States Department of Defense: Defense Threat 
Reduction Agency (DTRA)
Ofﬁ ce of Public Affairs
8725 John J. Kingman Road
STOP 6201
Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6201
Phone: 703-767-5870 or 800-701-5096 
Fax: 703-767-4450
E-mail: dtra.publicaffairs@dtra.mil
Web site: http://www.dtra.mil
Established in October 1998, DTRA marshals Department of 
Defense resources and expertise to help protect the United States 
against WMD threats. It prepares for domestic emergencies involv-
ing WMD, monitors existing treaties, and participates in weapon 
dismantlement. The agency is not a part of the U.S. intelligence com-
munity but cooperates with it by bringing together the research and 
intelligence communities to better understand the evolution of and 
threats posed by WMD. DTRA employs about 2,000 military and 
civilian personnel and had a 2005 budget of $2.6 billion. In addition 
to its headquarters in Virginia, DTRA has thirteen other facilities in 
the United States, Europe, Japan, and the former Soviet Union.
Some of the main activities of DTRA include cooperative threat 
reduction in the former Soviet Union, on-site inspections for treaty 
veriﬁ cation, technology development, and combat support. The 
U.S. Government Agencies 261

262 Directory of Organizations
purpose of the Cooperative Threat Reduction Program is to help 
the republics of the former Soviet Union eliminate their WMD and 
safeguard WMD-associated materials and technology. By reducing 
the amount of WMD materials, technologies, and infrastructure, 
cooperative threat reduction contributes to the effort to prevent 
terrorists from acquiring WMD. The On-Site Inspection Director-
ate is responsible for implementing international arms control 
treaties by carrying out treaty-related inspections and monitoring 
procedures. The Technology Development Directorate supports 
the use of operational forces to design systems to counter WMD 
proliferation. Finally, the Combat Support Directorate helps main-
tain U.S. nuclear weapons. (The Chemical and Biological Technolo-
gies Directorate provides similar support for defensive measures 
against chemical and biological weapons.)
The agency publishes reports and press releases on its Web 
site related to its activities. The Web site also offers information 
about the agency (including a video and books on DTRA’s his-
tory), fact sheets on DTRA’s role in treaty veriﬁ cation and weapon 
dismantlement, photograph collections of different facets of 
DTRA’s activities, speeches, transcripts, and lists of relevant gov-
ernmental and nongovernmental publications.
United States Department of Energy: Lawrence Livermore 
National Laboratory (LLNL)
Street Address:
7000 East Avenue
Livermore, CA 94550-9234
Mailing Address:
PO Box 808 
Livermore, CA 94551-0808
Phone: 925-422-1100
Fax: 925-422-1370
Email: Use form at http://www.llnl.gov/llnl/contact.jsp
Web site: http://www.llnl.gov
In 1952, the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission established LLNL—
the second nuclear weapon design laboratory built, after Los Ala-
mos National Laboratory—at the urging of Edward Teller. The 
laboratory’s ﬁ rst job was thermonuclear (hydrogen) bomb diag-
nostic studies. The University of California operates the lab for 
the Department of Energy. LLNL has a staff of more than 8,000 
employees and an annual budget of approximately $1.6 billion.

LLNL’s main job is ensuring that U.S. nuclear weapons 
remain secure and reliable. In addition to designing and maintain-
ing nuclear warheads and other weapons, the lab has become one 
of the world’s premier scientiﬁ c centers, using its knowledge of 
nuclear science and engineering to make advances in magnetic and 
laser fusion energy, non-nuclear energy, biomedicine, and environ-
mental science. LLNL also works to improve homeland security by 
preventing the spread of WMD to states and terrorists. 
LLNL has major responsibility for the controversial Stock-
pile Stewardship Program, a joint effort among the U.S. weapons 
labs and other nuclear weapon facilities and the Nevada Test Site 
to ensure the safety and reliability of U.S. nuclear weapons with-
out new testing and development. The program’s National Igni-
tion Facility has greatly overrun its initial cost estimates and raised 
questions about compliance with some test-ban treaty provisions.
The LLNL Directorate for Nonproliferation, Homeland, 
and International Security (NHI), formed in 1992, addresses the 
changing threats to U.S. national security in the aftermath of the 
Gulf War and the breakup of the Soviet Union. NHI contributes 
to international threat assessments of WMD proliferators and ter-
rorist groups and other efforts to keep nuclear materials out of the 
hands of terrorists, and to computer simulations of conﬂ ict and 
crisis situations. In 1996, NHI established the Center for Global 
Security Research to provide a forum for studies of the interaction 
of policy and technology in national and international security.
The laboratory’s publications include LLNL-authored unclas-
siﬁ ed and technical reports, annual reports (some are available 
online), and the monthly Science and Technology Review. The labo-
ratory’s Web site offers information on the organization and his-
tory of LLNL and its programs, news reports, and publications, 
including unclassiﬁ ed technical reports and annual reports, as 
well as useful links to related Web sites.
United States Department of Energy: Los Alamos National 
Laboratory (LANL)
PO Box 1663
Los Alamos, NM 87545
Phone: 505-667-7000
Web site: http://www.lanl.gov (See Contacts at http://www.lanl
.gov/contacts.shtml)
The War Department established LANL in 1943 on a high mesa 
near Santa Fe, New Mexico, to develop the atomic bomb. The two 
U.S. Government Agencies 263

264 Directory of Organizations
nuclear weapons used against Japan were both designed and built 
there. After World War II ended, the lab worked on reﬁ nements to 
atomic weapons. However, after the Soviet Union tested a nuclear 
bomb, the lab began work in earnest on a thermonuclear (hydro-
gen) bomb. The University of California operates LANL for the 
Department of Energy. The lab has approximately 9,000 Univer-
sity of California employees, about 650 contractors, and a budget 
of $2.2 billion.
LANL’s Principle Associate Directorate for Nuclear Weap-
ons Programs sets priorities for the $1.2 billion nuclear weap-
ons program at Los Alamos. LANL’s Weapons Engineering and 
Manufacturing Directorate participates in the Stockpile Steward-
ship Program, attempting to safeguard the U.S. nuclear stockpile 
without designing new weapons or performing tests that vio-
late existing test-ban treaties. Other divisions at LANL support 
nuclear nonproliferation efforts through threat assessments and 
the development of technologies and systems to control the global 
supply of nuclear and radiological materials and to interdict ille-
gal diversions of these materials. For example, the Threat Reduc-
tion Directorate investigates threats such as weakened controls 
over nuclear materials and expertise in the states of the former 
Soviet Union, and the emergence of “rogue” states and terrorist 
organizations that seek WMD.
LANL publishes a wide range of printed and electronic mate-
rial. The Web site includes LANL’s newsletters and magazines, 
detailed information about the lab, technical reports, and ofﬁ cial 
documents.
United States Department of Energy: National Nuclear 
Security Administration (NNSA)
1000 Independence Avenue SW
Washington, DC 20585
Phone: 800-DIAL-DOE or 202-586-5363
Fax: 202-586-4403
Email: Use contact form at http://www.nnsa.doe.gov/
contactform.asp
Web site: http://www.nnsa.doe.gov
The NNSA, a semiautonomous organization within the U.S. 
Department of Energy, began operating on 1 March 2000; for ﬁ scal 
year 2006 it requested a budget of approximately $9.4 billion. The 
purposes of the NNSA are to (1) enhance U.S. national security 

through the military application of nuclear energy, (2) maintain 
the safety and performance of the U.S. nuclear weapon stockpile, 
(3) provide the U.S. Navy with militarily effective nuclear propul-
sion, (4) promote international nuclear safety and nonprolifera-
tion, (5) reduce global danger from WMD, and (6) support U.S. 
leadership in science and technology.
The NNSA Ofﬁ ce for Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation, 
through its many programs, works to prevent the spread of WMD 
technologies and know-how and to eliminate surplus ﬁ ssile mate-
rials. It develops positions, policies, and procedures relating to 
international treaties and agreements, nuclear transfer and supplier 
control, international nuclear safeguards policies and programs, 
and various initiatives to detect and prevent the proliferation of 
WMD. It strives to improve treaty-monitoring systems and tech-
nologies to reduce threats to national security posed by nuclear 
weapons proliferation. The ofﬁ ce’s other functions include ensur-
ing that the U.S.-Russian deal related to highly enriched uranium 
is implemented; planning, managing, and implementing the ﬁ s-
sile material protection and control programs in cooperation with 
Russia; coordinating the development of Department of Energy 
policy regarding surplus ﬁ ssile materials; directing the disposi-
tion of surplus U.S. highly enriched uranium and plutonium; and 
aiding U.S. government efforts to support the disposition of sur-
plus Russian plutonium. The Ofﬁ ce for Defense Nuclear Nonpro-
liferation collaborates with international partners and other U.S. 
agencies. For example, in 2003, the NNSA, in cooperation with 
foreign governments and the U.S. Department of Homeland Secu-
rity, began the Megaports Initiative. The objective of the initia-
tive is to improve the screening of cargo at major international 
seaports, as 90 percent of global trade occurs via container cargo 
shipped by sea. The NNSA designed the enhanced screening 
measures to detect nuclear or radioactive material, stop harmful 
materials from entering the United States or other countries, and 
deter terrorists from using seaports to ship illicit materials.
The NNSA Ofﬁ ce for Defense Programs (http://www.nnsa
.doe.gov/defense.htm) helps reduce the global nuclear danger by 
planning for, maintaining, and enhancing the safety, reli ability, 
and performance of the U.S. stockpile of nuclear weapons. It 
directs all defense weapon programs and projects at the Los Ala-
mos, Sandia, and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories, the 
Pantex Plant, the Y-12 Plant at Oak Ridge, the tritium operations 
U.S. Government Agencies 265

266 Directory of Organizations
facilities at Savannah River, and the Nevada Test Site. The NNSA 
Ofﬁ ce for Naval Reactors directly supervises the Bettis and Knolls 
Atomic Power Laboratories, the Expended Core Facility, and 
naval reactor prototype plants.
The NNSA Web site provides information about NNSA pro-
grams, budget requests, and facilities; an organizational chart; 
congressional testimony and reports; press releases; and links to 
NNSA ﬁ eld ofﬁ ces, plants, and laboratories.
United States Department of Energy: Sandia National Labora-
tories (SNL)
Sandia National Laboratories, New Mexico
PO Box 5800
Albuquerque, NM 87185
Sandia National Laboratories, California
PO Box 969 
Livermore, CA 94551-0969
Phone:
NM Community Involvement: 505-284-5200
CA Community Outreach: 925-294-2912
Web site: http://www.sandia.gov
SNL is managed for the U.S. Department of Energy’s National 
Nuclear Security Administration by government contractor Lock-
heed Martin. SNL was established in 1945 as part of what is now 
Los Alamos National Laboratory and participated in development 
of the ﬁ rst U.S. atomic bomb in the areas of ordnance design, test-
ing, and assembly. Since 1949, SNL’s primary mission has been 
ensuring that U.S. nuclear weapons are secure, reliable, and able 
to back up the U.S. policy of nuclear deterrence. SNL designs and 
integrates more than 6,300 parts of a modern nuclear weapon’s 
6,500 components; it also implements large-scale non-nuclear 
testing and computational simulations of nuclear tests.
The SNL Nonproliferation and Assessments program tries 
to reduce U.S. vulnerability to WMD attacks. It seeks to improve 
national security and stabilize international relations by sup-
porting treaty veriﬁ cation with other countries, developing new 
remote sensing technologies for aircraft and satellite deployment 
to detect and characterize proliferation activities, working with 
the countries of the former Soviet Union to protect and track 
nuclear materials from dismantled weapon systems, and develop-
ing and evaluating physical protection technologies and systems. 

SNL also supports Department of Homeland Security efforts to 
protect the U.S. mainland and armed forces abroad from terrorist 
attacks.
Since the passage of the 1991 Cooperative Threat Reduction 
Act, SNL has worked with its Russian counterparts in support 
of nonproliferation policies. In 1994, it opened the Cooperative 
Monitoring Center at Sandia to host visits by arms control spe-
cialists from around the world. At the Cooperative Monitoring 
Center they can learn about available treaty-monitoring tech-
nologies used to build conﬁ dence among neighboring nations. 
(See Cooperative Monitoring Center Web site: http://www.cmc
.sandia.gov.)
On its Web site, SNL publishes information about its pro-
grams, its annual report, newsletters and magazines featuring 
articles on the lab’s technological and program achievements, fact 
sheets, and some papers authored by its staff.
United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
Washington, DC 20528
Phone: 202–282-8000
Web site: http://www.dhs.gov (See Contact Us form)
After the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, President Bush 
proposed combining several disparate government activities into 
the newly created Department of Homeland Security in June 
2002. The purpose of DHS is to coordinate all activities to protect 
Americans against all terrorist threats, including those involving 
WMD, and to manage federal emergency response activities. The 
responsibilities of DHS include securing U.S. borders, ports, and 
critical infrastructure; synthesizing and analyzing intelligence on 
possible threats from multiple sources; coordinating communica-
tions between state and local governments, industry, and private 
citizens regarding threats and preparedness; organizing efforts to 
protect against WMD attacks; and managing federal emergency 
response activities. Several federal agencies were combined into 
one of four DHS directorates: the Directorate for Preparedness, the 
Directorate for Science and Technology, the Directorate for Man-
agement, and the Directorate for Policy. The Directorate for Sci-
ence and Technology partners with the Defense Threat Reduction 
Agency and some of the Department of Energy’s weapons labs, 
among other agencies, to develop new ways to detect nuclear and 
radiological weapons.
U.S. Government Agencies 267

268 Directory of Organizations
The DHS Web site offers a description of its history, organi-
zation, agenda, and programs; Congressional testimony and leg-
islation related to DHS and its activities; fact sheets; and press 
releases.
United States Department of State: Bureau of International 
Security and Nonproliferation (ISN)
2201 C Street NW
Washington, DC 20520
Phone: 202-647-4000
Web site: http://www.state.gov/t/isn
In 2005, the Arms Control and Nonproliferation Bureaus were 
merged into the ISN. Under the jurisdiction of the Department of 
State, ISN takes the lead on a range of nonproliferation, counter-
proliferation, and WMD terrorism issues. The ISN leads many 
bilateral and multilateral efforts in promoting international con-
sensus regarding WMD nonproliferation efforts, addresses domes-
tic threats by strengthening physical security, and coordinates the 
implementation of international treaties and agreements. Further-
more, the ISN coordinates with the UN, the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization, the IAEA, and other international organizations on 
measures to reduce the threat posed by WMD, whether developed 
by states or non-state actors. The ISN is the chief promoter of the 
U.S. nonproliferation agenda, including such efforts as the Prolif-
eration Security Initiative, the Global Partnership Against Weap-
ons and Materials of Mass Destruction, the Cooperative Threat 
Reduction Program, and UN Security Council Resolution 1540.
The ISN Web site contains a description of the organization, 
press releases, and selected Congressional testimony and speeches 
on U.S. nonproliferation policies. It links to sections of the State 
Department Web site with fact sheets on the various initiatives 
and treaties that ISN supports, including texts of the treaties, U.S. 
statements on them, and related government reports. It also pro-
vides an archive of relevant documents from 1997 to 2000 during 
the Clinton administration. This site provides a good overview of 
the Bush administration’s approach to nonproliferation issues.
United States Department of State: Bureau of Veriﬁ cation, 
Compliance, and Implementation (VCI )
Bureau of Political-Military Affairs
2201 C Street NW

Washington, DC 20520
Phone: 202-647-4000
Website: http://www.state.gov/t/vci
The VCI began operating in February 2000; its mandate was 
expanded in 2005 to include responsibility for implementing arms 
control treaties. It deals with matters related to the veriﬁ cation and 
compliance of international arms control, nonproliferation, and 
disarmament agreements and commitments. The ofﬁ ce is respon-
sible for preparing the president’s Annual Report to Congress on
Adherence to and Compliance with Arms Control and Nonprolifera-
tion Agreements and Commitments, veriﬁ ability assessments for all 
international arms control and nonproliferation agreements, and 
specialized compliance reports required by the U.S. Senate resolu-
tions on various treaties. It also assesses and develops veriﬁ cation 
technologies and operations.
The VCI oversees the Department of State’s leadership of 
the interagency Nonproliferation and Arms Control Technology 
Working Group and operates the Nuclear Risk Reduction Center. 
The Nuclear Risk Reduction Center and its Soviet (now Russian) 
counterpart were formally formed in 1987 to establish the ﬁ rst 
direct communications link between the capitals since the 1963 
presidential Hot Line Agreement. The Nuclear Risk Reduction 
Center primarily exchanges information and notiﬁ cations under 
existing bilateral and multilateral treaties.
The VCI publishes specialized reports on compliance with 
arms control agreements and on world military expenditures and 
arms transfers. Its Web site offers a description of the organiza-
tion, remarks by State Department ofﬁ cials on treaty issues, and 
links to treaties and press releases. The site also contains archives 
to documents from the Clinton administration.
Nongovernmental Organizations
This section includes only membership organizations, that is, those 
that the general public can join. Additional nongovernmental organiza-
tions working on nuclear weapon and nonproliferation issues are pro-
vided in Chapter 8.
Arms Control Association (ACA)
1313 L Street, NW, Suite 130
Nongovernmental Organizations 269

270 Directory of Organizations
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: 202-463-8270
Fax: 202-463-8273
E-mail: aca@armscontrol.org
Web site: http://www.armscontrol.org
Founded in 1971, the ACA is a national nonpartisan membership 
organization that promotes public understanding of and support 
for effective arms control policies, including nuclear nonprolifera-
tion measures. Anyone is eligible for membership, and there is a 
reduced rate for students ($30 per year in 2006). Membership dues 
($65 per year) include a one-year subscription to ACA’s print jour-
nal, Arms Control Today. ACA staff participates in public educa-
tion and media programs on arms control proposals, negotiations 
and agreements, and related national security issues. ACA’s Web 
site includes the full text of material from current and back issues 
of Arms Control Today, as well as media advisories, fact sheets, 
the full texts of treaties, and other resources organized by sub-
ject (including nuclear proliferation, missile defense, and nuclear 
black markets material) and by country.
Federation of American Scientists (FAS)
1717 K Street NW, Suite 209
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: 202-546-3300
Fax: 202-675-1010
E-mail: webmaster@fas.org 
Web site: http://www.fas.org
Founded as the Federation of Atomic Scientists in 1945 by mem-
bers of the Manhattan Project who produced the ﬁ rst atomic bomb, 
FAS is the oldest organization dedicated to ending the worldwide 
arms race, achieving complete nuclear disarmament, and avoid-
ing the use of nuclear weapons. FAS conducts analysis and advo-
cacy on many scientiﬁ c issues related to military issues, including 
strategic security, nuclear weapon and energy technologies, and 
the environment. FAS brings the scientiﬁ c perspective to the legis-
lative arena through direct lobbying, membership and grassroots 
work, and expert testimony at congressional hearings. The group 
publishes in print and online the quarterly Public Interest Report,
occasional papers, and special reports that offer scientiﬁ c perspec-
tives on security issues, particularly nuclear weapons. The site 

also has interactive nuclear bomb blasts and nuclear fallout calcu-
lators, which illustrate the potential damage of a nuclear bomb in 
a speciﬁ ed area. Membership is $50 for new members.
Greenpeace International
Ottho Heldringstraat 5
1066 AZ Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Phone: 31 20 7182000
Fax: 31 20 5148151
Email: supporter.services@int.greenpeace.org
Web site: http://www.greenpeace.org/international
Greenpeace USA
702 H Street NW
Washington, DC  20001
Phone: 202-462-1177 or 800-326-0959
E-mail: info@wdc.greenpeace.org
Web site: http://www.greenpeace.org/usa
Greenpeace was formed in 1971, when a small group of volunteers 
and journalists sailed a boat into an area of northern Alaska where 
the U.S. government was conducting underground nuclear tests. 
Since then, Greenpeace has mounted various campaigns, includ-
ing protests against French nuclear testing in the South Paciﬁ c 
and the transport of ﬁ ssile material for reprocessing, protests to 
protect the global environment, and protests to expose govern-
ment and corporate policies and activities that harm humans, 
wildlife, and the ecosystems. Greenpeace, a nonproﬁ t member-
ship organization, has ofﬁ ces in more than forty countries across 
Europe, the United States, and Asia. Funded almost exclusively 
by individual contributions, Greenpeace has 2.5 million members 
worldwide and approximately 250,000 members in the United 
States. Its Web site provides information on its various campaigns 
to promote nuclear disarmament and to protest environmental 
contamination and other dangers caused by both civilian and 
military use of nuclear power and materials. Greenpeace’s Web 
site also offers many ways to become involved in its campaigns 
as a volunteer, online activist, and donor. Greenpeace publishes 
online reports, press releases, blogs, and other information related 
to its campaigns and government and corporate policies harmful 
to the environment. 
Nongovernmental Organizations 271

272 Directory of Organizations
Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC)
40 West 20th Street
New York, NY 10011
Phone: 212-727-2700
Fax: 212-727-1773
E-mail: nrdcinfo@nrdc.org
Web site: http://www.nrdc.org
The NRDC uses law, science, and the support of more than 1.2 
million individual members to protect the planet’s wilderness and 
wildlife and to ensure a safe and healthy environment. Nuclear 
weapons and waste are important areas of concern for the organi-
zation. For more than twenty-ﬁ ve years, the NRDC has worked to 
shape U.S. nuclear nonproliferation, arms control, energy, and envi-
ronmental policies. The NRDC aims to reduce and ultimately elimi-
nate the unacceptable risks to people and the environment from the 
use of nuclear energy for both military and peaceful purposes.
The NRDC publishes a quarterly magazine, Onearth, which
includes an update on the organization’s activities in various 
areas as well as feature articles on environmental topics. It also 
produces the Nuclear Weapons Databook series and other books 
and monographs on worldwide nuclear deployments, nuclear 
weapon research at U.S. universities, and critiques of the Bush 
administration’s nuclear weapons policy. Its Web site offers in-
depth information on each of the NRDC’s programs, including 
nuclear weapons and waste, some material from Onearth, a list 
of publications that can be ordered or accessed online, the full 
texts of some technical reports, its annual report, a media center 
with press releases and lists of experts, and links to other sites on 
nuclear weapons. Of special interest are comprehensive reports 
on U.S. nuclear weapons deployed in Europe and the outdated 
U.S. plan for using nuclear weapons against Russia. Memberships 
begin at $10.
Nuclear Age Peace Foundation (NAPF)
1187 Coast Village Road
Suite 1, PMB 121
Santa Barbara, CA 93108-2794
Phone: 805-965-3443
Fax: 805-568-0466
E-mail: wagingpeace@napf.org
Web site: www.wagingpeace.org

Founded in 1982, the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation is a non-
proﬁ t membership-based organization that strives to abolish 
nuclear weapons and promote peace by offering research and 
information, educational programs, and policymaking guidance 
on security issues. The NAPF Web site, as well as NAPF’s Nuclear 
Files Web site (http://www.nuclearﬁ les.org), contains a wealth of 
educational materials on the history of nuclear weapon develop-
ment and nonproliferation efforts. These two sites are invaluable 
for educators developing curricula on nuclear issues for students 
of all ages and for citizens who would like to voice their opinions 
on nuclear issues.
NAPF publishes an online monthly newsletter, The Sunﬂ ower,
which contains articles and perspectives on nuclear, missile, and 
military issues; NAPF events; action alerts; and other resources. 
In addition, the Web site covers current nuclear weapons policies 
and other issues key to global security. The site offers users the 
means to participate in online advocacy and activism by provid-
ing action alert messages to representatives regarding key bills in 
Congress. Membership is free and includes a subscription to The
Sunﬂ ower.
Physicians for Social Responsibility (PSR)
1875 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 1012
Washington, DC 20009
Phone: 202-667-4260
Fax: 202-667-4201
E-mail: psrnatl@psr.org
Web site: http://www.psr.org
Since it was founded in 1961, PSR has worked to create a world 
free of nuclear weapons, global pollution, and gun violence. PSR’s 
national leaders and local chapters (including Student PSR) seek 
to educate policymakers and the public on issues critical to human 
health and survival, including the effects of nuclear weapons and 
nuclear tests. In the nuclear ﬁ eld, PSR advocates a moratorium on 
the testing and development of nuclear weapons and advocates 
for their eventual abolition. PSR publishes a quarterly newsletter 
for members and bulletins on research into the effects of radiation 
from nuclear weapons and testing. Its Web site features updates 
on PSR’s campaign, online publications, a quarterly newsletter, 
and a legislative action center. Anyone can join PSR with a dona-
tion in any amount.
Nongovernmental Organizations 273

274 Directory of Organizations
Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS)
2 Brattle Square
Cambridge, MA 02238-9105
Phone: 617-547-5552
Fax: 617-864-9405
E-mail: ucs@ucsusa.org
Web site: http://ucsusa.org
Founded in 1969 by faculty members and students at the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, the UCS is an alliance of more 
than 100,000 concerned citizens and scientists. They combine sci-
entiﬁ c analyses and citizen advocacy to address issues that affect 
the environment and human health. The UCS tackles problems 
related to nuclear weapons, nuclear terrorism, nuclear power 
plant safety, and the prevention of space-based weapons. UCS’s 
core group of scientists and engineers prepares technical studies 
and shares the results with policymakers, the news media, and 
the public. UCS members and staff around the United States use 
this information to advocate at all levels of government against 
nuclear weapons and missile defenses and for stronger envi-
ronmental measures. Individuals can join for $25; membership 
includes a semiannual news magazine, Catalyst, and a quarterly 
newsletter, Earthwise. The UCS Web site contains information on 
its various projects; short fact sheets on topics such as nuclear 
weapons, nonproliferation treaties, nuclear terrorism, space secu-
rity, and warhead elimination with related links; and ways to take 
action on its various campaigns. The Web site also offers instruc-
tive animations on nuclear bunker busters and countermeasures 
to missile defense. Users can sign up for an online action network 
and electronic newsletters.

275
8
Resources
T
his chapter contains reference tools—including books, peri-
odicals, DVDs, videos, and Web sites—covering all aspects 
of nuclear weapons and nonproliferation. Because the United 
States was the ﬁ rst to develop nuclear weapons, and its program 
has been the most thoroughly documented, the ﬁ rst section is 
devoted to U.S. resources. The subsequent sections ﬁ rst cover 
nuclear weapon programs in other countries, then general topics 
on weapons proliferation and nonproliferation. From among the 
many resources on nuclear issues, this chapter offers those that 
are the most accessible in terms of content and availability. Many 
of the works summarized also contain long and detailed lists of 
notes and references for those who want to delve more deeply 
into a speciﬁ c topic. 
Books
Nuclear Weapon Issues: 
United States
Ackland, Len. 2002. Making a Real Killing: Rocky Flats and the 
Nuclear West. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. 
320 pp. ISBN 0-8263-2798-2.
The history of the nuclear weapon assembly facility at Rocky 
Flats, Colorado, provides a microcosm of problems witnessed 

276 Resources
within the whole U.S. nuclear weapons complex during the Cold 
War: lack of effective congressional oversight, wasteful spending, 
and inadequate attention to worker safety. The author offers a fas-
cinating and detailed account of the Rocky Flats plant through the 
lens of the Church family, who homesteaded the land and even-
tually sold large tracts to the federal government for the facility 
in 1951 while retaining signiﬁ cant adjacent property. Ackland’s 
account explains the complex politics of the Atomic Energy Com-
mission and the role of Colorado legislators in bringing large fed-
eral contracts to their state. Rocky Flats brought thousands of jobs 
and hundreds of millions of dollars annually to the local economy, 
but its large plutonium and uranium processing and remanufac-
turing activities also brought signiﬁ cant environmental and safety 
hazards. Serious ﬁ res at the facility in 1957 and 1969 threatened to 
release large amounts of plutonium into the atmosphere, where 
prevailing winds could have blanketed Denver with deadly 
radioactive particles. The book details decades during which 
Cold War priorities for accelerated bomb production led to casual 
compliance with safety practices and frequent incidents involv-
ing worker contamination and illness. The conclusion of the book 
shows how stronger environmental legislation during the 1970s, 
combined with the increasingly active antinuclear protesters in 
the early 1980s, spelled the beginning of the end for Rocky Flats, 
which was ﬁ nally shuttered in 1992. The author shows how the 
costly cleanup of Rocky Flats and the entire U.S. nuclear weap-
ons complex will continue decades (and indeed centuries) into the 
future. 
Bird, Kai, and Martin J. Sherwin. 2005. American Prometheus: 
The Triumph and Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer. New York: 
Vintage Books. 721 pp. ISBN-13: 978-0375726262. 
The authors of this Pulitzer Prize–winning book draw on twenty-
ﬁ ve years of research to construct a comprehensive portrait of J. 
Robert Oppenheimer and his pivotal role in the successful U.S. 
nuclear bomb effort. They trace his rise from a sheltered, sensitive, 
apolitical polymath to arguably the most famous man in America 
after the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945 and then 
to his fall in 1954 when the Atomic Energy Commission, after a 
rigged hearing, revoked his top-secret security clearance and thus 
his ability to serve as a government adviser. The authors give a 
thorough and balanced presentation of Oppenheimer’s involve-

Books
277
ment with left-wing activities and associates who were Communist 
Party members, and in the process reveal the atmosphere of suspi-
cion and continuous government surveillance in which he worked 
and socialized. They also show how the personal became politi-
cal during discussions about the use of the atomic bomb in Japan 
and the subsequent development of U.S. nuclear policies. The call 
of Oppenheimer and like-minded scientists and policymakers for 
international control of nuclear materials and a political solution to 
the arms race went unheeded. The book contains numerous photo-
graphs of Oppenheimer and the important actors in his life, exten-
sive notes, and a lengthy bibliography.
Boyer, Paul. 1998. Fallout: A Historian Reﬂ ects on America’s 
Half-Century Encounter with Nuclear Weapons. Columbus: Ohio 
State University Press. 280 pp. ISBN-13: 978-0814207864. 
The author, a history professor, gathers in chronological order 
a collection of his writings—from newspaper articles and book 
reviews to more scholarly articles—on the fallout of the U.S. use 
of nuclear weapons and the resulting arms race. He examines the 
political, social, psychological, and cultural repercussions of the 
U.S. bomb program from August 1945 to the mid-1990s. Boyer 
examines such topics as the earliest reactions to the atomic bomb; 
the planning for a nuclear war and other projects in the 1950s 
and early 1960s, including Dr. Edward Teller’s strange scheme 
to use nuclear explosions in public works projects; the history of 
the medical profession’s interest in nuclear issues; and the shifts 
in U.S. public interest that peaked with the nuclear freeze cam-
paign in the early 1980s. He also looks at related topics, such as 
ﬁ lms and other artistic and cultural artifacts of the nuclear era, 
how college students contemplate nuclear issues, and the contro-
versy that arose when the Smithsonian Institution tried to mount 
a ﬁ ftieth anniversary exhibit on the bombing of Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki. This book serves as both a historical assessment of the 
nuclear era through the 1990s and a reminder of how profoundly 
nuclear weapons have shaped U.S. thinking and culture.
Conant, Jennet. 2005. 109 East Palace: Robert Oppenheimer and 
the Secret City of Los Alamos. New York: Simon & Schuster. 424 
pp. ISBN-13: 978-0743250078. 
Conant explores the Manhattan Project at Los Alamos through 
the lens of the personal stories of such key personnel as Dorothy 

278 Resources
McKibben, Oppenheimer’s secretary and the civilian gatekeeper 
for the entire two and a half years (March 1943 through August 
1945) that the lab remained a secret facility. “109 East Palace” was 
the address in Santa Fe, New Mexico, that served as the ﬁ rst head-
quarters for the Los Alamos facility and through which all sci-
entists and other personnel passed for security clearances before 
making the harrowing, 35-mile trip to the bomb-design facility. 
Conant draws on numerous interviews, oral histories, and pri-
mary sources, particularly a manuscript of McKibben’s, to detail 
the logistics and atmosphere at Los Alamos, where many of the 
world’s best scientists and their families congregated. She shows 
how the world’s most sophisticated weapon was built in the midst 
of primitive conditions, including water, food, and energy short-
ages. Through the narrative of housing shortages, baby booms, 
and wild parties, she weaves the issue of the tension among the 
mostly young scientists pursuing the greatest scientiﬁ c challenge 
of the time, and the military planners and policymakers who dic-
tated the use of the bomb while ignoring the scientists’ insights 
into its destructive capabilities. Many scientists realized only 
belatedly how terrible and history-changing their creations (a 
uranium gun-type and two plutonium implosion bombs) would 
be and how little say they would have in their use. Several of the 
personal and public tensions that germinated at Los Alamos grew 
to inﬂ uence U.S. policy on nuclear weapons and nonproliferation. 
The book contains photos, notes on sources, and a selected bibli-
ography.
Dibblin, Jane. 1990. Day of Two Suns: U.S. Nuclear Testing and 
the Paciﬁ c Islanders. New York: New Amsterdam Books. 318 pp. 
ISBN-13: 978-0941533836. 
Between 1946 and 1958, the United States conducted sixty-six 
nuclear weapon tests in the Marshall Islands; in addition, since 
the 1960s the United States has used the Kwajalein Atoll and its 
lagoons as a target for missiles launched from California. Dib-
blin examines the devastating effects of these tests on Marshall 
Islanders. She focuses on two communities: the natives of Ron-
gelap Atoll, who were irradiated by fallout from a U.S. hydrogen 
bomb test in 1954, moved from their homes to a smaller, less fer-
tile island, and forced from self-sufﬁ ciency to dependency on U.S. 
aid; and the people of Kwajalein Atoll, forced by the United States 

Books
279
to move to a crowded slum on a neighboring atoll so it could use 
their land for a missile target and exclusive military and civil-
ian facilities. Drawing on interviews, research, and visits to the 
islands, Dibblin covers the history of U.S. nuclear colonialism in 
the Paciﬁ c, the U.S. failure to protect the Marshall Islanders or to 
provide adequate assistance and health care, and the local peo-
ple’s efforts to regain their land and appropriate compensation. 
She also compares the comforts enjoyed by the U.S. citizens on 
Kwajalein to the squalor of life for the atoll’s original landowners 
who are forced to live on the overcrowded, polluted Ebeye Atoll 
without adequate facilities and barred from almost all facilities 
on their homeland, where they now must work in menial, low-
paying jobs. Dibblin shows how the U.S. nuclear bomb program 
destroyed the health and way of life of whole communities.
Goodchild, Peter. 2004. Edward Teller: The Real Dr. Strangelove.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 469 pp. ISBN-13: 
978-0674016699.
This biography of Edward Teller, the controversial force behind 
the U.S. thermonuclear or “super bomb,” shows how personal 
slights and beliefs ended up playing an important role in the U.S. 
government’s decisions about nuclear weapons. Teller, a Hungar-
ian refugee and physicist with international scientiﬁ c contacts, 
felt slighted by Robert Oppenheimer and other Manhattan Project 
scientists who criticized his design for a fusion bomb (a thousand 
times more powerful than the ﬁ ssion bombs dropped on Japan) as 
being technologically and morally questionable. Teller’s frustra-
tion at his colleagues, particularly Oppenheimer, and his paranoia 
about the capabilities and motivations of the Soviet Union fueled 
his sales pitches for his designs to a few sympathetic government 
and military ofﬁ cials. Ultimately, Teller was instrumental in the 
U.S. decisions to build a thermonuclear bomb, establish a second 
weapons lab at Livermore, California (to compete with the Los 
Alamos, New Mexico lab), revoke Oppenheimer’s security clear-
ance, and pursue various schemes for missile defenses. Teller’s 
efforts to promote himself and his paranoia about the Soviet 
Union (parodied in the movie Dr. Strangelove), coupled with his 
willingness to tout such dubious technologies as “clean” nuclear 
weapons and nuclear-triggered lasers in space, contributed to the 
escalating arms race during the Cold War. He inﬂ uenced the U.S. 

280 Resources
decisions not to agree to a ban on underground nuclear tests and 
not to accept Soviet President Gorbachev’s offer to sharply reduce 
nuclear arsenals in exchange for dropping missile defense efforts. 
The book contains photographs, a glossary of characters, selected 
bibliography, extensive notes, and appendices with technical 
information.
Hersey, John. 1989 (reprint edition). Hiroshima. New York: Vin-
tage Books. 152 pp. ISBN-13: 978-0679721031. 
First published in 1946, this book tells the stories of six survi-
vors of the U.S. bombing in Hiroshima. Through the eyes of the 
six—including a young mother, a doctor in the city’s largest hos-
pital, a factory worker, and a foreign priest—the author shows the 
devastation, confusion, and suffering caused by the new weapon 
technology. In a city of approximately 240,000, the bomb killed 
66,000 instantly and thousands more gradually through ﬁ re and 
radiation sickness. These personal stories go beyond the statistics 
and provide a graphic reminder of the nuclear bomb’s potential to 
destroy an entire community.
Lifton, Robert Jay, and Greg Mitchell. 1996. Hiroshima in Amer-
ica: A Half Century of Denial. New York: Quill. 448 pp. ISBN-13: 
978-0380727643.
The authors, a professor of psychology and psychiatry and a 
writer specializing in the atomic bomb, examine the effects of the 
Hiroshima bombing on the United States and its citizens. They 
look at the manipulations and distortions that surrounded the U.S. 
use of the bomb and how they led to profound conﬂ icts within 
the government, the scientiﬁ c community that built the bomb, 
subsequent administrations, and the U.S. public. Speciﬁ cally, the 
authors describe and dissect the U.S. government’s ofﬁ cial version 
of the Hiroshima bombing (developed largely by General Leslie 
Groves, the director of the bomb project, and Henry Stimson, the 
former secretary of war): the atomic bombings were necessary 
to prevent the invasion of Japan and save an estimated 1 million 
U.S. lives. Drawing on interviews and extensive original research, 
they detail the Hiroshima cover-up—the suppression of evidence, 
including scientiﬁ c research, articles, photographs, and ﬁ lm that 
showed the terrible human costs of the bombing and questioned 
whether it was necessary to force Japan’s surrender. Then, they 

Books
281
examine President Harry Truman’s decision to use the bomb, 
the psychology behind his decision, and how the bombing was 
presented to the U.S. public. Finally, the authors analyze how the 
U.S. public has struggled with the Hiroshima bombing ever since 
and the grave psychological and ethical consequences, including 
nuclear entrapment, national self-betrayal, fear of futurelessness, 
emotional numbing, and denial. 
McMillan, Priscilla J. 2005. The Ruin of J. Robert Oppenheimer 
and the Birth of the Modern Arms Race. New York: Viking. 373 
pp. ISBN-13: 978-0670034222. 
In April 1954, the Atomic Energy Commission Board rescinded 
J. Robert Oppenheimer’s security clearance on the grounds that 
the scientist who oversaw the building of the ﬁ rst atomic bombs 
had fundamental defects in character that made him a security 
risk. Using many newly declassiﬁ ed documents and several inter-
views, McMillan explores the events that resulted in this decision. 
She tells a story not only of Edward Teller and Lewis Strauss’s 
personal vendetta against Oppenheimer for his misgivings about 
a crash program to build a hydrogen bomb project (misgivings 
shared by the other scientists on the Atomic Energy Commis-
sion’s General Advisory Committee), but also of how the Oppen-
heimer case signaled a change in the partnership of scientists and 
government policymakers and spurred an arms race with Russia. 
The author covers the development of the hydrogen bomb, Teller 
and Edward Lawrence’s successful effort to get a second weap-
ons lab in Livermore, California, and the competition between 
the various branches of the armed services that all wanted a role 
in nuclear weapons delivery. She draws on the U.S. government’s 
illegal wiretapping of Oppenheimer’s conversations, including 
those with his defense counsel for the clearance hearing. The 
hearing itself was a travesty of justice, as the defense team was 
denied access to the top-secret documents used against Oppen-
heimer. But, as the author points out, the larger tragedy was the 
harm done to U.S. nuclear weapons policy when the scientists 
who understood the technology were denied decision-making 
roles, when the secrecy mandated by the government prevented 
the public from understanding or commenting on nuclear issues, 
and when the mistaken belief that a more powerful bomb would 
lead to national security meant a ratcheting up of the arms race 
and a lost opportunity to negotiate an arms ban with the Soviets. 

282 Resources
Rhodes, Richard. 1996 (reprint edition). Dark Sun: The Making 
of the Hydrogen Bomb. New York: Simon and Schuster. 736 pp. 
ISBN-13: 978-0684824147. 
Drawing on a wide range of documents and interviews, Rhodes 
provides a comprehensive history of the politics and science 
behind the development of the hydrogen bomb in the United 
States and Soviet Union. He shows how those two countries, 
while competing to build the most destructive nuclear arsenal, 
progressed from World War II allies to Cold War enemies. He doc-
uments the widespread Soviet espionage that greatly accelerated 
the Soviet bomb program and proﬁ les major ﬁ gures in the race 
for the hydrogen bomb: J. Robert Oppenheimer, Edward Teller, 
Igor Kurchatov, Klaus Fuchs, and Curtis LeMay. He discusses the 
rivalries between countries, scientists, and military leaders that 
led to the hydrogen bomb and U.S. plans to use nuclear weapons 
during the Korean War and the Cuban Missile Crisis. The book 
contains photographs, a glossary of names, extensive notes, and a 
lengthy bibliography.
Rhodes, Richard. 1995 (reprint edition). The Making of the 
Atomic Bomb. New York: Touchstone, Simon and Schuster. 928 
pp. ISBN-13: 978-0684813783.
In this Pulitzer Prize–winning book, Rhodes presents a compre-
hensive, detailed history of the development of the U.S. atomic 
bomb from the discovery of isotope separation to the U.S. bomb-
ing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. He vividly portrays the scien-
tists, including J. Robert Oppenheimer, Edward Teller, Enrico 
Fermi, and Leo Szilard, who pursued their interest in releasing 
the energy of the atom, despite their misgivings about the history-
changing destructive power it would unleash. Rhodes provides 
a sense of the mammoth scale of the U.S. bomb-building project, 
which involved government, private industry, and the scientiﬁ c 
community on an unprecedented scale, and includes accounts of 
the domestic and international politics that propelled the proj-
ect to completion. He also describes the slim likelihood that U.S. 
adversaries in World War II would build a nuclear bomb ﬁ rst, if at 
all. Finally, he offers statements from the bombs’ victims in Hiro-
shima and Nagasaki and shows how the U.S. decision to pursue 
security through technological superiority set off the arms race 
with the Soviet Union. The book contains an extensive bibliogra-

Books
283
phy as well as numerous photographs of key players and events 
in the bomb-building program.
Richelson, Jeffrey T. 2006. Spying on the Bomb: American Nuclear 
Intelligence from Nazi Germany to Iran and North Korea. New 
York: W. W. Norton. 702 pp. ISBN 0-393-05383-0. 
Although this book focuses on U.S. efforts to monitor the nuclear 
activities of other countries, it also serves as a good overview 
of the history of nuclear weapon programs in several countries, 
including Germany, Russia, China, France, Israel, India, Pakistan, 
North Korea, Taiwan, South Africa, Iraq, Iran, and Libya. The 
book begins with U.S. missions during World War II to determine 
the extent of the Nazi nuclear program and ends with the current 
measures being taken to monitor Iran and North Korea. While 
nuclear spying has evolved from reliance on human intelligence, 
to seismic, air sampling, and other monitoring to satellite imag-
ery, the means of evading this technology, human fallibility, and 
political inﬂ uences in interpreting data seem to be constants. This 
book provides a thorough case study of the U.S. intelligence com-
munity’s monitoring of nuclear efforts—the evolving technolo-
gies, relevant agencies, reports, and important players, as well as 
the main institutions and actors in each of the nuclear-aspiring 
states. Of special interest is a chapter on the controversial intel-
ligence the Bush administration used to justify invading Iraq. The 
range of the subject matter and the extensive notes make this an 
excellent reference on the history of nuclear proliferation.
Schwartz, Stephen I., ed. 1998. Atomic Audit: The Costs and Con-
sequences of U.S. Nuclear Weapons since 1940. Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution Press. 680 pp. ISBN-13: 978-0815777731. 
This volume provides the most exhaustive and deﬁ nitive account-
ing ever to appear in print related to the funds the United States 
has spent on its nuclear weapon complex. In a series of detailed 
chapters written by well-known experts in the arms control ﬁ eld, 
the book provides a narrative history of U.S. nuclear developments 
and a careful ﬁ nancial breakdown of how the U.S. government 
spent an estimated $5.8 trillion on these programs from 1940 to 
1996. The chapters cover the construction of the atomic bomb and 
initial costs, the large-scale deployment of nuclear weapons, costs 
of targeting and controlling the bomb, expenditures on programs 

284 Resources
aimed at defending against Soviet nuclear weapons, expenses 
for nuclear waste management and environmental remediation, 
funds paid to victims of atom testing and other nuclear pro-
grams, and costs associated with keeping nuclear secrets. These 
chapters are accented with several rare photographs showing a 
variety of deployed U.S. nuclear weapons (including the porta-
ble, shoulder-launched Davy Crockett), various U.S. nuclear test 
explosions, and a range of facilities associated with U.S. nuclear 
weapon construction and related fuel-cycle activities during the 
Cold War. The sheer number and variety of nuclear weapons cre-
ated by the United States provide a story that is both engrossing 
and deeply disturbing. The concluding chapters offer analyses of 
the extremely limited oversight exercised over these expenditures 
during the Cold War, along with proposals for increasing congres-
sional oversight and direct accountability of these programs to the 
U.S. public.
Sokolski, Henry D. 2001. Best of Intentions: America’s Campaign 
against Strategic Weapons Proliferation. Westport, CT: Praeger 
Publishers. 184 pp. ISBN-13: 978-0275972899. 
The author examines U.S. participation in developing nuclear non-
proliferation initiatives: the never-adopted Baruch Plan, Atoms for 
Peace, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 
various proliferation technology control regimes, and counter-
proliferation. He focuses on the original rationale for each initia-
tive and compares that goal to the outcome. The author concludes 
that each important nonproliferation initiative adopted by the 
United States has fallen short to varying degrees; some, such as 
Atoms for Peace, actually contributed to nuclear weapon devel-
opment by promoting nuclear technology transfers. The author 
argues that the efforts failed because the United States did not 
fully understand the character of the threats the initiatives were 
designed to address. In addition to endnotes, the book contains 
the full text of several historical documents. 
Welsome, Eileen. 1999. The Plutonium Files: America’s Secret 
Medical Experiments in the Cold War. New York: Dell Publish-
ing. 592 pp. ISBN-13: 978-0385319546.
Welsome investigates the thousands of government-sponsored 
experiments on the health effects of plutonium, uranium, and 

Books
285
radiation that took place during the Cold War. She reveals how 
the U.S. government funded and participated in tests using civil-
ians and military personnel without their knowledge or consent. 
Protected until 1993 as national security secrets, many of these 
experiments exploited the most vulnerable members of soci-
ety: at hospitals, doctors injected eighteen terminally ill patients 
with plutonium; at a prenatal clinic, physicians gave radioactive 
cocktails to pregnant women during routine checkups; at a state 
school for the developmentally disabled, doctors fed several boys 
radioactive oatmeal; in Washington and Oregon prisons, doctors 
radiated and thus sterilized male inmates; and military ofﬁ cials 
ordered troops to witness atmospheric tests of nuclear weapons 
at the U.S. test sites in Nevada and at the Paciﬁ c Proving Ground. 
Many of the unwitting subjects and their children suffered long-
term health problems. While giving a voice to some of the gov-
ernment’s victims and outlining their quest for justice, Welsome 
provides a history of the U.S. nuclear weapon program and the 
agencies established to oversee it. She also touches on the envi-
ronmental contamination caused by weapon plants and atmo-
spheric testing of bombs.
Nuclear Weapon Programs: 
Worldwide
Campbell, Kurt M., Robert J. Einhorn, and Mitchell B. Reiss, 
eds. 2004. The Nuclear Tipping Point: Why States Reconsider 
Their Nuclear Choices. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institu-
tion Press. 367 pages. ISBN-13: 978-0815713319. 
This multi-author volume studies eight countries—Egypt, Syria, 
Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Germany, Japan, South Korea, and Tai-
wan—that have remained nonnuclear, although they have had the 
means and/or the will to acquire nuclear weapons. Part one gives 
a brief history of nuclear weapons development and nonprolif-
eration efforts and then sets out the analytical framework for the 
country studies. Each country chapter examines that state’s rea-
sons for going nonnuclear, and then turns to its current capability 
and possible motivations for deciding to pursue nuclear weap-
ons. For most of the examined states, the key factor is whether 
another state in their region is pursuing nuclear weapons and the 
international response. Thus, for Egypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia, and 

286 Resources
Turkey it is critical that Iran not become a nuclear weapon state 
and of some importance that Israel not become an overt weapon 
state. Similarly, the fate of North Korea’s nuclear program will 
inﬂ uence other states—particularly Japan and South Korea. Other 
factors that might push these states toward the nuclear tipping 
point include a change in U.S. foreign policy, particularly a pull-
ing back from security guarantees; the disintegration of the global 
nuclear nonproliferation regime; an erosion of regional security 
and rise in terrorism; and the increased availability of nuclear 
technology, particularly from Pakistan and Russia. The conclud-
ing chapter recommends ways, for the United States in particular, 
to prevent countries from reaching the nuclear tipping point. The 
studies show that the decision to renounce nuclear weapons is 
not an easy one to reverse, even in the case of countries like Japan 
and Germany that are “virtual nuclear states” because of their 
advanced civilian nuclear energy capabilities and their scientiﬁ c 
and industrial bases. However, current trends—challenges to the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), terrorist threats, the disintegra-
tion of Iraq, the Bush administration’s disdain for formal nonpro-
liferation treaties, and the A. Q. Khan nuclear black market—all 
make proliferation more likely. 
Chang, Gordon G. 2006. Nuclear Showdown: North Korea Takes 
on the World. New York: Random House. 327 pp. ISBN-13: 978-
1400062942.
Chang, an investigative journalist, delves into why North Korea, 
a country that cannot feed its people, has invested so heavily in 
nuclear weapons. He provides a history of North Korea’s nuclear 
weapon program, aided at times by the Russians, Chinese, and 
Dr. A. Q. Khan of Pakistan, and discusses why the international 
community has been unable to stop Kim Jong Il’s drive to main-
tain his despotic regime by becoming a nuclear power. He points 
out that, like Iran, North Korea as a member of the NPT received 
international assistance with its declared civilian nuclear activi-
ties, while carrying on clandestine plutonium reprocessing and 
uranium enrichment programs. North Korea traded its expertise 
in missile technology to Pakistan in return for help with uranium 
enrichment technology and know-how. Consequently, most ana-
lysts assume North Korea has enough ﬁ ssile material for several 
nuclear weapons and is working on long-range missiles that can 

Books
287
be equipped with nuclear warheads. They also fear that as the 
leader of a rogue regime willing to starve millions of his own 
people, Kim Jong Il may also be willing to share nuclear weapons 
technology with terrorists, al Qaeda in particular. Moreover, as 
the ﬁ rst country to withdraw from the NPT, North Korea rep-
resents a dangerous challenge to the nuclear nonproliferation 
regime and, if left unchecked, a spur to possible further nuclear 
proliferation by other countries. The 1994 U.S.–North Korean 
Agreed Framework fell apart when neither the United States nor 
North Korea honored all the terms of the bargain. Chang argues 
that solving the North Korean dilemma will require rethinking 
policies on nuclear deterrence, international aid, the global order, 
and disarmament. Extensive endnotes support the material pre-
sented in the book.
Chubin, Shahram. 2006. Iran’s Nuclear Ambitions. Washington, 
DC: Carnegie Endowment of International Peace. 222 pp. ISBN-
13: 978-0870032301.
This book does not provide an event-by-event history of Iran’s mili-
tary and civilian nuclear programs. Instead, the author, a security 
analyst, discusses why Iran might want to pursue nuclear weapons 
to enhance its status, deter attack, and preserve the current domes-
tic regime. The author also explores the repercussions of a nuclear-
armed Iran for the Middle East and nonproliferation efforts. He 
examines the competing factions weighing in on Iran’s nuclear pol-
icy: While most agree that Iran should develop a complete nuclear 
fuel cycle to enhance its status regionally and internationally, they 
differ on whether to accommodate or challenge Western countries 
in the process and whether to pursue nuclear weapons or just a 
nuclear weapon capability. He also discusses Iran’s shifting negoti-
ating strategy with the International Atomic Energy Agency, Euro-
pean countries, Russia, and the United States since 2002 when the 
National Council of Resistance of Iran revealed the extent of Iran’s 
clandestine nuclear activities, and the often confused interna-
tional response, particularly from the United States, which seems 
more interested in regime change than banning nuclear weapons. 
This book provides an instructive look at the thorny international 
policy and negotiating issues that arise when a country develops 
a civilian nuclear program (permitted by the NPT) that may also 
give it a nuclear weapon capability. 

288 Resources
Cirincione, Joseph, Jon B. Wolfsthal, and Miriam Rajkumar. 
2005. Deadly Arsenals: Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical 
Threats. 2nd revised and expanded edition. Washington, DC: 
Carnegie Endowment of International Peace. 487 pp. ISBN-13: 
978-0870032165.
This book provides an excellent overview of the WMD capabili-
ties and nonproliferation commitments of eighteen states: the 
declared nuclear weapon states (Russia, China, France, the United 
Kingdom, and the United States); the non-NPT nuclear weapon 
states (India, Pakistan, and Israel); two hard cases (North Korea 
and Iran); and “nonproliferation successes” (Libya, Iraq, Belarus, 
Kazakhstan, Ukraine, Argentina, Brazil, and South Africa). Intro-
ductory chapters explain basic nuclear weapon concepts and 
designs and outline the international nonproliferation regime. 
Each chapter then assesses a state’s progress toward developing 
and maintaining a nuclear arsenal (and delivery systems), ana-
lyzes its standing in the nonproliferation regime, and describes 
some of the international politics contributing to its nuclear devel-
opments. Chapters also contain charts summarizing a country’s 
nuclear infrastructure, maps showing the locations of nuclear-
related facilities, and citations. Appendices include the full text of 
the nuclear NPT and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 
as well as descriptions of nuclear supplier organizations. 
Cohen, Avner. 1998. Israel and the Bomb. New York: Columbia 
University Press. 470 pp. ISBN-13: 978-0231104838.  
Cohen’s book is the ﬁ rst authoritative history of the highly secre-
tive Israeli nuclear weapon program. This study is the product of 
years of interviews and research, including newly declassiﬁ ed doc-
uments from both the U.S. and Israeli archives. The book follows 
the political and strategic aspects of Israeli nuclear weapons plans 
from their roots in the late 1940s under Prime Minister David Ben-
Gurion through the genesis of an actual program in the 1950s and 
1960s thanks to the efforts of scientist Ernst David Bergmann (the 
ﬁ rst head of the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission) and a dynamic 
young Ministry of Defense ofﬁ cial (and future prime minister), Shi-
mon Peres. It also covers debates about Israeli security strategy and 
U.S.-Israel relations. By the 1970s, this strategy resulted in a policy 
that Cohen calls nuclear opacity, in which Israel neither conﬁ rmed 
nor denied its nuclear weapon capability (although it refused to 

Books
289
sign the NPT). The book provides details on the initial U.S. sup-
port for an Israeli nuclear research program and the much more 
extensive French support for the Dimona reactor, which eventually 
provided the ﬁ ssile material for Israel’s bombs. Ironically, Cohen 
quotes Israeli sources who noted in the wake of the 1967 Arab-
Israeli war the “inapplicability” of nuclear weapons to “almost all” 
security threats facing Israel. Israel’s failure to join the NPT remains 
a point of contention in the Middle East.
Corera, Gordon. 2006. Shopping for Bombs: Nuclear Prolifera-
tion, Global Insecurity, and the Rise and Fall of the A.Q. Khan 
Network. New York: Oxford University Press. 288 pp. ISBN-13: 
978-0195304954.
Corera, a BBC security correspondent, charts the career of Dr. 
A. Q. Khan, the Pakistani metallurgist who has done the most to 
spread nuclear weapon technology in the past three decades. In 
the late 1970s, spurred by nationalism and stung by India’s 1971 
defeat of Pakistan, Khan (then working at Urenco in the Nether-
lands) volunteered his services as a nuclear spy. At Urenco, Khan 
gained access not only to the speciﬁ cations for the latest centri-
fuge technology but also to the Western network of suppliers for 
the necessary components. Khan ﬁ rst parlayed this knowledge 
into his own nuclear weapon and missile facility in Pakistan 
(Khan Research Laboratories). By the late 1980s, Pakistan, with 
considerable help from China and Khan’s stolen designs, prob-
ably had a nuclear weapon. Khan then began selling his exper-
tise to other nuclear aspirants: Iran, North Korea, and Libya and 
possibly Saudi Arabia, Syria, and al Qaeda. All the while, Khan’s 
activities were tracked by Western intelligence agencies whose 
efforts to stop the illicit nuclear trafﬁ cking were often stymied 
by their governments’ more pressing concerns and the Pakistani 
government’s unwillingness to rein in a national hero. At crucial 
points, the U.S. government ignored Pakistan’s successful quest 
for nuclear weapons in order to enlist Pakistan as an ally, ﬁ rst in 
Afghanistan against the Soviet Union and later against the Tal-
iban. Meanwhile, Pakistan successfully tested a nuclear weapon 
in 1998 and traded nuclear technology for missile assistance from 
North Korea. Khan, probably with government assistance, also 
helped Iran build its nuclear enrichment facilities and transferred 
centrifuge technology and weapons designs to Libya. British and 
U.S. intelligence agencies ﬁ nally unraveled the Khan network 

290 Resources
after Libya’s leader, Colonel Moammar Gadhaﬁ , agreed to dis-
close and dismantle its nuclear weapon program and in the pro-
cess conﬁ rm multiple transfers of weapons-related materials and 
designs from Khan’s worldwide network of suppliers. The author 
highlights the related issues of inadequate intelligence on nuclear 
programs and good intelligence on nuclear proliferation that is 
ignored for political reasons. He also notes the repercussions of 
the Khan network for the ailing nonproliferation regime. 
Holloway, David. 1996. Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet Union 
and Atomic Energy, 1939–1956. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press. 480 pp. ISBN-13: 978-0300066647. 
The author examines the history of the development of the atomic 
and hydrogen bombs in the Soviet Union. Drawing on interviews 
with participants in the Soviet nuclear program and Western sci-
entists as well as extensive research, he discusses Soviet policy 
in relation to atomic energy from 1938, when nuclear ﬁ ssion was 
ﬁ rst discovered, to the mid-1950s, when the Soviet Union tested 
thermonuclear weapons in an arms race with the United States. 
In addition to detailing the scientiﬁ c developments, the author 
places the bomb in political and social contexts. He reviews how 
the atomic bomb affected Soviet foreign and military policy, and 
he also looks at how the Soviet developments were inﬂ uenced by 
espionage and U.S. policies. The book contains photos and short 
biographies of the key players in the Soviet bomb program as well 
as several pages of detailed notes.
Lewis, John W., and Xue, Litai. 1991. China Builds the Bomb.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 329 pp. ISBN-13: 978-
0804718417.
The authors chronicle the political and technological develop-
ments that led to China’s ﬁ rst test of an atom bomb on 16 Octo-
ber 1964, and a hydrogen bomb on 17 June 1967. They argue that 
in 1955 China’s leaders decided to obtain a nuclear weapon in 
response to U.S. involvement in the Korean War, Indochina, and 
the Taiwan Strait. The authors describe the evolving relationship 
between the political leaders and the atomic bomb, as well as 
the nuclear assistance that China received from the Soviet Union 
from 1955 to 1960. They also explain how the bomb program sur-
vived despite great domestic upheaval and very difﬁ cult condi-
tions, including famine. The book contains photographs; short 

Books
291
biographies of key ﬁ gures in the nuclear weapon program; the 
government’s statement on the day of the ﬁ rst atomic bomb test, 
which explains China’s nuclear weapons philosophy; and exten-
sive notes and list of references.
Karpin, Michael. 2006. The Bomb in the Basement: How Israel 
Went Nuclear and What that Means for the World. New York: 
Simon and Schuster. 404 pages. ISBN 13: 978-0743265942. 
As a matter of government policy, Israel neither conﬁ rms nor 
denies that it possesses nuclear weapons. Karpin, an Israeli jour-
nalist, had to submit this book to military censors, who excised 
any mention of Israel’s “nuclear weapons,” “atomic arsenal,” or 
other similar terms. Yet, as Karpin relates, David Ben-Gurion, 
Israel’s ﬁ rst prime minister and minister of defense, determined 
at the end of World War II that the only way to prevent another 
Holocaust and to preserve the Jewish state was to build a nuclear 
arsenal. The author examines the domestic debates and interna-
tional negotiations that resulted in the small, ﬂ edging state attain-
ing a nuclear capability within ten years. With French assistance, 
construction on the nuclear complex at Dimona began in 1957; 
by 1967, Israel reportedly had produced enough plutonium for a 
nuclear weapon. While the U.S. government received reports and 
satellite photographs indicating that Israel intended to produce 
ﬁ ssile material, it ofﬁ cially stated that Israel did not appear to be 
pursuing nuclear weapons. U.S. presidents Kennedy and Johnson 
gave their tacit approval to Israel’s nuclear option. According to 
the author, later U.S. administrations may have insisted that Israel 
maintain its nuclear ambiguity to avoid provoking its neighboring 
countries into going nuclear. The history ends with the 1973 Yom 
Kippur War, when Israel allegedly readied nuclear warheads for 
use against Egypt and Syria. In the ﬁ nal chapter, Karpin looks at 
what steps Israel might take to prevent Iran from attaining nuclear 
weapons. While covering the intrigue and duplicity of Israel’s 
nuclear program, the author shies away from technical informa-
tion and the effect that Israel’s nuclear status has on the nuclear 
nonproliferation regime and instability in the Middle East. 
Makhijani, Arjun, Howard Hu, and Katherine Yih, eds. 2000. 
Nuclear Wastelands: A Global Guide to Nuclear Weapons Produc-
tion and Its Health and Environmental Effects. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 696 pp.  ISBN-13: 978-0262632041.

292 Resources
This book provides concise histories of the development of the 
nuclear weapon programs of the ﬁ ve declared nuclear weapon 
states and of the de facto nuclear states (Israel, India, and Paki-
stan). It details the health and environmental effects in all the 
states involved in weapon testing and uranium mining. Chap-
ters describe how nuclear weapons are produced—from the 
mining and milling of uranium to the conversion to weapons-
grade material to the assembly of the weapons—as well as the 
adverse environmental and health consequences of each stage. 
The collection persuasively demonstrates that nuclear weapons 
have profoundly harmed the very people and environment they 
were supposed to protect. The book contains a comprehensive 
list of mainly technical references, as well as numerous photos, 
graphics, and charts illustrating the scientiﬁ c processes of bomb-
building and listing the facilities involved in each country.
Perkovich, George. 2001. India’s Nuclear Bomb: The Impact on 
Global Proliferation. Updated edition. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 610 pp. ISBN-13: 978-0520232105.
Drawing extensively on interviews with senior analysts and high-
ranking former and current Indian and U.S. ofﬁ cials, Perkovich 
offers the most deﬁ nitive history of the Indian nuclear weapons 
program to date. Perkovich divides the book into three phases: 
(1) the period between 1947 and 1974, when Indian scientists 
acquired the technical means to produce nuclear weapons and 
detonated a peaceful nuclear explosion, despite the moral doubts 
and competing priorities of its leaders and citizens; (2) the period 
between 1975 and 1995, when India refrained from a follow-up 
test but continued nuclear weapon and ballistic missile develop-
ment in secret; and (3) the period between 1996 and 1998, when 
India became disillusioned with the failure of the declared nuclear 
weapon states to disarm, even after the Cold War ended, and 
decided to show the world it had the ability to build and deliver 
nuclear weapons. Along the way, Perkovich answers three major 
questions: (1) Why did India acquire a nuclear weapons capability 
when and how it did? (2) What factors keep India from reversing 
its nuclear weapon program like other countries, such as South 
Africa? and (3) What impact did the United States have on India’s 
nuclear intentions and capabilities? His overarching premise, at 
least in the case of India, is that the conventional wisdom that 
states build nuclear weapons in response to external threats is 

Books
293
misguided. He argues that India wanted nuclear weapons more 
for ideological and domestic political reasons than to respond to 
threats from China and Pakistan. India wished to be regarded 
as a major power with the technical prowess to join the nuclear 
club and pursued this course despite its moral qualms and social 
needs. Thus, he argues, India will not reverse its nuclear program, 
even if external security threats disappear. He concludes with a 
chapter exploding the illusions of the nuclear age—the grandest 
being that the nuclear states can secure themselves and the world 
against proliferation without placing a higher priority on eliminat-
ing their own arsenals. The book contains more than 100 pages of 
notes documenting the author’s sources and photographs of the 
key ﬁ gures, facilities, and tests in the Indian nuclear program.
Podvig, Pavel, ed. 2004. Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces. New
edition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 720 pp. ISBN-13: 978-
0262661812.
The great interest this book has generated lies only partially in 
the fact that the Russian intelligence service stopped the sale 
of the original Russian-language edition in the late 1990s and 
removed all copies from store shelves. More important for schol-
ars and analysts, the volume represents the single most compre-
hensive, authoritative, and unbiased history of the development 
of Soviet (and Russian) strategic forces available, oddly, now 
only in English. Written by Russian experts (many of them sci-
entists), the book provides exhaustive details about all aspects 
of the Soviet and Russian nuclear weapons structure, including 
warheads, delivery vehicles (land-, sea-, and air-based), nuclear 
testing, command and control, air defense, antimissile defense, 
and space-based early warning and reconnaissance. The account 
may be too heavy for the general reader, but the expert will revel 
in the information available about this previously secret nuclear 
heritage. The English-language edition is updated from the earlier 
Russian version and covers the signiﬁ cant downsizing of the Rus-
sian arsenal and plans for the future.
Powers, Thomas. 2000 (reprint edition). Heisenberg’s War: The 
Secret History of the German Bomb. New York: Da Capo Press. 
608 pp. ISBN-13: 978-0306810114. 
This book tells the fascinating and little-known story of the scien-
tists involved in the German effort to develop a nuclear weapon 

294 Resources
before and during World War II. Most of these individuals, includ-
ing Nobel Prize–winning physicist Werner Heisenberg, who infor-
mally headed the program, faced a complex personal dilemma 
of wanting to support their country but not wanting to deliver 
a bomb into the hands of Adolf Hitler. Powers’s book provides 
a detailed history of this critical period in world history, where 
the global balance teetered on the brink of creating a century-
long Nazi dynasty, possibly equipped with nuclear weapons. As 
Powers tells the story, Heisenberg remained doubtful of the pos-
sibility of developing a bomb throughout the war, even after the 
Nazi capture of Czech uranium mines, a French centrifuge, and 
the Norwegian heavy-water plant at Rjukan (Vemork). Wartime 
conditions, German scientiﬁ c traditions that preferred small group 
research (rather than large programs), and Nazi preferences for 
weapons with greater promise for near-term results (particularly 
after 1942) eventually caused the program to peter out, although 
this information was not known to the Allies at the time. Powers 
also provides details of the U.S. Alsos mission, which aimed to 
disrupt German bomb efforts, even to the point of kidnappings 
and assassinations (never carried out) of key personnel. This book 
provides perhaps the best history of the German nuclear program 
in English. 
Duelfer, Charles. September 2004. Comprehensive Report of the 
Special Advisor to the DCI on Iraq’s Weapons of Mass Destruc-
tion. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁ ce. 1,000 
pp. ISBN-13: 978-0160724923 (set of three volumes plus 2005 
Addenda). Electronic copies free at https://www.cia.gov/cia/
reports/iraq_wmd_2004.
In this extensive three-volume report, the Iraq Survey Group 
(headed by chief weapons inspector Charles Duelfer) concludes 
that the 1991 Gulf War and subsequent United Nations (UN) sanc-
tions and inspections destroyed Iraq’s nuclear weapon program 
and inventory of long-range missiles. According to the “Duelfer 
Report,” at the time of the 2003 invasion, Iraq had no nuclear 
weapons or the facilities to build them, no production facilities 
for chemical weapons, and no interest in biological weapons. The 
second volume, which deals with nuclear issues, debunks the 
Bush administration’s claim that Iraq had sought uranium from 
abroad and was pursuing a nuclear weapon capability. It provides 
a detailed history of Iraq’s nuclear weapon ambitions, technol-

Books
295
ogy, and know-how. The report draws on physical inspections of 
WMD sites, interrogations of captured Iraqi experts and ofﬁ cials 
(including Saddam Hussein), and millions of pages of documents 
recovered after the invasion. 
Timmerman, Kenneth R. 2005. Countdown to Crisis: The Coming 
Nuclear Showdown with Iran. New York: Crown Forum. 392 pp.  
ISBN-13: 978-1400053681. 
Timmerman, an investigative journalist, draws on previously clas-
siﬁ ed documents, U.S. government ofﬁ cials, defectors from Iran’s 
intelligence services, and government reports to portray Iran as 
one the greatest threats facing the United States. He lays out the 
evidence for his arguments that Iran collaborated in many of the 
recent terrorist attacks against the United States and that Iran is 
far more advanced in developing nuclear weapons than Western 
states and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) under-
stand. He is highly critical of the international community and 
the IAEA for failing to sanction Iran for what he portrays as its 
clear pursuit of a nuclear weapon program since the late 1980s. In 
1987, Iran signed a consulting agreement with Pakistani nuclear 
scientist A. Q. Khan, who reportedly instructed Iran on how to 
use its membership in the nuclear NPT to get aid for a civilian 
nuclear program that could also be used for a secret weapon pro-
gram using both highly enriched uranium and plutonium. Iran 
acquired nuclear technology, training, know-how, and delivery 
systems not only from Khan and his international black market, 
but also from China, Russia, North Korea, Ukraine, Germany, and 
other Western states. Timmerman claims that intelligence agen-
cies in the United States and Germany noticed repeated signs that 
Iran was seeking materials that would likely be used for a nuclear 
weapons program, but the governments never stopped the lucra-
tive military trade with Iran or made serious charges to the IAEA. 
Not until 2003, after an Iranian opposition group revealed the exis-
tence of secret enrichment and heavy-water facilities in Iran, did 
the IAEA perform more thorough inspections in Iran and ﬁ nally 
force Iran to admit that it had been working on enriching uranium 
and extracting plutonium for more than twenty years. While some 
of his conclusions may be controversial, Timmerman offers useful 
information on the buildup of the Iranian nuclear program, the 
international trade in nuclear- and missile-related technologies, 
the range of the Khan network, and Iran’s possible motives and 

296 Resources
intentions for developing WMD and pursuing ties with al Qaeda. 
A sixty-page appendix contains documents, photographs, IAEA 
reports, and other evidence relied on by the author. 
Nuclear Weapon Proliferation and 
Nonproliferation: General Topics
Allison, Graham. 2005. Nuclear Terrorism: The Ultimate Prevent-
able Catastrophe. New York: Owl Books, Henry Holt and Com-
pany. 275 pages. ISBN-13: 978-0805078527. 
The author starts from the premise that a nuclear terrorist attack 
in the United States in the next decade is more likely than not, and 
that such an attack is preventable if world leaders make protect-
ing nuclear weapons and ﬁ ssile materials a priority. In part one, he 
gives an overview of what groups would and could use nuclear 
weapons, what type of weapons they might use, and where and 
how a nuclear attack might occur. Reportedly, al Qaeda and its 
leader, Osama bin Laden, have been investigating the purchase 
of nuclear weapons or ﬁ ssile material for more than a decade. 
Al Qaeda and other such groups could steal or buy a nuclear 
weapon or ﬁ ssile material from poorly protected nuclear facili-
ties in the states of the former Soviet Union or from Pakistan or 
North Korea, both states with a history of dealing in nuclear tech-
nologies and weapon systems. While it would be almost impos-
sible for a terrorist group to produce highly enriched uranium or 
plutonium, once a terrorist acquires ﬁ ssile material, building an 
effective bomb is relatively easy, particularly given all the publicly 
available information on bomb design. As Allison discusses at 
length, once built, a bomb could be easily delivered to any location 
in the United States via the international system of cargo shipping, 
where only a small percentage of containers are ever physically 
inspected, or through the same smuggling routes used for trans-
porting drugs and illegal aliens. In part two, Allison critiques the 
Bush administration’s war on terrorism that, while going on the 
offensive against terrorist organizations and rogue states, fails to 
limit means by which terrorists could acquire nuclear or other 
WMD materials. He believes nuclear terrorism can be prevented 
if countries adhere to the “doctrine of three nos”: no loose nukes, 
no new nascent nukes, and no new nuclear weapon states. In an 
afterword written in 2005, Allison notes developments support-

Books
297
ing an increased likelihood of a nuclear terrorist attack. The book 
contains a “frequently asked questions” section that covers gen-
eral information about ﬁ ssile material and nuclear weapons pro-
duction, nuclear-capable states, and nuclear terrorism basics. 
Cirincione, Joseph. 2007. Bomb Scare: The History & Future of 
Nuclear Weapons. New York: Columbia University Press. 206 
pp. ISBN 13: 978-0231135108.
Cirincione, the former director of nonproliferation policy at the 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and a former con-
gressional staff member, offers a comprehensive yet remarkably 
pithy overview of the history of nuclear proliferation and current 
policy debates on nonproliferation policies. Although the book 
covers a range of technical issues—including the basics of bomb 
physics—the author’s style is informal and accessible to the gen-
eral reader. Cirincione begins with the history of nuclear weap-
ons and their development and use by the United States during 
World War II.  He then covers in turn early efforts to control the 
bomb, the Soviet nuclear program and the arms race, the NPT, 
the Reagan build-up, late Cold War arms control, and the cur-
rent status of nuclear proliferation. After this U.S.-Russian focus, 
the book then analyzes nuclear programs in various other coun-
tries and conceptual arguments about why states proliferate—or 
don’t. Cirincione uses these tools to examine current challenges 
within the nonproliferation regime, including frayed norms, treaty 
enforcement difﬁ culties, terrorist threats, and the risks posed by 
large amounts of ﬁ ssile material internationally. The book con-
cludes with a call for a more active U.S. policy to combat nuclear 
threats by reducing nuclear stockpiles, tightening controls over ﬁ s-
sile material, and resolving the regional conﬂ icts that spur nuclear 
acquisition. In sum, Cirincione’s timely study offers a well-written, 
well-researched, and easily digestible primer on nuclear weapons 
issues.
Ferguson, Charles D., and William C. Potter.  2005. The Four 
Faces of Nuclear Terrorism. New York: Routledge. 376 pages. 
ISBN-13: 978-0415952446. 
This book offers a comprehensive examination of the potential for 
nuclear terrorism and current U.S. and international measures to 
prevent it. The authors, experts in nuclear nonproliferation, ﬁ rst 

298 Resources
look at the motives and capabilities of terrorist organizations, such 
as Aum Shinrikyo and al Qaeda, which might seek a nuclear capa-
bility to bolster their political goals, increase their prestige, and 
create a great psychological impact on their target audience. Sub-
sequent chapters delve into the four paths to nuclear terrorism: (1) 
stealing and detonating a nuclear bomb; (2) acquiring ﬁ ssile mate-
rial to build a crude nuclear device (an improvised nuclear device 
or “IND”); (3) attacking a nuclear facility, particularly a nuclear 
power plant, which would release large amounts of radioactivity; 
and (4) using radioactive materials to construct and detonate a 
radiological dispersion device or “dirty bomb.” The authors con-
clude that the ﬁ rst two types of attack are potentially the most 
devastating but also the most unlikely. However, they argue that 
it is highly likely that a motivated terrorist group could deto-
nate a dirty bomb causing radiation contamination, illness, and 
panic. The book concludes with a “Plan for Urgent Action against 
Nuclear Terrorism” that calls on the United States to recognize that 
terrorist organizations, rather than nuclear-armed states, pose the 
greatest nuclear threat. Consequently, the United States must help 
secure highly enriched uranium worldwide, reduce nuclear risks 
in South and Central Asia, and secure Russia’s nuclear weapons. 
To mitigate the use of a dirty bomb, the United States must train 
ﬁ rst responders, educate the public, and develop new decontami-
nation technologies. The book contains comprehensive endnotes 
for each chapter and a lengthy bibliography.
Preston, Diane. 2006. Before the Fallout, from Marie Curie to 
Hiroshima. New York: Berkley Books. 400 pages. ISBN-13: 978-
0425207895.
Preston uses primary documents and interviews to cover the 
history of the atomic bomb from the early discoveries about 
the nature of the atom in the late eighteenth century to the U.S. 
bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945. She covers the sci-
entiﬁ c, political, military, and personal aspects of the quests for 
the bomb, telling a compelling and troubling story. Preston shows 
how this quest evolved from a worldwide collaboration of scien-
tists pursuing pure scientiﬁ c knowledge to a race between war-
ring nations where groups of scientists toiled in secrecy at the 
behest of their government. As a result of political developments, 
and particularly Hitler’s policy of persecuting Jewish scientists, 

Books
299
former students and teachers and former colleagues began com-
peting against each other to develop atomic power for military 
purposes in Britain, the United States, Germany, the Soviet Union, 
and Japan. Preston provides clear explanations of scientiﬁ c and 
technical developments while weaving in the personal stories of 
the scientists, particularly the rare women scientists and the Jew-
ish scientists who ﬂ ed persecution in German-held countries and 
helped design bombs for Britain and the United States. She shows 
how British scientists, through their early work on a possible 
atomic bomb and their persistence, convinced the United States to 
build a nuclear weapon. She also examines the German scientists’ 
ambivalence about building a bomb for Hitler and their miscon-
ceptions about the process for producing ﬁ ssile material. In the 
concluding chapters, she outlines the damage done by the atomic 
bombs in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, worldwide reactions to the 
bombings, the subsequent fates of many of the nuclear scientists, 
and the historical “what ifs.” The book offers good portraits of 
many of the key players in atomic history. It contains photographs 
throughout, extensive notes, a glossary, and a bibliography. 
Sagan, Scott D., and Kenneth N. Waltz. 2002. The Spread of 
Nuclear Weapons: A Debate Renewed. Second edition. New York: 
W. W. Norton. 224 pp. ISBN-13:978-0393977479. 
The implications of nuclear proliferation are the subject of this vig-
orous debate by two leading academics. Waltz makes the case that 
“more may be better,” arguing that a gradually increasing number 
of states with small nuclear arsenals may make the world safer by 
strengthening military restraint, establishing mutually deterrent 
relationships in unstable regions, and making states with such 
weapons more secure. Sagan counters by arguing that nuclear pro-
liferation will instead make war more likely and will increase the 
chance of nuclear accidents, given the dominance of aggressive 
militaries in many states seeking nuclear weapons and the limits 
of the ﬁ nancial resources, training, and technology needed to keep 
these weapons safe. The book takes the form of statements by each 
author and then a section of back-to-back rebuttals to the other’s 
arguments. It is useful for laying out the strategic and philosophi-
cal issues related to nuclear proliferation in stark terms, although it 
does not provide a resolution to the issues it raises.

300 Resources
Schell, Jonathan. 1998. The Gift of Time: The Case for Abolishing 
Nuclear Weapons Now. New York: Henry Holt. 240 pp. ISBN-13: 
978-0805059618.
The author addresses the question of whether it is possible to elim-
inate nuclear weapons now that the Cold War is over. He weaves 
together a series of interviews with people once involved at high 
levels in designing Cold War nuclear deterrence policies who are 
now rethinking their support for nuclear arms. From these con-
versations, he builds an argument that with the complete support 
of political authorities the world can abolish nuclear weapons. 
(However, the book was written before India and Pakistan tested 
nuclear devices in May 1998.) In speaking with former policymak-
ers from the United States, Europe, and Russia, the author teases 
out how the Cold War theory of nuclear deterrence has always 
been untenable and has, in fact, resulted in larger nuclear arsenals 
and more advanced technologies. Among the politicians and ana-
lysts interviewed are Robert McNamara, former U.S. secretary of 
defense; Joseph Rotblat, the only scientist to leave the Manhattan 
Project for moral reasons; Helmut Schmidt, former chancellor of 
West Germany; and Mikhail Gorbachev, former president of the 
Soviet Union.
Weapons of Mass Destruction Commission. 2006. Weapons of 
Terror: Freeing the World of Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical 
Arms. Stockholm: WMD Commission. 227 pp. ISBN-13: 978-
9138225820. Electronic copies free at www.wmdcommission.org.
This book is the ﬁ nal report of an independent international com-
mission chaired by former UN weapons inspector and Swedish 
diplomat Hans Blix and funded by the Swedish government. The 
WMD Commission examined ways the international community 
could cooperate to prevent the spread of nuclear, biological, chem-
ical, and radiological weapons and the means of delivering them. 
The report provides a good, concise overview of the current state 
of nuclear nonproliferation efforts, such as treaties, security assur-
ances, nuclear-weapon-free zones, physical protection measures, 
and ﬁ ssile material cleanup initiatives. In addition, the commis-
sion offers several concrete proposals for preventing nuclear pro-
liferation and nuclear terrorism, and calls on all nuclear-capable 
states to question their need for a nuclear deterrent and multiple 

Books
301
nuclear delivery systems. According to the Commission, two of 
the most important nonproliferation goals are bringing the Com-
prehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty into force and concluding a 
ﬁ ssile material cutoff treaty.
Wittner, Lawrence S. 2003. The Struggle Against the Bomb: 
Toward Nuclear Abolition: A History of the World Nuclear Dis-
armament Movement, 1971–Present. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press. 688 pp. ISBN-13: 978-0804748629. 
This third volume of Wittner’s exhaustive history of the inter-
national nuclear disarmament movement since the 1930s covers 
the period from the era of U.S.-Soviet détente to the ﬁ rst years 
of the George W. Bush administration. Like its predecessors, it is 
thoroughly researched and truly multinational in scope, drawing 
on government documents, nongovernmental organization pub-
lications, and interviews with former government ofﬁ cials and 
leading ﬁ gures in the peace movement. This volume begins by 
tracing the short-lived hopes of the détente era and moves on to 
discuss renewed U.S.-Soviet hostility and arms buildups in the 
late 1970s and the revival of the antinuclear movement. The larg-
est section of the book focuses on international reactions to the 
Soviet deployment of SS-20 missiles in Eastern Europe and the 
U.S./North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) deployment 
of Pershing II missiles in Western Europe. Throughout the book, 
Wittner summarizes both the ofﬁ cial policies of the two super-
powers and the activities and perspectives of a dizzying array of 
antinuclear and peace groups, particularly in Western Europe and 
the United States (including the nuclear freeze movement of the 
early 1980s). Wittner’s main theme is the role of the peace move-
ment in pressuring governments toward nuclear arms control. The 
later parts of the book are less detailed as, ironically, progress in 
U.S.-Soviet/Russian arms control caused the peace movement to 
wane after 1991. But problems in government-led efforts toward 
disarmament by the late 1990s (the 1998 nuclear tests in South 
Asia, the U.S. Senate’s rejection of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty in 1999) caused old and new protest groups to 
arise. Wittner believes only an active disarmament movement can 
keep governments in check and ensure progress toward eventual 
nuclear disarmament. 

302 Resources
Periodicals
Arms Control Today
Arms Control Association
1313 L Street NW, Suite 130
Washington, DC 20005
Ten issues per year
$60 per year for U.S. addresses, free with ACA membership ($65 
regular, $30 student) 
Web site: www.armscontrol.org
E-mail address: act@armscontrol.org
This policy journal includes feature articles on topical arms con-
trol issues, ranging from current analyses of missile defense policy 
to studies of emerging proliferation threats in various countries 
to developments and problem areas for speciﬁ c arms control 
treaties. Issues also contain recently published documents in the 
ﬁ eld of arms control, press brieﬁ ngs by government ofﬁ cials, 
and bibliographies. The full text of the journal can be found on 
the Web site of its sponsoring organization, the Arms Control 
Association.
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists
6042 South Kimbark Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-2806
Subscriptions: Kable Fulﬁ llment, 308 East Hitt Street, Mt. Morris, 
IL 61054
Bimonthly, $18 new subscribers
Web site: www.thebulletin.org
E-mail address: bulletin@thebulletin.org
Founded in 1945 by former members of the Manhattan Project, 
the Bulletin is the oldest journal dealing exclusively with nuclear 
weapons and nonproliferation issues. Although most articles deal 
with nuclear policy issues, such as the status of U.S. nuclear waste 
storage facilities and nuclear weapon stockpiles, the journal deals 
with other nonproliferation issues as well, including delivery sys-
tems. Each issue contains book reviews, reports on current events, 
and a nuclear notebook providing information on the nuclear arse-
nal of a selected country. The full text of current and back issues 

can be found on the journal’s Web site. The Bulletin is written for 
both a popular audience and experts.
Disarmament Diplomacy
The Acronym Institute
24 Colvestone Crescent
London E8 2LH
England
Approximately 10 issues per year, free on the Internet
Web site: www.acronym.org.uk/dd/index.htm
E-mail address: rej@acronym.org.uk
Published since January 1996, this expert-oriented journal con-
tains news and documents relating to disarmament and arms 
control, including close coverage of proceedings at the UN Con-
ference on Disarmament and other international organizations. It 
also includes opinion pieces by nonproliferation and arms control 
analysts. Disarmament Diplomacy is particularly useful for provid-
ing ofﬁ cial documents and sources, as well as current analysis of 
policy issues. The journal is available on the Internet.
Nonproliferation Review
Center for Nonproliferation Studies, Monterey Institute of Inter-
national Studies
Web site: http://cns.miis.edu
E-mail: cns@miis.edu
Subscriptions available from Taylor & Francis at http://www
.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/10736700.asp
Three times per year, $58
Published since 1993 by the largest U.S. nongovernmental center 
devoted to the study of proliferation and nonproliferation issues, 
this international journal includes well-documented case studies 
and analyses on all issues related to WMD. Its authors are poli-
cymakers, scientists, and academics from around the world. The 
journal features histories of weapon programs in various coun-
tries, analyses of treaties and regimes, and viewpoints on such 
issues as terrorism, national missile defense, and protection of 
ﬁ ssile materials. The full text of previous volumes and selected 
articles from current issues are available on the Center for Non-
proliferation Studies Web site.
Periodicals
303

304 Resources
DVDs and Videos
The Atomic Cafe
Date: 1982
Media: DVD, VHS 
Length: 88 minutes
Price: DVD $24.95; VHS $19.95
Source: Producer: The Archives Project, Inc., New Yorker Films; 
Studio: New Video Group
This classic in the genre of nuclear documentaries focuses on the 
simultaneous horrors and absurdities of what was arguably the 
most hostile period of the nuclear Cold War: the period from 1949 
(the ﬁ rst Soviet atomic test) to the late 1950s. The ﬁ lm is organized 
in documentary fashion but runs without narration, drawing skill-
fully on newsreel footage and interviews conducted at the time 
with various participants in the nuclear program: bomber pilots 
on the Enola Gay, ofﬁ cials of the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, 
and presidents Harry Truman and Dwight Eisenhower. Extensive 
footage from U.S. Army training ﬁ lms is provided, exhorting sol-
diers not to fear the bomb and focusing attention on the threat 
of communism in the United States. Ironies abound, such as the 
extensive duck-and-cover drills in schools and the bomb shelter 
movement, juxtaposed with experts stating the absolute futility 
of such measures anywhere near a nuclear explosion. Although 
the pace of the presentation is rapid, the images colorful (if not 
always in color), and the tone generally lighthearted, the careful 
viewer will not fail to take in many of the depressing elements of 
the time: the witch hunt for U.S. communists, the extensive expo-
sure of animals to radiation at various nuclear tests, and the real 
fear of Americans that they might well become victims of a Soviet 
nuclear attack, especially after the Soviet test of the hydrogen 
bomb in 1953. The ﬁ lm is very well edited and provides an excel-
lent snapshot into the thinking and events of the time.
Atomic Journeys: Welcome to Ground Zero
Date: 1999
Media: DVD, VHS
Length: 52 minutes
Price: DVD $24.95; VHS $9.98
Source: Visual Concept Entertainment; distributed by Goldhil 
Home Media

The nuclear powers have tested more than 2,400 nuclear weapons 
and explosive devices since the Trinity test in 1945. This video—
which focuses on U.S. tests—shows more nuclear explosions than 
perhaps any other ﬁ lm available, while also offering fascinating 
background information on the sites where the tests were con-
ducted. The net effect is deeply troubling, as even participants in 
the test programs who were interviewed in the ﬁ lm admit that 
the tests frequently caused unexpected dangerous radiation and 
damage to the local environment. But the ﬁ lm does not comment 
on the wisdom of the tests. Rather, it presents the material in a 
matter-of-fact tone that allows viewers to draw their own conclu-
sions. Most surprising is the large number of so-called peaceful 
nuclear explosions, an effort by the U.S. weapons establishment to 
show that nuclear power could be used for excavating and engi-
neering purposes (such as the extraction of natural gas). The ﬁ lm 
visits peaceful nuclear explosion test sites in New Mexico, Colo-
rado, Mississippi, and Nevada, although in all cases the contami-
nation caused by the explosions rendered their commercial value 
worthless. Perhaps most disturbing is the footage from the so-
called Cannikan underground test conducted on Amchitka Island 
in the Aleutian chain in the late 1960s. This 5-megaton blast, set off 
5,000 feet below the surface, generated a shockwave measuring 
6.8 on the Richter scale, causing coastal sections of the island to 
collapse into the sea and raising a fault 25-feet high across parts of 
the island. This detonation stimulated the formation of the Green-
peace organization. The ﬁ lm closes with extensive footage of the 
range of explosions conducted at the Nevada Test Site. This ﬁ lm 
is a must-see for any classroom examining issues related to the 
proposed Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Carnegie International Non-Proliferation Conference 2005
Date: 2006
Media: DVD-Video
Length: 102 minutes
Price: free
Source: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. To order: 
http://www.carnegieendowment.org.
The Carnegie Endowment produced this free DVD of three ses-
sions from its 2005 International Non-Proliferation Conference. 
The DVD contains three segments: a 15-minute multimedia his-
tory of nuclear nonproliferation efforts; a conversation with three 
DVDs and Videos 305

306 Resources
prominent historians of the nuclear age; and an interview with 
International Atomic Energy Agency Director General and 2005 
Nobel Peace Prize winner Mohamed ElBaradei. The “Brief His-
tory of the Atomic Age” is an excellent resource for classroom use. 
Nuclear nonproliferation expert Joseph Cirincione provides an 
overview of nuclear weapon development and the simultaneous 
efforts to ban the weapons from World War II to the present. He 
describes how plans to ban nuclear weapons and to put nuclear 
materials under international control lost out to a U.S.-Soviet arms 
race. In the 1960s, countries began to realize that weapons supe-
riority did not bring security and negotiations on nuclear test ban 
treaties and the nuclear NPT were begun. He notes that the “most 
heartbreaking” loss of the nuclear era was President Reagan’s 
failure to accept Soviet President Gorbachev’s offer to dismantle 
all nuclear warheads. This segment is illustrated with video and 
still photos of nuclear explosions, notable ﬁ gures of the era, and 
the devastation caused by U.S. nuclear weapons in Japan. The 
conversation with historians Robert Norris, Richard Rhodes, 
and Jonathan Schell offers some insights into the military/civil-
ian divide on nuclear weapons, the failure of the United States 
and Russia to signiﬁ cantly change their views on the purpose of 
nuclear weapons after the Cold War, and the factors that prompt 
countries to develop nuclear weapons. The interview with ElBara-
dei gives an idea of the challenges facing the one agency charged 
with inspecting nuclear facilities worldwide. 
Copenhagen
Date: 2002
Media: DVD
Length: 117 minutes
Price: DVD $24.99
Source: PBS Hollywood Presents, Community Television of South-
ern California and British Broadcasting Corporation; Distributor: 
Image Entertainment
This multilayered drama written by Michael Frayn explores an 
actual 1941 meeting in Nazi-occupied Copenhagen between 
Werner Heisenberg, a German Nobel Prize–winning physicist 
working on the Nazi atomic bomb program, and his mentor, the 
Danish Nobel laureate Niels Bohr. Through four versions of their 
meeting, as reconstructed by the ghosts of Heisenberg, Bohr, and 
his wife Margrethe, the play addresses the still controversial ques-

tion of what the two scientists said at the fraught meeting that 
ended their friendship. For years after the meeting, Heisenberg 
claimed that he tried to tell Bohr that scientists should discourage 
their governments from working on atomic weapons. But Bohr 
thought Heisenberg was bragging about a successful Nazi bomb 
program, which was ultimately stymied by Heisenberg’s calcula-
tion errors and a lack of resources. It provides a good introduc-
tion to the scientists’ biographies while offering glimpses of the 
personal, moral, and professional dilemmas posed by the bomb’s 
development. The DVD contains a prologue by the playwright 
and a physicist that introduces the scientists and their important 
discoveries in quantum physics, and an epilogue that provides 
more historical details about the fateful meeting through inter-
views with Frayn, two of Heisenberg’s children, and others. 
The Day after Trinity
Date: 1981
Media: DVD (2002)
Length: 89 minutes
Price: $22.99
Source: Producer: Jon Else for KTEH, San Jose; The MacArthur 
Library, The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation; 
distributed by Image Entertainment
This documentary ﬁ lm about the life of bomb builder and later 
arms control advocate J. Robert Oppenheimer provides an excel-
lent short history of the politics and internal culture of the U.S. 
nuclear weapons program in the 1930s, 1940s, and 1950s. Its 
main focus is on the extraordinary story of the building of the 
ﬁ rst atomic bomb at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New 
Mexico during World War II under conditions of great secrecy. 
The ﬁ lm recounts the motivations of Oppenheimer and his mis-
givings after the war about the failure of the U.S. government to 
control the spread of the bomb. The presentation beneﬁ ts from 
extensive interviews with colleagues from Oppenheimer’s Los 
Alamos days who describe in colorful detail the events, struggles, 
and emotions involved in that extremely important yet danger-
ous national effort. They also discuss Oppenheimer’s transforma-
tion from bomb builder to opponent of the hydrogen bomb and 
supporter of international nonproliferation efforts. In the end, the 
witch hunt of the McCarthy trials in the 1950s resulted in sus-
picions being raised about Oppenheimer’s alleged communist 
DVDs and Videos 307

308 Resources
connections and his reliability to possess nuclear secrets. The ﬁ lm 
describes the bitter irony of the U.S. decision to ﬁ nally revoke the 
clearances of the man who built the bomb.
Dr. Strangelove or: How I Stopped Worrying and Learned to 
Love the Bomb
Date: 1964
Media: DVD and VHS (B&W)
Length: 93 minutes
Price: DVD various prices; VHS various prices
Source: Producer: Stanley Kubrick
Stanley Kubrick directed this black comedy about a ﬁ ctional 
nuclear crisis. In the ﬁ lm, an obsessive war-crazed U.S. general 
unilaterally launches a nuclear attack against the Soviet Union, 
which soon develops plans to retaliate with the mysterious and 
feared Doomsday Machine. The U.S. president, played by Peter 
Sellers, frantically negotiates with the Soviet Union to prevent a 
full-scale nuclear war. The ﬁ lm satirizes both U.S. and Soviet mili-
tary policies during the Cold War and the dangers they posed to 
humanity. Although very funny, the ﬁ lm raises many disturbing 
questions about nuclear weapons that remain with us to this day.
Last Best Chance
Date: 2005
Length: approximately 1 hour
Media: DVD
Price: Free 
Source: Produced by Nuclear Threat Initiative, www.nti.org. 
Order from: Last Best Chance Web site, www.lastbestchance.org.
Produced by the Nuclear Threat Initiative, this docudrama 
depicts the possible but not inevitable catastrophe of a terror-
ist group obtaining nuclear weapons to detonate in the United 
States and other Western countries. The story follows two al 
Qaeda cells as they build bombs from highly enriched uranium 
stolen from a poorly guarded research reactor in Belarus and pur-
chased from a corrupt nuclear scientist in South Africa. A third 
group steals Russian tactical nuclear weapons. While a network 
of international terrorists assembles and transports the bombs, the 
U.S. president, his cabinet, and their Russian counterparts scram-
ble to stop the operation. The U.S. scenes provide an overview 
of incomplete U.S. and Russian efforts to secure ﬁ ssile materials 

and the concerns about spying, liability, and funding that have 
stymied these efforts. The drama graphically illustrates how much 
easier it would be to secure and eliminate nuclear material through 
international cooperative efforts than it would be to stop a nuclear 
bomb from being smuggled into the country via cargo container, 
drug-running boat, or even a sport utility vehicle driving through 
a remote or unguarded section of the vast U.S. border. The Nuclear 
Threat Initiative (and other foundation sponsors) provides the 
DVD to urge viewers to support politicians who understand that 
securing and eliminating nuclear material should be their highest 
priority. An interview with former Senator Sam Nunn and Senator 
Richard Lugar on the DVD hammers home these points. 
Nukes in Space: The Rainbow Bombs
Date: 1999
Media: DVD and VHS
Length: 52 minutes
Price: DVD $24.95; VHS various prices
Source: Visual Concept Entertainment; distributed by Goldhil 
Home Media
Drawing on declassiﬁ ed footage, this ﬁ lm follows the events 
associated with the U.S. and Soviet testing of nuclear weapons 
in space from 1958 to 1962. The video begins with some general 
background on the history of rocketry in both countries, linking 
them to their shared use of captured hardware and scientists from 
the German V-2 program after World War II. Once orbital rockets 
were developed by both sides in the late 1950s, the purpose of test-
ing nuclear weapons in space was to determine the behavior of 
radiation in near-Earth space, the impact of electromagnetic pulse 
radiation on military communications, and the possible utility of 
nuclear blasts for stopping ballistic missiles traveling through low-
Earth orbit. All told, the United States attempted nine tests and 
the Soviet Union ﬁ ve, with similar results: destruction or blinding 
of satellites in orbit; the shorting-out of the civilian power grids 
on the ground; and the trapping of dangerous radiation in the 
ionosphere, through which both sides hoped to send astronauts 
as part of their developing space programs. The ﬁ lm also reveals 
that three of these tests (one U.S. and two Soviet tests) were actu-
ally conducted at the height of the Cuban Missile Crisis in October 
1962, which could have easily led to inadvertent war. Given the 
threatening character of these tests, the two superpowers opted 
DVDs and Videos 309

310 Resources
a year later to step back and ban nuclear testing in space in the 
Limited Test Ban Treaty (1963). 
Trinity and Beyond (The Atomic Bomb Movie)
Date: 1995
Media: DVD and VHS
Length: 95 minutes
Price: DVD $24.95; VHS $19.95
Source: Visual Concept Entertainment; distributed by Goldhil 
Home Media
The focus of this ﬁ lm is on developments in the U.S. atomic bomb 
program in the 1940s and 1950s in the context of historical events 
at that time. Although the presentation is weakened by a heavy-
handed musical score and sometimes biased voice-overs from 
period newsreels that make up much of the presentation, the ﬁ lm 
shows fascinating video footage of a variety of U.S. nuclear test 
explosions in the Paciﬁ c and at the Nevada Test Site. Some of the 
scenes, offering graphic testimony to the effects of nuclear radia-
tion on test animals placed on ships or in cages within range of 
the tests, are not suitable for children or some adults. Edward 
Teller, the proponent and developer of the hydrogen bomb—the 
so-called super bomb—is interviewed in several segments about 
his role in the nuclear program, for which he is unapologetic. The 
effect of the repeated test footage is numbing. The latter parts of 
the video discuss growing public opposition to the health effects 
of aboveground nuclear tests in the late 1950s and early 1960s. 
Rare Soviet and Chinese nuclear test footage is also shown. The 
ﬁ lm concludes abruptly with the signing of the Limited Test Ban 
Treaty in 1963, drawing few lessons for the viewer.
CD-ROM
Atomic Archive: Enhanced Edition
Date: 2002
Price: $29.95
Source: Written and produced by Chris Grifﬁ th, AJ Software & 
Multimedia
Web site: http://www.atomicarchive.com
This CD offers a good overview of the science, history, and con-
sequences of the atomic bomb; it would be particularly useful 

for high school and college students studying the early history 
of nuclear weapons. The CD draws together succinct text on 
nuclear developments and actors, along with photographs, vid-
eos, and selected historical documents. (Much of the CD’s content 
is available on the companion Web site.) While the CD would have 
beneﬁ ted from an easier navigation system, more background 
information on included photos and videos, and links to additional 
sources, it does provide a good introduction—both explanatory 
and visual—to a complex subject. A twenty-three-page section of 
the CD explains nuclear ﬁ ssion and fusion as well as bomb designs. 
The ﬁ fty-eight-page history section covers the international race 
for the ﬁ ssion and fusion bomb, the U.S. bombing of Hiroshima 
and Nagasaki, and a few subsequent milestones in nuclear his-
tory. A consequences section includes information on the technol-
ogy used to monitor nuclear tests, an overview of nuclear weapon 
delivery systems, a description of the effects of nuclear weapons, 
and scenarios depicting the results of a nuclear attack on a few U.S. 
cities. The CD’s library contains thirty-two short biographies and 
photos of important actors in nuclear weapons history, a listing 
of arms control treaties, a time line of nuclear activities to 2001, a 
glossary, selected historical texts, an almanac with facts on nuclear 
facilities and forces, and numerous photos and videos clips, mostly 
related to nuclear tests and the aftermath of the U.S. bombing of 
Japan. While many of these materials are available on the Atomic 
Archives Web site and from other Internet sources, the CD pulls 
them together in a concise and instructive package.
Web Sites
Hundreds of Web sites deal with different aspects of the history 
and effects of nuclear weapons and nonproliferation efforts at both 
the governmental and grassroots levels. (Some of these Web sites 
are included among the organizations listed in Chapter 7 and are 
not repeated below.) The following Web sites are rich sources of 
information, analysis, and original documents on nuclear weap-
ons, nonproliferation, and related issues.
Acronym Institute
http://www.acronym.org.uk
The Acronym Institute is a British nonproﬁ t independent research 
and advocacy organization that concentrates on disarmament, 
Web Sites 311

312 Resources
arms control, and security issues. It focuses on providing timely 
reporting on negotiations at the UN, the Conference on Disarma-
ment, and the NPT review process. Its Web site furthers its work by 
providing recent ofﬁ cial documentation and statements on arms 
control, nonproliferation, and disarmament, as well as the full text 
of Disarmament Diplomacy, a journal with articles by experts from 
around the world on a range of nuclear security issues. It offers 
special collections of materials on WMD and arms control issues 
in Britain, NATO, and the European Union.
Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues
http://alsos.wlu.edu
Hosted by Washington and Lee University and overseen by a 
national advisory board, this Web site offers an annotated bibliog-
raphy of more than 2,000 sources (books, articles, ﬁ lms, Web sites, 
CDs) covering current and historical nuclear weapons issues. 
This Web site is a good place to start research on a wide range of 
nuclear topics from the Manhattan Project to the current status of 
Iran’s nuclear program. 
Bellona Foundation
http://www.bellona.no
A Norwegian nongovernmental organization, Bellona tracks 
Russian environmental and security problems. On its Web site it 
provides news and analysis on a broad range of issues, including 
particularly the Russian Navy, the environmental impact of Rus-
sian nuclear weapons in the Far North, and nuclear accidents. The 
Web site contains many photographs and detailed studies regard-
ing nuclear issues in Russia, particularly in the area of nuclear 
waste management.
British American Security Information Council (BASIC)
http://www.basicint.org
The British American Security Information Council is an inde-
pendent research organization that analyzes government policies 
on defense, disarmament, military, and nuclear issues, includ-
ing national missile defense. BASIC’s Web site features a section 
on nuclear weapons and WMD with reports and collections of 
primary and secondary research materials prepared by BASIC’s 
experts. This site is particularly helpful for information on the 

British and European views of nuclear issues and national missile 
defense, and on the Proliferation Security Initiative. It also offers 
a long list of links to WMD-related sites.
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace (CEIP), Prolifera-
tion News & Resources
http://www.carnegieendowment.org/npp
The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace is a private, non-
proﬁ t organization dedicated to furthering cooperation among 
nations and promoting active engagement in international issues 
by the United States. The Proliferation News & Resources portion 
of its Web site contains a plethora of frequently updated informa-
tion on nuclear, nonproliferation, ﬁ ssile material, weapon system, 
and defense topics. The site provides both a digest of articles from 
large daily newspapers on WMD topics and analyses and publi-
cations by Carnegie experts. The site also offers an extensive list 
of links to government resources (congressional testimony, Central 
Intelligence Agency reports), treaties and agreements, and useful 
journal articles. A good place to start research on current nuclear 
proliferation topics, the site breaks out information both by sub-
ject matter and selected countries. Users can sign up for a twice-
weekly electronic newsletter, Proliferation News.
Center for Arms Control and Non-Proliferation
http://www.armscontrolcenter.org
Established in 1980, this private, nonproﬁ t center seeks the reduc-
tion and eventual elimination of nuclear weapons, and it moni-
tors peace and security issues affected by WMD. The Web site 
provides critiques of U.S. policies on nuclear weapons, missile 
defense, terrorism, and military spending, as well as links to con-
gressional materials. 
Center for Defense Information (CDI)
http://www.cdi.org
The Center for Defense Information, part of the World Security 
Institute, is a nonpartisan, nonproﬁ t organization that researches 
the social, economic, environmental, political, and military com-
ponents of global security. The Web site contains issue briefs and 
reports on nuclear policy (including the U.S. stockpile stewardship 
and reliable replacement warhead programs), nuclear testing, and 
Web Sites 313

314 Resources
the arsenals of all nuclear weapon states. It also offers a handful of 
electronic newsletters on such topics as space security and missile 
defenses, as well as the CDI’s weekly journal, Defense Monitor.
Center for Nonproliferation Studies (CNS), Monterey Institute of 
International Studies
http://cns.miis.edu
The Center for Nonproliferation Studies strives to combat the 
spread of WMD by training the next generation of nonprolifera-
tion specialists and disseminating timely information and analysis. 
The Web site features full texts of the center’s many publications, 
including its journal, The Nonproliferation Review, its Occasional 
Paper series, and Web-based reports on current WMD prolifera-
tion developments. It also offers special collections of materials 
on submarine proliferation, security in outer space, Iran, North 
Korea, and the NPT. Of special interest is the Inventory of Interna-
tional Organizations and Regimes, a frequently updated report that 
provides useful descriptions of organizations, broadly deﬁ ned, 
that work to stop the spread of WMD. 
GlobalSecurity.org
http://www.GlobalSecurity.org
Launched in 2000, this frequently updated Web site provides 
breaking news from worldwide sources and background infor-
mation on a full range of security issues, including WMD, mili-
tary, intelligence, homeland security, and space topics. Items of 
special interest are materials on nuclear weapon technology, a 
description of each country’s WMD capabilities, satellite photos 
of certain WMD-related facilities, information on U.S. military 
services, and links to Congressional Research Service reports on 
WMD and nonproliferation issues. While the nuclear page itself 
is spare, the Web site offers a variety of sources and leads to infor-
mation on nuclear technologies and policies in the United States 
and worldwide.
Institute for Science and International Security (ISIS)
http://www.isis-online.org
Founded in 1993, the Institute for Science and International Secu-
rity is a nonproﬁ t, nonpartisan group that focuses on encourag-
ing cuts in nuclear arsenals and promoting greater transparency 

in nuclear programs worldwide. The site contains articles and 
reports by ISIS experts on nuclear proliferation, export controls, 
and nuclear terrorism. Of special interest, the site makes avail-
able satellite imagery of selected nuclear weapon–related facilities 
and contains an assessment of global stocks of nuclear explosive 
materials.
National Security Archive, George Washington University
http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv
The National Security Archive is a private research center and 
library that collects and publishes declassiﬁ ed documents obtained 
through the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). The archive pub-
lishes selections of its extensive materials on its Web site, as well 
as on microﬁ che, on CD-ROM, and in books. The Web site offers 
more than thirty electronic brieﬁ ng books on nuclear history, 
covering a range of topics from the nuclear programs of China, 
France, India, Pakistan, Israel, and North Korea to the Cuban 
Missile Crisis, the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, and U.S. nuclear 
weapon decision making. The e-books provide an overview of 
the topic with links to relevant documents. A section of the site 
also explains the FOIA and provides instructions on how to make 
a FOIA request. Although most useful to serious researchers or 
analysts, this site does offer some gems for students and others 
seeking access to government documents.
Nevada Site Ofﬁ ce
http://www.nv.doe.gov/default.htm
The U.S. Department of Energy National Nuclear Security Admin-
istration maintains this Web site to cover all current and historical 
activities of the Nevada Test Site, an unpopulated 5,470 square-
mile region used for weapon testing since 1945. This is the best 
site for information on U.S. nuclear weapon tests between July 
1945 and September 1992. It contains a 185-page Department of 
Energy report on the tests, photographs and descriptions of the 
tests, and videos. The site also offers material on the test site’s 
current stockpile stewardship, homeland security, and environ-
mental cleanup projects. 
Nuclear Files/Nuclear Age Peace Foundation
http://www.nuclearﬁ les.org
Web Sites 315

316 Resources
This Web site should be one of the ﬁ rst stops for any educator and 
researcher delving into the history and effects of nuclear weapon 
development. The site provides comprehensive information on 
nuclear weapons, missile defense, nuclear energy, and space weap-
ons and has links to primary documents and other background 
information. Of special note are a chronology of the nuclear age, 
biographies of key actors, the full text of nonproliferation treaties, 
and a media gallery with photos, videos, and audio clips. This 
site offers many resources for classroom use and a special section 
on the ethical issues raised by the nuclear weapons. Users can 
subscribe to the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation’s free monthly 
e-newsletter covering nuclear and security topics, The Sunﬂ ower.
Nuclear Threat Initiative (NTI)
http://www.nti.org
The Nuclear Threat Initiative is a charitable organization work-
ing to reduce the risk of use and prevent the spread of WMD. 
It sponsors a content-rich Web site with authoritative, balanced 
information about the threats from nuclear/biological/chemical 
weapons, terrorism, and related issues. The Center for Nonpro-
liferation Studies (CNS) contributes major portions to this unique 
educational resource, including a research library with tutorials 
on such topics as the NPT, nuclear terrorism, and nuclear-weapon-
free zones; issue briefs on a range of current nonproliferation 
topics; and in-depth coverage of selected countrys’ WMD pro-
grams. It also offers several databases on weapons and prolifera-
tion topics, including global submarine ﬂ eets and civilian highly 
enriched uranium elimination. “WMD 411,” an original narrative 
written by experts from the CNS, describes all aspects of WMD 
and provides links to key treaties, policy papers, and other source 
materials. In addition, this Web site features an exclusive daily 
news service produced by staff of the National Journal with origi-
nal reporting and a comprehensive snapshot of the day’s global 
news on WMD. Harvard College’s Managing the Atom Project 
produces “Securing the Bomb,” articles and an inﬂ uential report 
exploring the threat and prevention of nuclear terrorism.
Partnership for Global Security
www.partnershipforglobalsecurity.org

The Partnership for Global Security (formerly the Russian Ameri-
can Nuclear Security Advisory Council) works toward a world in 
which all WMD have been secured and are no longer a threat. The 
partnership’s Web site offers information on all its projects and 
publications as well as ofﬁ cial documents and legislative updates 
on topics related to WMD nonproliferation, particularly coopera-
tive threat reduction efforts in Russia. The site also has the full 
text of the partnership’s frequently produced Nuclear News, a 
compilation of materials from international sources that discuss 
all aspects of nuclear power and weapons issues.
Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs
http://www.pugwash.org
Started in 1957 by Joseph Rotblat, the only Manhattan Project 
scientist to leave the project on moral grounds, Pugwash Con-
ferences gather together inﬂ uential scholars and public ﬁ gures 
from around the world who are concerned with reducing armed 
conﬂ ict in general and nuclear weapons in particular. The chosen 
participants meet in conferences, symposia, and workshops and 
then issue reports and statements. The Web site consists mainly 
of reports and statements from the meetings, many on topics 
related to nuclear weapons. The site contains the Pugwash News-
letter, which offers reports on recent Pugwash meetings as well as 
selected essays by conference participants.
Reaching Critical Will, Women’s International League for Peace 
and Freedom (WILPF)
http://www.reachingcriticalwill.org
Reaching Critical Will is a project of the Women’s International 
League for Peace and Freedom that strives for total and uni-
versal nuclear disarmament. The Web site is designed to help 
non governmental organizations and individuals participate in 
international disarmament forums. It offers reports on nuclear 
and disarmament topics; facts and ﬁ gures about nuclear weapons; 
fact sheets on topics such as the environmental, health, legal, and 
religious ramiﬁ cations of nuclear weapons; and guidance on what 
individuals can do to take action for disarmament. Features of 
particular note are a database on the military and civilian nuclear 
activities of the forty-four countries with signiﬁ cant nuclear 
Web Sites 317

318 Resources
capabilities, a comprehensive listing of nongovernmental orga-
nizations involved in disarmament, information on international 
nonproliferation efforts with links to primary documents, includ-
ing treaties, and proﬁ les of the “Dirtiest Dozen” corporations (i.e., 
those companies that are most involved in building WMD). 
Truman Presidential Museum & Library
http://www.trumanlibray.org/
This Web site offers the original source material of the Harry S. 
Truman Presidential Library, including documents, photographs, 
and other archival materials. The searchable site contains many of 
the original documents related to Truman’s decision to drop the 
atomic bomb on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.

319
Glossary
ABACC Brazil-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear 
Materials
ABM Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty
AEC Atomic Energy Commission
atomic Relating to atoms, the smallest part of an element with all the 
properties of that element. An atom consists of electrons (negatively 
charged particles) that orbit a nucleus of neutrons (uncharged particles) 
and protons (positively charged particles). The atomic mass number of 
an atom or isotope equals the number of neutrons and protons in the 
nucleus.
atomic bomb A weapon that uses the ﬁ ssion of isotopes of uranium 
or plutonium to cause a powerful explosion. It can also be described 
generically as a “nuclear” weapon, because it relies on nuclear ﬁ ssion.
ballistic missile A missile whose ﬂ ight is powered only in the ﬁ rst 
segment of its trajectory and then travels unpowered past its apogee 
into a ﬁ nal stage where it falls to Earth (compared with air-breathing 
cruise missiles whose ﬂ ights are powered throughout). Longer-range 
ballistic missiles travel outside of the Earth’s atmosphere, reaching their 
apogees in space. A reentry vehicle consisting of a protecting warhead (or 
warheads) plunges back toward Earth to attack its target(s).
chain reaction A self-sustaining process that occurs when a critical mass 
of a ﬁ ssile isotope, such as uranium 235 or plutonium 239, is bombarded 
with neutrons and continues splitting into lighter elements.
CIA Central Intelligence Agency (U.S.)
conﬁ dence-building measures Actions agreed to by states to reduce 
tensions between them and to avoid conﬂ ict. Such measures can include 
communication agreements, limits on activities in certain areas, data 
exchanges, and inspections.

320 Glossary
counterproliferation Military efforts to destroy, damage, or render 
unusable facilities, material, or troops associated with weapons of 
mass destruction (WMD), particularly against countries not currently 
possessing WMD.
critical mass The smallest amount of ﬁ ssile material required for a 
chain reaction to occur.
cruise missile An unmanned missile that typically ﬂ ies slowly and 
very close to the ground and is powered by the use of conventional 
fuels and an air-breathing motor. It can be launched from the ground, 
ships, submarines, and aircraft and can be equipped to deliver nuclear, 
biological, chemical, or conventional payloads.
CTBT Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
CTBTO Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
CTR cooperative threat reduction
DCI Director of Central Intelligence
de-alerting In regard to nuclear weapons, to take steps that would make 
an immediate launch of a country’s missiles impossible. According to 
supporters, the purpose of such actions—including separating warheads 
from missiles and placing them in storage—would be to improve crisis 
stability and reduce the chance of an accidental or unauthorized launch.
deterrence Actions threatening retaliation taken by a state or group of 
states to discourage a potential enemy from initiating an attack. These 
actions, such as building and deploying nuclear weapons, should show 
an adversary that the costs of an attack would be too great and would 
outweigh any potential gains.
dirty bomb A weapon combining a conventional explosive surrounded 
by radioactive materials (often radioactive waste or low-enriched uran-
ium) with the aim of contaminating a localized area. There is no nuclear 
chain reaction in such weapons. It is believed that terrorists, lacking 
access to weapons-grade material and the scientiﬁ c knowledge needed 
to construct such a nuclear weapon, might seek to use such devices.
DOD Department of Defense (U.S.)
DOE Department of Energy (U.S.)
downblend A process through which nuclear material with a higher 
enrichment level is converted into material with a lower enrichment 
level. Typically, this process describes the conversion of weapons-grade 
material removed from bombs into nuclear fuel suitable for use in a 
reactor to generate electricity.
DPRK Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (North Korea)
DTRA Defense Threat Reduction Agency (U.S.)

Glossary 321
enrichment The process of increasing the concentration of one isotope 
of a given element (for example, in uranium increasing the amount of 
uranium 235).
entry-into-force The date on which all the provisions of a treaty become 
legally binding on its parties. Normally, this requires a certain majority of 
states eligible for a treaty both to sign and ratify the agreement.
EURATOM European Atomic Energy Community
ﬁ rst strike The launch of a surprise attack on an opponent’s nuclear 
forces to destroy or substantially weaken its military capabilities and 
thus reduce or eliminate its ability to attack or retaliate.
ﬁ ssile material Substances possessing nuclei with a greater tendency 
to give off electrons and energy when bombarded by neutrons, enabling 
them to sustain a chain reaction. Uranium 235 and plutonium 239 are two 
such materials.
ﬁ ssion The splitting of an atom’s nucleus into two or more parts, 
releasing large amounts of energy. Nuclear ﬁ ssion occurs when elements 
such as uranium and plutonium are bombarded by neutrons under 
certain conditions.
FMCT
ﬁ ssile material cutoff treaty (proposed)
fusion The uniting of two nuclei of light elements, such as hydrogen, 
to make a heavier one, releasing even larger quantities of energy than 
nuclear ﬁ ssion.
gaseous diffusion A method of separating isotopes that uses the fact 
that gas atoms with different masses will diffuse through a porous barrier 
at different rates. This process, which requires large facilities for many 
stages of separation, is used to separate the isotope uranium 235 (used in 
weapons) from uranium 238.
half-life The time it takes for a radioactive substance to decay to half its 
original amount of radioactivity.
heavy water Water whose hydrogen atoms contain an extra neutron 
compared with ordinary, or “light,” water. Heavy water is used as a 
moderator (to slow down neutrons) in uranium reactors, allowing them 
to imbed themselves in ﬁ ssile atoms. The imbedded neutrons in turn 
cause the ﬁ ssile atoms to split (ﬁ ssion). Because heavy water is a more 
effective moderator than ordinary water, uranium does not have to be 
enriched to be used as fuel in a heavy-water reactor. In most of these 
reactors, the heavy water is also used as a coolant (to control the reactor’s 
temperature).
highly enriched uranium (HEU) Uranium in which the percentage 
of uranium 235 isotopes has been increased to a higher level than in 
naturally occurring uranium (0.7 percent) to some level greater than 20 

322 Glossary
percent through an industrial process, such as gaseous diffusion, for the 
purposes of promoting a chain reaction. To maximize the efﬁ ciency of 
such a reaction, nuclear weapons usually contain uranium enriched to 
more than 90 percent uranium 235. With some exceptions, nuclear power 
reactors normally run at lower levels of enrichment. Certain power 
reactors can run on proliferation-resistant low-enriched uranium.
horizontal proliferation The spread of nuclear weapons to additional 
states beyond those countries that currently posses them.
hydrogen bomb A nuclear weapon that uses fusion, rather than ﬁ ssion, 
as the primary means to release a vast amount of destructive energy. 
Fusion bombs, also known as thermonuclear bombs, are many times 
more destructive than ﬁ ssion bombs.
IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency
ICBM intercontinental ballistic missile
INF Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty
isotopes Atoms of the same element that have the same number of 
protons (and thus the same chemical properties) but a different number 
of neutrons and thus a different atomic weight. Uranium 233, uranium 
235, and uranium 238 are all uranium isotopes.
KEDO Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization
kilogram A metric weight equal to 2.2 pounds.
kiloton One thousand tons. In the context of nuclear weapons, kiloton 
describes an amount of explosive power; a 1-kiloton nuclear weapon can 
create an explosion equal to the power of 1,000 tons of TNT.
light-water reactor A nuclear reactor that uses conventional water (H2O)
as a coolant (to control the temperature in the reactor) and moderator (to 
slow the chain reaction of its ﬁ ssile components). These reactors normally 
use uranium enriched to approximately 3 percent and are used to create 
electricity by heating the water into steam and using it to run turbine 
generators.
low-enriched uranium Material that has undergone an industrial 
process to increase the percentage of ﬁ ssionable uranium 235 isotopes 
above the 0.7 percent occurring in natural uranium but whose level 
remains below 20 percent.
LWR light-water reactor
megawatt (MW) A measure of energy equivalent to 1,000,000 watts. 
MW electric (MWe) refers to the potential electric power that can be 
generated by a particular reactor. MW thermal (MWt) refers to the 
amount of heat a particular reactor can generate, and is larger than the 
MWe rating. Although all reactors can be rated by either scale, most 

Glossary 323
power reactors are listed in MWe terms and most research reactors are 
listed in MWt terms.
metric ton One thousand kilograms, a weight equivalent to 1.1 tons or 
2,200 pounds.
MIRV Multiple independently targetable reentry vehicle. The term 
describes ballistic missiles armed with more than one nuclear weapon, 
each of which can be set to hit a different target after reentry into the 
atmosphere.
MTCR Missile Technology Control Regime
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NIS newly independent states (of the former Soviet Union)
NNWS non–nuclear weapon state
nonproliferation A collective term used to describe efforts to prevent 
the spread of weapons of mass destruction short of military means 
(counterproliferation), including export controls, material inspections, 
international treaties, cooperative destruction of past weapon facilities, 
defense conversion, retraining of workers, and popular education.
NORAD North American Air (later Aerospace) Defense Command
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons/Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty
NSC National Security Council
NSG Nuclear Suppliers Group
nuclear reactor A device in which a controlled, self-sustained nuclear 
chain reaction can be maintained and the heat generated by the reaction 
removed to provide energy for civilian purposes. Reactors also create 
ﬁ ssionable material (e.g., plutonium) that can be used as a source of ﬁ ssile 
material for weapons. Reactors fall into three general categories: power 
reactors (to produce electricity), production reactors (for large-scale 
creation of plutonium 239), and research reactors (to supply neutrons for 
experimental purposes).
nuclear weapons A collective term for atomic bombs and hydrogen 
bombs; it thus covers bombs that get their explosive power from either or 
both atomic ﬁ ssion and fusion.
NWFZ nuclear-weapon-free zone
NWS nuclear weapon state
OPANAL Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America and the Caribbean
PAL permissive action link

324 Glossary
plutonium A heavy, man-made radioactive metallic element that is 
highly toxic. There are 15 isotopes of plutonium; the most important is 
plutonium 239, which is ﬁ ssile and thus used in nuclear weapons and 
some power reactors.
PNE peaceful nuclear explosion
PSI Proliferation Security Initiative
radioactivity The spontaneous release of energy from the nucleus of an 
atom. Energy released in the form of beta or alpha emissions results in 
the transformation of an atom into a different element.
ratiﬁ cation The formal process established by a country to legally 
bind its government to the terms of a treaty. Normally, this involves 
the approval (by vote) of a certain percentage of its parliament or other 
legislative body. In the United States, treaties require a vote of two-thirds 
of the members of the Senate.
reprocessing Chemical treatment of irradiated reactor fuel to separate 
the uranium and plutonium from the unwanted radioactive waste by-
products and from each other.
research reactors Small ﬁ ssion reactors built to produce neutrons for 
many purposes, including scientiﬁ c research, medical isotope production, 
and training. Although less powerful than reactors used to produce 
energy, the vast majority of research reactors use highly enriched uranium 
fuel that can be a proliferation concern.
SAC Strategic Air Command
safeguards In the nuclear ﬁ eld, mechanisms to prevent the theft or 
diversion of ﬁ ssile material. These can include antitamper technologies, 
such as tags and seals on containers holding such materials, as well as 
certain procedures, such as the periodic inspections of facilities, the use 
of cameras and motion detectors, and the requirement of a “two person” 
rule for the handling of any material.
SALT Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
SDI Strategic Defense Initiative
signature The initial approval of a treaty by a country’s ofﬁ cial rep-
resentative (such as the president or secretary of state), indicating that 
the country agrees to the terms of the treaty. States are not legally bound 
by a treaty until ratiﬁ cation is completed but, in common international 
practice, may be under an assumed moral obligation not to comply with 
treaty obligations while the ratiﬁ cation process is taking place.
SLBM submarine-launched ballistic missile
SORT U.S.-Russian Strategic Offensive Reduction Treaty or Moscow 
Treaty

Glossary 325
SSBN nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine
START Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty
STRATCOM U.S. Strategic Command
strategic nuclear weapons Nuclear armamentsdeployed for the purpose 
of deterring an attack on a country’s homeland and/or to attack another 
country’s homeland. During the Cold War, U.S. and Soviet strategic nuclear
warheads were placed on long-range delivery systems, including land-
based intercontinental ballistic missiles (with ranges greater than 5,500 
kilometers, or about 3,400 miles), submarine-launched ballistic missiles, 
and long-range bombers. The United States and Russia still maintain 
thousands of these weapons. For countries whose enemies are located 
close by, strategic and tactical nuclear weapons may be synonymous.
tactical nuclear weapons Nuclear armaments intended for use in short-
range battleﬁ eld situations. Examples include nuclear land mines, nuclear 
artillery shells, and earth-penetrating nuclear bombs designed to destroy 
underground bunkers. The yields of such weapons can range from less 
than 1 kiloton (for destruction of a small force) to tens or hundreds of 
kilotons (for destruction of large troop concentrations, tank deployments, 
ships, or storage depots).
thermonuclear weapon Also known as a hydrogen bomb; a nuclear 
weapon in which the fusion of light nuclei, such as deuterium, solid 
lithium 6, and tritium, provide the main explosive energy. An initial 
ﬁ ssion explosion is used to create the high temperatures required for 
fusion. The destructive energy released by these weapons is much greater 
than that released by ﬁ ssion-only bombs.
U-235 uranium 235
UN United Nations
UNMOVIC UN Monitoring, Veriﬁ cation, and Inspection Commission 
UNSCOM UN Special Commission on Iraq
uranium A naturally occurring radioactive element with 92 protons. 
Its principal isotopes are uranium 238 and uranium 235 (0.7 percent of 
natural uranium), the latter of which is ﬁ ssionable. Unlike plutonium 
(which has to be created in a laboratory), uranium is found naturally in 
the ground and is mined in several countries.
veriﬁ cation The process of collecting data to demonstrate whether 
or not a state has complied with a treaty or agreement. Means for 
verifying treaty compliance include satellites, seismic monitoring, on-site 
inspections, and intelligence gathering.
vertical proliferation An increase in the size or destructive capacity of 
an existing nuclear weapons arsenal.

326 Glossary
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) Armaments capable of inﬂ icting 
large-scale casualties and whose effects are indiscriminate between 
military and civilian victims. Typically, the term is used to describe 
nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons.
weapons-grade Fissile material of the type most suitable for pro-
ducing a chain reaction and nuclear explosion, that is, uranium 
enriched to approximately 90 percent uranium 235 and plutonium with 
approximately 93 percent plutonium 239.
WMD weapons of mass destruction
yield Total amount of energy released by a nuclear explosion, generally 
measured in equivalent tons of TNT.

327
Acheson-Lilienthal Commission, 
7
Afghanistan, 18, 20
Afrasiabi, Kaveh, 42
African Nuclear-Weapon-Free 
Zone Treaty (Pelindaba 
Treaty), 67, 217
Agency for the Prohibition of 
Nuclear Weapons in 
Latin America and the 
Caribbean (OPANAL), 
249–250
Al Qaeda, 24, 53
Amchitka Island, 87
Antarctic Treaty (1961), 66, 217
Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) 
Treaty, 16–17, 25, 85, 89
Argentina, 19
Arms Control Association (ACA), 
269–270
Aum Shinryko, 53
Baruch, Bernard, 7
Baruch Plan, 7–8
Belarus, 41, 67
Belgium, 62
Belknap, 44
Bethe, Hans, 40, 171–173
Bhabha, Homi Jehangir, 
173–174
bin Laden, Osama, 24
Biological Weapons Convention 
(1972), 75
Blair, Bruce, 45
Blair, Tony, 32, 68
Blix, Hans, 21, 174–175
Bohr, Niels, 175–177
Brazil, 19, 62–63
Brazil-Argentine Agency for 
Accounting and Control 
of Nuclear Materials 
(ABACC), 250–251
Brodie, Bernard, 46
Bush, George H. W., 19, 88
Bush, George W., 24–25, 31, 48, 80
 arms control policies of, 25
 belief in the employment of 
missile defense systems, 
88–89
 opposition of to the 
Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty, 60–61
Butler, Lee, 67
Caldicott, Helen, 40, 177–178
Canada, 23
Carter, Jimmy, 21
Castro, Fidel, 12
Center for Weapons Intelligence, 
Nonproliferation, and 
Arms Control (WINPAC), 
260–261
Index
Please note that the Index does not include material from the Chronology or 
Resources chapters.

328 Index
Central Asian Nuclear-Weapon-
Free Zone (Semipalatinsk 
Treaty), 67, 93, 218
Central Intelligence Agency 
(CIA), 90
Chemical Weapons Convention 
(1993), 75
China, 6, 7, 14–15, 22, 25, 31, 42
 anti-satellite system test, 89
 nuclear policy of, 32, 33, 46–47
 number of strategic warheads 
in, 47
 policy of concerning India’s 
nuclear program, 32
Clinton, Bill, 60, 80, 81, 88
Cold War, 33
 role of nuclear weapons 
during, 39–41
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban 
Treaty (CTBT [1996]), 23, 
75, 85, 213
 debates concerning, 59–61
 rejection of by the U.S. Senate 
(1999), 24, 59–60
 signer nations of, 59
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty Organization 
(CTBTO), 251–252
Conference on Disarmament 
(CD), 252
Cuban Missile Crisis, 12–13, 40
Détente, 16–17, 66
Deuterium, 8, 9
Drell, Sidney D., 69
Duelfer, Charles, 90
Duelfer Report (2004), 29, 90
Eastman Kodak Company, 54
Egypt, 33
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 9–10
 Atoms for Peace proposal of, 
10, 61
ElBaradei, Mohamed, 29, 178–179
Elugelab Island, 9
Eniwetok Atoll, 9
European Union Directorate 
General for Energy 
and Transportation, 
European Atomic Energy 
Community (EURATOM), 
253–254
Fat Man, 6
The Fate of the Earth (Schell), 40
Federation of American Scientists 
(FAS), 270–271
Fissile materials, weapon-grade, 
211
Frisch, Otto, 3–4
France, 15, 22, 23, 24, 32, 46, 62
 number of strategic warheads 
in, 47
Fuchs, Klaus, 179–180
Gaddis, John Lewis, 39
George Washington, 11
Global Initiative to Combat 
Nuclear Terrorism, 30
Global Partnership Against the 
Spread of Weapons of 
Mass Destruction, 85
Global Threat Reduction 
Initiative (GTRI), 30, 85
Goodby, James E., 69
Goodpaster, Andrew, 67
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 19, 20, 67, 70
Greenpeace International, 271
Greenpeace USA, 87, 271
Group of Eight (G-8), 26
Groves, Leslie, 5, 180–181
Gulf War (1990–1991), 20
Hahn, Otto, 4
Halperin, Morton H., 69
Hanford nuclear facility, 4
Harrison, Selig, 49
Heisenberg, Werner, 4, 182–183
Hiroshima, 6
Hot-Line Agreement (1963), 13
Hydrogen (thermonuclear) bomb, 
8–9, 210–211

Index
329
India, 15, 32–33, 42, 45, 47, 83, 84
 nuclear weapons tests of, 17, 
24, 215
 number of strategic warheads 
in, 47, 214
Institute for Science and 
International Security, 27
Intermediate-Range Nuclear 
Forces Treaty (1987), 19
International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA), 2, 10, 
20–21, 27–29, 51, 62, 75, 
216, 254–255
 application of sanctions by, 63
 effectiveness of sanctions by, 
29
International Convention for the 
Suppression of Acts of 
Terrorism (2005), 53
International Science and 
Technology Center (ISTC), 
255
Iran, 27, 29, 33, 48, 58, 62, 68
 missile development in, 89
Iraq, 20–21, 26–27, 28, 57, 58
Iraq War (2003– ), 26–27, 68, 92
Israel, 15, 32, 42, 45, 46, 83
 Arab-Israeli War (1967), 15
 number of strategic warheads 
in, 47
Japan, 21, 31, 47, 58, 62
 attempts to develop nuclear 
weapons, 5
 number of casualties sustained 
from the  bombings of 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, 
227–229
report on the effects of Hiroshima 
and Nagasaki bombings, 
222–226
Johnson, Lyndon, 15
Joint North-South Declaration on 
the Denuclearization of the 
Korean Peninsua, 217
Jordan, 33
Kazakhstan, 8, 9, 33, 41, 67
Kennedy, John F., 11–12, 56
 and the Cuban Missile Crisis, 
12–13
Khan, A. Q., 1, 28–29, 64, 183–185
Khrushchev, Nikita, 11
Kim Il Sung, 21
Kissinger, Henry, 16, 69
Komsomolets, 44–45
Kurchatov, Igor, 8, 9, 185–187
Kyrgyzstan, 33
Lawrence, Ernest, 3, 187–188
Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory (LLNL), 77, 78, 
262–263
Liberia, 27
Libya, 28, 29, 57
Lieber, Keir A., 43
Limited Test Ban Treaty (1963), 
13, 65, 75, 87, 213
Lisbon Protocol (1992), 19
Lithium, 9
Little Boy, 6
Litvinenko, Alexander, 53
Los Alamos National Laboratory 
(LANL), 5, 77, 78, 263–264
Makhijani, Arjun, 54
Manhattan Project, 4–5
 expenditures for, 5
McNamara, Robert, 79
Meitner, Lise, 3–4
Missile Technology Control 
Regime (1987), 75
Mixed-oxide reactor fuel, 52
Moscow Treaty, 31, 48, 85
Mueller, John, 41
Multiple independently 
targetable reentry vehicles 
(MIRVs), 17
 Soviet deployment of, 18, 19
“mutually assured destruction,” 
40, 79

330 Index
Nagasaki, 6
Natural Resources Defense 
Council (NRDC), 272
Nautilus, 11
Nie Rongzhen, 188–189
Nixon, Richard M., 16
Nonproliferation, 2, 33–34, 70–71
 attempts to halt horizontal 
proliferation, 17–18
 and civilian nuclear energy, 
61–65
 collective approaches to 
proliferation challenges, 
25–26
 current debates concerning 
nuclear arsenals, 31–33
 current proposals for 
elimination of nuclear 
weapons, 69–70
 early attempts to control 
nuclear weapons, 7–8
 in Latin America, 13–14
 movement from the arms race 
to negotiated reductions 
(1970s–1980s), 18–20
 post–Iraq invasion non-
proliferation efforts, 
27–30
 renewed efforts to control 
under Eisenhower, 9–10
 success in international efforts 
for (1990s), 22–23
 and tactical nuclear weapons, 
19
 tensions within the 
nonproliferation regime 
(late 1990s–2003), 23–27
 threats to (Iraq and North 
Korea), 20–21
See also United States, special 
issues concerning 
nuclear weapons and 
nonproliferation
Non-Proliferation Review and 
Extension Conference 
(1995), 22–23, 92–93
Non-Proliferation Review  
Conference (2005), 64
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT 
[1968]), 1–2, 17–18, 22–23, 
38, 75, 83–84, 229
 Article VI of, 61, 63
 and civilian nuclear energy 
programs, 61–65
 evolution of, 14–16
 problems with concerning 
international trade, 64
 text of, 230–235
Non-Proliferation Treaty 
Exporters Committee 
(Zangger Committee), 
17–18, 259–260
North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO), 11, 
24, 56, 80
 number of tactical nuclear 
weapons held by member 
states, 48
North Korea, 21, 23, 29, 32, 42, 45, 
48, 66, 68
 and the “Agreed Framework” 
(1994), 21, 26
 attempts to curb nuclear 
program of, 30–31
 missile development in, 89
 number of strategic warheads 
in, 47, 214
 testing of nuclear weapons by, 
37, 57, 58, 215
 United Nations sanctions 
against (UN Resolution 
1718), 243–248
Norway, 16
Nuclear Age Peace Foundation 
(NAPF), 272–273
Nuclear reactions, 207
ﬁ ssion, 4, 6, 207, 209–210
 fusion, 8, 207, 210–211
Nuclear reactors, 208–209
ﬁ ssion, 4, 6, 208–209
 heavy water reactors (HWRs), 
209

Index
331
 light water reactors (LWRs), 
209
Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), 
18, 84, 256–257
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Status of 
Mongolia, 217
Nuclear-weapon-free zones 
(NWFZs), 66–67, 216, 
217–218
 in the South Paciﬁ c, 14
Nuclear weapons, 1–2, 37–39. See
also Nuclear weapons, key 
documents concerning
 boosted-ﬁ ssion devices, 210
 costs of as a deterrent to 
developing, 57
 as deterrents, 38–40, 42–43, 46
 development of delivery 
systems for, 10–12
 efforts to eliminate, 65–70
 environmental and health 
effects of, 53–56
 estimated cancer deaths from, 
55
 expansion of the nuclear club, 
8–9, 14
ﬁ ssion devices, 6, 209–210
 German attempts to develop, 4
 inherent risks of, 37–38
 Japanese attempts to develop, 5
 lack of proliferation to other 
countries, 56–58
 military use of nuclear ﬁ ssion, 
4–6
 necessary amount of for 
deterrence, 46–47
 nuclear accidents, 44–45
 and nuclear energy, 206
 number of strategic nuclear 
weapons worldwide 
(2006), 47, 214
 role of during the Cold War, 
39–41
 role of in today’s world, 38–39, 
41–43
 safety of, 43–45
 scientiﬁ c development of, 2–4
 testing of, 5, 213–214, 215, 216
 worldwide stockpiles of, 
212–213, 214
See also Hydrogen 
(thermonuclear) bomb; 
United States, nuclear 
weapons policy of; 
United States, special 
issues concerning 
nuclear weapons and 
nonproliferation
Nuclear weapons, key documents 
concerning, 218
 letter from Einstein to 
President Roosevelt, 
218–220
 military order for atomic 
bombing of Japan, 220–221
 number of casualties sustained 
from bombing Hiroshima 
and Nagasaki, 227–229
 report on the effects of the 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki 
bombings, 222–226
 text of the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty (1968), 230–235
Nunn, Sam, 69
Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat 
Reduction Program, 22
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 
4–5
Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 5, 7, 8, 9, 
190–191
Pakistan, 15, 18, 28–29, 32, 33, 42, 
45, 83
 nuclear weapons tests of, 24, 
215
 nuclear weapons program of, 
19–20, 47
Panama, 27
Pauling, Linus, 191–193
Perkovich, George, 38
Permissive action links (PALs), 45

332 Index
Perry, William, 69
Physicians for Social 
Responsibility (PSR), 273
Plutonium, 51–52, 55, 85, 206, 207, 
211
 reprocessing of, 212
Powell, Colin, 26
Press, Daryl G., 43
Pressler Amendment (1985), 20
Program on International Policy 
Attitudes (PIPA), 94, 95
Proliferation Security Initiative 
(PSI), 2, 27–28, 53, 76
Putin, Vladimir, 25, 48, 49
Radiological dispersion device 
(RDD), 50, 51, 52
Reagan, Ronald, 18–19, 67. See
also Strategic Defense 
Initiative (SDI)
Reiss, Mitchell, 56
Reliable Replacement Warhead 
(RRW) program, 78–79
Rocky Flats plutonium 
processing facility, 55, 56, 
66
Rotblat, Joseph, 193–195
Russia, 24, 31, 41, 62
 cooperation of with India, 32–33
 erosion of its nuclear arsenal, 
43
 number of strategic warheads 
in, 47, 48, 214
Rutherford, Ernest, 3
Sagan, Scott, 44
Sakharov, Andrei, 9, 195–197
Sandia National Laboratories, 77, 
266–267
Schell, Jonathan, 40
Schelling, Thomas C., 40
Scorpion, 44
Shultz, George P., 69
Single Integrated Operational 
Plan, 81
Six-Party Talks (2003), 30–31, 85
Soddy, Frederick, 3
South Africa, 1, 15, 22, 23, 67
South Korea, 21, 30, 31, 42
South Paciﬁ c Nuclear-Free Zone 
(Rarotonga Treaty), 66, 
217
Soviet Union, 7, 8, 10, 13, 14, 39, 
42, 54
 and the development of 
nuclear weapons delivery 
systems, 10–12
 invasion of Afghanistan by, 18, 
20
 and the launch of Sputnik I, 11
 and the testing of nuclear-
tipped ABM defense 
systems, 86–87
 U.S.-Soviet nuclear arms 
control, 16–17, 25
See also Cuban Missile Crisis
“Star Wars.” See Strategic Defense 
Initiative (SDI)
Stockpile Stewardship Program, 
77–78
Strait of Malacca, 93
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks 
(SALT), 16
Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty 
(START), 19, 48
Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), 
19, 87–88
Strauss, Lewis L., 197–198
Submarines, nuclear-powered, 
11, 77
 accidents involving, 44–45
Sweden, 16
Switzerland, 16
Szilard, Leo, 3, 199–200
Tajikistan, 33
Teller, Edward, 9, 39, 200–203
Terrorism, 42, 49, 67
 seriousness of nuclear 
terrorism threat, 50–53

Index
333
Thermonuclear bomb. See
Hydrogen (thermonuclear) 
bomb
Three Mile Island nuclear 
accident, 18
Toxin Weapons Convention 
(2001), 85
Treaty on the Principles 
Governing the Activities of 
States in the Exploration of 
Outer Space, Including the 
Moon and Other Celestial 
Bodies (Outer Space 
Treaty), 66, 217
Treaty on the Prohibition of 
the Emplacement of 
Nuclear Weapons and 
Other Weapons of Mass 
Destruction on the Sea-Bed 
and the Ocean Floor and in 
the Subsoil Thereof (Sea-
Bed Treaty), 66, 217
Treaty on the Prohibition of 
Nuclear Weapons in 
Latin America and 
the Caribbean (1967 
[Tlatelolco Treaty]), 13–14, 
22, 66, 217
Treaty on the Southeast Asia 
Nuclear-Weapon-Free 
Zone (Bangkok Treaty), 
67, 217
Tritium, 8, 78
Truman, Harry S., 6, 7
Turkmenistan, 33
Ukraine, 41, 67
Union of Concerned Scientists 
(UCS), 274
United Kingdom, 8, 9, 13, 24, 26, 
28
 debate in concerning phase out 
of nuclear weapons, 67–68
 nuclear modernization 
program of, 32
 nuclear policy of, 46
 number of strategic warheads 
in, 47, 214
United Nations (UN), 7, 14, 15, 
20, 21, 257–259
 UN Institute for Disarmament 
Research (UNIDIR), 259
 UN International Convention 
for the Suppression of Acts 
of Nuclear Terrorism, 30
 UN Security Council, 31
 UN Special Commission on 
Iraq (UNSCOM), 20
 UN Security Council 
Resolution 1540 (2004), 2, 
29, 53, 237–238
  text of, 238–242
 UN Security Council 
Resolution 1718 (2006), 
243–244
  text of, 244–248
United States, 8, 9, 13, 14, 18, 26, 
41, 62
 design facilities for nuclear 
weapons, 77
 and the development of 
nuclear weapons delivery 
systems, 10–12
 effectiveness of conventional 
weapons used by, 49–50
 and the price of the Cold War, 
39
 size of nuclear stockpile: 12 
(1961–1962); 46 (1965); 
46 (1985); 47, 48, 79–80, 214 
(2006)
 superiority of its nuclear 
technology and nuclear 
arsenal, 43
 and the testing of nuclear-
tipped ABM defense 
systems, 86–87
 and the “triad” delivery 
structure for nuclear 
weapons, 12

334 Index
United States (continued)
 use of nuclear weapons against 
imperial Japan, 5–7
 U.S.-Soviet nuclear arms 
control, 16–17, 25
See also Cuban Missile Crisis; 
Proliferation Security 
Initiative (PSI); United 
States, nuclear weapons 
policy of; United States, 
special issues concerning 
nuclear weapons and 
nonproliferation
United States Atomic Energy 
Commission, 54, 55
United States Department of 
Defense, Defense Threat 
Reduction Agency 
(DTRA), 261–262
United States Department of 
Energy, National Nuclear 
Security Administration 
(NNSA), 264–266
United States Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS), 
267–268
United States Department of 
State, 268–269
 Bureau of International 
Security and Non-
proliferation (ISN), 268
 Bureau of Veriﬁ cation, 
Compliance, and 
Implementation (VCI), 
268–269
United States, nuclear weapons 
policy of, 79–84
 development of nuclear bunker 
buster bombs, 82
 inﬂ uence of public opinion on, 
94–95
 National Security Strategy 
documents, 81, 83
 nonproliferation as a priority 
of, 80–81
 the recommendations of the 
Nuclear Posture Review 
(2001), 81–82
 regarding new nuclear-
weapon-free zones, 92–94
 tactical nuclear weapons 
outside of the United 
States, 80
 under the Bush (George H. W.) 
administration, 19
 under the Bush (George W.) 
administration, 25, 81–85
 under the Clinton 
administration, 81
United States, special 
issues concerning 
nuclear weapons and 
nonproliferation, 75–77
 formal treaties and veriﬁ cation 
issues, 84–86
 intelligence, nuclear 
proliferation, and 
counterproliferation 
issues, 90–92
 missile defense systems of, 
86–90
 nuclear tests, 215
 operational costs of 
maintaining the nuclear 
arsenal, 77–78
 as a partner in international 
nonproliferation efforts, 
75–76
 politics and nonproliferation, 
95–96
 status of U.S. nuclear weapons 
complex, 77–79
University of Chicago, 4
U.S.-Russian Strategic Offensive 
Reductions Treaty (2001), 
25, 235–236
 text of, 236–237
Uranium, 8, 9, 207
 enriched uranium, 27, 30, 33, 
212

Index
335
 highly enriched uranium 
(HEU), 51, 52, 57, 85
 irradiating of, 4
 reprocessing of, 212
 uranium-235 isotopes, 4, 206
Uzbekistan, 33
Vajpayee, Atal Behari, 23–24
Vanunu, Mordechai, 203–204
Waltz, Kenneth, 39, 69
Warsaw Treaty Organization 
(Warsaw Pact), 11
Weapons of mass destruction 
(WMD), 20, 26–27, 29, 82, 
83
 in Libya, 28
 and U.S. intelligence gathering, 
90–92
Wells, H. G., 3
The World Set Free (Wells), 3
Yeltsin, Boris, 19
Yugoslavia, 16
Zangger, Claude, 17
Zangger Committee. See Non-
Proliferation Treaty 
Exporters Committee 
(Zangger Committee)


About the Authors
Sarah J. Diehl is senior editor and research associate with the Cen-
ter for Nonproliferation Studies (CNS) at the Monterey Institute 
of International Studies. She holds a B.A. and a J.D. from Stanford 
University. After eight years in legal practice in San Francisco, 
she joined CNS in 1994. She has served as managing editor of The
Nonproliferation Review (1994–2000), edited a number of other CNS 
publications, and written Web site materials on weapons of mass 
destruction issues. 
James Clay Moltz is a research professor in the Graduate School of 
International Policy Studies at the Monterey Institute of Interna-
tional Studies. He also teaches at the Naval Postgraduate School. 
From 1993 to 2007, Dr. Moltz worked at the Monterey Institute’s 
Center for Nonproliferation Studies, serving as deputy director 
from 2003 to 2007. He earned his Ph.D. in political science at the 
University of California–Berkeley. From 1993 to 1998, he served 
as editor of The Nonproliferation Review. Dr. Moltz has authored or 
edited several books on proliferation issues, as well as numerous 
book chapters and articles.

