Yang Xu
Editor
Nuclear Power 
Plants: Innovative 
Technologies for 
Instrumentation and 
Control Systems
Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering   400
International Symposium on Software 
Reliability, Industrial Safety, Cyber Security 
and Physical Protection of Nuclear Power Plant

Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering
Volume 400
Board of Series editors
Leopoldo Angrisani, Napoli, Italy
Marco Arteaga, Coyoacán, México
Samarjit Chakraborty, München, Germany
Jiming Chen, Hangzhou, P.R. China
Tan Kay Chen, Singapore, Singapore
Rüdiger Dillmann, Karlsruhe, Germany
Haibin Duan, Beijing, China
Gianluigi Ferrari, Parma, Italy
Manuel Ferre, Madrid, Spain
Sandra Hirche, München, Germany
Faryar Jabbari, Irvine, USA
Janusz Kacprzyk, Warsaw, Poland
Alaa Khamis, New Cairo City, Egypt
Torsten Kroeger, Stanford, USA
Tan Cher Ming, Singapore, Singapore
Wolfgang Minker, Ulm, Germany
Pradeep Misra, Dayton, USA
Sebastian Möller, Berlin, Germany
Subhas Mukhopadyay, Palmerston, New Zealand
Cun-Zheng Ning, Tempe, USA
Toyoaki Nishida, Sakyo-ku, Japan
Bijaya Ketan Panigrahi, New Delhi, India
Federica Pascucci, Roma, Italy
Tariq Samad, Minneapolis, USA
Gan Woon Seng, Nanyang Avenue, Singapore
Germano Veiga, Porto, Portugal
Haitao Wu, Beijing, China
Junjie James Zhang, Charlotte, USA

About this Series
“Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering (LNEE)” is a book series which reports
the latest research and developments in Electrical Engineering, namely:
• Communication, Networks, and Information Theory
• Computer Engineering
• Signal, Image, Speech and Information Processing
• Circuits and Systems
• Bioengineering
LNEE publishes authored monographs and contributed volumes which present
cutting edge research information as well as new perspectives on classical ﬁelds,
while maintaining Springer’s high standards of academic excellence. Also
considered for publication are lecture materials, proceedings, and other related
materials of exceptionally high quality and interest. The subject matter should be
original and timely, reporting the latest research and developments in all areas of
electrical engineering.
The audience for the books in LNEE consists of advanced level students,
researchers, and industry professionals working at the forefront of their ﬁelds. Much
like Springer’s other Lecture Notes series, LNEE will be distributed through
Springer’s print and electronic publishing channels.
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/7818

Yang Xu
Editor
Nuclear Power Plants:
Innovative Technologies
for Instrumentation
and Control Systems
International Symposium on Software
Reliability, Industrial Safety, Cyber Security
and Physical Protection of Nuclear Power
Plant
123

Editor
Yang Xu
Department of Engineering Physics
Tsinghua University
Beijing
China
ISSN 1876-1100
ISSN 1876-1119
(electronic)
Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering
ISBN 978-981-10-3360-5
ISBN 978-981-10-3361-2
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016963309
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or
for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
The registeredcompanyaddressis:152 BeachRoad,#21-01/04GatewayEast,Singapore189721,Singapore

Preface
The International Symposium on Software Reliability, Industrial Safety, Cyber
Security and Physical Protection of Nuclear Power Plant was successfully held in
Yinchuan, China, from May 30 to June 2, 2016. This symposium was jointly
organized by China Instrument and Control Society and the Government of
Yinchuan City.
The purpose of this symposium is to discuss the status quo, technical progress
and development direction of digital instrument control technology, software reli-
ability, information security and physical protection in the process of nuclear power
development. It aims to provide a platform of technical exchange and experience
sharing for those broad masses of experts and scholars and nuclear power practi-
tioners. At the same time, it also provides a platform for the combination of pro-
duction, teaching and research in universities and enterprises to promote the safe
development of nuclear power plant.
This symposium received a total of 50 papers, covering digital instrument
control technology, software reliability, information security and physical protec-
tion and other technical directions. After an anonymous peer review and expert
selection, 24 excellent papers were ﬁnally recommended to Springer for publica-
tion. These 24 papers presented corresponding technical solutions and new ideas
of the main design of the nuclear power plant control system, software veriﬁcation
and validation, digital instrument control system CPU redundancy conﬁguration,
fault diagnosis, remote I/O technology and software reliability, etc. We deﬁnitely
believe that these papers in this volume have the innovative and practical value, and
they can provide a useful reference for the follow-up-related work of nuclear power
plant.
201 experts and scholars, students, corporate executives and outstanding sci-
entist and technological workers from 68 institutes and organizations attended this
symposium, including Tsinghua University, the Ministry of Environmental
Protection, the Chinese Academy of Sciences and the China General Nuclear Power
Group. Mr. Wang Zhongqiu, director of Nuclear and Radiation Safety Review
Center of Environmental Protection Department, gives the keynote speech of
“Nuclear power plant digital instrument control system review”, and Mr. Chen
v

Weihua, director of Instrumentation and Control Department of China Guangdong
Nuclear Power Design Corporation, gives the invited lecture of “Discussion on
Information Security of Digital Instrument Control System in Nuclear Power
Plant”. Many other wonderful presentations were also presented by experts such as
Prof. Huang Xiaojin, researcher of Tsinghua University, Mr. Gao Feng, vice
president of China Guangdong Nuclear Power Design Corporation and other
industry professionals. A wide ranging discussion were held in the ﬁnal section of
this symposium, which focus on the safety review and information security and
other content people generally concerned about.
The symposium was a great success, and we must give our thanks to the
organizers, to the scientiﬁc society, external reviewers, subject report experts and
session chairs, also to the authors of these papers, and so on. Thanks again to the
great effort of each of them. Prof. Yang XuTsinghua University, Beijing, China.
Beijing, China
Yang Xu
vi
Preface

Contents
3D Digital Virtual Simulation Application System for Technical
Management of Nuclear Power Station Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Yi-Yang Xing, Hua-Bo Huang and Xiao-Ming Yang
HFE Study About Environment Design Indexes for Main Control
Room of Nuclear Power Plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
Bo Cheng, Jian-bo Zhang, Shi-bo Mei, Gang Zhang, Yan Wang
and Yu Luan
A Study of Implementation V&V Activities for Safety Software
in the Nuclear Power Plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Hui-hui Liang, Peng-fei Gu, Jian-zhong Tang and Wei-hua Chen
Analysis of CPU Redundant Conﬁguration for the Safety DCS
of NPP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
You-ran Li, Wei Sun, Liang Zhou and Long-qiang Zhang
Research and Improvement of TG Equipment Load Shedding Control
Scheme in Nuclear Power Plant. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
Le-Yuan Bai, Xu-Feng Wang, Gang Yin and Bin Zeng
The Research About Explosive Gas Atmosphere and Explosion
Proof Technique of Waste Gas Treatment System in Nuclear
Power Plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Dan Xu, Hua Huang and Jing-Jie Bo
Analyzing and Processing the Malfunction of Control
Valve Dithering in PWR Nuclear Power Plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
Chu-hao Xi, Long-qiang Zhang and Yong Tian
First Loop Loose Parts Field Diagnosis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
Hui-Tao Yang and Jin-Bo Zhao
vii

Research on Application of Remote IO Technology
in Nuclear Power Plant. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Hui Wang, Tian-Sheng Ji, Ai-Guo Lv and Hao Zhong
Research on Wireless Location Technology of Nuclear Power Plant
and Discussion for Physical Protection System Application . . . . . . . . . . .
87
Lin Ye, Hua-Ping Chen, Shuang Li and Wen-Fei Wu
Analyzing the Digitally Levelled Control Systems Used
for Nuclear Power Plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
Yuan-Long Wang
A Study About Software Development QC and QA of the Digital RPS
in Nuclear Power Plant. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
Wei-Hua Chen, Wang Xi, Peng-Fei Gu and Wang-Ping Ye
A Study of NI Indoor Wireless Coverage in CPR1000 Projects . . . . . . .
113
Chang Su, Shou-Yang Zhai, Yu Cao, Xiao-Fei Deng and Chao-Jun Wu
Evaluation System of Software Concept V&V About the Safety Digital
I&C System in Nuclear Power Plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125
Peng-Fei Gu, Wang Xi, Wei-Hua Chen and Su-Yuan Yu
Discussion About Issues of Human Error in Digital Control Room
of NPP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
133
Yan Feng, Zhong-Qiu Wang, Jing-Bin Liu and Yin-Hui Guo
Improving Human-System Interface Design Through Human
Behavior Assessment in the Control Room of Nuclear Power Plants . . .
143
Xiaolu Dong, Dan Pan, Zhizhong Li, Yunbo Zhang, Yan Feng
and Jingbin Liu
Qualiﬁcation Test Standards Research of Electrical Equipment
Important to Safety of Nuclear Power Plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
153
Yin-Hui Guo, Zhong-Qiu Wang, Yun-Bo Zhang, Yan Feng, Ning Qiao
and Jing-bin Liu
The Several Issues in Safety Review of Digital Control System
in Chinese Nuclear Power Plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
163
Yun-Bo Zhang, Zhong-Qiu Wang, Yan Feng, Jing-Bin Liu
and Yin-Hui Guo
The Situation and Suggestion of Diversity Actuation System
Applied in China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
169
Jing-Bin Liu, Zhong-Qiu Wang, Yun-Bo Zhang, Yan Feng, Yin-Hui Guo
and Xiao-Lu Dong
The Application of the Wireless Sensor Network in Intelligent
Monitoring of Nuclear Power Plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
179
Jianghai Li, Xiaojing Kang, Zhenhai Long, Jia Meng and Xiaojin Huang
viii
Contents

Performance Comparison of Tri-level Switching AMB
Power Ampliﬁers Based on Different Current Sensors
and Control Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
189
Kai Zhang, Yang Xu and Jin-Ping Dong
The Independence of Safety Digital I&C System
in Nuclear Power Plant. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
201
Xiang Jia, Zhong-Qiu Wang, Yun-Bo Zhang and Yin-Hui Guo
Study on Application of Veriﬁcation and Validation
to Digital Control Room of Nuclear Power Plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
209
Yong-Bin Sun, Tao Bai and Li-Sheng Hu
Research About the Spurious Trip Rate of Digital RPS
Based on FMEA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
217
Jun-Yi Li, Hui-Hui Liang and Ya-Nan He
Contents
ix

3D Digital Virtual Simulation Application
System for Technical Management
of Nuclear Power Station Equipment
Yi-Yang Xing, Hua-Bo Huang and Xiao-Ming Yang
Abstract 3D digital virtual simulation application system is designed to improve
the risk prevention capability, reduce the maintenance cost and strengthen the
reﬁned technical management of nuclear power station equipment. By using virtual
reality technology, the assembly and disassembly process, maintenance process and
operation principle of nuclear power station equipment can be displayed and
simulated in the system. And with the effective association between 3D model,
operation data and maintenance data, the system can help professionals to improve
and standardize the management of maintenance, quality control and engineering
log. This paper expounds the application value and function of the 3D digital virtual
simulation of nuclear power station, and presents the technical route of the whole
software system.
Keywords Nuclear power station  Technical management of equipment 
Virtual reality  3D  Simulation application
1
Introduction
According to the 13th Five-Year Plan in China, the installed capacity of operational
nuclear power station will reach 58 million kW, and those of nuclear power station
under construction will reach 30 million kW in 2020, which will increase the
nuclear power generation ratio from 2 to 4%. It is expected that the nuclear power
generation ratio will be increased to 8–10% till 2030, which indicates nuclear power
is an important direction for the development of Chinese energy structure opti-
mization. However, due to the particularity of production object and process of
nuclear power, safety problem has attracted a lot of attention. Except the safety
Y.-Y. Xing  H.-B. Huang (&)  X.-M. Yang
Nanjing Isane Information Technology Co., Ltd., No. 6, Jiangjun Avenue,
Jiangning District, Nanjing City 210000, Jiangsu Province, China
e-mail: hhb@isane.com.cn
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_1
1

measures in the design of reactor, excellent equipment technical management of
professionals is also an important factor in ensuring the safety of nuclear power
plant.
Equipment maintenance is important work of nuclear power station equipment
technical management. There are two kinds of maintenance: one is to ensure the
normal operation of system and equipment as designed, and the other one is to
repair the failure system and equipment to restore the operational ability as
designed. The maintenance of nuclear power station is different from those of the
conventional power station or other industrial plants for its large scale, complex
equipment, big loss of outage, its importance in nuclear safety and public health
protection. Therefore, the technical requirements of equipment maintenance of
nuclear power station is very high. The short-term task of nuclear power station
maintenance department is to repair the failure equipment as soon as possible to
ensure the secure and reliable operation of the units, and the long-term task is to
analyze the failure, ﬁnd out the countermeasures, formulate and improve the
practical maintenance plan, and implement the plan.
By using virtual reality technology, combined with database, software, network
and graphics technology, 3D digital virtual simulation application system of nuclear
power station equipment technical management can establish a 3D digital equip-
ment technical management platform with integrated services, data information and
3D visualization. The 3D display and virtual simulation of equipment structure,
disassembly and assembly process of equipment, maintenance process and oper-
ating principle can be achieved through this platform, also a comprehensive and
effective association among the online operation data, historical maintenance data
and equipment basic information can be created in the 3D environment. Therefore,
for the equipment technical management with core work of maintenance, both
short-term and long-term task, the professionals can understand equipment location,
structure, environment, current status and historical maintenance data through the
platform in real-time, which helps to formulate quickly and effectively the con-
struction and maintenance, quality control, debugging and commissioning, accep-
tance check plan and the allocation of related resources, and provides the 3D
visualization means for nuclear power station maintenance safety, standardization
and speedy and thus to enhance reﬁned equipment technical management and
improve the risk prevention capacity of nuclear power station.
2
System Design
A B/S architecture is used in nuclear power station equipment technical manage-
ment virtual simulation application software. The application function and database
are deployed in the back server. Client of nuclear power station network can access
the system through web browser, and operate the corresponding function according
to the operating authority.
2
Y.-Y. Xing et al.

2.1
System Function Design
The 3D digital virtual simulation application software of nuclear power station
equipment technical management includes ﬁve parts: 3D visualization model, 3D
equipment log, equipment maintenance process simulation, equipment operation
principle simulation, and equipment operation parameters in real-time 3D display.
First, set up visualized models for nuclear power station and all equipment, then
develop integrated application software for 3D models and equipment technical
management logic, database, and interactive operation, forming a 3D digitized
virtual simulation platform, achieving 3D virtual simulation and reﬁned technical
management implementation of each equipment structure, principle and mainte-
nance process.
Nuclear power plant equipment management level and technical proﬁciency is
one of the important factors to guarantee the safety of the nuclear power plant, the
3D simulation system of nuclear power plant has a realization of a simple display
device or roaming [1]. The system based on virtual reality technology with
equipment management business and database data form a complete set of virtual
simulation system, and ERP and EAM information systems and docking, can be
used for guiding equipment maintenance support sqlserver, Oracle and other
mainstream relational database (Fig. 1).
3D Digital Virtual Simulation
Nuclear Power Station 3D
Visualization
Nuclear Power Station Equipment 3D Digital Virtual Simulation Application Platform
3D Model Operation Based
on
WEB Mode
Equipment 3D Log
Equipment
Maintenance 
Equipment Operation Principle
Virtual Simulation
Equipment Operation Real-time
Paramet ers 3D 
Fig. 1 System function structure
3D Digital Virtual Simulation Application System …
3

2.2
Technical Architecture
The technical architecture of 3D digital virtual simulation application system of
nuclear power station equipment technical management includes the core 3D digital
engine, 3D scene editing, IDE integrated development environment and 3D display.
1. Resolve equipment 3D model into 3D image through graphics rendering of 3D
engine, the rendering effect is related to the equipment material.
2. Achieve roaming function of 3D scene through scene editing, 3D coordinate and
angle of camera controlling and other development of technical parameters.
3. Simulate the wind, steam, smoke, water and other effects in real world through
controlling the particle emission rate, emission direction, particle density and
other parameters of the particle system in 3D engine by mathematical
calculation.
4. Read and modify the related equipment information in relational database
through data exchange module to realize the integration of management infor-
mation system and 3D digital virtual simulation application system.
5. The system support iOS, Android, Window and Mac operating systems, and
support web browsers (Fig. 2).
3D Display 
ApplicaƟon
 System 
iOS/Android
PC/Mac
HTML
3D Engine
Audio, Video
Camera, Light
Material 
System
Graphics 
Rendering System
Physical System
ParƟcle 
System
Equipment 3D Module Base 
Equipment InformaƟon 
Database 
Business Logic 
Module
Data Exchange 
Module
Business System
Business System
Business System
Business System
WebGL
Fig. 2 System technical structure
4
Y.-Y. Xing et al.

3
3D Modeling
Nuclear power station is composed of three parts: nuclear island, conventional
island and auxiliary system [2]. The physical part includes buildings, systems and
equipment. Nuclear power station 3D modeling is divided into plant modeling
and equipment 3D modeling. Plant modeling is for understanding plant appearance
and nuclear power station layout by scene roaming; and equipment 3D modeling is
the base of 3D virtual simulation system application with the scale of 1:1 to the real
dimensions of equipment structure, and with the basic modeling primitives of
equipment components.
The 3D modeling tool is 3dsMax. The total number and number of surface of
models must be fully considered during the modeling. And the model compression,
instantiation, mapping and other technical optimization need to be implemented
after 3D model is built to ensure the smoothness, stability and realness in the
process of using the application system.
4
System Application Function
4.1
The Operation of 3D Model Based on WEB Mode
The operation of 3D model based on WEB mode includes scene roaming and
equipment interactive operation.
Different directions of 3D virtual scene is displayed by translation, rotation, push
and pull, shake, zoom and combined above methods of camera [3]. The mouse and
keyboard can be used as roaming controller and roam freely in the scene, a ﬁxed
line can also be set for scene roaming to get best effect of 3D virtual scene.
Equipment interactive operation is the operation of 3D equipment model based
on WEB environment, including positioning, zooming, rotation, hiding, perspec-
tive, separate display, etc.
4.2
Equipment 3D Log
Nuclear power station equipment 3D log integrates the 1D data, 2D drawings and
3D structure information of equipment together, building the comprehensive,
visualized equipment archive, which helps accessing information and review data
conveniently and mastering equipment structure, service status at any time.
Equipment 1D data includes speciﬁcations, size, manufacturer, spare parts,
maintenance record, repair record, etc.; equipment 2D drawings includes equipment
structure drawings, installation drawings, photographs, etc.; and equipment 3D
information includes equipment 3D visualized model, sound, video, etc.
3D Digital Virtual Simulation Application System …
5

4.3
Equipment Maintenance Process Simulation
Nuclear power station equipment maintenance process simulation is to reappear or
preview the real maintenance process in 3D virtual environment, showing the
speciﬁc operation method of equipment maintenance visually and dynamically,
discovering the spatial relationship of equipment, tools and scene in the process of
maintenance, reminding the key operation points and risk precautions, so as to
standardize and visualize the maintenance process and improve the efﬁciency and
quality of maintenance work. The speciﬁc steps are as follows:
1. Decompose the process of equipment maintenance scientiﬁcally and reasonably
according to the nuclear power station equipment maintenance procedures,
process and safety standards;
2. Build the 3D elements which need to be displayed in maintenance process through
3D modeling, including ﬁeld, equipment and spare parts, tools and appliance, etc.;
3. Build maintenance simulation animation according to decomposed maintenance
process and 3D elements by 3D scene editor, including particle and physical
effect and animation control parameters;
4. Develop simulation application function through 3D digital engine, IDE inte-
grated development environment, such as equipment assembly, process jump,
pause, text, voice, maintenance record, quality control points, etc.
4.4
Equipment Operation Principle Simulation
Nuclear power station equipment operation principle simulation is to reappear the
working principles and effects of each equipment in 3D virtual environment,
showing the operation process of the equipment visually and dynamically, pro-
viding a visualized analysis method for mastering equipment basic structure and
principle, analyzing the key parts and reasons which inﬂuence equipment efﬁciency
during operation process.
Nuclear power station equipment operation principle simulation can show the
principle of nuclear power station, structure and working mode of the main system
and operation principle of single equipment; and can also achieve 3D simulation of
nuclear power station equipment operation principle in different conditions, by
mapping, texture, particle effect, physical effect, 3D animation and other methods.
4.5
3D Display of Equipment Operation Real-Time
Parameters
3D display of nuclear power station equipment operation real-time parameters is to
integrate the 3D model and equipment operation real-time data, monitoring and
6
Y.-Y. Xing et al.

showing dynamically the operation status of equipment, and alarming and 3D
positioning for abnormal data in real time.
Firstly develop one-way access interface program according to the interface
protocol provided by nuclear power station DCS system and the equipment ﬁeld
bus control system as well as the information security management regulations;
then develop function program through real-time data obtained by interface pro-
gram in 3D IDE integrated development environment.
5
Conclusion
The system is based on virtual reality technology and 3D digital technology applied
in nuclear power station equipment technical management, building a integrated
application platform for nuclear power station dynamic virtual simulation, visual-
izing and standardizing the reﬁned equipment technical management and mainte-
nance process, helping saving maintenance cost, improving equipment technical
management and risk prevention ability of nuclear power station. The system can
also be used for professional training to improve training quality and equipment
operating proﬁciency.
References
1. Hong-Bo Li (2008) Nuclear power plant’s key equipment virtual assembly simulation system
[J]. China High-tech Enterprises
2. Lin Sun (2008) Nuclear Power Station Maintenance Quality Management [J]. Nuclear Power
Engineering 29(4): 36–38
3. Li Zhu (2002) Research on Technology of Building Virtual Roaming System [J]. Xi’an,
Northwestern Polytechnical University
3D Digital Virtual Simulation Application System …
7

HFE Study About Environment Design
Indexes for Main Control Room
of Nuclear Power Plant
Bo Cheng, Jian-bo Zhang, Shi-bo Mei,
Gang Zhang, Yan Wang and Yu Luan
Abstract Main control room (MCR) is an important site of the nuclear power plant
(NPP), and the environmental condition in MCR shall be beneﬁt to operators per-
forming their task effectively and comfortably. With the development of HFE (human
factor engineering), there is more attention to environment design of MCR. the MCR
environment design mainly include noise reduction, illumination, air condition, interior
and colour design, earthquake protection, ﬁre protection, radiation protection, missile
protection, and so on. At present, the indexes for environment design of domestic and
international regulations and standards are inconsistent. None of regulations and stan-
dards is comprehensive, detailed and fully adapting to the MCR environment design of
NPP, and some indexes are difﬁcult to achieve. This paper compares the indexes of
MCR environment of regulations and standards, performs HFE study about the indexes
of MCR environment design combining with engineering experience in different NPPs.
Finally, this paper proposes a set of environment design indexes applied to MCR of
NPP, which will guide the MCR environment design of third generation NPPs.
Keywords NPP  MCR  HFE  Environment design indexes
1
General
The MCR environment of NPP affects the health, performance and human factors
effect of operators, even the safety of NPPs. For the MCR design, ﬁrstly to com-
plete the basic structure and equipment arrangement of the control room according
to HFE theory, then the MCR environment design consider the following indexes:
noise reduction, illumination, air conditions, interior and colour design, earthquake
protection, ﬁre protection, radiation protection, missile protection, and so on. But
now, the indexes of MCR environment design in different regulations and standards
B. Cheng (&)  J. Zhang  S. Mei
G. Zhang  Y. Wang  Y. Luan
China Nuclear Power Engineering Co., Ltd., Shenzhen 518172, China
e-mail: chengbo@cgnpc.com.cn
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_2
9

are inconsistent. None of regulations and standards is comprehensive, detailed and
fully adapting to the MCR environment design of NPPs, and some indexes are
difﬁcult to achieve. So it’s necessary to establish a set of comprehensive, consistent
and suitable indexes for MCR environment design of NPPs.
2
MCR Environment Design Indexes in Regulations
and Standards
This chapter compare and analyse the indexes for MCR environment in regulations
and standards to expound the present situation of the environment design
requirements of the MCR.
2.1
Noise Level
Noise is an important index that affects the environment of MCR in NPP and a
major contributor to operator fatigue and effectiveness. Noise reduction is the
emphasis and difﬁculty of MCR environment design. The indexes of MCR noise
level in regulations and standards are shown in Table 1.
Table 1 The noise level indexes in the regulations and standards
Regulations and standards
Indexes
IEC 60964-1989 [1]
Maximum ambient noise: 45 dB
Background noise should not exceed 45 dB
IEC 60964-2009 [2]
Guidance for environmental speciﬁcations under
normal conditions is provided in ISO 11064
ISO 11064-6:2005(E) [3]
The ambient noise should not exceed 45 dB LAeq,T
The background level should be in the range 30–35 dB LAeq,T
EUR [4]
MCR shall have an ambient noise level no greater than 50 dB
URD [5]
MCR shall have an ambient noise level no
greater than 60 dB (A)
Mid-frequency reverberation times should not exceed 0.75 s and should
preferably be closer to 0.4 s—dependent on room
Nureg0700 [6]
Background noise levels should not exceed 65 dB (A)
The acoustical treatment of the control room should
limit reverberation time to 1 s or less
HAF J0055-1995 [7]
Ambient noise should not exceed 45 dB
Reverberation (Chinese word is “huisheng” in this standard)
time should be limited to below 1 s
GB/T 13630-1992 [8]
Equivalent to the requirements in IEC 60964-1989
EJ/T 638-1992 [9]
Background noise in the control room should not exceed 45 dB (A)
Reverberation (Chinese word is “huixiang” in this standard) time should
not exceed 1 s
NB/T 20190-2012 [10]
Noise limitation of MCR is 55 dB (A)
10
B. Cheng et al.

According to Table 1, the noise indexes mainly include ambient noise, back-
ground noise level and reverberation time, but the indexes in different regulations
and standards are inconsistent. The suggesting indexes will be provided in Sect. 4.
2.2
Illumination
In normal condition, normal lighting works in MCR, but the possibility of losing
normal lighting should be considered, so emergency lighting is as a backup. The
indexes of MCR illumination in regulations and standards is shown in Table 2.
Table 2 The illumination indexes in the regulations and standards
Regulations and
standards
Indexes
IEC 60964-1989 [1]
Level of illumination: minimum: 200 lx, maximum: 750 lx
Uniformity of illumination (ratio): not less than 0.5
Incident illumination to VDU screen: minimum: 50 lx, maximum:
100 lx
Minimum emergency illumination: 200 lx
IEC 60964-2009 [2]
Guidance for environmental speciﬁcations under normal conditions is
provided in ISO 11064
ISO
11064-6:2005(E) [3]
Illuminance levels on work surfaces where paperwork is undertaken
should be “maintained” at a level of 200–750 lx with an upper limit of
500 lx where VDUs are used
Dimming should be provided with a lower limit of “maintained”
200 lx on the work surface at all times
For working areas where mainly paperwork is undertaken, an
illumination level of 500 lx should be maintained
Electric lighting should achieve a glare index (UGR) of 19 or less for
all work positions
EUR [4]
Illumination for the lighting areas (e.g. Operator workstations,
auxiliary and supervisor areas) may be in the range of 50–250 lx
More detailed guidance is given in IEC 60964: Design for control
rooms of nuclear power plants
URD [5]
Control stations shall be provided with lighting which can be adjusted
by the operators to provide uniform illumination in the range of 10–50
foot-candles
The emergency lighting system shall provide a minimum illumination
level of 10 foot candles
Note: 1 footcandle = 10.761 lx
Nureg0700 [6]
Nominal illumination levels for various tasks and work areas indicate
in Table 1 of Chapter “A Study about Software Development QC and
QA of the Digital RPS in Nuclear Power Plant” are 50 or 100 foot-
candles, reading on VDU: 10 footcandles
Emergency operating lighting: 10 footcandles
(continued)
HFE Study About Environment Design Indexes …
11

According to Table 2, the illumination indexes mainly include nominal illumi-
nation level, emergency illumination level, uniformity of illumination and UGR,
but the indexes in different regulations and standards are inconsistent. The sug-
gesting indexes will be provided in Sect. 4.
2.3
Air Conditions
The MCR of NPP should have appropriate temperature, humidity and air ﬂow
organization. The indexes of MCR air condition in regulations and standards are
shown in Table 3.
Table 2 (continued)
Regulations and
standards
Indexes
HAF J0055-1995 [7]
Average illumination is 100–500 lx, adjustable
Uniformity of illumination is not less than 0.7
Incident illumination (Chinese word is “shigu zhaodu” in this
standard) to VDU screen is 50–100 lx
Emergency illumination is not less than 200 lx
GB/T 13630-1992
[8]
Equivalent to the requirements in IEC 60964-1989
EJ/T 638-1992 [9]
The illumination requirements are from 200 to 1000 lx distinguishing
between different areas, and please see the original text for details
Emergency illumination is not less than 200 lx and can work 8 h
at least
Table 3 The air condition indexes in the regulations and standards
Regulations
and standards
Indexes
IEC 60964-1989 [1]
No requirements
IEC 60964-2009 [2]
Guidance for environmental speciﬁcations under normal conditions is
provided in ISO 11064
ISO
11064-6:2005(E) [3]
For sedentary activity during winter conditions: the operative
temperature should be between 20 and 24 °C (i.e. 22 ± 2 °C)
The mean air velocity should be less than 0.15 m/s
The relative humidity should be between 30 and 70%
For sedentary activity during summer conditions: the operative
temperature should be between 23 and 26 °C (i.e. 24.5 ± 1.5 °C)
The mean air velocity should be less than 0.15 m/s
The relative humidity should be between 30 and 70%
EUR [4]
Applicable values for the temperature of the HMI rooms are in the range
of 18–25 °C with a humidity rate of 40–60%
URD [5]
73–78 °F; 35–50% relative humidity
(continued)
12
B. Cheng et al.

According to Table 3, the air condition indexes mainly include temperature,
humidity, the mean air velocity and introducing fresh air requirements, even the
temperature requirements in extreme environment. But the indexes in different
regulations and standards are inconsistent. The suggesting indexes will be provided
in Sect. 4.
2.4
The Interior and Color Design
The technical indexes of MCR decoration material of NPPs are an important index
in the interior design. In addition to considering the basic requirements of human
health, ﬁre, etc., but also need to be combined with the principles of human
engineering and effectiveness.
Table 3 (continued)
Regulations
and standards
Indexes
Within a temperature range of 73–78 °F with a 1 h maximum of 85 °F
and a relative humidity range of 25–60% maximum
For a loss of all ac power event, provisions shall be made to limit the
average temperature rise to 15 °F maximum at 72 h into the event
Note: conversion formula of temperature: F = 9C/5 + 32
Nureg0700 [6]
The climate control system should maintain temperatures of 68–75 °F in
winter and 73–79 °F in summer and relative humidity levels between 30
and 60%
The ventilation system should be capable of introducing fresh air into
the control room at a rate of at least 20 cubic feet per minute per
occupant
HAF J0055-1995 [7]
Temperature: 18–25 °C;
Relative humidity: 20–60%
The mean air velocity through the body of main area should be less than
15 m/min. Introducing fresh air into the control room is at a rate of at
least 0.43 m3 per minute per occupant
GB/T 13630-1992
[8]
No requirements
EJ/T 638-1992 [9]
Temperature: 20–25 °C
Relative humidity: 30–60%
The mean air velocity through the body of main area should be less than
0.23 m/s
In normal situation, introducing fresh air into the control room is at a
rate of at least 0.43 m3 per minute per occupant
Temperature requirements in extreme environment
Duration time of work: h
1
2
4
12
Extreme maximum temperature: 
38
35
32
29
Extreme minimum temperature: 
0.1
13
15
17
HFE Study About Environment Design Indexes …
13

The reﬂection coefﬁcient of a variety of colours should be considered in colour
design, and the choice of main tone is also consider the user’s needs to provide a
pleasant working environment and a calming backdrop. The requirements of inte-
rior and colour design in regulations and standards is not too much and shown in
Table 4.
Table 4 The interior and color design indexes in regulations and standards
Regulations and standards
Indexes
IEC 60964-1989 [1]
No requirements
IEC 60964-2009 [2]
No requirements
ISO 11064-6:2005(E) [3]
In selecting materials and ﬁnishes for the control
areas the following should be considered
(a) The reﬂectance value of the ﬂoor ﬁnishes should
be between 0.2 and 0.3
(b) Wall ﬁnishes should have a surface reﬂectance
of between 0.50 and 0.60. The surface
reﬂectance value should not fall below 0.50, as
values below this can increase the contrast
between the ceiling and walls, contribute to a
gloomy environment, and increase electric light
power consumption
(c) The glazing bars and solid areas of the partitions
should have a similar reﬂectance value (0.5–0.6)
to the periphery walls
(d) Where indirect lighting systems are used,
ceilings should be white, should be of matt
ﬁnish and should have a minimum surface
reﬂectance of 0.8
EUR [4]
Typically the ﬂoor covering material and the
ﬂooring system provide resistance values from 50
to 100 MX measured between two points on the
ﬂoor spaced by 1 m
URD [5]
General requirements of material storage and
surface ﬁnishes but no indexes
Nureg0700 [6]
Reﬂectances
Surface
Preferred
(%)
Permissible
(%)
Ceiling
80
60–95
Upper wall
50
40–60
Lower wall
15–20
Instruments/displays
80–100
Cabinets/consoles
20–40
Floor
30
15–30
Furniture
35
25–45
HAF J0055-1995 [7]
No requirements
GB/T 13630-1992 [8]
No requirements
EJ/T 638-1992 [9]
Equivalent to the requirements in Nureg0700
14
B. Cheng et al.

According to Table 4, the interior and colour design indexes mainly include
reﬂectance which can’t satisfy the design requirements fully. The detailed sug-
gestions will be provided in Sect. 4.
2.5
Other Requirements
In addition, there are some other requirements for MCR environment design in IEC
60964-1989, IEC 60964-2009, ISO 11064-6:2005(E), EUR, URD, Nureg0700,
GB/T 13630-1992, EJ/T 638-1992, e.g. ﬁre protection, radiation protection, missile
protection, earthquake protection, prevention of hostile acts, and so on. These
requirements are the general or basic requirements for the MCR environment
design, and no indexes requirements generally (except the indexes requirements of
radiation protection in EJ/T 638-1992). But such general or basic requirements
should be complied with. For example, the requirements in EJ/T 638-1992 is
following: For discontinuous running equipment in control room, such as cable tray
and catheter, ceiling, lamps and lanterns, their fault should not injure operators and
damage the safety system function during or after S2 earthquake [9]. So these
requirements will not be analysed in this paper.
3
Environment Design Indexes in Different NPPs
This chapter analyse the actual or design indexes of noise, illumination, air con-
ditions, interior and colour design of MCR environment design of Ling Ao phase II
(LA II), CPR1000 new project, EPR, AP1000 projects. The general or basic
requirements without detailed indexes are not analysed here.
3.1
Noise Level
The actual value or design target value of MCR noise of different NPPs is shown in
Table 5.
According to the above situation, the 45 dB index requirement of noise level is
difﬁcult to achieve.
During the MCR environment design, a questionnaire investigation was per-
formed with six crews to estimate the noise level of MCR [11].
The estimation criteria are:
• Perfect satisﬁed design (10)
• Good satisﬁed design (8–10)
• Satisﬁed design (6–8)
• Bad design (0–6) (Table 6).
HFE Study About Environment Design Indexes …
15

So the background noise level with about 50 dB is reasonable.
For the LAI, the shift team put forward the requirement to reduce the noise level
of MCR, c about 60 dB is not ideal.
3.2
Illumination
• Actual value of LA II basing on IEC 60964-1989: normal illumination is from
200 to 750 lx distinguishing between different areas and can be adjusted con-
tinually; the emergency illumination in main operation area is about 200 lx.
• Actual value of Fang Chenggang basing on IEC 60964-1989: normal illumi-
nation is from 200 to 750 lx distinguishing between different areas and can be
adjusted continually; optimal illumination in main digitized operation area is
500 lx, the uniformity of illumination is not less than 0.5; Emergency illumi-
nation is not less than 200 lx and can work 8 h at least.
• Design target value of EPR mainly basing on IEC 60964-1989: The illumination
level shall be 500 lx in the area of the workplaces and in the other areas.
Table 5 The actual value or design target value of MCR noise of NPPs
No.
Project
Indexes
1
Actual value of LA II
Less than 52 dB, reverberation time in some
frequency is less than 1 s
2
Actual value of CPR1000 new
project
Hong Yanhe: less than 51 dB
Fang Chenggang: less than 50 dB; reverberation
time is less than 1 s
3
Actual value of Tian Wan NPP
55–60 dB; before improvement, the smooth
surround wall and ground, and simple perforated
plate with big hole on ceiling have low frequency
noise absorption function and perform a large
reverberation sound ﬁeld
4
Design target value of EPR
basing on EUR
50 dB
5
Design target value of AP1000
basing on Nureg0700
55 dB (A), peak value is not exceeding 65 dB (A).
Reverberation time is not exceeding 1 s
6
Actual value of Ling Ao phase I
55 dB, some measuring points exceed 60 dB
7
Actual value of N4
65 dB
Table 6 The estimation for the noise in MCR
Project
Estimation item
Score
LAII
How about the noise in MCR?
7.4
Hong Yanhe
How about the noise in MCR?
7.8
16
B. Cheng et al.

• Design target value of AP1000 basing on Nureg0700: overall illumination can
be adjusted from 250 to 500 lx; illumination of reading zone is form 800 to
1000 lx. Emergency illumination is not less than 100 lx in all areas.
The optimal illumination in main digitized operation area is 350 lx of Hong
Yanhe MCR. After commercial operation, a questionnaire investigation was per-
formed that 41.7% operators thinks that such illumination is a little dark. Optimal
illumination in main digitized operation area is improved to 500 lx of Fang
Chenggang, a questionnaire investigation was also performed that 26.4% operators
are no comments because the MCR is not running, but 73.6% operators thinks that
such illumination is ideal according to simulator.
3.3
Air Condition
• Actual value of LAII: satisfy the indexes of HAF J0055 in Table 3. But a
questionnaire investigation shows that 18 °C is a little cold.
• Actual value of CPR1000: satisfy the indexes of HAF J0055 in Table 3.
• Design target value of EPR mainly basing on EUR: The temperature is between
18 and 22 ± 2 °C max. 24 °C and the relative humidity between 40 and 60%
and in accidental conditions between 10 and 30 °C for 24 h.
• Design target value of AP1000: design basing on the indexes of Nureg0700 in
Table 3.
3.4
Interior and Colour Design
At the beginning of design of LAII, a questionnaire investigation was performed
and shown that the interior and colour design of MCR environment is important.
Please see Figs. 1 and 2 and Tables 7, 8 and 9.
The choice of main tone of color is considering the user’s opinion. A survey
result shows that the blue color image perceived by the operators was classiﬁed into
fresh, cheerful, and comfortable. So the blue is chosen as the main color of LAII.
For the interior design, it’s important to improve working efﬁciency and make
operators feel more comfortable. For the technical indexes of the decoration
materials, besides the requirement in Table 4, the functionality should be consid-
ered, e.g. the sound absorption index. In Fang Chenggang project, the technical
indexes of the decoration materials are optimized entirety. The technical factors of
MCR ﬂoor is as following table that solves the wear, reﬂection, antiskid and other
issues of ground effectively.
The indexes of above factors are provided according to the standards and
engineering experience in NPPs.
AP1000: design basing on the requirements of Nureg0700 in Table 4.
HFE Study About Environment Design Indexes …
17

Fig. 1 Questionnaire investigations on wall and ﬂoor color and materials
Fig. 2 Questionnaire investigations on color harmony
Table 7 Statistical result of Fig. 1
No.
Number of operator
Mean
P-value (0.05)
Result
1
16
1.63
0.00
Important
Table 8 Statistical result of Fig. 2
No.
Number of operator
Mean
P-value (0.05)
Result
2
16
1.88
0.00
Important
18
B. Cheng et al.

4
Analysis and Project Experience of Environment
Design Indexes
Basing on the analysis in Sects. 2 and 3 and the research achievement of NPPs, this
chapter put forward that the suggested indexes of noise level, illumination, air
condition, interior and colour design of MCR environment.
4.1
Noise Level
Background noise level and reverberation time are suggested to consider for MCR
noise level of NPPs. The detailed indexes are as following:
• Background noise in MCR should not exceed 50 dB (A) according to the
project experience.
• Mid-frequency reverberation times should not exceed 1 s according to the
project experience.
In Table 1, the description of “huisheng” in HAF J0055 and “huixiang” in EJ/T
638-92 is not accurate; the correct interpretation is “hunxiang” originating from
word “reverberation”. This should be corrected when the regulations and standards
are updated.
Table 9 Technical factors of ﬂoor material of Fang Chenggang project
No.
Technical factor
1
Speciﬁcation
2
Color
3
Impact strength
4
Density
5
Water absorption rate
6
Combustion performance
7
Wearing strength
8
Moh’s hardness
9
Compressive strength
10
Reﬂectance value
11
Glossiness
12
Meet the requirements of class A decoration materials standards in GB6566-2010
(limits of radionuclides in building materials)
13
Friction index (wet)
HFE Study About Environment Design Indexes …
19

4.2
Illumination
The MCR should be provided with several lighting areas, which can be manually
adjusted to provide illumination suitable for the Operators to perform their tasks.
Suggesting indexes:
• Level and uniformity of illumination are suggested subjecting to IEC
60964-1989 and optimal illumination in main digitized operation area is 500 lx.
• Level and working time of emergency illumination is suggested subjecting to
EJ/T 638-1992.
• Uniformity of illumination (ratio) is not less than 0.5 subjecting to IEC
60964-1989.
• For direct light, electric lighting should achieve a glare index (UGR) of 19 or
less for all work positions subjecting to ISO 11064-6:2005(E) and project
experience.
In Table 2, the description of “shigu zhaodu” in GB13630 and HAF J0055 is not
accurate; the correct interpretation is “rushe zhaodu” originating from word “inci-
dent illumination”. This should be corrected when the regulations and standards are
updated.
4.3
Air Condition
The different index of temperature for winter and summer is more reasonable.
Suggesting indexes are as following:
• The temperature, humidity and mean air velocity of normal air condition is
suggested subjecting to ISO 11064-6:2005(E).
• The rate of introducing fresh air is suggested subjecting to HAF J0055-1995.
• Temperature requirements in extreme environment subjects to EJ/T 638-1992.
4.4
The Interior and Color Design
For the interior design, suggest considering the surface reﬂectance basing on
Table 4 and actual requirements, and specify detailed technical indexes of the
decoration materials according to the functionality. The author suggests deter-
mining the main tone of colour with the users together to provide a pleasant
working environment and a calming backdrop.
20
B. Cheng et al.

4.5
Others
The requirements in Sect. 2.5 are general or basic requirements for MCR envi-
ronment design and should be complied with.
5
Conclusion
The MCR of NPP is an important work place for the operation staff. A good
environment of MCR can improve the work efﬁciency of MCR staff and the safety
of NPP. This paper put forward a set of entire, speciﬁc and strongly adaptive
indexes for MCR environment design. This research achievement lays a solid
foundation for the MCR environment design of the third generation NPPs.
References
1. IEC 60964-1989. Design for control rooms of nuclear power plants [S].
2. IEC 60964-2009. Nuclear power plants-Control rooms-Design [S].
3. ISO 11064-6. Ergonomic design of control centres-Part 6: Environmental requirements for
control centres [S].
4. EUR 2.10 revision D. Instrumentation & control and human-machine interface [S].
5. URD revision 8 volume III chapter 1. Overall requirements [S].
6. Nureg0700 Rev.2. Human-System Interface Design Review Guidelines [S].
7. HAF.J0055-1995. Engineering principles for control room design of nuclear power plant [S].
8. GB/T 13630-1992. The design of control room of nuclear power plant [S].
9. EJ/T 638-1992. Design criteria for control room complex of nuclear power plant [S].
10. NB/T 20190-2012. Noise control for production buildings of nuclear power plants [S].
11. Pengfei Gu, etc. Study about Ceiling Design for Main Control Room of NPP with HFE.
Engineering Village (2014) Energy Materials Conference Proceedings.
HFE Study About Environment Design Indexes …
21

A Study of Implementation V&V Activities
for Safety Software in the Nuclear Power
Plant
Hui-hui Liang, Peng-fei Gu, Jian-zhong Tang and Wei-hua Chen
Abstract In order to improve the safety and reliability of the safety related soft-
ware for the nuclear power plant, the veriﬁcation and validation (V&V) is necessary
for the software in the whole development life cycle based on nuclear laws and
principles requirement. Nuclear Safety software implementation phase means using
programming
language
to
perform
system
requirement
speciﬁcations.
Implementation V&V activities based software design documentation to veriﬁca-
tion and validation the correctness, accuracy and completeness of the source code.
This paper considered the regulation and law requirements and given the test types
of implementation V&V activities. The test process of implementation V&V
activities for safety software in nuclear power plant has been given. The paper also
proposed the key points of the test case and the principles that the test person need
to follow.
Keywords Safety software  Implementation V&V activities  Test type  Execute
1
Introduction
The safety and reliability of nuclear safety application software will directly affect
the entire nuclear power plant safety and economy. To ensure the quality level and
improve nuclear safety level of reliability, nuclear safety application software need
to perform independent software veriﬁcation and validation (V&V) work within the
entire development life cycle. Nuclear power plant safety applications software
V&V work is the key point to self-developed nuclear safety-class system.
H. Liang (&)  P. Gu  J. Tang  W. Chen
State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Power Safety Monitoring Technology
and Equipment, China Nuclear Power Design CO., LTD, Shenzhen, China
e-mail: lianghuihui@cgnpc.com.cn
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_3
23

According to IEEE 1012 [1], software V&V activities include concept V&V,
requirement V&V, design V&V, implementation V&V and integration V&V and
so on. The software implementation phase means using programming language to
perform system requirement speciﬁcations. The implementation phase will generate
the source code that the computer can read. Implementation V&V activities are
based on software design documentation to veriﬁcation and validation the source
code is correctness, accuracy and completeness.
The V&V standards and regulations are developed by the international organi-
zations, such as IEEE [1, 2], NRC [3] and IEC [4]. The domestic [5–7] is also to
compile the standards and guidance documents. The standards and regulations only
give the software V&V activities and performance requirements. They don’t carry
out the system implementation process and what test type need to be executed for
the software implementation phase V&V.
The paper is organized as follows. The ﬁrst part introduced the research back-
ground. The second part collates the domestic and international standards and
regulations for the safety application software V&V test. The second part gives the
test types that need to be performed in the safety application software implemen-
tation V&V. The third part presents the implementation phase V&V test process
and methods which considers the test type. The fourth part is the conclusion.
2
Software Test Requirements in Regulations
and Standards
In order to achieve the better results of nuclear power plant safety software V&V
activities, the nuclear advanced countries build the nuclear power plant V&V
regulations and standards. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
International Electro technical Commission (IEC) promulgate the nuclear power
plant software V&V standards and regulations. IEC 60880 [4] gives the rules of
design and documentation for the category A functions software. It includes
speciﬁcation, design, veriﬁcation and validation, etc. IEEE 1012 [1] is the veriﬁ-
cation and validation standard for system and software. It regulates the content,
scope, method and demand of the software implementation V&V activities. It also
gives the minimum task set. IEEE 1028 [8] describes the guidance on how to
conduct software reviews, inspections, technical and management review. It pro-
vides the reference for the implementation V&V activities. IEEE 829 [9] gives the
purpose, content, formal and key elements of software test. The NRC R.G.1.170
[10] accepts IEEE 829. The software unit test requirements and method is put
forward by IEEE 1008 [11] and R.G.1.171 [12]. The domestic standards and
regulations are mostly transformed by IEC. HAD 102/16 [5] provides the veriﬁ-
cation and validation plan.
24
H. Liang et al.

Based on NB/T 20054-2011 [7], the nuclear plant A category function software
should be divided into module when the program is designed. So the implemen-
tation V&V activities for safety-class software need to test the module units before
component test.
3
Test Types for Implementation V&V Activities
The application software implementation V&V activities include the module unit,
function, interface and component test. The unit test is to verify the software units
satisfy the software speciﬁcations and coding standards. Currently the test types for
high security application include dozens. The paper combines the nuclear safety
software its own characteristics and standard and regulation requirements that gives
the test types in the software implementation V&V activities.
The standard and regulation requirements provide the following demands for the
software and documents:
1. The software satisﬁes the software speciﬁcation and it can be veriﬁed. The code
can also be read, understood and has adequate comments.
2. The code should be simple. The recursive structure, code compression and
optimization need to be avoided.
3. The data structure and name should be consistent in the whole system. It
includes data type, scope, accuracy and so on.
4. In order to regulate and guide the program design, the approved encoding rules
are requisite.
5. The software should be testability that means the every executable code can be
interviewed.
6. The document should include software design speciﬁcation and logical
requirements. It also needs to contain pre-condition and post-condition for every
module.
7. The input and output variable, the effective scope and interface should be
described in the document.
8. The document and software should give the methods of abnormal situation. The
reliability and safety measures are also needed to consider.
Due to the aforementioned conditions, the nuclear safety application software
implementation V&V need to performed the minimum set of the test type as shown
in Table 1. From Table 1, we can see that the nuclear safety application software
implementation V&V need to execute at least thirteen test types.
A Study of Implementation V&V Activities for Safety …
25

Table 1 Test types of implementation V&V activities for safety application software in the
nuclear power plant
No.
Test type
Requirement speciﬁcation
1
Document review
Do completeness, consistency, accuracy and correctness review for
requirement documents
2
Code review
Review the code consistent with requirement documents and
standards and code structure design is reasonable and code
readability
3
Static analysis
It includes data ﬂow analysis, control ﬂow analysis, and information
ﬂow analysis
4
Code walkthrough
Code walkthrough is a way of checking the code design ﬂaw. Code
walkthrough executes the test case by human brain to verify the
code to run properly and meet the functional requirements
5
Logical test
Logical test is to verify the software logical structure is correct. It is
able to achieve all branch and statement coverage and make sure
that the code does not exist any inﬁnite loops or redundant branches
or statements
6
Function test
Functional test needs to verify every functional requirement.
Functional test needs to verify the normal and abnormal situation
for every module
7
Interface test
Interface test should perform the conformance between the software
interface data types and structures. Input and output interfaces for
each module should be executed the abnormal and normal test
8
Reliability test
The speciﬁc test need to be performed for the situation which may
change the operation mode. It includes the boundary and
environmental test. The human negligence design which will affect
the software reliability that should be avoided, such as division by
zero
9
Regulatory
compliance test
The compliance between the application software design and the
development standards should be executed. Standards compliance
evaluation criteria should be established
10
Compatibility test
Nuclear safety application software compatibility test mainly refers
to the new version application software to retain the old version
function. In this case, it needs to verify the compatibility between
the two versions, the potential risks and incompatibilities
11
Performance test
Nuclear safety application software implementation V&V
performance test is mainly for the response time, accuracy of the
output data and other critical functions
12
Boundary test
Boundary test is the running state test when the software in the
boundary and endpoint. It includes state transition boundary,
functional boundary and properties boundary
13
Data processing
test
Data processing test includes the conversion of test data, test data
acquisition and the capability of removing the bad data
26
H. Liang et al.

4
Implementation V&V Activities
Nuclear Safety software implementation V&V test technology and methods can be
divided into static test and dynamic test. The nuclear safety software implemen-
tation V&V test can be divided into document review, code walkthrough and code
analysis, unit test and component test.
1. Document review
It is mainly to review the software module unit document in the correctness,
completeness, accuracy, consistency. The tester need to veriﬁcation and validation
the demands of software module unit documentation are traceable.
2. Code walkthrough and code analysis
Code walkthrough and code analysis is static test. Static test is not running the
program. It executes the program and document analysis and examination. The
analysis can use the automation tools which have been reviewed by the project in
order to improve the efﬁciency and quality assurance.
Code walkthrough and code analysis focus on the following problems:
• The document describes inconsistent;
• Code is inconsistent with the requirements document;
• The compliance between code implementation process and the standard;
• Code structure problem;
• Code protection mechanism.
3. Unit test and component test
Unit test and component test is dynamic test. Dynamic test runs the program and
achieves the software errors and defects by executing a set of instance data.
Software coverage index is a common way to assess the adequacy of the dynamic
test. The design of nuclear safety application software test case should consider
statement coverage, branch coverage and MC/DC coverage.
In order to ﬁnd as many as the program design ﬂaws, perfect test case is
essential. Table 2 is the compared result which is the different team executes the
same project. The project is to test the function for the ordering system. Team A
fund thirty one problems by implementing ﬁve hundred two test cases. But team B
just executed three hundred forty three test cases and fund thirty three problems. So
the reasonable and effective case will cover various types of test requirements and
coverage metrics, reduce test effort and efﬁciency work.
Table 2 Compared team A
with team B in the same
project
Number
Team A
Team B
Test cases
502
343
Problems
31
33
A Study of Implementation V&V Activities for Safety …
27

Nuclear Safety software implementation phase V&V test case design needs to be
completed after the software requirements speciﬁcation has been ﬁnished. The
following key factors should consider when the nuclear safety software imple-
mentation V&V design the test case.
• The normal and abnormal value design;
• Each test case needs as many contain multiple test types;
• It need to give a reasonable and feasible evaluation criteria for each test case;
• A test case needs to consider the effective equivalence class;
• The test cases need to cover every requirement;
• The test cases preferably prepared by the engineers which have the relevant
project experience.
Unit test and component test include the following common problems.
• Functional description is inconsistent with the requirement;
• Data processing exists risk, such as data accuracy;
• Abnormal value or boundaries don’t give the protection mechanisms;
• Interface inconsistencies.
5
Quality Assurance
Nuclear Safety software implementation V&V need to write the test plan and
instruction. The test plan includes personnel, scope, purpose, schedule, exception
handling quality assurance programs. Test instruction used to guide and regulate the
implementation of test cases. The tester should ensure completely and correctly
execute the test cases. Tester should comply with the following requirements.
• Testers need to organize test procedures, test plan and test management training
ﬁles before performing the test;
• Test cases need to be completely and accurately execute in step;
• Testers need to record the real test environment and test results to ensure test
repeatability;
• Adding or changing the test case need to be conﬁrmed by the technical director.
6
Application
Above implementation V&V activities for safety-class application in the nuclear
power plant had been applied to the CPR1000 project. The project involved nearly
two hundred thousand code lines and included four versions. The code lines existed
small changes because of the software modules increasing and revising. Problem
statistics shows in Figs. 1, 2, 3 and 4. The problems of four versions software were
one-hundred-three, sixty-six, twenty-six and nineteen as show in Fig. 5.
28
H. Liang et al.

From Fig. 1, the problems were focus on software implementation. The test team
found sixty-seven problems through code walkthrough and code analysis. The main
problems were the process of the documentation requirements transformed into
software. Through the three visions testing, the third and fourth visions software
problems concentrated on the documentation requirements. That means the
Important Problems  Common Problems
Document review
Code walkthrough
and code analysis
Unit test and
component test 
Fig. 1 The ﬁrst vision
software problem statistics
Important Problems Common Problems
Document review
Code walkthrough
and code analysis
Unit test and
component test 
Fig. 2 The second vision
software problem statistics
Important Problems  Common Problems
Document review
Code walkthrough
and code analysis
Unit test and
component test 
Fig. 3 The third vision
software problem statistics
Important Problems  Common Problems
Document review
Code walkthrough
and code analysis
Unit test and
component test 
Fig. 4 The fourth vision
software problem statistics
A Study of Implementation V&V Activities for Safety …
29

imperfect demands lead to the software problems. As shown in the Fig. 5, the
problems are gradually reduce. The implementation V&V activities improved
the reliability and safety for the safety-class application in the nuclear power plant.
7
Conclusion
This article had analyzed and discussed the test types for the nuclear safety
applications software implementation V&V activities. The paper proposed the
minimum test type set for the nuclear safety application software implementation
V&V activities. The paper also described how to execute the implementation V&V
activities. In order to ensure quality, the paper given the key factor what the person
need to obey. Through the actual project veriﬁed the effectiveness of implemen-
tation V&V activities. It provided a reference and guidance for nuclear safety
software implementation V&V activities.
Acknowledgements This project was ﬁnancially supported with funds which provided by a
reliability research of reactor protection system which based on digital microprocessor and elec-
trical equipment (national science and technology major project). The award number is
2014ZX06004002-004.
References
1. IEEE 1012 (2004). IEEE Standard for Software Veriﬁcation and Validation.
2. IEEE 7-4.3.2 (2010). IEEE Standard Criteria for Digital Computers in Safety Systems of
Nuclear Power Generating Stations.
3. R.G.1.168 (2013). Veriﬁcation, Validation, Reviews and Audits for Digital Computer
Software Used in safety Systems of Nuclear Power Plant.
4. IEC 60880 (2006). Nuclear Power Plants Instrumentation and Control Systems Important to
Safety – Software Aspects for Computer-Based Systems Performing Category A Functions.
5. HAD 102/16 (2004). Systems Important to Safety Based on Computer of Nuclear Power
Plants.
6. HAF102 (2004). Regulate for Nuclear Power Plant Design Safety.
First
Second
Third
Fourth
Problems
Fig. 5 Problem statistics of
four visions
30
H. Liang et al.

7. NB/T 20054 (2011). Nuclear Power Plants Instrumentation and Control System Important to
Safety Software Aspects for Computer based System Performing Category A Functions.
8. IEEE 1028 (1997). IEEE Standard for Software Reviews.
9. IEEE 829 (1998). IEEE Standard for Software Test Documentation.
10. R.G.1.170 (1997). Software Test Documentation for Digital Computer Software used in
Safety Systems of Nuclear Power Plants.
11. IEEE 1008 (1987). IEEE Standard for Software Unit Test.
12. R.G.1.171 (1997). Software Unit Test for Digital Computer Software Used in Safety Systems
of Nuclear Power Plants.
A Study of Implementation V&V Activities for Safety …
31

Analysis of CPU Redundant Conﬁguration
for the Safety DCS of NPP
You-ran Li, Wei Sun, Liang Zhou and Long-qiang Zhang
Abstract Safety digital control system (DCS) has been used in nuclear power plant
(NPP). DCS provides different control, monitoring and operating means for nuclear
power plant (NPP). It is necessary to consider the redundant conﬁguration for CPU,
because CPU is one kind of the important equipment of safety DCS which need to
accord with the single failure criterion and reliability requirement. Based on the
project technical plan, the paper analyzes the different redundant conﬁguration for
CPU of safety DCS system and gives some thoughts on engineering practice. It will
be beneﬁt to the following project practice.
Keywords Nuclear power plant (NPP)  Safety DCS  CPU  Single-failure 
Redundant conﬁguration
1
Introduction
In recent years DCS technology has be used in all the newly-built nuclear power
plant (NPP). It is the important system for the safety operation of the NPP, because
it provides an advanced control, monitoring and managing means for the tech-
nics and equipment control of nuclear power plant. The CPU is the vital part of the
DCS and it need to accord with the single failure criterion and reliability require-
ment. So redundancy conﬁguration shall be employed for some important CPU
structure. It can avoid the failure of the system and the failure of safety functions
when to meet the Single-Failure. It help to improve the reliability of DCS functions.
Based on the project technical plan, the paper analyzes the different CPU redundant
conﬁguration for safety DCS system and gives some beneﬁcial reference for the
following DCS design and project practice.
Y. Li (&)  W. Sun  L. Zhou  L. Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Power Safety Monitoring Technology
and Equipment, ShenZhen China Nuclear Power Design Co. Ltd., Shenzhen, China
e-mail: liyouran@cgnpc.com.cn
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_4
33

2
Redundant Conﬁguration Analysis
2.1
The Regulations and Standards
According to the single failure criterion requirements of the regulations, it needs
consider the redundant conﬁguration in the design of safety DCS system. The
following requirements about the protection function design which from the
HAF102 and HAD102 will point out the importance of the redundant conﬁguration.
HAF102 requires that “The means for shutting down the reactor shall consist of
at least two different systems to provide diversity. At least one of the two systems
shall be, on its own, capable of quickly rendering the nuclear reactor subcritical by
an adequate margin from operational states and in design basis accidents, on the
assumption of a single failure” [4]. In order to verify whether it meets the single
failure criterion, it needs to consider the failure mode and affect for all the equip-
ment and modules of the safety DCS. The reactor trip control system and the
safety-related engineered safety feature actuation system shall follow this
requirement.
HAD102/10 requires that “Diversity is applied to redundant systems or com-
ponents that perform the same safety function by incorporating different attributes
into the systems or components. The reliability of systems can be improved by
maintaining the features for independence in design” [5]. HAD102/14 requires that
“Redundancy is commonly used in I&C systems important to safety to achieve
system reliability goals and/or conformity with the single failure criterion. For
redundancy to be fully effective there should be independence. Higher reliability of
the safety-related I&C system is achieved by the use of redundancy or diversity
with multiple channels or modules” [6]. Besides the single failure criterion, inde-
pendence and consistency criteria still are considered for the safety-related I&C
system [2].
2.2
Requirements for Design
For the requirements from the regulations and design documents, it needs to meet
the Single-Failure Criterion in safety DCS systems performing safety functions and
certain safety-related functions [1, 3]:
1. This implies a necessity for redundant design for the protection system. If there
is a failure on one of the equipment or channel, the protection function still is
performed.
2. This implies a necessity for redundant design for the engineered safety feature
actuation system. If there is a failure on one of the equipment or channel, the
engineered safety features actuation function still is performed.
34
Y. Li et al.

3. Redundancy shall be employed in other important I&C system to improve the
reliability of safety DCS functions.
Using the PSA modeling analysis for safety DCS, it discovers that the CPU unit
is the vital part of the safety DCS, and redundancy conﬁguration should be
employed for some important CPU structure. Because it very important for the
reliability of safety DCS system.
3
Modes of Redundant Conﬁguration
3.1
Parallel Redundant
For the parallel redundant, the control units which complete redundant each other
achieve their respective functions independent, and the realization and output of
each unit is independent of the other.
Adopting the parallel redundant mode, the control units in the same group will
keep independent and asynchronous operation each other. They receive the same
input signals, perform the same logic operation and export the results respectively.
Then they will take a vote for the redundant results with the vote logic which is
built by another software or hardware.
There should be the versatility of redundant components. And they can meet the
requirements of the exchange without changing the function logic code. They can
switch each other through simple settings such as the dial switch, switching cards
etc. (Fig. 1).
3.2
Control/Standby Redundant
For the control/standby redundant, they have two identical hardware and software
and the two control units which are mutual redundancy share the same set of
acquisition and output channels. They determine the control-standby through the
information exchange, and choose the effective output. In this conﬁguration, the
following requirements need to be considered:
1. The requirements of bumpless switchover
Bumpless switchover shall be ensured and the changeover between the
control/standby does not allow the signal to jump. The control/standby redundant
just is established in the normal operation.
Analysis of CPU Redundant Conﬁguration for the Safety DCS of NPP
35

2. The changeover of the control/standby redundant
The changeover is performed automatically just at the time that the control unit
have the detectable fault and the standby unit has no fault. The changeover can be
performed manually if necessary.
3. Operation mode
The two subsystems for the control/standby redundant all receive the input date
and perform the operation. But only the control subsystems gives the ﬁnally output
single.
The control/standby states of the system can be identiﬁed through certain
mechanisms in the normal operation time. It should avoid that all the unit are in the
control state.
4. Keep the data synchronization
It needs to consider data synchronization between the two subsystems for the
control/standby redundant in each operation cycle.
In addition to the state information and the data synchronization, there should
not have any other interaction between the control/standby redundant subsystems.
Especially it cannot rely on other subsystem data to complete the protection
function of subsystem self (Fig. 2; Table 1).
Control
Fail
Occurrence of 
malfunction s
root cause
Recovery of 
malfunction s root 
cause and reset of 
malfunction
Normal operating cindition
Control
Fail
Occurrence of 
malfunction s root 
cause
Recovery of 
malfunction s root 
cause and reset of 
malfunction
Normal operating cindition
Subsystem A
Subsystem B
Fig. 1 CPU status transition diagram of parallel redundant system
36
Y. Li et al.

4
Analysis of Project Practice
4.1
Parallel Redundant in Project Practice
According to the safety DCS system from one of the CPR1000 nuclear power
project, they have the parallel redundant conﬁguration for the CPU of the ALU unit
which is using for logic processing. There are two controllers like ALUx1 and
ALUy1 for every subgroup with the parallel redundant. Every ALU unit has a CPU
card. The ﬁnally output signal come from the redundant CPU after a “OR” logic
processing (Fig. 3).
Subsystem B selected
(Manual system switching)
Automatic
startup
Automatic
startup
Subsystem A
failure
Subsystem A
failure
Subsystem B
failure
Subsystem B
failure
Subsystem A
Control
Subsystem B
Failure
Subsystem A
Failure
Subsystem B
Control
Subsystem B
failure
Subsystem B
failure
Subsystem A
failure
Subsystem B
failure
Subsystem A
Control
Subsystem B
Standby
Subsystem A
Standby
Subsystem B
Control
Subsystem B failure 
recovered and failure 
reset
Subsystem A failure 
recovered and failure 
reset
Subsystem A selected
Subsystem A failure 
recovered and failure 
reset
Subsystem B failure 
recovered and failure 
reset
Fig. 2 CPU status transition diagram of control/standby redundant system
Table 1 Comparison between the two modes
Mode
Conﬁguration
Operation
Output
Parallel
redundant
Complete redundant each
other achieve their
respective functions
independent
Keep independent
and asynchronous
operation each other
Output of each
subsystem is
independent
Control/standby
redundant
Have two identical
hardware and software and
the two control units which
are mutual redundancy
share the same set of
acquisition and output
channels
Have the different
state at the same
time
Need to keep the
data synchronization
and bumpless
switchover
Only the control
subsystems
gives the ﬁnally
output
Analysis of CPU Redundant Conﬁguration for the Safety DCS of NPP
37

Another example in project practice likes that: Parallel redundant CPU which
comes from two groups receives the same input signal, and gives the result after the
operation processing. The ﬁnally command signal will be output after a “OR” logic
which is made up of hard wired (Fig. 4).
4.2
Control/Standby Redundant in Project Practice
According to the design scheme of safety DCS system from one of the CPR1000
nuclear power plant, they have the control/standby redundant conﬁguration for the
CPU of the RPC cabinet which likes the following diagram. The system man-
agement card for each CPU can give the operation state monitoring to the Switch
Changeover card which will perform the changeover between the control/standby
CPU (Fig. 5).
Output Card
 Failure 
Block
Logic 
Output
ALUx1
&
 Failure 
Block
Logic 
Output
ALUy1
&
CPU  Unit
CPU  Unit
1
Fig. 3 Equipment conﬁguration diagram of the parallel redundant control cabinet
CPU A Unit
Logic diver 
control Cabinet
CPU A
1
E/O 
Bus Master
Output Card
CPU B
CPU B Unit
Bus Master
E/O 
Fig. 4 Equipment conﬁguration diagram of logic diver control cabinet
38
Y. Li et al.

4.3
The Problems from Different Conﬁguration
1. Parallel redundant
For the parallel redundant, it’s completely same redundant. One of them is
correct and the all unit is effective. It depends on the transition between the control
state of and standby state. It needs to consider the double DO problem as the
following example:
• Taking an example from a project: In the same subgroup, there are two con-
trollers with the parallel redundant. Every controller has the module which can
identify the failure state. When one of controllers is failure, there is a “AND”
logic between the failure signal and the real output signal. It can avoid the
double DO problem, because the ﬁnally output signal is blocked.
• Taking an example from another project: In the same subgroup, there are two
controllers with the parallel redundant. When one of controllers is failure and the
other is correct, there will be two different output signals from different con-
trollers. Because the failure signal is not blocked. So it would have the double
DO problem for the ﬁnally output signal.
This problem reminds that the fault recognition of parallel redundant is impor-
tant for the ﬁnal correct output. Different types of equipment have the different
ways to achieve, and the design should combine with the product characteristics.
2. Control/standby redundant
For the control/standby redundant, it’s not a completely same redundant. It
depends on the transition between the control state of and standby state. It needs to
consider effect of the main and standby switching process from the detectable fault
and undetectable fault of the CPU unit. Give a detailed analysis of the main and
standby switching with the concrete conditions of switching mode and consider the
following questions:
Repeater A
Cnotrol CPU 
Bus Master
Repeater B
System
Management
Switch
Changeover
Standby CPU 
Bus Master
System
Management
CPU A
CPU B
PRC Cabinet
Fig. 5 Equipment
conﬁguration diagram of RPC
cabinet
Analysis of CPU Redundant Conﬁguration for the Safety DCS of NPP
39

• If it meets the conditions of the changeover just because of some undetectable
fault of the control CPU unit, the switch is fail to diagnose the fault and have no
changeover. Whether the standby part is deemed invalid and the entire unit is
considered failure?
• It needs to know the failure models of all the diagnostic points which meet the
conditions of the changeover.
• Whether the more equipment such as switch etc. will bring more the risk of
multiple failures for the control/standby redundant?
• It needs to consider the problem of data synchronization between the two
subsystems for the control/standby redundant. The changeover shall be per-
formed smoothly and avoid the impact of the system disturbance caused by the
changeover.
Generally these problems should been considered in the process of systematic
safety analysis. The DCS products supplier needs to provide detailed information
about the equipment performance and the fault mode analysis for the safety analysis.
5
Conclusion
In view of the above analysis, there have the diversities for the CPU redundant
conﬁguration of safety DCS based on different projects which use the different plat-
forms and different technical schemes. Each redundant conﬁguration has its advan-
tages. In order to choose the suitable CPU redundancy conﬁguration for the safety
DCS system, it needs to have the comprehensiveevaluation for the different functional
requirements and equipment’s characteristics for the different project applications.
References
1. General Administration of Quality Supervision Inspection and Quarantine of the People’s
Republic of China, Standardization Administration of the People’s Republic of China (2008).
Application of the single failure criterion to safety systems in nuclear power plant [S], GB/T
13626. Beijing
2. General Administration of Quality Supervision Inspection and Quarantine of the People’s
Republic of China, Standardization Administration of the People’s Republic of China (2008).
Applicable criteria for digital computers in safety systems of nuclear power plants [S], GB/T
13629. Beijing
3. International Electrotechnical Commission (2011) Nuclear power plants – Instrumentation and
control for systems important to safety - General requirements for systems [S], IEC 61513
4. NSSS (2004) Safety of Nuclear Power Plants: Design [Z], HAF 102. Beijing
5. NSSS (2004) Nuclear power plant protection system and related facilities [Z], HAD 102/10.
Beijing
6. NSSS (2004) Safety related instrumentation and control system for nuclear power plant [Z],
HAD 102/14. Beijing
40
Y. Li et al.

Research and Improvement of TG
Equipment Load Shedding Control
Scheme in Nuclear Power Plant
Le-Yuan Bai, Xu-Feng Wang, Gang Yin and Bin Zeng
Abstract Once the emergency diesel generator in operation in CPR1000 nuclear
power plant (NPP), the selected equipment reloads in the pre-speciﬁed sequence
after load shedding, and the important equipment should reload preferentially and
successfully. This paper ﬁnds that the load shedding command for turbine and
generator (TG) equipment is from non-classiﬁed turbine control system (NC-TCS)
to motor control center (MCC) in a CPR1000 NPP. There is a risk that the more
important equipment might fail to reload if TG equipment load shedding fails in
case TCS system out of order. This paper adds a new TG load shedding path from
class 1E distributed control system (1E-DCS) to MCC, and realizes the hard priority
logic of TG load shedding by MCC control loop, increasing the reliability of TG
load shedding command and eliminating the inﬂuence on other more important
equipment. The improvement scheme proposed in this paper enhances the safety of
NPP and cuts the cost of nuclear power engineering.
Keywords TG  Emergency diesel generator  Load shedding  Control 
Improvement
1
Introduction
To improve the reliability of power supply to key equipment is an important means
to ensure the safety of NPP. Normally the power of equipment is supplied by
500 kV offsite power via main transformer and step-down transformer in
CPR1000 NPP. When 500 kV off-site power lost, 200 kV off-site auxiliary power
will be put into operation via auxiliary transformer. The emergency diesel generator
ﬁnally takes charge of power supply if 500 and 200 kV off-site power both lost, to
ensure the automatic response of related systems, prevent damage of important
equipment and ensure the safe shutdown of nuclear power unit [3] (Fig. 1).
L.-Y. Bai (&)  X.-F. Wang  G. Yin  B. Zeng
China Nuclear Power Engineering Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China
e-mail: baileyuan@cgnpc.com.cn
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_5
41

Once the power supply is switched to the emergency diesel generator unit, the
grid breaker opens and the off-site power of plant is lost. Only certain important
equipment starts to reload until the circuit breaker of the emergency diesel generator
closes. To make sure of the success of reload, all the pre-selected key equipment
has to shed load ﬁrst and then reload in the pre-speciﬁed sequence. The sequence is
established according to the importance of the equipment, and the more important
the equipment is, the earlier the reload time is. The reload times start from 0 s and
increase 5 s delay once. All equipment is forbidden to reload in advance [1, 4].
TG is the most signiﬁcant equipment of conventional island in CPR1000 NPP. TG
important equipment has to be powered by the emergency diesel generator when both
500 kV off-site power and 200 kV off-site auxiliary power fail, so that the turbine can
be safely stopped in emergency and accidents can be avoided, such as bush burning,
scored cylinder and so on.
2
Analysis of TG Load Shedding Scheme
2.1
TG Load Shedding Scheme
The TG of CPR1000 NPP 1 is a turbine-generator of million-kilowatt class, which
is controlled by Siemens TCS platform. The following TG equipment should be
powered by the emergency diesel generator, ensuring the turbine can be safely
stopped in emergency (Table 1).
Fig. 1 The power supply of CPR1000 NPP
Table 1 The equipment and time of TG load shedding
No.
Equipment
Quantity
Load shedding time (s)
1
Turbine lube oil pump
1
25
2
Turbine jacking oil pump
2
25
3
Turbine lube oil vapor extractor
1
0
4
Generator seal oil pump
1
40
5
Generator vapor extractor
1
0
42
L.-Y. Bai et al.

The reload process of TG equipment is as follows [2, 6]:
• The equipment will stop instantly as soon as the normal bus bar fails, but the
operation feedback of the equipment will remain valid, according to line A.
• The emergency diesel generator prepares to start for no more than a time after
the bus failure.
• When the emergency diesel generator is ready, normal load breaker will turn off,
the operation feedback of the equipment will become invalid, and the load
shedding command will be active, which time is 0, 25 or 40 s, according to line B.
• After the normal load breaker off, the load switch of the emergency diesel
generator will be on and the voltage of 6.6 kV bus bar will be restored, shown as
line C.
• Once the load shedding command disappears, the equipment will begin to
reload, shown as line D (Fig. 2).
The load shedding of TG equipment is achieved by both 1E-DCS and NC-TCS
in the control process shown as follows [7]:
• Normal start-stop control logics are completed in NC-TCS.
• Load shedding command are issued from 1E-DCS, and sent to NC-TCS by
redundant hard-wire.
• The priority logic of load shedding over normal start-top is realized in NC-TCS.
• After priority, the ﬁnal command is transmitted from NC-TCS to MCC by
hard-wire, achieving start-stop in normal operation and load shedding in
emergency (Fig. 3).
Normal bus voltage
Normal load breaker
Load switch of the 
emergency diesel generator
the emergency diesel 
generator ready
load shedding command
the operation feedback of 
equipment
the operation  of 
equipment
Fig. 2 The diagram of TG equipment load shedding sequence
Research and Improvement of TG Equipment Load Shedding …
43

The priority logic of load shedding over normal start-top is realized by the
control module of sub-loop control (SLC) and DCM SWITCH in NC-TCS [5]:
• Under normal circumstances, the equipment switch module and sub-loop con-
trol module are in operation so that TG equipment can normally start up and be
redundantly switched.
• When the load shedding signal is valid, the stop command comes out and the
start-up command is reset, achieving the load shedding of TG equipment.
• When the load shedding signal disappears, the start-up command comes out and
the fault signal of switching module is reset, achieving the reloading of TG
equipment (Fig. 4).
2.2
Analysis of TG Load Shedding Scheme
The characteristics of TG equipment load shedding scheme are as follows:
• TG load shedding signals from 1E-DCS are two redundant hard-wired signals,
which proves higher reliability.
• The priority logic of load shedding over normal start-top is realized by soft logic
in NC-TCS.
1E Processing Unit
DO
DO
NC Processing Unit
DI
DI
DO
DO
Dedicated Drive Card
MCC
1E-DCS
NC-TCS
Load shedding
ON
OFF
Hardwire
DI
Feedback
Communication 
ON
OFF
Feedback
Fig. 3 The control scheme of TG equipment load shedding
44
L.-Y. Bai et al.

• The load shedding path of TG is that: “1E-DCS sends the load shedding
command ! NC-TCS determines the priority ! Motor Control Center starts
or stops the equipment” (Table 2).
According to the analysis, the scheme of TG equipment load shedding has the
following defects:
• The path of TG load shedding is not a whole 1E class path, which decreases the
reliability of load shedding command. It is possible that the breakdown of the
priority card or the platform in NC-TCS will result in the failure of TG load
shedding command.
• The priority logic of load shedding over normal start-top is realized by not
hardware in 1E-DCS, but soft logic in NC-TCS, which inﬂuences the success of
TG load shedding. It is possible that the breakdown of the priority card or the
platform in NC-TCS will result in the failure of TG load shedding.
• The safety function of the emergency diesel generator is affected. When it needs
to start the emergency diesel generator because of loss of off-site power, if TG
equipment load shedding fails, the load of the signiﬁcant equipment in nuclear
island may fail because the whole plant shared one diesel generator unit.
Load shedding 1
Load shedding 2
1
S
RR
SLC
ON
ON
RESET
DCM SWTICH
ACK
Plus
OFF
ON
OFF
The priority logic model
1E-DCS
NC-TCS
Fig. 4 The priority logic of TG equipment load shedding
Table 2 The characteristics of TG equipment load shedding control scheme
Characteristics
NPP 1
Load shedding command
Source
1E-DCS
Redundancy
Redundant
Priority function
Platform
NC-TCS
Implementation
Soft logic
Load shedding path
Implementation
1E-DCS ! NC-TCS ! MCC
Research and Improvement of TG Equipment Load Shedding …
45

Taking into account the risk that the failure of TG equipment load shedding
leads to the failure of nuclear island equipment loading, it is essential to improve
TG load shedding scheme to enhance the reliability of TG load shedding.
3
Improvement of TG Load Shedding Scheme
According to the defects of the original TG load shedding scheme, the rational
improvement scheme has been designed as follows:
• A new dedicated 1E class path is added for TG load shedding, which is from
1E-DCS to MCC directly by hard-wire, not through NC-TCS.
• A new priority function is realized by hard logic in the MCC control loop, not
by soft logic in NC-TCS, so that the priority of new load shedding command is
not inﬂuenced by NC-TCS, ensuring the success of TG load shedding.
• The logic design of TG load shedding in NC-TCS is reserved (Fig. 5).
Compared to the original scheme, the improvement scheme has the following
advantages:
• TG load shedding has a dedicated 1E class path, which is not affected by the
breakdown of the priority card or the platform in NC-TCS, enhancing the
reliability of TG load shedding command.
1E Processing Unit
DO
DO
NC Processing Unit
DI
DI
DO
DO
Dedicated Drive Card
MCC
1E-DCS
NC-TCS
DI
Load shedding
Communication 
Hardwire
New added 
load shedding
1E-relay
ON
OFF
Feedback
ON
OFF
Feedback
Load shedding
Fig. 5 The improvement scheme of TG equipment load shedding control
46
L.-Y. Bai et al.

• TG load shedding has a hard priority logic in the MCC control loop, which is
not affected by the breakdown of the priority card or the platform in NC-TCS,
ensuring the success of TG load shedding.
• The safety function of the emergency diesel generator is not affected by the
breakdown of NC-TCS, enhancing the safety of NPP.
• The logic design of TG load shedding in NC-TCS is reserved, avoiding changes
of hardware interface and soft logic in 1E-DCS and NC-TCS, cutting the cost of
nuclear power engineering (Table 3).
4
Conclusions
TG is the most important equipment in conventional island of NPP. On one hand, it’s
necessary to supply power to TG equipment when off-site power supply fails in
emergency situations. On the other hand, the power supply to TG must not affect that
to other more important equipment for the overall security of NPP. The scheme of
TG equipment load shedding is researched in this paper, and the defect is found
which might cause potential danger to the plant. The improvements were put forward
to eliminate potential security risks and enhance the security. The improved scheme
in this paper has been successfully applied in nuclear power projects and provides
experiences for the following projects on TG equipment load shedding design.
References
1. Allen R E (1970) Standby Power Supplies for Nuclear Generating Stations. IEEE Transactions
on Nuclear Science 17(1):608–615.
2. Guoqiang Zhou, Yu Qiu (2012) Analysis of the Time Inﬂuence Factors when Startup of the
Emergency Diesel Generator of Nuclear Power Plant. Nuclear Power Engineering 32(z1):
31–33.
Table 3 Comparisons of TG equipment load shedding control schemes before and after the
improvement
Characteristics
Before the improvement
After the
improvement
Load shedding
command
Source
1E-DCS
1E-DCS
Redundancy
Redundant
Redundant
Priority function
Platform
NC-TCS
MCC + NC-TCS
Implementation
Soft logic
Hard logic + Soft
logic
Load shedding
path
Implementation
1E-DCS ! NC-TCS ! MCC
1E-DCS ! MCC
1E-DCS ! NC-TCS
! MCC
Research and Improvement of TG Equipment Load Shedding …
47

3. IEEE Standard Criteria for Diesel-Generator Units Applied as Standby Power Supplies for
Nuclear Power Generating Stations (1996).
4. Moses C S, Swart P K, Dodge R E (1983) IEEE Standard Periodic Testing of Diesel-Generator
Units Applied as Standby Power Supplies in Nuclear Power Generating Stations. Geochemistry
Geophysics Geosystems 7(9):1–12.
5. Xiaolei Zhan, Guang Meng, Tian Deng (2013) A system and method of turbine equipment load
shedding by emergency diesel generator in nuclear power plant. CN103000241A.
6. Xiusheng Lu, Zhifei Zhong, Yong Yang (2011) Study on Issues of CPR1000 NPP Emergency
Diesel Generator Test. Nuclear Power Engineering 32(1):25–28.
7. Yuexin Liu, Yiming Zhong (2014) Application of None-safety Classiﬁed Priority Control
Technique in CPR1000 NPP Project. Atomic Energy Science and Technology z2: 868–872.
48
L.-Y. Bai et al.

The Research About Explosive Gas
Atmosphere and Explosion
Proof Technique of Waste Gas Treatment
System in Nuclear Power Plant
Dan Xu, Hua Huang and Jing-Jie Bo
Abstract Hydrogen waste gas has been produced during normal operation of
pressurized water reactor nuclear power plant and sent to the atmospheric envi-
ronment after treatment in conﬁned space areas. In this process, hydrogen explosive
atmosphere is formed and it becomes a threat to the production safety. This article
analyzed the potential release resource and explosive environment in the wastes
treatment buildings, and presented a few of I&C explosion proof techniques
applicable to the nuclear power plant. Commonly used explosion proof techniques
of I&C design include ﬂameproof enclosure type and intrinsically safe type.
Flameproof enclosure technique focuses on the integrity while intrinsically safe
technique emphasizes the compatibility of equipment installation environment and
all the apparatuses in the system. The analyses show that the explosive gas atmo-
sphere can be classiﬁed as secondary zone and application of different explosion
proof techniques should take consideration of different aspects.
Keywords Nuclear power plant  Waste gas  Hydrogen  Explosive gas atmo-
sphere  Explosion proof
1
Introduction
There are two kinds of waste gases being produced in CRP1000 nuclear power
plant normal operation. One is hydrogen and the other is oxygen. Hydrogen comes
from two ways. When the reactor coolant is under radiation, water can be
decomposed into hydrogen and oxygen. Meanwhile, if the oxygen is over the limit,
hydrogen will be injected into the chemical and volume control system for oxygen
suppression. After the waste gas circulates in the reactor primary loop, it is collected
into the waste gas treatment system for stocking and irradiation decaying. The
D. Xu (&)  H. Huang  J.-J. Bo
China Nuclear Power Design Co. Ltd., Shenzhen, China
e-mail: xudan@cgnpc.com.cn
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_6
49

radioactivity will be checked before the gas is discharged into the atmospheric
environment.
In the waste gas treatment system, hydrogen concentration can reach 70 vol.%,
and this article shows how to classify the explosive area and how to choose the
technique methods of explosion proof for I&C system.
2
Explosive Environment Analysis
Equipments of CPR1000 nuclear power plant waste gas treatment system include
gas containers, pipes, valves, compressors and instruments. They are laid in nuclear
auxiliary building which can be treated as conﬁned area. The building takes arti-
ﬁcial ventilation and the ventilation capacity is 0.3 m3 per ﬂoor square meters. It
meets the requirement of well-ventilated area [1].
During normal operation, potential hydrogen releasing resource can be classiﬁed as
secondary source of release. Hydrogen characteristics are shown in Table 1. According
to the plant operation experience, the probability of hydrogen release is quite low, and
the existing time of hydrogen mixture in surrounding environment is under 1 h.
However, hydrogen concentration in waste gas treatment system is high. Once
leakage happens, there will be a high hydrogen concentration area around the leak
point. Production safety is threatened. So, it’s reasonable to classify the explosive
environment as a secondary hazardous zone.
2.1
Source of Hydrogen Release Analysis
2.1.1
Containers
Hydrogen stays in pressure release tank, volume control tank, and coolant drain
tank, gas-stripper of boron recycle system, waste gas buffer tank and decay tank.
Source of hydrogen release is formed when the containers’ connections with out-
side fail.
Table 1 Hydrogen
parameters
Gas
Formula
Group
T class
Ignition temp (°C)
Hydrogen
H2
IIC
T1
500
FP (°C)
Flammability
limit (V%)
Relative
density
Minimum ignition
energy (mJ)
Lower
Upper
–
4
75
0.1
0.019
50
D. Xu et al.

The volume of these containers is less than 95 m3, and the pressure is under
3.5 MPa when the ﬂow is less than 38 L/s. The area in radius of 4.5 m from the
releasing source center should be classiﬁed as secondary hazardous zone [1], as
shown in Fig. 1.
2.1.2
Pipes
No consideration of the possibility of hydrogen release in case of pipe breaking
down.
2.1.3
Valves
The potential hydrogen releasing point is the ﬂange connection, and the area in
radius of 4.5 m from the releasing source center should be classiﬁed as secondary
hazardous zone [1], as shown in Fig. 1.
2.1.4
Compressors
The waste treatment system sets two compressors, and the connection style of the
gas inlet and outlet is ﬂange. The interface of the ﬂange’s two parts is the potential
hydrogen releasing point. The area in radius of 3 m from the releasing source center
should be classiﬁed as secondary hazardous zone [2], as shown in Fig. 2.
Zone 2
Radius 4.5m
Wall
Source
Grade
Zone 2
Fig. 1 Hazardous classiﬁed
area
The Research About Explosive Gas Atmosphere …
51

2.1.5
Instruments
The interfaces of instruments and containers or pipes whose connection style is
thread or ﬂange are the potential sources of hydrogen release. The explosive haz-
ardous area can be classiﬁed as same as Sect. 2.1.1, as shown in Fig. 1.
2.2
Hazard Analysis of Hydrogen Area Inside Equipments
To avoid the explosion danger caused by hydrogen waste gas ﬂows in the con-
tainers, pipes and compressors, CPR1000 nuclear plants take the measure of lim-
iting oxygen concentration under 4 vol.%. An oxygen concentration monitor is set
at the entrance of the waste gas treatment system. Once oxygen concentration
reaches the upper limit, alarms will be produced and nitrogen charging system starts
work.
3
Analysis of Explosion Proof Design of I&C System
The control system of waste gas treatment system of CPR1000 nuclear power plant
locates in electric building, and it is separated from the site equipments in hazardous
area of auxiliary building, as shown in Fig. 3. The I&C electric equipments include
temperature and pressure switches, thermal couples, thermal resistance, and
Zone 2
Radius 3m
Source
Wall
Grade
Zone 2
Fig. 2 Hazardous classiﬁed
area for compressor building
52
D. Xu et al.

transmitters, analyze instruments and electric actuators of valves. The I&C control
system is DCS.
The equipment protect level (EPL) adapting to secondary hazardous zone
includes Ga, Gb and Gc, and all of the explosion proof methods are applicable.
Flameproof enclosure method is used in nuclear power plant usually. But this
method causes some inconvenience which can be solved by intrinsically safe circuit
method.
3.1
Flameproof Enclosure Method
Flameproof enclosure equipment has a ﬂameproof enclosure, in which the parts
which can ignite an explosive gas atmosphere are placed and which can withstand
the pressure developed during an internal explosion of an explosive mixture, and
which prevents the transmission of the explosion to the explosive gas atmosphere
surrounding the enclosure [3].
This method just considers the ﬂameproof ability of equipments and related
accessories in explosive gas environment while without considering the equipments
in safe areas. It makes system design more simply and purchasing work more easily
while equipments exchanging more difﬁcult. For example, the length of cables
supplied together with ﬂameproof enclosure instruments should be especially
required, and more junction boxes are added in the plant. Problems of cables
without plenty length sometimes happen in plant installation phase. When the
equipments fail to work and are taken outside of the plant to repair, cables also
should be pulled out of the cable tray, and this may be a burden to plant operators.
Local equipment
DCS I/O
module
Hydrogen
explosive
atmosphere
Safe area
Cable
Fig. 3 Equipment connection model of nuclear plant waste gas treatment system
The Research About Explosive Gas Atmosphere …
53

Pay attention to the junction surface of ﬂameproof enclosure, there should be a
40 mm distance between the surface and surrounding barrier. Enclosures are not
allowed to open or structure changed casually. Operators should judge the main-
tenance opportunity according to the plant hydrogen detection system operation
condition.
3.2
Intrinsically Safe Circuit Method
Explosion proof method of intrinsically safe circuit is based on the restriction of
electrical energy within equipment and interconnecting wiring exposed to the
explosive atmosphere to a level below that which can cause ignition by either
sparking or heating effects [4]. Normally intrinsically safe equipments are inte-
grated together to form an intrinsically safe circuit in engineering.
Intrinsically safe circuit limits the energy of the control system from the design
point so that the energy is less than the minimum igniting energy of explosive gas
and the maximum surface temperature is below the igniting temperature of the
explosive gas. As shown in Table 1, the minimum igniting energy of hydrogen is
0.019 mJ, igniting temperature is 500 °C, and the allowed maximum surface
temperature is 450 °C. Since only different parts of the whole system match well
can an intrinsically safe circuit system play its function, the whole system is pur-
chased rather than single equipment.
The following method shows a way for judging the intrinsically safe circuit of
simple system.
3.2.1
Equipments in Hazardous Area
1. Thermal resistance and switches: belong to simple equipment.
2. Thermal couple: the waste gas temperature is around 100 °C and usually K type,
and electromotive force is 5 mV. The maximum current of DCS I/O module is
50 mA. So the thermal couple can be treated as simple system as well.
3. Transmitters, solenoid valves and others: should be specially identiﬁed.
3.2.2
Safety Barrier
Intrinsically safe DCS I/O modules haven’t been used in the CPR1000 nuclear
power plants, and it’s more convenient to use safety barrier in intrinsically safe
circuit design than develop a new I/O module.
54
D. Xu et al.

3.2.3
Cables
The length of cables can be known once the places of start equipment and end
equipment are ﬁxed. So the distributed inductance and capacitance value of cables
can be calculated by referring cables’ characteristics. Equivalent model of cable
distributed parameters are shown in Fig. 4 [5].
The cable length can reach 120 m from the equipment in hazardous area to DCS
cabinet in electric building. The transient voltage and current which is produced by
closing and opening circuit can be calculated by referring the model in Fig. 5 [5],
and the energy shouldn’t exceed 19 lJ.
3.2.4
System Assessment
When the signal collection and equipment driver both take single power supply,
simple analyze method can be used to assess the intrinsically safe circuit. The
model is shown in Fig. 6.
The following equations should be satisﬁed [6]:
Uo  Ui
Io  Ii
Po  Pi
Lc þ Li  Lo
Cc þ Ci  Co
Requirements for load resistance:
Rc þ Ri þ Ro  Rd
(Rd is the allowed external resistance of DCS I/O module) [7]
There are special requirements for cable identiﬁcation in nuclear power plant,
and consideration of both cable special identiﬁcation and intrinsically safe
requirement should be taken. Intrinsically safe circuit uses single-point grounding
in safe areas, or equal potential grounding in hazardous areas.
The Research About Explosive Gas Atmosphere …
55

Local equipment
Ui
Ii
Pi
Li
Ci
Ri
Safety
barrier
Uo
Io
Po
Lo
Co
Ro
DCS I/O 
module
Hydrogen
explosive
atmosphere
Safe area
Cable
Lc
Cc
Rc
Fig. 6 Equipment connection model of intrinsically safe electrical system
Fig. 4 Equivalent model of
cable distributed parameters
Fig. 5 Cable circuit model
under oscillation condition
56
D. Xu et al.

4
Conclusions
1. The hazardous areas belonging to waste gas treatment system of CPR1000
nuclear power plant can be classiﬁed as secondary zone;
2. Flameproof enclosure technique is easier to carry out, but corresponding mainte-
nance is inconvenient. Intrinsically safe technique can avoid unnecessary equip-
ments’ explosion proof requirements by analyze and it’s much safer than other
explosion proof methods, but it’s quite complicated for the whole system design;
3. Consideration of system scale and purchase willing should be taken to choose
the explosion proof methods.
References
1. GB 50058-2014 Code for design of electrical installations in explosive atmosphere.
2. SY/T 6671-2006 Recommended practice for classiﬁcation of locations for electrical
installations at petroleum facilities classiﬁed as class I, zone 0, zone 1, and zone 2.
3. IEC 60079-1-2007 Explosive atmospheres-part 1: Equipment protection by ﬂameproof
enclosures “d”.
4. IEC 60079-11-2006 Explosive atmospheres-part 11: Equipment protection by intrinsic safety “i”.
5. SUN, J. P., WANG, Z. L., LIU, X. Y., ZHANG, L. Y., & CUI, L. Z. (2010). The distributed
parameters and discharge characteristic of communication and signal cable. Journal of China
Coal Society, 7, 040.
6. IEC 60079-25-2010 Explosive atmospheres-part 25: Intrinsically safe electrical systems.
7. Li, S.L. (2000). The application of safety barrier in intrinsically safe electrical systems.
Automation in Petro-Chemical Industry, (1), 6–7.
The Research About Explosive Gas Atmosphere …
57

Analyzing and Processing the Malfunction
of Control Valve Dithering in PWR
Nuclear Power Plant
Chu-hao Xi, Long-qiang Zhang and Yong Tian
Abstract As digital technology is more and more used in nuclear power plants, the
electromagnetic compatibility issues between new digital device and the plant en-
vironment are increasingly prominent. This paper is aiming at the dither of control
valve in pressurized water reactor project, which is causing by the electromagnetic
compatibility issues. And this paper mainly describes the experience of working
process and the solving program of failure eliminating. First it introduces
the installation condition and operating principle of the valve, then it analyzes the
possible causes by using fault tree and ﬁnd the root cause by site investigation. The
root cause of the malfunction is that the feedback signal of valve position is disturbed
by an interferential signal about 32 kHz. At last, this paper provides two kinds of
program to solve the problem, one is grounding directly and another is grounding
with capacitance.
Keywords PWR  Dithering of valve  Fault tree  Ground  Electromagnetic
compatibility
1
Introduction
As digital technology is widely used in nuclear power plants, the electromagnetic
compatibility issues between new digital device and the plant environment are
increasingly prominent. Because the working frequency of digital technology is
higher than the analog technology, which contributes to extend the band width of
interference and increases the risk of being disturbed. Therefore, it raises some new
questions. The fault of certain type of control valve with digital positioner was
found in the debugging process of some PWR power plant, the fault reason is
largely related with electrical interference. This paper describes the working process
and solutions in dealing with the above-described engineering problems.
C. Xi (&)  L. Zhang  Y. Tian
China Nuclear Power Plant Design Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China
e-mail: xichuhao@cgnpc.com.cn
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_7
59

2
Background
In the Debugging phase of a PWR power plant project, when a certain type of valve
is receiving the input signal from a portable signal generator, there is no signiﬁcant
abnormity about valve and positioner. But when that valve is receiving the input
signal from DCS, it found that this type of valve position is obvious dithering, at the
same time the output pressure of valve driver exists obvious ﬂuctuations too. And
when the debugging staff re-runs the self-tuning function, it was found unable to
successfully complete the self-tuning function (after about 15 min the tuning has
failed). After observation and analysis, above phenomenon shows that this type of
valve may be under interference and need to be eliminated.
3
Failure Analysis
3.1
Valve Principle
The control channel of the valve is installed as shown in Fig. 1, DCS output
4–20 mA control command that send to the positioner though local CR box. The
positioner and position sensor form a closed control loop. The positioner receiving
setpoint from DCS. At the same time, it acquires valve position feedback signal
from sensor, then after internal PID operation output signal to drive the actuator
control valve actuation.
Positioner electronic module consist of a multiplexer, an A/D converter, a D/A
converter, a temperature sensors, a Hall-effect position sensor (or a slide rheostat), a
pressure sensor, a microprocessor and a power distribution management circuit. The
diagram of functional block linking shown in Fig. 2 [1, 2].
Fig. 1 Control channel installation diagram
60
C. Xi et al.

The feedback signal of valve position is provided by a circuit of sliding resis-
tance, as it is show in Fig. 3. The slide terminal will move as the valve position,
thereby changing the feedback signal of valve position.
3.1.1
Fault Tree Analysis
By using Fault tree [3, 4], it gradually split the reasons though the following two
possible path. The establishment of the fault tree shown in Fig. 4. The possible
theoretical reasons were as following section.
Fig. 2 Block diagram of internal positioner
Fig. 3 Feedback signal of
valve position
Analyzing and Processing the Malfunction …
61

Fig. 4 The fault tree analysis diagram of positioner dither cause
62
C. Xi et al.

Related Equipment Failure
Valve dither is due to equipment failure caused by:
1. The failure of positioner including two aspects:
• the failure of controller may cause the output control command abnormal,
causing the valve dither.
• the failure of valve position sensor could cause the controller getting
unstable or in accurate feedback signal of the valve position, causing the
valve position dither.
2. The failure of linking
Equipment installation
at
the connection of substandard, may
form
a
non-constant contact resistance. In the ﬁeld the devices inevitably have varying
degrees of shock or vibration, so it may cause the non-constant contact resistance
changing, therefore the valve dither.
3. The failure of cable
Cable insulation resistance or shield is under substandard. It may bring in
interference signal, so the valve dither.
4. The failure of DCS card
The failure of DCS analog output card cause the substandard of the output
signal. So the supply voltage of positioner is instability, causing the valve dither.
Interference in Control Loop
Valve dither due to the interference in control loop:
1. Interference to set point, including two aspect:
• DCS output control command ﬂuctuating.
• The performance of positioner’s receiving terminal is under substandard,
resulting setpoint instable.
2. Interference to valve position sensor, including two aspect:
• valve position sensor is interfered by turbulence of the process ﬂuid.
• valve position sensor is affected by electromagnetic interference.
3. Interference to temperature compensation circuit.
A temperature sensor is positioned within the electronic module for measuring
the temperature of environment to compensate valve position signal and pressure
signal.
Analyzing and Processing the Malfunction …
63

4. Existing Problems in positioner controller design:
• The design of control parameters or the dynamic response of control loop is
under substandard.
• The deadband of controller is setting unreasonable.
5. Interference to valve pneumatic actuator, including the pressure of gas source
instability, the ﬂuctuation of pressure ampliﬁer’s output and other factors.
3.1.2
Root Cause
Root cause is obtained by combining theoretical reason of fault tree analysis, the
pre-trial test and follow-up supplementary tests [5]. The root cause is found that
the terminal of 5 V power supply has a interference signal of high-frequency, and
the conduction path of interference signal is shown in Fig. 5. So the feedback signal
of valve position is disturbed by the high-frequency interference.
The feedback signal of valve position was measured, the waveforms is measured
as Fig. 6. Obviously, output sampling signal of valve position exists high-frequency
electromagnetic interference. the valve positioner signal obtained a series of ﬂuc-
tuations value, so the controller is receiving a series of instable values, so it send the
false command to the actuator. Therefore it ﬁnally cause the valve dithering.
3.2
Failure Elimination
According to the root cause described in the preceding part of the paper, two kinds
of schemes were designed to eliminate the disturbance.
Fig. 5 The conduction path of interference signal
64
C. Xi et al.

3.2.1
Direct Grounding Scheme
To eliminate the dither, the negative of signal should be linked to the ground at the
CR box, the wiring diagram is shown in Fig. 7 [6, 7].
By using this scheme, we can ﬁnd that the valve dither is reduced, but not
completely eliminated. Because this scheme does not directly act to the root cause.
3.2.2
Capacitance Grounding Scheme
Aiming at the feature of the interference signal, a capacitor which is 1lF is added
between the negative terminal and the shield grounding of the valve’s position
sensor to ﬁlter the interference signal, and it is show in Fig. 8. Because the
impedance of capacitance is much lower than the resistance for the high-frequency
interference signal. So the capacitor provide interference signal with a conduction
Fig. 7 Directly grounded wiring diagram
Fig. 6 The valve position feedback sampling signal waveform
Analyzing and Processing the Malfunction …
65

path of low impedance. And the conduction path of the high-frequency interference
signal will change as Fig. 9 shows. Then we could ﬁnd that the valves dither is
disappeared, the function of self-tuning recover and the valves work normally
again.
The wave form of the valves’ position sampling feedback sampling is as shown
in Fig. 10 [8]. Apparently showed in the ﬁgure, the signal is smoothing and the
Fig. 8 Capacitance grounding diagram
Fig. 9 The conduction path of interference signal with capacitance
66
C. Xi et al.

valves’ position is back to normal. Compared to the scheme of the signal’s positive
is grounded directly, adding a capacity is better in restraining the jitter. We can
make a conclusion that adding a capacity is more effective in ﬁltering the
interference.
Apparently showed in the ﬁgure, the signal is smoothing and the valves’ position
is back to normal. Compared to the scheme of the signal’s positive is grounded
directly, adding a capacity is better in restraining the jitter. We can make a con-
clusion that adding a capacity is more effective in ﬁltering the interference.
3.3
Conclusions
This paper is aiming at the dither of control valve in pressurized water reactor
project. Firstly, analyzing the root cause by using the fault tree. Then ﬁnding the
root cause according to the investigation at the ﬁeld and discussing two solutions’
difference and the effect in ﬁltering the interference. Finally making a conclusion
that adding a capacity between the negative terminal and the shield grounding of the
valve’s position sensor is more efﬁcient.
References
1. Zhou Hongyan (2001) Research on intelligent electric valve positioner. Sichuan University.
2. Zhang Lei (2001) Research on intelligent valve positioner. Luoyang Institute of Technology.
3. Chen Dedao (2015) An huping Numerical Control Machine Fault Diagnosis Based on Fuzzy
Fault Tree. J Machine Tool & Hydraulics 177–178.
4. Pan Bo, Jiang Tongmin (2012) The structure of the corrosion damage of aircraft Fuzzy
comprehensive evaluation based on fault tree. J Beijing University of Aeronautics and
Astronautic 38–42.
Fig. 10 The waveform of
valve position sensor after
adding capacitance
Analyzing and Processing the Malfunction …
67

5. Wu Weizhi, Cheng Shengchang, Yuan Wenzhong (2012) Power Plant Unit 4 DCS system
analog signal processing analysis of wide ﬂuctuations. J Thermal Power Generation.
6. Wang Qinghai (2012) PLC control system grounding jamming technology. J Automation,
173–174.
7. Machang (2009) Talking about the PLC control system grounding jamming technology.
J Dragons Technology and Management.
8. Wang Qingliang (2012) Single-phase ground fault analysis and line selection. M China Electric
Power Press.
68
C. Xi et al.

First Loop Loose Parts Field Diagnosis
Hui-Tao Yang and Jin-Bo Zhao
Abstract This paper from the loose parts of the harm, combining with the actual
situation of the ﬁeld, for ﬁrst loop loose parts of the alarm signal after the scene
recognition and diagnosis are introduced, respectively used in the diagnostic ﬁeld
listen to the sound of needle method, ﬁeld data playback listening method and data
analysis of linear positioning method, circle intersection method, hyperbolic posi-
tioning method, Newton iterative positioning method, contrast and analysis the
advantages and disadvantages. And combined with ﬁeld loose off parts of echo,
the reactor internal structure characteristics, equipment operation state, through the
positioning analysis method to determine loose parts quality and position, of ﬁrst
loop loose parts ﬁeld diagnosis put forward own views, for follow-up of new project
a loop loose parts detection system design reference.
Keyword Loose parts  First loop  Diagnosis
1
Introduction
First loop system as an important part of the nuclear power plant, there are a large
number of screws, pins and other parts of the interior, although at the beginning of
the design of the anti-loosing measures, but in ﬁrst loop under the continuous
impact of high-speed ﬂow and high pressure steam, these parts will be loose or even
fall off. According to GB/T11807-2008 [2], including the shedding parts, loose
parts and foreign object. Shedding parts refers to the reactor coolant pressure
boundary components without the connection and can be carried by the coolant.
Loose parts are loose, but ﬁxed with the original parts which can still keep the
H.-T. Yang (&)  J.-B. Zhao
Shenzhen China Nuclear Power Design Co., Ltd.,
Shenzhen 518045, Guangdong, China
e-mail: huitaoyang@163.com
J.-B. Zhao
e-mail: zhaojinbo@cgnpc.com.cn
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_8
69

connection parts. Foreign object refers to the reactor shutdown (e.g. refueling and
maintenance) during the period of the reactor coolant pressure boundary, does not
belong to the internal structure of objects. Loose parts will affect the reactor running
stability and reliability; even threaten the safety of nuclear power station. In history,
there are a lot of nuclear accident is due to the presence of loose parts, for example,
in 1979 the American prairie island 1# units because of coil spring fall cause steam
generator tube rupture; in 1982 Wisconsin cusp beach, the steam generator heat
transfer guide tube leakage caused by type C clamp and other loose parts; in recent
years, in the construction of a nuclear power plant project occurred during fuel
assembly pin loosening caused by hot test was interrupted.
So as soon as possible in order to detect the loose parts in nuclear power plant,
avoid or reduce the occurrence of loop system of safety related damage or failure, in
improving the monitoring capability of loose parts monitoring system and at the
same time, how in the complicated ﬁeld conditions, existing technology and
analysis means of reasonable use, early detection and determine the loose parts of
size, location and range of inﬂuence, to provide reference data for reliable operation
in the construction unit, it is particularly important.
2
Listen to the Sound Identiﬁcation Method
During the normal operation of the reactor, ﬁrst loop system has three main voices:
structure sound, background noise, and constant background noise [2]. Structure
sound refers to the propagation of sound. Propagation in solid voice in GB/T
11807-2008 [2], the structure mainly refers to the propagation of sound frequency
from 30 to 20 Hz voice. The background noise refers to the structure of trans-
mission during reactor operation, the noise in the loose parts will be. The back-
ground noise comprises a constant background noise and run single sound event.
The constant background noise is caused by the random part (such as the coolant
ﬂow noise) and determining part (such as noise depends on the reactor coolant
pump speed). Through the compression device between the inner component and
the pressure vessel, the vibration can be transmitted to the acceleration sensor or
displacement sensor [1].
Listen to the sound identiﬁcation method mainly uses the structure of sound
loose parts impact pressure boundary generated. As long as the loose parts, shed-
ding parts or foreign objects impact the inner surface of the reactor coolant pressure
boundary or its internal structure, energy will be transferred to the pressure
boundary wall, resulting in a single sound event. The single event from dropping off
the impact of the loose parts and run in single event sound frequency and loudness
will have some differences; so as to identify the loose parts has laid the basis of
distinguishing.
70
H.-T. Yang and J.-B. Zhao

2.1
Listening to the Sound of Needle
Listening to the needle identiﬁcation method is mainly applicable to the commis-
sioning period. A single voice after the incident, the alarm will send to the loose
parts monitoring system of main control room or cabinet, supervision personnel
according to the operating conditions of equipment and components on the alarm to
do the basic analysis eliminate interference due to equipment start stop or other
construction site caused by. Then notify the instrument control personnel to analyze
and judge. During the cold test and hot test (no fuel), because of loose part mon-
itoring system is still in the debugging stage, site condition is complex, on-site
technical personnel often used to judge loose parts of the location with needle, the
main monitoring position: heat steam generator bottom hot side and cold side, the
bottom of pressure vessel and between heat pipe and connecting pipe. Listening to
the needle has the advantages of avoiding the false alarm, leading to the technical
problems of loose parts monitoring system itself, such as sensor terminal error etc.
Can more directly on the removal of parts of the landing position and the regional
judge.
2.2
Loose Part Monitoring Data Playback Sound
In the two generation and the three generation reactor, loose parts monitoring
system has data storage and playback function. During normal operation, the
operator can periodically or according to the needs of listening and playback recent
noise signal, at the same time according to the normal operation of change of
background noise adjust peak factor, to make sure the loose part monitoring system
in good condition monitoring. Familiar with the various characteristics of noise
equipment start and stop the noise, improve the recognition ability.
Listen and choose the data playback to the corresponding region according to the
running state of the equipment, but also according to the direction of movement of
refrigerants in order to monitor playback.
3
Data Analysis Method
The data analysis method is mainly based on data collected from loose sound
components; the data is calculated to determine the location, size and direction of
movement of loose parts [3]. The principle of the CPR reactor type in the loose
parts monitoring system and EPR reactor type in the loose parts monitoring system
is the same, but in the EPR reactor, the loose part monitoring system conﬁguration
calculation mature analysis software, improves the efﬁciency and accuracy of ﬁeld
diagnosis analysis.
First Loop Loose Parts Field Diagnosis
71

3.1
Linear Positioning Method
See Fig. 1.
The following calculation model of linear positioning method:
Dt ¼ x
c  a  x
c
) x ¼ a  c  Dt
2
;
ð1Þ
Among them:
Dt
The measured time difference between the impact signals for the sensor 1 and
sensor 2;
a
The distance between the sensor 1 and sensor 2;
c
The speed of vibration wave propagation in a pipe, different material pipes or
equipment vibration wave propagation speed is different.
Linear positioning method is a kind of time difference method, only the moni-
toring data of two points, for the smaller diameter of straight pipe equipment. In the
EPR reactor, due to hot and cold pipe and the steam generator are installed only two
sensors, so the location method commonly used in the calculation of the heat pipe
section and positioning in the steam generator of the parts and loose the impact
point.
3.2
Hyperbolic Positioning Method
See Fig. 2.
The following calculation model of hyperbolic intersection method:
r2  r1 ¼ cDt1;2;
r3  r1 ¼ cDt1;3
ð2Þ
Fig. 1 linear localizing
method
72
H.-T. Yang and J.-B. Zhao

r1; r2; r3
Respectively distance difference between the points of impact and the
three known points;
c
Transmission speed of vibration wave;
Dt1;2
The time difference of vibration wave between sensor 1 and sensor 2;
Dt1;3
The time difference of vibration wave between sensor 1 and sensor 2.
Hyperbolic positioning method needs three monitoring data of two-dimensional
calculation method, in actual calculation, and the two-dimensional coordinates of a
known transducer, just assume the impact point coordinates. Based on the model of
the formula established two-dimensional coordinate equation can be calculated
impact point coordinates. The coordinate value is two, the mistake one can be
eliminated according to the internal coordinate range.
3.3
Circle Intersection Positioning Method
See Fig. 3.
The following calculation model of circle intersection method:
r1 ¼ cacsDt1
cs  ca
;
r2 ¼ cacsDt2
cs  ca
;
ð3Þ
ca
Symmetric wave speed;
cs
Asymmetric wave velocity;
Dt1, Dt2
The time difference of two different sensors monitoring points.
Circle intersection positioning method is realized by calculating the absolute
distance between position of sensor and impact point, using the characteristics of
the bending wave propagation, velocity in the propagation process of different
frequency of ﬂexural wave is different, with the increase of propagation distance,
various frequency ﬂexural waves separated gradually. In the waveform, wave crest
and wave front be open and wave energy attenuation. In theory, as long as more
than two sensors can realize the positioning, estimate the collision point of absolute
Fig. 2 Hyperbolic
intersection method
First Loop Loose Parts Field Diagnosis
73

distance as the radius, sensor position as the center circle, then the circle inter-
section point is the loose parts impact position. The installation position of sensor is
ﬁxed, so the key of this method is to determine the sensor absolute distance to the
point of impact, the commonly used methods for estimating the absolute distance
measurement, the peak vibration modal method, time-frequency analysis method,
reference collision method etc. But these methods have a common problem, namely
cannot determine the accurate position of loose parts impact, can only determine the
approximate position.
3.4
Newton Positioning Method
See Fig. 4.
The following calculation model of Newton method:
di ¼ cDti;
pi ¼ li  l0;
pi ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðxi  xsÞ2 þ ðyi  ysÞ2
q

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðx0  xsÞ2 þ ðy0  ysÞ2
q
;
Q ¼
X
n
i¼1
ðdi  piÞ2
ð4Þ
Among them:
c
Transmission speed of vibration wave;
di
Distance difference between the points of impact and the two known points;
Fig. 3 Cycle intersection
method
74
H.-T. Yang and J.-B. Zhao

Dti
The time difference of vibration wave between xi; yi
½
 and x0; y0
½
;
pi
The distance difference of vibration wave between xi; yi
½
 and x0; y0
½
;
n
The number of time difference.
Newton method is a general algorithm for linear calculation, two-dimensional
calculation and dimension calculation, in the positioning calculation plays an
important role, but the Newton iterative calculation process is complex, and with
the increase of the number and dimension involved in the calculation, the amount of
calculation increases exponentially. Frequently used in computer programming. In
the EPR reactor type loose part monitoring system, Newton iterative method is
applied for the calculation of steam generator, heat pipe segment and RPV and
other parts of multiple points.
4
To Estimate the Quality of Loose Part
In the ﬁeld of diagnosis process, the quality of the loose parts estimation mainly
through the following ways:
1. By tapping on the primary pressure boundary and the size of the voice of
artiﬁcial estimation.
2. Through the analysis of the reactor components may be loose to estimate, but
due to the possibility of external components, the estimation method of errors is
very high.
3. By calculating software to calculation and analysis, EPR type of reactor loose
parts monitoring system equipped with quality evaluation software, through the
loose part of the pressure boundary impact strength estimated the size of loose
parts, but due to vibration and equipment operation noise of reactor device, the
author analysis the estimated the accuracy is not high.
Fig. 4 Newton (gradient)
method
First Loop Loose Parts Field Diagnosis
75

So to improve the efﬁciency of quality estimation and the accuracy of loose parts
quality, need to establish internal loop pressure boundary especially in internal
component of every parts of the shape, quality, location of the database, improve
the ability of analyzing and ﬁltering background noise, avoid impact signal missing
low mass of loose parts, the accuracy of analysis software and improve the level of
automation.
5
Conclusions
Starting from the concept of safety accidents and loose components caused by the
loose parts, expounds the importance of loose parts monitoring system, combining
with the current technical level of loose part monitoring system, based on the actual
conditions are summarized and analyzed six kinds of ﬁeld diagnostic method,
respectively used in the diagnostic ﬁeld listen to the sound of needle method, ﬁeld
data playback listening method and data analysis of linear positioning method,
circle intersection method, hyperbolic positioning method, Newton iterative posi-
tioning method, contrast and analysis the advantages and disadvantages. And
combined with ﬁeld loose off parts of echo, the reactor internal structure charac-
teristics, equipment operation state, through the positioning analysis method to
determine loose parts quality and position, for follow-up of new project a loop loose
parts detection system design reference, has a certain guiding signiﬁcance on the
loose parts of site diagnosis.
References
1. EJ_T 1188 (2005) Vibration monitoring of internal components of pressurized water reactor in
nuclear power plant.
2. GB/T 11807 (2008) The characteristics, design and operational procedures of acoustic
detection system and exploration of loose parts.
3. Pei-Gen Zhang (2012) Analysis of the key technology of loose parts monitoring system (C).
The 2012 nuclear power plant digital control seminar 10:176–178.
76
H.-T. Yang and J.-B. Zhao

Research on Application of Remote IO
Technology in Nuclear Power Plant
Hui Wang, Tian-Sheng Ji, Ai-Guo Lv and Hao Zhong
Abstract The technology of remote I/O system has the characteristics of good
physical dispersion, high reliability, high accuracy of measurement and control,
openness, strong function, high degree of intelligence and strong communication
ability. Remote I/O technology, as a mature bus technology, has been widely used
in thermal power, chemical industry, metallurgy, petroleum and other ﬁelds. All
systems and sub items in nuclear power plant are still using the traditional dis-
tributed control system (DCS), some signals by hardwire have a long distance
transmission, which against economic and signal stability. In this paper, from the
plant and system environment restriction condition, functional requirements
(Operational protection requirements), system performance requirements, installa-
tion requirements, equipment identiﬁcation, cost and other system interface and
other factors, to analyze the feasibility of remote I/O technology used in nuclear
power plant. Determine the scope of the implementation of remote IO technology
for nuclear power plant. Finally, pumping station as an example, the implementa-
tion plan of using the remote I/O technology under the various technical route of
nuclear power plant was studied in detail.
Keywords Remote I/O technology  Distributed control system (DCS)  Local
control system  Pumping station
1
Introduction
The remote I/O technology transfers the data processing and control function of the
traditional DCS to the ﬁeld equipment nearby, and the multiple monitoring points
are connected with the PLC or DCS through the bus. The remote I/O technology
have been widely used in thermal power, chemical industry, metallurgy, petroleum
H. Wang (&)  T.-S. Ji  A.-G. Lv  H. Zhong
State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Power Safety Monitoring Technology and Equipment,
China Nuclear Power Engineering Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China
e-mail: hui.wang@cgnpc.com.cn
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_9
77

and other ﬁelds, the technology has been very mature. But all nuclear power plant
system and sub items still use the traditional DCS. Some signals were long-distance
transmission, detrimental to the economy and the stability of the signal, it is nec-
essary to research and analyze the feasibility of using remote IO in nuclear power
plant, and timely improved.
The technology of remote I/O system has the characteristics of good physical
dispersion, high reliability, high accuracy of measurement and control, openness,
strong function, high degree of intelligence and strong communication ability. At
the same time, the economic beneﬁts are obvious.
2
The Application of Remote IO in Conventional
Thermal Power Plant
Remote I/O system has been widely used in thermal power plant, the application of
the main two aspects of thermal power plant.
2.1
To Replace the IO Acquisition Module
The typical application of thermal power plant is the application of metal tem-
perature group. Metal temperature of the main steam turbine and boiler and the
main auxiliary groups including boiler tube wall temperature, wall temperature of
steam turbine, a generator coil and iron core temperature and main auxiliary
equipment (such as pumps and fans) temperature. These measured parameters
usually changes slowly, does not participate in the system regulation, the remote IO
of on-site temperature acquisition and digital processing, then transmitted signals to
DCS through the communication bus (also have a way of transmitted signals
through control cable to DCS).
In this application, remote I/O is only as a data acquisition system, not through
the DCS system on the remote intelligent I/O online conﬁguration. Data are
transmitted to the DCS system simply from the remote I/O system [1].
2.2
Using the Remote IO Station to Form Medium
and Small Scale Production Monitoring
and Management Information System
In thermal power plant, some auxiliary equipments part away from the unit, such as
water supply and drainage treatment pump station, the exception of ash slag station,
heat metering station and booster stations, due to their distance from the main
78
H. Wang et al.

control room far away, so the control is difﬁcult to incorporate into conventional
DCS, before we used the independent monitoring system. When the remote I/O is
used, the monitoring information of the equipment can be transmitted to the main
control room, centralized and uniﬁed management.
In this application, remote I/O is not only used as a data acquisition system, but
also need to realize the control function. In this case, the communication between
the DCS and the remote I/O is a two-way street. The normal operation of a large
number of data in remote intelligent I/O and DCS system exchange, at the same
time, through the DCS system engineer station can also be conﬁgured for remote
intelligent I/O [2].
3
Feasibility Analysis of Remote I/O Using
in Nuclear Power Plant
The application of remote I/O in nuclear power plant can be considered from the
environmental constraints of plant and system, function requirements (operational
protection requirements), system performance requirements, installation require-
ments, equipment identiﬁcation, cost, other system interface and other point of
view, do feasibility analysis of the remote I/O technology application in the nuclear
power plant.
3.1
Environmental Restrictions
According to the layout nuclear power plant can be divided into nuclear reactor
plant, nuclear auxiliary building, nuclear fuel plant, steam turbine plant, electrical
plant and BOP building. Different areas of the application conditions of require-
ments, Application of remote I/O system should meet the RCC-E (2005) d 2100
provisions of regional environmental restrictions, such as temperature, humidity,
pressure, radiation, including:
• Environmental conditions when the device is not running.
• External safety shell normal environmental conditions and accident condition.
• Normal environment conditions and accident conditions inside the safety shell
Some areas have certain radiation, so it is necessary to carry on the radiation
supplementary test to the equipment used in this area [3].
Consider from environmental constraints, for the reactor building, nuclear
auxiliary plant, nuclear fuel plant, because of radiation and other environmental
problems, the remote I/O should not be used. For the turbine plant, electrical plant
and BOP building, environmental conditions can meet the basic requirements of
remote I/O, you can consider the use of remote I/O system.
Research on Application of Remote IO Technology …
79

3.2
Operation and Protection Requirements
Based on the importance of the executive function, distributed signal transmission
requirements and smart device application status, the principle of following system
or equipment should adopt the conventional DCS (hard wired connection), should
not be application of ﬁeld bus remote I/O:
• The system has a signiﬁcant impact on the safety of the reactor and turbine
engine (such as RPR, GSE etc.).
• Important control circuit, such as NSSS, GRE, etc.
Consider the system operation and protection requirements, Nuclear reactor
plant, nuclear auxiliary plant, nuclear fuel plant and electrical plant ventilation
system are not suitable to use the remote I/O system, because the bus signal may be
disturbed. Conventional island auxiliary system and BOP plant can be considered
using remote I/O system.
3.3
System Performance
The precision and response time of the system (such as SOE) should not be based
on remote IO system.
Field bus to meet the main performance indicators of the protection system
(response time: 150 ms, sampling accuracy of 0.25%), So in addition to the reactor
building, nuclear auxiliary building, nuclear fuel plant, steam turbine plant, elec-
trical plant and BOP building on the accuracy and response time without the special
requirements of the system basically meet the system performance requirements by
remote I/O Technology.
3.4
Installation Requirements
Should follow the DL/T 1212 on the ﬁeld bus equipment, communication
cable/optical ﬁber and grounding installation technical requirements, such as plant
restrictions or site construction conditions do not meet the requirements of DL/T
1212, remote I/O should not be used [4].
80
H. Wang et al.

3.5
Equipment Identiﬁcation
Select ﬁeld bus system and equipment should be according to the importance of the
safety function of the equipment, and carry out corresponding equipment identiﬁ-
cation tests, identiﬁcation steps and procedures see volume requirements RCC-E B.
For safety level systems, the control system is required to carry out relevant
identiﬁcation, According to the research of the remote I/O system on the markets,
the current remote I/O device can’t meet the requirements.
Therefore, only the non safety level of the plant or system using remote I/O.
3.6
Cost
Some system and equipment which are not far away from DCS electronic equip-
ment room, can be not consider using a remote I/O, due to the adoption of the
remote I/O do not lower investment cost. Some sub item far away from the DCS
electronic devices room, using the intelligent remote I/O technology can reﬂect the
advantages of remote I/O.
From the cost considerations, only some BOP building distance from DCS
electronic equipment room, can reﬂect the cost advantage of remote I/O.
4
Feasibility Analysis of Nuclear Power Plants Using
Remote I/O
According to the second section, for the reactor building, nuclear auxiliary building,
nuclear fuel building, consider to environmental conditions (such as radiation),
operational protection system requirements, and the distance between the DCS
electronic equipment room, without consider using the remote I/O system.
For the steam turbine building, due to the short distance between the DCS
electronic equipment room, operation and protection requirements, system perfor-
mance and other factors, in principle, it is not considered the use of remote I/O.
Only some BOP sub term which distributed in the main plant around, there is a
need to use remote I/O.
There is no radiation in most BOP building of the nuclear plant, the environ-
mental conditions between the nuclear power plant and the thermal power plant is
no obvious difference, except the individual execution level of nuclear safety and
nuclear safety related functions of BOP building, plant environment meet the basic
conditions of remote I/O equipment.
Research on Application of Remote IO Technology …
81

4.1
BOP Buildings Controlled by Local PLC
The hydrogen station, air compressor room, condensed water ﬁne treatment plant
and other BOP buildings and systems are relatively independent. In design of
nuclear power plant, by the local PLC achieve local control, the control cabinet is
arranged in the BOP buildings. For this type of equipment and systems are rela-
tively independent sub items, the use of remote I/O is not signiﬁcant [5].
4.2
BOP Buildings Controlled by DCS
BOP buildings controlled by DCS mostly is the combined pump station. In
CPR1000 project, most system in combined pump station adopts the traditional
DCS, The signals are sent to DCS electric equipment room directly from combined
pump station.
Through some experience feedback from the projects under construction and in
operation, combined pump station using traditional DCS control have some prob-
lems as follows:
• Combined pump station is far from DCS electric equipment room, signal trans-
mission path is long, for some analog signals, appeared signiﬁcant voltage drop.
• Combined pump station due to the extreme conditions of coast (such as ﬁsh
signal period, Seaweed ﬂood season etc.), circulating water pump mal operation
problem, the corresponding design change more, after the cable tray sealing,
appeared with increase measuring points and cables to DCS many times,
resulting in site construction difﬁcult, poor scalability, if using remote I/O, the
situation can be improved.
• Signals are sent to DCS cabinet through hard wiring, the more cables, high
costs. Due to the huge number of cables, the DCS electric equipment rooms
always have cable over capacity problem.
Through above analysis, combined pump station has the necessity and feasibility
of using remote I/O.
5
Remote I/O Program Implementation of Combined
Pump Station
5.1
Remote I/O Program of Combined Pump Station Under
the CPR1000 Technical Route
The main process system of combined pump station include: circulating water
ﬁltration system (CFI), circulating water system (CRF), circulating water pump
82
H. Wang et al.

lubrication system (CGR), essential service water (SEC), ﬁre water production
system (JPP), nuclear plant pump station ventilation system (DWS), circulating
water pumping Station ventilation system (DVP), sewage collection system (SEO),
etc. CFI/CRF/CGR/SEC/JPP/DWS are taken into DCS control, and CFI/SEO are
taken into local PLC control.
In CPR1000 project, circulating water pump station and essential service water
pump station jointly build, essential service water system and circulating water sys-
tem using common ﬁltering. Essential service water system is safety function system,
circulating water ﬁltration system and SEC supporting ventilation system DWS are
safety related function system. The speciﬁc I/O points are shown in Table 1.
In CPR1000 project combined pump station did not using remote I/O. The main
reason is as follows.
1. There is no instrument control equipment room in CPR1000 project of com-
bined pump station, instrument control equipment to be shared with the elec-
trical equipment in electrical room. Electrical room congestion has poor
environmental conditions. Electrical room layout is as shown in Fig. 1.
Table 1 Speciﬁc I/O measuring points of CPR1000 project pumping station
Sys.
Total
Single unit
1E
NC
DI
DO
AI
AO
DI
DO
AI
AO
CFI
337
86
24
–
–
62
99
12
50
4
–
CGR
46
–
–
–
–
29
16
1
–
CRF
134
–
–
–
–
64
30
40
–
SEC
196
20
12
6
–
82
–
54
22
DWS
62
16
8
–
–
26
12
–
–
JPP
45
6
4
–
–
14
4
17
–
Fig. 1 Combined pump station electrical room layout
Research on Application of Remote IO Technology …
83

2. SEC, CFI and other systems belong to safety and safety related function sys-
tems, need to be put in safety DCS to achieve control function, there’s no safety
remote I/O. This part is not recommended to achieve remote I/O product now.
3. Only more than 200 NC level I/O signals can using the remote I/O, if using
remote I/O, different channel of equipment need distribution in different cabinets
and remote I/O requires at least three cabinets, and each cabinet arranged
60 measuring points or so, then using the remote I/O not only reduce the cost,
there may cause cost increase.
5.2
Remote I/O Program of Combined Pump Station Under
the AP1000 Technical Route
Combined pump station provides cooling and production with seawater respec-
tively to circulating water system (CWS), plant water system (SWS), open cooling
water system (OWS), circulating water dosing system (WIS), seawater desalination
system (SWD) and the drum washing water system.
In AP1000 project combined pump station includes the following process: cir-
culating water system (CWS), circulating water ﬁltration system (WFS), gear box
lubricating oil system (GOS), plant water system (SWS), follow the pump room
ventilation system (VPS), production wastewater system (WWS), life water dis-
tribution system (DPS), plant drainage system (DRS), etc. The number of DCS I/O
points is shown in Table 2. Other systems are controlled by local control box.
In AP1000 project combined pump station can use remote I/O. The reasons are
as follows:
1. AP1000 as a new designing, can be considered setting independent instrument
and control electronic devices room in combined pump station.
2. In AP1000 project, combined pump station does not perform safety related
functions, all systems for non-safety system.
3. Combined pump station is far away from DCS electric equipment room, more
interlocking with other systems, need to be sent to DCS system.
Table 2 Speciﬁc I/O measuring points of AP1000 project combined pump station
System number
Total
Single unit
DI
DO
AI
RTD
AO
Communication
WFS
433
337
66
30
–
–
–
GOS
69
33
12
21
3
–
–
CWS
243
78
18
15
90
–
42
SWS
4
The main control equipment in the steam turbine plant,
pumping station only 4 AI
84
H. Wang et al.

4. The pump station has more measuring points, after using the remote I/O, the
advantages of remote IO technology can be fully reﬂected.
5.3
Remote I/O Program of Combined Pump
Station Under the EPR Technical Route
Under EPR project, the pumping station, in addition to the number of ﬂow channels
differ from CPR1000, Other are the same as CPR1000 design. Therefore, under the
EPR technology route the pumping station is not suitable for the use of remote I/O
technology.
5.4
Remote I/O Program of Combined Pump
Station Under the HPR1000 Technical Route
Under HPR1000 technical route, circulating water pump station and essential ser-
vice water pump station have completely independent. SEC system increases the
ﬁlter section on the original basis, CFI system no longer supply water to SEC
system. Circulating water pump station no longer perform safety related functions,
including only circulating water ﬁltration system (CFI) and circulating water system
(CRF) and circulating pump lubrication system (CGR), circulating water pump
station ventilation system (DVP), sewage collection system (SEO) system.
Essential service water system (SEC) and its related supporting system are
arranged in essential service water pump station. Essential service water pump
station due to the implementation of safety and safety related functions, are still
using the traditional DCS control. I/O points of systems in Circulating water pump
station with a slight increase compared CPR1000.
HPR1000 project considering use of remote I/O program, the main reasons are
as follows:
1. Projects under the HPR1000 technical route are all new projects, the setting and
the size of the electronic equipment room, the environmental requirements and
so on in the planning stage can be considered completely;
2. HPR1000 project has been conﬁrmed that circulating water pump station and
essential service water pump station are separated, circulating water pump
station equipment are non safety equipment;
3. The pump station has more measuring points, after using the remote intelligent
IO, the advantages of remote IO technology can be fully reﬂected.
Research on Application of Remote IO Technology …
85

6
Conclusions
As mentioned above, based on the characteristics of the remote intelligent I/O
Technology, In this paper, from the nuclear power plant and system of environ-
mental constraints, functional requirements (protection operation, system perfor-
mance requirements, installation requirements, equipment identiﬁcation, cost and
other system interface and other factors to the feasibility of the nuclear power plant
using remote I/O technology are analyzed in detail, determine the scope of the
implementation of remote I/O technology for nuclear power plant. Namely in the
CPR1000 project and EPR project, do not consider the use of remote IO
Technology. In the AP1000 project and HPR1000 project, can be considered using
remote intelligent I/O Technology in the pumping station (circulating pump room),
to reduce number of cables, enhance the reliability of signals, improve the scala-
bility of control systems in pumping station, and improve the cable capacitance in
DCS electronic equipment room.
References
1. Su L S, et al (2007) System and equipment of 900 MW pressurized water reactor nuclear
power plant [M] Beijing: Atomic Energy Press, 488–497.
2. Sun S R (2001) Application of remote intelligent IO in the computer monitoring system of
thermal power plant [J]. Industrial control computer, 16 (6): 41–43.
3. The French nuclear design and construction rules of association (2005) RCC-E-2005 nuclear
electrical equipment design and construction rules of [S].
4. Technical guidelines for the installation of 1212 (2013) DL/T thermal power plant ﬁeldbus
equipment [S].
5. GB/T 13286 (2008) Nuclear power plant safety grade electrical equipment and circuit
independence criteria [S].
86
H. Wang et al.

Research on Wireless Location
Technology of Nuclear Power Plant
and Discussion for Physical Protection
System Application
Lin Ye, Hua-Ping Chen, Shuang Li and Wen-Fei Wu
Abstract Several kinds of indoor wireless location technology are introduced in
this paper, such as the Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID), Bluetooth, Light
Emitting Diode (LED) visible light location, and Ultra Wideband (UWB), which
are analyzed and compared. Moreover, the paper also discusses the nuclear facilities
physical protection system application of wireless location technology in nuclear
power plant by means of collecting the location information of the internal
authorized personnel to analyze the internal authorized personnel’s behavior fur-
thermore for the analysis of the internal threats with the data. And by using the
wireless localization technologies it is expected to manage and control the nuclear
materials in the real-time and achieve nuclear materials speciﬁed in the security area
to prevent nuclear materials from being stolen or illegal transfer.
Keywords Indoor location technology  LED visible light location  UWB 
Nuclear power plant authorized personnel position  Nuclear material position
1
Introduction
The access control system of Nuclear power plant is only deﬁned in the authorized
persons in the area to defend the border through the entry checkpoint, can only be
reﬂected in the access record of the area and the number of personnel in the area, so
the situation and the real-time location of the authorized personnel in the area can’t
be control and nuclear materials temporary control is mainly by means of intrusion
prevention technology combined with the video. With the development of power
plant intelligence and meticulous management requirements as well as wireless
location technology, the location technology is widely used in coal mines and
prisons and has good application effect, so we can explore the application of
L. Ye (&)  H.-P. Chen  S. Li  W.-F. Wu
State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Power Safety Monitoring Technology and Equipment,
China Nuclear Power Engineering Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China
e-mail: yelin@cgnpc.com.cn
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_10
87

wireless location technology in the physical protection system of nuclear power
plant to further achieve the upgrading and improvement of physical protection
system of nuclear power plant.
Wireless location technology can’t produce electromagnetic interference for the
power plant instrumentation and DCS system, so the application information
security of wireless network in the security system should be considered.
2
Introduction of Several Kinds of Indoor Wireless
Location Technologies
2.1
RFID Position Technology
RFID radio frequency identiﬁcation technology is a kind of wireless communica-
tion technology and also a kind of non-contact automatic identiﬁcation technology
which automatically identiﬁes the target object and obtains the relevant data
through the radio-frequency signal. The characteristics of RFID Technology:
operation process are non-contact, by the RFID reader and special RFID tag which
can be attached to the target object, the information is transmitted from the RFID
tag to the RFID reader; RFID tag has the advantages of small volume, low price,
easy to control, simple and practical and is currently widely used in the positioning
technology. But RFID is subject to the limit of the distance, has a short operating
distance and is vulnerable to be interference [1, 2].
2.2
Bluetooth Position Technology
Bluetooth locates by means of measuring the signal strength. This is a kind of
wireless transmission technology with a short distance and low-power. The
Bluetooth device is small, easy to be integrated and popularized and is easy to be
transmitted and not affected by the range of visibility. Bluetooth system is not stable
in a complex space environment and greatly interfered by noise and signal.
2.3
UWB Position Technology
UWB is an ultra-wideband communication technology. UWB signal contains a
larger range of frequencies than that of narrowband and broadband signals and it is
located in the range of ultra-wideband signals. UWB is a new technology and
different from other traditional communication technologies. The biggest difference
compared with other existing communication technology is that it doesn’t need
carrier
and sends
and
receives
nanosecond extremely
narrow
pulse
data
88
L. Ye et al.

transmission, so the power of signal required in the transmission is low and has a
bandwidth with GHz. UWB technology ensures high-speed data transmission while
solves the problem of power consumption of the mobile terminal, so there is a wide
application prospect. This technology has the characteristics of small transmission
power, strong penetrating power, low power consumption, high security, strong
anti-interference ability, low system complexity, providing accurate positioning and
others [1, 2].
2.4
LED Visible Light Position Technology
LED visible light indoor positioning is a new type of indoor positioning technology,
which is the a new wireless communication technology application combined lighting
with light communication technology. The technology uses a wide coverage of the
LED lighting equipment, can effectively meet the needs of high precision positioning
and has low power consumption, strong anti-interference capability, environmental
protection and other features. But the localization tags cannot be blocked.
3
Indoor Wireless Location Technology Applications
in Nuclear Power Plants
For the transmission rate of UWB positioning technology with ultra wideband
technology, higher precision, better stability, stronger anti-interference ability,
UWB has a wide application prospect.
LED visible light positioning technology has advantages of low power con-
sumption, high efﬁciency, small electromagnetic interference effects and other
advantages in recent years, so it becomes a very hot research direction.
This paper mainly introduces the UWB positioning system and the system
components and system architecture of LED visible positioning system. Referring
to the rating grade of the actual protective division and actual situation of nuclear
power plant, deploy different positioning system solutions.
3.1
UWB Position System
3.1.1
System Solution
The tag should be set to the items (such as safety helmet, safety shoes) which an
authorized ofﬁcer must carry in the nuclear power plant, or ﬁxed on the monitored
items. The base station uses an omnidirectional antenna with the placement of 30 m
interval to ensure that the protective area of nuclear power plants is wholly covered.
Research on Wireless Location Technology …
89

The positioning tag is equipped with the random code sequence. Sensor stations send
the pulse signal according to the time set. When it detects a random code sequence, it
compares the original code with the random code sequence to achieve precise posi-
tioning by using TDOA mechanism. UWB position net approach, see Fig. 1.
3.1.2
System Composition
1. UWB Anchor calculates the distance from TAG and pass back to the server via
a wired or wireless network.
2. UWB TAG broadcast their position according to the system requirements.
3. Server.
Position calculation engine: calculate the speciﬁc location of the label according
to the ranging results between the Anchor and Tag.
Graphic rendering server: Graphics Rendering Server: Tag position is presented
in a graphically way based on vector diagram of scene.
Other servers: according to the system application design other servers, such as
server for data mining.
3.2
Solution of LED Visible Position System
LED optical communication positioning technology is a communication technology
based on visible light, reads the characteristics of the image information by means
Fig. 1 UWB position net approach
90
L. Ye et al.

of the image sensor line by line and is modulated by the driving current or driving
voltage of the light source, i.e. by changing the frequency and duration in the
driving current or the voltage to form different light and dark stripes in the image on
the image sensor output. Then according to the detected light or dark stripes’
number or phase of image, through the calculation, obtain the frequency infor-
mation of the driving current loaded. And then determine the code according to the
transmitted frequency information is coded. Finally, recover the transmitted
information based on the speciﬁc decoding mode. In case of practical application
through the LED lamps on the roof, lamps emit ﬂashing signals like Moss telegraph
code, which are received and detected by the user’s smart device or speciﬁc
equipment and the user can receive direct feedback over the light signal without
directing the receiving device at a particular direction. The positioning accuracy
may be within 1 m. LED visible light positioning principle, see Fig. 2.
4
Discussion on Wireless Location Technology
in the Physical Protection Application
of Nuclear Power Plants
There are a large number of electronic devices associated with nuclear safety in the
electrical plants of nuclear power island and the barriers of nuclear island reinforced
concrete structure, so we should select a smaller electromagnetic interference,
stronger penetration of wireless location technologies, the wireless positioning
technology furthermore need have the simple and convenient layout features so as
not to affect the implementation of major systems of nuclear power plants safety
equipment.
At present the access control system of nuclear power plant is only managed by
the authorization in the board of security area. It can be only reﬂected in the state of
personnel “in” and “out” of the board and cannot grasp the real time position of
internal staff, especially after entering the vital parts. Using the wireless location
technology enables personnel in the real-time monitoring and is conducive to
radiation safety and security of nuclear materials.
Tx module
Rx module
Location
Location
Fig. 2 LED visible light positioning principle
Research on Wireless Location Technology …
91

UWB positioning technology and LED visible light wireless location technology
are the research focuses of wireless communication positioning technology; in the
future it has a broad application prospect. Now discuss the application of wireless
location technology in nuclear power plant (NPP) especially in the physical pro-
tection system: used for auxiliary determining the internal threat, actively detecting
and according with intrusion detection to prevent nuclear material from being stole;
other emergency applications in the nuclear power plant.
4.1
Auxiliary Discriminating Internal Threats
Usually when recognizing internal threat of physical protection system in the
nuclear power plant is greatly difﬁcult, the positioning technology can be used in
the real-time and on-line monitoring for any authorized ofﬁcer into the protective
area of nuclear power plant, collecting and analyzing a large amount of data for any
authorized personnel behavior, especially those into the vital parts of nuclear power
plant, such as staying for a long time, frequently access to vital parts, together with
the other means of identiﬁcation and management system to effectively reduce the
determination range of insider threat of the physical protection of nuclear power
plant and provide technologically the auxiliary method for determining internal
threat.
4.2
Anti-nuclear Material Missing
The positioning technology can be applied in the staff and also store items. Usually
store items are stationary. The receiving device of positioning is ﬁxed on the article
which can be monitored in real time whether there has been displacement. For the
physical protection of nuclear material, positioning technology makes the state of
article from passive defense and anti-invasion to the active discovery, which
improves the effectiveness of the physical protection of the three elements of the
“detection” feature. It can be expected that the positioning technology in the system
of physical protection application of nuclear power plants the feasible.
4.3
Other Applications
When the nuclear power plant is in the state of emergency, the real-time location of
staff can assist to determine the location of staff trapped, so that the emergency and
rescue are more quick and effective. In the emergency collection region, realize the
quickly check and timely evacuation of emergency personnel.
92
L. Ye et al.

4.4
Difﬁculties
Compared to wired technology, the key issue of wireless technology applications of
nuclear power plant needs to be focused on resolving electromagnetic interference
and electromagnetic compatibility. In nuclear power plants there are more
mechanical and electrical equipment, the sources of electromagnetic interference
abound, which may affect voice communications and operational management
based on wireless communications. More importantly, the electromagnetic wave
wireless device transmits may cause the interference for critical electrical and
mechanical equipment of nuclear power plants and there is a risk of normal reading
for instruments.
The positioning label carrier also is the key technology of nuclear power plants
and the locating labels should be easy to use for the plant personnel into the plant
under the condition where the locating tag should not affect personnel’s work in the
nuclear power plant.
5
Conclusions
In this paper, through the analysis of wireless location technology, particularly
UWB and LED visible light communication technology exposition, with the con-
tinuous development of wireless technology, the key problem of wireless location
technology and wireless real-time location and risk of electromagnetic interference
are solved. Select the positioning technology applied to nuclear power plant in
different security area to ensure the operation of nuclear power plant safety; solve
problems about the locating label carrier; solve the problem of information security,
and potential risk for wireless hardware for the security of the system. The wireless
location technology will play an important role in the application of physical
protection system of nuclear power plant and daily management and provided a
strong technical support for the physical protection of nuclear power plants.
At this stage the wireless location technology may be attempted to be applied in
some auxiliary buildings which are not involved in the nuclear safety, which
accumulates experience for the comprehensive application of nuclear power plant.
References
1. Chun-Ling TANG, Ming-Gang SUN (2014) Research on personnel location system of mine
based on wireless location technology. Coal technology 1:116–118
2. Fan ZHANG, Dian-Cheng CHEN, Jie YANG (2012) Comparative study on indoor location
technology and system. Guangdong Communication Technology. 11: 73–79
Research on Wireless Location Technology …
93

Analyzing the Digitally Levelled Control
Systems Used for Nuclear Power Plants
Yuan-Long Wang
Abstract This paper analyzes the digitally levelled control systems used for the
nuclear power plants. The main contents are as follows: Through describing the
expression of DCS, the accurate concept of the digitally levelled control system is
highlighted. The level model of the digitally levelled control system is provided
here by examples. The comparison is done here, in which the difference of clas-
siﬁcation to the same subsystems in the different digitally levelled control systems
used for the nuclear power plants is clearly shown. The digitally levelled control
system used for the nuclear power plant is a network system. Its safety belongs to
one part of the whole nuclear safety. Here, the paper will concisely discuss the
safety problem according to the nuclear safety principle of defense in depth. But the
notice must be pointed out that the principle of defense in depth does not only exist
in the nuclear energy systems, also in the industrial control systems.
Keywords Nuclear power plant  Digital  Level  Control system  Function
safety
1
Introduction
At China, the widespread adoption of DCS technique to conﬁguring the new
instrumentation and the control systems in nuclear power plants under construction
has been already practiced [1, 2].
Here, DCS can be in the name of Digital Control System, or Distributed Control
System. The following description will show that doing distinguishing between
them is necessary.
Figure 1 is the schematic diagram of the digital control system [3–6]. Here, the
actual meaning of word ‘digital’ is that computer or microprocessor is widely used
in the instrumentation systems.
Y.-L. Wang (&)
Science and Technology Laboratory on Reactor System Design,
Sichuan, China
e-mail: wang_yuanlong126@126.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_11
95

In the digital control system, A/D converter can convert the analog signal (input)
into the digital signal. But the actuator needs the analog signal, so the digital signal
must be converted into the analogy signal through D/A converter.
The distributed control system has the feature with levels or layers. Its theoretical
basis is built on the levelled control of a large system [7]. The control of the large
system is relied on the control systems in it. Such control systems cooperate with
each other to implement the control function of the large system.
Distributed means hierarchy, i.e., levels. So, the distributed control system is
called the levelled control system. Figure 2 shows the level classiﬁcation of the
levelled control system [8, 9].
In Fig. 2, the information communication among levels is the basis of the dis-
tributed control system. So, the distributed control system is also called the infor-
mation control system.
It is difﬁcult for the analog control system to implement the information control
based on levels. To implement the information control, the prerequisite is the
application of computers or microprocessors. Through integrating the automatic
control and the controlled object as a unit, a digital control and supervisory system
is constructed. As the enterprise management and process control are classiﬁed as
levels, a hierarchy model is built effectively. Therefore, the digitally levelled control
Fig. 1 The schematic diagram of the digital control system
Fig. 2 The control levels of a large system
96
Y.-L. Wang

system of a large system has been completed. Here, it is obvious that the current
DCS should be named as the digitally leveled control system, i.e., DLCS. The DCS
is only used for the digital control system.
2
Typical Nuclear Power Plant and Control Systems
The schematic diagram of the typical nuclear power plant (NPP) is shown at Fig. 3
[10]. Normally, a nuclear power plant is classiﬁed into two loops. The primary loop
is the nuclear island. The secondary loop is the normal island. Their main devices
are highlighted in Fig. 3. To secure the nuclear power plant, all of these devices
must be controlled and monitored.
Fig. 3 The schematic diagram of typical nuclear power plant
Analyzing the Digitally Levelled Control Systems …
97

2.1
The System Scale and the Control Scale of A Typical
Nuclear Power Plant
The fact of the history of NPP is clear that its thermal-hydraulic loop number, for
example of 1000 MW NPP, has experienced three stages: from four loops to three
loops, and then to two loops [11]. Here, if the estimation is done according to the
mature model of NPP, i.e., the second generation or the second generation modi-
ﬁed, the control signal quantity of the whole system is listed in Tables 1 and 2 [12].
Notice, Tables 1 and 2 are only to Tian-wan NPP in China. The statistic data to
other NPPs will be not the same as here. Especially, AP1000 NPP is absolutely
different from here [11].
2.2
NSSS Control Systems in NPP
Through Fig. 3, Tables 1 and 2, it is clear that a NPP is a typical large system. Such
system needs the levelled control policy.
Here, for analyzing concisely, the example is only to the control systems of the
nuclear steam supply system (NSSS) of NPP. Figure 4 is its schematic diagram [10,
13, 14]. In Fig. 4, the control systems include as follows.
The reactor power control system. its function is to control the reactor power
(nuclear power). Its measurement inputs are nuclear power, temperatures respec-
tively come from the hot section and the cool section of the coolant of reactor, the
load needed by turbine, etc.
The pressurizer pressure and level control system. The inputs are the pressure
and level of the pressurizer.
The steam generator (SG) level control system. The inputs are the steam ﬂow,
the feedwater ﬂow, the load needed by turbine.
The steam dump control system. The inputs are the load needed by turbine, the
average temperature of coolant.
Table 1 1000 MW NPP control signals
Type
Temperature
Pressure,
level, ﬂow
Electrical
measurement
On-off
input
On-off
output
Analog
outpour
Local
indicator
Number
2500
3100
450
900
500
330
1000
Table 2 Actuators and control loops
Type
Motor
Isolated
value with
switch
Isolated value
without switch
Control
value
Solenoid
value
Heater
Closed
control
loop
Number
1000
2850
1700
350
120
300
330
98
Y.-L. Wang

3
The Model of the Digitally Levelled Control System
of NPP
According to the levelled policy of Fig. 2, the digitally levelled control system is
shown at Fig. 5 [8, 9]. Here, the control system consists of four levels. In Fig. 5, the
rest control systems of NSSS excluding the steam dump control system belong to
SICS.
Figure 6 is the schematic diagram when the levelled architecture of Fig. 5 is
replaced by the actual engineering DCS [8, 9]. The classiﬁcation of levels in Fig. 6
corresponds to the levels from Field level to Process management level in Fig. 2.
The meanings of abbreviations in Fig. 6 will be introduced in Fig. 7.
Here, as an example of NSSS control systems, Fig. 6 is the exhibition of the
levelled policy of all the process control systems except the reactor power control
system. The process control systems are the non-safety to the nuclear safety con-
sideration. Their instrumentation conﬁguration is accomplished by TXP automatic
control system in Siemens. To the safety system and the relevant-safety control
system, for example, the protection system and the reactor power control system,
Fig. 4 NSSS control systems in NPP
Analyzing the Digitally Levelled Control Systems …
99

Fig. 5 Digitally levelled control system (1)
Fig. 6 Digitally levelled control system (2)
100
Y.-L. Wang

Siemens uses TXS automatic control system to implement. The digital instru-
mentation and control systems of the whole NPP are concisely exhibited by Fig. 7
[9, 12].
Here, the notice must be taken into consideration, i.e., in Fig. 7, both the reactor
power control system(RCLS) and the reactor protection system (PS) are imple-
mented by TXS automatic control systems, and Westinghouse, however, considers
the reactor power control system (RCS) as being non-safety (see Fig. 8). It is
obvious that the different considerations exist when the actual control systems are
replaced by the digital instrumentation systems [15].
By comparing Fig. 8 with Fig. 6, the other differences will be exposed. First, the
word phrase meaning for each level is not the same. It reﬂects the fact that the
design thinking on how to construct the digitally levelled control system is not the
equivalent. Second, the main network shows the similar problem. Figure 6 uses the
circular net, and Fig. 8 uses the bus net [16]. If all these imply that the advantages
and the disadvantages exist each other. The problems are worth to study further.
Here, because the pages are limited, the management levels in Fig. 2 do not be
discussed [17, 18].
Fig. 7 Digitally levelled control system (3)
Analyzing the Digitally Levelled Control Systems …
101

4
The Safety Problem of the Digitally Levelled
Control System
The radioactive problem which especially exists in nuclear energy systems causes
the safety problem on the application of the nuclear energy. According to the
nuclear safety principle of defense in depth [19], the reactor control systems belong
to the ﬁrst safety layer (level).
In the view of the above nuclear safety principle, NPP is classiﬁed into two
loops: the primary loop and the secondary loop (seeing Fig. 3). Here, the primary
loop corresponds to the nuclear island in Fig. 7, and the secondary loop corre-
sponds to the turbine island in Fig. 7. Based on this classiﬁcation, the digitally
levelled control system is also divided into two parts: for the safety functions and
for the non-safety functions (seeing Fig. 8). To ﬁve control systems above, the
reactor power control system (RCS) is the relevant safety control system. The
others (NSSS CS) are the non-safety control systems [20]. But here, the notice must
be taken into consideration, i.e., in Fig. 8, RCS and NSSS CS are all considered as
the non-safety control systems. And in Fig. 7, RCS is the part of RCLS in the
Fig. 8 Digitally levelled control system (4)
102
Y.-L. Wang

nuclear island. The difference which exists here will affect selecting the devices of
the individual control system.
Even though the safety classiﬁcation is not the same here, the four-level clas-
siﬁcation of the digitally levelled control system is not affected. Here, another
notice must be pointed out is that the principle of defense in depth not only exists in
the nuclear energy systems, but also exists in the industrial control systems [18].
The details are not discussed further.
5
Conclusions
Here, the principle analysis of the digitally levelled control system used for NPP has
been ﬁnished. The architecture for discussion comes from the Siemens products
which have been applied in Tian-wan NPP.
In the Chinese mainland, the public view has been realized in the nuclear
industry, that is, using the digital technology to build the new nuclear power plants
is the intelligent selection. Because of the factor of the history, the current situation
is that the digitally levelled control systems used for the nuclear power plants are
mainly introduced abroad, and the way is not only one. The introductions from the
more suppliers easily produce the problem that it is difﬁcult for users to unite the
technology model. So it will result in the effect that the costs for construction,
operation, and maintenance will obviously increase. In order to avoid the phe-
nomenon appears repeatedly, it is important for the users to enhance the force to
study the principles on the digitally levelled control system and develop the relevant
techniques. It is obvious that the advanced techniques are mastered and then the
products could be manufactured and used safely.
References
1. China nuclear society, china instrumentation society (2013) Theses on the second China
nuclear power instrumentation and control conference [G]. Xian, China.
2. China nuclear energy industry society (2014). Theses on the digital instrumentation and
control system technology conference of the nuclear energy industry [G]. Shanghai, China.
3. Shi Ren, Liu Wen Jiang (2005) Automatic instrumentation and process control [M].
Electronic Industry publisher, China.
4. Shao Yusen (1995) Process control and instrumentation [M]. Shanghai Jiaotong University
Press, China.
5. Curtis D. Johnson (2002) Process control instrumentation technology (sixth edition).
M Printed by Science Publisher, USA.
6. Wang
Yuanlong
(2016)
Digital
controller
technology
and
application.
J
China
Instrumentation, 23: 56–60.
7. Qian Xuesen, Song Jian (1980) Engineering cybernetics [M]. Science Press, China.
8. I&C working team (2004) Digital instrumentation and control platforms Teleperm XS/XP.
G Siemens ANP, FRANCE.
Analyzing the Digitally Levelled Control Systems …
103

9. Siemens PGL, Areva NP NL-G (2006) Fang Jiashan nuclear power project I&C exchange
meeting. G Siemens.
10. Guang Dong nuclear power training center (2005) 900 MW PWR nuclear power plant
systems and devices. M Atomic Energy Publisher, China.
11. Wang Yuanlong (2013) 1000 MW nuclear power plant nuclear island architecture and safety
comparison analysis [C]. China Atomic Energy Publisher, China.
12. Jiang Su nuclear power limited company (2002) Tian Wan nuclear power plant digital
instrumentation and control systems. G JSNPLC, China.
13. Cui Zhenhua, Wang Yuanlong (1998) NSSS control systems simulation program research
report [R]. Tsinghua university and NPIC cooperating team, China.
14. Liao
Zhongyue,
Wang
Yuanlong
(1997)
NPIC-CNEIC-QINSHAN-FRAMATONE
Cooperation Agreement: Catia2 Code-First part: Descriptions of the models. R NPIC, China.
15. Wang Yuanlong (2013) Nuclear power plant digital instrumentation and control systems
architecture comparison analysis [C]. China Atomic Energy Publisher, China.
16. Bnﬂ(2008) Common Q-Ovation Integrated I&C Platforms. G WESTINGHOUSE, USA.
17. Michael Palmer, Robert Bruce Sinclair (2003) Guide to designing and implementing local and
wide area networks (second edition). M Printed by Tsinghua University Press, China.
18. Xiao Jianrong (2015) Industrial control system information safety. M Electronic Industry
Publisher, China.
19. International atomic energy agency (2012) Safety standards series No. SSR-2/1 Safety of
nuclear power plants: design. S IAEA, Vienna.
20. International
electrotechnical
commission
(2009)
IEC
61226
Nuclear
power
plants-Instrumentation and control important safety-Classiﬁcation of instrumentation and
control functions [S]. IEC, Geneva, Switzerland.
104
Y.-L. Wang

A Study About Software Development QC
and QA of the Digital RPS in Nuclear
Power Plant
Wei-Hua Chen, Wang Xi, Peng-Fei Gu and Wang-Ping Ye
Abstract Reactor protection system (RPS) is one of the very important systems in
nuclear power plant (NPP). Since the digital technology was used in RPS, for the
software development,the quality control (QC) and quality assurance (QA) should
be further researched. Based on the CPR1000 digital RPS software development
project, this paper discusses the deﬁnitions and necessity for QC and QA, illustrates
the software life cycle, proposes the practical veriﬁcation and validation (V&V)
activities, describes V&V process through in software development. In each stage
of V&V process, the V&V activities that QC and QA works and products imple-
mented by are detailed introduced, provides a practical and efﬁcient reference of
QC and QA method for other nuclear digital safety system software development
projects.
Keywords NPP  RPS  QA  QC  V&V
W.-H. Chen  W. Xi  P.-F. Gu  W.-P. Ye
Instrumentation and Control Department,
China Nuclear Power Design Co., Ltd.,
Shenzhen, China
e-mail: chenweihua@cgnpc.com.cn
W. Xi
e-mail: wang.xi2@cgnpc.com.cn
W.-P. Ye
e-mail: yewangping@cgnpc.com.cn
P.-F. Gu (&)
Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology,
Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Nuclear
Energy Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
e-mail: gupengfei@cgnpc.com.cn
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_12
105

1
Introduction
RPS is one of the most critical Instrumentation and Control (I&C) systems, which
protected the NPP by triggering reactor trip and actuating the engineered safety
features. The previous RPS designs were based on analog technologies, which
preferred to assure and control the quality of hardware, such as hardware identi-
ﬁcation and environment test. Compared with traditional analog technology, the
application of DCS can effectively improve the accuracy, stability, safety and
reliability [1] of the nuclear power plant. Therefore, the quality of RPS software led
to widespread concern, and the quality control (QC) and quality assurance (QA) for
the software development of digital RPS should be further discussed.
The safety software plays a key role in digital RPS devices, its fault may lead to
system operation failure. QA and QC, which were implemented to reduce the
defects during software development, have been the focal points to realize the
expected functions in RPS. The QA and QC in software development can be
implemented by the independence V&V activities, which complying with proce-
dures and standards strictly. To detect the mistakes and provide information for
error repairing, V&V activities are executed in the whole stages of software
development.
Combining with the V&V activities in CPR1000 safety digital RPS design
project, this paper makes a discussion for QC and QA, and introduce the practical
V&V activities in software development.
2
Discussions
2.1
Deﬁnitions
QC activities including the process checking, quality evaluation, and tested or
reviewed product concerning, aims to ﬁnd out the potential and possibility mistake
or error during software development, and proposes information for error repairing.
QA activities implemented complying with procedures and plans, aims to
guarantee consistency between software development and expected results, reduces
the differences between the actually and expected outcome, It is also obligated to
control the operation of QA system, the differences between the implementation
and speciﬁcation, and proposes analysis reports and suggestions during software
development.
In software V&V activities, veriﬁcation conforms to requirements for all
activities during each life cycle process, satisﬁes the standards, practices, and
conventions during lifecycle processes, successfully completes each lifecycle
activity and satisﬁes all the criteria for initiating succeeding lifecycle activities.
Validation satisﬁes system requirements allocated to the products at the end
106
W.-H. Chen et al.

lifecycle activity, solves the right problem, and satisﬁes intended use and user needs
in the operational environment [2].
2.2
Necessity
QC and QA are emphasized in legislations and standards to insure the safety and
reliability of systems in nuclear power plant.
In nuclear safety legislation HAF 102 [3] and its related guide HAD 002/16 [4],
the requirements are provided for the application of safety computer system and the
design of safety software, including the formulation and implementation of the
standards, and the technique method for software QC and QA. The QA outline
indicates that the V&V activities are necessary for the software development pro-
cess. HAF 003 [5] and its related guide HAD 003/06 [6] provides the QA
requirement for safety items.
R.G.1.152 [7] indicates that the QA for safety software need QA plan and
software V&V activity. The V&V process of the overall system should ensure the
testability, correctness, consistency, completeness, and accuracy of the system
security requirements.
IEC 60880 Standard for software used in nuclear power plant safety systems [8]
and IEEE 1012 Standard for software V&V provides the work, range, method and
document-speciﬁc for V&V activity.
The structure of legislations and standards for QA and QC, software lifecycle
and V&V are shown in Fig. 1.
The description of the legislations and standards illustrate the importance and
necessity of V&V activities in nuclear safety software development. The V&V
activity complying with the legislations and standards in RPS software develop-
ment is a basic guarantee for QC and QA.
HAF 102,HAD 102/16
 HAF 003,HAD 003/06
IEEE 1012
IEEE 7-4.3.2
R.G.1.152
 IEC 12207
 IEC 60880
Chinese Legislations
American Standards
European Standards
Software V&V
Software Lifecycle
QA and QC
Fig. 1 The structure of legislations and standards
A Study About Software Development QC and QA …
107

2.3
Software Lifecycle
The software lifecycle described in IEC 12207 [9] is shown in Fig. 2, which were
referenced in IEEE 7.4.3.2 [10] and IEEE 1012, including purchase, supply,
development, operation, maintenance, organization, and support processes. Among
them, the development process draws signiﬁcant attention in CPR1000 safety
digital RPS design project. According to IEEE 7.4.3.2 and IEEE 1012, V&V
management process, activities and tasks exist in the whole software lifecycle, the
V&V
activities
and
tasks
corresponding
with
each
process
should
be
complemented.
3
Stage QC and QA in V&V Activities
3.1
V&V Process
Combing with CPR1000 nuclear power project, according to IEC 60880 and IEEE
1012, the V&V process for RPS software design and development has been
instructed in Fig. 3, as it shown, V&V activities in software development process
contains 6 stages, including concept stage, requirement stage, design stage,
implementation stage, and integration stage, all of them are independent of the
development process, make tests for the whole development process.
To implement the QC and QA in RPS software development, assure the
objective and useful default information could be provided, the V&V activities are
carried out by the third party independence, which including the technical inde-
pendence, managerial independence and ﬁnancial impedance.
Purchase
Supply
Development
Operation
Maintenance
Orgnazation
Support
V&V
process
for the 
whole
lifecycle
V&V 
activities
V&V 
tasks
Management 
process
Document preparation
Configuration management
Quality Asurance
Fig. 2 Software life cycles
108
W.-H. Chen et al.

3.2
V&V Plan
At the beginning of V&V project, the V&V plan was provided to describe the
purpose, deﬁnitions, overview, processes, activities and tasks. To implement QC
and QA, the V&V plan should be reviewed and the QA plan should be prepared at
the same time.
Meanwhile, according to the legislations and standards, the writing and publi-
cation of documents should comply with the speciﬁcations. For instance, required
by R.G.1.172 [11], in order to provide standard, traceability, and veriﬁability
documents for V&V activities, the developer was obligated to write and publicize
the
software
requirement
speciﬁcation
document
complying
with
strict
speciﬁcation.
3.3
Concept V&V
In concept V&V, quality is controlled by requirement tracing, including forward
and backward, between system requirement speciﬁcation and 16 design scheme
introductions. The non-conformance terms are reviewed and classiﬁed into Concept
V&V Bug Report, which is provided to developer for error restore. QA is worked
by auditing, including concept V&V process audit and delivery audit, the results are
gathered in Concept V&V Report to evaluate concept V&V activities.
Plant and System 
Requirements
I&C System 
Requirements
I&C System Design
Software
Requirements
Software Design
Software
Implementation
I&C System 
Integration Test
Software Acceptance 
Test
Installation and System 
Checkout
System Requirements 
based on Computer 
Verification
Verification
Verification
Verification
Verification
Validation
Validation
Validation
Concept V&V
Design V&V
Implementation V&V
Integration Test 
V&V
Requirements V&V
Fig. 3 The V&V process for the RPS software in CPR1000 RPS project
A Study About Software Development QC and QA …
109

3.4
Requirement V&V
During requirement V&V, QC worked by requirement tracing in two parts. In the
ﬁrst part, requirements are forward and backward tracing between design scheme
introductions and software requirement speciﬁcation. In the second part, require-
ments are forward and backward tracing between Logic/Analogy Diagram and
Function Diagram. The inconsistent terms in both parts are emphasised in
Requirement V&V Bug Report, which is propose to developers for default
repairing. QA works through this stage to audit the process and delivery, and make
a conclusion in Requirement V&V Report.
3.5
Design V&V
In design V&V, quality control is implemented by forward and backward tracing
between I/O interfaces and EAST TAG to insure the whole interfaces are designed
correctly. The mistakes in each interface are illustrated in Design V&V Bug Report,
which is provided to developer for interfaces correctly designed. QA still makes
process and delivery audit, and produces Design V&V Report.
3.6
Implementation V&V
In implementation V&V, QC executed by test case design, unit test and regression
test. In this stage, the test cases are carefully designed for each algorithm block,
which is tested in six rounds. After each round, the V&V Bug Report is produced
for the error repairing by developer, and the related regression test is executed to
evaluate the repairing efﬁciency. QA executed by evaluating the product quality
state evaluation, process audit and implementation delivery audit. Implementation
V&V report and Product evaluation report are produced after QA works.
3.7
Integration Test V&V
In integration test V&V, QC contains works for integration test and system test. In
these works, the test cases are designed for typical functions, which covered the
main unit and algorithm blocks to test their integration performance. The integra-
tion V&V Bug report in this stage is produced to guarantee functions and systems
operated correctly. Process audit and delivery audit are also implemented to assure
the quality, in additional, the Integration V&V report and Product evaluation report
are produced to show the QA result.
110
W.-H. Chen et al.

The works and products of V&V activities for QA and QC in each stage are
concluded in Table 1.
To meet the requirement of the software integrity level, considering the different
key point of each stage, the different standard should be referenced and introduced.
For example, the unit test in implementation V&V stage could comply with the
aerospace and military industry standard, which contains skilled experience to meet
the requirement of V&V of digital RPS software in nuclear power plant [12].
4
Conclusions
This paper discusses QC and QA that practiced and implemented combining with
CPR1000 digital RPS software development project, based on the importance and
necessity that emphasized by legislations and standards, QC and QA works and
products implemented by the third party independence V&V activities are detailed
introduced in each stage of software development, provides a practical and efﬁcient
reference of QC and QA method for other nuclear digital safety system software
development projects.
Table 1 V&V activities for QA and QC in each stage
Category
Quality assurance (QA)
Quality control (QC)
Stage
Works
Products
Works
Products
V&V plan
QA plan preparation
QA plan
V&V plan
management
Review
V&V plan
Concept V&V
Process audit
Stage delivery audit
Stage V&V
report
Requirement
tracing
Review
V&V bug
report
Requirements
V&V
Process audit
Stage delivery audit
Stage V&V
report
Requirement
tracing
Review
Bug report
Test report
Design V&V
Process audit
Stage delivery audit
Stage V&V
report
Requirement
tracing
Review
Bug report
Test report
Implementation
V&V
Product quality state
evaluation
Process audit
Stage delivery audit
Stage V&V
report
Product
evaluation report
Test case design
Unit test
Regression test
Test
management
Review
Test case
Bug report
Test report
Integration test
V&V
Product quality state
evaluation
Process audit
Stage delivery audit
Stage V&V
report
Product
evaluation report
Integration test
System test
Test
management
Bug report
Test report
A Study About Software Development QC and QA …
111

Acknowledgements This project was ﬁnancially supported with funds which provided by a
reliability research of reactor protection system which based on digital microprocessor and elec-
trical equipment (national science and technology major project). The award number is
2014ZX06004002-004.
References
1. Liu Z, Hu L S, Bai T (2015) Requirements and Methods of Reliability Design for Safety
Level Software of Nuclear Power. PROCESS AUTOMATION INSTRUMENTATION,
36(11):116–120.
2. Software Engineering Standards Committee of the IEEE Computer Society (2004) IEEE 1012
IEEE Standard for Software Veriﬁcation and Validation. Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineer, New York.
3. HAF 102 (2004) Safety of Nuclear Power Plant Design Regulations. Doctoral dissertation.
4. HAF 102/16 (2004) Safety of Nuclear Power Plant Design Regulations Guides. Doctoral
dissertation.
5. HAF 003 (1991) Safety of Nuclear Power Plant Design Regulations. Doctoral dissertation.
6. HAD 003/06 (1986) Safety of Nuclear Power Plant Design Regulations Guides. Doctoral
dissertation.
7. R.G.1.152 (2006) Criteria For Use Of Computers in Safety Systems of Nuclear Power Plants
[S]. U.S Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
8. International Electro technical Commission (2006) IEC 60880 Nuclear power plants-
Instrumentation and control systems important to safety-Software aspects for computer-based
systems performing category a functions. International Electro technical Commission,
Switzerland.
9. Joint Technical Committee ISO/IEC JTC 1, Information technology, Subcommittee SC 7,
Software engineering (1995) IEC 12207 Software Life Cycle Processes. International Electro
technical Commission, Switzerland.
10. Nuclear Power Engineering Committee of the IEEE Power Engineering Committee (2010)
IEEE 7-4.3.2 IEEE Standard Criteria for Digital Computers in Safety Systems of Nuclear
Power Generating Stations. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, New York.
11. R.G.1.172 (1997) Software Requirement Speciﬁcation For Digital Computer Software Used
in Safety Systems of Nuclear Power Plants [S]. U.S NUCLEAR REGULATORY
COMMISSION.
12. Ding Y X, Gu P F, et al. (2015) Study on Standard about Safety Digital I&C System in
NPP. Process Automation Instrumentation, 36 (11):61–64.
112
W.-H. Chen et al.

A Study of NI Indoor Wireless Coverage
in CPR1000 Projects
Chang Su, Shou-Yang Zhai, Yu Cao, Xiao-Fei Deng
and Chao-Jun Wu
Abstract This article analyses the difference between McWiLL system and paging
system in indoor wireless coverage of the nuclear island. It argues the principles and
conditions that should be satisﬁed when doing indoor wireless coverage in the
nuclear island. Moreover, how to do design work of NI indoor wireless coverage
under these principles and conditions is discussed. Finally, it ﬁnishes a proposal of
NI indoor wireless coverage using McWiLL system and summarizes the main
points of the proposal.
Keywords Nuclear island  Wireless  Indoor coverage
1
Introduction
It is difﬁcult for wireless signal goes through because of many rooms, complex
structure and thick wall in the Nuclear Plant. To achieve the purpose of the wireless
indoor distribution basic universal coverage, the design is difﬁcult and the program
is complicated. Therefore, it’s necessary to use electromagnetic theory and radio
space propagation theory, combined with the currently identiﬁed the technical
characteristics of the wireless system for specialized research, design solutions to
meet the requirements of the NI of wireless indoor distribution.
C. Su (&)  S.-Y. Zhai  Y. Cao  X.-F. Deng  C.-J. Wu
China Nuclear Power Design Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China
e-mail: suchang@cgnpc.com.cn
S.-Y. Zhai
e-mail: zhaishouyang@cgnpc.com.cn
Y. Cao
e-mail: caoyu@cgnpc.com.cn
X.-F. Deng
e-mail: dengxiaofei@cgnpc.com.cn
C.-J. Wu
e-mail: wuchaojun@cgnpc.com.cn
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_13
113

2
Comparison with Reference Nuclear Power Plant
NI wireless indoor distribution of reference nuclear power plant Ling’ao Phase II
Project adopts paging system (commonly known as beeper-beeper). The paging
system works at the frequency band of 280 MHz. From the relation formula
between wavelength and frequency: k = c/f (k means wavelength, c means velocity
of light, and f means frequency), we know that the wireless signal frequency is only
280 MHz. The signal frequency is low, wavelength is long, and diffraction easily
occurs according to the physics and electromagnetic ﬁeld theory. Therefore, indoor
distribution by the paging system is still simple, even if NI indoor structure is
complex. The coverage problem of the whole NI building will be solved, if several
paging transmitters are put in the NI building. But the paging system is lag in
technology, shrinking in market and difﬁcult in equipment purchase, so it has been
eliminated. New project will not use the paging system again, so the paging system
can not be used for indoor distribution.
CPR1000 project NI indoor distribution plans to adopt McWiLL (Multi-Carrier
Wireless Information Local Loop) broadband wireless access system. The system
can completely replace the paging system in function. Nevertheless, the working
frequency of the system reaches is 1800 MHz which is several times as high as that
of the former paging system, the wavelength is short, diffraction does not easily
occur, so the design difﬁculty of indoor distribution increases, in the face of daedal
indoor environment of NI. McWiLL system is completely different from the paging
system, so it can not design indoor distribution with reference to former paging
system. It must start all over again, and restudy to obtain a feasible scheme which
can meet the operating requirements.
3
Study on Indoor Distribution Scheme
3.1
Design Principles of Indoor Distribution
The selection of signal source for NI indoor distribution adopts connecting base
station unit and single circuit in-line tower ampliﬁer, and connecting ceiling antenna
by means of connection with power divider or coupler. For the area with larger
coverage area and far away from the base station unit, the network signal coverage
adopts connecting optical ﬁber machine by remote at the back of base station unit.
As for the ceiling antenna, main control room and reactor center will not design
the ceiling antenna, but other places in the room inside NI, namely all areas that
people can touch will be covered with signal. The coverage of special areas such as
long and narrow corridor, large-size electrical cabinet room, reactor periphery and
reactor top-level maintenance area will adopt special antenna such as directional
antenna. But most of rooms will install omnidirectional ceiling antenna to ensure
seamless coverage of most of areas in NI.
114
C. Su et al.

3.2
Selection of Antenna Power
Table 1 Radiation Oscillation Disturbance Source and Immunity Scope [1] in
Sect. 5.3 of GB/T 11684-2003 Electromagnetic Environment Conditions and
Testing Procedures for Nuclear Instrumentation stipulate basic requirements of
anti-disturbance requirements of nuclear instruments which are used in different
places, as shown in the following table.
According to the requirements of Appendix B.1 of the Speciﬁcations, the
immunity of nuclear instruments for nuclear power plant is 3. From the table, it can
be seen that the immunity of wireless signal is 3 V/m (the frequency of McWiLL
system is 1800 MHz).
The provisions on immunity requirements in other speciﬁcations are shown as
follows:
– According to GB 17626.3-2006 Electromagnetic Compatibility—Testing and
Measurement Techniques—Radiated, Radio-frequency, Electromagnetic Field
Immunity Test [2], the equipment shall meet the test class 3 and test voltage
10 V/m.
– According to the provisions of Sect. 8.4.1.2 of GB 14048.1-2006 Low-voltage
[3].
Switchgear and Controlgear—Part 1: General Rules, EMC test requirement for
the product is 10 V/m.
Table 1 Radiation oscillation disturbance source and immunity scope unit V/m
Immunity
Disturbance source
9 kHz–
27 MHz,
any
source
27 MHz
frequency
band, CB
(citizens
band)
Amateur
radio, all
frequency
bands
27–
1000 MHz
portable,
except CB
27–
1000 MHz
mobile,
except CB
27–
1000 MHz,
except CB,
portable,
mobile
1000 MHz–
40 GHz, all
sources
A
(controlled)
Consider item by item according to the equipment requirements
1
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
5
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
X (harsh)
Consider item by item according to the situation
A Study of NI Indoor Wireless Coverage in CPR1000 Projects
115

– DL/T 478-2001 General Speciﬁcations for Static Protection [4], Security and
Automatic Equipment stipulates that the ability of the device to withstand
electromagnetic interference shall meet the provisions of GB/T 14598.9
Electrical Relays Part 22-3: Electrical Disturbance Test for Measuring Relays
and Protection Equipment-Radiated Electromagnetic Field Disturbance Tests
[5], namely 10 V/m.
To sum up, in consideration that other specialties fail to raise concrete number
requirements for immunity of equipment in NI, from the angle of security, the
equipment in NI shall at least meet the immunity requirements of not more than
3 V/m.
3 V/m ¼ 20 lg 3  106 ¼ 129:54 dBuV
ð1Þ
According to the reduction formula:
dBm ¼ dBuB  113
ð2Þ
129:54 dBuV ¼ 129:54  113 ¼ 16:54 dBm:
Because the antenna adopts the ceiling installation mode, it is impossibly close
to the equipment of other systems in NI, so the power at 1 m away from antenna
shall be ﬁrstly calculated.
According to indoor propagation model which is suggested by ITU-R
Rec.P.1238 [6]:
Ls ¼ 20 lg f þ 10n lg d þ Le  28
ð3Þ
(f means working frequency, unit MHz; d means path distance, unit m; n means
indoor propagation index, a constant within 2.0–3.3, relating to the nature of the
building; in consideration of the situation in NI, n = 3; Le means through-wall loss)
Le ¼ 37  7:9 lg f ¼ 11:28 dBm
ð4Þ
Calculate the attenuation at 1 m away from the antenna:
Ls ¼ 20 lg 1800 þ 30 lg 1 þ 11:28  28 ¼ 48:4 dBm
The transmitting power at entrance of antenna is generally L(0) = 10 dBm, and
we can calculate the power at 1 m away from antenna:
10  48:4 ¼ 38:4 dBm\16:54 dBm
which is far lower than the value required for resistance to electromagnetic radiation
interference. Therefore, we take the transmitting power at entrance of antenna
L(0) = 10 dBm, that is to say, 10 mW meets the requirements.
116
C. Su et al.

According to one-way communication characteristics of the system in NI, the
mobile phone terminal will not transmit signal in NI, so we do not need to consider
the interference and inﬂuence of signal transmission at mobile terminal on other
important devices, but we shall guarantee the transmitting power at entrance of
antenna less than 10 mW.
3.3
Conﬁrmation of Signal Coverage Radius of Antenna
The signal coverage radius of antenna is set as r, the power of antenna at r is L(r),
and loss is L(r).
In consideration that pipelines, portal frame, equipment cabinet and network
structure equipment made of various metal materials in NI will shield and absorb
wireless signal, there is possibly the disturbance of other wireless communication
signals, so theoretically, there is excess loss of 20 dB, therefore:
L rð Þ ¼ L 0
ð Þ  Ls rð Þ  20 dBm
ð5Þ
According to technical features of McWiLL wireless system, mobile terminal
under wireless environment of −90 dBm can meet basic communication require-
ments. Therefore:
L rð Þ   90 dBm
L 0
ð Þ  Ls rð Þ  20   90 dBm
10  20 lg f þ 10n lg r þ Le  28
ð
Þ  20   90
r  11:3 m
For appropriate margin, preventing that insufﬁcient signal power at the edge of
antenna coverage radius will inﬂuence signal reception, we take r = 8–10 (m).
3.4
Field Test
For proving the reliability of data calculated theoretically, we conduct relevant tests
in the constructed simulation test environment.
(1) Take the power at entrance of antenna as 10 mW;
(2) Test the strength of cell phone receiving signal within 3–10 m away from
antenna by simulation test.
Test data is shown as follows (Table 2):
A Study of NI Indoor Wireless Coverage in CPR1000 Projects
117

Thus, it can be seen that, when power of antenna is 10 mW, the coverage radius
of 8–10 m can meet basic communication requirements of cell phone terminal
−90 dBm.
3.5
Arrangement of Indoor Distribution Antenna Point
Location
According to the principles of the foregoing discussion, we design the arrangement
of antenna point location, as shown in Fig. 1 (take NI 1LX −6.70 m layer as an
example):
Among them,
is the position of signal source, and is generally optical ter-
minal equipment or in-line tower ampliﬁer. Locating place is close to the position of
terminal box of other communication subsystems.
is the punching position of
cable, and the cable feeder connecting antenna shall traverse wall along the existing
cable perforation of other communication subsystems to the greatest extent.
3.6
Laying of Feeder Cable and Average Power Distribution
After completion of antenna point location, it is required to lay feeder cable. The
principle is to control roughly similar antenna transmitting power at each end, and
meet the requirements of less than 10 dBm. This needs to adopt network topology
which is composed of coupler or power divider to effectively distribute power.
Power divider and coupler of different parameters complete equalization of antenna
power under the premise of reasonable route so as to guarantee standard wireless
signal edge ﬁeld strength of coverage area [7].
Table 2 Test data
Distance from test point to antenna (m)
The strength of cell phone receiving
signal by simulation test (dBm)
3
−56.3 to −58.6
4
−58.4 to −60.2
5
−61.3 to −64.6
6
−62.8 to −65.6
7
−66.6 to −67.8
8
−69.3 to −72.6
9
−73.8 to −75.6
10
−76.8 to −78.2
118
C. Su et al.

The parameters of feeder, coupler and power divider are shown as follows
(Tables 3 and 4).
The feeder loss is related to its length, so the change in loss arising from the
change in feeder length must be considered during design of feeder cable route in
order to ensure equalization of antenna power.
3.7
Design Results of Indoor Distribution
Indoor distribution design drawing is basically completed, after completing
arrangement of antenna point location and laying of feeder cable as well as adding
of equipment coding. The area in NI is too big, so we adopt the subarea design
Fig. 1 Arrangement of antenna point location of NI 1LX −6.70 m layer
Table 3 Line loss of feeder
every 10 m in each frequency
band
Frequency
Feeder
Loss/10 m
1800 MHz
1/2 feeder
1.1
7/8 feeder
0.7
A Study of NI Indoor Wireless Coverage in CPR1000 Projects
119

Table 4 Devices adopted for indoor distribution and loss of each device
Name of device
Power loss value of
coupling terminal
Power loss value of straight
terminal (exit of power divider)
6 dB coupler
6
1.5
10 dB coupler
10
1
15 dB coupler
15
0.5
20 dB coupler
20
0.5
30 dB coupler
30
0.5
Two-port power divider
/
3.5
Three-port power divider
/
5.5
Four-port power divider
/
7.5
Fig. 2 Wireless communication ﬂoor plan for 1LX −6.70 m layer in NI
120
C. Su et al.

method during detailed design. The whole NI building is designed according to
1LX, 9LX, 2LX, 9NX, 1KX, 2KX, 1DX and 2DX subareas respectively. The
drawings of different subareas are based on different layers. The following is the
drawing for 1LX −6.70 m layer (Figs. 2 and 3).
3.8
Power Supply of Indoor Distribution System
For research and design of indoor distribution in NI, all devices are basically
passive devices which do not need special power supply, including coupler, power
divider, antenna and feeder. Active devices mainly include base station and optical
terminal equipment, UPS power supply specially used for communication system in
W601 communication equipment room provides the power to them so as to ensure
the power supply reliability of the system, and avoid that the workers in NI fail to
receive information timely in case of power failure arising from any accidents.
Fig. 3 Wireless communication system chart of NI
A Study of NI Indoor Wireless Coverage in CPR1000 Projects
121

3.9
Summary of Indoor Distribution Design
– The power at entrance of indoor antenna is controlled at 10 dBm. The antenna
or cable may shift in a small range during installation, so we consider a certain
margin during design.
– The coverage radius of omnidirectional ceiling antenna is considered as 8–10 m.
– Elevator shaft and staircase adopt directional antenna.
– The adjoining room with the wall thickness of 200 mm or less is equipped with
1 antenna according to the room size and position. Each room with the wall
thickness of more than 200 mm is equipped with antenna.
– For avoiding the inﬂuence of antenna on the instrument control equipment and
other important equipment, the main instrument control equipment room, con-
trol room and storage battery room are not equipped with antenna.
– All base stations in NI are set in W601 communication equipment room of
+15.5 m layer, appropriate clearance around base station shall be reserved for
the convenience of heat dissipation of base station.
– In principle, the optical terminal equipment at each layer shall be installed near
terminal box of other subsystems.
– In principle, all cables shall traverse former communication holes (horizontal,
vertical). The cables shall not be laid with wind pipe and other metal pipes in
parallel. The radius of cable bending (if required) shall meet the requirements of
cable technology speciﬁcations. Add galvanized steel pipe for cable laying when
traversing the hole.
– Coaxial cable entering each diesel factory building shall enter from one place.
The diesel factory building does not consider active devices.
4
Conclusions
This research proposes a solution for wireless indoor distribution in NI by adopting
McWiLL broadband wireless access system. The scheme avoids the inﬂuence on
important sensitive devices such as DCS inside NI, effectively solves wireless
communication problem inside NI, and also opens new thought for wireless indoor
distribution in NI after the paging system is eliminated.
At the present stage, no organizations at home and abroad conduct design and
research on wireless communication coverage in NI in combination with McWiLL
system and nuclear power plant, which has important innovation signiﬁcance. The
research scheme can be applied to CPR1000 new projects. At present, it has been
implemented in Hongyanhe, Ningde and Yang jiang nuclear power plants. Because
of ﬂexibility and universality, the appropriately improved scheme is also applicable
to nuclear power plant of AP1000 reactor type, enjoying broad development
prospect.
122
C. Su et al.

References
1. GB/T 11684-2003 Electromagnetic Environment Conditions and Testing Procedures for
Nuclear Instrumentation.
2. GB 17626.3-2006 Electromagnetic Compatibility—Testing and Measurement Techniques—
Radiated, Radio-frequency, Electromagnetic Field Immunity Test.
3. GB 14048.1-2006 Low-voltage Switchgear and Controlgear—Part 1: General Rules.
4. DL/T 478-2001 General Speciﬁcations for Static Protection, Security and Automatic
Equipment.
5. GB/T 14598.9 Electrical Relays Part 22-3: Electrical Disturbance Test for Measuring Relays
and Protection Equipment-Radiated Electromagnetic Field Disturbance Tests.
6. McWiLL Broadband Wireless Access Technology and Application, Wen Bin-2009-the
People’s Posts and Telecommunications Press.
7. Evolution of McWiLL: Industry Informatization-Oriented Broadband Multimedia Cluster
System, Jiang Hui, Xu Ruifeng, Zhang Dandan, Hu Zhenxing-Telecommunications Science,
2008, 24(8).
A Study of NI Indoor Wireless Coverage in CPR1000 Projects
123

Evaluation System of Software Concept
V&V About the Safety Digital I&C System
in Nuclear Power Plant
Peng-Fei Gu, Wang Xi, Wei-Hua Chen and Su-Yuan Yu
Abstract Since the digital technology was used in the safety digital I&C (Instrument
and Control) system of nuclear power plant (NPP), its safety and reliability have been
one of the most important factors to the safety operation of NPP. V&V activity is a
signiﬁcant method to insure the safety and reliability of the nuclear power I&C system
software, the system to evaluate the efﬁcient of V&V activity need further research.
This paper on the basis of CPR1000 NPP Reactor Protection System (RPS) software
development project, use the concept V&V activity for example, make a discussion
for the evaluation of V&V activity, including the description of general tasks, deﬁ-
nition of the Failure Modes, and analysis of V&V activity by FMEA (Failure Modes
Effects Analysis). The results of our evaluation method in project show that the
efﬁciency of V&V activities has been improved, and provide references for the
evaluation to other NPP I&C system software development V&V activity.
Keywords Nuclear power plant  I&C  V&V  FMEA
1
Introduction
As the active development strategies for nuclear power, the installed capacity of
which will reach 70–100 GWe at the time of 2020, account for more than 4% of the
total installed capacity in China, and the proportion should be at least added to 6%
P.-F. Gu (&)  S.-Y. Yu
Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology, Collaborative Innovation Center
of Advanced Nuclear Energy Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
e-mail: gupengfei@cgnpc.com.cn
P.-F. Gu  W. Xi  W.-H. Chen
Instrumentation and Control Department, China Nuclear Power Design Co., Ltd.,
Shenzhen, China
e-mail: wang.xi2@cgnpc.com.cn
W.-H. Chen
e-mail: chenweihua@cgnpc.com.cn
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_14
125

according to the Low Carbon (LC) plan with the installed capacity arriving at 150–
200 GWe in the year of 2030. The time limit for a complement construction of NPP
is more than 5 years, which means there are 10 nuclear power units for each year
from now to the year of 2025. A mature, quantity production stage for the devel-
opment of nuclear power is coming for us.
The sustainable development of nuclear power station not only relies on the
acceptance of the nuclear economy in public, the improvement of the safety and
reliability in nuclear technology is also more signiﬁcant. The nuclear Digital
Control System (DCS) is one of the most important devices for the safety of nuclear
power station. Software is the kernel of DCS, which on the basis of CPU, to achieve
the protection and logic of the devices for nuclear power station. The safety of the
software affects the safety, reliability and economy of the NPP directly. Therefore, a
strict veriﬁcation and validation (V&V) activity for the whole lifecycle of software
development is necessary [1, 2], and the method to evaluate the effectiveness of the
V&V activity should be further discussion.
This paper arranged as follow. Section 2 introduces the work of V&V activity
for DCS software development in NPP, and propose the general tasks and key
points for the evaluate of concept V&V; Sect. 3 makes deﬁnitions for failure modes
including the general tasks and key points; Sect. 4 combines to the CPR1000
project, bases on the constructed failure modes, use FMEA method to analyze and
improve the V&V activity; Sect. 5 make a conclusion for the whole paper.
2
V&V Activities and Tasks
V&V activity is an important method to assure the quality of software. Veriﬁcation
conforms to requirements for all activities during each life cycle process, satisﬁes
the standards, practices, and conventions during lifecycle processes. Validation
satisﬁes system requirements allocated to the products at the end lifecycle activity,
solves the right problem, and satisﬁes intended use and user needs in the operational
environment [3]. V&V activity aims to locate and recognize the default or errors in
the software, assure the correct process of software development, make the products
satisfy the whole requirements from user, and assure the consistency of computer
software and the technology requirements, make sure of the software functions
correctly in the environment designed previously [4].
2.1
V&V General Tasks
According to HAD 102/16 (2004) [5], IEEE1012-2004 and IEC60880 [6], the
V&V activities for DCS in NPP process by 6 stages, including management pro-
cess, acquisition process, supply process, development process, operation process,
and maintenance process. The most signiﬁcant stage among them is the
126
P.-F. Gu et al.

development process, in which the main V&V activities including Concept V&V,
Requirements V&V, Design V&V, Implementation V&V, Integration test V&V,
Installation V&V and checkout V&V. For each V&V activity, there are tasks to be
complemented, named general tasks.
This paper use concept V&V as example to introduce the general tasks.
2.1.1
Concept Documentation Evaluation
Concept documentation evaluation insures that the concept documentation satisﬁes
use requirements and complies with the precede needs, assures the restrains of
interfacing systems and the imposed restrictions on provided approach, make
analysis on system requirement and ensure the needs from user, including system
function, end-to-end system performance, operation and maintenance requirements
and so on.
2.1.2
Traceability Analysis
The traceability analysis implemented as follow. Firstly, make identiﬁcation for the
whole system needs, which should be accomplished completely or partially by
software. Then, verify that precede needs can be traced by the system requirements.
Finally, the traceability analysis starts between the software requirements and
system requirements.
2.1.3
Requirements Allocation Analysis on Hardware,
Software and User
The analysis veriﬁes the completeness, correctness and accuracy of the concept
requirement that has been allocated to hardware, software, and user interfaces for
user needs. The completeness veriﬁes that user needs should be satisﬁed by follows,
including failure detection, isolation, diagnostic, and error recovery. The correct-
ness veriﬁes hardware, software, and user interfaces have been allocated to those
performance requirements that satisfy the needs from user. The accuracy including
the veriﬁcation of the speciﬁcation of external and internal interfaces for interface
protocols, data formats, and the frequency of data exchange.
2.1.4
Hazard Analysis
Hazard analysis analyzes the potential dangerous to and from the concept system,
including the identiﬁcation of the potential system hazards and mitigation strategies
for each hazard, the accession of the severity and the probability of each hazard.
Evaluation System of Software Concept V&V …
127

2.1.5
Risk Analysis
The risk analysis including two parts, the identiﬁcation of the technical and man-
agement risk, the proposed suggestions to mitigate or decrease the risks.
2.1.6
Security Analysis
The security analysis including: review the acceptable level of security, and then
ensure conﬁdentiality, integrity, availability, and accountability. Surely the risk
related to system interfaces should be analyzed.
2.1.7
Criticality Analysis
The main activities of criticality analysis pay attention to the integrity levels [7],
make sure that software integrity levels have been established for detailed func-
tions, software modules, requirements, subsystem, or other software partitions;
make veriﬁcation of the assigned software integrity levels to be correct; insure the
software integrity levels have been assigned to individual software components.
The assignment of the software system should be the same as highest level assigned
to any individual element; the assignment of software component should be the
same or higher than the software integrity level, while any software component that
can inﬂuence individual software components are assigned a higher software
integrity level.
2.2
V&V Key Points
The concept V&V activities should pay more attention to the “key points”, which
reﬂect a speciﬁc consideration for the nuclear power station engineering project. An
evaluation of whether these “key points” has been considered in software V&V
activity could show further effectiveness of V&V works. This paper discusses the
importance of DCS Contracts and the Requirement Tracing on the basis of the
V&V activity in CPR1000 RPS DCS software development project.
2.2.1
DCS Contracts
The DCS contracts should be included in the input documents as the reference ﬁles
that can be traced.
Theoretically, the RPS speciﬁcation is the baseline of concept V&V activities.
With the progressively implementation of the construction of NPP, the technical
details in DCS contracts, which signed at the beginning of engineering project for
128
P.-F. Gu et al.

the consideration of the whole schedule, may not in consistent with the RPS
speciﬁcation, these inconsistent points cannot satisfy the original requirements of
the NPP. Therefore the analysis of technical points is necessary.
2.2.2
Requirement Tracing
As the part of the requirement management [8], the requirement tracing establish
traceability links [9] between every neighboring stages to provide a foundation for
requirement modiﬁcation management and version control. As the NPP DCS RPS
software lifecycle has covered each stage including development, operation, and
maintenance and so on, the mistakes and errors discovered in V&V activity not
only beneﬁcial to the quality assurance, and also provide a convenient for the
Experience feedback of succession operation and maintenance if the NPP need
renovation. Therefore, the requirement tracing matrix should be established exactly
at the beginning of concept V&V.
3
Deﬁnitions of Failure Modes
Failure modes means the system or its sub-system or components do not satisfy
their design or function of system requirements, as the example of the concept
V&V illustrated in Table 1, Failure modes can be classiﬁed into ﬁve parts,
including the inconsistent of legislation and standards, Lack of general tasks,
Unaccomplished plan, inconsideration of the speciﬁc in engineering project, and
Uncompleted requirement tracing. The deﬁnitions can be used for the classiﬁcation
of the Failures events that discovered by V&V activity.
Table 1 Deﬁnitions of failure modes in concept V&V activity
V&V
activities
Failure modes
Deﬁnitions
Concept
V&V
Inconsistent of legislation
and standards
The V&V tasks are not in consistent of legislations
and standards such as HAD102, IEEE1012
Lack of general tasks
Lack of general tasks, such as hazards analysis
Unaccomplished plan
The formulated plans for V&V activities haven’t
been totally accomplished
Inconsideration of the
speciﬁc in engineering
project
The DCS contracts are not included in input
documents
Uncompleted requirement
tracing
The requirements are not arranged to entries and
tracked by using a requirement tracing tool
Evaluation System of Software Concept V&V …
129

4
Failure Modes and Effect Analysis
The project, of which this paper on the basis, uses FMEA (Failure Mode and Effect
Analysis) method to do an effectiveness analysis for concept V&V activities. In this
project, according to the FMEA result for the ﬁrst round concept V&V activity and
the project schedule, the V&V teams formulate improvement measures for the
second round concept V&V activity, and according to the FMEA result for the
second round concept V&V activity and the project schedule, V&V teams for-
mulate improvement measures for the third round concept V&V activity.
The FMEA results of the concept V&V activity in the project are described in
Table 2, the “Failure results” means an uncompleted tasks results in V&V for the
reason of the corresponding “Failure Modes”; The “Effect Analysis” evaluates the
inﬂuence on the effectiveness of V&V activities by analyzing the failure events;
“Improvements” assure the effectiveness of V&V activities by formulating
improved method; “Problem Classiﬁcations” illustrated in Table 3, which deﬁnes
the different levels of problems according to inﬂuences on V&V activity.
As showed in Table 3, to solve the failure modes, the backward tracing is done
in the second round concept V&V activity; The requirement tracing tool named
DOORS [10] is used in the second round concept V&V activity to establish the
requirement tracing matrix; The FMEA method is used in the second round concept
V&V activity and product the reports for the hazard analysis; The DCS contracts
are included in the foundation documents for analysis in the third round concept
V&V activity. Compared to the ﬁrst round, the second round concept V&V activity
discovered other 51 mistakes or errors, and the third round concept V&V activity
ﬁnd other 34 questions, by use the FMECA (Failure Mode Effect and Criticality
Analysis) [11] method, an enhanced effectiveness of V&V activity has been
showed in project results.
Table 2 Problem classiﬁcations
Problem
levels
Discretions
Serious
Events will lead to the failure of the whole V&V activities.
Important
Events will result in losing of important contents of V&V activities
General
Partly inﬂuence on V&V activities and need pay further attention to the
analysis of effectiveness for V&V activities
Suggestion
No inﬂuence on the effectiveness of V&V activities, but may lead to
unfavorable operations and maintenances in the future
130
P.-F. Gu et al.

Table 3 FMEA results of concept V&V activities
No.
Failure modes
Failure results
Effect analysis
Improvements
Problem
classiﬁcations
1
Lack of general
tasks
The backward
tracing is not
done in the ﬁrst
round concept
V&V activity
Ignoring of the
extra
requirements in
DCS design
ﬁle, and result
in the failure of
V&V activities
that extra
functions have
been designed
in system
The backward
tracing is done
in the second
round concept
V&V activity
Serious
2
Uncompleted
requirement
tracing
The
requirement
tracing is not
done in the ﬁrst
round concept
V&V activity
It is difﬁcult to
implement the
requirement
tracing in the
succession
V&V activities
The
requirement
tracing tool
named DOORS
is used in the
second round
concept V&V
activity to
establish the
requirement
tracing matrix
Suggestion
3
Unaccomplished
plan
The hazards
analysis, which
is formulated in
the plan, is not
done in the ﬁrst
round concept
V&V activity
The mistakes
and errors
cannot be
found in
system
structures and
the safety of
functions
cannot be
analyzed
The FMECA
method is used
in the second
round concept
V&V activity
Important
4
Inconsideration
of the speciﬁc in
engineering
project
The DCS
contracts are
not included
and analyzed in
the foundation
documents in
the second
round concept
V&V activity
The technical
details in the
DCS contracts
that
inconsistent
with the RPS
speciﬁcation
may not be
found and
result in lack of
analysis for the
differences
The DCS
contracts are
included in the
foundation
documents for
analysis in the
third round
concept V&V
activity
Important
Evaluation System of Software Concept V&V …
131

5
Conclusions
On the basis of CPR1000 NPP RPS software development project, this paper gives
a further discussion for V&V evaluation system, use FMEA system method to
analyze the failure modes and results in V&V activities and provide improvements.
By using the improvements in succession V&V activities, an enhanced efﬁciency of
V&V activity has been showed in results of project, provides an reference for the
evaluation of other NPP I&C software V&V activities.
Acknowledgements This project was ﬁnancially supported with funds which provided by a
reliability research of reactor protection system which based on digital microprocessor and elec-
trical equipment (national science and technology major project). The award number is
2014ZX06004002-004.
References
1. Liu Z, Jiang G J, Sun Y B (2011) The V&V activities and techniques for safety-class I&C
system in the nuclear power plant [J]. Chinese Journal of Nuclear Science and Engineering,
31(2):45–50.
2. Software Engineering Standards Committee of the IEEE Computer Society (2004) IEEE 1012
IEEE Standard for Software Veriﬁcation and Validation [S]. Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineer, New York.
3. R.G. 1.152 (2006) CRITERIA FOR USE OF COMPUTERS IN SAFETY SYSTEMS OF
NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS [S]. U.S NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION.
4. International
Electro
technical
Commission
(2006)
IEC
60880
Nuclear
power
plants-Instrumentation and control systems important to safety-Software aspects for
computer-based systems performing category a functions [S]. International Electro technical
Commission, Switzerland.
5. HAD 102/16 (2004) Safety of Nuclear Power Plant Design Regulations Guides [S]. Doctoral
dissertation.
6. Nuclear Power Engineering Committee of the IEEE Power Engineering Committee (2010)
IEEE 7-4.3.2 IEEE Standard Criteria for Digital Computers in Safety Systems of Nuclear
Power Generating Stations [S]. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, New York.
7. Ding Y X, Gu P F, et al. (2015) Study on Standard about Safety Digital I&C System in NPP
[J]. PROCESS AUTOMATION INSTRUMENTATION, 36(11):61–64.
8. Xia D Y, LIU W P (2015) Requirement Management on Nuclear Power Plant DCS for
Development [J]. INSTRUMENTATION, 22(2):63–66.
9. Xiao W (2012) An Optimized Method for Software Requirement Development Process Using
Doors [J]. Computer Application and Software, 29(9):175–177.
10. IBM Corporation (2010) Rational DOORS Help [CP/DK], IBM Corporation.
11. Wu X K, Wang G S (2014) Nuclear Safety Digital I&C System Software V&V Technical
Standards Research [J]. Nuclear Standard Measurement and Quality, (4):16–22.
132
P.-F. Gu et al.

Discussion About Issues of Human Error
in Digital Control Room of NPP
Yan Feng, Zhong-Qiu Wang, Jing-Bin Liu and Yin-Hui Guo
Abstract This article deﬁnes and classiﬁes human errors simply, and also analyzes
representative human errors in nuclear power plant. This article also describes the
difference between digital control room and traditional analog control room of
nuclear plant, such as composition, information display, procedure, alarm system
and operate mode. This article introduces human characteristics in digital control
room including the role of the operator, the task load of operators, operator’s ability
and experience, and digital human system interface. A example is given for human
issues in digital control room. And the article simply studies and discusses pre-
ventive countermeasures in digital control system of nuclear plant at last. Since in
preventing the human errors have common measures, but are also very different,
much research work has been carried out.
Keywords Digital control system  Nuclear power plant  Human factor engi-
neering  Human error
1
Introduction
Since nuclear power plant is a complex man-machine system, its design, operation
and management must depend on people. With the development of science and
technology, the performance of the hardware equipment of nuclear power plant is
Y. Feng  Z.-Q. Wang  J.-B. Liu (&)  Y.-H. Guo
I&C Department, Nuclear and Radiation Safety Center, Beijing, China
e-mail: liujingbinjob@163.com
Y. Feng
e-mail: fengyan@chinansc.cn
Z.-Q. Wang
e-mail: wangzhongqiu@chinansc.cn
Y.-H. Guo
e-mail: Gyh86126@126.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_15
133

increased, also the operation environment and the reliability of nuclear power plant
is greatly improved. Although the nuclear power plant is improved by the degree of
automation, then its design, operation and management as well as the speciﬁc
operation also depend on people, therefore people plays more and more important.
Because that people’s psychology, physiology and education are different, it is
possible to arise human errors and to affect the safety of nuclear power plant.
Instrumentation and control system is changed from the traditional analog control to
the widely used digital control technology, then the man-machine interface, pro-
cedures and cognitive behavior model of operator change, so new error mechanism
occurs [1]. Therefore, it is important to carry out the digital control system of
human error research, to ﬁnd out the underlying causes, and then to put forward
prevention strategies.
1.1
Deﬁnition and Classiﬁcation of Human Errors
Human error is that the result of people’s behavior deviates from the speciﬁed
target, or exceeds the acceptable limits, and has a bad effect. Different experts and
scholars deﬁne human error from different angles. Swain think that human errors
are people’s behavior or action exceed the scope in any more than a certain standard
system to accept the normal work of the accepted standard [2]. Reason deﬁned
human error from the point of view of psychology. He thinks that errors are all such
phenomenon that people despite a series of planned psychological or physical
activity, but did not achieve the expected results. This failure cannot be attributed to
certain external factors involved in [3]. Lorenzo think that if role in system of any
behavior (contains no enforcement or lax enforcement of its behavior) beyond the
system of tolerance, it is human error [4].
But regardless of how they are deﬁned, human errors have the following char-
acteristics: repeatability of human errors; the potential and irreversibility of human
errors; error often derived by situational context; the inherent variability of people’s
behavior; reparability of human errors [5].
The International Atomic Energy Agency divides human errors into three major
categories [6]:
Class A: the human errors can result potential failure of a device or system.
Class B: the human errors or the combination of equipment failure directly led to
the occurrence of the beginning events.
Class C: the human errors cause after the fault occurs, and they may be errors in
the implementation of safety behavior or the action to deteriorate the consequences.
In addition to the International Atomic Energy Agency’s human error classiﬁ-
cation method, there are three other kinds of classiﬁcation methods: namely, the
behavioral method, the relational method and the conceptual method. The behav-
ioral method is only related to the behavior of the observed and unexpected and
focuses on what behavior occurs. The relational method emphasizes the cognitive
134
Y. Feng et al.

mechanism of human error, and tries to provide a framework for improving system
design and training program. The conceptual method is one of the most effective
and most useful method, which divides all human error into slip, lapse, mistake [7].
1.2
Difference Between the Digital Control Room
and the Traditional Control Room
The traditional control room is mainly composed of MIMIC panel, alarm window,
control instrument, recorder, control panel, control button and so on. The control
console is in the middle of control room, the equipment group is distinguished by
physical distance, the contour line or the color code, the control switch is distin-
guished by using the different size and the shape. Overall, the overall layout is more
intuitive. The operator can easily ﬁnd all kinds of information of main control room
and determine the severity of alarm according to the color and position of alarm.
The layout of digital control room is relatively simple, and there are four main
computer operator workstations, large screen display and backup panel. Each
workstation includes visual display unit, mouse and the track ball. The information
of the whole nuclear power plant is obtained from the computer, and the infor-
mation is much larger than that of the traditional control room, but it is not intuitive
in the traditional control room.
Digital control room can provide more comprehensive and accurate nuclear
power plant information, and this helps the operator a lot. For example, the operator
can quickly ﬁnd fault causes through the alarm. Digital control room can auto-
matically judge in the handling of the accident, and then the burden of operator is
reduced. Computerized procedures system, advanced alarm system and graphical
information display system play a positive role for the team’s performance, reduce
the work load and reduced human errors [8].
Although, the digital control room also increases the work load of the operator.
Because of the huge amount of information, the operator obtaining the desired
information from the computer is not as easy as the traditional main control room.
To obtain the required information, operator must be familiar with the man-machine
interface and need to open different screens and windows. It is a challenge for the
operator to obtain the key information in a short time since a large amount of
information exists. The computerized procedures system also changed the tradi-
tional mode of operation of operators. This may also induce new human errors,
such as pattern confusion, data entry errors, loss of situational awareness, etc.
Table 1 describes the difference between the digital control room and the tra-
ditional control room.
In summary, the digital control room changes in the system, man-machine
interface, procedure system, alarm system, analysis and decision support system,
the team structure and communication path. The cognitive processes and behav-
iorial mode of the operator are also changed. The man-machine interaction is more
Discussion About Issues of Human Error …
135

closely and more complex in the digital control room. The role of operator is from
the traditional patrol plate, monitoring and operation gradually changed to moni-
toring and decision, which makes human errors appear new characteristics and new
human error distribution, human errors data and failure mechanism.
2
The Human Characteristics of the Digital Control Room
The ﬁgure below is the overall DCS structure diagram. Automation level, com-
munication level, process information and control level are the focus of attention in
safety review.
The operator has to cope with the very complex system in the control room of
nuclear power plant. In the traditional analog control room, the operator needs to
move back and forth, to read the information from the larger control panel and to
operate the button. In the advanced digital control room, the reliability of system
and equipment is improved. The operator can monitor and control nuclear power
plant by using the integrated system. The human characteristics of the digital
control system mainly are the following aspects:
(1) The role of the operator. The operator is mainly monitoring and operating
system in traditional control room, and the operator may mostly monitor and
make decision in digital control room. The operator’s task contains more
cognitive work and the operator performs cognitive tasks through a series of
cognitive behavior.
(2) The task load of operator. The information through the traditional simulation
system displayed is very intuitive. However, the digital control room is based
on the large screen display and the computer workstation display information,
and displays the huge amount information. If the operator needs to obtain
information, he has to conﬁgure screen, navigate, and check, also need con-
tinuous navigation. These have increased the task load of operators.
Table 1 The difference between the digital control room and the traditional control room
Digital control room
Traditional control room
Composition
Computer operator workstations,
large screen display and backup
panel
MIMIC panel, alarm window, control
instrument, recorder, control panel, control
button
Information
display
The amount of information is huge
The information is intuitive
Procedure
Computerized procedure
Printed procedure
Alarm
system
To spend more time in query the
alarm
The display of alarm system is very
intuitive
Operate
mode
Software-based control
Hardware-based control
136
Y. Feng et al.

(3) Operator’s ability and experience. Digital control system is a complex system,
the higher the degree of automation, the more complex the system. This require
the operator’s ability and experience.
(4) Digital human system interface. The digital human system interface mainly
includes three aspects: computerized procedure systems, information display
and control based on VDU, alarm system.
①Computerized procedure systems. The printed procedure is used in the
traditional control room, while the digital system is based on computerized
procedures. Also computerized procedure systems is the complex
structure.
②Information display and control based on VDU. The indicator in tradi-
tional control panel is usually cured, however, the display based on
computer information is not limited to physical space and can be displayed
through the screen of arbitrary conﬁguration information. The same
information in different screen position may not is the same. Therefore, the
difﬁculty of operator positioning, search and identiﬁcation is increased. In
addition, soft control is more complicated than traditional control in the
control room, soft control may sometimes induce mis-operation.
③Alarm system. The display in traditional alarm is very intuitive. According
to the color and location, experienced operators can judge the severity of
the alarm. The operator may need to query, ﬁlter and other acts to query
the alarm in the computer alarm. In other words, the operator needs to
spend more time to search and conﬁrm the alarm, and then may delay
other tasks.
A example about issues of human factor in digital control room is as followed.
IRS 8023 (NRC Information Notices 2009–09 and IN 2008–13) covers events
relating to improper ﬂow controller settings in the injection systems at several
BWRs, which resulted in system-ﬂow oscillations rendering the systems inopera-
ble. Testing failed to identify this because the systems’ alignment during surveil-
lance differed from that when they are called upon to perform their safety functions.
An unplanned automatic reactor trip occurred at a BWR in response to a turbine
control valve fast-closure signal caused by failure of the digital feedwater control
system (DFWCS). The root cause was a defect on the 24 V direct current converter
board of both the primary and secondary power supplies. It was established that the
primary power supply was in degraded condition and the secondary power supply
had failed completely. This resulted in erratic performance of the input and output
boards. Also, the licensee had previously received two precursor alarms pointing to
possible problems with the digital power supplies, but no troubleshooting had been
carried out.
Licensees should ensure that main feedwater system digital modiﬁcations are
fully understood and properly implemented and that operators are trained in the
modiﬁed system and abnormal operating procedures in the event of feedwater
system failures.
Discussion About Issues of Human Error …
137

Operating experience highlights the importance of timely investigation, trou-
bleshooting and analysis of power supply and communications alarms. Operators
should be trained in the monitoring of important parameters such as power supply
voltage to ensure the early detection and correction of problems.
3
The Response Measures to Human Error in Digital
Control System
The causes of human errors are divided into internal and external factors. The
external factors refer to the individual work environment, and the internal factors
include the physiological characteristics and psychological characteristics of the
individual. Weitzen summarize three causes of human errors, that is overload,
mistaken decision making and man-machine factor [7].
Overload is that a person’s ability in a certain mental state does not adapt the
physical, physiological and psychological load. the person’s ability refers to
affordability of the physical, physiological and psychological aspects (human nat-
ure); current mental state; and current knowledge and the technical level related
work; the temporary ability decline due to taking drugs or alcohol, stress, fatigue.
Mistaken decision is that the choice of unsafe behavior is more logical than the
choice of safety behavior in some times. Ergonomic reasons mainly include two
aspects: the current working conditions don’t adapt to person’s physique, and the
work platform design makes people easy to make mistakes.
A lot of statistical practices show that a lot of major security incidents and
accidents of nuclear power plant are caused by human errors. Therefore, it is
particularly important to strengthen the nuclear safety culture and to prevent people
from mistakes. The main measures for reducing human error are the design of
advanced control room, the use of human factors engineering principles, in addition
to strengthening the training of education, the management and the working
environment in view of the digital control system.
1. The nuclear safety culture is in the ﬁeld of nuclear industry culture, and
strengthening nuclear safety culture and preventing human errors can not
depend on alone a person or unit. It refers to government and operating units.
(1) The government: the government and its departments should formulate
relevant laws and regulations, strengthen law enforcement on the basis of
existing laws. Regulatory authorities have complete safety regulations,
guidelines and related documents, supervising nuclear facilities indepen-
dently and evaluating nuclear facilities regularly.
(2) Operating units: operational units have main responsibility to deal with
nuclear security and to prevent of human errors. Operating units should pay
attention to safety, adjust the relation between the power management
organization and government supervision departments, review operating
138
Y. Feng et al.

units regularly and strengthen the training of personnel in power plant.
Operating units also should organize the on-site work and strengthen the
education of safety culture. Nuclear safety education includes nuclear safety
laws and regulations, nuclear safety knowledge, nuclear safety skills edu-
cation and nuclear safety attitude training. The operation personnel should
consciously abides by the regulations, develop a rigorous style of work, and
improve the capacity of judgment, prediction and treatment only through the
nuclear safety education and training.
2. Strengthening safety management and forming human factors analysis and
experience feedback system.
The possibility of human error can be reduced by strengthening the safety
management. There are many measures for strengthening safety management, such
as implementing work permit system, ensuring that staff qualiﬁcation and technical
level comply with operating conditions, and ensuring the operation in a fully
prepared and adequate safety measures. At the same time, it is necessary to improve
the working conditions and the environment, to establish appropriate safety mon-
itoring measures, to monitor the high risk operation that it may lead to major
accidents, to correct timely the mistakes and to avoid causing serious consequences.
It is very important for analysing human events and forming experience feed-
back. The general practice is using the scientiﬁc safety management method and
technology, changing passive “accident treatment” to the active “accident predic-
tion”, taking the active defense strategy, and reducing or avoiding the occurrence of
human error as far as possible.
3. Defense in depth
Through the establishment of multi-layer overlapping security system to con-
stitute a multi-line of defense, even if the failure of a certain line of defense can also
be made up or corrected by other defense. To construct of active human accident
defense in depth system, it is necessary to take a combination of technical, orga-
nizational and cultural measures to reduce and prevent from the management
decision-making, organization, technology, accident analysis and reduction and
feedback. The initiative to exploration and recognition of potential accident and to
take measures to reduce an prevent accident are very important.
4. Improving the man-machine interface
Human errors may be caused because that the man-machine interface design is
unreasonable, and adequate security and protection facilities is lack. It should
establish the necessary physical barriers under the guidance of cost-effectiveness of
the budget and effective prevent effectively human errors. The following aspects In
the man-machine interface design should be paid attention to: (1) Reasonable
matching man, machine and environment system, allowing the operator to easily
and accurately obtain information, and correcting implementation of the related
Discussion About Issues of Human Error …
139

operations; (2) Using design preventing human errors, to ensure that operator
operates in the right way; (3) It is necessary to provide sound, light alarm signal;
(4) It is necessary to consider the necessary safety devices.
5. Application of human factors engineering principles
Human factors engineering study how to use the human’s features systematically
(including psychological and physiological characteristics) during the product or
system development process. Using human factors engineering principles in nuclear
power plant design can reduce human errors of endangering the safety and oper-
ability and improve plant safety.
In order to minimize human error, it should take full account of the human factor,
retaining positive features and avoiding weaknesses of person in designing digital
control room. For example, the functional analysis and assignment should consider
handling capability and capacity between operator and the instrumentation and control
systems. The allocation of functions to personnel and machine resources can take
advantage of human and machine strengths and avoid human and machine limitations.
Screen design should be full use of human factors engineering principles, such as font
size, color, and other information packets must take into account the human factor.
Alarm design should be graded according to the degree of importance. Alarm design
needs to consider the design of alarm classiﬁcation, ﬁltering, suppression, so that the
operator can quickly obtain the alarm he needed. Workstation design should provide
more comfortable operation in sitting or standing, such as operator workstations disc
table size, the size of the operator’s visual angle. Digital control room has to provide a
safe and comfortable operating environment, which can reduce operator fatigue and
stress, and avoid mistakes. For example, it is necessary to consider the design of the
main control room ventilation, noise design and lighting design.
6. Add human factor topics review
Human factor topics review may early detect issues of human factor, and take
measures to reduce human errors.
4
Conclusion and Suggestion
Human error is one of the main factors causing accident. Especially after the Three
Mile Island and Chernobyl nuclear accidents, people have a more profound
understanding of this. Complex man-machine interface and computerized proce-
dures are adopted in digital control room, which are very different from traditional
control room. Both in preventing the human errors have common measures, but are
also very different. This article only studied human error related content in digital
control system of nuclear power plant, and we still have to carry out research work,
to discuss strategies to prevent human error, and to promote the development of
nuclear power.
140
Y. Feng et al.

References
1. ZHANG Li, WANG Yi-qun, HUANG Shu-dong. System Model for Preventing in Depth the
Accident due to Human Factor (J). China Safety Science Journal. 2002, 12(01).
2. Swain A D, Guttmann H E. Handbook of human - reliability analysis with emphasis on nuclear
power plant applications, 1983, NUREG/ CR 1278.
3. Reason J. Human Error UK. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
4. LI Peng-cheng. Human Error Cause Analysis and Application Study [M]. University of South
China, 2006.
5. LIAN Shi-qian, ZHANG Li, WANG Yi-qun, SONG Hong-tao. Study on Human Error and
Causal Factors (J). Industrial Safety and Environmental Protection. 2007, 33(11).
6. International Atomic Energy Agency. Human Reliability Analysis in Probabilistic Safety
Assessment for Nuclear Power Plants [R]. Vienna: IAEA, 1995.
7. XIAO Guo-qing, CHEN Bao-zhi. Study on the Mechanism of Human Error and Its Reliability
(J). China Safety Science Journal. 2001, 11(01).
8. LI Peng-cheng. Study on Human Error and Reliability in Digital Control System of Nuclear
Power Plant. University of South China, 2006.
Discussion About Issues of Human Error …
141

Improving Human-System Interface
Design Through Human Behavior
Assessment in the Control Room
of Nuclear Power Plants
Xiaolu Dong, Dan Pan, Zhizhong Li, Yunbo Zhang, Yan Feng
and Jingbin Liu
Abstract Human plays an important role in sophisticated and safety-critical systems
such as Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs). Digital systems are applied in the control room
alongside the development of technology. Operators in the control room of NPPs can
interact with the system through traditional consoles as well as computer worksta-
tions. In order to evaluate the design of human-system interface, measures can be
taken by assessing the task results and human performance. By observing the
behaviors of operators, evaluators can identify potential problems of Human-System
Interface (HSI) and thus making improvement. This paper brieﬂy summarizes issues
of human activities and performance assessment in NPPs, and then discusses the
relationship between human behavior and HSI design. It provides some recommen-
dations on interface design based on the observation of human activities in the control
room, such as working on traditional panels and workstations, communication, and
auxiliary activities. Discussions are then made on the objectives of evaluation and
conditions of HSI evaluation in China nuclear industry. The corresponding experi-
ences can be generalized to human-system interface design in other systems.
Keywords Human-system interface design  Performance assessment  Human
behavior  Control room  Nuclear power plant
1
Introduction
The effect of human activities on safety is essential in safety-critical systems such as
nuclear power plants, petrochemical plants, and aviation industry, etc. In
socio-technical systems where people interact with technology, the reliability of
X. Dong (&)  Y. Zhang  Y. Feng  J. Liu
Nuclear and Radiation Safety Center, Beijing, China
e-mail: dongxlchinansc@163.com; dongxiaolu@chinansc.cn
D. Pan  Z. Li
Department of Industrial Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_16
143

human performance and the ability of human handling of abnormality are of vital
importance [1]. Modern control rooms in nuclear power plants nowadays are
equipped with digital instrumentation and control (I&C) systems, which results in
the appearance of many task support systems like computerized procedure system,
digital alarm system, and safety function surveillance system, etc. [2, 3]. Operators
working in such control rooms use computerized interfaces more frequently than
traditional panels, and thus with different behavioural patterns.
The primary task of operators in the control room is to monitor and control the
operating status of the plant. During the normal monitoring, operators should not
only pay attention to alarms that might appear but also interpret changing trends of
parameters and the existing interplay between them [4]. In emergency situations,
operators are required to handle the events following instructions of procedures.
Human performance can be measured by task results, which are plant conditions
and task features such as time, accuracy, error, and frequency, etc. [5–7]. Form the
cognitive perspective, major measures include cognitive workload and situation
awareness. They can be measured based on performance, subjective rating, and
physiological measurement [4, 8–10]. In tests that can validate proper integrated
design, operators should be able to successfully accomplish the task with appro-
priate workload and certain level of situation awareness.
Considering the importance of human involvement and technological changes in
human-system interaction, the inﬂuence on operators’ cognitive tasks should be
emphasized in the design, test, veriﬁcation, and validation of interfaces [5, 6]. By
observing operators’ behavior and measuring corresponding performance during
the test, the evaluators will be able to identify potential problems in interface design
and training course development. This paper discusses the relationship between
human behavior observation and HSI design along with recommendations on both
issues in the realm of process control systems, especially in control rooms of NPPs.
Corresponding activities include using traditional panels, using computerized
workstations, communication, and other auxiliary activities.
2
Human Behavior and HSI Design
In the control room, operators’ cognitive process can be affected by many factors,
including external factors like task, environment, automation level, interface design,
and organization, as well as internal factors such as pressure, health, and knowledge
level. These factors have inﬂuence on stages of cognitive process, and thus have
indications in operators’ behavior and ﬁnal task results. Because cognitive process
cannot be directly observed, speculation can be made by observing human behavior
and measuring physiological indicators like eye movement. Also, since operators
will have their own understanding of the task process, methods of interview and
subjective rating can be applied in the evaluation.
In engineering practice, whether human-system interface can satisfactorily
support task execution should be validated through the actual task conducting
144
X. Dong et al.

process. Indirect inference on the interface design can be made by observing
indications in human behavior and performance that reﬂect the inﬂuence of inter-
face design on operators’ cognitive process. In the analysis, these indications should
be afﬁliated with tasks, cognitive factors, and interview results to provide a more
accurate evaluation. Further recommendation on interface design, training, and
organization can then be made based on the previous assessment.
In the following sections, this paper will discuss categories of operators’
activities in the control room corresponding to interface design and other human
factors elements. Examples of activities were observed during several ﬁeld studies
and validation tests. For commercially conﬁdential reasons, the names of facilities
and detailed design features are not provided in the paper.
2.1
Using Traditional Panels
In an advanced digital control room, traditional panels can be introduced as a
backup for the computerized system. Operators using traditional panels can check
alarms and indicators, adjust trends and displays, and implement control actions.
Related activities including:
1. Moving in front of panels
The movement of operators reveals how displays and controls are distributed on
the panel. Apart from routine patrolling, frequent moves and ineffective quick
returns may indicate inappropriate panel layout or unclear illustration. Walks of
long distance can reveal potential problems in panel layout or task assignment.
2. Searching for information
If operators ask for the positions of displays/controls or spend relatively long
time in searching for information, possible defects in panel layout and presen-
tation may exist. However, this situation could be improved through proper
training and better communication.
3. Observing
Awkward postures in operators’ observing activities could reveal possible
problems in size, presentation, position, and layout of interface elements. For
example, if operators lean signiﬁcantly close to the panel when examining
system status, the corresponding information may not be clearly presented or
well illuminated. Also, if operators turn aside or move to another spot for
feedback after operation, there could be incompatibility between controls and
displays.
4. Operating
Awkward postures in operators’ operating activities could reveal inappropriate
deign in size, position, or control features of control devices. For example, if
operators have to press a button carefully with their ﬁngertips, it is possible that
the button is too small or the distance between buttons is not enough.
Improving Human-System Interface Design …
145

2.2
Using Computerized Workstations
In advanced control rooms, operators monitor and control major plant operating
functions on computerized workstations. Related operating actions include page
switching, opening procedure, choosing/adjusting trends and parameters, managing
alarm, and controlling of variables, etc. These actions are completed through inputs
of mouse, keyboards, and/or touchscreens.
The advanced control room in a NPP is generally equipped with several small
Visual Display Units (VDUs), and sometimes with Large Display Panels (LDPs) at
the front. Operators in the working crew with different roles have different
responsibility and focus on different displays located in the room. For instance,
workstations located in the back are generally used by Unit Supervisor (US) and
Shift Supervisor (SS) for monitoring. For the workstations in the front row, VDUs
representing the status of primary loop systems are occupied by the Reactor
Operator (RO), meanwhile Turbine Operator (TO) and sometimes Electric Operator
(EO) are in charge of secondary loop systems. While RO, TO, and EO usually work
in relatively restricted and well-deﬁned areas, US and SS could walk around the
MCR and supervise the crew. In order to accomplish tasks in sophisticated systems,
operators should cooperate as a team and keep smooth communication.
Facing the complexity of tasks and control room coordination, experienced
evaluators would identify several important and questionable actions for scrutiny.
Since well-trained operators may have many information sources and perform with
considerable speed during the test, it is better to take visual and audio recordings for
further assessment alongside the ﬁeld observation. Besides, if physiological mea-
sures like heart rate, eye movement, and EEG (Electroencephalogram) are recorded
and analyzed, the integrated assessment can be more comprehensive [4, 9, 11].
During the analysis, inappropriate designs could be revealed by the performance
data. Problems could be identiﬁed on interface design, navigation system design,
information allocation and combination, interface elements design, and shortcuts
design, etc. The following variables could be applied in identiﬁcation of deﬁciency
in design [12].
(1) Number of pages appeared/page transitions (visits)
Since display units are distributed in different positions and used by different
operators under distinct circumstances, the values of these variables can vary
considerably with the tasks that performed in the test. The results indicate the
overall usage of workstations and displays.
Generally, more pages are required when wider range of information need to be
accessed. However, too much page viewing may indicate inappropriate information
allocation among pages, which means that the data provided on some pages may
not be sufﬁcient or cannot be easily found. Number of page transitions and visits
will increase with the number of pages appeared, but short page stay time and
revisits to same pages can signiﬁcantly raise the number of transitions and visits.
Besides important pages that require multiple visits, inefﬁcient navigation could be
146
X. Dong et al.

responsible for this increase, in that when the pages in need cannot be assessed
directly, visits to extra “middle” pages will become necessary.
Considering the nature of these variables, pages should be carefully examined
with the consideration of tasks and scenarios if there are indications of possible
deﬁciency. Improvement can be made by some extend of information combination.
For instance, important information placed on isolated pages can be provided on
major working page as supplement. The navigation system should have sufﬁcient
and effective connections among closely related pages. It is essential to carefully
design the navigation system based on the results of task analysis.
(2) Number of visits to certain pages
Multiple visits to certain pages imply that such pages may be relatively
important in the dynamic process. However, inappropriately designed navigation
system or improper information allocation among pages may also result in high
visits to certain pages. Therefore attention should be paid to ensure that these pages
contain appropriate information and can be visited conveniently. By recording
number of visits to each and every page appeared in the test, evaluators can identify
critical pages and sometimes possible problems.
(3) Page stay time
Operators may stay on a page for many reasons, for instance, monitoring,
operating, waiting for feedbacks, or leaving the page for later use. Page stay time is
a simple and important index for the evaluation of digital systems and can be
calculated for every page on every visit. Long stay duration on a page usually
implies high need for monitoring or perhaps keyhole effects on few VDUs.
Generally, well-trained operators are familiar with distributing information among
many VDUs. There are also operating requirements on what to present on each
workstation VDU. However, pressure of emergency could cause operators to ignore
some VDUs and focus on one or two displays. In addition, durations of stays will
change with the task evolvement. Thus, experts in plant operation need to make
judgment on whether pages with long stay time are in need at that very moment.
For each VDU in different tasks/scenarios, there often exist one or two major
pages that occupy the majority of the test time. It is reasonable given the task
allocation and operating requirement. Though most visits are not very long, short
stays that could not support even a fast scan can be indications of error recovery or
defective navigation.
By integrating the results of page transitions and page stay time, evaluators may
detect pages that are crucial for the tasks, moments when operators’ attention gets
narrow, and switches when wrong pages are opened. Attention should be paid on
displays and navigation system in support of the operating tasks. Moreover, task
reallocation, targeted training, and supportive interface features can relieve opera-
tors’ workload and stress in facing transients.
Improving Human-System Interface Design …
147

(4) Cursor and keyboard activities
Mouse clicks and keyboard entries can illustrate how operators interact with the
digital system. Statistics of cursor and keyboard activities could be based on using
of an integrated system, a workstation, a VDU, or a certain page. Usually, mouse
clicks are for page transitions. Other purposes include executing procedures,
managing alarms, popping out menus, selecting from select boxes, and moving
scroll bars, etc. The clicks are accompanied by cursor moving as an auxiliary action.
Likewise, keyboard activities can include setting up target values and using func-
tion keys.
If there are no correct feedbacks for mouse clicks or keyboard activities, these
activities are considered to be invalid. Apart from temporary system breakdown,
Non-responsive clicks or key pressings could be caused by: (a) unclear indications
of whether elements are clickable; (b) items too small, too narrow, too crowded, or
too close to the edge to be conveniently clicked; (c) using function keys under
wrong modes; (d) inputs blocked by safety interlocks; (e) improper sensitivity of
the input device, etc.
For the conditions of cursor movement, long mouse moving time and frequent
cursor movements could be the result of parameters, indications, or illustrations that
are incompatible with the users’ mental model. For example, elements with same
functions appear at distinct positions on similar pages could cause confusion of the
operator.
If the performance data indicates high mouse clicks per visit, low effective ratio
of clicks and keystrokes, and long and frequent cursor movement, inappropriately
designed interface elements may exist. The suggestion is to follow consistent design
guidelines for interface elements like buttons, labels, data, pictures, and diagrams,
etc. Also, the design of interface elements should adapt to users’ habits. To be more
speciﬁc, the categories and functions of the elements should be clear by the
appearance. Also, the clickable items should be large enough and having proper
space between each other to avoid wrong or ineffective clicks. Because operating
modes and safety interlocks are features of the system, besides adding notiﬁcations
on displays, related training on information input is also necessary.
2.3
Communication
To ensure successful completion of tasks performed in the main control room,
especially proper handling of accidents, full cooperation of operators is essential.
Rephrasing and verifying in communication contribute greatly to better information
exchange and team performance. Therefore, operators are required to keep two-way
commination in order to make the process smooth and clear. Communication
language can reveal characteristics of the crew, such as skills, openness, coordi-
nation, and team spirit. Also, the style and contents of language can demonstrate the
process of information gathering, problem solving, and plan execution, as well as
148
X. Dong et al.

real time pressure and workload of the crew. Observers will be able to predict the
situation awareness of crew members, and to determine mendable places in training,
organization, stafﬁng, and interface design.
2.4
Other Auxiliary Activities
Apart from direct monitoring and operating, operators will also need to perform
auxiliary activities, for example, walking to the ﬁle cabinets to fetch procedures,
looking through procedures for the execution page, and connecting personnel inside
and outside the plant using broadcast or telephone. Physiological measurement
during the test can indicate how well facilities are placed in the room. For instance,
if operators have difﬁculty in crossing the passage way, holding heavy procedures,
or making phone calls during the test, improvement should be made on the related
devices, according to the task requirement.
3
Discussion
By measuring human performance, one can assess interface design, training, and
organization of the plant. The results can facilitate corresponding design of the
interface and training course, which can better support operators’ task performance.
The analysis should synthesize related information for thorough study of the
important tasks and process.
There are four levels of objectives in evaluation: (1) the results of task execution
satisfy the requirement of operation and safety; (2) the execution process should be
smooth and without hindrance; (3) the workload and situation awareness of oper-
ators are at appropriate levels; (4) the above objectives can be achieved in real
practice, that is, can be generalized to conditions of greater scale. These four levels
of objectives are gradually enhanced, which considers not only the task require-
ment, experts’ evaluation, and design conventions, but also the variation of human
performance and changes in real conditions [5, 6]. Therefore, the observation of
human performance can focus on unnatural activities, error recovery, and situations
of high workload on the basis of successful tasks completion. Questions on any
level could imply places for improvement in areas such as interface design, training,
and organization.
When conducting evaluation tests, methods of walkthrough, mock-up, and
prototype with simulator can be applied in the process. Evaluators can use various
kinds of tools such as human factors guidelines’ checklist, questionnaire, interview,
and recording analysis. Recordings on system status, task performance, human
behaviour, communication, and physiological data can be taken during the evalu-
ation tests. Among all the data collected, evaluators need to select important sets
and use appropriate methods in data analysis and explanation in order to prove that
Improving Human-System Interface Design …
149

the design satisﬁes the requirements of the above four levels. If not, some emen-
dations should be taken place.
Serving the objective level two, the technique in identifying potential problems
considering relationships between human performance assessment and HSI design
summarized in this paper is an important part in the analysis and explanation
process. By spotting tasks and processes that require scrutiny, the evaluators can
ﬁnd and solve the possible problems more effectively and efﬁciently. Though data
recording may require hardware technology, the analysis and explanation focus
more on domain knowledge, statistical knowledge, and experience in Human
Factors Engineering (HFE). In China, though some attempts were made in the
nuclear industry to improve interface design through performance-based testing, the
majority of work is still on proving successful task completion. Sometimes, oper-
ators’ subjective feedbacks were collected as a supplement in support of some small
corrections. In general, the existing evaluations of NPPs’ HSI in China can hardly
reach the level 2: “the execution process should be smooth and without hindrance”,
let along higher levels. It is an urgent need that more technicians with proper
trainings of human factors engineering should enter the domain of nuclear industry.
At the same time, trainings on HFE should also be provided to practitioners in the
industry.
4
Conclusion
In the control room of NPPs, activities involve using of traditional panels and
computerized
workstations,
communication,
and
other
auxiliary
activities.
Generally, the assessment of control room design in complex systems has common
objectives in spite of great difference in task domains. The ways of interacting with
panels and computers as well as methods of assessing human performance and
interface design in modern systems are similar in nature. Though the conclusion is
based on observations of operators’ activities in the control room of nuclear power
plants, the results and recommendations in this paper can be generalized to the
design and evaluation of human-system interface in other systems.
References
1. Hollnagel, E. (1998) Cognitive Reliability and Error Analysis Method (CREAM). Elsevier
2. Committee on Application of Digital Instrumentation and Control Systems to Nuclear Power
Plant Operations and Safety, Commission on Engineering and Technical Systems, Division
on
Engineering
and
Physical
Sciences,
National
Research
Council
(1997)
Digital
Instrumentation and Control Systems in Nuclear Power Plants: Safety and Reliability
Issues. pp. 1–31. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
3. Zhang, Y.F. (1997) Computerized Operator Support System for Nuclear Power Plant. Nuclear
Power Engineering. 18(2), 163–169
150
X. Dong et al.

4. Mumaw, R.J., Roth, E.M., Vicente, K.J., Burns, C.M. (2000) There Is More to Monitoring a
Nuclear Power Plant than Meets the Eye. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors
and Ergonomics Society. 42(1), 36–55
5. O’Hara, J.M., Higgins, J.C., Persensky, J.J., Lewis, P.M., Bongarra, J.P.: NUREG-0711,
Human Factors Engineering Program Review Model. Rev. 3. U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, Washington, D.C. (2012)
6. O’Hara, J.M., Stubler, W.J., Higgins, C., Brown, W. (1997) NUREG/CR-6393, Integrated
System Validation: Methodology and Review Criteria. U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,
Washington, D.C.
7. Meister, D. (1985) Behavioral Analysis and Measurement Methods. Wiley, New York
8. Gawron, V.J. (2008) Human performance, workload, and situational awareness measures
handbook. Second ed. CRC press, Boca Raton
9. Tran, T.Q., Boring, R.L., Dudenhoeffer, D.D., Hallbert, B.P., Keller, M.D., Anderson, T.M.
(2007) Advantages and Disadvantages of physiological assessment for next generation control
room design. In IEEE 8th Human Factors and Power Plants and HPRCT 13th Annual
Meeting, vol. 1, pp. 259–263. IEEE
10. Endsley, M.R., Garland, D.J. (2000) Situation Awareness: Analysis and Measurement. CRC
Press
11. Ha, J.S., Seong, P.H., Lee, M.S., Hong, J.H. (2007) Development of human performance
measures for human factors validation in the advanced MCR of APR-1400. IEEE transactions
on nuclear science. 54(6), 2687–2700
12. Dong, X.L., Song, F., Li Z.Z., Zhang, S.S. (2013) Data extraction and analysis for integrated
system validation of a nuclear power plant. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 265, 826–832
Improving Human-System Interface Design …
151

Qualiﬁcation Test Standards Research
of Electrical Equipment Important
to Safety of Nuclear Power Plants
Yin-Hui Guo, Zhong-Qiu Wang, Yun-Bo Zhang, Yan Feng,
Ning Qiao and Jing-bin Liu
Abstract Safety digital I&C system has been gradually used to the new nuclear
power plant I&C system or renovation project of the nuclear power plant. Nuclear
equipment reliability directly affects the safety operation of nuclear power plant, so
the safety digital I&C system should be carried out Equipment qualiﬁcation (EQ) in
accordance with the relevant regulation and standards. EQ test is effective measure
to prevent the common failure caused by operating conditions and environmental
conditions. And also can meet the single failure criterion of nuclear I&C equipment.
Type testing is still method of choice for the safety electrical equipment. However,
in terms of safety electrical EQ, multiple international standard system lack of
detailed guide. This paper analyzes the required qualiﬁcation standards. Combined
with the international EQ experiences then put forward requirements of qualiﬁca-
tion test items, test levels and qualiﬁcation process.
Keywords Nuclear power plant  Safety  Electrical equipment  Qualiﬁcation test
Y.-H. Guo  Z.-Q. Wang  Y.-B. Zhang (&)  Y. Feng  N. Qiao  J. Liu
I&C Department, Nuclear and Radiation Safety Center, Beijing, China
e-mail: zhangyunbo@chinansc.cn
Y.-H. Guo
e-mail: gyh86126@126.com
Z.-Q. Wang
e-mail: wangzhongqiu@chinansc.cn
Y. Feng
e-mail: fengyan@chinansc.cn
N. Qiao
e-mail: qiaoningthu@foxmail.com
J. Liu
e-mail: liujingbinjob@163.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_17
153

1
Introduction
Digital instrument and control (I&C) system is the central nervous system in nuclear
power plants (NPPs). The reliable and economical operation of NPP units largely
depends on the performance level of I&C system. Qualiﬁcation technology of class
1E equipment is necessary measure to guarantee I&C system can operate normally
when it withstands normal, abnormal service conditions and accident conditions.
And qualiﬁcation technology of class 1E equipment is one of the key technologies to
realize autonomy intellectual property rights of I&C system in NPPs.
In qualiﬁcation of 1E equipment, there are a number of international standards
and guides issued respectively by Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE), International Electro technical Commission (IEC), International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) etc.
However, among these standards for EQ are not entirely consistent. Consequently,
different countries have large different requirements and actual practice in the EQ.
Although part of IEEE and IEC standards are planning to uniﬁcation, but still has a
long way to go. On the other hand, only have the general requirements for EQ in the
relevant standards, did not give the exact qualiﬁcation guide. Therefore it is nec-
essary to analyze and compare research on international standards requirements of
EQ, then combined with the practical experience in the nuclear power plant safety
review, considers the requirements of qualiﬁcation test, ﬁnally put forward a set of
suitable for nuclear safety electrical EQ test requirements.
Considering most safety electrical equipment installed outside the containment
and corresponding to the RCC-E speciﬁcation of K3 class equipment, this article
describes EQ only for K3 class electrical equipment.
2
International Standards in EQ
2.1
Status Standard in EQ
Internationally, it is acknowledged that NRC cooperates with IEEE and IAEA
cooperates with IEC so as that there have two standard architectures which can be
called as American architecture and European architecture. American architecture
consists of codes, regulatory guides (R.G.) and standard review plan (SRP) all
issued by NRC and IEEE standards were issued by IEEE. European architecture
consists of codes and guides which are issued by IAEA and IEC standards which
were issued by IEC. In addition, there are several branches existing in European
architecture such as in France and Germany [1].
American architecture consists of 10CFR50, R.G. and SRP NUREG 0800 and
IEEE standards. 10CFR50 stands on the top of the architecture. R.G. and SRP
analysis and explain codes’ requirements, and endorse relevant IEEE standards to
satisfy it so as to give relevant guidance for NRC staffs in review activities.
154
Y.-H. Guo et al.

The standards above do not provide detailed guidance or advice in EQ.
DI&C-ISG-06, as licensing process for digital I&C system, points out that
R.G.1.209 endorses IEEE 323-2003 for mild environment qualiﬁcation. R.G.1.209
considers the mild environment qualiﬁcation practices endorsed in this guide are
equivalent to, and consistent with those described in EPRI TR-107330 (technical
report issued by Electric Power Research Institute). And also R.G.1.209 endorses
R.G.1.180-2003 and EPRI TR-102323-1996 as EMC testing guide. Besides envi-
ronmental qualiﬁcation, EQ shall also contain seismic qualiﬁcation. As seismic test
guide R.G.1.100-1988, it endorses IEEE 344-1975 [2, 3].
European standard architecture is based on IAEA codes, guides, and IEC
standards. In Europe, France and Germany built their own standard architecture,
especially RCC-E and its supporting speciﬁcations are widely used in EQ of
pressurized-water reactor NPPs in the world. RCC-E volume B provides relevant
requirements about qualiﬁcation and approval. And chapter B2600 points out that
alternative EQ method can be used but it should conform to IEC60780. The
architecture in Germany is based on KTA series which were issued by Nuclear
Safety Standards Commission (KTA), and KTA 3503 is for type testing of electrical
modules for the safety related instrumentation and control system. KTA3503 also
endorses IEC60780 as system qualiﬁcation standard. Thus IEC60780 is the main
standard in EQ in European architecture from above analysis.
2.2
Analysis of Applicable Standards in EQ
2.2.1
Three-Level Standard Architecture in EQ
Three-level standard architecture should be used in EQ: main standards, supporting
standards/guides, general standards. Main standards provide general process, pro-
cedure and method of EQ. In general, detailed test parameters cannot be found in
main standards. However, supporting standards and guides will do. And most of
this supporting standards and guides endorse general standards. For example,
R.G.1.180 endorses IEC61000-4 standard series and IEC61000-6 standard series.
2.2.2
Main Standards
In American standard architecture, IEEE323 is the main standard for class 1E
electrical EQ, while in European architecture, IEC60780 is. RCC-E volume B is the
main standard in France and KTA3503 in Germany.
Comparing the content of these main standards, it can be found that the
requirements of qualiﬁcation items, qualiﬁcation methods of RCC-E volume B and
IEC60780 are equivalent. Although IEC60780 is main standards in Europe, but
Qualiﬁcation Test Standards Research …
155

RCC-E volume is widely used in Chinese EQ of in-service and in-construction
NPPs. Therefore the relevant requirements of RCC-E should be referenced because
autonomy intellectual property rights of digital I&C system may be used in NPPs
with pressurized water reactor. On the other hand, IEEE323 is from American
architecture. And American architecture is paid more and more attention because of
NRC’s authority in the area of nuclear power and the other I&C platforms such as
Common Q platform have been all qualiﬁed according to it. So IEEE 323 should
also be referenced.
2.2.3
Supporting Standards, Guides and General Standards
IEEE323, IEC60780, and RCC-E all point out that type test can be divided into
different phases and in a speciﬁed order. Different phases should conform to dif-
ferent supporting standards and guides. Comparing these main standards, it can be
concluded that qualiﬁcation test can be according to the following order: reference
test, extreme environmental test, aging test, accident and post-accident function test.
The following sections will analyze applicable supporting standards, guides and
general standards of these four phases.
2.2.4
Conclusion of Applicable Standard Analysis
From the analysis of applicable supporting standard, guides and general standards
in four different phases, it can be concluded that the applicable standards which
have three levels for digital I&C system EQ as shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1 Standard architecture applicable to EQ
156
Y.-H. Guo et al.

3
Test Item of EQ
3.1
Test Item Overview
IEC 60780 point out EQ type tests shall be divided into three main test groups.
• Group 1: To check the functional characteristics under normal ambient condi-
tions and in all speciﬁed limits of normal operation.
• Group 2: To demonstrate the seismic resistance of equipment.
• Group 3: To demonstrate the resistance of the equipment against accident and
post-accident conditions.
This article focus on the K3 equipment is not affected by environmental con-
ditions after accident and post-accident. Therefore do not consider the Group 3
requirements [4].
In the chapter 6.3.1.7 of IEEE 323 are mentioned test sequence should be follow
as: Speciﬁed baseline functional tests shall be performed under normal conditions;
The test sample shall be operated to the extremes of all performance, operating,
surge voltages, and electrical characteristics given in the equipment speciﬁcations,
excluding design basis event and post-design basis event conditions, unless these
data are available from other tests (e.g., design veriﬁcation tests) on identical or
similar equipment; When required, the test sample shall be age conditioned to
simulate its functional capability at the end of its qualiﬁed life. The test sample shall
be subjected to speciﬁed non-seismic mechanical vibration; The test sample shall be
subjected to simulated OBE and safe shutdown earthquake (SSE) seismic vibration
in accordance with IEEE 344 [5].
RCC-E requires to ensure that equipment installed outside the containment is
capable of performing its speciﬁed functions under normal ambient conditions and
under seismic loading, as well as accidental ambient conditions speciﬁed for certain
items of equipment [6].
Integrated the above requirements of test contents and test process, EQ should
include the following stages:
• Reference test.
• Extreme environmental test.
• Aging test.
• Accident and post-accident function test.
3.2
Reference Test
The objective of this test is to verify the functional characteristic of the equipment
under normal environmental condition. This test includes (1) electrical interface
characteristics tests and measurement of insulation resistance, (2) functional
Qualiﬁcation Test Standards Research …
157

characteristics measurement. The functioning of the equipment as speciﬁed in the
data sheet shall be demonstrated.
3.3
Extreme Environmental Test
During this phase the equipment shall be operated to the extreme limits of its
utilization ﬁeld (electrical and environmental) indicated in its performance speci-
ﬁcation. Safety electrical equipment should be checked: the speciﬁed limits of
normal supply voltage (or frequency) ﬁeld; the extreme limits of the temperature
range; electrical or electromagnetic disturbances, conducted and/or radiated.
Extreme test for power supply, AC-powered devices are required function
performance under supply voltage and frequency limit. The choice of extreme
power requirements should meet the speciﬁcations and need to combine the power
supply and frequency standards of each country.
Climatic test shall be demonstrated may be subjected during normal operation
limits of temperature and humidity. Also taking into account the extreme conditions
when ventilation heating equipment failure. EPRI TR-107330 provides test tem-
perature and humidity curve in Fig. 2 [7].
Figure 2 give fully consideration to the operating equipment may be subjected to
the high temperature and humidity, low temperature and humidity. Test conditions
may cover most of the operating condition of electrical equipment.
Fig. 2 Temperature and humidity requirements of EPRI 107330
158
Y.-H. Guo et al.

About EMC test, R.G.1.209 states that R.G.1.180 and EPRI TR-102323 provide
guidance for EMC test. R.G.1.180 and TR-102323 endorse general standard
MIL-STD, IEC61000-4 series and IEC61000-6 series. R.G.1.180 gives test grades
and acceptance criteria of radiation emission, radiation immunity, and conduction
emission and conduction immunity [8, 9].
For operating, the equipment surrounds the vibration source. According to the
vibration amplitude and acceleration, the equipment should be tested the ability to
withstand vibration. Test methods can be followed the requirements of IEC
60068-2-6.
3.4
Aging Test
The assessment of equipment aging effects in connection with a type test program is
required to determine if aging has a signiﬁcant effect on operability. Requirements
of ageing test in IEC60780 and RCC-E are equivalent. Based on the characteristics
of the electrical equipment to choice the following test:
• Thermal test and/or thermal tests with mechanical effects.
• Mechanical vibration tests.
• Prolonged operating test.
• Irradiation ageing test.
3.5
Accident and Post-accident Function Test
Accident and post-accident function test will be performed to verify the function-
ality of the equipment under accident condition. In general, only seismic condition
should be considered because most safety class electrical equipment will be
installed outside the containment.
According to IEEE 344, if equipment will be installed on the speciﬁed ﬂoor
location and the ﬂoor response spectrum is available, then the seismic test should
use artiﬁcial time history method. On the contrary, if the equipment installation
location or the response spectrum is not available, or the equipment will be installed
in different location, then it is better to use the single frequency sine beat method to
simulate the seismic condition [10].
For time history method, the test should be performed on a dual-axis or tri-axis
shake table. And the table shall output multi-frequency.
Single frequency wave method means the single-axis shake table shall output
speciﬁed single frequency wave from 1 to 33 Hz which is the seismic frequency
band. Test frequency points shall be selected based on the center of enlarged area,
and then the frequency points shall be extended to both ends with the one-third
octave. Each sine wave beat should include 5–10 sine wave. And one time OBE or
Qualiﬁcation Test Standards Research …
159

SSE should include 5 or above beats. Time interval should be more than 2 s to
avoid equipment overlap effect. IEC 60980 gives the magniﬁcation factor from the
input time domain acceleration to test spectrum based on the equipment damp ratio,
the number of beat and the number of sine wave of each beat. Therefore if test
spectrum is available, then the input acceleration level can be calculated according
to the magniﬁcation factor.
In general, seismic test will perform 5 OBEs followed by 1 SSE.
4
Process Assurance in Qualiﬁcation Test
4.1
Preparation of Test Specimen
For the condition that qualiﬁcation equipment is combined by multi-cabinets or has
complex conﬁguration, a qualiﬁcation test specimen (referred to as the specimen)
which is enough to represent the qualiﬁcation equipment should be prepared. The
representative of the specimen is reﬂected in following aspects:
• Representative of function. The specimen should have the typical function of
qualiﬁcation equipment, including typical input and output, operation process,
data communication, typical isolation, typical information display, and typical
monitoring and diagnostic function.
• Representative of products type. For the modules which are used to realize the
hardware, software, man-machine interface, and data communication functions
and the auxiliary modules, at least one of each type of module should be
conﬁgured in test specimen.
• Representative of mechanical structure. The dynamic structural characteristics
of specimen should be similar with qualiﬁcation equipment.
• Representative of application conﬁgurations. The specimen should be conﬁg-
ured similar with or more rigorous than the qualiﬁcation equipment, including
the cabinet temperature rise and interface connections in actual operation.
4.2
Preparation of Test Instruments
The test equipment under strict veriﬁcation and evaluation and certiﬁed third party
lab are effective methods to ensure the credibility of the test data. Test equipment
and third party lab should be chosen according to the characteristics of the specimen
before qualiﬁcation test, the requirements including:
• The generic instruments and meters which are used in the test must be within
calibration period validity. The calibration records should be contained in test
reports according to IEC60780-1998 section 6.3.
160
Y.-H. Guo et al.

• Some auto-test or auto-monitor equipment which is self-developed shall have
the developing process documents and veriﬁcation record which can be
traceable.
4.3
Evaluation of the Third-Party Test Labs
Test Lab satisﬁed with requirements of test item shall be selected for qualiﬁcation
test. The organization responsible for qualiﬁcation should evaluate the third party
lab, includes: authorization, parameters of test equipment, capability of test engi-
neers and quality assurance.
5
Conclusions
Safety functions of the safety system are guaranteed by safety class electrical
equipment and the qualiﬁcation of electrical equipment become the important
approach of deep defense. Only if the equipment undergoes the strict test can
guarantee the equipment can operate reliably under different abnormal environ-
mental conditions.
This paper analyzed the requirements of related standards of qualiﬁcation,
concluded the requirements of qualiﬁcation test of electrical equipment combined
with qualiﬁcation test experience of other international DCS platform. The con-
clusion of this paper will be reference for persons of I&C electrical EQ.
References
1. HUANG Weijie, (2014) Nuclear Power Engineering. A Preliminary Study on Qualiﬁcation of
Instrumentation and Control System for Nuclear Power Plants. Vol. 35. No. 6
2. R.G.1.100-1988 Seismic Qualiﬁcation of Electric and Mechanical Equipment for Nuclear
Power Plants
3. EPRI TR102323-1997 Guidelines for Electromagnetic Interference Testing in Power Plants
4. IEC 60780-1998, Nuclear power plants - Electrical equipment of the safety system -
Qualiﬁcation
5. IEEE Std. 323-2003, IEEE Standard for Qualifying Class 1E Equipment for Nuclear Power
Generating Stations
6. RCC-E-2005, Design And Construction Rules for Electrical Equipment of Nuclear Islands
7. EPRI TR107330-1996 Generic Requirements Speciﬁcation for Qualifying a Commercial
Available PLC for Safety-Related Application in Nuclear Power Plants
8. R.G.1.209-2007
Guidelines
for
Environmental
Qualiﬁcation
of
Safety-Related
Computer-Based Instrumentation and Control Systems in Nuclear Power Plants
9. R.G.1.180-2003
Guidelines
for
Evaluating
Electromagnetic
and
Radio-Frequency
Interference in Safety-Related Instrumentation and Control Systems
10. IEEE 344 2004 IEEE recommended practice for seismic qualiﬁcation of class 1E equipment
for nuclear power generating stations
Qualiﬁcation Test Standards Research …
161

The Several Issues in Safety Review
of Digital Control System in Chinese
Nuclear Power Plant
Yun-Bo Zhang, Zhong-Qiu Wang, Yan Feng, Jing-Bin Liu
and Yin-Hui Guo
Abstract With the extensive application of digital control system (DCS) in
Chinese nuclear power plant, the safety of DCS attracts people’s attention. First of
all, this paper brieﬂy introduces the overall structure of DCS. Then it summarizes
the several key issues about DCS from the perspective of nuclear safety review: the
single failure criterion, testability, diversity, software veriﬁcation and validation
(V&V), conﬁguration management, which are common issues in the safety review.
These issues are analyzed according to the relevant regulation and standards. At
last, some solutions are given to these common issues, and some suggestions are
made for future review.
Keywords Nuclear power plant  DCS  Safety review
1
Introduction
Digital control system is one of the most important systems in nuclear power plant.
DCS is more like the “central nervous system” of the entire nuclear power plant,
and its stability is the key for the safety, reliability and economic of operation. At
present, DCS technology is or will be used in most of Chinese nuclear power plants.
Y.-B. Zhang  Z.-Q. Wang  Y. Feng (&)  J.-B. Liu  Y.-H. Guo
I&C Department, Nuclear and Radiation Safety Center, Beijing, China
e-mail: fengyan@chinansc.cn
Y.-B. Zhang
e-mail: zhangyunbo@chinansc.cn
Z.-Q. Wang
e-mail: wangzhongqiu@chinansc.cn
J.-B. Liu
e-mail: liujingbinjob@163.com
Y.-H. Guo
e-mail: Gyh86126@126.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_18
163

Compared with traditional analog technology, the application of DCS can improve
the efﬁciency of the nuclear power plant, safety and reliability. With the application
of DCS in nuclear power plant, the related operation event leads to widespread
concern. Therefore, the review of the DCS is one of the key issues in nuclear safety
review. This paper analyzes several important issues in safety review of DCS, and
gives some suggestions for future review.
2
The Structure of DCS in Nuclear Power Plant
In general, DCS can be divided into 4 levels by functions: ﬁeld level, automation
level (individual control and measurement level), communication level, process
information and control level. The ﬁeld level is mainly used for detecting the
parameters of process equipment, controlling the technical process according to the
command, providing/controlling processing functions such as power supply
equipment. The automation level is mainly used for data acquisition, signal pre-
processing, logic processing, operation of control algorithm, and other functions.
The communication level is mainly used for data and signal communications. The
process information and control level is mainly used for information support,
diagnostic, operator action and process information records, controlling unit by
operating equipment and other tasks.
Fig. 1 DCS structure diagram
164
Y.-B. Zhang et al.

Figure 1 is the overall DCS structure diagram. Automation level, communica-
tion level, process information and control level are the focus of attention in safety
review.
3
The Review Concerns
3.1
The Structure of Reactor Protection System
Reactor protection system mainly includes reactor trip (RT) system and engineered
safety feature (ESF) system [1]. The RT system is made up of process measurement
channel, nuclear measuring channel, acquisition and processing logic channel,
reactor trip breaker, manual driving circuit and so on.
Except for adopting four redundant channels, the RT system should also adopt
the principle of diversity; the protection parameters with functional diversity are
assigned in different processors in order to reduce the impact of common cause
failure. When a protection channel fails, if the rest of the protection channels can’t
meet the single failure criterion, the system will generate scram signal to achieve
safe shutdown.
The ESF system consists of measurement/signal processing and logic part.
The structure of measurement/signal processing part is similar to RT system,
including four redundant signal processing channels.
The logic part includes two redundant series. It receives the input signal from the
signal processing channels and performs the required logic to drive the engineered
safety features. Each logic series can drive minimum number of engineered safety
facilities and equipment as the safety functions required. To ensure that, single
failure in any redundant series will not result in the loss of protection functions.
3.2
Testability
Reactor protection system should have the ability of fault detection and testability
during the reactor shutdown mode and power operation mode. The test should be
conducted in several stages and each stage should be overlapped to ensure the
integrity of the system test [2]. The fault detection and test of RT system should
include T1 test-measuring instrument channel test, T2 test-processing unit test
(digital protection system test) and T3 test-the output signal and the actuator test.
In the case of self-check failed to cover any fault, there should be speciﬁc
test equipment to determine the periodic test cycle on the basis of reliability
analysis.
The Several Issues in Safety Review …
165

3.3
The Diversity of ATWT and RT System
As the back-up of emergency shutdown system, anticipated transients without trip
(ATWT) mitigation system should follow the principle of diversity and indepen-
dence in the system design [3]. It uses the different devices (including software and
hardware) to perform the functions same as RT system. For example, the functions
of ATWT are implemented by the NC platform and the functions of RT are
implemented by the safety platform. The diversity between different platforms are
in several aspects such as design, equipment, software, human factors and so on [4].
3.4
Software Veriﬁcation and Validation
In case of one nuclear power plant, its safety platform TRICON (V10.2.1) has
passed the V&V conducted by the vendor itself and the independent third party.
Meanwhile in the ﬁnal safety evaluation report of TRICON, the NRC states that the
development process of TRICON (V10.5.1) and the new/updated version of the
software components meet the requirement of SRP section 7, BTP7-14, BTP7-18,
EPRI TR-107330 and EPRI TR-106439, and the software modules in TRICON
(V9.5.3) are also accepted due to the safety evaluation of TRICON (V9.5.3). The
review conclusion requires a detailed description of the hardware and software
changes from TRICON (V10.5.1) to TRICON (V10.5.3) which is used in this
nuclear power plant.
For the speciﬁc TRICON application software of this nuclear power plant, the
related V&V work is conducted by the independent third party. So it can effectively
guarantee the independence of V&V work in management, organization and
ﬁnancial [5].
3.5
Conﬁguration Management
The conﬁguration management of DCS is used to control hardware equipment,
software, and ﬁle version so as to identify the system version, help to the execution
of the change, and to protect the history of conﬁguration object and so on [6].
The following problems often exists in the conﬁguration management work of
DCS in nuclear power plant: there is no clear distinction between safety and
non-safety items in the conﬁguration state statistics; it lacks some contents such as
software tool which is required in conﬁguration management program; the naming
rule of software version is unclear; the conﬁguration state statistics can’t reﬂect the
actual situation of DCS, and so on.
A detailed and speciﬁc conﬁguration state statistics, the naming rule of the
version and the clear expression of the software version in the V&V report are
166
Y.-B. Zhang et al.

helpful to ensure the implementation of the conﬁguration management program of
DCS. The conﬁguration management can effectively control the hardware and
software version in factory test phase and site commissioning phase, and it is also
helpful to the following subsequent change management and update work.
4
Conclusion and Suggestion
The structure design, testability, diversity, software V&V, conﬁguration manage-
ment of DCS should meet the requirements of relevant laws and regulations.
For future review, some suggestions should be noticed. The software conﬁgu-
ration management of hardware and software should be enhanced and improved to
ensure the effectiveness; the safety software V&V activities should be carried out
strictly in the operation and maintenance phase according to the requirements of
relevant laws and regulations.
In recent years, some operator workstation disable events had showed up in
some nuclear power plants, and the operators had to move to the BUP panel to wait
for workstation restarting. These events brought some adverse effect for the stable
operation of the power plant. So it should be paid more attention to the commis-
sioning test and operation of non-safety DCS.
Acknowledgements This work is supported by the soft subject “Research and standard devel-
opment of cyber security about digital I&C system in nuclear power plant”. Many people have
offered me valuable help in this work. I thank professor Zhong-Qiu WANG for helpful conver-
sation, Engineer Jing-bin Liu and Yin-hui Guo for proposed changes.
References
1. ZHENG Weizhi (2012) The Fault Analysis and Application of Reactor Protection System in
Nuclear Power Plant. Nuclear Electronics & Detection Technology, Vol. 32. No. 3: 337–341.
2. GB/T5204-1994, Periodic tests and monitoring of the safety system of nuclear power plant.
3. US NRC. NUREG/CR6303-1994, Method for Performing Diversity and Defense-in-Depth
Analyses of Reactor Protection Systems.
4. ZHANG Yunbo (2014) Analysis of Diversity and Independence for ATWT Mitigation System
in Nuclear Power Plant. Nuclear Power Engineering, Vol. 35. No. 6: 77–79.
5. IEEE Std.1012-2012, IEEE Standard for System and Software Veriﬁcation and Validation.
6. IEEE Std.828-2005, IEEE Standard for Software Conﬁguration Management Plans.
The Several Issues in Safety Review …
167

The Situation and Suggestion of Diversity
Actuation System Applied in China
Jing-Bin Liu, Zhong-Qiu Wang, Yun-Bo Zhang, Yan Feng,
Yin-Hui Guo and Xiao-Lu Dong
Abstract Digital control system has been widely used in nuclear power plant. It
brings some obvious advantages in system design and application. Meanwhile the
accompanying common cause failures (CCFs) problem becomes one of the most
concerned issues. To deal with this problem, many regulations and methods are
proposed. NUREG 6303 describes a method for analyzing computer-based nuclear
reactor protection systems to discover design vulnerabilities with common-mode
failure (US NRC. NUREG/CR6303-1994 in Method for Performing Diversity and
Defense-in-Depth Analyses of Reactor Protection Systems, [1]). NUREG 7007
considers that diversity in a safety system is needed for mitigating the consequences
of potential CCFs and provides guidance to the staff and nuclear industry for
evaluation (US NRC. NUREG/CR7007-2010 in Diversity Strategies for Nuclear
Power Plant Instrumentation and Control Systems, [2]). In this paper, the diversity
actuation system (DAS) has been described in detail and the functions of DAS
system have been introduced. Then several representative different reactor type in
China is selected (including M310 model, Second generation plus based on M310
model, AP1000 model and EPR model), and made some comparison between these
J.-B. Liu  Z.-Q. Wang  Y.-B. Zhang  Y. Feng (&)  Y.-H. Guo  X.-L. Dong
I&C Department, Nuclear and Radiation Safety Center, Beijing, China
e-mail: fengyan@chinansc.cn
J.-B. Liu
e-mail: liujingbinjob@163.com
Z.-Q. Wang
e-mail: wangzhongqiu@chinansc.cn
Y.-B. Zhang
e-mail: zhangyunbo@chinansc.cn
Y.-H. Guo
e-mail: guoyinhui@chinansc.cn
X.-L. Dong
e-mail: dongxiaolu@chinansc.cn
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_19
169

DAS systems. At the end of this paper some suggestions are proposed to the third
generation nuclear power technology in China to reduce the common cause failures
and enhance the reliability.
Keywords Diversity actuation system  Common-cause failure  I&C system
1
Introduction
Currently, digital control system has been used more widely in nuclear power plants
(NPPs) in CHINA and abroad. Its openness, high reliability, rapidity and oper-
ability have been gradually recognized by the industry. However, due to the
application of digital technology, common cause failures become one of the factors
must be considered in the design [3]. The work of diversity and common cause
failures is still in research stage in our country, there are no relative speciﬁc reg-
ulations and standards. But the regulator’s position is very clear: HAD 102/14 [4]
points out that the possibility of common cause failures of safety-critical items must
be considered; it determined where the diversity, redundancy and independence
should be applied to achieve the required reliability. HAD 102/16 [5] emphasizes
that software CCFs is a key issue and using the diversity strategy can reduce
potential CCFs effectively and improve its reliability. CCFs problems become one
of the concerned issues in safety review of digital control system design and
modiﬁcation [6].
Diversity actuation system provides the necessary means to alleviate the con-
sequence when design basis accidents occur due to the CCFs of digital reactor
protection system. Compared with the protection and control systems it could be
based on a different platform and use diverse system design, functions driven and
parameter display to provide a back-up.
2
The Functions of DAS System
Although different nuclear plants types, manufacturers and technologies of DAS
system may be very different in design and implementation, the main functions of
DAS system are basically the same:
• Provide diverse and backup automatic drive signals such as reactor trip
(RTs) and engineered safety features (ESFs) functions. When the speciﬁed
parameters exceed the setting value, automatically shutdown or drive critical
ESF functions to assure the integrity of the fuel cladding, primary circuit
pressure boundary and containment pressure boundary;
170
J.-B. Liu et al.

• Provide diverse and backup manual RT and ESF functions to assure the integrity
of the fuel cladding, primary circuit pressure boundary and containment pressure
boundary;
• Provide adequate information of the device status and parameters on the panel
station in the main control room (such as reactivity, core residual heat removal
condition, primary system coolant outlet temperature, primary circuit pressure
boundary condition, Containment pressure boundary etc.) to monitor and dis-
play the safety-critical parameters.
To achieve the above functions, DAS system generally has the following
devices, as described in Fig. 1:
• DAS Panel station. This Panel station includes the manual operation devices,
indicating instruments and alarm devices. It is mainly used for safety-critical
manual functions, provides safety-critical parameters, alarm information and
other display functions.
• DAS Processor Cabinets. The cabinet is mainly used for collecting, processing
and outputting the signals. In order to prevent equipment malfunction and
rejection, it should be set up with architectural redundancy. Each redundant
subsystem would collect signals and process, compare with the set values then
generate the “local signal” for voting logic.
• Anticipated Transients without Trip (ATWT) mitigation system. ATWT event is
caused by control rods that can not be inserted into the reactor core due to the
CCFs and the unit failed to achieve the expected transient scram. So ATWT
system uses diverse equipment to achieve reactor scram. At present most of the
NPPs integrate this function into DAS systems.
In order to achieve the above functions, different instrumentation and control
system uses a variety of strategies to achieve.
Fig. 1 The function diagram
of DAS
The Situation and Suggestion of Diversity Actuation …
171

3
The Introduction of Different Diversity Methods Used
in China
3.1
M310 Model
As second-generation nuclear power technology, it is widely used in CHINA’s
nuclear power project, and achieved good operating performances. At present, there
are still a large number of operating units. The digital technology in the nuclear
power ﬁeld had not been universal when this type of plants completed its design,
besides consensus on diversity and common cause failures had not been agreed,
therefore such models did not set up a separate DAS system.
However, to avoid common cause failures since the control rods can not be
inserted into the core and the unit failed to achieve the expected transient scram, it
sets ATWT mitigation system [7]. The system is mainly to monitor the SG water
ﬂow and nuclear power level. When the SG water ﬂow is lower than the setting
value and the nuclear power exceed the setting power, then the auxiliary feedwater
system will be activated, the turbine will be triggered and the shut-down signal will
be sent out. ATWT system uses diverse equipment to achieve reactor scram, follow
the principles of diversity and independence. However because the functions are
simple and there are no diverse safety-critical parameters and alarm information
displayed in the main control room, in subsequent improved and new designed
power plants this system is integrated to the DAS system.
3.2
Second Generation Plus Based on M310 Model
DAS system of Fangjiashan/Fuqing project is different from the safety-class digital
I&C platform TRICON, it uses a non-safety digital I&C platform I/A. There are
enough physical and electrical isolation between DAS system and reactor protection
system. DAS system does not receive the signals processed by reactor protection
system, meanwhile does not send signals to reactor protection system. As stated
earlier, it integrated the functions of ATWT systems. In addition, parts of the
automatic functions of reactor protection system are also selected as below [8]:
• Automatic reactor trip and turbine trip;
• Main steam(-piping) system isolation actuation;
• Safety injection actuation.
There are ﬁve reactor shutdown signals, respectively: High power range neutron
ﬂuence rate, high pressurizer pressure, low pressurizer pressure, 2 loops of low
reactor coolant ﬂow rate, low pressurizer pressure (this signal will trigger safety
injection at the same time).
DAS system is not provided with system-level and device-level manual opera-
tions as well as safety-critical parameters and alarm information display. Backup
172
J.-B. Liu et al.

manual control and display functions are mainly achieved through safety video
display unit (SVDU), network computer-video display unit (NC-VDU) and back-up
disk.
As a diversity of design, the reactor trip of automatic functions is accomplished
through cutting rod position indicating and rod control system (RGL) power supply,
which is different from the way of protection system by opening the trip breakers.
The ESF functions of DAS system are accomplished through its own cabinet which
bypassing the logical processing of reactor protection system. The signals of ESF is
sending to the priority logic processing module (PLM), and then sending to the
relevant actuator. Furthermore, the output signals of DAS systems are initiated by
energized way not de-energized way like protection system.
3.3
AP1000 Model
As the third-generation nuclear power technology AP1000 is imported from
Westinghouse. Its safety grade platform is COMMON-Q to perform the functions
of the reactor protection system and its non-safety grade platform is OVATION to
achieve majority control functions of nuclear island/conventional island/BOP. The
safety system (PMS) uses hardware and software that is based on microprocessor
and Plant Control System (PLS) is also microprocessor-based. In order to achieve
diversity, the DAS system uses ALS platform that is based on Field Programmable
Gate Array (FPGA).
DAS system selects parts of the automatic functions of the reactor protection
system [9]:
• Automatic reactor and turbine trip;
• Automatic CMT (coolant makeup tank) valve actuation and RCP (reactor
coolant pump) trip;
• Automatic PRHR (passive residual heat removal) discharge valve actuation and
IRWST (in-containment refueling water storage tank) gutter isolation valve
actuation;
• Automatic containment isolation valve actuation and PCS (passive containment
cooling system) valve actuation.
DAS system uses independent sensors compared with PMS system, such as hot
leg RTDs, containment RTDs, core exit thermocouples, steam generator level
transmitters, etc.
The trip signal of automatic functions drives the generator set trip, and then
CRDM (control-rod device mechanism) losing of power and dropping of control
rod. This method is different from the manner of PMS that uses trip breaker to
shutdown. ESF functions also uses diverse drive interface compared with PMS, and
these devices can operate independently without affecting each other.
The Situation and Suggestion of Diversity Actuation …
173

In addition, there are system-level manual operation functions in DAS Panel
station and processor cabinets (partly). Its output signals are connected via hard-
wired to the ﬁnal load, thus can completely bypass the PMS and DAS automatic
drive logic path. To support manual actuation, there are adequate instrument
indications and alarms provided in the DAS Panel station and processor cabinets.
3.4
EPR Model
EPR is the third-generation nuclear power technology imported from AREVA. Due
to the different strategies of diversity, EPR does not actually set up a separate DAS
system strictly. It uses defense in depth strategy and adds a hard core system
(HKS) to maintain the diversity. Its safety grade platform is TXS to perform the
functions of the reactor protection system and its non-safety grade platform is
SPPA-T2000 to achieve control functions [10].
The I&C system includes 2 levels and is made up of 9 subsystems. Level 1 layer
contains process automation system (PAS), safety automation system (SAS), that
are based on SPPA-T2000 platform; reactor protection system (PS), reactor control
surveillance and limitation system (RCSL), severe accident I&C system (SA I&C),
priority actuation and control system (PACS), hard kernel system (HKS), that are
based on TXS platform. Level 2 layer contains process information and control
system (PICS) and safety information and control system (SICS).
Compared with other power plant, there are a large number of F1B safety
functions implemented in SPPA-T2000 SAS system, and post-accident related
functions are implemented in SPPA-T2000 SAS system. Since the SPPA-T2000 is
the lower safety class platform, in the event of design basis accident with
SPPA-T2000 platform failure, some functions that bring the power plant into safe
shutdown state will fail and lose. Therefore, the HKS functions are added into the
design of I&C systems and the DEC-B functions of SAS subsystem are allocated to
the dedicated cabinet. HKS system is used for the event of design basis accident
with SPPA-T2000 platform failure. SAS DEC-B and SA I&C are used for DEC-B
events together.
3.5
Summary
Table 1 is the situation of digital I&C system applied in CHINA. This table
introduces the NPP’s platform, supplier, non-1E platform and DAS/ATWT situa-
tion. It contains ﬁve types of NPP and the DAS system of Sects. 3.1–3.4 is
included.
174
J.-B. Liu et al.

4
Conclusions
We can make a thinking and conclusion from the introduction and comparison of
the different DAS system.
The DAS system of AP1000 has the most comprehensive and deepest diverse
means in design. It uses a different I&C platform compared with protection system
(especially different from control system and its digital technology is based on
FPGA). Besides it uses a different shutdown strategy and has part of automatic
functions of the reactor protection system and manual functions. There are adequate
Table 1 Digital I&C system situation applied in China
NPP
1E
platform
Supplier
Non-1E
platform
DAS/ATWT situation
Tianwan1,2
TXS
AREVA
TXP
Only ATWT system
(Seismic)
Lingao3,4
TXS
AREVA
TXP
Tianwan3,4
TXS
AREVA
SPPA-T2000
Taishan1,2
TXS
AREVA
SPPA-T2000
ATWT+HKS, same with
Sect. 3.4 introduction
(Seismic)
Hongyanhe1–4
Meltac
Mitsubishi
Hollias
Only ATWT system
(Seismic)
Ningde1–4
Meltac
Mitsubishi
Hollias
Yangjiang1–4
Meltac
Mitsubishi
Hollias
Fangchenggang1,2
Meltac
Mitsubishi
Hollias
Fuqing1–4
TRICON
INVENSYS
FOXBORO
I/A
DAS system is based on
non-1E platform, same with
Sect. 3.2 introduction
(Seismic)
Fangjiashan1,2
TRICON
INVENSYS
FOXBORO
I/A
Changjiang1,2
TRICON
INVENSYS
FOXBORO
I/A
Sanmen1,2
Common
Q
Westinghouse
Ovation
DAS system is based on
FPGA technology, same
with Sect. 3.3 introduction
(Non-seismic)
Haiyang1,2
Common
Q
Westinghouse
Ovation
Yangjiang5,6
FirmSys
CTEC
HOLLiAS-N
DAS system is based on
diverse platform compared
with protection system. It is
like Sect. 3.2, but added
some functions such as
system-level and
device-level manual
functions, instrument
indications and alarms (the
ﬁnal solution is not
conﬁrmed yet)
(Seismic)
The Situation and Suggestion of Diversity Actuation …
175

instrument indications and alarms provided in the DAS Panel station and processor
cabinets. DAS system also uses a different dedicated driver interface and sensor.
The only drawback is that the DAS system is not designed to be ant seismic, just
not caused an inadvertent actuation of a squib valve.
M310 and EPR model does not set up a separate DAS system strictly.
Though EPR adds HKS system to ensure safe shutdown when the event of design
basis accident with SPPA-T2000 platform failure. However it does not set up
automatic functions in response of design basis accidents with failure of TXS safety
platform. There is still much room for improvement.
M310 plus model takes many effective measures in diversity design such as
automatic trip and ESF functions of DAS system. But it does not contain
system-level and device-level manual functions, independent parameters display,
sensors and driver interfaces are shared with protection system, so there is also
much room for improvement. Table 1 has shown that subsequent Yangjiang5,6 and
Hongyanhe5,6 units have some improvements in these aspects, but the ﬁnal solu-
tion is not determined.
HPR1000 (Hua-long Pressurized Reactor) project has reached the international
advanced level of third generation nuclear power technology in safety indicators
and technical performance. Its instrumentation and control system design can draw
on the above diversity strategy of DAS system, enhance advantages and avoid
disadvantages, to implement the principle of defense in depth and diversity.
Acknowledgements This work is supported by the soft subject “Research and standard devel-
opment of cyber security about digital I&C system in nuclear power plant”. Many people have
offered me valuable help in this work. I thank professor Zhong-Qiu WANG for helpful conver-
sation, Senior Engineer Yun-Bo ZHANG for assistance with the information material.
References
1. US NRC. NUREG/CR6303-1994, Method for Performing Diversity and Defense-in-Depth
Analyses of Reactor Protection Systems.
2. US
NRC.
NUREG/CR7007-2010,
Diversity
Strategies
for
Nuclear
Power
Plant
Instrumentation and Control Systems.
3. US NRC. NUREG 0800 Chapter 7-2007, Guidance for evaluation of diversity and defense
in-depth in digital computer-based instrumentation and control systems.
4. HAD 102/14-1988, Safety related instrument and control system in nuclear power plant.
5. HAD 102/16-2004, The important safety system based on computer software in nuclear
power plant.
6. Mao Congji, Wu qi (2012) Discussing the Design of Digitized I&C for NPP from the
Perspective of Safety Review. PROCESS AUTOMATION INSTRUMENTATION, vol.
7:39–42.
7. Zhang Yunbo, Zhang Mi, Huang Weijie, Mao Congji, Li Shixin, Yin Baojuan (2014)
Analysis of Diversity and Independence for ATWT Mitigation System in Nuclear Power
Plant. Nuclear Power Engineering, Vol. 35. No. 6:77–79.
176
J.-B. Liu et al.

8. Xiao Peng, Liu Hongchun, Zhou Jixiang, Guan Zhonghua (2014) Design of Diverse
Actuation System in Nuclear Power Plant. Nuclear Power Engineering, Vol. 35. No. 2:90–93.
9. YU Jinbo (2008) The diversity analysis of AP1000 drive system. Heilongjiang science and
technology information, Vol. 33:53–54.
10. JIN Si-qi, PENG Jin, PENG Hua-qing, ZHOU Wei-hua (2012) Research on the strategy
coping with DCS platform failure of EPR. Nuclear Science and Engineering, Vol. 32 s2:105–
110.
The Situation and Suggestion of Diversity Actuation …
177

The Application of the Wireless Sensor
Network in Intelligent Monitoring
of Nuclear Power Plants
Jianghai Li, Xiaojing Kang, Zhenhai Long, Jia Meng
and Xiaojin Huang
Abstract The wireless sensor network (WSN) has great potential in monitoring
equipment and processes of nuclear power plants (NPPs). The WSN can not only
lower the cost of regular monitoring, but also enable the capability to achieve
intelligent monitoring. The massive and heterogeneous monitoring data collected
by the WSN can contribute various monitoring applications, including the cyber
and physical security defense, the fault detection and diagnosis, and the advanced
operation and maintenance. The Wi-Fi technology is promising to be the underlying
platform for the WSN in NPPs. Speciﬁc data-driven statistical algorithms for
anomaly detection and identiﬁcation are demonstrated.
Keywords Nuclear power plants  Wireless sensor networks  Intelligent
monitoring  Cyber security  Fault diagnosis  Nuclear security
1
Introduction
The sensor network based on wireless communication technology has been widely
used in industry, agriculture, military, transportation and other ﬁelds, but not yet in
nuclear power plants (NPPs). In China, the wireless system in NPPs is used merely
for voice communication, e.g. the wireless telephone system in the AP1000 NPP
designed by Westinghouse. Around the world, a few NPPs apply the wireless
technology to data transmission, equipment monitoring, radiation measurement,
personnel positioning, ﬁre control and video surveillance [1]. The advantages of the
wireless communication technology are not fully played.
J. Li (&)  X. Huang
Key Laboratory of Advanced Reactor Engineering and Safety of Ministry of Education,
Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Nuclear Energy Technology,
Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology of Tsinghua University,
Energy Science Building, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
e-mail: lijianghai@tsinghua.edu.cn
X. Kang  Z. Long  J. Meng
Chinergy Co., Ltd, Beijing, China
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_20
179

At present, the process control system of NPPs is mainly composed of wired
connection between instruments and the Distributed Control System (DCS).
Instrument signals and control commands are transmitted by hard wires. Although
the wired connection is assumed to be safer and more reliable, it brings a relative
high cost of the Instrumentation and Control (I&C) system and a fairly complex
layout of the plant. There are tens of thousands of devices in a nuclear power unit.
Only a few important devices related with nuclear safety, such as the main pump,
are under the comprehensive monitoring by DCS [6]. More than half of devices are
out of the monitoring by DCS, due to the limited number of DCS input/output (I/O)
channels. The I/O channel number is constrained not only by the cost of DCS
modules, but also by the conﬁned space occupied by DCS cabinets. Moreover, a
large number of cables connecting devices over the plant would require more cable
trays which may lead to space collision problems for design and construction.
Applying the wireless sensor network (WSN) in monitoring part of equipment
and processes in NPPs can effectively alleviate the above problems. The wireless
sensors are able to send monitoring information back to the control center via
wireless channels. Therefore, the number of wired I/O channels of DCS could be
reduced under the same monitoring requirements. The replacement of some wired
cables with wireless connection will create the beneﬁts of fewer cables and trays,
less space for I&C equipment, and the shorter design and construction period.
Wireless sensor networks can not only lower the cost of regular monitoring, but
also enable the capability to achieve higher levels of monitoring. With wireless
sensor networks, massive and heterogeneous data about equipment and processes
can be obtained. These rich monitoring data offer brand new possibilities for the
fault detection and diagnosis, the advanced operation and maintenance, the physical
and cyber security defense.
To achieve such high levels of intelligent monitoring, three questions need to be
answered. Q1: what kinds of process variables and equipment parameters need to
be included into monitoring? Q2: how the massive and heterogeneous data can be
transmitted via the WSN? Q3: how do we deal with the large scale of data to realize
intelligent monitoring?
Therest ofthispaperisorganizedasfollows.Whatdatatomonitor inQ1dependson
intelligent monitoring schemes for various scenarios. Three monitoring schemes for
different applications are proposed in Sect. 2. How to transmit data in Q2 is speciﬁed in
wireless protocols. In Sect. 3, wireless protocols employed by the WSN are compared
and other important issues are discussed. We also demonstrate speciﬁc data processing
algorithms related with Q3 in Sect. 4. Conclusions are made in Sect. 5.
2
Intelligent Monitoring Schemes for Various Scenarios
Intelligent monitoring with rich information about processes and equipment will
make a great beneﬁt for safety and economy efﬁciency of NPPs. Currently, the
amount and types of monitoring information adopted by NPPs are for achieving the
180
J. Li et al.

control performance in normal operation or for actuating protections in abnormal
occurrences. However, it has not given full considerations to aspects of cyber
security, fault diagnosis, and smart maintenance. To realize such high level of
intelligent monitoring, massive and heterogeneous data are required [10]. Multiple
types of data out of the scope of DCS monitoring can be included into intelligent
monitoring with the WSN, such as radio-frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) tags data,
video camera data, and vibration sensor data. Some examples will be elaborated
below to show how the rich information could contribute to cyber-attack detection,
fault diagnosis and recovering, and nuclear security.
To detect cyber-attacks on electrical motors in the Stuxnet scenario, heterogeneous
observations besides the rotational speed (rpm) of a motor can be supplemented with
the WSN. A motor under cyber-attacks which does not rotate smoothly will make
unusual noises and eventually cause abnormal vibration of the motor case. Thus a
variety of wireless sensors could be positioned around the motor to provide diverse
information. An infrared thermometer placed above the motor can observe its tem-
perature increase. A vibration sensor laid on the surface of the motor case can measure
its vibration. A microphone deployed beside the motor can hear its noise. If there is a
cyber-attack aiming to destroy the motor by disturbing its rotation, not only the
rotational speed would go wrong, but anomalies will occurs in signals of the infrared
thermometer, the vibration sensor, and the microphone as well. The diverse infor-
mation about the motor could help to build anomaly detection against cyber-attacks.
Another example shows fault diagnosis and recovering with wireless monitoring
data. The feed water ﬂow in NPPs measured by the ﬂowmeter could be send back to
the process control system via the wired cables as well as the wireless channel. The
wireless data serves as a diverse backup for the wired data. The backup data can
verify the wired data to detect malfunctions of cables or control modules. If the fault
is identiﬁed, the wireless data can substitute for the faulty data to maintain the
continuous monitoring.
The third example demonstrates how the RFID technology and wireless net-
works can strengthen the security of nuclear material. The RFID tag is composed of
memory, modulator, and wireless antenna. They can be attached on any nuclear
material containers or packages that require rigorous monitoring. The information
about nuclear material can be recorded and updated on the RFID tags.
Through RFID reader, the information on tags can be read in a contact-less way.
Meanwhile, the positions of nuclear material can be localized and tracked by RFID
tags and readers pair. The up-to-data information retrieval and the localization by
RFID can reduce risk of nuclear material loss.
3
Wireless Issues for the WSN in NPPs
To employ wireless technologies to transmit the monitoring data in NPPs, three
major concerns need to be comprehensively considered. They are the electromag-
netic compatibility of wireless devices, the security of wireless networks, and
protocols selection for the requirements of wireless applications.
The Application of the Wireless Sensor Network …
181

For the ﬁrst concern, wireless devices must be electromagnetically compatible
(EMC) with the existing I&C systems. The power level of wireless sensors is
usually below 20 mW. In the EMC standard IEC 61000-4-3 (GB/T 17626.3), note
4 in Sect. 5.2 states: “Other systems operating in this frequency range, e.g. radio
LANs operating at 2.4 GHz or higher frequencies, are generally very low power
(typically lower than 100 mW), so they are much less likely to present signiﬁcant
problems.”
For the second one, wireless transmission in opening space makes the network
platform vulnerable to external malicious attacks. Thus wireless platform must be
based on a private network. With the advanced technologies of encryption,
authorization, channel fault-tolerance and security certiﬁcation, the wireless net-
work can be guaranteed to be reliable and secure.
For the third one, more and more applications have been or are going to be built
on the wireless platform of NPPs, such as voice communication, personnel posi-
tioning, and radiation dose monitoring. The requirements of future wireless appli-
cations need to be taken into account in advance. The characteristics of the wireless
platform in NPPs should be as follows.
1. High bandwidth;
2. Lower RF power, while covering a wide range;
3. Scalable and extensible with the capacity of sharing components;
4. Widespread use of communication protocols supported by industry.
Wireless technologies which have been employed in NPPs in China include:
Wi-Fi, McWill, PHS and TDD (Table 1). Currently these technologies are mainly
used for voice communication. The great potential of wireless data communication
has not yet to be fulﬁlled. Only McWill and Wi-Fi technologies have the potential
for the data communication. They have the properties of high bandwidth, high
security, and terminal roaming handoff. However McWill causes higher RF power,
thus only allows one-way communication for mobile receiver in nuclear island [7].
Wi-Fi technology with 2.4 GHz band meets all the above requirements of wireless
applications in NPPs. The high bandwidth of communication, the openness of
protocols and the scalability of the systems make the Wi-Fi suitable for a variety of
applications, such as wireless monitoring, emergency communications and mobile
operation. .
4
Data Processing Algorithms for Intelligent Monitoring
To fuse a large scale of data collected by the WSN to realize intelligent monitoring,
speciﬁc data processing algorithms are required. Two statistical algorithms for fault
detection and fault classiﬁcation are demonstrated below.
182
J. Li et al.

Table 1 Comparison of wireless technologies in NPPs
Tech
McWill
WiFi
PHS
TDD
Spec.
Frequency band
1875–1805 MHz
Need licenses
2.4 GHz
Free band
1900–1920 MHz
Need licenses
800 MHz
Need licenses
Bandwidth
15.36 Mbps
300 Mbps
64/128 Kbps
64 Kbps
Transmitting
power
Base station 30 W (outdoor)
Base station 10 mW (indoor)
Cell phone 2 W (outdoor)
Cell phone 10 mW (indoor)
Base station 0.1 W (indoor)
Base station 0.5 W (outdoor)
Cell phone 0.1 W
Base station
10 mW
Cell phone
10 mW
Base station 0.6–40 W
Cell phone 1.8 W
Coverage
(outdoor) (km)
4
0.5
0.5
5
Mobility (km/h)
120
50
40
100
Advancement
Better
Great
Normal
Good
Security
Encryption, group function,
authorization, channel
fault-tolerance and security
certiﬁcation
Encryption, group function,
authorization, channel fault-tolerance
and security certiﬁcation
AI encryption
Authorization, P2P encryption
Industrial
cluster
Scarcely
More than 300 alliance member
Weed out
TETRA/PDT/GT800/GoTa/iDEN
Functionality
Dispatcher
voice/note/data/real-time
video
Dispatcher voice/note/data/HD real-time
video/location
Voice/note
Voice/note
The Application of the Wireless Sensor Network …
183

4.1
KPCA Algorithms for Fault Detection
Kernel principal component analysis (KPCA) performs a nonlinear mapping from
the high dimensional input space to the lower dimensional feature space through
kernel function. It greatly simpliﬁes the calculation through converting inner pro-
duct computation into kernel function calculation. In KPCA, x 2 RM are projected
onto feature space U : RM ! F through a nonlinear mapping function. The
covariance can be expressed as,
C ¼ 1
N
X
N
n¼1
UðxnÞUðxnÞT
ð1:1Þ
where UðxnÞ is the n th sample in the feature space with zero mean and unit
variance. N is the total number of the samples. Because UðÞ is usually hard to
obtain, kernel matrix K is used,
kij¼kðxi; xjÞ ¼ UðxiÞ; UðxjÞ


ð1:2Þ
Here, the radial basis function is used as the kernel function.
By calculating ka ¼ Ka, it yields the orthonormal eigenvectors a1; a2; . . .; aN,
and the corresponding eigenvalues k1  k2      kN. The dimensionality can be
reduced by retaining only the ﬁrst R eigenvectors. The score vector tk can be
obtained as,
tk ¼ vk; UðxÞ
h
i ¼
X
N
n¼1
ak
nkðxn; xÞ
ð1:3Þ
where v ¼ P
N
n¼1
anUðxnÞ.
To apply KPCA algorithm to condition monitoring and fault diagnosis of nuclear
power plants, monitoring statistical control charts, Hotelling T2 and SPE, need to be
constructed to reﬂect the operating condition.
Hotelling T2 statistic is the standard sum of squares of principal component
vectors.
T2 ¼ t1; t2; . . .; tp


K1 t1; t2; . . .; tp

T
ð1:4Þ
where K ¼ diag k1; k2; . . .; kp


. The Hotelling T2 statistic conﬁdence limit can be
estimated by F-distribution,
T2
lim ¼ RðN þ 1ÞðM  1Þ
N2  NR
Fa;R;MR
ð1:5Þ
184
J. Li et al.

where Fa;R;NR is the upper 100a% critical point of the F-distribution with R and
M  R degrees of freedom, and a is the signiﬁcance level.
SPE statistic is the error between the change trend of each sample and the
statistical model. SPE statistic in the feature space is deﬁned as:
SPE ¼
U x
ð Þ  ^UR x
ð Þ

2¼
X
N
i
t2
i 
X
R
i
t2
i
ð1:6Þ
where ^UR x
ð Þ ¼ P
R
i
tivi. The SPE statistic conﬁdence limit can be estimated as the
following equation,
SPElim ¼ gv2
h;a
ð1:7Þ
where g ¼ m
2m, h ¼ 2m2
m . m and m are the estimated mean and variance of SPE
respectively.
Faults can be detected by judging whether T2 and SPE statistics exceed the
respective conﬁdence limit or not. In recent years, KPCA has shown its capability
of nonlinear process monitoring. KPCA was used to detect faults in two example
systems [3, 8]. It was found that KPCA could effectively capture the nonlinear
relationship between the process variables. The problem of fault detection was
addressed in mechanical systems using a KPCA-based method [9]. In view of the
nonlinear characteristics in practical process of NPPs, the KPCA technique pro-
vides a method for fault detection in NPPs, which is a topic that has not been
explored in the literature. The architecture of the KPCA-based fault detection
algorithm is shown in Fig. 1.
ObservaƟon Sequence
ObservaƟon Sequence
Check 
control 
limits
Fault  1
1
KPCA
Fault
ClassiﬁcaƟon
Fault
ClassiﬁcaƟon
Fault  l
KPCAl
Fault  L
KPCAL
Fig. 1 Architecture of the KPCA-based fault detection algorithm
The Application of the Wireless Sensor Network …
185

4.2
SVM Algorithms for Fault Classiﬁcation
Support vector machine (SVM) is adopted to identify the faults. Deﬁne the training
set xi 2 Rn and yi 2 f þ 1; 1g their class values. To construct the optimal
hyperplane H : w  UðxÞ þ b ¼ 0 that can separate the two-class samples, a non-
negative relaxation variable ni  0 is introduced. To construct the optimal classi-
ﬁcation plane is to solve the following optimization problem:
min
1
2 wTw þ C
X
n
i¼1
ni
s:t:
yi½w  UðxiÞ þ b  1  ni;
i ¼ 1; 2; . . .; n
ð1:8Þ
where C is the penalty parameter. By using Lagrange function, the above problem
can be transformed into
Lðw; b; n; a; bÞ ¼
X
n
i¼1
ai  1
2
X
n
i¼1
X
n
j¼1
aiajyiyj½UðxiÞ  UðxjÞ
ð1:9Þ
where ai is Lagrange multiplier. By replacing ½UðxiÞ  UðxjÞ by Kðxi; xjÞ, it can be
transformed into the dual quadratic programming problem as follows:
max
a
X
n
i¼1
ai  1
2
X
n
i¼1
X
n
j¼1
aiajyiyjKðxi; xjÞ
s:t:
P
n
i¼1
yiai ¼ 0
0  ai  C; i ¼ 1; 2; . . .; n
8
<
:
ð1:10Þ
Given the test samples x, classiﬁcation function of SVM classiﬁer can be written
as:
f ðxÞ ¼ sgn½w  UðxÞ þ b ¼ sgn½
X
n
i¼1
aiyiKðxi; xÞ þ b
ð1:11Þ
where sgn is the sign function.
When constructing classiﬁer m, the output of Class m samples is trained as 1 and
the output of the rest samples is trained as −1. The test sample x is ﬁrst put into
classiﬁer 1. If the output of classiﬁcation function f 1ðxÞ is 1, x belongs to Class 1.
Otherwise, x is put into classiﬁer 2. If the output of f 2ðxÞ is 1, x belongs to Class 2.
Otherwise, x is put into classiﬁer 3. The rest can be done in the same manner. When
x is put into classiﬁer k −1, if the output of f k1ðxÞ is 1, x belongs to Class k −1.
Otherwise, x belongs to Class k (Fig. 2). SVM has been widely employed in fault
classiﬁcation. Four fault types of power transformer were identiﬁed by the trained
186
J. Li et al.

multi-layer SVM classiﬁer [4]. A hybrid two stage one-against-all SVM approach
was proposed for fault diagnosis of defective rolling element bearings [5]. An
improved SVM classiﬁer was developed to fault diagnosis of actual analog circuits
[2]. This paper is ﬁrst concerned with fault detection and isolation problems for
NPPs by combining KPCA and SVM. Thus, KPCA-SVM based algorithm is
expected to realize the fault diagnosis of NPP with the WSN in the future work .
5
Conclusion
Although the wireless sensor network cannot substitute for the wired instruments
and DCS at present, the WSN can serve as a diverse backup for non-safety I&C
systems. Meanwhile, the WSN collecting massive and heterogeneous data is able to
support a great many of intelligent monitoring applications, including the cyber
security defense, the fault detection and diagnosis, and the security of nuclear
material in NPPs. Three major concerns about applying wireless technology in
NPPs are discussed. By comparison, the Wi-Fi technology is promising to be the
underlying platform for wireless data communication in NPPs. Statistical data
processing algorithms, KPCA-SVM based algorithms for anomaly detection and
identiﬁcation, are demonstrated. Speciﬁc algorithms for other applications need to
be developed in the future work.
Acknowledgements This paper is jointly supported by the National S&T Major Project (Grant
No. ZX06901) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61502270).
References
1. Bi D, Zhang J (2010) Applications of wireless Technology in nuclear power plants and
research on its key issue (in Chinese). Process Automation Instrumentation 31:47–53.
2. Cui J, Wang YR (2011) A novel approach of analog circuit fault diagnosis using support
vector machines classiﬁer. Measurement 44:281–289.
3. Elaissi I, Jaffel I, Taouali O et al (2013) Online prediction model based on the SVD–KPCA
method. ISA Transactions 52:96–104.
Fig. 2 Architecture of the SVM-based fault classiﬁcation algorithm
The Application of the Wireless Sensor Network …
187

4. Gan LV, Cheng HZ, Zhai HB et al (2005) Fault diagnosis of power transformer based on
multi-layer SVM classiﬁer. Electric Power Systems Research 7:1–7.
5. Gryllias KC, Antoniadis IA (2012) A Support Vector Machine approach based on physical
model training for rolling element bearing fault detection in industrial environments.
Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 25:326–344.
6. Hashemian HM (2011) Wireless sensors for predictive maintenance of rotating equipment in
research reactors. Annals of Nuclear Energy 38:665–680.
7. Jiang S, Chai B, Cao Y et al (2010) Study of the technical solution to the dedicated wireless
communication system in nuclear power plant (in Chinese). Chinese Journal of Nuclear
Science and Engineering 30:275–279.
8. Lee JM, Yoo CK, Choi SW (2004) Nonlinear process monitoring using kernel principal
component analysis. Chemical Engineering Science 59:223–234.
9. Nguyen VH, Golinval JC (2010) Fault detection based on kernel principal component
analysis. Engineering Structures 32(11):3683–3691.
10. Qin SJ (2012) Survey on data-driven industrial process monitoring and diagnosis. Annual
Reviews in Control 36:220–234.
188
J. Li et al.

Performance Comparison of Tri-level
Switching AMB Power Ampliﬁers Based
on Different Current Sensors and Control
Methods
Kai Zhang, Yang Xu and Jin-Ping Dong
Abstract Active magnetic bearings are advanced bearing components for High
Temperature Gas-cooled Reactors. As an important part of active magnetic bear-
ings, switching power ampliﬁers are designed to accurately convert a command
signal to a real bearing coil current. Current ripples of the power ampliﬁers can be
reduced effectively based on different tri-level control methods. Their performances
are different. Even when the same control method is used, the performances of
ampliﬁers using electrical circuits with different hardware components are different.
To reduce current ripples of ampliﬁers, the performance of ampliﬁer circuits with
different current sensors and different control methods were studied. With the same
control method, three kinds of current sensors were used in a power ampliﬁer and
their performances were compared. It was shown that hardware delay caused the
performance difference. With the same current sensor, a tri-level Sampling-Hold
method and a Pulse-Width Modulation (PWM) method were used to control the
same ampliﬁer driver. The accuracy of the tri-level PWM ampliﬁer was better.
The reason for the performance difference between the two methods was discussed.
The experimental results were provided.
Keywords High temperature gas-cooled reactor  Pulse-width modulation  Power
ampliﬁer active magnetic bearing
1
Introduction
Because of their advantages of no wear, no oil, high speed and low maintenance
cost, active magnetic bearings (AMB) have been widely used in many industry
applications such as vacuum pumps, grinding machines, ﬂywheels, turbo machines
K. Zhang (&)  Y. Xu  J.-P. Dong
Department of Engineering Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
e-mail: zhangkai@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_21
189

and so on [1, 3]. They are also used in the helium fan for High Temperature
Gas-cooled Reactors [4] as an irreplaceable advanced bearing technology.
As an important part of AMB, a power ampliﬁer is used to convert a current
command signal to a real current in a magnet coil. The current makes the magnet
producing a magnetic force to control the movement of a rotor with ferromagnetic
material. In an AMB system, power loss of its power ampliﬁers can’t be ignored.
Generally, a switching power ampliﬁer is preferred over a linear power ampliﬁer
considering system power loss. But current ripples in a coil should be reduced
effectively to obtain a high accuracy control current [5, 7, 8].
Traditional switching power ampliﬁers are controlled by two-level methods
including the two-level Pulse-Width Modulation (PWM) method, the two-level
Hysteresis method, the two-level Sampling-Hold method and the two-level
Minimum Pulse-Width (MPW) method [5, 7, 8]. For the two-level ampliﬁers, the
voltage on the driven coil is a DC link voltage (positive or negative) and the coil is
in a charging state or a discharging state. The current ripples of a two-level
ampliﬁer are large when the DC link voltage is increased to achieve a high
bandwidth for the ampliﬁer. They cause low current accuracy and high power loss
[2, 6, 9]. To reduce the ripples, tri-level ampliﬁers are developed in AMB appli-
cation. Compared with the two-level ampliﬁers, an idle state is added in a tri-level
power ampliﬁer to smooth the coil current.
The work is focused on the inﬂuence of hardware components and control
methods of power ampliﬁers. The inﬂuence of the hardware components is mainly
in the dynamic response speed. For the electrical circuit of an ampliﬁer, the most
sensitive component for the response speed is the current sensor used. When dif-
ferent current sensors with the different respond speed were used, the corresponding
ripple performance was studied. It was shown that the hardware delay caused the
performance difference. At the same time, the control methods used also inﬂuence
the ripple performance. With the same current sensor, a tri-level Sampling-Hold
method and a Pulse-Width Modulation (PWM) method were used to control a
current ampliﬁer. Their performances were compared. The reason for the perfor-
mance difference between the two methods was discussed. The experimental results
showed that the tri-level PWM ampliﬁer could achieve better current accuracy.
2
Working Principle of a Tri-level Power Ampliﬁer
Compared with a two-level ampliﬁer, a new state called idle-state is added in a
tri-level ampliﬁer. In an idle-state, the voltage on the coil driven is nearly zero; the
resistor in the coil current loop is low and the current ﬂows with very low power
loss. The topology for the output stage can be a half bridge or a full bridge. They
can both used to achieve a tri-level current power ampliﬁer. The full bridge can be
even used to drive a bi-directional current [2].
190
K. Zhang et al.

In Fig. 1, a simpliﬁed structure of the full bridge topology circuit is shown. The
bridge contains four power transistors: Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4. A magnet coil is in the
middle of the bridge.
3
Realization of a Tri-level Power Ampliﬁer
There are different kinds of tri-level power ampliﬁers developed before, such as
tri-level Sampling-Hold ampliﬁers, tri-level Hysteresis ampliﬁers and tri-level PWM
ampliﬁers. These ampliﬁers have a similar structure as Fig. 2. Their differences are in
the control circuit (in Fig. 2) which is designed based on a special control method and
used to produce switch signals for the power transistors of the bridge.
The work about the control methods is focused on the two popular tri-level ampli-
ﬁers: the tri-level PWM ampliﬁer and the tri-level Sampling-Hold ampliﬁer. They are
the most used tri-level switching power ampliﬁers in magnetic bearing systems.
3.1
Tri-level Sampling-Hold Ampliﬁer
A tri-level Sampling-Hold switching ampliﬁer is based on a traditional two-level
Sampling-Hold switching ampliﬁer, and its switch control signals are produced by
speciﬁc designed timing logic modules or a truth table.
Fig. 1 Structure of the full
bridge topology circuit
Fig. 2 Structure of the
ampliﬁer circuit
Performance Comparison of Tri-level Switching …
191

There is a clock signal for the control circuit of the ampliﬁer. It determines the
working frequency of the power transistors. At every rising edge, the error of the
command signal and the measured current signal is sampled. Based on the sign of
the error, the control circuit produces four switching signals for the four bridge
power transistors separately and makes the coil enter a charging state or a dis-
charging state. During this clock period, the error is monitored continually. If the
sign of the error changed (from positive to minus or from minus to positive), the
coil enters an idle state until the next rising edge of the clock. Such a control
scheme insures that the power transistors won’t switch more than once within a
clock frequency and the switching frequency of the transistors can be reduced. Such
an ampliﬁer has the advantages of high stability, wide bandwidth, simple circuit and
low current ripple [2].
By reducing the switch frequency, the electromagnetic interference from high
frequency switch signals can be reduced. But the control scheme still has its dis-
advantages. When the change of the error sign just comes from a noise signal, the
ampliﬁer will enter an idle state because of a misjudgment until the next rising edge.
It reduces the response speed of the ampliﬁer and increases the current ripples.
3.2
Tri-level PWM Ampliﬁer
A PWM ampliﬁer uses a pair of bipolar triangular waves to compare with the
current error signal and gets the corresponding switch control commands. The time
curve of the error signal is divided into three regions by the triangular waves as
shown in Fig. 3. Region 1: the error signal is larger than the positive triangular
wave and the coil is in a charging state; region 2: the error signal is smaller than the
minus triangular wave and the coil is in a charging state; region 3: the error signal is
smaller than the positive triangular wave, larger than the minus triangular wave and
the coil is in a idle state. The control circuit is sensitive when the error is near the
cross point of the two triangular waves (e.g.: position a in Fig. 3). The ampliﬁer
usually charges or discharges here. When the error comes to the middle position of
Fig. 3 Region division for
the time curve of the error
signal
192
K. Zhang et al.

region 3, error tolerance can be relatively larger and the ampliﬁer is usually in an
idle state. The tri-level PWM control scheme has the advantages of high stability,
low current ripple and controllable switching frequency [2, 9].
4
Inﬂuence of Current Sensors
Many researchers have discussed the performance difference between tri-level
ampliﬁers and two-level ampliﬁers [2, 5]. For one special tri-level ampliﬁer of
AMBs, it is seldom discussed what happens when time delay of hardware used in
the ampliﬁer changes.
The most sensitive component for the response speed is the current sensor. For
one tri-level Sampling-Hold ampliﬁer working with a clock of 40 kHz, different
current sensors were used to feedback the coil current signal. These sensors had
different time delay and they were used to study the inﬂuence of the response speed.
The test coil used for the ampliﬁer has a register of 3.4 X and an inductance of
3.6 mH. The DC link voltage used is E = 28 V.
There were three kinds of current sensors being used in the ampliﬁer. They were
a TamuraL18P hall current sensor (Tamura Sensor), a LEM LA28-NP hall current
sensor (LEM Sensor) and an AD 8211 voltage current sensor (Voltage Sensor). The
Tamura Sensor and the LEM Sensor were both hall current sensors. They measured
the current ﬂowing in a coil through hall-effect. The Voltage Sensor obtained the
current value by measuring the voltage on a sampling resister connected with the
coil in serious.
The response speeds of the three sensors were different. The Voltage Sensor was
the fastest and the LEM Sensor was the slowest. When the command signal for the
ampliﬁer was +1 V (1A command) DC signal and the ampliﬁer worked with the
three sensors respectively, the corresponding coil current ripple waves were
recorded by an oscilloscope as shown in Fig. 4. It was seen that the ampliﬁer
achieved the smallest current ripple when the Voltage Sensor was used. If not
considering transient switch noise in the current signal, a current accuracy of
40 mA peak-to-peak value was obtained. As a comparison, the current accuracy
was about 60 mA for the LEM Sensor and 40–60 mA for the Tamura Sensor.
When the Tamura Sensor was used, the ripple waves had two looks as c1 and c2 in
Fig. 4 respectively.
If the ampliﬁer would enter a charging state, the corresponding transistors should
be opened. When the three sensors were used to provide the feedback signal
respectively, the relationship between the error signal and the switch-on signal in
the time domain was shown in Fig. 5. In the ﬁgure, the curve 1 was the output
signal of the corresponding current sensor and the curve 2 was the sign signal of the
current error. When the sign signal was high, it meant that the current in the coil
was higher than the command signal. From the curve 1, it was easy to identify the
moment that the transistor opened. The time between the transistor opening and the
sign signal changing was called the inverting time and labeled as T in Fig. 5.
Performance Comparison of Tri-level Switching …
193

In Fig. 5, it was seen that the T for the ampliﬁers used the three different current
sensors were 2.60, 3.24 and 5.40 us respectively. If the sensors had no delay time,
the T should be a constant T0. The sensors caused an additional delay time Tlag.
Fig. 4 Current ripple waves of tri-level sampling-hold ampliﬁer with different current sensors
Fig. 5 The relationship between the error signal and the switch-on signal in the time domain
194
K. Zhang et al.

The total T was the sum of T0 and Tlag. Obviously, the Tlag for the three sensors
were different. Tlag for the LEM Sensor was the largest. In its ﬁrst charging state, the
transistor could not close in time because of Tlag. When the next rising edge of the
clock came, the current was only a bit lower than its command signal. It caused a
very short adjacent charging time and the control circuit let the current move to an
obvious minus current peak in the following idle state. The current curve looked as
working at a half clock frequency as shown in Fig. 5b. The delay of the Voltage
Sensor was the smallest; its positive current peak was smaller than the LEM Sensor.
When the next rising edge came, the current had been obviously below the command
signal and an obvious charging state followed after that. It produced the lowest
current ripple level and worked at the clock frequency. The time delay of the Tamura
Sensor was larger than the Voltage Sensor and smaller than the LEM Sensors. So its
current ripple level was within the level of the other two sensors. The similar
phenomenon could be seen in the working frequency as shown in Fig. 5.
To further illustrate the inﬂuence of the delay on current curves, a typical curve
was divided into three regions in Fig. 6. In Fig. 6, the curve “a” was a real current
error curve and the curve “b” was the current error measurement curve of a current
sensor. In the region 1, the ampliﬁer was in a charging state and the current curve
rose quickly. Because the initial error was relatively large, the charging time was
relatively long. The delay time between the zero-crossing time of the curve “a” and
the curve “b” was obvious. It caused an overshoot of the current curve “a”. In the
region 2, the ampliﬁer was in an idle state and the current curve changed slowly. So
the sensor could more easily follow the current signal. Because the overshoot in the
region 1 was relatively large and the current changed slowly in the region 2, at the
end of the idle state in the region 2, the error value of the current was small. After
the idle state, the ampliﬁer began a new charging state as the region 3. In the region
3, because of the small error value, the curve “a” reached zero in a short time; the
curve “b” reached zero too soon after that. When the curve “b” reached zero, the
control circuit let the charging state end and the ampliﬁer began a new idle state.
The idle state would not end until the coming of the next clock rising edge. Then a
new large initial error would come and the ampliﬁer would start a new circle. If the
region 3 was ignored and the two closing idle states were combined, the working
frequency of the ampliﬁer looked just like half of the clock frequency.
Fig. 6 Typical current waves
for a tri-level ampliﬁer with a
current sensor
Performance Comparison of Tri-level Switching …
195

5
Inﬂuence of Control Methods
The control methods used also inﬂuence the ripple performance. The tri-level
Sampling-Hold method and PWM method were compared when they were used to
control the same ampliﬁer with the Tamura Sensor. They worked based on the same
bridge stage and the same current sensor.
When the command signal was a +1 V (1A command) DC signal, the experi-
mental current waves were shown as Fig. 7. If the high frequency switching noise
was ignored, it was shown that the tri-level PWM method obtained a smaller current
ripple and higher current accuracy compared with the tri-level Sampling-Hold
method.
Based on the different working principle compared with the Sampling-Hold
method, the PWM method could monitor the current error signal in a whole clock
period and it could more effectively reduce noise disturbance. Moreover, there was
a good deviation correction effect in the PWM method when it controlled the
transistors based on the comparison results between the command signal and the
triangular waves. Without loss of generality, as shown in Fig. 8, the error signal
changed from zero at the beginning; the triangular wave changed with a constant
velocity of V1; it rose in the region “a” and dropped in the region “b”; the error
signal changed with a velocity of V2(t). V1 could be used as a reference to limit V2
Fig. 7 Current waves of the two control methods
Fig. 8 Deviation correction
effect in the PWM method
196
K. Zhang et al.

and the integration of V2 in the time domain (corresponding to the average
velocity). In the region “a”, if the formula (1) was satisﬁed, the ampliﬁer stayed in
an idle state. On the contrary, if the current error increased rapidly as i1 in the
ﬁgure, the control circuit would change to a recharging state.
j
Zto
0
V2ðtÞdtj \ jV1toj
ð1Þ
In the region “b”, the triangular wave dropped with a constant velocity of −V1.
If the average velocity magnitude of the error signal was less than V1 as i2 shown
in Fig. 8, the control circuit would change from the idle state to a recharging state.
With the deviation correction effect, the ampliﬁer allowed the current having a
small ﬂuctuation to decrease the corresponding switching frequency. At the same
time, a large ﬂuctuation could be restrained in time to assure a high quality current
wave. If the error signal was compared with the minus triangular wave, similar
things happened.
When the tri-level Sampling-Hold ampliﬁer stayed in a charging or discharging
state, it closed the opened transistors and entered an idle state once the coil current
reached the command value. If there was a non-ignorable time delay in the circuit,
Fig. 9 Current waves of the PWM ampliﬁer
Performance Comparison of Tri-level Switching …
197

the delay would cause an additional current overshoot. For the tri-level PWM
ampliﬁer, as shown in Fig. 8, the control circuit could monitor the error signal
during the whole clock frequency; the deviation correction effect could correct the
misjudgment from noise signal; the inﬂuence of the time delay and some other
unexpected circuit noise could be reduced and the current quality could be
improved.
The PWM method was tested in a test ampliﬁer. When the reference signal was a
square signal with a frequency of 500 Hz and peak-to-peak amplitude of 1 V, the
reference signal and the current signal were measured and shown in Fig. 9. In the
ﬁgure, the curve 1 was the current signal and curve 2 was the reference signal. In
Fig. 9b, it was seen that the ampliﬁer’s good performance in tracking a signal
step. After 3 charging periods, the current reached the command signal and the time
used was about 162 us. In Fig. 9c, the waves were recorded when the square signal
stayed at a constant voltage. It showed that the current ripples of the ampliﬁer were
small.
6
Experimental Comparison
To compare the performance of the Sampling-Hold method and the PWM method,
two control circuits based on the two methods respectively were designed and
manufactured. They were used to control the same power driver module. The power
driver module consisted of an Intelligent Power Module (IPM) output stage, a
current sensor and other necessary interface circuits. When the two control methods
were used to construct the corresponding ampliﬁers, the ampliﬁers had the same
hardware except the different control circuits. It was a good way to directly compare
the performance of the two control methods.
In experiments, the ampliﬁers were used to track a constant reference signal for 1
A. The current ripple comparison was shown in Fig. 10. The current ripples of the
Sampling-Hold
method
were
shown
in
Fig. 10a
and
the
corresponding
Fig. 10 Current ripple comparison
198
K. Zhang et al.

peak-to-peak value was about 200 mA. The current ripples of the PWM method
were shown in Fig. 10b and the corresponding peak-to-peak value was about
40 mA. It was shown that the current ripples of the PMM method were much lower
than that of the Sampling-Hold method.
7
Conclusions
For the tri-level switching power ampliﬁers of AMBs, the ampliﬁer performance
was inﬂuenced by its hardware speed and the control methods used. The inﬂuence
of the hardware components was checked by three kinds of current sensors. They
were used for the same ampliﬁer and the current ripples obtained respectively were
obviously different. With the same current sensor, the tri-level Sampling-Hold
method and the Pulse-Width Modulation (PWM) method were used to control the
same ampliﬁer circuit. The performance comparison showed that the accuracy of
the tri-level PWM method was much better than that of the tri-level Sampling-Hold
method. The reason for the performance difference was discussed. The deviation
correction effect of the PMW method could assure a high quality current wave. The
experimental results also proved it.
References
1. Gerhard Schweitzer, Eric H. Maslen, etc. Magnetic Bearings: Theory, Design, and Application
to Rotating Machinery [M]. Dordrecht, New York, Springer, 2009
2. LI Bin, Deng Zhiquan, Yan Yangguang. Current Mode Switching for Tri-state Ampliﬁers in
Magnetic Bearing Control System Supporting High Speed Motors [J], Power Electronics,
2003, 37(4): 52–55
3. Schweitzer G. Active Magnetic Bearings: Basic, Properties, and Applications of Active
Magnetic Bearings [M]. ETH Zurich, Switzerland: Verlag der Fachvereine Hochschulever-lag
AG an der ETH Zurich, 1994
4. Shi Lei, Zhao Lei, Yang Guojun, etc. Design and Experiments of the Active Magnetic Bearing
System for the HTR-10, 2nd International Topical Meeting on HIGH TEMPERATURE
REACTOR TECHNOLOGY, Beijing, China, September 22–24, 2004
5. Zhang Guangming, Chen Chun, Mei Lei, etc. The Future and Development of Power Ampliﬁer
for Magnetic Bearings [J], Small & Special Electrical Machines, 2012, 40(3): 73–76
6. Zhang Jing, et al. Synchronous Three-level PWM Power Ampliﬁer for Active Magnetic
Bearings [C]. Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on Magnetic Bearing,
Kanazawa, Japan, 1996: 277–282
7. Zhang Liang Fang Jiancheng. Analysis of Current Ripple and Implementation of Pulse Width
Modulation Switching Power Ampliﬁers for Active Magnetic Bearing [J], Transactions of
China Electrotechnical Society, 2007, 22(3): 13–20
8. Zang Xiaomin, Wang Xiaolin, Qiu Zhijian, etc. Research on Current Mode Tri-state
Modulation Technology in Switching Power Ampliﬁer for Magnetic Bearings [J], Proceedings
of the CSEE, 2004, 24(9): 167–172
9. Zeng Xueming, Xu Longxiang, Liu Zhengxun. Study of Three Level PWM Power Ampliﬁer
for AMB [J], Power Electronics, 2002, 36(3): 13–15
Performance Comparison of Tri-level Switching …
199

The Independence of Safety Digital I&C
System in Nuclear Power Plant
Xiang Jia, Zhong-Qiu Wang, Yun-Bo Zhang and Yin-Hui Guo
Abstract Independence is one way to improve the reliability of digital instru-
mentation and control (I&C) system in nuclear power plant, and relevant regulation
and standards give clear requirements about independence. Based on these regu-
lation and standards, this paper brieﬂy introduces the three means to achieve
independence: electrical isolation, physical separation, communication isolation.
Then it summarizes ﬁve aspects of the independence of digital I&C system. It is
useful to the design and review of the digital I&C system.
Keywords Nuclear power plant  Digital I&C system  Independence
1
Introduction
For the design of safety system in nuclear power plant, in order to improve the
system reliability, it usually adopts the redundancy and the diversity principle.
Independence is an important way to achieve effective redundancy and diversity.
X. Jia
Ministry of Environmental Protection, Beijing, China
e-mail: jia.xiang@mep.gov.cn
Z.-Q. Wang  Y.-B. Zhang (&)  Y.-H. Guo
I&C Department, Nuclear and Radiation Safety Center, Beijing, China
e-mail: zhangyunbo@chinansc.cn
Z.-Q. Wang
e-mail: wangzhongqiu@chinansc.cn
Y.-H. Guo
e-mail: Gyh86126@126.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_22
201

2
The Independence Means
HAF 102-2004 “nuclear power plant design and safety requirements” describes the
redundancy and independence of protection system in nuclear power plant should
be at least sufﬁcient to ensure that [1]:
No single failure results in loss of protection function;
The removal from service of any component or channel does not result in loss of the
necessary minimum redundancy, unless the acceptable reliability of operation of the
protection system can be otherwise demonstrated.
HAF 102-2004 also points out that the reliability of system can be improved by
maintaining the following features for independence in design:
1. Independence among redundant system components;
2. Independence between system components and the effects of postulated initi-
ating events (PIEs) such that, for example, a PIE does not cause the failure or
loss of a safety system or safety function that is necessary to mitigate the
consequences of that event;
3. Appropriate independence between or among systems or components of dif-
ferent safety classes; and
4. Independence between items important to safety and those not important to
safety.
GB/T13286 “The Independence Guidelines for Safety Electrical Equipment and
Circuits in Nuclear Power Plant” provides the guidelines for the independence of
safety electrical equipment and circuits [2].
Independence requirements can be reached by the following means.
2.1
The Electrical Isolation
The electrical isolation between the multiple parts of the system is used to reduce
the possibility of adverse interactions. Typically design measures of electrical
isolation include the use of isolation ampliﬁer, control switch, current transformers,
optical couplers, relays, circuit breakers and other equipment. GB/T13286 gives the
acceptable isolation device (Table 1).
2.2
The Physical Separation
The physical separation is used to reduce the possibility of the loss of the multiple
parts in the safety system caused by certain types of PIEs (such as ﬁres, chemical
explosions, plane crashes, ﬂying objects, ﬂooding, extreme temperature and
202
X. Jia et al.

humidity, etc.) and failures at the same time. It usually adopts geometric partition
(such as distance, direction, etc.), separated by a barrier or a combination of both
methods to achieve physical separation. Physical separation usually is applied to
redundant channels [3] (Table 2).
2.3
The Communication Isolation
The communication isolation can be used to prevent the spread of failures along the
communications path in redundant channels or between the safety component and
non-safety component, and prevent the loss of safety functions due to communi-
cation activity. GB/T13629 gives the means to meet the provisions of the com-
munication independence, and makes recommendations for communication
isolation methods. One is communication between computers in different safety
channels. Another is communication between safety and non-safety computers [4].
3
The Independence of Digital I&C System
For digital I&C system, it usually considers the following independence.
Table 1 Acceptable
isolation device
Isolation device
1
Ampliﬁers
2
Control switches
3
Current transformers
4
Fiber optic couplers
5
Photo-optical couplers
6
Relays
7
Transducers
8
Power packs
9
Circuit breakers
Table 2 Physical separation
Physical separation includes
1
Separation by geometry (such as distance or orientation)
2
Separation by barriers
3
Separation by a combination of these
The Independence of Safety Digital I&C System …
203

3.1
The Independence in Reactor Trip (RT) System
and Engineered Safety Features (ESF) System
Reactor protection system mainly includes reactor trip (RT) system and engineered
safety features (ESF) system [5]. RT system and ESF system usually adopt
redundant structure to meet the single failure criterion of safety system. Electrical
isolation and physical separation methods in their redundant structure design are
used to meet the independence requirements. Because of the data communication
between multiple safety systems, RT system and ESF system also should meet the
communications isolation requirement. The deterministic feature of software in
safety system can ensure the independence of the multiple safety system.
When protection system (RT system and ESF system) share the analog signals
with other systems, the electrical isolation is necessary to meet the independence
requirement.
It also should be meet the independence between the protection system and the
maintenance system.
3.2
The Independence Between the Diverse Actuation
System and RT System
The diverse actuation system (DAS) should be diversity to the RT system. For
independence, the application of analog equipment can overcome common cause
failure, and it also can adopt the diverse digital equipment to protection system.
When RT system share the analog signals with DAS system, the electrical isolation
is necessary to meet the independence requirement [6].
Anticipated transients without trip (ATWT) mitigation function is one function
of the DAS system, it should use different trigger variables or adopt diverse
transmitter with RT system.
3.3
The Independence Between the Control System
and Protection System
When protection system share the analog signals with control system, the electrical
isolation is necessary to meet the independence requirement. At the same time, the
communication isolation between them should be met. The design of independence
should use isolation devices between components and use different cable and power
circuit. For example, the communication between protection system and control
204
X. Jia et al.

system use isolation device to reach communication isolation, and the classiﬁcation
of this device should be safety. The use of isolation device can ensure the inde-
pendence of the protection system and control system (Fig. 1).
3.4
The Independence of Manual Control and Display
Manual control and display usually adopt analog device in nuclear power plant, the
signal which is shared with digital system should be electrical isolation to meet the
independence requirement. In order to improve the availability of the plant, manual
backup is usually provide to operator in the loss of digital device, so the plant can
be maintain in stable station over several hours.
The minimum safety manual control and display should include accident and
post-accident important information and the manual trigger of protection systems.
3.5
The Independence of Redundant Division
of Safety System
Redundant division of safety system shall be independent. The independence
between the redundant divisions can be met by the installation of digital I&C
cabinets in different rooms. It can ensure the capability of accomplishing the safety
function to a certain extent (Fig. 2).
Fig. 1 Communicate between protection system and control system
The Independence of Safety Digital I&C System …
205

4
Conclusion
Digital I&C system is the main development trend of nuclear power plant.
Independence is an important requirement to the safety of digital I&C system. The
main means of independence include electrical isolation, physical separation and
communication isolation. In the design, it should be consider the independence of
the independence in RT system and ESF system, the independence between the
DAS and RT system, the independence between control system and protection
system, the independence of manual control and display, the independence of
redundant division of safety system.
References
1. HAF102-2004, Safety Requirements of Nuclear Power Plant Design.
2. GB/T13286-2008, the Independence Guidelines for Safety Electrical Equipment and Circuits
in Nuclear Power Plant.
Fig. 2 The layout of digital I&C cabinets
206
X. Jia et al.

3. LU Chao (2012) Independence Design of Safety Class DCS System in Nuclear Power Plant,
Nuclear Science and Engineering. Vol. 32 Suppl. 2: 232–237.
4. GB/T13629, Applicable criteria for digital computers in safety systems of nuclear power
plants.
5. ZHENG Weizhi (2012) The Fault Analysis and Application of Reactor Protection System in
Nuclear Power Plant. Nuclear Electronics & Detection Technology, Vol. 32. No. 3: 337–341.
6. ZHANG Yunbo (2014) Analysis of Diversity and Independence for ATWT Mitigation System
in Nuclear Power Plant. Nuclear Power Engineering, Vol. 35. No. 6: 77–79.
The Independence of Safety Digital I&C System …
207

Study on Application of Veriﬁcation
and Validation to Digital Control Room
of Nuclear Power Plants
Yong-Bin Sun, Tao Bai and Li-Sheng Hu
Abstract Control rooms are the operational decision-making centres of nuclear
power plants, by which the plant performance and safety of operation would be
directly affected. It is estimated that almost 90% events and accidents happened in
nuclear power plants are caused by operator failures. Therefore, how to effectively
and efﬁciently maintain the plant’s safety and performance by the modern digital
control rooms is a critical topic due to their centralized and stacked display and
control modes. From the viewpoint of veriﬁcation and validation (V&V), the V&V
process and methods are summarized and some V&V key issues are focused in this
paper to ensure the quality of control rooms design.
Keywords Veriﬁcation
and
validation
(V&V) 
Digital
control
room 
Computerized graphic human system interface (HSI)  Computerized procedure 
Computerized alarm system
1
Introduction
Nowadays, more and more nuclear power plants (NPPs) utilize digital instrumen-
tation and control (I&C) systems to improve plant performance and maintain higher
levels of safety, because of many advantages like self-checking, on-line diagnostics,
improved accuracy and fault tolerance. As an integral part of the I&C systems, the
control rooms with human-system interfaces (HSI) are also equipped by modern
digital equipment, such as large screen displays, video display units (VDU) and so
Y.-B. Sun (&)  L.-S. Hu
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
e-mail: sunyongbin@cgnpc.com.cn
Y.-B. Sun
China Techenergy Co. Ltd., Beijing, China
T. Bai
State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Power Safety Monitoring Technology and Equipment,
China Nuclear Power Design Co. Ltd., Shenzhen, China
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_23
209

on. Different from the traditional discrete analogy controls and displays, the
modernized digital control rooms have many new characteristics, including inte-
grated displays, VDU based information systems, soft controls, on-line computer-
ized procedures, advanced alarm systems and so on, which should be considered in
human-system interfaces (HSI) design.
The main control room in NPPs is the most important control centre, where the
operators monitor and control the overall plant performance with safety and reli-
ability. On one side, any subtle faults or weaknesses in HSI design of the main
control room maybe cause the safety threat to the NPP. On the other side, it is
shown by all of the three severe accidents, Three Mile Island (TMI) accident in the
U.S. (1979), Chernobyl Accident in the former Soviet Union (1986) and Fukushima
accident in Japan (2011) that the NPPs are thrown into the dangerous situations
because of human factor failures. Therefore, veriﬁcation and validation (V&V) is
the most useful and effective way during the life cycle of the digital control room
design. It could ensure that the HSIs, computerized graphic display and control
layout, and procedures would meet the task and operators performance require-
ments, and be coincident with human cognitive and physiological characteristics as
well. What is more, it would improve the operation reliability of the digital control
room with its HSI.
In this paper, the V&V process and methods for design of digital control rooms
are summarized according to NUREG 0700 [1], NUREG 0711 [2] and some
engineering practices in Sect. 2. Some V&V key issues on digital control rooms are
focused and discussed in Sect. 3 to ensure the quality of control rooms. Some
application practices are given in Sect. 4. Finally, Sect. 5 concludes the paper.
2
V&V Process and Methods for Digital Control Room
According to NUREG 0700 [1], NUREG 0711 [2] and some engineering practices
[3] such as the digital control room V&V for LING-AO nuclear power engineering,
V&V process for design of the digital control rooms is summarized, shown as
Fig. 1. It could be divided into three phases, including Preparation, Evaluation,
Resolution and Regression.
In the ﬁrst phase (Preparation), the V&V plan and methodologies should be
prepared, where evaluation criteria, V&V methods and tools, V&V input ﬁles,
V&V team and personnel, and V&V schedule are the key items to be considered.
Among them, the evaluation criteria may include workload, correctness and
accuracy, completeness, coincidence, traceability, error tolerance and so on. V&V
methods mainly include static mock-up veriﬁcation, dynamic mock-up veriﬁcation
shown as in Fig. 2, and full scope simulator-based simulation.
In the second phase (Evaluation), the V&V activities are implemented
throughout the 3-phased control room design life cycle. For concept V&V, task
analysis and operational review are the main V&V activities. For design V&V, HSI
task support veriﬁcation, HFE design veriﬁcation [4], and checklist and traceability
analysis are the main V&V activities. For integrated system V&V, process
210
Y.-B. Sun et al.

simulation and operators performance validation are implemented. All of the
activities are performed by three groups of operators with designers and suppliers.
The last phase (Resolution and Regression) is performed iteratively throughout
V&V. The testing data are collected and the V&V issues (human engineering
discrepancies, HED) are identiﬁed and resolved before the following V&V activ-
ities are started. Any design improvement should be veriﬁed by regression testing.
Any residual issues should be analysed whether they do endanger the safety and
performance of NPPs.
3
V&V Key Issues on Digital Control Room
The main characteristics of digital control rooms are the highly integrated com-
puterized designs for display, control, alarm and procedures. How to run such
computerized systems effectively, efﬁciently and safely is a key issue, which is still
V&V Plan
1.EvaluaƟon criteria
2. V&V methods and tools
3. V&V Input ﬁles
4. V&V team
5. V&V Schedule
1.Issues tracking
2.HED evaluaƟon
3.Design improvement 
regression tesƟng
PreparaƟon 
EvaluaƟon
Concept V&V
1.Task analysis
2. OperaƟonal experience reviews
ResoluƟon and Regression 
Design V&V
1.HMI task support veriﬁcaƟon
2. HFE Design VeriﬁcaƟon
3. Checklist and traceability analysis
Integrated System V&V
1.EnƟre process simulaƟon
2. operators performance valuaƟon
StaƟc mock-up
Dynamic mock-up Simulator-based
V&V Methods
Fig. 1 V&V process and methods for digital control rooms
Fig. 2 Static mock-up and dynamic mock-up veriﬁcation
Study on Application of Veriﬁcation and Validation …
211

in discussion. This section will focus on the issue from the viewpoint of V&V for
the following four aspects, including computerized graphic HSI V&V, computer-
ized or hardcopy procedures V&V, computerized alarm systems V&V, and oper-
ators performance V&V.
3.1
Computerized Graphic HSI V&V
In digital control rooms, the plant state information is mainly displayed on the large
screen displays and VDUs, and most of the manipulations are implemented by
computer, which are also called soft controls. The computerized display and control
graphs are not ﬂat but stacked, which only could be browsed by means of page
navigation. Therefore, the major tasks of computerized graphic HSI V&V are to
inspect whether the designed graphs could support the operators’ actions efﬁciently
and effectively. Moreover, it should be checked whether there are errors or
unnecessary items in the graphs, whether all required tasks are realized correctly,
and whether the graphs are optimized.
3.2
Computerized or Hardcopy Procedures V&V
The main purpose of computerized or hardcopy procedures V&V is to verify that
the HSI design and the procedures are coincident with each other and meet the plant
safety and operational requirements. Usually, the hardcopy procedures are used for
the operation of BUP (back up panel), and the computerized procedures are used for
the computerized graphic HSI. In fact, although the digital technologies are used in
control rooms, not all of the existing NPPs adopt the computerized procedures. For
example, TIANWAN nuclear power plant is still using the hardcopy or paper
procedures. Therefore, the following two cases should be considered for procedures
V&V:
1. Computerized procedures V&V
2. Hardcopy or paper procedures V&V
For these two kinds of procedures, the common V&V tasks are to check and test
the correctness of the procedures for the different operating conditions, including
startup, operation, shutdown of the NPPs with normal, abnormal, alarm conditions,
combating emergencies and other signiﬁcant events. Especially, for the comput-
erized procedures, it should be veriﬁed whether the contents of the procedures meet
the requirements of the application of digital control rooms. For the hardcopy or
paper procedures, it should be veriﬁed whether the actions listed in the procedures
could be well performed by the computerized graphic displays and soft controls.
212
Y.-B. Sun et al.

3.3
Computerized Alarm Systems V&V
Computerized alarm systems are one of the typical characteristics of the digital
control rooms. On one hand, the computerized alarm systems substitute most of the
traditional alarm systems. On the other hand, based on the digital technology, some
new technologies, such as alarm suppression technology, are used to reduce the
amount of alarms so as to avoid the excessive interference of alarms to operators
and ensure the correctness of operators. Usually, there are two kinds of suppression
technology. One is the alarm signal shielding technology used in Level 1. The other
is alarm signal compression technology used in Level 2, where the alarm signals
generated in the Level 1 are processed by the HSI using some constraint conditions.
However, in order to maintain the higher safety of NPPs, some traditional alarm
measures are still retained in control rooms.
Accordingly, the main tasks of computerized alarm systems V&V are to verify
whether the computerized alarm systems and the reserved traditional alarm devices
cooperate well with each other, and whether all alarms required by the system
speciﬁcation could be produced properly and timely.
3.4
Operators’ Performance V&V
Operators are the diversiﬁed controllers of manipulating the NPPs, who are the
critical backup of the automatic controllers and on whom the ultimate operational
decisions are relied. The human factors failures could cause the safety risks. The
operators’ performance V&V is also the key issue during the life cycle of control
rooms V&V. The main purpose of operators’ performance V&V is to verify
whether they could accomplish their mission efﬁciently and correctly under any
anticipated conditions. In practice, the V&V range of process simulation is con-
strained by the V&V schedule and V&V human resources. Partial process simu-
lation and validation is usually implemented under some typical operating
conditions, such as startup, operation, shutdown of the NPPs with normal and
abnormal conditions, by which the operators’ performance are veriﬁed.
4
Application Practice
In this section, some example application practices are given to show the effec-
tiveness of digital control rooms V&V.
1. Optimized computerized graphic HSI
The early computerized graphic HSI with two graphs and the optimized HSI
with four graphs for reactor coolant system (RCS) are shown in Figs. 3 and 4
Study on Application of Veriﬁcation and Validation …
213

respectively. It is shown by Fig. 4 that more information for the each main
equipment in RCS are accommodated and laid out properly.
2. Optimized operator workstation
As shown in Fig. 5, the left ﬁgure is the early covered-type operator worksta-
tions and the right ﬁgure is the optimized bracket-type ones. By such change, it is
easy to install the operator workstations, and to adjust the place and the visual angle
of operator workstations as well.
Fig. 3 Early computerized graphic HSI design for RCS
Fig. 4 Optimized computerized graphic HSI design for RCS
214
Y.-B. Sun et al.

5
Conclusion
With the digital technologies are used in the control rooms of NPPs, the information
displays, controls and alarm systems are changed into the highly integrated com-
puterized design. Most of the manipulations are accomplish through page naviga-
tion. How to effectively and efﬁciently maintain the plant’s safety and performance
is a critical topic for the design and V&V technologists. From the viewpoint of
V&V, the paper concludes and analyzes some important issues during the life cycle
of digital control room V&V to ensure the quality of control rooms.
References
1. USNRC, Human-System Interface Design Review Guidelines, NUREG 0700, Rev 2, 2002.
2. USNRC, Human Factors Engineering Program Review Models, NUREG 0711, 2004.
3. Zhang J.B., Sun Y.B., Liu Y.Z., Study on Human Factor Engineering V&V method System of
Advanced Main Control Room in Nuclear plant (In Chinese). Electronic Instrumentation, 20
(5): 23–27, 2013.
4. Liang K., Kang L.H., Feng W., Application Research of HFE V&V Based on the Design of
Nuclear Power Control Room (In Chinese). Computer Knowledge and Technology, 9(20):
4752–4757.
Fig. 5 Covered-type and bracket-type operator workstation
Study on Application of Veriﬁcation and Validation …
215

Research About the Spurious Trip Rate
of Digital RPS Based on FMEA
Jun-Yi Li, Hui-Hui Liang and Ya-Nan He
Abstract Digital control system (DCS) is the central nervous system of automation
monitoring and controlling of nuclear power plant. Safe operation and economic
beneﬁts of nuclear reactor units depend heavily on the performance of DCS. DCS
consists of hardware and control logic. Mal-Operation Rate and Anti-Operation
Rate are two important measures to evaluate the reliability of DCS. Failure Mode
and Effects Analysis (FMEA) is now in common use to analyze the failures of
hardware and control logic. FMEA has been widely used in assessing DCS of
nuclear power plant. Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) is effective in analyzing causes and
effects of failures. Based on the top-down analyzing strategy, it can easily identify
the basic reason accident. Reactor protection system (RPS) is the most important
part of DCS, which is used to guarantee the reactor stay in a safety state. This paper
takes Spurious Trip Rate of RPS as example, analyzing how different failure modes
affect reliability of RPS based on the method of FMEA and FTA. This method can
also apply to analyze engineered safety features actuation system (ESFAS), and
even the whole DCS of nuclear power plant, which can provide guidance for the
design, operation and maintenance of nuclear power plant.
Keywords DCS  RPS  FMEA  FTA  Spurious trip rate
1
Introduction
RPS is an important safety system of nuclear power plant. It will be triggered
automatically when the system encounter failures. Nuclear power plants always use
FMEA to identify potential failures which may affect the reliability of RPS. It is a
systematic process for identifying potential failures before they occur, with the
J.-Y. Li (&)
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, USA
e-mail: lijunyi0819@gmail.com
H.-H. Liang  Y.-N. He
China Nuclear Power Design CO., LTD, Shenzhen, China
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Y. Xu (ed.), Nuclear Power Plants: Innovative Technologies for Instrumentation
and Control Systems, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 400,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-3361-2_24
217

intent to eliminate or minimize the risks associated with them. It allows validating
the architecture of the protection system with regards to the Single Failure criterion.
The FMEA for safety functions which are implemented in protection system
only presents the failure effects and consequences on the functions when the system
encounters single failure. It only orients toward qualitative analysis on the failure
mode of hardware: safe or unsafe and what is the functional consequences. When it
is unsafe, Reactor Trip System and Engineered Safety Features Actuation System
will be triggered. However, when assessing the reliability of the software, quanti-
tative analysis should be brought into the evaluation. In this way, the safety
functions which are implemented in protection system could be assessed and
improved after the quantitative analysis. According to the reliability level of the
system, engineers could make adaptive changes to upstream design in order to
ensure normal function of power plants.
Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) is one of the most important logic and probabilistic
techniques used in system safety and reliability assessment today. In order to
quantify their contribution to system unreliability in the course of product design, it
investigates potential faults and their modes and causes. Because of its logical,
systematic and comprehensive approach, FTA has been proven capable of
uncovering design and operational weaknesses that escaped even some of the best
deterministic safety and engineering experts.
2
RPS Failure Modes
Reactor Spurious Trip occurs when Reactor Trip Actuating Signal encounters spu-
rious trip and the Reactor Trip Breaker is triggered. Reactor Trip Breaker is made up
of hardware, while Reactor Trip Actuating Signal consists of hardware and software.
Here the paper is discussing the reliability of Reactor Trip Actuating Signal.
Reactor Trip Actuating Signal is produced from four Reactor Protection Cabinet
(RPC) channels through 2-out-of-4 voting logic. Each RPC channel is composed of
input part, communication part, processing part and output part. Input part collects
signals in the channel and communication part collects signals from other channels.
Then processing part processes the signals through logical operations and output
part outputs Reactor Trip Actuating Signal from the channel. Finally Reactor Trip
Breaker is triggered. Once one of the four parts encounters failures would lead to
channel failure and then spurious trip.
Assume the possibilities of each part encounters failures are P1, P2, P3 and P4.
Thus the possibility Reactor Trip Actuating Signal trigger spurious trip consists of
P1, P2, P3 and P4. Manipulating Fault Tree Analysis and the functional conse-
quences implemented by [1] the Protection System, this paper deduces the
expression of the Spurious Trip Rate of Reactor Trip Actuating Signal and checks
which failure affects the whole system the most (Fig. 1).
218
J.-Y. Li et al.

Taking the input part of RPS as example, this paper analyzes the effects on
Spurious Trip Rate from single failure. Failures generated from RPS input part are
divided into three modes according to if they could be detected:
Mode 1: failures detected by self-diagnosis;
Mode 2: failure undetected by self-diagnosis and resulting in the spurious protective
actuation;
Mode 3: failure undetected by self-diagnosis and resulting in no protective
actuation.
Assume each failure mode has an occurrence rate as listed in Table 1.
Input failure
Processing failure
Communiting failure
Output failure
Mode1
Mode2
Mode3
Spurious trip rate
Mode1
Mode2
Mode3
Mode1
Mode2
Mode3
Mode1
Mode2
Mode3
Fig. 1 RPS spurious trip rate diagram
Table 1 Occurrence rate of
three failure modes
Failure
mode
Description
Occurrence
rate
Mode 1
Detected by self-diagnosis
R
Mode 2
Undetected and actuated
S
Mode 3
Undetected and not
actuated
T
Research About the Spurious Trip Rate of Digital RPS …
219

3
RPS Voting Logic Degrade
RPS consists of four channels and Reactor Trip Actuating Signal is produced after
the output signal being processed by voting logic 2-out-of-4 in the channels.
Ignoring bypassing situations, voting logic would be degraded to 2-out-of-3 when
one of channels encounters failure.
If one of the other channels encounters failure at this time, the voting logic will
be degraded to 1-out-of-2. When all three channels encounter failures, the voting
logic would be degraded to 1-out-of-1. Namely, Reactor Trip Actuating Signal from
the other one channel must trigger reactor trip. Due to undetectable failures in the
system, there are voting logic 1-out-of-3, 2-out-of-2 and 1-out-of-1. Here the paper
assumes each situation has an occurrence rate of A, B and C separately [2].
The system is taking voting logic 2-out-of-4 when the reactor in normal running.
When any channel encounters failure, the voting logic would be degraded. Three
failure effects and functional consequences of the voting logic 2-out-of-4 are shown
in Table 2.
Table 2 2-out-of-4 voting logical degrade process
Failure
mode
Failure effect
Functional consequences
Mode 1
Logic is degraded
Reactor Trip Logic (RTL) becomes
2-out-of-3 due to the logic degradation.
Remaining 3 channels provide reactor
trip. If unrestricted by pass of one
instrument channel has already been
executed in another channel, RTL
becomes 1-out-of-2 due to the further
logic degradation. Remaining 2
channels provide reactor trip
Mode 2
Bistable changes to trip state and partial
trip signal is generated in the affected
RPC channel
RTL becomes 1-out-of-3 due to the
sensor failure. Remaining 3 channels
provide reactor trip. If unrestricted by
pass of one instrument channel has
already been executed in another
channel, RTL becomes 1-out-of-2 due
to the further logic degradation.
Remaining 2 channels provide reactor
trip
Mode 3
Bistable does not change to trip state in
the affected RPC channel when process
reaches trip level
RTL becomes 2-out-of-3 due to the
input failure. Remaining 3 channels
provide reactor trip. If unrestricted by
pass of one instrument channel has
already been executed in another
channel, RTL becomes 2-out-of-2 due
to the further logic degradation.
Remaining 2 channels provide reactor
trip
220
J.-Y. Li et al.

When voting logic 2-out-of-4 degraded to 2-out-of-3, if any other channel
encounters failure, then the voting logic would be degraded furthermore. Three
failure effects and functional consequences of the voting logic 2-out-of-3 are shown
in Table 3.
When voting logic 2-out-of-3 degraded to 1-out-of-2, if any other channel
encounters failure, then the voting logic would be degraded furthermore. Three
failure effects and functional consequences of the voting logic 1-out-of-2 are shown
in Table 4.
According to the analysis results of Tables 2, 3 and 4, the degrade process of
reactor protection system voting logic can be shown as Fig. 2.
4
RPS Spurious Trip Rate
When the system encounters these three failure modes, the voting logic would be
degraded. Spurious Trip Rate at this time is the product of occurrence rate of the
failure mode and spurious probability of voting logic for next state, which is
Spurious Trip Rate = (spurious trip probability of ﬁrst state)  (spurious trip
probability of second state) [3].
Table 3 2-out-of-3 voting logical degrade process
Failure
mode
Failure effect
Functional consequences
Mode 1
Logic is degraded
RTL becomes 1-out-of-2 due to the
logic degradation. Remaining 3
channels provide reactor trip. If
unrestricted by pass of one instrument
channel has already been executed in
another channel, RTL actuates due to
the further logic degradation
Mode 2
Bistable changes to trip state and partial
trip signal is generated in the affected
RPC channel
RTL becomes 1-out-of-2 due to the
sensor failure. Remaining 3 channels
provide reactor trip. If unrestricted by
pass of one instrument channel has
already been executed in another
channel, RTL actuates due to the sensor
failure
Mode 3
Bistable does not change to trip state in
the affected RPC channel when process
reaches trip level
RTL becomes 2-out-of-2 due to the
input failure. Remaining 3 channels
provide reactor trip. If unrestricted by
pass of one instrument channel has
already been executed in another
channel, RTL becomes 1-out-of-1 due
to the sensor failure. Remaining 2
channels provide reactor trip with
1-out-of-1 logic
Research About the Spurious Trip Rate of Digital RPS …
221

Table 4 1-out-of-2 voting logical degrade process
Failure
mode
Failure effect
Functional consequences
Mode 1
Logic is degraded
RTL becomes 1-out-of-1 due to the
logic degradation. Remaining 3
channels provide reactor trip
Mode 2
Bistable changes to trip state and partial
trip signal is generated in the affected
RPC channel
RTL actuates due to the sensor failure
Mode 3
Bistable does not change to trip state in
the affected RPC channel when process
reaches trip level
RTL becomes 1-out-of-1 due to the
input failure. Remaining 3 channels
provide reactor trip with 1-out-of-1
logic
Start
2-out of-4
Mode1
Mode2
N
Mode3
N
2-out of-3
Y
1-out of-3
Y
Y
Mode1
Mode2
N
Mode3
N
1-out of-2
Y
Y
Y
2-out of-2
Mode1
Mode2
N
Mode3
N
1-out of-1
Y
Y
Y
Trip
Fig. 2 RPS voting logic
degrade process
222
J.-Y. Li et al.

According to Table 4, when the system is taking voting logic 1-out-of-2 and
encountering one of the failure modes, it would trigger reactor trip or the voting
logic would be degraded (becoming 1-out-of-1). Spurious Trip Rate of these dif-
ferent situations is shown in Table 5. For spurious trip caused by any channel
failure, 1-out-of-2 Trip Function has a Reactor Spurious Trip Rate: (RA + TA).
According to Table 3, when the system is taking voting logic 2-out-of-3 and
encountering one of the failure modes, the voting logic would be degraded,
becoming 1-out-of-2 or 2-out-of-2. Combining the results from Table 5, Spurious
Trip Rate of these different situations is shown in Table 6. For spurious trip caused
by any channel failure, 2-out-of-3 Trip Function has a Reactor Spurious Trip Rate:
R(RA + TA) + S(RA + TA) + TB.
According to Table 2, when the system is taking voting logic 2-out-of-4 and
encountering one of the failure modes, the voting logic would be degraded,
becoming 1-out-of-3 or 2-out-of-3. Combining the results from Table 6, Spurious
Trip Rate of these different situations is shown in Table 7. For spurious trip caused
by any channel failure, 2-out-of-4 Trip Function has a Reactor Spurious Trip Rate:
(R + T)[(S + R)(RA + TA) + TB] + SC = R3A + AR2(2T + S) + R
(AT2 + 2ATS + TB) + T2(AS + B) + SC.
For 2-out-of-4 Trip Function, probability of occurrence of Failure Mode 1 affects
the spurious trip rate the most. As results, engineers should pay more attention to
this kind of failure in order to achieve proper operation.
Table 5 1-out-of-2 trip function spurious trip rate
Failure mode
Second state
Spurious trip rate
Mode 1
1-out-of-1 logic
RA
Mode 2
If sensor fails ! Reactor trip
0
Mode 3
1-out-of-1 logic
TA
Table 6 2-out-of-3 trip
function spurious trip rate
Failure mode
Second state
Spurious trip rate
Mode 1
1-out-of-2 logic
R(RA + TA)
Mode 2
1-out-of-2 logic
S(RA + TA)
Mode 3
2-out-of-2 logic
TB
Table 7 2-out-of-4 trip
function spurious trip rate
Failure mode
Second state
Spurious trip rate
Mode 1
2-out-of-3
R(S + R)
(RA + TA) + RTB
Mode 2
1-out-of-3
SC
Mode 3
2-out-of-3
T(S + R)(RA + TA) + T2B
Research About the Spurious Trip Rate of Digital RPS …
223

5
Conclusions
This paper takes RPS as example, which focusing on the input part of RPS.
Analyzing how different failure modes affect reactor spurious trip using the method
of FMEA and FTA. Getting the spurious rate of nuclear reactor through calculating
the spurious trip rate of 2-out-of-4, 2-out-of-3, 1-out-of-2, then identify the
important part of RPS, which can use to provide guidance for the design, operation
and maintenance of nuclear power plant. This research method can also be applied
to the analysis of processing, communication and output part of RPC. Furthermore,
engineers can generalize this analysis method to evaluate the reliability of the whole
DCS.
References
1. Hong-Wei Li, Sun Yu. Analysis of Shutdown Operation Reliability of Reactor Trip Breaker.
Nuclear Power Engineering. 2013(34): 169–171.
2. Jia-Sheng Wang, Zhen-Min Hong, Ping Hu. Some digit I&C system applies and analyze in
nuclear power station’s reconstruct. Chinese Journal of Nuclear Science and Engineering,
2005-03.
3. Galyean W J. Digital control systems in nuclear power plants: Failure information, modeling
concepts, and applications. Revision 1[J], 1993.
224
J.-Y. Li et al.

