August 15, 2019
21
dependence not only of one’s party 
but of one’s closest friends. Yet there 
is another feature of the elite worlds in 
which the justices travel that rewards 
such independence and may moderate 
partisan inﬂuence. As much as legal 
elites may disagree these days, they do 
share some values—in particular, the 
notion that law should be distinct from 
politics, and that judges should decide 
cases by appeal to logic and precedent 
rather than personal or partisan ideol-
ogy. As Devins and Baum put it, “the 
Supreme Court is a court, and the Jus-
tices respond to expectations among 
legal elites that they will act as legal 
decision makers.” 
These expectations are held in com-
mon by the Federalist Society on the 
right, the American Constitution Soci-
ety on the left, the American Bar As-
sociation in the middle, and, perhaps 
most importantly of all, the “Supreme 
Court bar”—the small group of super-
elite lawyers who regularly appear be-
fore the Court. This group in particular 
prides itself on collegiality and respect 
for legal craft, and is committed to a ju-
dicial ideal that honors reasoned argu-
ment above partisan identity. Indeed, 
Roberts, who before becoming a judge 
was one of the most highly regarded 
members of the Supreme Court bar, 
put it in just these terms when asked 
at his conﬁrmation hearings about ju-
dicial independence: “If it all came 
down to just politics in the judicial 
branch, that would be very frustrat-
ing for lawyers who worked very hard 
to try to advocate their position and 
present the precedents and present the  
arguments.” 
If the Supreme Court is to remain 
above the partisan maelstrom, it will 
be because of the bipartisan appeal of 
those traditional ideals. In no one are 
they more deeply ingrained than in 
Chief Justice Roberts, a traditional-
ist to his core. Skeptics often dismiss 
the distinction between law and poli-
tics, but today’s Court underscores the 
critical importance of the norms of in-
dependence that Roberts has champi-
oned. That may be a slender reed—but 
it’s better than the alternative. Just look 
at Congress.  
There’s No Place Like Home
Geoffrey O’Brien
Aniara:  
A Review of Man in Time and Space
by Harry Martinson, adapted from  
the Swedish by Hugh MacDiarmid  
and Elspeth Harley Schubert.  
Knopf, 133 pp. (1963)
Aniara
an opera by Karl-Birger Blomdahl
Aniara
a ﬁlm directed by Pella Kågerman  
and Hugo Lilja 
An immense and well-stocked space-
ship sets out on what should be a rou-
tine voyage: shuttling eight thousand 
refugees to resettlement on Mars after 
Earth’s environment has been poi-
soned by a succession of nuclear wars. 
Early in the ﬂight, the ship is bumped 
slightly off course after a near collision 
with an asteroid; its navigational equip-
ment is damaged, and it will be unable 
to change direction. The passengers 
must resign themselves to years of con-
tinued existence as the ship proceeds 
inexorably into the empty regions be-
yond the solar system, heading for a 
destination they will not live to reach, 
the constellation Lyra:
Thus it was when the solar system 
closed
its gateway of purest crystal and 
cut off
the space ship Aniara from all
the associations and promises of 
the Sun.
Such is the narrative gist of the 
Swedish poet Harry Martinson’s book-
length serial poem Aniara: A Review of 
Man in Time and Space, begun in 1953 
and published in its entirety in 1956, 
eighteen years before Martinson won 
the Nobel Prize for Literature (which 
he shared with the novelist Eyvind 
Johnson). In Sweden, where Martin-
son was already a prominent ﬁgure, the 
poem was an immediate best seller and 
has continued to work its way into the 
culture, giving rise to an opera (later 
televised), pop and electronic musi-
cal adaptations (including a somewhat 
harrowing “blackened death metal” 
version by Necrosavant), planetarium 
shows, a graphic novel, and now the 
ﬁlm adaptation that opened in the US 
this spring. 
There have also been numerous 
foreign-language translations, but al-
though Aniara has twice been ren-
dered into English, both versions have 
gone out of print. The work’s reputa-
tion in the English-speaking world has 
remained fairly subterranean and has 
owed more to readers of science ﬁc-
tion than of poetry. Lately it has been 
getting increased attention. The US re-
lease of the ﬁlm is one such harbinger; 
others are the artist Fia Backström’s re-
cent multimedia installation A Vaude-
ville on Mankind in Space and Time, in 
which Aniara’s themes were connected 
with complex photographic images fus-
ing microscopic and global perspec-
tives,1 and a fresh musical incarnation: 
a choral theatrical work, Aniara: Frag-
ments of Time and Space, composed by 
Robert Maggio in collaboration with 
the Helsinki-based Klockriketeatern, 
which was performed in Philadelphia in 
June by the Crossing, a chamber choir. 
It is easy enough to situate Aniara as 
the product of its historical moment, 
but it carries a quantum of unease that 
keeps it from settling into the past. It 
persists on its trajectory like the space-
ship proceeding unstoppably toward 
nothingness. 
It was in operatic form that Aniara 
ﬁrst came to America. In 1960 the mar-
ket for a Swedish opera incorporating 
twelve-tone serialism and electronic 
tape collages might have appeared 
limited, yet Columbia Masterworks 
gambled on a major release for Karl-
Birger Blomdahl’s Aniara (which had 
premiered in Stockholm a year earlier), 
billing it as “An Epic of Space Flight 
in 2038 AD” and adorning its cover 
with the eyepopping multicolored geo-
metrics that at the time connoted the 
edgiest in stereophonic sounds. Since I 
had not yet been exposed to Wozzeck, 
Moses und Aron, or any similar trail-
blazing 
twentieth- century 
works, 
Blomdahl provided a point of entry 
into modernist opera—or rather into 
“space opera,” of which this seemed 
the only example. It would take years 
and a lot more listening, to Blomdahl 
and much else, before I could grasp 
more than the most obviously outré el-
ements of a score that the New Yorker 
music critic Alex Ross has praised as 
“wildly inventive, at times propheti-
cally psychedelic.”
My hope at the time was simply for 
what was strange: sounds that might 
somehow provide a foretaste of the 
future. I kept listening, undeterred by 
the somber a cappella opening cho-
rus of earthly refugees mourning the 
transformation of their planet into “a 
desolate, poisoned land.” I recall being 
jolted by the fragments of futuristic 
dance band music played in the ship’s 
lounge where everybody is doing “the 
yurg”—tantalizing hints of an angular, 
robotic sort of future pop—in the mo-
ments before the fatal encounter with 
the asteroid. It is the last ﬂeeting sug-
gestion of anything like festivity. With 
a prolonged doom-laden orchestral 
incursion marking the shock of disas-
ter, the party is over before it properly 
began. 
The ﬁnal dividing line is the opera’s 
most futuristic feature: a sequence of 
multilayered tape “arias” representing 
the voice of the Mima, the spaceship’s 
feminized computer, an omniscient en-
tity whose bulletins from Earth provide 
respite for the passengers who cluster 
around her worshipfully in the Mima 
Hall. These tapes, an operatic innova-
tion, were made with rudimentary radio 
equipment and stock sound effects, 
and their beeps, oscillations, ﬂutters, 
and rumbles are not far removed from 
some of the eerie outer space noises 
of science-ﬁction ﬁlms of the era, but 
when interwoven with human voices 
such as chants, arguments, authoritar-
ian exhortations, choral laments, and 
a baby crying, they make a character—
the central character of both the opera 
and the poem—out of a mass of wir-
ing.2 The Mima’s tapes are in fact her 
swan song, as a laconic stage direction 
indicates: “A lightning-blue ﬂash from 
Mima (the Earth is blown up). Panic 
in the Mima Hall.” The computer has 
died of grief at channeling the fate of 
Earth. What follows is a deeper voy-
age into terminal galactic chill. It 
could hardly be otherwise in a drama 
whose end has been determined at 
the outset. There can be no suspense, 
no plausible hope, nothing but mere  
continuing. 
The opera’s libretto compresses the 
103 songs of Martinson’s poem into 
seven episodes, but even in this form 
the central notion of endless vacant 
duration was more insidiously disturb-
ing than many more visceral horrors. 
The potential terrors of the cosmos 
were a familiar childhood fantasy. Im-
ages of planetary peril abounded in 
movies and comic books, whether the 
peril was caused by nuclear devasta-
tion, alien invasion, or an interplan-
etary mishap. At that time, however, it 
was still the general custom for Earth 
to be saved, even if it might take some 
doing to emerge from the rubble—
or at least, as in When Worlds Col-
lide (1951), some carefully chosen 
group would survive to start civiliza-
tion over on another planet, or else, 
as in World Without End (1956), in a 
distant future to which a time warp 
had teleported them. The spectator 
could somehow count on being among 
the saved, and the possibility of es-
caping and colonizing other worlds 
A scene from Pella Kågerman and Hugo Lilja’s ﬁlm Aniara
Magnet Releasing
1Presented at Callicoon Fine Arts, New 
York City, February 23–April 8, 2018.
2On the creation of the tapes, see 
Christina Tobeck, “Aniara: A Cry of 
Desperation—An Appeal to Presence 
of Mind,” in the booklet accompany-
ing the 1985 Caprice recording of the 
opera.

22
The New York Review
provided an undercurrent of eager  
expectancy. 
Aniara’s libretto recalled those fanta-
sies, but its mood excluded any buoy-
ancy beyond the curdled fun of the 
yurg dancers. Everything here was 
about catastrophe’s aftermath: the 
spaceship’s diversion from its course 
was only the last in a chain of disasters, 
starting with memories of the wars that 
had poisoned Earth in the ﬁrst place, 
the emigration to outer planets where 
colonists had followed familiar pat-
terns of destruction and cruelty, and ﬁ-
nally—when the spaceship was already 
off course—the obliteration of the 
home planet in the ﬁnal war. It was not 
simply that the passengers couldn’t go 
home; there was no home to go back to. 
Past and future alike were sealed off, 
while the blank present persisted in a 
fusion of sorrow and claustrophobia. 
The opera’s mournful continuum was 
only slightly jarred by the grating and 
parodistic music given to a newly es-
tablished regime of callous technocrats 
whose only agenda was to keep panic 
barely under control.
Abstract and stylized though it was, 
the opera effectively prodded the nag-
ging sense of danger that pervaded that 
cold war era, the dread of an apoca-
lypse made by humans for humans. 
The Cuban missile crisis was only two 
years away, and in the meantime the 
notion that the world might no longer 
have a future was hard to avoid: in 
Stanley Kramer’s On the Beach (1959), 
for instance, with its all-star cast (Ava 
Gardner, Gregory Peck, Fred Astaire) 
trying to ﬁgure out how to pass the 
weeks before a radioactive cloud drifts 
in to obliterate them, or the Twilight 
Zone episode “Time Enough at Last” 
(1959), in which a bookworm bank 
clerk reveled for a moment in the post-
nuclear world in which he would ﬁnally 
be able to read to his heart’s content, 
before the unfortunate smashing of his 
thick-lensed glasses. 
Aniara pushed this question of what 
to do while waiting for the world to end 
to another level. The home planet was 
already incinerated, and outer space of-
fered no escape, only the prolongation 
of consciousness with no hope of ﬁnd-
ing another habitat. When Martinson’s 
poem became available in English, it 
could be seen as an epic in which sub-
ject matter itself has been incinerated. 
It enlisted poetic splendor—calling up 
lost stores of sensuous association—to 
describe an environment devoid of any 
possibility of splendor, where there 
is nothing left to do or talk about, or 
rather where anything done or spoken 
can only be an ersatz placeholder for 
what will not return:
And one hears scattered voices 
singing songs
whose nature shows they are still 
sung
with some mystic hope seeking 
immunity
in the vacancy of space or through 
the Mima’s visions.
Martinson located the origin of 
Aniara in a late summer night—not 
long after the Soviet Union conducted 
its ﬁrst H-bomb test—when, peering 
through his home telescope, he ob-
tained a preternaturally clear sighting 
of the Andromeda Galaxy. He said he 
experienced, in the days that followed, 
sensations of being on board a space-
ship, and over the course of two weeks 
in October dictated to his wife the ﬁrst 
twenty-nine songs, which appeared 
in 1953 in the collection Cicada. The 
process seems to have been something 
of an oracular outpouring (“I am not 
making up this poem, it just reveals it-
self for me”), and the poem is ﬁlled with 
analogous communications, whether 
from the computer Mima, the various 
witnesses to earthly destruction whose 
accounts are transmitted, or the Blind 
Poetess who emerges among the pas-
sengers in the spaceship’s dying days. 
When I ﬁrst encountered Aniara in 
the original translation by Hugh Mac-
Diarmid and Elspeth Harley Schubert 
(1963), its propulsive urgency carried 
me along in an uninterrupted reading. 
The effect is musical even if the trans-
lators did not attempt to replicate the 
various meters and rhyme schemes de-
ployed by Martinson,3 and there is an 
echo in its voicings of cosmic emptiness 
of MacDiarmid’s stark evocations of 
rock and sea in such poems as “On a 
Raised Beach” and “Island Funeral,” 
as well as his devotion to incorporat-
ing scientiﬁc and technical vocabulary 
into his poetry. In 1968, the year it 
appeared as a science-ﬁction paper-
back—oracular song smuggled into 
mass distribution—Aniara seemed a 
model for further attempts at epic in its 
fusing of concepts from astrophysics, 
the trappings of pulp fantasy, the con-
temporary science ﬁction of A. E. van 
Vogt and Ray Bradbury (writers Mar-
tinson greatly admired), the memories 
of wartime trauma, the fear of future 
weaponry, and the deep well of myth 
and ancient history. The theme was 
claustrophobic but the form was exhila-
rating, open to all manner of variations 
and tonal shifts.
Binding it together is the swirl of 
neologisms around whose repetitions 
the poem’s rhythm constructs itself: 
the Mima and her priestly guardian, 
the Mimarobe; Douris (Earth); gold-
onda (spaceship); phototurb (weapon 
of future destruction); the abandoned 
lands of Rind and Xinombra and 
Upper Gond. Pleasure-seeking pas-
sengers are nostalgic for the lost slang 
of Dourisburg: “Come rockasway and 
shimble. . . .  Droom dazily, come hillo 
in my billows.” All this vocabulary is 
not clutter but a ﬂuid element, offering 
momentary respite from the oppres-
siveness of strict deﬁnition, a last stand 
of playfulness even when the subject is 
annihilation. Of “Aniara,” the name of 
the spaceship and the most haunting 
coinage of all, Martinson said, “The 
name Aniara doesn’t signify anything. I 
made it up. I wanted to have a beautiful 
name.” A glossary to the MacDiarmid- 
Schubert translation describes it as 
a combination of letters, rich in 
vowels, which represents the space 
in which the atoms move. The ad-
jective aniaros (fem. aniara) in 
ancient Greek means sorrowful. 
Thus, Aniara = the ship of sorrow.
When sung by a chorus in Blomdahl’s 
opera, “Aniara” becomes a wail of 
lamentation. 
The poem moves with the narrative 
urgency of a chronicler without much 
time to spare, while progressively sub-
tracting the possibilities for any further 
narrative development. In true epic 
tradition, its matter acquires authentic-
ity through the persuasive force of its 
utterance, even the parts manifestly 
pasted together from old space ad-
venture magazines. The ﬁgure of the 
Mima in particular takes on mythic 
weight: the supercomputer that is the 
storehouse and conduit for all stories 
and images, the screen to which the 
passengers turn as the only antidote to 
“the immitigable glare of nothingness,”  
until she is “worshipped/as a holy 
being.” She evolves into an entity ex-
ceeding human comprehension, whose 
inventor must acknowledge that “half 
the Mima . . . /lay beyond analysis and 
had been/invented in fact by the Mima 
herself!”
Kubrick’s HAL was soon to come; in 
the Mima, Martinson created a more 
archaic image, not bothering with tech-
nological plausibilities. Her death, as 
she ﬁnally breaks down from grief at 
seeing “a thousand things no human 
eye can see”—expressed in images 
drawing on recent accounts of Hiro-
shima and Nagasaki—becomes the 
indelible sign of an authentically tragic 
mystery, a cataclysm on which the rest 
of the poem is an extended meditation. 
In Aniara, computer technology be-
comes indistinguishable from mystery 
religion. Archaic and futuristic merge 
and mutate, and after the Mima’s death 
the passengers enact a recapitulation of 
ancient orgies and blood sacriﬁces, and 
submit to omens and prophecies. 
Aniara is an epic of extinction, con-
ceived at a moment when extinction 
had begun to seem not only possible 
but perhaps imminent. More precisely 
it is an anti-epic: heroic connotations 
are inappropriate for a work better de-
scribed as an elegiac song cycle work-
ing variations on the disappearance 
of the human species, a premonitory 
mourning ritual for Earth, “the only 
planet where Life has found/a land of 
milk and honey.” Its underlying mood is 
grief-stricken. In repeated near-ecstatic 
passages, Martinson insists on the inca-
pacity of the human mind to grasp cos-
mic scale—“the vastnesses/into which 
Aniara has been plunged”—passages  
whose sublime calm is battered by 
inconsolable sorrow. In essence it is 
a protest poem, a cry of despair not 
against the emptiness of the cosmos 
but against the human malevolence 
that has forced humans into exile from 
their only home, and the human denial 
and submissiveness that allowed it to 
happen: “For space can never be more 
cruel than man.” It is punctuated by bit-
ter outbursts against those who brought 
it about: “The men responsible? All 
dead!/The instigators in oblivion!” 
Martinson’s sense of homelessness 
came naturally. One of his early collec-
tions was called Nomad. Born in 1904 
to a rural shopkeeper, his family life 
was obliterated in a series of disasters. 
His father, a violent and difﬁcult man, 
ﬂed to America as a fugitive from jus-
tice when Martinson was one year old, 
and died a year after returning to Swe-
den in 1909. His mother in short order 
likewise went to America, abandoning 
her seven children. Martinson became 
a charity case sent to work as a child la-
borer on a series of farms. He received 
only the most rudimentary education. 
At sixteen he signed on as a stoker and 
spent the next seven years sailing the 
world on a series of ships. Returning 
to Sweden with tuberculosis and more 
or less penniless in 1927, within a few 
years he succeeded in establishing 
himself as an important young poet. In 
the title poem of his ﬁrst book, Ghost 
Ships (1929), can be found these lines:
Look, a thousand ships have lost 
their course
and drifted off in the fog and a 
thousand
men have foundered while 
 praying to the stars.4
The marine realms of Martinson’s 
early poetry forecast Aniara’s vision of 
cold inﬁnite space. On the one hand it 
feels like a poem of the future, on the 
other like a distillation not only of his 
own experience but of the awe and 
foreboding that pervades a long line 
A scene from the Malmö Opera’s production of Aniara, 2017
Malin Arnesson/Malmö Opera
3The more recent translation by Ste-
phen Klass and Leif Sjöberg (Story 
Line, 1998) is more faithful to Mar-
tinson’s formal schemes and is said 
to be more accurate and somewhat 
more complete, but the MacDiarmid-
Schubert version is more persuasive as 
English poetry. 
4Harry Martinson, The Procession of 
Memories: Selected Poems, 1929–1945, 
translated by Lars Nordström (Word-
craft of Oregon, 2009). For biographi-
cal information on Martinson, I am 
indebted in particular to Staffan Söder-
blom, “Reading Harry Martinson,” in 
Harry Martinson, Chickweed Winter-
green: Selected Poems, translated by 
Robin Fulton (Bloodaxe, 2010).

August 15, 2019
23
of works of the previous century—
Coleridge’s Rime of the Ancient Mari-
ner, Poe’s Narrative of Arthur Gordon 
Pym, Wagner’s Flying Dutchman, Mel-
ville’s Moby-Dick—in which incom-
mensurable oceanic vastness is tied to 
intimations of wrongdoing and fatal-
ity. But there is a more modern aspect 
to Martinson’s sea poems, a ferocious 
clarity about the monstrousness of the 
industrialism that the great ships em-
body, their capacity to crush all obsta-
cles indifferently. In the 1930s he would 
give himself over to prose tracts decry-
ing modern man’s alienation from the 
natural world and making utopian 
appeals, under the rubric of what he 
called “geosophy,” for a return to life 
in harmony with nature. His nightmar-
ish perception of modern technology 
was compounded by his experiences as 
a volunteer in Finland during the 1940 
war against Soviet forces. At a meeting 
with Niels Bohr during this period, he 
expressed misgivings about the possi-
ble uses of the cyclotron particle accel-
erator for the development of advanced 
weaponry.
After the publication of Aniara, 
Martinson’s work moved in a different 
direction, more microscopic than tele-
scopic. It was as if he were making a re-
cord of the earthly environment whose 
loss was mourned by his doomed space 
voyagers, close-ups of natural life like 
those transmitted by the Mima. In his 
contemplation of the minutiae of vege-
tation and temperature change and an-
imal movement—bats and black snails 
and tussocks and ice jams—Martinson 
summons up a distinctive landscape 
of quagmires, moors, stands of spruce 
and alder. He returns repeatedly to im-
ages of human habitations abandoned 
to wilderness, spaces where humans no 
longer are. In “Late-born swarms . . .,” 
a poem evoking the swarms of insect 
life that ﬁll the air in late summer and 
then are blown into oblivion in autumn, 
he writes:
If each one of them could be 
called a word,
then a life’s language blows away 
on the wind…
Uncounted and numberless most 
of what we see whirls
always away, a ceaseless 
 scattering.
His own end was gloomy. Depressed 
after receiving the Nobel Prize—ap-
parently at least in part because of 
public accusations that as a member of 
the Swedish Academy he had gotten it 
improperly—he committed suicide in 
1978.
It was probably inevitable that a movie 
would be made of a poem bearing such 
kinship to cinematic visions of its own 
era and later. Aniara, directed by Pella 
Kågerman and Hugo Lilja, is an am-
bitious attempt at a marketable genre 
movie that remains faithful to Martin-
son. The result, while fascinating, is 
only partly successful, which was per-
haps also inevitable. Martinson’s poem 
was a prophetic myth of the future, 
reveling in invented terminology while 
constantly, with elastic associative free-
dom, suggesting ancient parallels. The 
ﬁlm, on the other hand, employs the 
visual language of the present, trans-
lating Martinson’s archaic-futuristic 
mode of expression into the language 
of news broadcasts and game apps and 
genre movies. Its future is the world we 
already inhabit. 
We know it by the decor. The space-
ship’s interiors are those of a tackily 
luxurious ferry, with high-end bou-
tiques and arcade games to pass the 
time. The Mima is an advanced virtual 
reality installation, and the Mimarobe 
combines the roles of tour guide and 
therapist. The Mima’s breakdown elic-
its a memorial wall like those that went 
up after September 11. The implication 
that there is nothing new to see, that 
our safety belts are fastened and we are 
well past the point where disaster could 
be averted, is dispiriting in a way that 
the poem is not. Martinson in the mid-
twentieth century wrote as a Cassandra 
whose prophecies were yet to be real-
ized and might still be countermanded. 
The ﬁlm seems to signal that in the 
interim a very different mentality has 
taken hold, a reluctant acknowledg-
ment that the citadel is already irrevo-
cably lost. The shock of apocalypse has 
worn off.
Martinson’s poem does not really 
have characters—there are multiple re-
curring ﬁgures who express themselves 
at times in long soliloquies, but never 
in anything resembling naturalistic 
dialogue. They are ﬁgures of dream or 
allegory, ideogrammatic embodiments 
that can change their form or aspect as 
the poem evolves, in a ﬂuidity of move-
ment that counteracts the deadening 
immobility of the passengers’ plight. 
Language, at least, can move. The ﬁlm-
makers have had to invent dramatic 
personages and situations analogous to 
Martinson’s abstractions: an alcoholic 
scientist, a birth on shipboard, an ulti-
mately tragic lesbian love affair. They 
succeed at many junctures in distilling 
moods of panic and misery and cata-
tonic estrangement. 
If there is not much of the poem’s 
constant insistence on the “intolerable 
void” of interstellar emptiness, the ﬁlm 
effectively simulates the condition of 
being trapped in outer space in a ﬂoat-
ing shopping mall under dictatorial 
rule. One of the best scenes presents 
the dismal banquet as the ship’s com-
mander attempts to celebrate the tenth 
year of Aniara’s voyage, to obligatory 
but tepid applause. Less successful is 
the handling of the various ascetic, or-
giastic, or mystical cults that come and 
go within the ship. The more literally 
such scenes are represented, the more 
they tend to look like something that 
would happen in a movie. Martinson 
had the advantage of relying on the 
suggestive blur that in poetry can be 
sharper than the literal. 
The devastation of the home planet, 
in which the poem is rooted, recedes 
into the background along with any 
strong sense that the passengers 
were already traumatized when they 
boarded the craft. The worst in fact has 
already happened. What remains is the 
drama of the lost spaceship and its pas-
sengers trying to retain some measure 
of selfhood in the face of silent inﬁnite 
spaces. The ﬁlm comes nearest to the 
original’s poetic force in its ﬁnal scene, 
in which the image of Aniara as galac-
tic sarcophagus is fully realized, all life 
within extinguished, still light-years 
distant from Lyra. The constellation 
of the lyre was certainly the most apt 
destination for a poem that itself can 
be imagined as the spaceship, the last-
ditch vessel in which life can be pre-
served, provisionally and vulnerably, 
after everything else has gone under. 
“A RIVETING STORY WHICH HAS
RESONANCE TODAY AS THE DEMOCRACIES 
AGAIN FACE DICTATORSHIPS.” 
—MARGARET MACMILLAN
A NEW YORK TIMES EDITORS’ CHOICE
“An eye-opening narrative with lessons 
for the present.” —ANTONIA FRASER
“This is well-paced narrative history: 
intelligent, lucid, riveting.” 
—JENNIFER SZALAI, THE NEW YORK TIMES
“This is the debut of an unusually 
talented writer.” —MAX HASTINGS
“Bouverie tells the story of appeasement 
with skill, verve, and panache.”
—IAN KERSHAW
“Particularly timely . . . Has striking 
resonance today.” —LYNNE OLSON,
THE NEW YORK TIMES BOOK REVIEW
AVAILABLE EVERYWHERE BOOKS ARE SOLD

