
OBESITY

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
American Families in Crisis, Jeffrey S. Turner
Campaign and Election Reform, Glenn H. Utter and Ruth Ann
Strickland
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Climate Change, David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and Catherine
Vaughan
Corporate Crime, Richard D. Hartley
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Education in Crisis, Judith A. Gouwens
Emergency Management, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Environmental Justice, David E. Newton
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Gangs, Karen L. Kinnear
Globalization, Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith
Lobbying in America, Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Modern Sports Ethics, Angela Lumpkin
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James
Clay Moltz
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources, Zachary A. Smith
and Katrina D. Taylor
Rich and Poor in America, Geoffrey Gilbert
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. Social Security, Steven G. Livingston
Waste Management, Jacqueline Vaughn
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly writ-
ten, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting point
for research by high school and college students, scholars, and
general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, activ-
ists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an over-
view of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical sketches,
facts and data and/or documents and other primary-source
material, a directory of organizations and agencies, annotated
lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
ﬁnd the information they need to have a better understanding
of the social, political, environmental, and economic issues fac-
ing the world today.

This page intentionally left blank 

OBESITY
A Reference Handbook
Judith S. Stern and Alexandra Kazaks
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California
Denver, Colorado
Oxford, England

Copyright 2009 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Stern, Judith S., 1943–
Obesity : a reference handbook / Judith Stern and
Alexandra Kazaks.
p. ; cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-195-4 (hardcover : alk. paper)
1. Obesity—Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Kazaks, Alexandra. II. Title.
III. Series: Contemporary world issues.
[DNLM: 1. Obesity—United
States—Handbooks. WD 200.1 S839o 2009]
RA645.O23S74
2009
616.3’98—dc22
2009008131
13 12 11 10 9
1 2 3 4 5
E-ISBN: 978-1-59884-196-1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

Contents
List of Tables, xiii
List of Figures, xv
Preface, xvii
1
Background and History, 1
Deﬁning and Measuring Overweight and Obesity, 4
Indirect Measuring Methods, 4
Limitations and Shortcomings, 10
Assessing Percentage of Body Fat, 11
Direct Measuring Methods, 12
Obesity Trends in the United States, 14
Obesity as a National Health Problem, 16
Why Are We Overweight?, 17
Factors That Contribute to Obesity, 19
Increased Energy Intake, 19
Distorted Portion Sizes, 20
Drinking More Calories, 23
Conveniently Available Food, 23
Physical Inactivity, 24
Physical Activity and Short-term Weight Loss, 25
Metabolic and Genetic Contributions, 26
Can We Blame Obesity on Our Genes?, 27
Ways Genes Contribute to Obesity, 28
Consequences of Overweight and Obesity, 29
Discrimination, 31
Economic Consequences, 32
We Live in an Obesogenic Environment, 33
References, 34
vii

2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 41
Is Obesity a Disease?, 41
Is Obesity an Epidemic?, 45
Treatment of Obesity: Fighting the Battle of the Bulge, 49
Diet Foods, 56
Adequate Nutrition Labeling, 57
Physical Activity, 59
Behavioral Strategies for Responding to an Obesogenic
Environment, 60
Long-term Success, 62
Medications, 63
Red Flag Campaign, 67
Dietary Fiber, 68
Prescription Drugs, 69
Obesity (Bariatric) Surgery, 73
Other Invasive Treatments for Obesity, 77
How Does the Health Care System Deal with Obesity?, 78
Why Can’t We Just Prevent Obesity?, 80
Conclusions, 81
References, 82
3
Worldwide Perspective, 89
Multinational Scope of Overweight and Obesity, 89
The Weight Gap: Undernutrition Coexists with Obesity, 90
Obesity Becoming More Common among Children, 91
Childhood Weight Categories Not Clear, 92
Changing Lifestyle and Economic Policies, 93
Globalization of Food Production and Marketing, 93
Move to Cities Reduces Physical Activity, 94
Gender Effects on Obesity, 95
Obesogenic Environment’s Inﬂuence on Children, 96
Global Health Risks Associated with Childhood Obesity, 97
Managing Childhood Overweight and Obesity, 98
Medical Treatment, 99
Dietary Interventions, 100
How to Choose the Best Diet for Children, 100
Pharmacological Treatment, 102
Surgical Treatment, 102
Health Care Delivery Systems, 103
Prevention, 103
Coordinated Strategies for Childhood Obesity
Prevention, 104
viii
Contents

Global Collaboration to Combat Childhood Obesity, 104
Goals for Government, Schools, Media and Marketing,
Parents, and Researchers, 106
Conclusion, 119
References, 119
4
Chronology, 125
References, 144
5
Biographical Sketches, 147
S. Daniel Abraham, 147
David Allison, 148
Arne Astrup, 149
Robert C. Atkins, 149
Richard L. Atkinson, 150
George Blackburn, 151
Steven N. Blair, 151
Claude Bouchard, 152
George A. Bray, 153
Jane E. Brody, 154
Kelly Brownell, 154
Henry Buckwald, 155
Paul F. Campos, 156
William J. Clinton, 157
Jenny Craig, 157
William H. Dietz, 157
Adam Drewnowski, 158
Johanna Dwyer, 159
Katherine M. Flegal, 159
Jared Fogle, 160
Jeffrey M. Friedman, 161
M. R. C. Greenwood, 161
Barbara Hansen, 162
Marion M. Hetherington, 163
James O. Hill, 163
Hippocrates, 164
Jules Hirsch, 164
W. P. T. James, 165
Robin B. Kanarek, 166
Janet C. King, 166
Ahmed Kissebah, 167
C. Everett Koop, 168
Contents
ix

John Kral, 169
Ray Kroc, 169
Shiriki Kumanyika, 170
Jack LaLanne, 171
Antoine Lavoisier, 172
Maimonides, 172
Jean Mayer, 173
Barbara J. Moore, 173
Jean Nidetch, 174
Dean Ornish, 175
Xavier Pi-Sunyer, 176
Nathan Pritikin, 176
Barbara J. Rolls, 177
Wim H. M. Saris, 177
Ethan Allen Sims, 178
Sachiko St. Jeor, 179
Judith S. Stern, 180
Albert J. Stunkard, 181
Oprah Winfrey, 181
Rena Wing, 182
References, 183
6
Data and Documents, 187
Data, 187
Documents, 198
Clinical Guidelines on the Identiﬁcation, Evaluation, and
Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults: The
Evidence Report, 198
‘‘The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Prevent and
Decrease Overweight and Obesity’’, 210
Strategic Plan for NIH Obesity Research, 222
References, 231
7
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations, 233
Government Agencies and National Programs and
Initiatives, 233
International Agencies and Organizations, 243
Nonproﬁt, Professional, and Trade Organizations, 247
References, 267
8
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources, 269
Books, 270
Reference Works, 270
x
Contents

Scientiﬁc Works, 271
Popular Books, 272
Reports, 277
Guidelines, 282
Journals and Magazines, 284
Newsletters, 286
Web Sites, 289
General Web Sites, 289
Interactive for General Population, 291
Interactive for Children and Adolescents, 292
Movies, 296
Databases, 297
Food and Nutrition Experts, 301
Calculators and Counters, 301
Glossary, 303
Index, 309
About the Authors, 323
Contents
xi

This page intentionally left blank 

List of Tables
1.1
Weight Ranges, BMI Values, and Weight Status, 8
1.2
Children’s BMI-for-Age Weight Status, 11
1.3
Prevalence of Overweight and Obesity among U.S.
Adults, Age 20 Years and Over (%), 15
1.4
Prevalence of Overweight among Children and
Adolescents, 16
6.1
1942–1943 Metropolitan Life’s Height and Weight
Tables, 190
6.2
Body Mass Index Table, 191
6.3
Determining Percentage of Body Fat Using
Skinfold Calipers, 192
6.4
MyPyramid Calorie Levels, 193
6.5
MyPyramid Food Intake Patterns, 194
6.6
Example of a Daily Food Record, 195
6.7
Types of Diet Plans, with Claims and Advantages, 196
xiii

This page intentionally left blank 

List of Figures
6.1
Obesity Trends Among U.S. Adults, 188
6.2
Algorithm for the Assessment and Treatment of Obesity, 197
6.3
Evidence Categories, 198
xv

This page intentionally left blank 

Preface
W
e are obesity researchers and nutritionists. When people ﬁnd
out what we do, we are bombarded with questions like, Why
are Americans so fat? How much should I weigh? What do
you think about this diet? Is obesity such a problem in other coun-
tries? In order to answer these questions, we have written this
reference book about obesity. We call it Obesity because factors like
serving or being served very large portions, eating lots of fast food,
and watching many hours of TVeach day are signiﬁcant problems
in the United States.
This volume examines why people gain weight, why they
either succeed or fail in losing it, and who they believe bears
responsibility. You will learn about obesity treatments, important
people in the obesity story, a wide range of resources, and inter-
esting Web sites to keep you up-to-date. Included are discussions
of controversial topics such as whether obesity is actually a dis-
ease. Chapter 1 deﬁnes obesity and its measures and gives a his-
torical perspective. For example, obesity can be traced back to the
Stone Age, and, historically, it was the wealthy who were obese.
In fact, the famous 17th-century artist Peter Paul Rubens painted
women who were ‘‘ideals of female beauty’’ who today would be
considered obese. Furthermore, Chapter 1 explores how we have
come to determine whether a person is at the ‘‘correct’’ weight
Chapter 2 discusses key problems, solutions, and controver-
sies. For instance, are we really in the midst of an obesity epi-
demic? Is obesity a disease or a moral failing? Presented in this
chapter is a section on how to make individualized plans, which
includes how to assess your diet, reduce energy intake, and rec-
ognize fat as a concentrated source of energy. Some of the behav-
ioral strategies demonstrate how to maintain a healthy weight
while living in an obesogenic environment. The section on herbs
xvii

and supplements identiﬁes advertising claims that are, in fact,
too good to be true. The pros and cons of various types of obesity
surgery are discussed, and a provocative discussion is included
of how the health care system deals with obesity. This chapter
concludes with the thought that our biology, the inﬂuences of
food advertising, and the customs of social eating act together
to make obesity hard to prevent and treat.
Chapter 3 describes how overweight and obesity are dra-
matically increasing, not only in the United States but also in
developing nations. The number of children who are overweight
or obese has increased throughout the world. The highest rates of
obesity are in the South Paciﬁc; 70 percent of people living on the
island of Nauru are now obese, whereas in the 1960s, only 15 per-
cent were obese. The World Health Organization classiﬁes
obesity as one of the top risks to human health.
Chapter 4 presents a timeline of key discoveries, thinkers,
and practices from 1942 to 2008.
Chapter 5 provides more than 50 short biographies of peo-
ple who have been important in studying, preventing, manag-
ing, and increasing awareness about obesity. It includes people
like Jared Fogle, who lost almost 245 pounds eating sandwiches
from Subway; Ray Kroc, who started McDonald’s fast food res-
taurants; Kelly Brownell, who coined the phrase ‘‘toxic environ-
ment’’ to describe our food and exercise patterns that contribute
to obesity; and researcher Ethan Allen Sims, who coined the
word ‘‘diabesity’’ to explain the relationship between obesity
and diabetes. Oprah Winfrey, who said that if there was a pill to
lose weight or a magic diet, she would have it, is also proﬁled.
Chapter 6 includes excerpts of key documents from the
National Institutes of Health; the U.S. Surgeon General; and the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute that guide how we
view, prevent, and treat obesity. Also provided in this chapter
are surprising facts as well as graphic ﬁgures and tables that
depict some of the points made in chapters 1, 2, and 3.
Chapter 7 lists a variety of government, international, non-
proﬁt, and trade and professional organizations and their Web
sites. Some organizations promote health, study diseases, and
provide statistics about health. Others, including the American
Academy of Pediatrics, make available guides to childhood and
adult obesity.
Chapter 8 lists a number of resources for additional in-depth
information. Many are Web sites for government agencies such
xviii
Preface

as the U.S. Department of Agriculture (www.usda.gov), Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (www.cdc.gov), and the
National Institutes of Health (www.nih.gov). These sites provide
reliable statistics and information about the latest research. Vid-
eos, such as Super Size Me, and books are listed that provide more
background on the topic.
We really enjoyed writing this book and hope that you will
use it as the reference book for obesity in the United States. We
want to give special thanks to Brittany Smolen for her research.
Preface
xix

This page intentionally left blank 

1
Background and History
O
besity is not a recent phenomenon. Its origins can be traced
back to our prehistoric ancestors. Statues dating from the
Stone Age provide the earliest depiction of obesity. The Venus
of Willendorf is a ﬁgurine of an obese woman that dates back to
about 22,000 BCE. It is thought to represent a fertility goddess.
Through the centuries obesity has been depicted in the arts, litera-
ture, and medical opinion both as a highly desirable state and as an
unhealthy condition to be avoided. Egyptian temples prominently
displayed statues of obese men and women while medical opin-
ions written on papyrus at the time describe obesity as a disease
state. Hippocrates, known as the father of medicine, noted that
fat people were more prone to sudden death than were lean peo-
ple. Stories and chronicles from the Middle Ages portray obese
individuals who are wealthy and powerful. Peter Paul Rubens, a
well-respected artist of the 17th century, painted ample, robust
women who today would be labeled as obese but were considered
ideals of female beauty at that time. In 1737 Benjamin Franklin
observed in his Poor Richard’s Almanack: ‘‘To lengthen thy life,
lessen thy meals’’ (Franklin 1737). In the 1930s, it was rumored that
the Duchess of Windsor declared, ‘‘You can never be too rich or too
thin,’’ setting a benchmark for socialites then and now.
Although overweight was sometimes linked with disease
and a shorter life span, in general, extra fat was related to wealth,
health, and attractiveness. Low weight and thinness were associ-
ated with poverty, malnutrition, and wasting diseases such as
tuberculosis. Scarcity of food throughout most of history meant
that most people did not have the opportunity to become obese.
The tendency to store energy in the form of fat results from
1

thousands of years of evolution in an environment characterized
by limited or uncertain food supplies. Those who could store
energy in times of plenty were more likely to survive periods of
famine and to pass this tendency to their offspring. Obesity as a
disease with pathologic consequences for a large percentage of
the general public is less than a century old. The current avail-
ability of inexpensive, high-energy food and the reduced need
to expend energy for daily living and work has allowed obesity
to become an ‘‘equal opportunity’’ state of health.
Attitudes about body weight have ﬂuctuated with the times.
In the mid-19th century, the health reformer Sylvester Graham
declared that overeating, or gluttony, was a great threat to both
health and morality in the United States. In Graham’s view, glut-
tony led to a state of what he called ‘‘over stimulation’’ that
would eventually lead to illness and moral failings (Luciano
2001). During America’s Gilded Age (1878–1889), fat bodies were
equated with fat wallets, while thinness was associated with
poverty. Rich men were depicted in the media with gold watch
chains stretched across their ample bellies. The fashion of over-
indulgence was embodied by Diamond Jim Brady, a railroad
equipment salesman who was known for his voracious appetite.
A typical meal for Brady could include three dozen oysters, six
crabs, soup, a half-dozen lobsters, two ducks, steak, vegetables,
and a platter of desserts, followed by a two-pound box of candy.
When he died at age 56, an autopsy showed his stomach was six
times the size of that of a normal man. The fat person as a posi-
tive model did not persist past the 19th century. President Wil-
liam Taft, who weighed 355 pounds when he took ofﬁce and
suffered the indignity of getting stuck in the White House bath-
tub, was the last obese president (Luciano 2001).
A number of reasons explain this turnaround in attitudes
about fatness. In the early 1920s, movies began to play a major
role in shaping ideals of bodily perfection. Movie stars radiated
youth, good health, and sex appeal. To look beautiful on ﬁlm,
actors and actresses had to be slim because ﬁlming on camera
created the illusion that they carried extra pounds. From 1930
into the 1950s, it became fashionable for women to have a fuller
bust and slender waist. Women were wearing girdles to narrow
their waists and padded bras to enhance their breast line. Follow-
ing World War II, fuller shapes became the accepted norm for
housewives and mothers. Actresses like Jayne Mansﬁeld and
Marilyn Monroe, with their hourglass ﬁgures, were the
2
Background and History

voluptuous female ideal. During the late 1960s and early 1970s,
the feminist movement questioned existing female stereotypes.
The self-health movement at the time encouraged women to take
pride in their body. This new concern of women about health and
ﬁtness fostered an industry that promoted cellulite creams, exer-
cises to develop so-called buns of steel, and liposuction to
remove unwanted fat. After the 1970s, a new, more athletic look
became popular as increasing numbers of men and women
began to participate in sports and regular exercise. In spite of
the continuing popularity of the athletic body type, the prevail-
ing look among top fashion models has remained ultrathin.
Through television, movies, and magazines, the media set
unrealistic standards for desirable body weight and appearance.
And portrayal of what is attractive and healthy keeps getting
thinner and thinner for women and more muscular for men. At
the beginning of the 21st century, two-thirds of Americans were
overweight. In the next decades the population is expected to
include a greater proportion of older people. The media image
of health and beauty will be increasingly out of step with a pop-
ulation that is growing older and fatter.
The belief that weight and health could—and should—be
under one’s personal control generated a proliferation of dieting
plans and treatments. One of the ﬁrst commercially available diets
came from William Banting in 1864. It was based on a high-
protein and high-fat ‘‘low farinaceous’’ plan recommended to
him by his doctor. Enthusiastic about his weight loss, he pub-
lished the diet as ‘‘A Letter on Corpulence, Addressed to the Pub-
lic’’ (Banting 1864). The plan became so popular that people spoke
of ‘‘banting’’ when they went on any weight loss diet. Before the
pure food and drug laws were passed in the United States, indi-
viduals seeking a cure-all for obesity were treated with doses of
such products as vinegar and soap. Other ingredients used exten-
sively in the 1920s that produced almost instant weight reduction
were laxatives, which caused diarrhea, and purgatives, which
induced vomiting. In the early 1900s, popular weight-loss drugs
included a wide array of animal-derived thyroid, arsenic, and
strychnine. Each could cause temporary weight loss, but they
were unsafe to use. Newspapers of the time carried advertise-
ments for Kellogg’s Safe Fat Reducer, a much-promoted remedy
that contained an extract of animal thyroid glands. Through a
combination of aggressive advertising and questionable ethics,
Kellogg’s became a popular remedy for people seeking rapid
Background and History
3

weight loss. It was eventually revealed that the Safe Fat Reducer
was a combination of thyroid extract, some laxatives, and bread-
crumbs. Thyroid hormone as the active ingredient increased risk
of hypertension, cardiac arrest, and stroke. Long-term use could
result in loss of normal thyroid function, osteoporosis, increased
heart rate, sweating, chest pain, and sudden death. The American
Medical Association was successful in getting the thyroid extract
removed from the product. However, it remained on the market
and sold simply as a laxative.
For decades thyroid hormone was medically prescribed for
obesity with the hope that an increase in metabolic rate would
result in weight loss. Long-term studies demonstrated that weight
loss occurring during thyroid hormone administration was due in
part to the breakdown of vital protein as well as unwanted fat. In
the 1930s, doctors prescribed dinitrophenol, a benzene-derived
ingredient in World War I explosives. Dinitrophenol did increase
metabolism and produced weight loss, but the drug was aban-
doned because of severe side effects, including neuropathy and
cataracts. During that time it was legal to sell untested remedies
because drugmakers were not required to prove that their prod-
ucts were safe before they were put on the market.
Defining and Measuring Overweight
and Obesity
Deﬁning overweight and obesity is somewhat subjective and
imprecise. ‘‘Overweight’’ is deﬁned as having more body weight
than is considered normal or healthy for one’s age or build. The
term ‘‘obese’’ is used for very overweight people who have a
high percentage of body fat. Normal weights have been vari-
ously referred to as ‘‘ideal,’’ ‘‘desirable,’’ or ‘‘healthy.’’ In addi-
tion to these subjective terms are several objective measures
that are used to classify individual weight.
Indirect Measuring Methods
Height-Weight Tables
In 1942, Louis Dublin, a statistician at Metropolitan Life Insur-
ance Company, grouped some 4 million people who were
insured with Metropolitan Life into categories based on their
4
Background and History

height, body frame (small, medium, or large), and weight. He
discovered that those who lived the longest were the people
who maintained their body weight at the level for average 25-
year-olds. The results were published in the Met Life standard
height-weight tables for men and women, which were trans-
formed from a record of national averages of weight in relation
to age, sex, and height to the accepted guides for a healthy
weight (MLIC 1942, 1943). The ‘‘1942–1943 Metropolitan Height
and Weight Tables’’ shown in Table 6.1 in Chapter 6 became
widely used for determining ‘‘ideal’’ body weights.
In 1959, research indicated that the lowest mortality rates
were associated with lower-than-average weights, and the
phrase ‘‘desirable weight’’ replaced ‘‘ideal weight’’ in the height
and weight table (MLIC 1959). The weights were derived from
those weight-for-height proportions associated with lowest mor-
tality among people in the United States and Canada who pur-
chased life insurance policies from 1935 to 1954. However, these
weights were associated with the lowest death rates but not nec-
essarily with the lowest morbidity (rate of illness or disease). In
1983, the tables were revised once again and called simply
‘‘height and weight tables.’’ The weights given in the 1983 tables
are heavier than the 1942 tables because, in general, heavier peo-
ple were living longer (MLIC 1983). It is interesting to note that
neither medical nor academic experts were the authoritative voi-
ces in setting weight guidelines. It was the life insurance indus-
try that established the system of weight classiﬁcation that
became part of medical practice throughout the United States.
A number of criticisms surrounded the use of a table to
determine whether an individual is at the right weight—or even
what ‘‘ideal weight’’ means. Experts have criticized the validity
of the Met Life tables for several reasons:
•
Insured people tend to be healthier than uninsured
people.
•
Frame size was not consistently measured.
•
The tables were based on a predominantly white, middle-
class population.
•
Some individuals were actually weighed and some
reported their estimated weight.
•
Height and weight were measured in people wearing
shoes and clothing of varying amounts and weights.
Defining and Measuring Overweight and Obesity
5

•
Both smokers and nonsmokers were included. Smoking is a
signiﬁcant factor that increases risk of disease and death.
Thus, height-weight tables should be used only as a guide,
and other measurements should be included for health evaluation.
People in the United States were able to ﬁnd out how much
they weighed when penny scales were imported from Germany
in the 1880s. Soon after, the National Scale Company manufac-
tured the ﬁrst coin-operated scales in the United States. These
scales were among the ﬁrst automatic vending machines. Being
able to weigh oneself was a novelty at the time, and during the
1920s and 1930s, coin-operated scales appeared in drugstores in
almost every city and town. In the 1940s, improvements in
mechanical scale technology made inexpensive personal scales
available for in-home use. Today, we can choose bathroom scales
that are digital, that are solar powered, or that ‘‘talk’’ and say the
weight aloud. The accuracy in these scales may vary, but they
serve the general purpose of measuring whether body weight is
going up or down.
Estimated Ideal Body Weight
In 1964, Dr. G. J. Hamwi developed a simple rule for estimating
ideal body weight (IBW). The Hamwi formulas have become
very popular since they ﬁrst appeared in a publication of the
American Diabetes Association (Hamwi 1964). They have
remained a well-accepted method of calculating ideal weight in
clinical situations. The formulas for IBW are:
Men—106 pounds for the ﬁrst 5 feet; 6 pounds for each inch
over 5 feet
Women—100 pounds for the ﬁrst 5 feet; 5 pounds for each
inch over 5 feet
In addition, a range of 10 percent variation above or below
the calculated weight was allowed for individual differences.
Example:
The estimated ideal body weight of a man who is 5 feet, 11
inches tall would be calculated as:
106 + (6 × 11) = 106 + 66 = 172 pounds
The range with 10 percent variation below and above is 155
to 189 pounds (10 percent of 172 = about 17 pounds, so 172 – 17
= 155 and 172 + 17 = 189).
6
Background and History

The estimated ideal body weight of a woman who is 5 feet 4
inches tall would be calculated as:
100 + (5 × 4) = 100 + 20 = 120 pounds
The range with 10 percent variation below and above is 113
to 137 pounds (10 percent of 120 = 12 pounds, so 125 – 12 = 113
and 125 + 12 = 137).
The IBW does not correlate weight to health or prevention of
disease. One criticism of the IBW formula is that it does not allow
for body composition or body type. Someone with large bones or
with a high percentage of lean tissue (muscle) would appear to
be overweight according to this method. For some, the IBW
may be an unrealistic range, and they may try unnecessary or
fad dieting to reach the ‘‘ideal’’ number.
Body Mass Index
As deﬁnitions of overweight have varied widely, health experts
have struggled to develop a useful deﬁnition of healthy weight.
Their recommendations have evolved from weight-for-height
standards to sex-speciﬁc references. The most recent proposal is
to use a single number, the body mass index (BMI) that is applied
to all adults. BMI is a calculated number, based on height and
weight of an individual. It is calculated as:
BMI = weight (lb)/[height (in)]2 × 703
(standard units of measure)
or as:
BMI = weight (kg)/[height (m)]2 (metric units of measure)
where kg = kilogram, m = meter, lb = pound, and in = inch.
This number is used to analyze health effects of body
weight. Because it is independent of age and reference popula-
tion, BMI can be used for comparisons across studies both in
the United States and internationally. The BMI is more generous
than the IBW. BMI calculations are meant to be applied only to
adults over age 20. At age two, children can be given a BMI num-
ber; however, they are rated differently from adults.
Defining and Measuring Overweight and Obesity
7

BMI can be calculated in inches and pounds (in the United
States) or in meters and kilograms (in countries that use the met-
ric system).
One can calculate BMI by dividing weight in pounds by
height in inches squared and multiplying that number by a con-
version factor of 703.
Example:
If one’s weight is 150 pounds and height is 5′5″ (65″), the
BMI is calculated as:
[150 ÷ (65)2] × 703 = 24.96
With the metric system, the formula for BMI is weight in
kilograms divided by height in meters squared.
Example:
If one’s weight is 68 kilograms and height is 165 centimeters
(1.65 meters), the BMI is calculated as:
68 ÷ (1.65)2 = 24.98
One can use available tables to easily determine BMI (see
Table 6.2 in Chapter 6) or enter one’s weight and height into a
Web-based BMI calculator. One such calculator is made available
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) at
http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/bmi/.
Based upon guidelines from the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute and the World Health Organization, Table 1.1
shows weight ranges compared with BMI values used to deter-
mine weight status.
8
Background and History
TABLE 1.1
Weight Ranges, BMI Values, and Weight Status
Height
Weight Range
BMI
Considered
5´ 9´´
124 lb. or less
Below 18.5
Underweight
125 lb. to 168 lb.
18.5 to 24.9
Healthy weight
169 lb. to 202 lb.
25.0 to 29.9
Overweight
203 lb. or more
30 or higher
Obese
Note: This example is for a person 5 feet 9 inches tall.
Source: CDC (2007a).

The BMI was ﬁrst developed in the mid-1800s by a Belgian
mathematician named Adolphe Quetelet. Quetelet worked with
life insurance companies to determine factors related to birth
and death. These types of correlations using body weight are
common now, but in 1833 the idea was revolutionary. More
recently, governmental agencies and scientiﬁc health organiza-
tions have deﬁned a BMI that correlates with the health risks of
overweight using a statistically derived deﬁnition from a series
of cross-sectional surveys called the National Health and Nutri-
tion Examination Surveys (NHANES). These surveys are
designed to gather information on the health and nutritional sta-
tus of the population of the United States. From 1985 to 1998, the
deﬁnition of overweight in government publications was a BMI
of at least 27.3 for women and 27.8 for men.
In 1995, the World Health Organization recommended a
new classiﬁcation system that included three ‘‘grades’’ of over-
weight using BMI cutoff points of 25, 30, and 40. The Inter-
national Obesity Task Force suggested an additional cutoff point
of 35. Eventually, in June 1998, an expert panel convened by the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) released a report that identi-
ﬁed being overweight as having a BMI between 25 and 29.9 and
being obese as having a BMI of 30 or above. These deﬁnitions,
widely used by the federal government and increasingly used
by the broader medical and scientiﬁc communities, are based
on evidence that health risks increase more steeply in individ-
uals with a BMI greater than 25. The term ‘‘morbid obesity’’ is
still used for medical coding purposes for individuals with a
BMI of 40 or above; however, the NIH recommends the use of
other descriptive terms, such as ‘‘Class III obesity,’’ ‘‘extreme
obesity,’’ or ‘‘clinically severe obesity.’’
Use of BMI cutoffs has been varied, yielding contrasting
results. A shift in BMI criteria can have a large effect on the pop-
ulation at risk (Kuczmarski and Flegal 2000). For example, when
applying the BMI cutoffs of ≥27.8 for men and ≥27.3 for women
to NHANES III—data collected between 1988 and 1994—the
prevalence of overweight is 33 percent for men and 36 percent
for women (CDC 1999). In contrast, with the lower BMI cutoff
of ≥25.0, the prevalence is 59 percent among men and 51 percent
among women. Changing the overweight group cutoff increases
the estimated number of overweight adults from 61.7 million to
97.1 million, putting 35.4 million more adults into the overweight
category.
Defining and Measuring Overweight and Obesity
9

Limitations and Shortcomings
Measuring body weight and body dimensions—or anthropom-
etry—is a quick and inexpensive way to estimate body fatness.
However, using calculated numbers such as BMI does have lim-
itations. A problem with using BMI as a measurement tool is that
very muscular people may be classiﬁed as overweight when they
are actually healthy. Similarly, people who have lost muscle
mass, such as the elderly, may have a weight that is in the healthy
BMI category when they actually have a high percentage of body
fat. The health risks associated with overweight and obesity are
based on a continuum and do not necessarily correspond to strict
cutoff points. For example, an overweight individual with a BMI
of 29 does not substantially add to his or her health consequences
simply by moving up one notch to a BMI of 30, the threshold of
the obese category (WIN 2006). Because health risks generally
do increase with increasing BMI, it is a useful screening tool for
individuals and a general guideline to monitor trends in the pop-
ulation. By itself, BMI is not diagnostic for individual health sta-
tus. Further assessment should be performed to evaluate
associated health risks.
BMI ranges for children and teens are deﬁned so that they
take into account normal differences between boys and girls at
various ages. After BMI is calculated, the BMI number is plotted
on BMI-for-age growth charts speciﬁc for either girls or boys to
obtain a percentile ranking. The percentile indicates the relative
position of the child’s BMI number among children of the same
sex and age. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
BMI-for-age weight status categories and the corresponding per-
centiles are shown in Table 1.2.
The CDC provides more information about BMI for children
and teens at an interactive Web site, http://www.cdc.gov/
nccdphp/dnpa/healthyweight/assessing/bmi/childrens_BMI/
about_childrens_BMI.htm.
Debate is ongoing among researchers and health professio-
nals about whether BMI is a reasonable indicator of body fatness,
as the correlation between the BMI and body fatness can vary
greatly according to sex, age, and race. For example:
•
At the same BMI, women tend to have more body fat
than men.
10
Background and History

•
At the same BMI, older people, on average, tend to have
more body fat than younger adults.
•
Race and ethnicity issues are inherent in BMI
measurements.
BMI does not take into account how people of different races and
ethnicities vary in muscle mass versus fat mass. People of Afri-
can and Polynesian ancestry may have less body fat and more
lean muscle mass for a given weight, and thus a higher baseline
BMI for overweight and obesity may be appropriate for these
populations. At the other end of the scale, one study found that
current BMI thresholds signiﬁcantly underestimate health risks
in many non-Europeans (Gallagher 2004). The body fat percent-
age of an Asian would be higher than that of a Caucasian of the
same height and weight. Even within normal BMI ranges, Asian
groups have a high risk of weight-related health problems, and
they begin to have abnormalities in their blood glucose levels
above a BMI of 21. It has been suggested that BMI levels be
dropped to 23 and 25 for overweight and obesity, respectively,
among Asian populations (Razak et al. 2007).
Assessing Percentage of Body Fat
BMI is not a speciﬁc index of fatness because its numerator—
measured body weight—may reﬂect muscle, bone, or body
water in addition to fat. The percentage of body fat is difﬁcult
to measure directly. Fat, or adipose, tissue is stored underneath
the skin as subcutaneous fat; as intramuscular fat, interspersed
in skeletal muscle; and as visceral adipose tissue, found deep in
the body around vital organs. Body fat can be divided into two
Assessing Percentage of Body Fat
11
TABLE 1.2
Children’s BMI-for-Age Weight Status
Weight Status Category
Percentile Range (compared with boys or girls of same age)
Underweight
Less than the 5th percentile
Healthy weight
5th percentile to less than the 85th percentile
At risk of overweight
85th to less than the 95th percentile
Overweight
Equal to or greater than the 95th percentile
Source: CDC (2007a).

categories according to its physiological purpose: Essential fat
cushions and insulates organs and is necessary for normal body
function. Nonessential fat is excess energy stored away for future
use. Although no universal body fat standards are in place, the
American Council on Exercise has suggested an average amount
of body fat of 18 to 24 percent for men and 25 to 31 percent for
women. Any amount over that range would be considered
obesity (ACSM 2001).
The distribution of adipose tissue is important, because over-
weight and obese adults are divided into risk categories depend-
ing on body shape and location of fat deposits. ‘‘Pear shaped’’
individuals, who have fat deposits on their hips and thighs, are
less susceptible to obesity-related diseases than ‘‘apple shaped’’
people, who store fat in the abdominal area. Abdominal fat accu-
mulation is generally considered to be a key health risk indicator,
as increased waist circumference is associated strongly with car-
diovascular disease and is a good predictor of future risk of type
2 diabetes and all-cause mortality. Measuring waist circumfer-
ence is a simple procedure that provides information about fat
distribution, but it is unclear how commonly clinicians measure
waist circumference. Anecdotal evidence suggests that this prac-
tice is not routine. As part of a complete health risk assessment,
health care professionals are urged to incorporate waist circum-
ference along with measuring weight, height, and BMI calcula-
tions (Ford, Mokdad, and Giles 2003).
Direct Measuring Methods
Direct measures of body fat include underwater weighing, bio-
electrical impedance analysis (BIA), dual energy X-ray absorpti-
ometry (DEXA), and skinfold thickness. These measures of
body fat can be expensive or time consuming and are not nor-
mally used by primary care clinicians. However, they can com-
plement BMI to assess risk and monitor the progress of
therapeutic interventions (Erselcan et al. 2000).
Underwater Weighing
Underwater weighing, also known as densitometry or hydrostatic
weighing, has long been the gold standard for determining body
composition (relative amounts of fat and lean). This technique
involves weighing a person when dry and then measuring his or
her weight when totally submerged in a tub of water and the air
12
Background and History

in the lungs has been fully exhaled. It is based on Archimedes’
principle, which states that given an equal weight, lower-density
objects have a larger surface area and displace more water than
higher-density objects. Bone and muscle are denser than water
and sinks, and fat is less dense than water and ﬂoats. Of two indi-
viduals of the same weight but with different proportions of fat
and lean, the one with the most body fat weighs less under water.
The volume of water displaced by a person and the difference
between the dry weight and the submerged weight are entered
into equations that can be used to estimate percentage of body
fat. The primary disadvantages of this method are the cost and
time required, the subject having to be underwater, and the vari-
ability in the ability of individuals to fully exhale. This technique
is not a useful approach for large-scale studies, and in terms of
precision, a DEXA scan is an alternative.
Dual Energy X-ray Absorptiometry
With DEXA, a scanner measures body composition using low
energy X-rays. This method was originally developed to evaluate
changes in bone mineral density, but it also reveals total body
composition. DEXA works by passing two X-ray beams through
the individual and measuring the amount of X-ray absorbed by
the tissue it has passed through. One beam is high intensity and
one is low intensity, so the relative absorbance of each beam is
an indication of the density of the tissue. DEXA differentiates
fat from lean mass, as tissue with greater density (e.g., bone and
muscle) shows a greater reduction in X-ray that passes through
and that can be detected. The amount of radiation energy that is
used with DEXA is extremely small. It would take approximately
800 full-body DEXA scans to equal the exposure to the amount of
radiation received from one standard chest X-ray. The level of
radiation is low enough that DEXA is approved by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration as a screening device to predict body
composition. DEXA is a very accurate measure of body fat,
although it is expensive and is generally limited to clinical
research studies (Bolanowski and Nilsson 2001).
Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis
BIA is based on the principle that body tissue is capable of con-
ducting electricity. Water is a good conductor of electricity, and
most body water is found in lean tissue. Fat, which has almost
no water in it, is such a poor conductor of electricity that it
Assessing Percentage of Body Fat
13

actually impedes, or slows down, the electrical ﬂow. High mea-
sured resistance equals a high level of fat. Impedance is calcu-
lated by entering the resistance data into regression equations
that take into account the person’s weight, age, gender, and eth-
nicity. The BIA method is population speciﬁc, and an equation
must be used that is speciﬁc to the population being measured
(Heymsﬁeld et al. 1996). Although this type of measurement ini-
tially required a laboratory procedure that involved attaching
electrodes to the hands and feet, the technology now features
easy-to-use devices, including at-home ﬂoor scales. BIA is con-
sidered to be safe because BIA currents (at a frequency of 50 kilo-
hertz) are unlikely to stimulate electrically excitable tissues, such
as nerves or cardiac muscle. The small current magnitudes are
less than the threshold of perception—that is, they are not notice-
able. Anyone with an implanted deﬁbrillator should avoid BIA
evaluation because even small currents could potentially pro-
voke an incorrect deﬁbrillator response (NHLBI 1998).
Measurement
Skinfold measurement is an inexpensive option for estimating
body fat based on the assumption that subcutaneous fat reﬂects
the total fat content of the body. Calipers are used to measure
subcutaneous fat at speciﬁc sites around the body, including the
chest, hip, abdomen, thigh, and upper arm. Prediction equations
that help estimate body fat from skinfold sites can be examined
in Table 6.3 in Chapter 6.
The skinfold technique is prone to signiﬁcant measurement
errors. Limitations on how wide the calipers open can make skin-
fold measurement challenging to use with extremely obese
patients. In addition, not all body fat, such as intra-abdominal
and intramuscular fat, is accessible to the calipers, and the distri-
bution of subcutaneous fat can vary signiﬁcantly throughout the
human body. Although skinfold measurements are easily admin-
istered and are practical for large studies, they have been found
to provide the least accurate estimates of percentage of body fat
(Wang et al. 2000).
Obesity Trends in the United States
According to the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS),
an agency connected with the CDC, 66 percent of U.S. adults
14
Background and History

age 20 years and older are either overweight or obese (NCHS
2006). The NCHS has been gathering data about obesity in the
United States since 1960. In the ﬁrst survey, almost 13 percent of
the population was obese. Obesity rates showed a slight increase
up to 1976–1980, then a rapid rise. More than twice as many U.S.
men and women were classiﬁed as obese in 1999–2000 as in 1960.
Table 1.3 illustrates how obesity has increased in American
adults to the point that 3 out of 10 are obese.
The continuing trend of increasing obesity in the United
States can be seen in Figure 6.1 in Chapter 6, ‘‘Obesity Trends
Among U.S. Adults,’’ showing the prevalence of obesity across
each state. This increase in prevalence has occurred among all
racial and ethnic groups; in men, women, and children; among
all educational levels; and throughout all regions of the United
States. However, some groups have consistently seen higher
prevalence than others. In 2006, the southeastern region of the
United States had the highest prevalence of obesity and over-
weight, led by Mississippi and West Virginia, which each had a
prevalence of obesity equal to or greater than 30 percent of its
population.
Since 1980, a similar increase in overweight has been seen
among children and adolescents. Table 1.4 shows NHANES
1999–2004 estimates of overweight among young people com-
pared with prior and later NHANES ﬁgures. The data suggest
that overweight in this population has been consistently increas-
ing since it was ﬁrst measured in 1963.
Although there is no generally accepted deﬁnition for
‘‘obesity’’ as distinct from ‘‘overweight’’ in children and adoles-
cents, NCHS data show that between the 1976–1980 and 2003–
2004 surveys, the prevalence of overweight was as follows:
Obesity Trends in the United States
15
TABLE 1.3
Prevalence of Overweight and Obesity among U.S. Adults, Age 20 Years and Over (%)
NHANES III
(1988–94)
NHANES
(1999–2000)
NHANES
(2001–02)
NHANES
(2003–04)
Percent overweight or obese
(BMI greater than or equal to 25.0)
56.0
64.5
65.7
66.3
Percent obese
(BMI greater than or equal to 30.0)
22.9
30.5
30.6
32.2
Source: CDC (2007b).

•
Increased from 5.0 percent to 13.9 percent among
preschool-age children, age 2–5 years.
•
Increased from 4.0 percent to 18.8 percent among school-
age children, age 6–11 years.
•
Increased from 6.1 percent to 17.4 percent among school-
age adolescents, age 12–19 years (NCHS 2006).
A young person with excess weight has a high risk of
obesity-related health problems in the future. Overweight ado-
lescents have a 70 percent chance of becoming overweight or
obese adults. Heart disease related to high cholesterol and high
blood pressure occurs with increased frequency in overweight
young people compared with those with a healthy weight. Type
2 diabetes, closely linked to overweight and obesity and previ-
ously considered an adult disease, has increased signiﬁcantly in
children and adolescents. Experts harbor serious concerns that
the current generation of children will experience debilitating
chronic diseases in adulthood and will actually have a shorter
life span than their parents (Olshansky et al. 2005).
Obesity as a National Health Problem
When Brandreth Symonds, a life insurance statistician, pub-
lished ‘‘The Inﬂuence of Overweight and Underweight on Vital-
ity’’ in 1908, his statistical analysis of insurance policyholders
showed that overweight was a greater risk factor for a shortened
life span than underweight. Dr. Symonds wrote, ‘‘Speaking gen-
erally, it is safer to be thin than fat’’ (Symonds 1908).
16
Background and History
TABLE 1.4
Prevalence of Overweight among Children and Adolescents
Age
(years)
NHANES
1963–65,
1966–70
NHANES
1971–74
NHANES
1988–94
NHANES
1999–2000
NHANES
2001–02
NHANES
2003–04
6–11
4.2
4.0
11.3
15.1
16.3
18.8
12–19
4.6
6.1
10.5
14.8
16.7
17.4
Source: NCHS (2006).

In 1943, enough of the U.S. population was above the IBW
that the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company declared, ‘‘Over-
weight is so common that it constitutes a national health problem
of the ﬁrst order’’ (MLIC 1943). In a classic paper, Dr. Lester Bres-
low noted that ‘‘one out of six ‘well people’ . . . were 20 percent or
more overweight’’ and that weight control was a ‘‘major public
health problem’’ (Breslow 1952). The obesity prevalence esti-
mates in Breslow’s paper are small compared with current ﬁg-
ures showing that 65 percent of U.S. adults are now classiﬁed as
overweight or obese. Former U.S. Surgeon General David
Satcher declared obesity to be a ‘‘public health epidemic’’ in the
2001 publication ‘‘Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Prevent
and Decrease Overweight and Obesity.’’ He said, ‘‘Health prob-
lems resulting from overweight and obesity could reverse many
of the health gains achieved in the U.S. in recent decades’’
(HHS 2001).
Healthy People 2010, a U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services health promotion and disease prevention pro-
gram, highlights overweight and obesity as key indicators of
national health. It set an objective to reduce the prevalence of
obesity among adults to less than 15 percent. The United States
has made little progress toward that target. In fact, current data
indicate that the obesity situation is getting worse.
Why Are We Overweight?
The obesity crisis did not happen overnight. It has been develop-
ing for decades, but only recently has it attracted much public
attention. The U.S. population has experienced steady gains in
both weight and height since the late 19th century. These gains
improved our capability to withstand diseases and increased
our longevity. Between 1900 and 2000, life expectancy at birth in
the United States increased by 65 percent for women and by 60
percent for men. Gains in height among U.S. adults have leveled
off, and weight has continued to increase. As obesity and over-
weight have risen in our population, the greatest increase in the
past two decades has been seen in the prevalence of extreme
obesity. Those who are severely obese are most at risk for serious
health problems (NHLBI 1998; NIH 1998).
Most people are aware of the health problems associated
with excess weight. Diet books top the best-seller list and the
Why Are We Overweight?
17

electronic and print media are loaded with nutrition advice, but
successful individual weight management is haphazard or even
nonexistent. Why are Americans overweight? Is it the availabil-
ity of fast food? Oversized portions? Too much TV? Experts
argue about the causes or contributors to overweight and obesity,
but the realistic answer is, too many calories. The reality is that
we eat too much and move too little. At the most fundamental
level, weight gain is caused by the imbalance between food and
activity: too much energy in and too little energy out. Weight
gain is the normal physiologic response that occurs when energy
intake exceeds energy expenditure.
Obesity is a consequence of our modern life. We have access
to large amounts of palatable, high-calorie food and a limited
need for physical activity. Humans evolved in an environment
that required vigorous physical activity and was characterized
by cyclical feast and famine. To survive, humans developed an
innate preference for sweet and fatty foods. These natural
defenses against starvation go awry in an environment where
food is always plentiful and technology has reduced the need
for human physical work. As the amount of energy, or calories,
in our food supply has grown in recent decades, each person
has consumed more food. Those extra calories turn into extra
pounds year after year.
Food energy is measured in calories. A calorie is deﬁned as
the amount of energy (or heat) it takes to raise 1 gram of water
(approximately 1 cubic centimeter, or about a thimbleful) 1°C.
In nutrition terms, the word ‘‘calorie’’ is used instead of the more
precise scientiﬁc term ‘‘kilocalorie,’’ or 1,000 calories of energy.
Dietary calories are in fact kilocalories (Kcal), with the ‘‘kilo-’’
preﬁx omitted. Here the terms are interchangeable, with Kcal
used most often with numbers or measurements.
When extra energy in the form of protein (4 Kcal/gram), fat
(9 Kcal/gram), carbohydrate (4 Kcal/gram) and/or alcohol (7
Kcal/gram) is consumed, the excess energy is stored in the form
of body fat. Conversely, by limiting energy intake, body fat loss
will be in proportion to the calorie deﬁcit. Each pound of body
fat represents approximately 3,500 Kcal. Reducing calorie intake
by 500 Kcal per day theoretically results in a 1 pound per week
weight loss. Small changes in food intake can make large differ-
ences over time. For example, using one tablespoon of mayon-
naise on a sandwich instead of two tablespoons can save 100
calories per day. Over a year the total 36,500 Kcal (365 days ×
18
Background and History

100 Kcal/day) deﬁcit could mean a loss of 10 pounds of body fat.
Most people have between 25 billion and 35 billion fat cells. This
number can increase in response to excessive weight gain to as
many as 150 billion cells. Fat cells expand and shrink in size dur-
ing weight gain and loss, but they never disappear.
Because resting metabolic rate (the energy required to main-
tain basic physiologic functions and for digestion) varies widely
among individuals, calorie intake and physical energy expendi-
ture are the most variable components of energy balance.
Changes in eating and activity provide the best opportunities to
prevent or treat obesity (Goran 2000).
Despite concern about the increasing levels of obesity, and
the knowledge that it is caused by excess energy intake and low
levels of physical activity, obesity remains a poorly understood
phenomenon. Considerable gaps remain in our knowledge about
the physiological pathways underlying weight gain and the
effectiveness of dietary, behavioral, and physical activity inter-
ventions. Americans, among the heaviest people on Earth, are
becoming fatter and at an ever younger age. How we got to this
point is an account of the complex interplay between biological,
psychosocial, and economic factors.
Factors That Contribute to Obesity
To understand obesity, we must comprehend the dimensions of
energy balance:
•
Energy in: Factors that affect food consumption
•
Energy out: Factors that affect activity level
•
Metabolic and genetic contributions
Increased Energy Intake
The surge in obesity in the United States reﬂects an increase in
per capita energy intake between 1970 and 1997 from 2,220 Kcal
to 2,680 Kcal. These ﬁgures are estimated from the total food
available in the national supply (Putnam, Kantor, and Allshouse
2000). Several factors have encouraged Americans to eat more. In
the early 1980s, food production was an average of 3,300 calories
a day for every person. Then U.S. farm policy changed, in a way
that moved farmers toward lower price supports, greater
Factors That Contribute to Obesity
19

planting ﬂexibility and greater orientation to market forces.
Farmers increased harvests and no longer plowed under food
crops to get subsidies for reducing production. Today, American
farmers produce enough food to allow every person 3,900
calories a day. Food prices in stores and restaurants have been
declining relative to prices of all other items. Between 1952 and
2003, the ratio of food prices to the price of all other goods fell
by 12 percent. Foods that once were available only seasonally
are now available year-round, and advances in food processing
and packaging have made available a multitude of ready-to-eat
foods virtually anywhere at any time (Variyam 2005).
Preparing food is now also more convenient. In 1965, it took
a housewife more than two hours per day to shop for, cook, and
clean up from meals. By 1995, the time it took to do these tasks
was cut in half. Researchers from Harvard University have sug-
gested that the increase in food consumption permitted by the
falling time cost of preparing and acquiring food is a major factor
behind the surge in obesity since 1980 (Variyam 2005).
‘‘A Nation at Risk: Obesity in the United States,’’ published
jointly by the American Heart Association and the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation in 2005, reported data from scientiﬁc
research studies about changes in the eating patterns of Ameri-
cans over the past few decades. Trends that contribute to obesity
are:
1. More calories: Adults consumed approximately 300 more
calories daily in 2000 than they did in 1985.
2. Bigger portion sizes: A study in the Journal of the American
Medical Association cited in this study reported a signiﬁ-
cant rise in portion sizes from 1977 to 1996.
3. A major increase in eating out: Spending in fast-food res-
taurants grew 18 times (from $6 billion to $110 billion) in
the past three decades. In 1970, approximately 30,000
fast-food restaurants were operating in the United States;
in 2001, approximately 222,000 were in operation (AHA
2005).
Distorted Portion Sizes
Portion sizes have dramatically increased in the past 40 years. As
we are exposed to larger quantities of food sold as a single por-
tion, we become victims of ‘‘portion distortion.’’ Many of the
20
Background and History

changes have been too subtle to notice; we have become used to
larger servings, and we now expect them. Consider the maxi-
mum serving size of french fries sold at McDonald’s. It has
increased from 210 calories in 1955 to 610 calories. Greater
increases are seen in the size of soft drinks. In the 1950s, the
standard-size Coca Cola was about 6 ounces. At many U.S. con-
venience stores, 64-ounce (2 quarts) soft drinks are common.
The sizes of mufﬁns, bagels, and croissants also contribute to
portion distortion. Portion-size increases have been continuous
since the 1970s. In a sample of 63,380 individuals who responded
to national surveys conducted by the USDA between 1977 and
1998, food portion sizes consumed at home and in restaurants
increased markedly (Nielsen and Popkin 2003):
•
Salty snacks increased from 1.0 to 1.6 ounces = 93 more
calories.
•
Soft drinks increased from 13.1 to 19.9 ﬂuid ounces = 49
more calories.
•
Hamburgers increased from 5.7 to 7.0 ounces = 97 more
calories.
•
Mexican food increased from 6.3 to 8.0 ounces = 133 more
calories.
Though it only costs a few cents more to get a larger size of
french fries or a soft drink, the result is too many calories for
one person. ‘‘Value meals’’ may not generate any savings when
the monetary and psychological costs of trying to lose weight
gained from eating larger portions are factored in. Large portion
sizes are not limited to meals. Bags of snack foods or soft drinks
in vending machines and grocery stores are available in larger
and larger sizes that contain multiple servings. (The National
Institutes of Health Web site, ‘‘Portion Distortion,’’ has an inter-
active quiz to show how portions today compare with portion
sizes 20 years ago. Visit http://hp2010.nhlbihin.net/portion/to
view the quiz.)
What is the effect of larger portion sizes on food intake?
According to research conducted by Professor Brian Wansink,
people eat more if the product is being eaten from larger pack-
ages (Wansink and Kim 2005). He conducted a ‘‘popcorn test’’
demonstrating that people given large containers of popcorn
ate an average of 44 percent more (equal to about 120 Kcal)
than those who were given small containers, even though they
Factors That Contribute to Obesity
21

said the popcorn did not taste very good. In a study by Rolls and
colleagues, volunteers ate 30 percent more macaroni and cheese
when given large 35 ounce portions than when they were given
smaller 18 ounce portions during a meal (Rolls, Morris, and Roe
2002). Consumers eat more from large servings, but, more impor-
tant, they also get a distorted impression of what a reasonable
serving size really is.
Large food portions affect children’s energy intake at meals,
even among toddlers (Fisher et al. 2007). Children ranging in age
from two to nine years were either given an age-appropriate
entre´e at the dinner meal or a portion size twice as large as the
age-appropriate portion. The study results showed that children
as young as two years had a 13 percent higher energy intake at
the meal when given the large-portion entre´e. Interestingly, chil-
dren took a similar number of bites regardless of the portion size,
but they took bigger bites when served the larger portion.
What Is the Difference between Portion Size and Serving Size?
Portion control is not easy. Standardized servings used to
develop labeling laws and the U.S. Department of Agriculture
Food Guide Pyramid are much smaller than portions commonly
consumed. Portion size is the amount of a single food item
served in a single eating occasion, such as a meal or a snack. A
portion is the amount offered to a person in a restaurant, the
amount offered in the packaging of prepared foods, or the quan-
tity a person chooses to put on his or her plate.
Serving size is a standardized unit of measuring foods—for
example, a cup or an ounce—used in the Dietary Guidelines for
Americans and listed on a product label’s nutrition facts. The por-
tion and serving size may match, but frequently they are differ-
ent. For example, bagels or mufﬁns are often sold in portion
sizes that comprise at least two servings. When consumers eat
the whole product, they may think that they have eaten only a
single serving (CDC 2006).
Food labels can help people understand that portions are
often larger than they think. For example, one serving of potato
or corn chips might supply just 100 calories. But when the serv-
ing size is only 10 chips and there are 10 servings per bag, the
calories really add up if a person ﬁnishes the whole bag. The
nutrition facts labels on beverage containers often give the
calories for only part of the contents. The label on a 20-ounce bot-
tle often lists the number of calories in an 8-ounce serving even
22
Background and History

though the bottle contains 20 ounces, or 2.5 servings. To ﬁgure
out how many calories are in the whole bottle, one must multiply
the number of calories in one serving by the number of servings
in the bottle (100 × 2.5). The whole bottle actually contains 250
calories. It is important to look closely at the serving size when
determining the calorie content of beverages. Note that the serv-
ing size on the nutrition facts label is not a recommended
amount of food to eat; it is just the calories and nutrients in a
given amount of food.
Drinking More Calories
Sugar-sweetened beverages, including sweetened fruit drinks
and carbonated drinks, account for nearly half of the added sug-
ars in the U.S. diet (Guthrie and Morton 2000). In 1997, 2.8 mil-
lion vending machines dispensed more than 27 billion drinks.
Most of those drinks came in 12-ounce cans, but the soft drink
trend is toward serving sizes of 20 ounces or more. The larger
the container, the more beverage people will drink, especially
when they assume that the container is a single serving, whether
it is 12 ounces, 20 ounces, or more (Johnson et al. 2007).
Soft drinks contribute extra energy that adds up day after
day and eventually leads to overweight and obesity. Another
reason to limit sugar-sweetened drinks is that liquid calories
may not be recognized by the body’s appetite feedback mecha-
nisms. People normally adjust or moderate energy intake by eat-
ing less after a large meal, but that moderation occurs more
readily with solid foods than with beverages. This phenomenon
was seen in a study of men and women who were given 450
extra calories per day as either 3- to 12-ounce cans of soda or 45
large jelly beans. The people who ate the candy adjusted for the
extra energy and later ate less. Those who got the extra liquid
calories made no compensation afterward; subsequently, their
overall calorie intake increased. The author of the article stated,
‘‘Liquid calories don’t trip our satiety mechanisms. They just
don’t register’’ (DiMeglio and Mattes 2000).
Conveniently Available Food
Meals eaten away from home allow easy and often inexpensive
access to large quantities of calorie-rich foods. In 1970, away-
from-home meals represented 25 percent of households’ total
Factors That Contribute to Obesity
23

food budget. In 1995, that percentage had risen to 40 percent
(Guthrie, Lin, and Frazao 2002). The National Restaurant Associ-
ation reported that in 1981 the average American ate 3.7 commer-
cially prepared meals per week. By 2000, that number had
increased to 4.2 per week. All those meals have contributed to
the increase in overweight and obesity, as the frequency of eating
in restaurants has been positively associated with body fatness.
Ample evidence exists to show that, ounce for ounce, foods eaten
away from home are more calorie dense than foods prepared at
home (McCrory et al. 1999). As the food service industry offers
more choices, from fast food to a wide array of ethnic restau-
rants, the popularity of dining out implies that desire for conven-
ience and variety overrides concern about obesity.
Physical Inactivity
Along with a growing tendency to consume more calories,
Americans have become less active overall than they were 20
years ago. Given labor-saving devices, from personal automo-
biles to e-mail, and a technology-driven workforce that is shift-
ing from physically demanding manual labor to sedentary
work, we cannot expect daily caloric expenditure to increase.
For most people daily work no longer provides the opportunity
for physical activity that it once did. As jobs have become more
sedentary, the workweek has been expanding, so even less time
is available for leisure-time physical activity. Television viewing
accounts for half of the average adult’s leisure time in the United
States (Hu et al. 2001).
The CDC and the Ofﬁce of the Surgeon General recommend
that all adults should do at least 30 minutes of moderate-
intensity physical activity most days of the week. National statis-
tics from 2000 indicate that only about 20 percent of Americans
reached the minimum activity goal. This percentage of inactive
people has not changed since the 1970s, but during that period
the population increased by about 60 million people, meaning
that the number of sedentary Americans actually increased by
48 million. Activity does not need to be high intensity or done
all at one time to be beneﬁcial. An example of a moderate-
intensity activity is brisk walking (a pace of 15 to 20 minutes
per mile) for 30 minutes. The 30 minutes can be divided into
three walks of 10 minutes each and still meet the recommenda-
tion (CDC 2008).
24
Background and History

Due to the reduction of physical education in schools, the
lack of access to playgrounds, and concerns for physical safety,
many children do not get the recommended amount of daily
activity. Researchers at Johns Hopkins University reported that
watching television is the number one leisure-time activity
among school-age children. A study from 1998 indicated that
more than a quarter of U.S. children watch four or more hours
of television a day (Andersen et al. 1998). A more recent study
reported that youth 6 to 13 years old spend approximately three
hours per day watching television; however, when time spent
on computers and video games is added, screen media exposure
exceeds ﬁve hours per day (Jordan 2006). Television viewing
affects childhood obesity in two ways: Watching TV is sedentary,
and food consumption is increased when children eat while
viewing programs or as they respond to the frequent advertise-
ments of high-calorie fun and exciting foods by reaching for
more snacks (Powell et al. 2007).
Physical Activity and Short-term
Weight Loss
Physical activity has favorable effects on the body’s metabolic
systems, so numerous health beneﬁts are gained from exercise
even without weight loss. This point is important to keep in
mind because, contrary to the belief that exercise causes weight
loss, data from randomized controlled studies suggest that add-
ing exercise to dietary therapy does not signiﬁcantly increase
short-term weight loss when compared with dieting without
exercise (Wing 1999). Resistance exercise can build strength and
muscle tissue, which may allow an obese or overweight person
to become more physically active; however, neither resistance
nor strength training increases weight loss (Jakicic et al. 2001,
2008). The ineffectiveness of moderate exercise alone to
reduce body fat is not surprising when we consider that 1 pound
of body fat contains the equivalent of about 3,500 Kcal, and
to reduce body fat one must expend more energy than is
taken in.
But moderate exercise is not useless. Depending on a per-
son’s body weight, 15 minutes of brisk walking uses about 100
Kcal. As shown in the list below, walking for 15 minutes seven
Physical Activity and Short-term Weight Loss
25

days a week will theoretically result in only a 0.2-pound weight
loss per week, but a 10-pound loss per year will be achieved if
the walking is done every day and if food energy intake remains
constant.
•
A 15-minute brisk walk uses 100 Kcal of energy.
•
100 Kcal × 7 days = 700 Kcal deﬁcit; 3,500 Kcal per pound
of fat; 700/3,500 = 0.2 pound loss per week.
•
Walking for 15 minutes seven days a week results in a
0.2-pound loss per week.
•
Walking for 15 minutes 365 days a year results in a
10.4-pound loss per year.
Even though physical exercise does not contribute greatly to
weight loss, it is absolutely necessary for weight maintenance
and good health, and moderate exercise is an important factor
in preventing regain after weight is lost.
The opportunity costs of being physically active during lei-
sure time include time, effort, and sometimes money. The value
of an alternate activity given up to spend time walking in the
park has to be balanced with the health beneﬁts. Costs to join a
gym or health club or to purchase ﬁtness equipment may be
incurred. Health economists Darius Lakdawalla and Tomas Phi-
lipson noted that in earlier agricultural and industrial times,
energy expenditure was part of one’s work, and people were
rewarded for their exercise. Today, physical labor is not always
built into daily life, and people must spend time and money for
exercise (Variyam 2005).
Metabolic and Genetic Contributions
Complex biological mechanisms involving fat cells, hormones,
and neurochemical pathways in the brain regulate the balance
between energy input and energy expenditure. Fat cells in the
body serve two major functions: They store and release fatty
acids ingested from food, and they secrete an array of biologi-
cally active molecules including the hormone leptin (Bray and
Champagne 2005). Leptin, from the Greek word leptos, meaning
thin, is a hormone produced by fat cells that are also called adi-
pocytes. The hormone was discovered in the 1990s in genetically
obese mice that carried the ob, or obese, gene, which rendered
26
Background and History

them unable to make any leptin. Leptin thus regulates energy
expenditure and food intake in rodents. As the amount of fat
stored in adipocytes increases, leptin is released into the blood-
stream and signals to the brain that the body has had enough to
eat. Absolute leptin deﬁciency in humans, as in mice, causes
severe obesity. These genetic defects are extremely rare in
humans. Only about 10 children have been identiﬁed worldwide
who have the disorder.
The discovery of the fat-regulating hormone was met with
great hope that injecting obese patients with leptin could pro-
duce weight loss. However, clinical trials conducted in 1999
showed that, even with high doses of leptin, only a small amount
of weight was lost. The results also demonstrated that most
obese people already have high levels of leptin in their blood-
stream. It was suggested that people with obesity are leptin
resistant, and injecting more of the hormone simply has no effect
(Heymsﬁeld et al. 1999).
Information about hunger and satiety also comes from the
gastrointestinal tract, where several peptides signal people and
animals to stop or start eating. Ghrelin is one peptide that has
received recent attention because, in contrast to other gastroin-
testinal hormones, it stimulates food intake (Cummings and
Shannon 2003).
The brain is a major director in regulation of food intake. It
receives and transmits information about hunger and satiety.
An interesting discovery made in 2004 was that sleep depriva-
tion enhances the release of peptides that produce hunger (Spie-
gel et al. 2004). In men allowed to sleep only 4 hours per night for
two days, leptin decreased and ghrelin increased when com-
pared with the pattern seen in men who slept for 10 hours on
each of the two nights. Is it possible that the epidemic of obesity
may be a response to lack of sleep?
Can We Blame Obesity on Our Genes?
The role of genetic determinants of obesity such as the ob (obese)
gene and the hormone leptin as a modulator of food intake and
energy expenditure are intriguing, but they cannot explain the
recent epidemic of obesity. Our human genome has not signiﬁ-
cantly changed in just a few decades. Genes themselves do not
make a person obese or thin. They merely determine which
Can We Blame Obesity on Our Genes?
27

individuals are susceptible to weight gain in response to envi-
ronmental factors. Genetics loads the gun and the environment
pulls the trigger.
Ways Genes Contribute to Obesity
Not all people exposed to an abundant food supply are obese.
Furthermore, not all obese people exhibit adverse health conse-
quences. This diversity occurs even among groups of the same
racial or ethnic background and within families living in the
same environment. The variation in how people respond to the
same environmental conditions suggests that genes play a role.
A common genetic explanation for the rapid rise in obesity is
the ‘‘thrifty gene’’ hypothesis: The same genes that made it easier
for our ancestors to survive occasional lack of food are now being
challenged by environments in which food is always plentiful.
Ways that genes may inﬂuence individual propensity for
obesity include poor regulation of appetite or the tendency to
overeat, inclination to be sedentary or physically inactive, dimin-
ished metabolic ability to use dietary fats as fuel, and capacity to
preferentially store body fat. The exact pathways by which these
genes exert their effects and interact with environmental factors
is unknown. Exploration of candidate genes through genomics
(the study of genes, their molecular mechanisms, and their asso-
ciations with health and disease) is an important area for future
research regarding overweight and obesity. Use of family history
is a straightforward way for clinicians and public health experts
to reduce the impact of obesity now. Family history reﬂects the
genetic background and environmental exposures shared by
close relatives. Health care practitioners collect family health his-
tories to identify people at high risk of obesity-related disorders
such as diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and some forms of
cancer. Weight loss or prevention of excessive weight gain are
especially important in this high-risk group. Although all people
should follow a healthful diet and incorporate regular physical
activity into their daily routine, health promotion programs to
reduce disease associated with obesity are more effective if they
are directed to the high-risk groups.
Clearly some genetic factors inﬂuence excess weight gain. If
weight control were simply a matter of willpower, obesity would
not be a problem because few people would choose to be fat.
28
Background and History

However, genes are not destiny. Obesity can be prevented or
managed in most cases with a combination of diet, physical
activity, behavior change, medication, or surgery. Finding the
most effective combination of treatments for each individual is
the challenge we now face.
Consequences of Overweight and Obesity
Although many Americans view overweight as a body image
issue, the real concern is the extent to which overweight and
obesity contribute directly to morbidity (disease or illness) and
mortality (death) (Patel et al. 2006). A declaration from the Ofﬁce
of the Surgeon General of the United States says, ‘‘The primary
concern of overweight and obesity is one of health and not
appearance’’ (HHS 2007). As Hippocrates noted centuries ago,
scientists today ﬁnd that life expectancy is reduced by obesity.
In 2003, before the U.S. House of Representatives, Surgeon Gen-
eral Richard Carmona said, ‘‘I welcome this chance to talk with
you about a health crisis affecting every State, every city, every
community, and every school across our great Nation. The crisis
is obesity. It’s the fastest growing cause of death in America’’
(Carmona 2003).
Individuals who are obese (BMI ≥30) have a 10 to 50 percent
increased risk of death from all causes compared with healthy-
weight individuals (BMI 18.5–24.9), and the risk of death rises
with increasing weight. Most of the increased deaths are due to
cardiovascular causes (NHLBI 1998). Obesity is associated with
about 112,000 excess deaths per year in the U.S. population rela-
tive to healthy-weight individuals (Flegal et al. 2005).
Overweight and obesity increase risk for developing more
than 35 major diseases, including heart disease; hypertension;
type 2 diabetes; respiratory problems; osteoarthritis; gallbladder
disease; and cancers of the endometrium, breast, prostate, and
colon (NHLBI 1998). Obesity also has serious psychological con-
sequences, such as low self-esteem and clinical depression
(Kopelman 2000).
According to NHLBI (1998) report:
•
The incidence of heart disease (heart attack, congestive
heart failure, sudden cardiac death, and angina or chest
Consequences of Overweight and Obesity
29

pain) is increased in persons who have a BMI of 25 or
greater.
•
High blood pressure is twice as common in adults who
are obese than in those who are at a healthy weight, and
obesity is associated with elevated triglycerides (blood
fat) and decreased HDL cholesterol (‘‘good cholesterol’’).
•
With a weight gain of 11 to 18 pounds, a person’s risk of
developing type 2 diabetes increases to twice that of indi-
viduals who have not gained weight. More than 80 per-
cent of people with diabetes are overweight or obese.
•
Sleep apnea (interrupted breathing while sleeping) is
more common in obese persons. Obesity is associated
with a higher prevalence of asthma.
•
For every 2-pound increase in weight, the risk of devel-
oping arthritis is increased by 9 to 13 percent. Symptoms
of arthritis often improve with weight loss.
Overweight and obesity are associated with an increased
risk for some types of cancer, including endometrial (cancer
of the lining of the uterus), colon, gallbladder, prostate, kidney,
and breast cancer. Women who gain more than 20 pounds
after age 18 double their risk of postmenopausal breast cancer,
compared with women whose weight remains stable (NHLBI
1998).
Reproductive complications are increased with excess
weight. Obesity during pregnancy is linked to increased risk of
death in both the baby and the mother. The risk of maternal high
blood pressure increases by 10 times for overweight women.
Women who are obese during pregnancy are more likely to have
gestational diabetes (a form of type 2 diabetes that ceases when
the baby is born). Women who are obese during pregnancy are
more likely to have high–birth weight infants and may face a
higher rate of Cesarean section delivery. Obesity during preg-
nancy is associated with an increased risk of birth defects,
including neural tube defects such as spina biﬁda.
A wide range of other physical and mental health conse-
quences are related to excess weight. Overweight and obesity
are associated with increased risks of gallbladder disease, incon-
tinence, and complications during surgery. Obesity can affect
quality of life by limiting mobility and decreasing physical
endurance.
30
Background and History

As little as 5 to 15 percent of total body weight loss in a per-
son who is overweight or obese reduces the risk factors for some
diseases, particularly heart disease and diabetes. Weight reduc-
tion is especially beneﬁcial if a person has other risk factors, such
as smoking, lack of physical activity, or a family history of heart
disease (NHLBI 1998).
Discrimination
Obese individuals endure widespread stigma and discrimina-
tion in social, academic, and job situations. Negative perceptions
of obese persons exist in the workplace. Research surveys indi-
cated that co-workers and employers viewed obese employees
as less competent and lacking in self-discipline. These attitudes
can have a negative impact on wages, promotions, and hiring
for obese employees. Other studies show that obese applicants
are less likely to be hired than thinner applicants, despite having
identical job qualiﬁcations (Brownell 2005).
Multiple forms of weight stigmatization occur in educa-
tional settings. Obese students face numerous obstacles, ranging
from harassment to rejection by peers at school. Research shows
that stigma toward overweight students begins early. Negative
attitudes have been reported among preschool children (ages
three to ﬁve), who said overweight peers were mean, stupid,
ugly, unhappy, and lazy and had few friends (Puhl and Brownell
2001).
Weight stigma also exists in health care settings. Obese
patients may be reluctant to seek medical care and are more
likely to delay important preventive health care services and can-
cel medical appointments to avoid experiencing weight bias
from health care providers. Negative attitudes about overweight
patients have been reported by physicians, nurses, dietitians,
psychologists, and medical students. Evidence exists that even
health care professionals who specialize in the treatment of
obesity hold negative attitudes (Schwartz et al. 2003).
Taken together, the consequences of being denied jobs,
rejected by peers, or treated inappropriately by health care pro-
fessionals because of one’s weight can have a serious and nega-
tive impact on quality of life. This effect can lead to a number of
psychological problems that add to physical difﬁculties.
Obesity-related mental health disorders include depression,
anxiety, and despair. Given the pervasive nature of weight
Consequences of Overweight and Obesity
31

stigma in U.S. society, transforming attitudes and enforcing laws
that prohibit discrimination based on weight are necessary to
decrease the problem of bias against obese individuals.
Economic Consequences
Health problems associated with overweight and obesity have a
signiﬁcant economic impact on the U.S. health care system
(HHS 2007). Both direct and indirect health care costs are
increased. Direct health care costs refer to preventive, diagnostic,
and treatment services such as physician visits, medications, and
hospital and nursing home care. Indirect costs occur when peo-
ple are unable to work because of illness or disability and thus
do not receive wages (Colditz 1999).
Studies to determine costs of obesity have shown that health
care expenditure among both underweight and overweight indi-
viduals increases as BMI varies from the healthy weight range.
An analysis of more than 16,000 individuals using data from
the 1987 National Medical Expenditure Survey conﬁrmed that
BMI, either higher or lower than the healthy weight range nor-
mal, was related to increased medical expenditures (Heithoff et
al. 1997, Finkelstein et al., 2005).
Further studies indicated that increased health care expend-
itures were largely related to such costly chronic medical condi-
tions as diabetes and hypertension. Studies from Kaiser
Permanente, a large national health maintenance organization,
support the BMI and health cost relationship (Thompson, et al.
2001). According to one Kaiser analysis of more than 17,000
patients, total excess costs to the health plan from obese partici-
pants amounted to $220 million, or about 6 percent of total
expenses for all plan members (Quesenberry, Caan, and Jacobson
1998). Costs were increased among obese members for pharmacy
services, outpatient services, and inpatient care.
The signiﬁcant increase in numbers of extremely obese
patients (BMI ≥40) puts additional strains on the health care sys-
tem. Lifting injuries among physical therapists, nurses, and other
health care workers are on the rise. New hospital expenditures
are required for special beds, scales, operating tables, and wheel-
chairs that will accommodate the weight of very heavy patients.
The costs of obesity treatment must be balanced with pre-
dicted outcomes. A weight loss of as little as 5 percent produces
health beneﬁts such as lowering blood pressure, blood sugar,
32
Background and History

and triglycerides (the form in which fat is carried in the blood).
Such health improvements could offset the costs of obesity
therapy over the long term (NHLBI 1998). However, even after
weight loss, formerly obese people need routine follow-up as
with control of other chronic conditions such as diabetes.
Another factor to be weighed is cost reimbursement. Without
adequate reimbursement, physicians are hesitant to take on
long-term patient obesity management. Some health insurers
cover obesity treatment, but the coverage is not widespread. A
key question is: Will a large investment in developing and imple-
menting effective obesity treatment and prevention produce a
sufﬁcient increase in good health, happiness, and longevity and
a decrease in health care costs?
We Live in an Obesogenic Environment
Although one individual might be born with a stronger tendency
to gain weight than another, certain circumstances also must be
in place to facilitate weight gain. An environment conducive to
weight gain has been termed ‘‘obesogenic’’ (Swinburn, Egger,
and Raza 1999). Three primary environmental factors of the obe-
sogenic environment contribute to overweight and obesity:
•
Eating more food than the body can use
•
Too little exercise or activity
•
Lifestyles that interfere with healthy eating and activity
(Galvez, Frieden, and Landrigan 2003)
The current situation in the United States encourages energy
consumption and discourages energy expenditure to the point
that people who could have maintained a healthy weight in past
decades ﬁnd it too difﬁcult to do so today. Americans have easy
access to a wide variety of good-tasting, inexpensive, calorie-
rich foods that are served and marketed in increasingly large
portions. Food is everywhere. It can be found in convenience
stores, vending machines, gas stations, museums, and even libra-
ries. The fast-food industry provides a combination of conven-
ience, large portions, and low cost. These factors are attractive
to many Americans (Variyam 2005). The food industry spends
about $11 billion annually on advertising and $22 billion on con-
sumer promotions. As a result, Americans eat more food than
We Live in an Obesogenic Environment
33

ever before—an average increase of more than 300 calories per
day since 1985 (Nestle and Jacobson 2000).
On the energy output side, increasing numbers of Ameri-
cans lead essentially sedentary lives. Many people sit all day at
computers and use cars to get to and from work. Even leisure
time is spent in sedentary activities such as watching television
and shopping, communicating, or playing games on a computer.
The obesity epidemic is a result of these interacting issues.
The solution lies in changing them at individual, community,
governmental, and cultural levels. Interventions that have been
suggested to help prevent obesity include mass media cam-
paigns, increased availability of exercise opportunities, taxes on
high-fat and high-sugar foods, control of food advertising during
children’s television programming, and restoration of daily
physical activity in schools.
Each intervention has positive and negative aspects that
may create conﬂict and controversy. The following chapters will
present issues that frame debates about the causes, assessment,
treatment, and prevention of obesity. These explanations and
ﬁndings are based on scientiﬁc research that uncovers answers
to current concerns about obesity, including the true impact of
an obesogenic environment, the merit of various diets, medica-
tions or surgeries, and even the stance that obesity may not
actually be a public crisis that requires intervention.
References
American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM). ACSM’s Resource
Manual for Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription, 4th ed.
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001.
American Heart Association (AHA). A Nation at Risk: Obesity in the
United States, a Statistical Sourcebook. Dallas: American Heart
Association and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, 2005.
Andersen, R. E., C. J. Crespo, S. J. Bartlett, L. J. Cheskin, and M. Pratt.
‘‘Relationship of Physical Activity and Television Watching with Body
Weight and Level of Fatness among Children: Results from the Third
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.’’ Journal of the
American Medical Association 279, no. 12 (1998): 938–942.
Banting, W. Letter on Corpulence, Addressed to the Public. London:
Harrison, 1864.
34
Background and History

Bolanowski, M., and B. E. Nilsson. ‘‘Assessment of Human Body
Composition Using Dual-Energy X-Ray Absorptiometry and Bioelectri-
cal Impedance Analysis.’’ Medical Science Monitor 7, no. 5 (2001):
1029–1033.
Bray, G. A., and C. M. Champagne. ‘‘Beyond Energy Balance: There Is
More to Obesity Than Kilocalories.’’ Journal of the American Dietetic
Association 105, no. 5, Suppl. 1 (2005): S17–S23.
Breslow, L. ‘‘Public Health Aspects of Weight Control.’’ American
Journal of Public Health and the Nation’s Health 42, no. 9 (1952):
1116–1120.
Brownell, K. D. ‘‘The Chronicling of Obesity: Growing Awareness of Its
Social, Economic, and Political Contexts.’’ Journal of Health Politics,
Policy and Law 30, no. 5 (2005): 955–964.
Carmona, R. ‘‘The Obesity Crisis in America.’’ In Testimony before the
Subcommittee on Education Reform Committee on Education and the
Workforce United States House of Representatives, edited by Surgeon
General, U.S. Public Health Service. Washington, DC: U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, 2003.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). ‘‘Portion Size:
Then and Now.’’ 2006. [Online information; retrieved 1/5/09.] http://
www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/nutrition/pdf/portion_size
_research.pdf.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). ‘‘About BMI for
Children and Teens.’’ Atlanta: CDC, 2007a.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Anthropometric
Reference Data, United States, 1988–1994: Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention; 1999. [Online information; retrieved 2/5/08.] http://
www.cdc.gov/nchs/about/major/nhanes/anthropometric
_measures.htm.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). ‘‘U.S. Obesity
Trends 1985–2006.’’ Atlanta: CDC, 2007b.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). ‘‘How Much
Physical Activity Do Adults Need?’’ 2008. [Online information;
retrieved 1/29/09.] http://www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/everyone/
guidelines/adults.html.
Colditz, G. A. ‘‘Economic Costs of Obesity and Inactivity.’’ Medicine &
Science in Sports & Exercise 31, no. 11, Suppl. (1999): S663–S667.
Cummings, D. E., and M. H. Shannon. ‘‘Roles for Ghrelin in the
Regulation of Appetite and Body Weight.’’ Archives of Surgery 138,
no. 4 (2003): 389–396.
References
35

DiMeglio, D. P., and R. D. Mattes. ‘‘Liquid versus Solid Carbohydrate:
Effects on Food Intake and Body Weight.’’ International Journal of
Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders 24, no. 6 (2000): 794–800.
Erselcan, T., F. Candan, S. Saruhan, and T. Ayca. ‘‘Comparison of Body
Composition Analysis Methods in Clinical Routine.’’ Annals of
Nutrition and Metabolism 44, no. 5–6 (2000): 243–248.
Finkelstein, E. A., C. J. Ruhm, and K. M. Kosa. ’’Economic Causes and
Consequences of Obesity.’’ Annual Review of Public Health 26 (2005):
239–257.
Fisher, J. O., Y. Liu, L. L. Birch, and B. J. Rolls. ‘‘Effects of Portion Size
and Energy Density on Young Children’s Intake at a Meal.’’ American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 86, no. 1 (2007): 174–179.
Flegal, K. M., B. I. Graubard, D. F. Williamson, and M. H. Gail. ‘‘Excess
Deaths Associated with Underweight, Overweight, and Obesity.’’
Journal of the American Medical Association 293, no. 15 (2005): 1861–1867.
Ford, E. S., A. H. Mokdad, and W. H. Giles. ‘‘Trends in Waist
Circumference among U.S. Adults.’’ Obesity Research 11, no. 10 (2003):
1223–1231.
Franklin, B. ‘‘Poor Richard, an Almanack for 1737.’’ [Online
information; retrieved 1/5/09.] http://www.vlib.us/amdocs/
index.html.
Gallagher, D. ‘‘Overweight and Obesity BMI Cut-offs and Their Rela-
tion to Metabolic Disorders in Koreans/Asians.’’ Obesity Research 12,
no. 3 (2004): 440–441.
Galvez, M. P., T. R. Frieden, and P. J. Landrigan. ‘‘Obesity in the 21st
Century.’’ Environmental Health Perspectives 111, no. 13 (2003): A684–685.
Goran, M. I. ‘‘Energy Metabolism and Obesity.’’ Medical Clinics of North
America 84, no. 2 (2000): 347–362.
Guthrie, J. F., B. H. Lin, and E. Frazao. ‘‘Role of Food Prepared Away
from Home in the American Diet, 1977–78 versus 1994–96: Changes
and Consequences.’’ Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior 34, no. 3
(2002): 140–150.
Guthrie, J. F., and J. F. Morton. ‘‘Food Sources of Added Sweeteners in
the Diets of Americans.’’ Journal of the American Dietetic Association 100,
no. 1 (2000): 43–51, quiz 49–50.
Hamwi, G. J. ‘‘Therapy: Changing Dietary Concepts.’’ In Diabetes
Mellitus: Diagnosis and Treatment, edited by T. S. Danowski, 73–78. New
York: American Diabetes Association, 1964.
Heithoff, K. A., B. J. Cuffel, S. Kennedy, and J. Peters. ‘‘The Association
between Body Mass and Health Care Expenditures.’’ Clinical
Therapeutics 19, no. 4 (1997): 811–820.
36
Background and History

Heymsﬁeld, S. B., A. S. Greenberg, K. Fujioka, R. M. Dixon, R. Kushner,
T. Hunt, J. A. Lubina, J. Patane, B. Self, P. Hunt, and M. McCamish.
‘‘Recombinant Leptin for Weight Loss in Obese and Lean Adults: A
Randomized, Controlled, Dose-Escalation Trial.’’ Journal of the American
Medical Association 282, no. 16 (1999): 1568–1575.
Heymsﬁeld, S. B., Z. Wang, M. Visser, D. Gallagher, and R. N. Pierson,
Jr. ‘‘Techniques Used in the Measurement of Body Composition: An
Overview with Emphasis on Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis.’’
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 64, no. 3, Suppl. (1996): 478S–484S.
Hu, F. B., M. F. Leitzmann, M. J. Stampfer, G. A. Colditz, W. C. Willett,
and E. B. Rimm. ‘‘Physical Activity and Television Watching in
Relation to Risk for Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus in Men.’’ Archives of
Internal Medicine 161, no. 12 (2001): 1542–1548.
Jakicic, J. M., K. Clark, E. Coleman, J. E. Donnelly, J. Foreyt, E.
Melanson, J. Volek, and S. L. Volpe. ‘‘American College of Sports
Medicine Position Stand. Appropriate Intervention Strategies for
Weight Loss and Prevention of Weight Regain for Adults.’’ Medicine &
Science in Sports & Exercise 33, no. 12 (2001): 2145–2156.
Jakicic, J. M., B. H. Marcus, W. Lang, and C. Janney. ‘‘Effect of Exercise
on 24-Month Weight Loss Maintenance in Overweight Women.’’
Archives of Internal Medicine 168, no. 14 (2008): 1550–1559; discussion
1559–1560.
Johnson, L., A. P. Mander, L. R. Jones, P. M. Emmett, and S. A. Jebb. ‘‘Is
Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Consumption Associated with Increased
Fatness in Children?’’ Nutrition 23, no. 7–8 (2007): 557–563.
Jordan, A. B., J. C. Hersey, J. A. McDivitt, C. D. Heitzler. ‘‘Reducing
Children’s Television-viewing Time: a Qualitative Study of Parents and
Their Children.’’ Pediatrics. 118, no. 5 (2006): e1303–1310.
Kopelman, P. G. ‘‘Obesity as a Medical Problem.’’ Nature 404, no. 6778
(2000): 635–643.
Kuczmarski, R. J., and K. M. Flegal. ‘‘Criteria for Deﬁnition of
Overweight in Transition: Background and Recommendations for the
United States.’’ American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 72, no. 5 (2000):
1074–1081.
Luciano, Lynne. Looking Good: Male Body Image in Modern America. New
York: Hill and Wang, 2001.
McCrory, M. A., P. J. Fuss, N. P. Hays, A. G. Vinken, A. S. Greenberg,
and S. B. Roberts. ‘‘Overeating in America: Association between
Restaurant Food Consumption and Body Fatness in Healthy Adult
Men and Women Ages 19 to 80.’’ Obesity Research 7, no. 6 (1999):
564–751.
References
37

Metropolitan Life Insurance Company (MLIC). ‘‘Metropolitan Life
Insurance Company. Ideal Weights for Men 1942.’’ Statistical Bulletin–
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company 23 (1942): 6–8.
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company (MLIC). ‘‘Metropolitan Life
Insurance Company. Ideal Weights for Women.’’ Statistical Bulletin–
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company 24 (1943): 6–8.
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company (MLIC). ‘‘New Weight
Standards for Men and Women.’’ Statistical Bulletin–Metropolitan Life
Insurance Company 40 (1959): 1–10.4
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company (MLIC). ‘‘1983 Metropolitan
Height and Weight Tables: New York.’’ Statistical Bulletin–Metropolitan
Life Insurance Company 64 (1983): 6–8.
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). ‘‘Chartbook on Trends in
the Health of Americans. Health, United States, 2006.’’ Washington,
DC: U.S. Public Health Service, 2006.
Nestle, M., and M. F. Jacobson. ‘‘Halting the Obesity Epidemic: A
Public Health Policy Approach.’’ Public Health Reports 115, no. 1 (2000):
12–24.
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI). Clinical Guidelines
on the Identiﬁcation, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity
in Adults: The Evidence Report. Bethesda, MD: National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, 1998.
Nielsen, S. J., and B. M. Popkin. ‘‘Patterns and Trends in Food Portion
Sizes, 1977–1998.’’ Journal of the American Medical Association 289, no. 4
(2003): 450–453.
National Institutes of Health (NIH). ‘‘Clinical Guidelines on the
Identiﬁcation, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in
Adults—the Evidence Report. National Institutes of Health.’’ Obesity
Research 6, Suppl. 2 (1998): 51S–209S.
Olshansky, S. J., D. J. Passaro, R. C. Hershow, J. Layden, B. A. Carnes,
J. Brody, L. Hayﬂick, R. N. Butler, D. B. Allison, and D. S. Ludwig. ‘‘A
Potential Decline in Life Expectancy in the United States in the 21st
Century.’’ New England Journal of Medicine 352, no. 11 (2005): 1138–1145.
Patel, M. R., M. Donahue, P. W. Wilson, and R. M. Califf. ‘‘Clinical Trial
Issues in Weight-Loss Therapy.’’ American Heart Journal 151, no. 3
(2006): 633–642.
Powell, L. M., G. Szczypka, F. J. Chaloupka, and C. L. Braunschweig.
‘‘Nutritional Content of Television Food Advertisements Seen by
Children and Adolescents in the United States.’’ Pediatrics 120, no. 3
(2007): 576–583.
38
Background and History

Puhl, R., and K. D. Brownell. ‘‘Bias, Discrimination, and Obesity.’’
Obesity Research 9, no. 12 (2001): 788–805.
Putnam, J., L. S. Kantor, and J. Allshouse. ‘‘Per Capita Food Supply
Trends: Progress toward Dietary Guidelines ‘‘ Food Review 23 (2000):
2–14.
Quesenberry, C. P., Jr., B. Caan, and A. Jacobson. ‘‘Obesity, Health
Services Use, and Health Care Costs among Members of a Health
Maintenance Organization.’’ Archives of Internal Medicine 158, no. 5
(1998): 466–472.
Razak, F., S. S. Anand, H. Shannon, V. Vuksan, B. Davis, R. Jacobs,
K. K. Teo, M. McQueen, and S. Yusuf. ‘‘Deﬁning Obesity Cut Points in
a Multiethnic Population.’’ Circulation 115, no. 16 (2007): 2111–2118.
Rolls, B. J., E. L. Morris, and L. S. Roe. ‘‘Portion Size of Food Affects
Energy Intake in Normal-Weight and Overweight Men and Women.’’
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 76, no. 6 (2002): 1207–1213.
Schwartz, M. B., H. O. Chambliss, K. D. Brownell, S. N. Blair, and C.
Billington. ‘‘Weight Bias among Health Professionals Specializing in
Obesity.’’ Obesity Research 11, no. 9 (2003): 1033–1039.
Spiegel, K., E. Tasali, P. Penev, and E. Van Cauter. ‘‘Brief
Communication: Sleep Curtailment in Healthy Young Men Is
Associated with Decreased Leptin Levels, Elevated Ghrelin Levels, and
Increased Hunger and Appetite.’’ Annals of Internal Medicine 141, no. 11
(2004): 846–850.
Swinburn, B., G. Egger, and F. Raza. ‘‘Dissecting Obesogenic
Environments: The Development and Application of a Framework for
Identifying and Prioritizing Environmental Interventions for Obesity.’’
Preventive Medicine 29, no. 6, Pt. 1 (1999): 563–570.
Symonds, Brandreth. ‘‘The Inﬂuence of Overweight and Underweight
on Vitality.’’ A Weekly Journal of Medicine and Surgery 74 (1908):
389–393.
Thompson, D., J. B. Brown, G. A. Nichols, P. J. Elmer, and G. Oster.
‘‘Body Mass Index and Future Healthcare Costs: a Retrospective
Cohort Study.’’ Obesity Research 9, no. 3 (2001): 210–218.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). ‘‘Overweight
and Obesity: Health Consequences.’’ Washington, DC: HHS, 2007.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). ‘‘The Surgeon
General’s Call to Action to Prevent and Decrease Overweight and
Obesity.’’Washington, DC: HHS, 2001.
Variyam, Jayachandran N. ‘‘The Price Is Right: Economics and the Rise
in Obesity.’’ Amber Waves February (2005): 21–27.
References
39

Wang, J., J. C. Thornton, S. Kolesnik, and R. N. Pierson, Jr.
‘‘Anthropometry in Body Composition. An Overview.’’ Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences 904 (2000): 317–326.
Wansink, B., and J. Kim. ‘‘Bad Popcorn in Big Buckets: Portion Size
Can Inﬂuence Intake as Much as Taste.’’ Journal of Nutrition Education
and Behavior 37, no. 5 (2005): 242–245.
Weight-control Information Network (WIN). ‘‘Understanding Adult
Obesity.’’ 2006. [Online information; retrieved 1/5/09.] http://
win.niddk.nih.gov/publications/understanding.htm.
Wing, R. R. ‘‘Physical Activity in the Treatment of the Adulthood
Overweight and Obesity: Current Evidence and Research Issues.’’
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 31, no. 11, Suppl. (1999):
S547–S552.
40
Background and History

2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
S
ome of the problems, controversies, and solutions discussed in
this chapter have been debated by researchers, health care pro-
fessionals, and policy makers for many years. Is obesity a dis-
ease, or is it a moral failing? Can obesity be called an epidemic?
How is obesity treated? The answers to these questions are not
simple and have major implications for U.S. society and its health
care system.
Is Obesity a Disease?
Advocates of deﬁning obesity as a disease contend that this label
will cause the issue to be taken more seriously. Those opposed to
calling obesity a disease say it will override personal and societal
responsibility. Although not without controversy, increasing sci-
entiﬁc evidence and medical consensus support the disease des-
ignation. It is generally accepted that a disease must have at least
two of the following three features: (1) recognized etiologic
agents, (2) identiﬁable signs and symptoms, and (3) consistent
anatomical alterations. Obesity meets all three criteria.
First, the recognized etiologic (causative) agents are a combi-
nation of metabolic, physiologic, genetic, social, behavioral, and
cultural factors. Second, the identiﬁable signs and symptoms
include an excess accumulation of fat tissue as well as increased
risk of breathing problems (sleep apnea), high blood glucose
(type 2 diabetes), and abnormal cholesterol level (cardiovascular
41

diseases). Third, the consistent anatomic alteration is a body
composition with a high percentage of body fat. Behaviors such
as overeating or lack of exercise are not part of the deﬁnition of
obesity.
Doctors and scientists who say obesity should be labeled as
a disease point to its link with increased morbidity and mortality.
Physicians who specialize in endocrinology, family practice, and
bariatrics accept that obesity is a disease. As a disease, obesity
will be the focus of scientists who will have a chance to receive
more funding to develop effective interventions. Patients will
be able to get the treatment they need, and third-party payers
will pay for weight-reduction services. At present, physicians
complain that weight management care and counseling services
are difﬁcult to code for payment. Without proper coding, they
cannot bill for obesity; rather, they have to bill for osteoarthritis,
hypertension, diabetes, or other conditions that exist as a side
effect of obesity. Most diseases, such as heart disease, cancer,
and stroke, are at least partly caused by both lifestyle choices
and genetic predisposition. Obesity is the result of a combination
of poor lifestyle and genetics in the same way that lung cancer
can be the end result of the act of smoking interacting with a
genetic predisposition.
Current understanding is that the genetic tendency to
obesity is both metabolic and behavioral. Obesity occurs as the
result of disturbances in the way energy is stored or expended
and of biologically driven abnormalities in appetite, satiation,
and satiety. Independent of willpower, a person with one of these
disturbances may never be satisﬁed after eating. Genes, and not
personal control, may ultimately determine how much a person
eats. Lean individuals may simply be genetically lucky.
Skeptical opponents of calling obesity a disease offer other
explanations. They assert that obesity-associated disorders are
not necessarily caused by increased body weight. Rather, they
propose that a particular disease or treatment for disease may
actually promote obesity. These skeptics point to the example of
type 2 diabetes, a disorder that currently seems to pose the big-
gest threat to public health in that some diabetes drugs and strict
blood sugar management cause weight gain. Compared with
31 percent prevalence of obesity in the general population, the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reports that
55 percent of adults with diabetes are obese. As obesity has
become more prevalent, so has diabetes.
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

What is the cause, and what is the effect? Does obesity cause
diabetes, for example, or does diabetes lead to obesity? Poor
health consequences may occur in obese people because they
are more likely to belong to an unhealthy group—one that is
older or has low socioeconomic status—or to an ethnic minority
that has an increased risk for disease in individuals of all
weights. Others suggest that it is hazardous weight loss practices
and repeated loss and regain of weight that is the major contribu-
tor to obesity-related disease (Ernsberger 1989).
Opponents to the disease designation further contend that
not all obese people are unhealthy and that calling obesity a
medical problem reduces individual responsibility for maintain-
ing a healthy weight. Patients will inevitably have excuses for
not taking ownership for their lifestyle habits. Even when people
have a genetic tendency to gain weight, overeating and inactivity
are the main causes of obesity. The gene pool has not changed,
but eating habits have. Some physicians who work with obesity
issues also believe obesity is a serious problem, but not a disease
in its own right. They say that when obesity is considered a dis-
ease it implies that individuals have no control over what is hap-
pening to their weight and health. The subject has been a matter
of debate for several years among American Medical Association
(AMA) members. The AMA continues to recognize obesity as a
major public health threat that requires great attention; however,
it does not classify obesity as a disease. Among some practi-
tioners there is doubt that applying the label will ensure insur-
ance reimbursement.
Obesity treatment got a boost in 2002 when the Internal Rev-
enue Service recognized obesity as a disease and allowed pay-
ments for medically valid obesity treatments to be claimed as a
medical tax deduction (IRS 2002). This decision helps to legiti-
mize the possibility of coverage from government and private
insurers. Then, in July 2004, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS) Secretary Tommy Thompson and Medi-
care administrator Mark McClellan announced that the phrase
‘‘Obesity itself cannot be considered an illness’’ had been
removed from regulations that guide payment for medical treat-
ment (HHS 2004). However, the wording change did not author-
ize any coverage for new treatments. For obesity to be recognized
and covered, the provider must ﬁrst supply scientiﬁc evidence
that a treatment works to improve Medicare beneﬁciaries’ health
outcomes. In other words, practitioners and government and
Is Obesity a Disease?
43

industry partners who believe that obesity is an actual disease
are responsible for collecting data from clinical trials on the effec-
tiveness of proposed treatments. The results will be ready to
present when the agency is prepared to review them. As with
the public health response to smoking, government regulation
and changes in behavior, both voluntary and mandated (such
as the restriction on smoking in public places) will be extensively
debated before any policy is formulated. Of course, the two
health issues differ greatly in that individuals do not have to
smoke to live but must eat to survive.
Considerable debate also surrounds how the disease label
will affect individual patients with regard to stigma. Proponents
maintain that diagnosing obesity as a serious disease removes
the stigma associated with extra body fat. Those opposed argue
that the disease designation actually further stigmatizes people
who do not feel sick and do not notice any ill effects from extra
weight. This line of thinking underscores one of the problems
surrounding efforts to address obesity: An unhealthy diet and a
sedentary lifestyle are health risks for anyone—fat or lean. Thus,
those opposed to the disease label are concerned that reclassify-
ing obesity as a disease places too much emphasis on the number
on the scale and neglects the importance of a healthful lifestyle.
As even the best weight loss interventions have limited efﬁcacy,
telling a patient to lose weight generally results in frustration
and guilt. Many clinicians propose alternative strategies such as
encouraging the individual to eat more fruits and vegetables, to
get adequate sleep, and to enjoyable physical activity. These
changes might actually prolong and improve life for all sizes.
Deﬁning obesity as a disease may put too much emphasis on
the medical aspect when every institution and individual
involved should accept some responsibility. A number of busi-
nesses are taking on that responsibility. Food companies are
pledging to make healthier snacks. Fast-food chains promise
new low-fat choices. Employers are integrating health manage-
ment options such as gyms, diet groups, cafeterias with healthful
foods, and health screening right at the work site. Health plans
and doctors are initiating new prevention, treatment, and
weight-management programs. Local communities are con-
structing more walking and bike trails and after-school-activity
programs for children.
In summing up the pros and cons of whether obesity is a dis-
ease, those who agree say:
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

•
Obesity is linked to increased morbidity and mortality.
•
Everyone would take the condition more seriously.
•
There would be better reimbursement for medical
treatment.
•
Obese people would not be stigmatized as lacking
willpower.
Those who disagree say:
•
It would reduce the importance of individual
responsibility.
•
It would place too much emphasis on medical
interventions.
•
It would put undue social pressure and stigma on obese
people who are healthy.
•
The evidence is not sufﬁcient to implicate obesity as a
risk factor in its own right. (Stagg-Elliott 2006)
Is Obesity an Epidemic?
A public opinion survey found that 85 percent of Americans
believe that obesity is an epidemic and that the government
should have a role in tackling the obesity crisis (Levi, Segal, and
Gadola 2007). In 2001, U.S. Surgeon General David Satcher
declared that obesity was reaching epidemic proportions and
could soon be the cause of as much preventable disease and
death as cigarette smoking. He released a call to action to pro-
mote the recognition of obesity as a health problem and to
develop programs to treat obesity and encourage people to
change their eating and exercise habits. But even with the urging
of America’s top physician, obesity statistics did not improve
and the rate of overweight and obesity kept growing. As quoted
in Chapter 1, at a congressional brieﬁng in 2003, Surgeon General
Richard H. Carmona spoke about the obesity crisis in the United
States—it bears repeating here: ‘‘As Surgeon General, I welcome
this chance to talk with you about a health crisis affecting every
State, every city, every community, and every school across our
great nation. The crisis is obesity. It is the fastest-growing cause
of disease and death in America.’’
He goes on to say, ‘‘And it is completely preventable. Nearly
two out of every three Americans are overweight or obese. One
Is Obesity an Epidemic?
45

out of every eight deaths in America is caused by an illness
directly related to overweight and obesity’’ (Carmona 2003).
‘‘Epidemic’’ is an emotionally charged term. It has different
meanings for different people. For the general public, it is associ-
ated with a rapidly spreading and uncontrolled disease. Profes-
sional health researchers may use the term quite differently.
Epidemiologists deﬁne an epidemic as the occurrence in a speci-
ﬁed area of an illness or other health-related events in excess of
what would normally be expected. Disease and epidemics occur
as a result of the interaction of three factors: agent, host, and
environment. Agents (too much food) cause the disease (extra
body fat), hosts are genetically susceptible, and environmental
conditions (easy access to high-calorie foods and reduced need
to be active) permit host exposure to the agent. Understanding
interactions between agent, host, and environment is crucial for
discovering the best ways to prevent or control the spread of
obesity.
Obesity has been called an epidemic in the United States
because one-third of Americans are obese and two-thirds are
overweight or obese. Looking at state-by-state statistics, one can
see how the prevalence of obesity seems to spread and grow each
year. (See Figure 6.1 in Chapter 6, showing obesity trends, epi-
demiologic data, and data that show increasing percentage of
obesity by state.) Adult obesity rates increased in 31 states in
2007. Mississippi led the list with the highest rate of adult obesity
in the United States. It was the ﬁrst state to reach an obesity rate of
more than 30 percent of the state population. Colorado was the
leanest state; however, its adult obesity rate has also slowly and
steadily increased over the years. Ten of the states with the high-
est rates of adult obesity were located in the South (CDC 2007).
The Center for Consumer Freedom (CFF) is a nonproﬁt
organization of restaurants, food companies, and consumers. Its
stated goal is to promote personal responsibility and protect con-
sumer choice. The group has published a response to the descrip-
tion of obesity as an epidemic entitled ‘‘An Epidemic of Obesity
Myths’’ (CFF 2004). It says the epidemic is a myth because, while
more people are heavier than ever, the ﬁgures used to calculate
the number of deaths attributed to obesity are ﬂawed and the
health risks of moderate obesity have been greatly overstated.
The Center also contends that better diagnosis and treatment of
high cholesterol and blood pressure have more than compen-
sated for any increases in mortality from rising obesity.
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

CCF may not have been too far off the mark when it pointed
out problems with past statistical estimations of obesity-
increased risk of death. In 2005, Dr. Katherine Flegal, a researcher
at the CDC, revised estimates of the deaths due to obesity after it
became clear that previous measurement methods were out-of-
date. The new estimate, published in the Journal of the American
Medical Association, showed that people in the overweight cat-
egory, with a body mass index (BMI ) of 25 to 29.9, typically live
longer than normal-weight people, who have a BMI of 18 to
24.9 (Flegal et al. 2005). Flegal and her colleagues reported that
the number of obesity-related deaths is signiﬁcantly lower than
previously believed. When National Health and Nutrition
Examination Surveys (NHANES) data, which measured
weights, heights, and death from 1988 to 2000, were analyzed,
even severe obesity failed to appear as a statistically signiﬁcant
mortality risk.
More than a dozen other studies have come to the same con-
clusion. Epidemiological studies reveal that, aside from the
extremes, BMI is not a strong predictor of death rates. The mini-
mum risk for mortality seems to be associated with a BMI of
approximately 25. The risk of death increases or decreases on
upper or lower side of 25, respectively. Flegal’s group speculates
that in recent decades, improvements in medical care have
reduced the mortality level associated with obesity (Flegal et al.
2005). This speculation is supported by research (also based on
NHANES data) showing, in spite of increases in overweight
and obesity, signiﬁcant declines in high blood pressure, high cho-
lesterol, and smoking. These are all risk factors for cardiovascu-
lar disease. Importantly, the greatest improvements occurred in
the heaviest people (Gregg et al. 2005). Although Americans are
heavier than ever, they are also healthier than they were in the
1960s and 1970s. The average BMI was lower in those days, but
the rate of deaths from cancer and heart disease was higher. In
short, people live longer now (NCHS 2007).
Even though the CDC ﬁndings, reported widely in the
media, caused confusion and questions about whether obesity
really was a problem, some facts about obesity are not disputed.
The proportion of the population that is overweight or obese
continues to rise rapidly. Despite debates about obesity as a
cause of death, there is little argument about the signiﬁcant
impact it has as a cause of disease. Excess weight is known to
be a major contributor to diabetes, cardiovascular diseases,
Is Obesity an Epidemic?
47

arthritis, and some forms of cancer. Even if obesity does cause
fewer deaths than have previously been reported, it continues
to be a serious public health problem.
An interesting addition to the discussion about whether
obesity is an epidemic was published in the New England Journal
of Medicine. The researchers suggested that obesity is inﬂuenced
by one’s social network and that it is ‘‘socially contagious.’’ To
see if obesity really did behave like an epidemic, they studied
the effects of these groups on obesity. They examined data from
the Framingham Heart Study—a very large social network that
involves 12,000 people, including family, friends, and neighbors
who have been studied and followed for more than 30 years.
The results showed that a person’s chances of becoming obese
increased by 57 percent if she or he had a friend who became
obese, by 40 percent if she or he had a sibling who became obese,
and by 37 percent if her or his spouse became obese. The infec-
tious effect was greater among friends of the same sex. A 71 per-
cent increased risk of obesity was seen if a same-sex friend
became obese (Christakis and Fowler 2007).
Further, a person’s chances of becoming obese were inﬂu-
enced by his or her family and friends, even if they were hun-
dreds of miles away. How could this possibly occur? The
dramatic effect of distant friends on the odds of increased obesity
rules out exposure to the same environment as a cause. The
Christakis study analyses revealed that similar weights were
not due to any tendency for people to interact with others like
them, eating the same foods as their friends did, or participating
in the same physical activities as their friends did. It may be that
esteem for friends inﬂuences a person’s conception of a normal,
healthy, and attractive body size. The investigators found that
thinness also appeared to be socially contagious. When a person
lost weight and was no longer obese, her or his friends and
family tended to lose weight, too. The scientists proposed
that this contagious social inﬂuence should be exploited to
spread positive health behaviors from one person to the entire
social network.
Another remarkable theory about how obesity may occur
has been put forth by a group of researchers who have impli-
cated a virus in the development of obesity in animals and pos-
sibly in humans. In 1992, Nikhil Dhurandhar, at the University
of Bombay, reported that an avian adenovirus—Ad36—caused
excessive fat in chickens (Dhurandhar et al. 2000). Researchers
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

began to look for antibodies against this type of virus in obese
humans. The presence of antibodies against the virus means that
the person had been exposed to the virus at some time. When
Richard Atkinson, professor of medicine and nutrition at the
University of Wisconsin, Madison, and Dhurandhar screened
humans in India and the United States for Ad36 antibodies, they
found that approximately 30 percent of the people with obesity
had the antibodies, compared with only 10 percent of the
normal-weight people (Atkinson et al. 2005). The researchers
theorize that the virus somehow affects the brain centers that
control appetite. Quoted in DOC News, Atkinson said, ‘‘We can’t
say that the virus caused obesity in all those people. It’s still
speculation, some say a gross speculation (Kolakowski 2005).
Treatment of Obesity: Fighting the Battle
of the Bulge
There are no simple solutions to the obesity problem. Obesity is a
complex disease that requires complex solutions. Successful
treatment of obesity and overweight requires lifelong behavioral
changes rather than short-term weight loss or quick ﬁxes. Pro-
grams that emphasize realistic goals, gradual progress, sensible
eating, and exercise are recommended by weight-loss experts.
Those that promise instant weight loss or feature severely
restricted diets are not effective in the long run. Unfortunately,
the success rate for even sensible diets is approximately 3 to
5 percent. Studies show that most people regain a considerable
amount of weight by one year and nearly everyone returns to
her or his pre-diet weight after ﬁve years (Wadden et al. 1989).
Long-term management of obesity is the most challenging
aspect of weight control for many individuals. Whatever method
of weight loss is used, the preferred goals of treatment are simi-
lar. In the past, physicians and other experts who designed treat-
ment programs encouraged people to achieve their ideal weight
based on height-weight charts or recommended BMI. Given the
lack of success in preventing weight regain, most programs
now aim for the ‘‘10 percent solution’’—to lose about 10 percent
of body weight. The focus is on improving overall health rather
than attaining a certain weight.
Treatment of Obesity: Fighting the Battle of the Bulge
49

Attempting to lose weight is a common pursuit for many
Americans. A study published in 2005 reported that 46 percent of
U.S. women and 33 percent of U.S. men said they were trying to
lose weight (Bish et al. 2005). The approaches that most people
use typically include a combination of dieting, increasing physi-
cal activity, lifestyle modiﬁcation and behavioral changes. Some
dieters try dietary supplements or medications that theoretically
could increase or speed up weight loss. For individuals who
haven’t had success with diet, lifestyle, and medication, various
types of surgery may be an option.
For those who enjoy a structure of companionship and sup-
port while trying to manage weight, a wide variety of weight-
loss groups are available. Do-it-yourself programs include
groups like Overeaters Anonymous (OA) and TOPS (Take Off
Pounds Sensibly). These self-help groups are free of charge and
are led by group members. TOPS advises a low-calorie, low-fat
meal plan, while OA encourages members to abstain from
reﬁned foods that might act as triggers to overeat. The OA phi-
losophy helps to guide participants to physical, emotional, and
spiritual recovery. Minimal scientiﬁc evidence is available to
examine success rates from these two groups.
Commercial franchises like Weight Watchers, Jenny Craig,
and Nutrisystem offer meetings, materials, and even meals.
These groups rely on counselors to provide services to clients.
In an evaluation of the success of the best-known commercial
programs, people who followed the Weight Watchers plan main-
tained a greater than 5 percent weight loss over 12 months. Par-
ticipants attending the most group sessions kept off the most
weight, clearly showing the importance of staying with the pro-
gram (Tsai and Wadden 2005).
Clinical programs provided by medical professionals who
may have specialized training to treat obese patients focus on
medical nutrition therapy, exercise, and psychological counsel-
ing. They can feature very-low-calorie diets (VLCDs) and liquid
diets, medications, and surgery. Medically supervised propri-
etary programs, such as Optifast, Health Maintenance Resources,
and Medifast, place patients on very-low-calorie, high-protein
plans (usually about 800 calories per day). These programs cus-
tomarily use liquid diets in place of solid food, and participants
are closely monitored by a physician. The theory is that a VLCD
could be effective for obese individuals to start their weight loss
if they have the medical supervision critical for following it
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

safely. Afterward, a transitional period with measured meal
replacements, slow reintroduction to foods, and education about
new ways of healthy eating should help ensure long-term suc-
cess. Studies show patients completing these programs can lose
approximately 15 to 25 percent of their initial weight during
three to six months of treatment and maintain a loss of 8 to 9 per-
cent at one year (Tsai and Wadden 2005). The success rate might
be overestimated, as the results did not include those who
dropped out of programs. A task force from the National Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) has indicated that one year
after the diet is completed, VLCDs do not result in any greater
weight reduction when compared with other, less stringent diets
providing 1,200 to 1,500 calories (NHLBI 1998).
Several commercial Internet-based programs offer meal
plans, recipes, online chats with other dieters, and e-mail advice
from experts such as dietitians and psychologists. Published evi-
dence of outcomes from eDiets showed participants losing
1.1 percent of their initial weight after one year. This type of
information and support could be used on its own or could sup-
plement other programs. The convenience of online record keep-
ing of daily intake and activity could possibly increase weight
maintenance.
The struggle to lose unwanted pounds requires choosing
between responsible products and programs that offer methods
for achieving moderate weight loss over time and ‘‘miracle’’
products or services that promise fast and easy weight loss with-
out sacriﬁce. Advertisements for weight-loss products and serv-
ices ﬂood the marketplace with promises of instant success
without the need to give up favorite foods or increase physical
activity. An example of such an eye-grabbling ad reads, ‘‘Amaz-
ing New Discovery, Guarantees Weight-Loss, Eliminates Dieting
. . . And Can Slash Up To 29 Pounds Of Embarrassing Fat From
Your Body Almost Overnight—Without Wasting 1 Minute Of
your Day!’’ as seen on the Internet at get-slim-while-you-sleep.
com. Almost all weight-loss experts agree that the key to long-
term weight management requires permanent lifestyle changes
that include a healthful diet at a moderate calorie level and regu-
lar physical exercise. Nevertheless, only about one in three peo-
ple reported trying to lose weight by eating less and engaging
in the minimum recommended amount of physical activity (30
minutes on most, preferably all, days of the week). Even fewer
—about
one
in
four
people—followed
the
approach
Treatment of Obesity: Fighting the Battle of the Bulge
51

recommended in the Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2005 of eat-
ing less and engaging in approximately 60 minutes of moderate-
to vigorous-intensity activity on most days of the week (about
300 or more minutes per week).
A large gap remains between recommended dietary pat-
terns and what Americans actually eat. Only 3 percent of all indi-
viduals in the United States meet the dietary goal for daily intake
of whole grains, fruits, and vegetables.
With dozens of new diets and miraculous foods being
advertised, people ﬁnd it hard to know what to eat, what to
avoid, and whom to believe. For a healthy diet beneﬁcial both
for weight loss and for improving long-term health, the U.S.
Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Dietary Guidelines for
Americans provides practical examples of healthful diet choices
for everyone. Every ﬁve years, HHS and USDA jointly pub-
lish the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, based on the latest
scientiﬁc evidence. The latest version was released in January
2005. The guidelines exist to provide people with authoritative
advice about the most healthful dietary habits. The guidelines
also are the basis for federal food and nutrition education pro-
grams and are depicted graphically as the Food Guide Pyramid
(FGP), which recommends types and amounts of foods from
seven food groups—grains, vegetables, fruits, milk, meat
and beans, oils, and discretionary calories—as well as physical
activity.
The guidelines are not speciﬁcally weight loss diets. They
are presented across a range of calorie levels for people over
two years of age with recommended calorie intake and food pat-
terns for individuals based on age, gender, and activity level.
‘‘MyPyramid Calorie Levels’’ is a chart that shows the appropri-
ate calories needed for males and females by age and activity
level. ‘‘MyPyramid Food Intake Patterns’’ identiﬁes suggested
amounts of food to consume from the various food groups at 12
different calorie levels. (See Table 6.4 and Table 6.5 in Chapter 6.)
The entire set of recommendations is intended to be used in the
context of planning an overall healthful diet. However, following
any of the recommendations can have health beneﬁts.
The FGP has been received with some criticism. Public
health advocates, nutritionists, and health care providers indi-
cate that it is not clear or easy to understand. To follow personal-
ized recommendations, the public has to use the pyramid Web
site. Information is lacking about what foods may be considered
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

unhealthy, and the guidelines did not receive adequate funding
from the federal government to fully promote them.
In spite of these drawbacks, the advice contained in these
guidelines related to choosing a variety of healthy foods in cor-
rect portions is a good way to maintain a healthy weight. Profes-
sional weight-management experts generally use the USDA
guidelines in combination with other general strategies to reduce
calorie intake. Suggestions for personal weight management
often include the following advice:
1. Make an individualized plan and assessment. Begin
with an evaluation of what you are eating. This is called
a current diet assessment. The word ‘‘diet’’ brings to
mind meals of tuna and carrot sticks or dry toast. A diet
is actually all the food and beverages that a person takes
in during the course of a day. People generally underes-
timate how much they eat and often do not remember
what they ate from one day to the next, so keeping a
journal that lists actual amounts of all food and bever-
ages consumed can be an effective tool to identify foods
that contribute to weight gain. Table 6.6 in Chapter 6 is an
example of a form for keeping a record of when one eats,
what, and how much one is eating, and the hunger level
experienced. Using the program entails matching the
foods on the form with daily goals in ‘‘MyPyramid
Calorie Levels’’ and ‘‘MyPyramid Food Intake Patterns’’
or using MyPyramid Tracker to assess the quality of
one’s diet. MyPyramid Tracker is an online, interactive
dietary and physical activity assessment tool that trans-
lates the principles of the 2005 Dietary Guidelines for
Americans into individualized healthful choices. Person-
alized recommendations are made for food and activity
depending on one’s age, sex, and weight. The Food
Calories/Energy Balance feature automatically calculates
energy balance by subtracting the energy expended from
physical activity from food energy intake. Using this tool
helps to point out links between good nutrition and
regular physical activity and assists in keeping track of
the food and exercise history for up to one year (CNPP
2008).
2. Reduce energy intake. A 500- to 1,000-calorie-per-day
deﬁcit can result in a weight loss of 1 to 2 pounds of fat
Treatment of Obesity: Fighting the Battle of the Bulge
53

per week. This type of energy reduction is designed to
achieve slow, progressive weight loss, and for most peo-
ple this means that the reduced energy plan will total
about 1,000 to 1,200 calories for women and 1,200 to 1,600
calories for men. The MyPyramid online tools provide a
good guide to meal plans for these calorie levels. Even
with some guidelines, evaluating calorie content of foods
takes practice because energy content is not always
obvious. For a woman with a goal of 1,200 calories per
day, just six chocolate sandwich cookies provide more
than one-quarter of those calories. Calorie content of
foods can be estimated using online databases, food
labels, restaurant nutrition information sheets, and
handbooks of nutrient information.
3. Recognize fat as a concentrated source of energy. Fat is a
concentrated source of calories. It has 9 calories per gram,
whereas protein and carbohydrate have only 4 calories
per gram. Thus, fat can supply more than twice as many
calories in each bite as a bite of carbohydrate or protein.
In a given weight of food, the most efﬁcient way to
reduce calories is to cut back on the fat. In the campaign
to prevent obesity, the NHLBI suggests limiting total fat
to 30 percent or less of total calories. For example, in a
2,000-calorie diet, about 660 calories—or about 75 grams
of fat—could come from fat in meals each day. Studies
show that people consume more total energy with high-
fat diets compared with low fat diets (NHLBI 1998).
4. Eat less fat and sugar and more fruits and vegetables.
Calorie density of menu items can be diluted by the
addition of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and water.
For example, extra vegetables and whole grain bread can
reduce the calorie density of a meat sandwich. Plant ﬁber
adds volume and provides a feeling of fullness, so fewer
overall calories may be consumed.
5. Limit food quantity at home and when eating out. By
recalibrating portion sizes to ﬁt individual health goals,
it is possible to eat all types of foods in moderation at
home or when eating out. Even without measuring
spoons or cups, the amount of a standard food portion
may be visualized by comparison to objects of similar
size. For example, three ounces of meat or poultry is
about the size of a deck of cards or the palm of one’s
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

hand. One-half cup of cooked rice, pasta, or potato is
similar in size to half of a baseball or the amount that can
ﬁt in a cupped hand. A serving size card with more
examples of what one serving looks like can be down-
loaded at http://hp2010.nhlbihin.net/portion/keep.htm.
Dozens of complex diets have been promoted for weight
loss, but there is no scientiﬁc evidence to show that any one diet
is more effective than another. Table 6.7 in Chapter 6 helps sort
through the various types of diets that exist today. It lists some
of the most common diet plans, examines their advantages and
disadvantages, and provides the dietary basis behind their
potential beneﬁts.
Currently, there is considerable interest in the effects of indi-
vidual macronutrients—fat, protein, and carbohydrate—to make
weight
management
easier
or
more
effective.
High-
carbohydrate, high-ﬁber, low-fat diets like those proposed by
Dean Ornish and Nathan Pritikin include whole grains, fruits,
and vegetables. These diets limit all types of dietary fat. Fat is
not intrinsically bad, but because fat contains twice the calories
of protein or carbohydrate, reduced-fat meals provide more food
volume for fewer calories.
High-fat, high-protein, low-carbohydrate food plans, such
as the Atkins diet, may be more satisfying than low-fat diets.
With this approach, less food could be eaten, but weight loss
does not occur unless fewer calories are consumed overall. A
review of nearly 100 studies of low-carbohydrate weight loss
diets did not ﬁnd enough evidence to recommend for or against
the use of such diets. Weight loss was related to eating fewer
calories and staying on the diet for a longer period of time, but
not with the carbohydrate content of food (Bravata et al. 2003).
At this time, no reliable data are available to show that any com-
bination or avoidance of foods will work better than the others
over the long term. The closer a person follows any calorie-
reduced diet, the greater the weight loss. It is the adherence to a
diet, not the diet itself, that makes the difference (Bray and
Champagne 2005). No one intervention works equally for every-
one. Not everybody loses weight. Of those who do so, the major-
ity are unable to keep it off. Before experts are able to predict that
diet plans will actually cause weight loss for longer than six
months, they need more data about matching the diet interven-
tion to individual metabolic and social needs.
Treatment of Obesity: Fighting the Battle of the Bulge
55

Diet Foods
The U.S. food and beverage industries have launched massive
campaigns to develop and promote reduced-calorie foods using
products such as artiﬁcial sweeteners and fat replacers. It is not
certain how these foods contribute to weight management for
most Americans. Do people actually lose weight by snacking on
fat-free chips and sugar-free pudding? Perhaps they just feel free
to eat more of everything. Although it seems to make sense that
exchanging high-calorie sweeteners with sugar-free substitutes
could help control weight, no scientiﬁc consensus has been
reached regarding their value. In a review of laboratory, clinical,
and epidemiological studies, artiﬁcial sweeteners were associ-
ated with only modest weight loss (Bellisle and Drewnowski
2007). The sweeteners did not suppress appetite or further con-
sumption of food. It was suggested that they could only be a ben-
eﬁt if they were integrated into a reduced-calorie diet. Although
some investigators have concluded that artiﬁcial sweeteners
enhance weight loss, others have suggested that they actually
increase body weight. This idea is based on studies such as one
in France that showed that people who regularly consume artiﬁ-
cial sweeteners have a higher BMI (West and de Looy 2001).
Instead of suggesting a causal relationship between artiﬁcial
sweeteners and increased body weight, these data may reﬂect
practices in which individuals were using artiﬁcial sweeteners
to reduce calories because they were already overweight. Little
is known about the long-term impact of sweetener replacements
on energy intake and body weight.
The American Heart Association and the American Dietetic
Association report that fat substitutes can have a substantial
impact on weight reduction as long as they lower total calorie
intake (Wylie-Rosett 2002). Olestra (which goes by the brand
name Olean) is a synthetic mixture of sugar and vegetable oil
that passes through the body undigested. Olestra-based foods
have the sensory qualities of real fat; however, concern has been
expressed about its safety based on reports from individuals
who experienced gastrointestinal problems, such as cramps and
loose stools, after consuming large amounts of olestra. Olestra
has been studied more than many other fat substitutes, and a
review of more than 100 studies has shown that consumption of
olestra-containing food does not affect gastric emptying or bowel
transit times. Occurrence of gastrointestinal symptoms under
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ordinary snacking conditions with olestra is similar to those that
occur following consumption of snacks fried in regular fats.
Olestra does cause a decrease in the availability of fat-soluble
vitamins A, D, E, and K, but this deﬁcit is offset by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA)–mandated addition of these
vitamins to olestra-containing foods (Hunt, Zorich, and Thom-
son 1998; Thomson, Hunt, and Zorich 1998).
Several studies on the effects of olestra on appetite and
energy intake showed that replacement of dietary fat with olestra
resulted in weight loss that was signiﬁcantly greater than a con-
trol diet. In these studies, weight loss occurred because total
energy intake was reduced. The overall results from studies of
sugar and fat replacers and increased dietary ﬁber indicate that
some products used to reduce energy density are helpful in
obesity management, while others do not make a signiﬁcant con-
tribution. The essential factor that determines effectiveness of
modiﬁed food products is that total energy in a person’s meals
and snacks must be decreased, or the beneﬁt of energy-reduced
foods for weight management is limited (Bray et al. 2004).
Nutritionists caution the public to be aware of the realities of
the weight-reduction potential of reduced-calorie foods and not
buy completely into the promises (Kazaks and Stern 2008). The
realities are that calories do count. Calories consumed must
equal calories expended even with low-energy-density foods. A
reduced-calorie food label is not a license to eat unlimited
amounts guilt free. Low-calorie products should be used as sub-
stitutes for higher-calorie foods, not in addition to a regular diet.
Furthermore, lower-calorie foods should taste good. Not all
products provide desirable ﬂavors, aromas, and textures. The
promises of successful weight management by reduced-calorie
food consumption is based on the theory that following a
reduced-calorie diet is easier when the taste and qualities of sug-
ars and fats are provided in reduced-calorie versions of foods. It
is anticipated that the volume of food in low-calorie, high-ﬁber
products may help consumers be satisﬁed with smaller portions
at each meal and, consequently, fewer calories overall.
Adequate Nutrition Labeling
Nutrition labels can help consumers make the informed food
choices that contribute to a healthy diet. In 1990, the Nutrition
Labeling and Education Act (NLEA) was signed into law. This
Treatment of Obesity: Fighting the Battle of the Bulge
57

act was a new mandate for food manufacturers to disclose the fat
(saturated and unsaturated), cholesterol, sodium, sugar, ﬁber,
protein, and carbohydrate content in their products. It required
retailers to provide labels for their store’s 20 top-selling fruits,
vegetables, ﬁsh, and shellﬁsh, although meat, poultry and egg
products, infant formula, foods sold in bulk, foods with insigniﬁ-
cant amounts of nutrients, and foods sold by retailers with total
sales of less than $500,000 were exempt from the requirement.
Retailers did not have to label each item, but if they chose not
to, they were required to provide this information in a single
location in the store.
In 1993, the FDA and the USDA issued regulations that
speciﬁed the table format and content of nutrition labels on most
foods, including processed meat and poultry products. The
nutrition facts table is intended to contain easy-to-read and
easy-to-use information that allows purchasers to understand
the nutritional value of a food, compare products, and increase
or decrease consumption of nutrients or calories. More resources
related to the nutrition facts label may be found in Chapter 7; see
also ‘‘How to Understand and Use the Nutrition Facts Label’’ at
http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/foodlab.html.
Although consumers have the right to nutrition information
about food products, NLEA did not cover foods purchased in res-
taurants and at prepared food counters in grocery stores. Despite
the fact that people are eating more food away from home, usu-
ally they can only guess at the calorie content of the items they
order. Most restaurants have no trouble listing the price of menu
items, but only about a third provide nutrition information on
the menus. Without having the information right where the food
purchasing decision is made, most people have difﬁculty com-
paring options and making the most healthful choice. A study
conducted in 2006 with more than 5,000 Americans who
answered questionnaires about their food purchases revealed
that, on average, they ate away from home about six times per
week. In that study consumers agreed that they were ultimately
responsible for making sensible food choices; however, 41 percent
wanted to see more nutrition information printed on menus so
they could choose well (Malone and Bland-Campbell 2005). The
Institute of Medicine, FDA, Ofﬁce of the Surgeon General, and
AMA all called for prominently visible displays of calories and
other nutrition information at the point of choice in restaurant
chains. The Center for Science in the Public Interest, a consumer
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

advocate group whose goals are to counter the food industry’s in-
ﬂuence on public opinion and public policies and to lobby for
government policies, was at the forefront of efforts to make
calorie content of purchased food readily available.
In 2006, the New York City Department of Health and Men-
tal Hygiene became the ﬁrst agency to require most restaurants
to show calorie information on menus and menu boards. In
2007, the New York State Restaurant Association (NYSRA) chal-
lenged the regulation and it was subsequently blocked. The
Department of Health loosened some of the rules that the
NYSRA had objected to and reinstated the menu-labeling regula-
tion. A subsequent motion ﬁled by chain restaurant lobbyists to
again block the requirement that the calorie value of dishes must
be displayed alongside prices was rejected by a U.S. District
Court judge. The judge agreed with the argument that showing
calorie values alongside prices will help consumers make choices
that will lead to a lower incidence of obesity, and the regulation
went into effect in 2008. The judge’s ruling meant that any res-
taurant chain with 15 or more nationwide outlets, or about
10 percent of the restaurants in the boroughs of New York City
—Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens, the Bronx, and Staten Island—
are required to display calorie counts on menus, menu display
boards, and food tags. Advocates of menu labeling say this land-
mark decision paves the way for other local and state govern-
ments to pass similar measures.
Physical Activity
As discussed previously, moderate exercise does not greatly con-
tribute to weight reduction. Exercise does use up calories, and
the cumulative effects of regular exercise over long periods of
time can be beneﬁcial in preventing weight gain. However,
calorie expenditure from low-level activity is not adequate to
permit increased food intake. When individuals have unrealistic
expectations that exercise can increase weight loss, they may
become disappointed at the lack of results. The true beneﬁts of
exercise are preventing weight gain, decreasing body fat, main-
taining weight loss, and improving general health at any weight.
For long-term good health, an important goal is to establish a
regular, sustained pattern of physical activity (Wadden and Fo-
ster 2000).
Physical Activity
59

Behavioral Strategies for Responding to an
Obesogenic Environment
Living in an obesogenic environment—one that encourages
sedentary living and aggressively promotes consumption of
high-energy-density foods—requires increasing effort to over-
come this barrier to good health. Behavioral treatment of over-
weight and obesity trains individuals to gain control over
unhealthful external conditions as they identify and modify
personal dietary and physical activity responses that lead to
overweight.
Four behavioral strategies commonly applied to weight loss
and maintenance programs are (1) self-monitoring, (2) stimulus
control, (3) cognitive restructuring, and (4) social support
(Fujioka 2002).
1. Self-monitoring diet and exercise patterns: To change
behaviors, it helps people to become aware of their
actions such as overeating or being sedentary. Keeping a
journal listing all food and beverages consumed and the
duration and frequency of physical activity can be an
effective learning tool because it pinpoints the amounts
and types of food eaten and exercise performed each day.
Daily food and activity records provide immediate feed-
back, so a problem pattern becomes obvious and possible
solutions can be tried right away. Self-monitoring data
can be recorded in a diary or notebook, as entries into a
handheld computer, or with the use of a computerized
diet and exercise analysis program. Exercise can be
monitored in time or distance, as with the use of a
pedometer. People generally underestimate how much
they eat and overreport exercise. Record keeping
decreases the tendency of both lean and obese people to
underestimate their food intake (Kretsch, Fong, and
Green 1999). Reducing energy intake is the key to weight
reduction, and accurate assessment of food intake by
keeping food records is consistently related to weight
loss (NHLBI 1998).
2. Stimulus control: Personal diet and activity records can
identify the ‘‘triggers,’’ or environmental cues associated
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

with incidental eating, overeating, and inactivity. Gener-
ally, weight-management guides, diet books, and Web
sites provide a wide variety of tips or ideas for manag-
ing cues.
3. Cognitive restructuring—deﬁning weight loss success:
If dieters are to develop reasonable weight-loss goals,
they must correct false beliefs and expectations. Most
dieters have unrealistic ideas about the amount of weight
they want to lose and the extent of weight loss that is
possible with even the best treatment. Instead of aiming
for ideal weight based on the Metropolitan Life Insur-
ance Company’s height-weight charts, people should
target a 10 percent reduction in body weight, as sug-
gested above, for a successful outcome. Losing as little as
5–10 percent of initial weight has been shown to improve
hypertension, type 2 diabetes, and abnormal cholesterol
levels, even if the person is not at ideal body weight
(NHLBI 1998). Most individuals expect that dieting will
result in much more weight lost than these modest goals.
A study published in 2000 reported that participants who
lost 10 percent of their body weight during a four-month
treatment were disappointed and felt that they had failed
because their weight loss was not, to them, sufﬁcient
(Foster et al. 2001). In this study, nearly 400 women
beginning a weight-loss program were asked to describe
their goal weight loss in terms of what they wished to
achieve, what they would be happy with, and weight
loss they would view as unsuccessful. The women said
they aimed for about a 38 percent reduction in body
weight—more than three times the recommended goal.
A 25 percent reduction was described as just ‘‘accept-
able,’’ but not one they would be happy with. A 16 per-
cent loss was considered ‘‘disappointing.’’ These
responses suggest that many dieters have unrealistic
goals and, even after a medically signiﬁcant weight loss,
they may feel unsuccessful (Foster et al. 2001). Cognitive
restructuring is also useful in dealing with lapses or
weight regain. Individuals are encouraged to see the set-
back for what it is—a temporary lapse from which it is
possible to recover, instead of total failure. The setback is
assessed to determine why the lapse occurred and how a
similar situation could be prevented in the future. Other
Behavioral Strategies for Responding to an Obesogenic Environment
61

techniques include rehearsing ways to cope with relapse
before it occurs. Each time a challenge is successfully
managed—even an imaginary one—the chances of
relapse are reduced (Wadden and Foster 2000).
4. Social support network: People with a social support
network are more successful at weight loss and mainte-
nance than those without strong support systems. Sixty-
six percent of women who participated in behavior
modiﬁcation groups along with friends were able to
maintain total weight loss 10 months after treatment
compared with only 24 percent of those in the group of
people who were recruited alone (Wing 1999). Scientiﬁc
literature on weight maintenance of greater than three
years shows that diet combined with group therapy and
social support have the best chance of long-term success
(Ayyad and Andersen 2000). Most weight is lost during
the ﬁrst six months of treatment (Wadden and Foster
2000). Numerous studies show that weight loss is
enhanced by long-term behavioral treatment, but atten-
dance at sessions generally declines over time, and
without support and encouragement and having to be
accountable for healthful lifestyle choices, people regain
weight. For most dieters, about a third of the initial
weight loss is regained in the year after treatment. Three
to ﬁve years later, at least 50 percent of participants have
returned to their initial weight or gained more. Behav-
ioral maintenance therapy can delay weight regain, but
data are insufﬁcient to prove that it is effective over the
long term (Kramer et al. 1989).
Long-term Success
The National Weight Control Registry (NWCR) shows that some
people are successful at long-term weight management on their
own. The NWCR was a project developed in 1994 by Dr. Rena
Wing and Dr. James Hill to help identify those individuals who
have succeeded at long-term weight maintenance and to exam-
ine the strategies that were successful. An estimated 5,000 people
participate in the NWCR. Participants may register if they have
maintained at least a 30-pound weight loss for more than a year.
After studying these individuals, Hill and his colleagues
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

described the keys to their weight loss success in a 2005 article. In
essence, no one plan or diet was common to all participants.
Weight loss was maintained by a variety of personally designed
diet and exercise strategies. Many participants had tried and
failed several times before they were able to ﬁnd the lifestyle
and diet patterns that worked for them. Methods that were
common to most participants were eating a relatively low-fat
diet, eating breakfast, self-monitoring through food records,
weighing themselves regularly, and regular physical activity
(about one hour per day) (Hill et al. 2005).
At present, no strategies are deﬁned that will help the major-
ity of obese and overweight people successfully manage their
weight given an environment that encourages overeating and
less and less physical activity. Because millions of people are
overweight or obese, they are a diverse group and will take
many routes to success.
Medications
Nonprescription
Numerous over-the-counter (OTC) weight-loss products are
available. Most have not been proven to be effective and safe.
During the past decades, products for weight loss have had to
change their formulations based on new government regulations
and warnings. For example, amphetamines, originally devel-
oped as a treatment for narcolepsy, were introduced in 1937 as
weight-loss drugs when they were found to reduce appetite as
well as keep people awake. An amphetamine-type drug, desoxy-
ephedrine, was approved by the FDA for obesity treatment in
1947. It warned against its use in persons with ‘‘cardiovascular
disease, hypertension, or insomnia’’ and in those who were
‘‘neurotic or hyperexcitable’’ (Colman 2004).
In 1960, amphetamines were the most commonly prescribed
medications for obesity (Parry et al. 1973). However, amphet-
amines were not without risks. Accelerated heart rate, increased
blood pressure, hallucinations, psychiatric disorders, addiction,
withdrawal problems, and heart failure were side effects that
brought about the end of the amphetamine era. In the 1970s,
government agencies all over the world placed tighter restric-
tions on drugs with the potential for abuse. Stimulant drugs are
well established in treatment of obesity, and amphetamines are
still approved for use under tight regulations in most countries.
Long-term Success
63

Ephedra
Ephedra, also commonly known as Ma Huang, has been used in
Chinese medicine for more than 2,500 years. It is made of dried
branches of an evergreen shrub–like plant native to Central Asia
and Mongolia. The principal active ingredient, ephedrine, is a
compound that can powerfully stimulate the nervous system
and heart. Ephedrine is chemically similar to amphetamines
and may decrease appetite and increase metabolism. From the
1980s, ephedra had been popular for increasing energy and
enhancing athletic performance, and it was used in many dietary
supplements marketed for weight loss in the United States. It
was a popular weight loss pill until it was banned in the United
States by the FDA in 2004 because of safety concerns. In April
2005, a federal District Court judge in Utah overturned the ban
in response to a suit brought by an ephedra manufacturer. The
FDA appealed this lower court ruling, and in August 2006 the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit upheld the FDA’s
original ban. With 19,000 adverse events reported, it was con-
cluded that no dose of ephedrine was safe, and the sale of these
products in the United States was made illegal. Up until this rul-
ing, many supplement companies marketed low-dose ephedra
products containing 10 milligrams (mg) or less of ephedra.
According to the FDA, little evidence exists to show that ephedra
is effective except for short-term weight loss. The increased risk
of increased blood pressure, heart attacks, strokes, or seizures
outweighs any beneﬁts (NCCAM 2006).
Another drug, phenylpropanolamine, originally used to
treat nasal congestion, also had the side effect of appetite sup-
pression and was used in nonprescription diet aids for weight
loss. One such product was Dexatrim—a popular appetite sup-
pressant for more than 25 years. Phenylpropanolamine was Dex-
atrim’s primary ingredient, but it was removed from the product
line because of side effects such as increased risk for bleeding in
the brain. Dexatrim switched its focus to ephedrine-based pills
until ephedrine was banned by the FDA. After the ban, manufac-
turers of diet and weight-loss drugs like Dexatrim turned their
attention to ﬁnding alternatives that would mimic its effects.
Dexatrim products are now drug free. They are based on a
blend of guarana, kola nut, and bitter orange as well as several
vitamins and minerals; green tea extract is also a common ingre-
dient. They may or may not contain caffeine. Some side effects
may include dizziness, nausea, high blood pressure, and
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

depression. Dexatrim does point out that its diet aid works best
when used with a sensible meal plan and regular exercise. It
advertises that dieters will see results in one to two weeks when
diet, exercise, and Dexatrim diet pills are combined. The truth is
that most people could probably achieve the same results with
diet and exercise alone.
The Metabolife line is another group of popular OTC prod-
ucts. Metabolife 356, an ephedra-based supplement, once gener-
ated hundreds of millions of dollars in annual sales. Metabolife
356, like other ephedra-containing supplements, was linked to
thousands of serious adverse events, so it was discontinued fol-
lowing the FDA ban on ephedra-containing dietary supple-
ments. Currently, Metabolife offers various supplements for
weight-loss or weight-maintenance phases that may contain caf-
feine; vitamins; minerals; and caffeine-containing extracts of
green tea, guarana, and yerba mate. Even without the effective
ephedra, the plan still claims that the supplement will control
appetite and burn fat. Metabolife also recommends that its prod-
ucts be combined with a healthy diet and exercise program. To
support that advice, an online program helps customers plan
and track weight-loss goals through education, tips from the
experts, and community encouragement. The Web site features
a collection of healthy recipes; suggestions for strength-training
exercises; weight-management tips; and logs to track goals, diet,
ﬁtness, and results. Using Metabolife without changes in lifestyle
will not be helpful for weight loss because it does not contain
ingredients that have been proven to achieve effective results in
the long run. The FDA does not support the weight-loss prom-
ises made by Metabolife.
For people who are wondering whether any OTC weight-
loss medications work, the answer is, maybe. Although some
ingredients like caffeine or tea that increase energy expenditure
may be helpful for weight control, the concentration of these
ingredients in diet preparations probably is too small to have
an effect on weight loss in most people. A few cups of coffee or
tea could have a similar outcome, taste better, and cost much less.
Herbs and Supplements
A popular question among people who are looking for more
ways to control weight is, What herbs or supplements should I
take to lose weight? A survey indicated that more than a quarter
of American women trying to lose weight tried over-the-counter
Long-term Success
65

weight-loss supplements (Blanck, Khan, and Serdula 2001). The
products promise a wide variety of ways to reduce fat, including
increasing energy expenditure, increasing satiety, increasing fat
oxidation, and blocking dietary fat and carbohydrate absorption.
In terms of OTC weight-loss products, 64 percent of consumers
think the government requires warnings about potential side
effects, 54 percent believe these products are approved for safety
by the FDA, and 46 percent think the products are approved for
efﬁcacy. In addition, 37 percent of consumers believe that herbal
supplements are safer than prescription or OTC medications
(Pillitteri et al. 2008). None of these beliefs is true. Although
claims that dietary supplements can prevent, mitigate, treat, or
cure a speciﬁc disease cannot be legally made, this distinction
becomes clouded for many weight-loss products. Misleading
weight-loss claims are seemingly everywhere, preying on con-
sumers desperate for an easy solution. Current regulatory proc-
esses are weak, underfunded, and understaffed. This situation
must be corrected and federal agencies must aggressively pursue
manufacturers of those products that make unsubstantiated
claims targeted toward vulnerable populations.
Supplements are attractive because they often advertise
remarkable beneﬁts and they are marketed as ‘‘natural,’’ which
may be interpreted as an assurance of safety and efﬁcacy. The
choice to supplement a diet with particular botanicals, vitamins,
minerals, or other products can be a sensible decision that
improves well-being and vitality. How do we sift through the
false claims or junk science to ﬁnd accurate information about
supplements and their side effects or beneﬁts? Because there is
no ofﬁcial recommended dose for supplements, distributors are
free to say whatever they want to about products. Intriguing
research ﬁndings may be seen in animals; however, rats and mice
are not people. Clinical trials with humans are necessary to know
if the supplements are truly effective. Only carefully controlled
scientiﬁc studies can show whether a product actually works.
The best information is based on the results of rigorous scientiﬁc
testing, rather than on testimonials or anecdotes. Some supple-
ment suppliers accuse scientists of trying to keep secrets about
alternative products that have miraculous powers. However, sci-
entists are interested in studying the beneﬁts and the risks of
dietary supplements. The federal government even has an
agency, the National Center for Complementary and Alternative
Medicine (NCCAM), devoted to rigorous scientiﬁc research
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

(http://www.nccam.nih.gov). Anyone can get information on
thousands of studies from NCCAM.
Red Flag Campaign
The allure of a magic elixir can tempt anyone who wants an easy
way to lose weight. Consumers spend roughly $1 billion a year
on heavily advertised weight-loss products that are at best
unproven and at worst unsafe. They promote unrealistic expect-
ations and false hopes. In September 2002, the U.S. Federal Trade
Commission (FTC) released a report titled Weight Loss Advertis-
ing: An Analysis of Current Trends indicating that the use of false
and misleading claims in weight-loss advertising was wide-
spread (FTC 2002). Researchers examined 300 weight-loss adver-
tisements taken from television, radio, the Internet, newspapers,
magazines, e-mail, and direct mail. The Commission found that
55 percent of weight-loss ads made claims that were misleading,
lacked proof, or were obviously false. Although the FTC study
did not criticize speciﬁc products, it provided numerous exam-
ples of false or exaggerated claims and said some weight-loss
supplements lacked safety warnings and could be dangerous.
The FTC Division of Advertising Practices is responsible for
enforcing federal truth-in-advertising laws. A major initiative
was the 2003 Red Flag program, which encourages the media to
screen out weight-loss advertisements that contain false claims.
It also advises consumers to be wary of any product that claims
fast and easy weight loss results. The following is a list of red
ﬂags that alert the public and the media that an advertising claim
should be met with a healthy portion of skepticism.
Red ﬂags are claims that a product can:
•
Cause weight loss of 2 pounds or more a week for a month
or more without dieting or exercise.
•
Cause substantial weight loss no matter what or how
much the consumer eats.
•
Cause permanent weight loss (even when the consumer
stops using the product).
•
Block the absorption of fat or calories to enable consumers
to lose substantial weight.
•
Safely enable consumers to lose more than 3 pounds per
week for more than four weeks.
•
Cause substantial weight loss for all users.
Long-term Success
67

•
Produce weight-loss results that exceed what is physio-
logically possible under normal circumstances, as claimed
by testimonials, for example, losing 120 pounds in seven
weeks (FTC 2003).
Dietary Fiber
This food component has also been linked to weight regulation.
A review summarizing the effects of high- versus low-ﬁber diet
interventions found that the high-ﬁber diets increased satiety
and decreased subsequent appetite. Because the average dietary
ﬁber intake in the United States is approximately half the USDA
recommendation of 25 to 30 grams per day, increasing dietary
ﬁber may be a simple way to help decrease the prevalence of
obesity (Howarth, Saltzman, and Roberts 2001).
Example of Research Study in Detail: Chitosan
Fiber supplements and ‘‘fat blockers’’ have been advertised as
ways to prevent fat absorption. Following is an example of
research that shows how scientists assessed the claims and effec-
tiveness of chitosan, a ﬁber supplement, starting with some back-
ground on the product.
Chitosan is a calorie-free, high-ﬁber carbohydrate. It is pro-
duced commercially by chemically altering chitin, which is the
structural element in the shells of crustaceans such as crabs,
shrimp, and lobsters. As a food ingredient, chitosan adds thick-
ness and a smooth texture to food products and is used in appli-
cations such as thickening chocolate milk drinks. Chitosan also
has been approved by the FDA for use as an edible ﬁlm to protect
foods from dehydration. Like other forms of ﬁber, such as bran,
chitosan is not well digested by the human body. Chitosan’s con-
ﬁguration allows it to bind to fats and cholesterol. Its calorie-
reducing effect is ascribed to its purported ability to bind with
ingested fat and carry it out of the digestive tract. It has been
used in Japan in several types of foods, including soybean paste,
potato chips, and noodles, to help prevent fat absorption. A Jap-
anese confection called Choco Lady is a sweet chocolate pellet
that contains a crispy chitosan-enriched center. The pellets are
claimed to help with weight loss. The product description states,
‘‘For maximum effect, the consumer is advised to eat ﬁve pellets
before each meal . . . targeted towards men and women who tend
to eat greasy meals’’ (AFJ 2006).
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Apart from its role as a food additive, chitosan is sold as a
dietary supplement with claims that it will block the absorption
of signiﬁcant amounts of dietary fat and lead to rapid weight
loss. In support of the fat-blocking claim was a demonstration
aired on the QVC television channel. A beaker was ﬁlled with
oil and a water-based liquid to simulate what happens in a per-
son’s gastrointestinal tract, even though a beaker does not
actually simulate human digestion. When the oil and water did
not mix, chitosan was added to the concoction. The TV camera
showed clumps of chitosan. This demonstration is offered as
‘‘proof’’ that chitosan combines with fat, prevents it from being
absorbed by the body, and will lead to rapid weight loss. If chito-
san were to work as claimed, an increased amount of fat would
appear in the feces after a person consumes chitosan along with
meals containing fat. A series of studies that measured the
amount of fat in feces of a total of 104 men and women taking
chitosan were published in 2005 (Gades and Stern 2005). These
data were compared with data from a control period. Three dif-
ferent brands of chitosan were tested. The greatest amount of
fat that was excreted in men was 1.8 grams per day, or 16
calories. At that rate, it would take more than 15 months to lose
about 2 pounds of body fat using chitosan. It did not block the
absorption of any fat in women. A systematic review of random-
ized controlled trials of chitosan indicated that the effect of chito-
san on body weight was minimal and unlikely to be of clinical
signiﬁcance (Mhurchu et al. 2005).
Prescription Drugs
All drugs have side effects, some of which are serious. Drugs for
chronic diseases are taken for long periods of time. For example,
if a person has high blood pressure, takes a drug to treat the dis-
ease, and subsequently stops taking the drug, blood pressure
increases. The FDA has different standards for approval of drugs
for treating obesity: (1) The FDA requires that obesity drugs have
been tested clinically for at least a year. (2) No side effects should
be present. (3) The drug is only prescribed for a limited time—
usually a few months.
When considering weight-loss prescription medication, it is
assumed that when a patient stops taking a drug, the patient
will not regain lost weight. At this time, drug therapy and life
Long-term Success
69

style interventions are not opposing strategies; the current drugs
used for weight loss are combined with lifestyle interventions.
Fen-Phen
In 1992, a University of Rochester professor ﬁrst promoted the
drug combination of fenﬂuramine and phentermine, or fen-
phen, as a magic weight-loss pill. Studies had shown that the
combination could be used in lower dosages with fewer side
effects than either drug alone (e.g., Weintraub et al. 1984). Partic-
ipants of a four-year research project lost an average of about 31
pounds on fen-phen, versus about 10 pounds on a placebo (see
Glossary for the deﬁnition of ‘‘placebo’’), after 34 weeks and
were able to keep the weight off over the long term (Weintraub
et al. 1992). Although the initial rationale for the combination
was that the two drugs would provide an additive action,
allowing the use of lower, safer doses of each drug, reviewers
from Texas A&M University concluded that the combination
was not merely additive but also synergistic—that is, they were
more effective together than simply doubling the dose of either
drug alone. Mass marketing of this combination of drugs took
place, and the number of prescriptions written for fen-phen
grew from 60,000 in 1992 to 18 million in 1996 (Langreth 1997).
Hundreds of clinics opened speciﬁcally to prescribe these
weight-loss medications. It seemed as though researchers had
ﬁnally found the magic pill for weight loss and long-term weight
control.
The drug was extensively used until a report from the Mayo
Clinic linked 24 cases of heart valve disease, which included
severe deformity and leakage, to use of the medications. These
24 cases, all women, had no previous history of cardiovascular
disease. The leakage was caused by a buildup of abnormal tissue
on the valves of their heart that prevented them from sealing
properly. This type of valve damage is a silent condition, causing
no symptoms until it becomes severe, is life threatening, and
requires surgery to repair. Another investigation showed that
271 of 291 patients who had taken fen-phen showed abnormal
electrocardiograms. In 1997, American Home Products, fen-
phen’s manufacturer, removed the drug from the market (Lan-
greth 1997). The 50-year-old generic drug phentermine, which
was one half of the fen-phen combination, does not show these
serious side effects and is still on the market.
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Meridia
The FDA has since approved a long-term appetite suppressant,
Meridia. Meridia is the brand name for sibutramine, a selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor, or SSRI. The drug prevents recy-
cling (re-uptake) of noradrenaline and serotonin. Noradrenaline
and serotonin are neurotransmitters that enhance the feeling of
satisfaction from eating. Weight loss with sibutramine is
increased when positive changes are made in diet and lifestyle.
In one trial, people with an initial BMI of 30–40 who had lost
weight when given sibutramine for four weeks continued to lose
weight during 44 additional weeks of sibutramine treatment. In
this study, people were simply told to eat a healthy diet. How-
ever, in a more recent study, a much higher amount of weight
loss was achieved when sibutramine treatment was combined
with lifestyle-modiﬁcation counseling. Those who had sibutr-
amine alone lost an average of 11 pounds after a year, while those
in the sibutramine and counseling group had an average weight
loss of 26 pounds (Rubio et al. 2007).
The neurotransmitters that control appetite also control
numerous other body processes, so side effects from sibutramine
are common. The drug is not recommended for people with
hypertension because it increases blood pressure in some indi-
viduals. Other reported side effects include constipation, dry
mouth, headache, and increased heart rate. Meridia also has
been associated with more serious problems. Between February
1998 and September 2001, hundreds of people throughout the
world who took Meridia were hospitalized, and the FDA
reported that 29 people taking Meridia in the United States had
died (Wolfe, Sasich, and Barbenhenn 2002).
Sibutramine has also encountered regulatory problems.
Warnings about its safety have been issued in France and the
United Kingdom. In 2002, the Italian Ministry of Health sus-
pended sales of the drug after 50 reports of adverse events and
two deaths. However, the European Union Committee for Pro-
prietary Medicinal Products later issued a report stating that,
when used according to directions, sibutramine had a favorable
risk/beneﬁt ratio. The manufacturer, Abbott Laboratories, had
reported that the death rate among patients taking the drug
(12,000 people in clinical trials and 8.5 million patients world-
wide) was substantially lower than what would normally occur
in any obese patient population (Abbott Laboratories 2002).
Long-term Success
71

In 2002, the FDA conducted an investigation into the safety
of the drug. The present protocol for sibutramine, issued as a
result of the investigation, indicates that it should be used only
by people who are at least 30 pounds overweight who do not
have cardiovascular problems.
Orlistat
Hoffmann–La Roche’s Xenical is the brand name for orlistat, an
obesity drug that can be taken for an extended time period. It
blocks fat-digesting enzymes in the intestine called lipases and
prevents some dietary fat from being digested and absorbed. It
is usually taken three times a day, before main meals that contain
fat. Up to 30 percent absorption of dietary fat can be blocked with
120 mg of orlistat taken with a meal. This extra fat that passes
down the intestine may cause abdominal pain, gas, oily stools,
and fecal incontinence, especially if the fat content of the meal
is high. This effect persuades users to limit their fat intake.
A meta-analysis of Xenical trials showed that the drug
helped dieting patients lose an average of 2 to 3 percent of their
body weight compared with dieting alone. After one year of
treatment, about one-third more patients treated with orlistat
three times per day lost a greater percentage of body weight than
those treated with placebo. In a number of studies, orlistat treat-
ment signiﬁcantly improved blood pressure, lowered levels of
LDL cholesterol (bad cholesterol) in the blood, and lowered fast-
ing blood glucose and insulin levels. Results from a four-year
study suggested that development of type 2 diabetes, especially
in those with impaired glucose tolerance, was delayed with orli-
stat use (Heymsﬁeld et al. 2000). The majority of subjects across
the studies gained the weight back after discontinuing the drug.
Orlistat has been approved for over-the-counter sales as the
product Alli. It contains about half the dose of the prescription
drug. The package insert cautions that, while the product does
prevent fat absorption, it may cause oily bowel movements so
frequently that it suggests consumers wear a panty liner when
starting the treatment.
Rimonabant
The brand name for rimonabant is Acomplia (Zimulti in Europe)
and is marketed by Sanoﬁ-Aventis. It acts, both in the brain and
in other parts of the body, to increase feelings of fullness, and it
plays a role in the metabolism of glucose and fat in the body.
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Rimonabant is an inhibitor of cannabinoid type 1 receptors,
which are widely distributed in the brain and in other tissues,
including on fat cells. Interestingly, these receptors affect intake
of sweet or fatty foods. These same receptors are also involved
in nicotine addiction; thus, rimonabant is also prescribed to help
people quit smoking. Overeaters and smokers have been shown
to have very active cannabinoid type 1 receptors. Rimonabant is
usually taken as a single dose before breakfast. In clinical trials
in people with BMI values of 34–38 who took rimonabant, partic-
ipants taking rimonabant had a signiﬁcantly greater weight loss
after one year compared with those given a placebo. By continu-
ing rimonabant treatment for a second year, weight loss was
maintained. Subjects who were switched to a placebo regained
most of the weight they had lost in the ﬁrst year (Rubio et al.
2007). Acomplia was introduced in Europe in 2006 and is also
available in several other countries. Sanoﬁ-Aventis withdrew its
application to market Acomplia in the United States after an
FDA advisory panel unanimously recommended against
approving the drug because of its side effects, including risk of
depression and suicide.
Response to drug therapy varies among individuals, and no
one drug works for all people. Diet drugs will not force anyone
to stop eating, as most people eat in response to environmental
cues rather than physiologic hunger. Medical professionals are
beginning to understand that regain of weight upon stopping
medication is not treatment failure, but rather it indicates that
obesity is a chronic disease much like diabetes. Drugs are not a
quick ﬁx for a disease that requires long-term treatment. As risks
are inherent in taking any medication, research is needed to
assess the long-term safety of obesity drugs relative to the health
risks of obesity and overweight. Since obesity is a chronic dis-
ease, it would be helpful to have weight loss medications that
can be used for long periods of time, such as those used for treat-
mentment of hypertension and dyslipidemia.
Obesity (Bariatric) Surgery
In 1954, Dr. Arnold Kremen and Dr. John Linner at the University
of Minnesota were studying nutrition absorption in dogs. They
discovered that the dogs lost weight after they underwent opera-
tions that bypassed much of their intestines (Kremen, Linner,
and Nelson 1954). After Dr. Linner went into private surgical
Long-term Success
73

practice, one of his patients asked him to use the technique on
her in the hope that she, too, could lose weight. With the success-
ful results of that procedure, bariatric surgery was born. In 1991,
a National Institutes of Health (NIH) expert panel endorsed
bypass surgery for obesity when they reviewed what was known
about surgical treatments for severely overweight individuals. It
concluded that surgical alterations of the digestive system
appeared to work for many people without severe side effects.
It approved bariatric surgery as an effective option for severely
obese people who have failed more moderate weight-reduction
strategies. In 1999, singer Carnie Wilson had gastric bypass sur-
gery and allowed the procedure to be broadcast live over the
Internet. The broadcast was viewed by more than 500,000 people.
Sixteen months after the procedure, Carnie had lost 152 pounds
of her original weight of more than 300 pounds. She was a cel-
ebrated example of successful weight-loss surgery and even
posed for Playboy Magazine in 2003. In 2005, after she gave birth
to her daughter, the pounds began to come back. In 2008, she
weighed more than 200 pounds—her weight increased but still
down about 100 pounds from her heaviest. That the weight
may be eventually regained demonstrates a limitation of obesity
surgery. On the other hand, an important health beneﬁt is that
the procedure may allow individuals to gain many years of
reduced risk related to high levels of obesity.
Ofﬁcial guidelines consider weight-loss surgery appropriate
for adults with severe obesity (BMI ≥40, or 37–39.9 if accompa-
nied by other conditions such as diabetes) who have not reached
a satisfactory weight through diet, exercise, and medication. Sur-
gery may be used as the initial treatment if BMI is greater than or
equal to 50. It is major surgery, undertaken only by specialist hos-
pital teams, and is not without risks. People who have weight-
loss surgery will need continuing specialist medical support for
many years. Weight-loss surgery is not advised in children,
except in extreme circumstances.
Three main types of weight-loss surgery are currently used:
gastric banding, gastric bypass, and duodenal switch/bilio-
pancreatic diversion. In gastric banding, a small pouch is made
in the upper part of the stomach with an adjustable band. During
eating, this smaller pouch ﬁlls up quickly, produces a sensation
of fullness, and reduces food intake. The food passes slowly into
the main part of the stomach and then on to the rest of the diges-
tive system. A remarkable feature of the gastric band is that it can
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

be adjusted without additional surgery. The band is actually a
balloon ﬁlled with saline solution that can be inﬂated or deﬂated.
This operation causes weight loss by reducing food intake, leaves
the main part of the digestive system unchanged, and is easily
reversible. It typically produces a 40 to 50 percent loss of excess
body weight in the two years after surgery (WIN 2008).
During the gastric bypass procedure, the top section of the
stomach is partitioned to make a new mini-stomach. This pouch
is connected to a lower section of the small intestine, bypassing
the upper part where most active digestion takes place. Food
does not get normal breakdown in the smaller stomach, and
absorption of nutrients from the small intestine is greatly
reduced. Weight loss is caused by both restriction and reduced
absorption of food. The surgery results in about 55 to 65 percent
of excess body weight. In a duodenal switch, the stomach pouch
is reduced in size and left connected to the upper small intestine,
which is then shortened. Similar to gastric bypass, weight loss
occurs with the combination of reduced food intake and reduced
absorption, and 65 to 75 percent of excess weight is typically lost
(WIN 2008).
The surgeries can either be performed via laparoscopic sur-
gery (two small incisions in the abdominal wall) or via open sur-
gery (one larger incision in the abdominal wall). How is the
decision made as to which surgical procedure to use? A number
of studies report death rates in people who received bariatric sur-
gery. Usually, a lower complication rate is associated with lapa-
roscopic surgery. However, for very obese patients, with a BMI
of greater than 80, laparoscopic surgery is not done. At this time,
a large enough database of obesity surgery results, including
beneﬁts and complications, is not available for individual
patients to be able to assess the risk for a given type of bariatric
surgery (Wolfe and Morton 2005). For people with cardiovascu-
lar disease (CVD), a national database houses data for individ-
uals that includes blood values that are risk indicators such as
cholesterol or triglycerides, physical symptoms, and the out-
comes of various treatments (NCEP 2001). For patients with
CVD, a physician may present the options to the patient
and, weighing the beneﬁts and risks, potentially choose
the ‘‘best’’ treatment for an individual. At this time, this
approach is not possible for obese patients. In terms of outcomes
for obese patients who are candidates for bariatric surgery, the
Long-term Success
75

construction of a database has begun, but it may be as long as 10
years before it is fully functional.
Obesity Surgery Cautions and Controversies
Pros
Most patients experience rapid weight loss and continue to do so
for 12 to 18 months following obesity surgery. Patients may
maintain 50 to 60 percent of their weight loss 10 to 14 years after
obesity surgery. Strong evidence exists to show that obesity sur-
gery works in older adults. For example, when patients older
than 65 years are only treated medically for severe obesity, the
prevalence of comorbidities increases after a year. In contrast,
surgically treated older patients experience a decrease in the
prevalence of comorbidities (Miller and Kral 2008). NIH guide-
lines for bariatric surgery do not provide any age criteria (NIH
1992).
Cons
Several risks are associated with obesity surgery, including a
10 percent or higher risk of complications. Ten to 20 percent of
patients needed follow-up operations to correct obesity surgery
complications such as abdominal hernias. Gallstones develop in
more than one-third of patients. Anemia, osteoporosis, and other
bone diseases are the result of nutritional deﬁciencies that
develop after the obesity surgery. The possible death rate is 1
out of 200 cases. This rate is lower for more experienced surgeons
who perform at least 150 operations yearly (Morino et al. 2007).
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina’s assessment of
results of surgery for morbid obesity showed that success rates
were highly variable in their coverage area. Some surgeons had
signiﬁcant complication rates of 25 to 50 percent. By reviewing
the claims data, the company found that patients of physicians
who performed bariatric procedures more often had lower com-
plication rates. Complications included such events as gastroin-
testinal tract leakage, bowel obstruction, bleeding, infections,
complications from anesthesia, and death. With the expectation
that the complication rate should be less than 10 percent during
the ﬁrst 60 days, Blue Cross identiﬁed those programs that con-
sistently delivered high-quality results as Bariatric Surgery Cen-
ters of Excellence (BCBSNC 2008).
Despite much progress in developing safer and more effec-
tive surgical techniques, obesity surgery remains a last option
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

for patients attempting weight loss. In addition, surgical candi-
dates must be willing to radically change the way they eat to
reﬂect the very much smaller amount of food (and water) that
can be consumed at one time. One of the side effects of this sur-
gery is the decreased absorption of some vitamins. Patients take
a prescribed multivitamin pill that has larger doses of vitamins
than the standard multivitamin supplement. People who have
Guillain-Barre´ syndrome may not achieve an ideal body weight
or a normal BMI range. The surgery commonly allows patients
to reduce 50 percent of their excess weight. A person who is 100
pounds overweight could theoretically maintain a 50-pound loss
and be healthier but still overweight. Long-term weight loss is
not effortless after bariatric surgery. Lifestyle change is still nec-
essary. For many people, the stomach pouch enlarges, intestinal
absorption increases, and weight can be regained if diet and
physical activity are not changed also.
Other Invasive Treatments for Obesity
Jaw Wiring
In 1977, the concept of wiring the jaws together was introduced.
Jaw wiring can be performed in a dentist’s chair. It is a painless
procedure that takes less than an hour to perform. This ortho-
dontic method of weight control prevents consumption of solid
food, thus causing a reduction in calorie intake. Once the desired
weight loss is achieved, the wiring is removed. The success rate
of jaw wiring as a long-term method of achieving a normal
weight is very low. Most patients do not discover a new, health-
ful way of eating; in fact, some are able to sip enough high-
calorie ﬂuids through a straw that no weight is lost. Large clinical
studies demonstrated a median weight loss of 55 pounds with
jaw wiring, but after four months the weight loss reached a pla-
teau. When the wires were removed, patients regained 100 per-
cent of the lost weight (Farquhar et al. 1986).
Liposuction
Liposuction is the most popular form of cosmetic surgery. It is a
surgical procedure that removes fat deposits from areas under
the skin (abdomen, thighs, buttocks, neck, back of arms) that do
not respond to traditional weight-loss methods. The fat is
extracted with a vacuum-suction canula (a hollow pen-like
instrument) or with an ultrasonic probe that breaks up the fat
Long-term Success
77

and then removes it with suction. The cosmetic effect of liposuc-
tion may be very good, and many patients report being satisﬁed.
Liposuction is not a cure for obesity, because relatively little
body fat (less than 10 pounds) can be removed safely. Some side
effects include unusual lumpiness or dents in the skin, excessive
bleeding, and negative response to general or local anesthesia.
Because fat removal is considered a cosmetic procedure, most
medical insurance will not pay for liposuction. The fat that is
removed may come back with weight gain. Furthermore, the fat
may appear in areas of the body where it did not previously
occur (CDRH 2002).
How Does the Health Care System Deal
with Obesity?
The health care system has a responsibility to play an active
role in the management of obesity, and physicians are a ﬁrst
line of defense in addressing the issue. A major barrier to suc-
cessful weight management is the lack of communication
between patients and their health care providers. Despite the
current focus on obesity and health care risks, less than half of
obese patients are advised by their physicians to lose weight.
Seventy-ﬁve percent of patients surveyed indicated that they
looked to their physician a ‘‘slight amount’’ or ‘‘not at all’’ for
help with weight control (Wadden and Foster 2000). When
physicians mention weight, they often do not give useful, action-
able information. Because patients have trouble losing weight
and maintaining weight loss, they need ongoing support
and reinforcement from health care providers. According to
Dr. William Dietz:
The kind of care delivery system necessary for chronic diseases like
obesity is different from the traditional patient-provider relation-
ship. So many patients in the United States are overweight that
the one-to-one provider-patient relationship is probably archaic. It
is based on an acute care model whereby the U.S. medical system
has evolved to treat infectious diseases or injuries. It did not evolve
to treat chronic diseases, and it did not evolve around prevention.
Providers are not ﬁnancially rewarded when they prevent disease;
they are rewarded when patients get sick or need hospitalization
(Pellerin 2005).
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Opinion varies widely about how health care providers
should manage obesity in the medical ofﬁce or clinic. Physicians
are often reluctant to discuss weight-related issues with patients.
Such discussions are time consuming, and no solutions are avail-
able that apply to everyone. Several studies have shown that
physician advice encouraging weight management signiﬁcantly
increases patients’ attempts to lose weight (e.g., Loureiro and
Nayga 2006). Experts recommend that doctors weigh and mea-
sure all their adult patients and refer obese ones to intensive
counseling and behavioral treatment. An individual may want
to lose weight but not be ready to make a focused commitment.
Health care providers can assess patient willingness to change
and educate patients about the effects of overweight on health
by discussing results of physical exams, lab tests, and family his-
tory. Reduction of excess weight requires concentration and sus-
tained effort. In cases where family- or work-related stress
interferes with that effort, the treatment goal may simply be pre-
vention of further weight gain (Wadden and Foster 2000).
All patients, no matter their weight, can beneﬁt from life-
style guidance to prevent weight gain. This advice and education
will become part of good health care if insurance companies
reimburse for obesity management as they do for control and
prevention of diabetes. To deal with the obesity issue, Kaiser Per-
manente, a leading health maintenance organization in the
United States, has adopted some of these recommendations for
adults. One policy requires that all adult patients be evaluated
for obesity. Those who are obese or at risk of becoming obese
should be offered appropriate long-term interventions, as sug-
gested by the NHLBI guidelines shown in Figure 6.2 in Chapter 6.
The algorithm in Figure 6.2 depicts the NHLBI Expert Panel’s
treatment decision process, which provides a step-by-step
approach to managing overweight and obese patients.
Interventions may include individual or group behavior
change therapy, pharmaceutical intervention, or surgery for
those at highest risk. A crucial step is to provide a variety of pro-
grams that can actually help patients manage weight. Because
there is no single approach that works for everyone, the most
effective interventions offer a number of programs that apply to
speciﬁc groups. Overall, the most successful strategies rely on
an active lifestyle that includes reasonable amounts of healthful
foods. While pursuing these health strategies individuals may
need to explore personal associations between emotions and
Long-term Success
79

eating habits. Programs may use Web-based resources alone or
combined with conventional lifestyle management classes or
one-on-one sessions.
With support from health care professionals, self-
management is a cornerstone of therapy. Providers cannot be
expected to manage weight for their patients. There are no guar-
antees for any medical treatment, including surgery, for long-
term weight loss. The role of the provider is to help patients iden-
tify and solve problems that make it difﬁcult for them to main-
tain a healthy weight. In the end, using the resources currently
available, patients must make the choices and manage their
problems for themselves.
Why Can’t We Just Prevent Obesity?
Prevention has the potential to help decrease obesity, but no
studies have been conducted for a long enough period to indi-
cate what method(s) of prevention will work. Health care profes-
sionals and patients continue to question whether they can
afford to wait for better evidence. Should we keep trying the
methods we now have, and hope that they work for some peo-
ple? The experts’ best guesses, given current knowledge, are to
encourage people to be more active; reduce marketing of
unhealthful foods; and make foods like fruits and vegetables
more affordable, attractive, and easily available.
The individual, the family, schools, workplaces, local and
state government, and communities and organizations have to
be part of the solution. To help people choose healthful foods,
government agencies can require that food companies, restau-
rants, and caterers provide information about the calorie content
of foods on menus and menu boards. To help people become
more active, walking and bike riding should be encouraged; peo-
ple may substitute bike riding and walking for going to a movie
or watching television. To help prevent obesity in children, fam-
ilies can focus on being active together. On a community level,
this means construction of safe bike lanes and paths. At work,
walking stairs can be made more attractive than taking elevators.
Also helpful is making people aware of healthy choices. In one
study conducted at a railroad station in the Philadelphia, Penn-
sylvania, business district, more commuters chose the stairs over
the escalator when a cartoon was visible showing a healthy heart
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

walking the stairs and a sick-looking heart taking the escalator
(Dolan et al. 2006).
A potentially successful model for obesity prevention would
encompass dietary, activity, behavioral, pharmacological, and
surgical components geared toward individual needs. To resolve
the questions and controversies surrounding obesity, we need
more scientiﬁcally based research into lifestyle or medical
approaches that will make it easier for anyone to maintain a
healthful energy balance. People in the United States depend
upon the NIH to increase our understanding of the forces that
contribute to obesity and to develop strategies for obesity pre-
vention and treatment. The 27 institutes and centers of NIH pro-
vide direction and ﬁnancial support through competitive grants
to researchers in the United States and throughout the world.
Currently, the NIH funds more than 90 percent of all obesity
research in the United States. It is critically important to increase
funding for obesity research in public and private sectors. The
choice is ours: We can either learn more about how to effectively
prevent obesity or spend billions and billions of dollars treating
people with obesity.
Conclusions
No one can escape the basic law of nature that governs weight
gain or loss—any energy consumed as food and not used
through activity must be stored in the body as fat. However, peo-
ple vary in their eating and exercise habits; in their genetic sus-
ceptibility to gaining weight; and in their individual metabolic
rate, which determine weight gain or loss. Scientists have discov-
ered a great deal about how weight gain occurs and some meth-
ods that may be effective in reversing it, although there is still
much to learn. Inability to lose excess weight often has more to
do with social, psychological, and behavioral factors than with
metabolism. Both physiology and society work against people’s
weight-loss attempts. The automatic slowdown in our metabolic
rate with weight loss, an evolutionary protection to prevent star-
vation, works against us when we try to lose excess weight.
Inﬂuences of food advertising and the customs of social eating
add to the difﬁculty. In short, weight management is not easy
for most people.
Conclusions
81

References
Abbott Laboratories. ‘‘Meridia Safety.’’ 2002. [Online information;
retrieved 1/6/09.] http://www.meridia-rx.com/diet-pills/meridia/
meridia_safety.htm.
Asian Food Journal (AFJ). ‘‘Choco Lady (Japan).’’ 2006. [Online
information; retrieved 1/6/09.] http://www.asiafoodjournal.com/
print.asp?id=3580.
Atkinson, R. L., N. V. Dhurandhar, D. B. Allison, R. L. Bowen, B. A.
Israel, J. B. Albu, and A. S. Augustus. ‘‘Human Adenovirus-36 Is
Associated with Increased Body Weight and Paradoxical Reduction of
Serum Lipids.’’ International Journal of Obesity (London) 29, no. 3 (2005):
281–286.
Ayyad, C., and T. Andersen. ‘‘Long-term Efﬁcacy of Dietary Treatment
of Obesity: A Systematic Review of Studies Published Between 1931
and 1999.’’ Obesity Reviews 1, no. 2 (2000): 113–119.
Bellisle, F., and A. Drewnowski. ‘‘Intense Sweeteners, Energy Intake
and the Control of Body Weight.’’ European Journal of Clinical Nutrition
61 (2007): 691–700.
Bish, C. L., H. M. Blanck, M. K. Serdula, M. Marcus, H. W. Kohl III, and
L. K. Khan. ‘‘Diet and Physical Activity Behaviors among Americans
Trying to Lose Weight: 2000 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance
System.’’ Obesity Research 13, no. 3 (2005): 596–607.
Blanck, H. M., L. K. Khan, and M. K. Serdula. ‘‘Use of Nonprescription
Weight Loss Products: Results from a Multistate Survey.’’ Journal of the
American Medical Association 286, no. 8 (2001): 930–935.
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina (BCBSNC). ‘‘Bariatric
Surgery Centers—Frequently asked questions.’’ 2008. [Online
information; retrieved 1/6/09.] http://www.bcbsnc.com/apps/coe/
public/bariatric.action?zipCode=null.
Bravata, D. M., L. Sanders, J. Huang, H. M. Krumholz, I. Olkin, C. D.
Gardner, and D. M. Bravata. ‘‘Efﬁcacy and Safety of Low-Carbohydrate
Diets: A Systematic Review.’’ Journal of the American Medical Association
289, no. 14 (2003): 1837–1850.
Bray, G. A., and C. M. Champagne. ‘‘Beyond Energy Balance: There Is
More to Obesity than Kilocalories.’’ Journal of the American Dietetic
Association 105, no. 5, Suppl. 1 (2005): S17–S23.
Bray G. A., S. Paeratakul, and B. M. Popkin. Dietary Fat and Obesity: a
Review of Animal, Clinical and Epidemiological Studies. Physiology and
Behavior 83, no. 4 (2004): 549–555.
82
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Carmona, R. ‘‘The Obesity Crisis in America.’’ In Testimony before the
Subcommittee on Education Reform Committee on Education and the
Workforce United States House of Representatives, edited by Surgeon
General, U.S. Public Health Service. Washington, DC: U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, 2003.
Center for Consumer Freedom (CFF). ‘‘Epidemic of Obesity Myths.’’
Washington, DC: Center for Consumer Freedom, 2004.
Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH). ‘‘Liposuction
Information.’’ Rockville, MD: U.S. Food and Drug Administration,
2002.
Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion (CNPP). ‘‘MyPyramid
Tracker.’’ 2008. [Online information; retrieved 1/6/09.] http://www
.mypyramidtracker.gov/.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). ‘‘U.S. Obesity
Trends 1985–2006.’’ Atlanta: CDC, 2007.
Christakis, N. A., and J. H. Fowler. ‘‘The Spread of Obesity in a Large
Social Network over 32 Years.’’ New England Journal of Medicine 357, no.
4 (2007): 370–379.
Colman, Eric. ‘‘FDA Regulation of Obesity Drugs: 1938–1999.’’ 2004.
[Online information; retrieved 1/6/09.] http://209.85.173.104/search?
q=cache:jl2bdha0NM0J:www.fda.gov/ohrms/dockets/AC/04/slides/
2004–4068S1_01_Colman.ppt+FDA+amphetamine+weight+loss&hl=
en&ct=clnk&cd=1&gl=us.
Dhurandhar, N. V., B. A. Israel, J. M. Kolesar, G. F. Mayhew, M. E. Cook,
and R. L. Atkinson. ‘‘Increased Adiposity in Animals Due to a Human
Virus.’’ International Journal of Obesity-Related Metabolic Disorders 24,
no. 8 (2000): 989–996.
Dolan, M. S., L. A. Weiss, R. A. Lewis, A. Pietrobelli, M. Heo, and M. S.
Faith. ‘‘ ‘Take the Stairs Instead of the Escalator’: Effect of Environ-
mental Prompts on Community Stair Use and Implications for a
National ‘Small Steps’ Campaign.’’ Obesity Reviews 7, no. 1 (2006):
25–32.
Ernsberger, P. ‘‘Obesity Is Hazardous to Your Health.’’ Debates in
Medicine 2 (1989): 102–137.
Farquhar, D. L., J. M. Grifﬁths, J. F. Munro, and F. Stevenson.
‘‘Unexpected Weight Regain Following Successful Jaw Wiring.’’
Scottish Medical Journal 31, no. 3 (1986): 180.
Flegal, K. M., B. I. Graubard, D. F. Williamson, and M. H. Gail. ‘‘Excess
Deaths Associated with Underweight, Overweight, and Obesity.’’
Journal of the American Medical Association 293, no. 15 (2005): 1861–1867.
References
83

Foster, G. D., T. A. Wadden, S. Phelan, D. B. Sarwer, and R. S.
Sanderson. ‘‘Obese Patients’ Perceptions of Treatment Outcomes and
the Factors that Inﬂuence Them.’’ Archives of Internal Medicine 161,
no. 17 (2001): 2133–2139.
Fujioka, K. ‘‘Management of Obesity as a Chronic Disease:
Nonpharmacologic, Pharmacologic, and Surgical Options.’’ Obesity
Research 10, Suppl. 2 (2002): 116S–123S.
Gades, M. D., and J. S. Stern. ‘‘Chitosan Supplementation and Fat
Absorption in Men and Women.’’ Journal of the American Dietetic
Association 105, no. 1 (2005): 72–77.
Gregg, E. W., Y. J. Cheng, B. L. Cadwell, G. Imperatore, D. E. Williams,
K. M. Flegal, K. M. Narayan, and D. F. Williamson. ‘‘Secular Trends in
Cardiovascular Disease Risk Factors According to Body Mass Index in
US Adults.’’ Journal of the American Medical Association 293, no. 15
(2005): 1868–1874.
Heymsﬁeld, S. B., K. R. Segal, J. Hauptman, C. P. Lucas, M. N. Boldrin,
A. Rissanen, J. P. Wilding, and L. Sjostrom. ‘‘Effects of Weight Loss
with Orlistat on Glucose Tolerance and Progression to Type 2 Diabetes
in Obese Adults.’’ Archives of Internal Medicine 160, no. 9 (2000):
1321–1326.
Hill, J. O., H. Wyatt, S. Phelan, and R. Wing. ‘‘The National Weight
Control Registry: Is It Useful in Helping Deal with Our Obesity
Epidemic?’’ Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior 37, no. 4 (2005):
206–210.
Howarth, N. C., E. Saltzman, and S. B. Roberts. ‘‘Dietary Fiber and
Weight Regulation.’’ Nutrition Reviews 59, no. 5 (2001): 129–139.
Hunt, R., N. L. Zorich, and A. B. Thomson. ‘‘Overview of Olestra: A
New Fat Substitute.’’ Canadian Journal of Gastroenterology 12, no. 3
(1998): 193–197.
Internal Revenue Service (IRS). ‘‘Internal Revenue Service Ruling
2002-19.’’ Washington, DC: IRS, 2002.
Kazaks, A., and J. S. Stern. ‘‘Strategies to Reduce Calories in Foods.’’ In
Handbook of Obesity, Clinical Applications, edited by G. A. Bray and C.
Bouchard, 417–424. New York: Informa Healthcare USA, 2008.
Kolakowski, Nick. ‘‘The Obesity Virus?’’ DOC News, January 1, 2005.
Kramer, F. M., R. W. Jeffery, J. L. Forster, and M. K. Snell. ‘‘Long-term
Follow-up of Behavioral Treatment for Obesity: Patterns of Weight
Regain among Men and Women.’’ International Journal of Obesity 13,
no. 2 (1989): 123–136.
84
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Kremen, A. J., J. H. Linner, and C. H. Nelson. ‘‘An Experimental
Evaluation of the Nutritional Importance of Proximal and Distal Small
Intestine.’’ Annals of Surgery 140, no. 3 (1954): 439–448.
Kretsch, M. J., A. K. Fong, and M. W. Green. ‘‘Behavioral and Body Size
Correlates of Energy Intake Underreporting by Obese and Normal-
Weight Women.’’ Journal of the American Dietetic Association 99, no. 3
(1999): 300–306; quiz 307–308.
Langreth, R. ‘‘Critics Claim Diet Clinics Misuse Obesity Drugs.’’ Wall
Street Journal, March 31, 1997.
Levi, J., L. M. Segal, and E. Gadola. ‘‘F as in Fat: How Obesity Policies
Are Failing in America—2007.’’ Washington, DC: Trust for America’s
Health, 2007.
Loureiro, M. L., and R. M. Nayga Jr. ‘‘Obesity, Weight Loss, and
Physician’s Advice.’’ Social Science & Med 62, no. 10 (2006): 2458–2468.
Mallone, C., and J. Bland-Campbell. ‘‘New Insights on the Away-From-
Home Eating Patterns and Nutritional Preferences of Americans.’’
2005. [Online information; retrieved 1/29/09.] http://www.aramark
.com/CaseStudyWhitePaperDetail.aspx?PostingID=420&
ChannelID=221.
Mhurchu, C. N., C. Dunshea-Mooij, D. Bennett, and A. Rodgers. ‘‘Effect
of Chitosan on Weight Loss in Overweight and Obese Individuals: A
Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled Trials.’’ Obesity Reviews
6, no. 1 (2005): 35–42.
Miller, M. E., and J. G. Kral. ‘‘Surgery for Obesity in Older Women.’’
Menopause International 14, no. 4 (2008):155–162.
Morino, M., M. Toppino, P. Forestieri, L. Angrisani, M. E. Allaix, and
N. Scopinaro. ‘‘Mortality after Bariatric Surgery: Analysis of 13,871
Morbidly Obese Patients from a National Registry.’’ Annals of Surgery
246, no. 6 (2007): 1002–1007; discussion 1007–1009.
National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine
(NCCAM). ‘‘Ephedra at a Glance.’’ 2006. [Online information; retrieved
7/9/07.] http://nccam.nih.gov/health/ephedra/ataglance.htm.
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). Health, United States,
2007. With Chartbook on Trends in the Health of Americans. Vol (PHS)
2007-1232: Government Printing Ofﬁce; 2007. http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/data/hus/hus07.pdf.
National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP). ‘‘Executive
Summary of the Third Report of the National Cholesterol Education
Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and
Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment
References
85

Panel III).’’ Journal of the American Medical Association 285, no. 19 (2001):
2486–2497.
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI). Clinical Guidelines
on the Identiﬁcation, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity
in Adults: The Evidence Report. Bethesda, MD: National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, 1998.
National Institutes of Health (NIH). ‘‘Gastrointestinal Surgery for
Severe Obesity: NIH Consensus Development Conference.’’ American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 55, Suppl. 2 (1992): 615S–619S.
Parry, H. J., M. B. Balter, G. D. Mellinger, I. H. Cisin, and D. I.
Manheimer. ‘‘National Patterns of Psychotherapeutic Drug Use.’’
Archives of General Psychiatry 28, no. 6 (1973): 18–74.
Pellerin, C. ‘‘The Global Epidemic of Obesity.’’ 2005. [Online
information; retrieved 12/15/07.] http://usa.usembassy.de/etexts/
sport/ijge0105.pdf.
Pillitteri, J. L., S. Shiffman, J. M. Rohay, A. M. Harkins, S. L. Burton, and
T. A. Wadden. ‘‘Use of Dietary Supplements for Weight Loss in the
United States: Results of a National Survey.’’ Obesity (Silver Spring) 16,
no. 4 (2008): 790–796.
Rubio, M. A., M. Gargallo, A. Isabel Millan, and B. Moreno. ‘‘Drugs in
the Treatment of Obesity: Sibutramine, Orlistat and Rimonabant.’’
Public Health Nutrition 10, no. 10A (2007): 1200–1205.
Stagg-Elliott, V. ‘‘Is Obesity a Disease? Clinicians Disagree.’’ 2006.
[Online information; retrieved 1/6/09.] http://www.ama-assn.org/
amednews/2006/02/06/hlsa0206.htm.
Thomson, A. B., R. H. Hunt, and N. L. Zorich. ‘‘Review Article: Olestra
and Its Gastrointestinal Safety.’’ Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics
12, no. 12 (1998): 1185–1200.
Tsai, A. G., and T. A. Wadden. ‘‘Systematic Review: An Evaluation of
Major Commercial Weight Loss Programs in the United States.’’ Annals
of Internal Medicine 142, no. 1 (2005): 56–66.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). ‘‘HHS
Announces Revised Medicare Obesity Coverage Policy.’’ 2004. [Online
news release; retrieved 1/6/09.] http://www.hhs.gov/news/press/
2004pres/20040715.html.
U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC). ‘‘Red Flag: Bogus Weight Loss
Claims.’’ 2002. [Online information; retrieved 1/6/09.] http://
www.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/edcams/redﬂag/falseclaims.html.
U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC). ‘‘Weight-Loss Advertising: An
Analysis of Current Trends.’’ Washington, DC: FTC, 2003.
86
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Wadden, T. A., and G. D. Foster. ‘‘Behavioral Treatment of Obesity.’’
Medical Clinics of North America 84, no. 2 (2000): 441–461, vii.
Wadden, T. A., J. A. Sternberg, K. A. Letizia, A. J. Stunkard, and G. D.
Foster. ‘‘Treatment of Obesity by Very Low Calorie Diet, Behavior
Therapy, and Their Combination: A Five-Year Perspective.’’
International Journal of Obesity 13, Suppl. 2 (1989): 39–46.
Weight-control Information Network (WIN). ‘‘Bariatric Surgery for
Severe Obesity.’’ Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health, 2008.
Weintraub, M., J. D. Hasday, A. I. Mushlin, and D. H. Lockwood. ‘‘A
Double-Blind Clinical Trial in Weight Control. Use of Fenﬂuramine and
Phentermine Alone and in Combination.’’ Archives of Internal Medicine
144, no. 6 (1984): 1143–1148.
Weintraub, M., P. R. Sundaresan, B. Schuster, G. Ginsberg, M. Madan,
A. Balder, E. C. Stein, and L. Byrne. ‘‘Long-term Weight Control Study.
II (Weeks 34 to 104). An Open-Label Study of Continuous Fenﬂuramine
Plus Phentermine versus Targeted Intermittent Medication as Adjuncts
to Behavior Modiﬁcation, Caloric Restriction, and Exercise.’’ Clinical
Pharmacology & Therapeutics 51, no. 5 (1992): 595–601.
West, J. A., and A. E. de Looy. ‘‘Weight Loss in Overweight Subjects
Following Low-Sucrose or Sucrose-Containing Diets.’’ International
Journal of Obesity-Related Metabolic Disorders 25, no. 8 (2001): 1122–1128.
Wing, R. R. ‘‘Behavioral Strategies to Improve Long-term Weight Loss
and Maintenance.’’ Medicine & Health Rhode Island 82, no. 4 (1999): 123.
Wolfe, B. M., and J. M. Morton. ‘‘Weighing In on Bariatric Surgery:
Procedure Use, Readmission Rates, and Mortality.’’ Journal of the
American Medical Association 294, no. 15 (2005): 1960–1963.
Wolfe, S. M., L. D. Sasich, and E. Barbenhenn. ‘‘Petition to FDA to Ban
the Diet Drug Sibutramine (Meridia).’’ Washington, DC: U.S. Food and
Drug Administration, 2002.
Wylie-Rosett, J. ‘‘Fat Substitutes and Health: An Advisory from the
Nutrition Committee of the American Heart Association.’’ Circulation
105, no. 23 (2002): 2800–2804.
References
87

This page intentionally left blank 

3
Worldwide Perspective
Multinational Scope of Overweight
and Obesity
Throughout history, a primary goal of human work was to
acquire enough food to prevent starvation. In 2000, a historical
moment occurred when the estimate of the number of over-
weight people in the world exceeded the number of those who
were underweight (Gardner and Halweil 2000). The prevalence
of obesity and overweight in adults and children is rapidly
increasing in most parts of the world. Eating too much food has
become a concern, as overweight and obesity have joined under-
weight, malnutrition, and infectious diseases as serious health
issues in developing countries. The World Health Organization
(WHO) now describes global obesity, or ‘‘globesity,’’ as one of
the top 10 risks to human health. There were an estimated
200 million obese people (those with a body mass index, or
BMI, of 30 or above) in 1995, but in 2005, more than 400 million
people were classiﬁed as obese. Experts at WHO predict that,
by 2015, the number of obese individuals will exceed 700 million
(WHO 2008).
Data on obesity in the developing world are limited, and
extreme variability is seen in obesity rates between countries
and even within rural and urban areas of the same country. The
highest rates seem to occur in the South Paciﬁc. On Nauru, an
island approximately 2,500 miles southwest of Hawaii, whose
population descended from Polynesian seafarers, 70 percent of
the population is classiﬁed as obese, up from just 15 percent in
89

the 1960s. In urban Samoa, three-quarters of adults are obese.
The body weight increases are not restricted to this region. Over-
weight and obesity affect 25 to 50 percent of men, women, and
children in countries as diverse as Brazil, Germany, and Aus-
tralia. Even in countries with obesity levels below 5 percent, such
as China, Japan, and several African nations, rates are almost
20 percent in some cities. The World Health Organization Global
Database on Body Mass, with interactive maps, tables, graphs,
and detailed data, is an interesting way to check up-to-date
examples of the multinational prevalence of adult underweight,
overweight, and obesity in both developed countries and nations
in transition.
The Weight Gap: Undernutrition Coexists
with Obesity
Historically considered a problem only in the rich countries,
overweight and obesity are dramatically increasing in low- and
middle-income nations. Experts forecast that the biggest rise in
obesity in the coming decades will affect developing countries.
It is ironic that beneﬁcial economic developments, such as
increased wealth, better health care, and a reduction in subsist-
ence farming, have lead to increased rates of obesity. This
increase is taking place in countries that are experiencing a nutri-
tion transition due to changes in diet and lifestyle that result
from economic development. It is assumed that a central health
problem is undernutrition rather than overnutrition for low-
and middle-income countries, and the number of hungry people
remains high in spite of global food surplus. Many developing
countries now face a ‘‘double burden’’ of disease: Infectious dis-
eases and hunger exist side by side with obesity and overweight
within the same country or even within the same household. As
an example, the majority of India’s citizens are undernourished,
yet a growing segment of wealthy Indians is becoming obese
(Subramanian and Smith 2006).
The emergence of obesity in developing countries initially
primarily affected wealthy people. More recent trends show a
shift in prevalence from the higher to the lower socioeconomic
level. In 1989, national surveys in Brazil found that obesity in
adults was more prevalent in the higher socioeconomic levels.
90
Worldwide Perspective

Ten years later, the lower socioeconomic group had a higher per-
centage of obese individuals (Caballero 2007). This demographic
switch means that the developing world will have to cope with
the health problems of populations moving from hunger to
obesity in a single generation.
Obesity Becoming More Common
among Children
In the United States, the prevalence of childhood overweight
tripled between 1980 and 2000 (Ogden et al. 2002). Childhood
overweight is not unique to the United States, as it has increased
in almost all countries for which data are available. Overall, 1 in
10 children is overweight, and even the youngest are affected.
In 2007, an estimated 22 million children under the age of ﬁve years
were overweight throughout the world. More than 75 percent of
overweight children live in low- and middle-income countries
(WHO 2008). Some remarkable facts about childhood obesity
are shared in the following list.
•
In Europe childhood obesity is most prevalent in Southern
European countries. Using the International Obesity
Taskforce’s (IOTF) strict assessment methods, researchers
found that more than a third of nine-year-olds in main-
land Italy and in Sicily were overweight or obese. In
Spain, 27 percent of children and adolescents were over-
weight or obese, while in Crete, nearly 40 percent of chil-
dren age 12 were overweight (Lobstein et al. 2004).
•
Comparison of the rates of childhood overweight from the
1970s to the end of the 1990s showed an increase of
66 percent in the United States and an even larger increase
(240 percent) during the same period in Brazil (Lobstein
and Baur 2005).
•
WHO reported that approximately 25 percent of Austra-
lian children and adolescents were overweight or obese—
a signiﬁcant jump from 5 percent in the 1960s (WHO
2008).
•
In the United States, national surveys have shown that
overweight affects children as young as two to ﬁve years
old (Ogden et al. 2002).
Obesity Becoming More Common among Children
91

In 2008, some good news was reported in the United States.
After years of steady increases in childhood overweight, data
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
showed that rates of overweight did not increase between 1999–
2000 and 2005–2006. Perhaps public health campaigns aimed at
raising awareness of childhood overweight may have begun to
pay off. Further data collection will tell whether these rates
reﬂect an actual plateau in the number of children becoming
overweight or a statistical abnormality. Even if childhood obesity
rates are slowing, the number of children who currently have an
unhealthy weight remains unacceptably high.
Childhood Weight Categories Not Clear
In general, youth 6 to 17 years of age are classiﬁed as children,
although the word ‘‘children’’ may also mean individuals 6 to
11 years of age and ‘‘adolescents’’ may deﬁne those 12 to 17 years
of age. The deﬁnition of overweight or obesity for children has
been inconsistent. The BMI, used for measuring excess body fat
in adults, is a less-effective measure for children. Body fat
changes considerably with age and differs between girls and
boys. Generally, the BMI of a child is compared with the BMI of
a reference population of children of the same sex and age. Chil-
dren are considered overweight if they weigh more than 95 per-
cent of other children in their height and age group. Based on
the CDC pediatric growth charts as described in Chapter 1, over-
weight is deﬁned as at or above the 95th percentile of BMI for
age, and children whose values fall between the 85th and 95th
percentile of BMI for age are at risk for overweight (Flegal, Wei,
and Ogden 2002).
The CDC does not use the term ‘‘obese’’ when referring to
body weight in children because of concerns about stigma and
embarrassment for children and parents. However, the rest of
the world does use that terminology. European researchers clas-
sify overweight as at or above the 85th percentile and obesity as
a BMI for age exceeding the 95th percentile (Flodmark et al.
2004). These standards, which link children’s BMI cutoffs to the
accepted adult cutoff points of 25 and 30 kg/m2 (kilograms per
meter squared), were developed in 2000 by the International
Association for the Study of Obesity. Countries around the world
are now using these standards to estimate the rate of childhood
obesity (Cole et al. 2000). In 2007, an expert committee from the
92
Worldwide Perspective

American Medical Association (AMA) recommended a change
in U.S. terminology to replace ‘‘at risk for overweight’’ with
‘‘overweight’’ and replace ‘‘overweight’’ with ‘‘obese’’ (Barlow
2007). Another category was proposed to deﬁne severe obesity
as BMI at or above the 99th percentile.
Studies document an association between elevated child-
hood BMI and increased risk of chronic disease in adulthood
(e.g., Baker, Olsen, and Sorensen 2007). Although optimal levels
of BMI for long-term health are not known, the increases in the
prevalence of obesity foretells mounting rates of obesity-
associated disorders in the future.
Changing Lifestyle and Economic Policies
Obesity has been described as both a medical condition and a
lifestyle disorder. No single factor is responsible for its onset, as
it is inﬂuenced by one’s genetic background, personal behavior,
and the political and social environment. In both developed
and developing nations, the prevalence of numerous obesogenic
conditions is increasing. As deﬁned in Chapter 1, ‘‘obesogenic’’ is
the term used to describe the worldwide economic and cultural
changes that have altered food selection and physical activity in
ways that promote weight gain. Though these conditions vary
greatly by region, it is possible to identify some common trends.
As incomes rise and populations become more urban, traditional
diets high in complex carbohydrates are replaced with those con-
taining more fats and sugars. At the same time, less physically
demanding work is required due to the increasing use of motor-
ized vehicles, labor-saving technology in the home and at work,
and more passive leisure activities.
Globalization of Food Production
and Marketing
Economic growth, the globalization of food markets, and urbani-
zation allow greater access to high-fat, high-sugar, energy-dense
foods. In the nutrition transition, developing nations move away
from traditional methods of cultivation and preparation of diets
that were based on grains and vegetables to consumption of
Globalization of Food Production and Marketing
93

mass-produced processed foods. A large part of this transition is
economic. In general, mass-marketed foods are cheaper, particu-
larly in urban areas, while fresh foods are more expensive. Glob-
alization of agricultural policies has contributed to progressive
cost reductions in meat, butter, oils, fats, and sugars, while the
relative price of fruit and vegetables has climbed.
As a result of these factors, traditional diets are being
replaced with high-calorie meals. In addition, taste plays a role
in these dietary shifts. From an evolutionary standpoint, humans
prefer foods high in fat and sugar. This preference is the result of
an adaptation for endurance in times of famine. Only recently
have such foods become so cheap and widely available to most
of the world’s population that eating them becomes a health
liability. Major international and domestic corporations attempt
to increase ﬁnancial growth with marketing designed to con-
vince people to eat more than they actually need. Proﬁtable strat-
egies used in countries around the world include creating foods
that are convenient to prepare, making foods available every-
where (including schools and workplaces), encouraging eating
out instead of preparing food at home, and providing bigger por-
tions for minimal additional cost. Consumers now make a large
part of their diet decisions based on information and encourage-
ment from the food industry.
Move to Cities Reduces Physical Activity
In urban areas, the majority of jobs are comparatively sedentary
ones that demand less physical energy than does rural labor.
Even on farms, less work is required with increased mechaniza-
tion. Motorized transport in cities reduces walking or cycling.
Urban sprawl, as opposed to traditional compact cities, aggra-
vates the situation in many areas. Urban sprawl with lack of pub-
lic transportation or pedestrian-friendly options has been
positively associated with weight gain. With the associated long
distances between home, ofﬁce, and shops, walking and biking
are simply not practical ways of getting around. Without safe
bicycle routes and walkways, people ﬁnd it is necessary to drive
to places of work and play. A study in 2004 reported a 6 percent
increase in the risk of obesity for every hour spent commuting
by car each day (Frank, Andresen, and Schmid 2004). Where
94
Worldwide Perspective

public transportation is lacking, people miss out on the exercise
they could get from walking to and from bus and train stations.
Gender Effects on Obesity
Gender differences further complicate the factors promoting
obesity. As more and more women work away from home, tradi-
tional patterns of food preparation are changing in developed
and developing countries. With migration to cities, many women
begin to work outside the home and have less time to purchase
and prepare food. These time challenges make prepared and
processed foods, which are often high in fat and sugar and low
in ﬁber, vitamins, and minerals, an easy choice. The tendency to
eat outside the home or to buy ready-to-eat or prepared meals
is also taking the place of time-consuming cooking with basic
ingredients. Children are less likely to see examples of meal
preparation in the home, and, as a result, cooking skills and prac-
tices may be limited in succeeding generations.
Generally, women tend to have higher rates of obesity than
men. In several developing countries, the relationship between
socioeconomic status and obesity is positive for men but nega-
tive for women. Heavier males and thinner females are often
associated with wealth, while the reverse occurs in poor com-
munities. Many minority and lower-income groups associate fat-
ness with prosperity (WHO 2008). Another obesity proﬁle is seen
in Eastern Mediterranean countries. In Saudi Arabia, Kuwait,
Bahrain, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates, the obesity per-
centage among married women ranges from 35 to 75 percent
and among married men from 30 to 60 percent. Diets that include
fatty foods, inactivity, and multiparity, or the repetition of preg-
nancy with short intervals between giving birth and pregnancy,
boost the obesity rate in this region (Musaiger 2004).
Growing awareness of the negative health effect of the
industrial diet is persuading health-conscious people in the
United States, Brazil, Thailand, and Chile, for example, to avoid
processed foods, improve exercise habits, and go back to a
whole-food diet that is low in fat and added sugar and high in
whole grains, fruits, and vegetables. A compelling question
is whether obesity will become the disease of poverty. People
with the most resources will be able to eat nutritious food and
maintain proper weight, while the poorest, with less access to
Gender Effects on Obesity
95

healthy food and nutrition education, are increasingly likely to
be overweight.
Obesogenic Environment’s Influence
on Children
Urban children in most countries are exposed to high-calorie
foods, increased frequency of eating occasions, and soft drinks
replacing water. Fast food is now a staple of many children’s
diets. Children who consume fast food, as compared with those
who do not, have higher caloric intake, including more fat and
more sugar (Bowman et al. 2004). The United States has been
called a fast food nation. Every day, one out of four Americans
eats fast food, and a 2004 study revealed that 30 percent of chil-
dren eat fast food on a daily basis (Bowman and Vinyard 2004).
Most parents provide fast-food meals out of convenience—lack
of time leads many people to the drive-through. Money plays a
part as well, as fast-food restaurants are often the cheapest
option.
Increased calorie consumption is not matched by adequate
levels of physical activity in young people. Researchers have
found that worldwide urbanization of society is reducing child-
ren’s physical activity opportunities. For example, fewer chil-
dren walk or bicycle to school, and school-based physical
education has decreased. Thirty years ago, nearly half of Ameri-
can children walked or biked to school; today, less than one in
ﬁve gets to school under her or his own power (McDonald
2007). The 2005 Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends that
children and adolescents engage in at least 60 minutes of physi-
cal activity on most days of the week. In analysis conducted on
data collected from more than 1,000 children from ethnically
and economically diverse backgrounds in the United States,
researchers found that, at age nine, more than 90 percent of the
children met the recommended level of 60 minutes or more of
activity each day. The researchers tracked these children over
the years and found that, by age 15, only 31 percent met the rec-
ommended level on weekdays, and 17 percent met the recom-
mended level on weekends. On average, boys were more active
than girls (Nader et al. 2008).
96
Worldwide Perspective

Children may be spending more time watching television,
playing computer games, and performing other sedentary activ-
ities at the expense of leisure physical activity and sports
(St-Onge, Keller, and Heymsﬁeld 2003). In the United States,
young people spend an average of almost 6.5 hours a day with
electronic media. That ﬁgure represents an increase of more than
an hour since 2000. Most of the time is spent with video games
and computers. According to a 2005 study by the Kaiser Family
Foundation, the typical 8- to 18-year-old lives in a home with
an average of 3.6 compact disc or tape players, 3.5 TVs, 3.3
radios, 2.9 video players, 2.1 video game consoles, and 1.5 com-
puters (KFF 2005).
Investigators have hypothesized that electronic media con-
tribute to childhood obesity because sedentary media behavior
displaces time that would be spent in physical activity (Epstein
and Roemmich 2001). It has also been demonstrated that calorie
intake increases with media use. Adolescents engaging in high
television and media use eat more fat, sugar, and high-density
foods (Robinson 2001). Not all studies have shown a correlation
between electronic media use and obesity, however. Past studies
have primarily focused on television viewing and did not
include computer video games and Internet use. These media
encourage young people to be sedentary; however, their impact
on eating behavior is presently unknown.
Global Health Risks Associated with
Childhood Obesity
In the 1990s, WHO initiated global public awareness campaigns
for policy makers, industry, medical professionals, and the gen-
eral public about the health consequences of obesity. For people
everywhere, being overweight and obese carries serious health
consequences, from increased risk of premature death to chronic
conditions that reduce overall quality of life. Obesity increases
the risk of heart disease and stroke, primary causes of death
throughout the world (WHO 2008).
Another health impact of global obesity is seen in the fast-
rising rates of type 2 diabetes, for which obesity is a key risk fac-
tor. According to the International Diabetes Federation, the num-
ber of people with diabetes worldwide is more than 150 million,
Global Health Risks Associated with Childhood Obesity
97

a ﬁvefold increase since 1985 (King, Aubert, and Herman 1998).
If current trends continue, signiﬁcant increases in type 2 diabetes
are predicted in China, Latin America, India, and the Middle
East in the next decade (WHO 2003).
Researchers are interested in whether children face the same
health risks as adults. Studies show a sharp increase in the num-
ber of children with type 2 diabetes. The condition was once
known as adult-onset diabetes before it started showing up in
obese children even before puberty. As with adults, diabetes
increases a child’s risk for blindness, nerve damage, kidney fail-
ure, and cardiovascular disease (Hossain, Kowar, and El Nahas
2007). The IOTF report ‘‘Obesity in Children and Young People:
A Crisis in Public Health’’ warned that health consequences of
child overweight and obesity may not become evident until
adulthood. Studies show that overweight children are more
likely to be obese as adults (e.g., Whitaker et al. 1997), and over-
weight that occurs in childhood is more predictive of later
extreme obesity than obesity that begins in adulthood. When
increasing numbers of overweight children grow up, experts
predict, health care problems will surge. The fact that the Ameri-
can Academy of Pediatrics has recommended cholesterol screen-
ing of young children with the possibility of prescribing
cholesterol-lowering drugs to prevent cardiovascular disease
and the controversial idea that children today may live less
healthy and shorter lives than their parents are dramatic exam-
ples of the effect obesity has on the health of youth today.
Managing Childhood Overweight
and Obesity
Any intervention that reduces positive energy balance (excess
calories) will be effective in preventing body fat storage. Obesity
management has centered, for the most part, on the two sides of
the energy balance equation: energy taken in and energy
expended. Dietary strategies for overweight children are similar
to those for adults, with treatment goals based on age and risk
factors. Most food plans for weight loss emphasize providing
age-appropriate food portion sizes, reducing the number of
meals eaten outside the home, increasing fruit and vegetable
consumption, and structuring meal times and places. Children
98
Worldwide Perspective

are similar to adults in that regular exercise provides health ben-
eﬁts even when weight is unchanged. Regular physical activity is
critical for the prevention of excess weight gain and weight
maintenance.
Weight management involves both short-term medical treat-
ment of established obesity and its complications and long-term
prevention strategies. Prevention involves both personal respon-
sibility for weight control and a community-based set of tactics
that create environmental support for healthy diets and regular
physical activity. Approaches to prevention for individuals
include health education, behavior modiﬁcation, medication,
and surgery. Population-based interventions such as requiring
menu labeling to show calories, providing attractive fruit and
vegetable choices in schools, including those available in the a`
la carte areas and vending machines, and encouraging physical
activity by creating bike and walking paths improve public food
and activity environments.
Medical Treatment
Prevention is a primary feature of pediatric medical practice.
Along with immunizations and promoting use of automobile
safety seats, identiﬁcation of excessive weight gain can be a rou-
tine part of childhood medical examinations. Health care profes-
sionals are encouraged to routinely track BMI in children and
youth and offer appropriate counseling and guidance to children
and their families. Individual behavioral modiﬁcation and medi-
cal treatment are appropriate for children who are already over-
weight, as early weight management can be a successful tactic
for preventing adult obesity. Although pediatricians may be con-
cerned about their patients’ obesity, most are not prepared to
treat obese children. The AMA has launched a campaign to edu-
cate physicians about how to prevent and manage childhood
obesity. The goal is to include training as part of undergraduate,
graduate, and continuing medical education programs. The
AMA Expert Committee recommends that treatment of over-
weight children be approached in a staged method based upon
the child’s age, BMI, related comorbidities, progress in treatment,
and the child’s primary caregiver/family involvement in the
process (AMA 2007). The committee created 22 recommenda-
tions for health care professionals who provide obesity care to
apply in their practices. A complete list of the recommendations
Managing Childhood Overweight and Obesity
99

can be found in the AMA’s ‘‘Expert Committee Recommenda-
tions on the Assessment, Prevention, and Treatment of Child
and Adolescent Overweight and Obesity’’ (AMA 2007).
Dietary Interventions
One of the recommendations set forth by the AMA is that a
dietary assessment should be conducted at each well-child visit.
A brief diet history can pinpoint appropriate behaviors to target
with explicit goals for diet change. For example, a nutrition risk
assessment checklist may identify a patient’s high consumption
of soda and sweetened beverages. A simple and measurable goal
would be to replace soft drinks and juice drinks with water. The
frequency of beverage replacement could be negotiated. Similar
to treatment of adults, pediatric weight management goals
should be realistic and should focus on small, gradual behavioral
changes. Rather than restrict food choices, a better plan is to
improve food choices.
Clinicians and scientists are learning more about how child-
hood eating behavior develops and is shaped by the environ-
ment; however, no good research exists that suggests how to
translate this knowledge into useful practices to prevent obesity.
Consensus has been reached that pediatricians should proac-
tively discuss and promote healthy eating behaviors for even
the youngest children and encourage parents to provide suitable
boundaries and opportunities that encourage healthful eating
(AAP 2001).
How to Choose the Best Diet for Children
There is a proper number of calories for each person to eat every
day. The number depends on gender, age, and activity level.
Children have periods of rapid growth and development, and
their energy needs can change rapidly. A child’s diet should be
like that of the rest of the family, with meals and snacks that offer
a variety of nutritious foods (USDA 2005). Government Web sites
often offer free information and fact sheets about good nutrition.
Country-speciﬁc food guides can help show families how to
select healthful foods and increase awareness of appropriate por-
tion sizes for any desirable calorie level. Examples of food guides
illustrated by graphic displays from various geographic regions
are the Food Guide Pyramids of the United States and the
100
Worldwide Perspective

Philippines, the Chinese and Korean Food Guide Pagodas, Cana-
da’s rainbow-shaped Guide for Healthy Eating, and the Swedish
Food Circle (Painter, Rah, and Lee 2002).
The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s ‘‘Tips from the Pyra-
mid’’ fact sheet suggests ways to select nutritious meals and pro-
vides clear-cut suggestions for following the Pyramid plans. For
instance:
Choose whole-grain foods, such as whole-wheat bread, oat-
meal, brown rice, and low-fat popcorn, more often.
Focus on fruits. Eat them at meals and at snack time. Choose
fresh, frozen, canned, or dried, but go easy on the fruit juice.
Whole Grains
Bread, cereal, and pasta account for a large part of the carbohy-
drates most people eat. These starches can be made from
whole-grain ﬂours or from reﬁned ﬂours. Whole grains provide
ﬁber, minerals, and vitamins that are lost when a grain is reﬁned.
Some examples of whole-grain products and serving sizes are:
1/2 cup of cooked brown rice, whole-wheat pasta, or rolled oats;
one slice of 100 percent whole-grain bread; or one 6-inch whole-
wheat tortilla.
The advice to limit sweet drinks is important because con-
sumption of juices and sweetened beverages is associated with
weight gain. By 14 years of age, 32 percent of girls and 52 percent
of boys in the United States are consuming 24 or more ounces of
sweetened soft drinks daily. A common 12-ounce serving of a
sweetened soft drink contains the equivalent of 10 teaspoons of
sugar. Serving sizes of 16, 20, and 32 ounces or more are fre-
quently sold in fast-food outlets or quick shop markets. Not sur-
prisingly, children and adolescents who consume soft drinks
regularly have a higher energy intake than those who do not.
They are also likely to be overweight or obese (Ludwig, Peterson,
and Gortmaker 2001). Even juices made from fresh fruit contain
concentrated sugars and calories. Most have little or no ﬁber,
and excessive juice intake can result in unwanted weight gain.
The American Academy of Pediatrics has issued these recom-
mendations about juice in children’s diets:
•
For children ages one to six, intake of fruit juice should be
limited to 4 to 6 ounces a day.
•
For children 7 to 18, limit juice intake to 8 to 12 ounces a
day.
Managing Childhood Overweight and Obesity
101

•
All children should be encouraged to eat whole fruits.
(AAP 2001).
Fruits and Vegetables
The average child in the United States does not consume enough
fruits and vegetables. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans
emphasize that children should eat amounts of fruits and vegeta-
bles appropriate for their calorie needs, and choose from a vari-
ety each day (USDA 2005). For example, a child who requires
1,500 calories per day should have about 1 cup of vegetables.
Fresh, frozen, and canned vegetables all count toward meeting
vegetable intake goals. Most fruits and vegetables are low in fat
and calories, and they also provide essential vitamins, minerals,
ﬁber, and phytochemicals that promote good health.
Pharmacological Treatment
Data about pharmacological, or drug, therapy for overweight
and obesity in children are limited and controversial (Yanovski
2001). In a randomized controlled trial of severe obesity, the drug
sibutramine was more effective than behavior therapy alone;
however, the medication is associated with side effects including
increased heart rate and blood pressure (Berkowitz et al. 2003).
The fat-blocking drug orlistat is approved for use in adolescents,
and a study of 12- to 16-year-old obese boys and girls showed
that orlistat, in combination with diet, exercise, and behavior
modiﬁcation, signiﬁcantly enhanced weight loss compared with
placebo. The use of orlistat for one year did not show major
safety issues, although gastrointestinal side effects were more
common in the orlistat group (Chanoine et al. 2005).
Surgical Treatment
Rising numbers of youth with a BMI of 50 or above, or a BMI of
40 or above with severe comorbidities such as type 2 diabetes,
are undergoing bariatric surgery. The AMA advises that surgical
therapy be reserved for full-grown adolescents with treatment
by experienced multidisciplinary teams who can provide com-
prehensive medical and psychological care. Reviews of trials
of weight-loss surgery indicate that it is an effective and safe
alternative for obese adolescents who have not responded to
medical therapy. Long-term data, including information on
102
Worldwide Perspective

malabsorption of critical nutrients and effects on maturation, are
unknown. More study is needed to deﬁnitively accept this
therapy for obesity in adolescents (Xanthakos, Daniels, and Inge
2006).
Health Care Delivery Systems
Contemporary health care often focuses on short-term interven-
tions and does not have policies or employ strategies to meet
the long-term needs of overweight children and their families.
Effective childhood weight management relies upon a compre-
hensive approach that targets the individual, the family, and the
environmental inﬂuences. These time-consuming models also
require changes in how obesity treatment and prevention serv-
ices are ﬁnanced. Long-term weight-management programs are
beyond the reach of people who lack personal ﬁnancial resources
or whose insurance does not cover obesity treatment. In many
countries, including the United States, changes in health care
systems are needed to meet needs of long-term weight manage-
ment for both adults and children.
Prevention
Childhood is a period during which lifelong habits are formed
and overweight and obesity, as well as their related diseases,
are theoretically preventable. It makes sense to initiate obesity
prevention programs for children, rather than focus on treating
the disease only after it already exists. Unlike most adults, chil-
dren and adolescents cannot choose the environment in which
they live or the food they eat. They also have a limited ability to
understand the long-term consequences of their behavior. For
these reasons, they require adult consideration and help to pre-
vent overweight and obesity. In town meetings sponsored by
Shaping America’s Youth, a nationwide initiative to identify
and centralize obesity prevention programs for children and
adolescents, Executive Director Dr. David McCarron has
asserted that obesity cannot be blamed solely on fast-food restau-
rants, computer makers, or parents. He describes obesity as a
multifaceted problem that requires communities to take respon-
sibility and join together to resolve it.
Managing Childhood Overweight and Obesity
103

Coordinated Strategies for Childhood
Obesity Prevention
In the United States, numerous state and local prevention pro-
grams are in place to increase physical activity and promote
healthful eating among children and youth. Current interven-
tions generally are not part of a national, focused effort to combat
obesity. In 2005, an Institute of Medicine (IOM) report, Preventing
Childhood Obesity: Health in the Balance, offered a guide for coordi-
nating contributions from government, schools, industry, media,
and families. Three years later, in collaboration with the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation, the IOM established the Standing
Committee on Childhood Obesity Prevention. This committee
will remain in place to consistently assess America’s progress
toward meeting the recommendations from the earlier plan and
to make suggestions for integrating ideas and programs from
government, academia, and corporate sectors. Progress toward
organizing the federal and state governments’ existing child-
hood obesity prevention programs was made in 2007 when the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services created the
Childhood Overweight and Obesity Prevention Initiative. In
remarks by First Lady Laura Bush promoting the initiative, she
agreed that parents, government ofﬁcials, and community and
education leaders must work together to improve children’s
health. And she promised that ‘‘Our government is working to
address one of the greatest dangers to America’s young people:
childhood overweight and obesity’’ (Bush 2007).
Global Collaboration to Combat Childhood
Obesity
Obesity may be overlooked as a serious health problem in devel-
oping countries where policy makers are still focusing on issues
of undernutrition, but many nations are increasing obesity pre-
vention programs for children. To be successful, these plans,
which encourage children to eat a healthful diet and engage in
physical activity, require commitment from political leaders.
The prime ministers, kings, presidents, and high-ranking ofﬁ-
cials within ministries of health can facilitate the political agenda
and resource allocation. Their commitment should include a for-
mal, public statement that cites obesity prevention as a priority
104
Worldwide Perspective

and provides national goals and strategic action plans created for
each country. For example, leaders in China, which will soon
have the highest number of people in the world with cardiovas-
cular disease, would need to formulate prevention programs
for the nation’s particular conditions. Professor Chen Chunming
from the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention
says, ‘‘We need a country-speciﬁc strategy for China based on
the current situation of the food industry and the food market
and of people’s dietary patterns, which are different from else-
where’’ (Burslem 2004).
To promote healthy lifestyles for adults and children in all
countries, WHO developed the Global Strategy on Diet, Physical
Activity and Health (DPAS), which was endorsed by the 57th
World Health Assembly in May 2004. DPAS aims to reduce non-
communicable diseases such as obesity, diabetes, and cardiovas-
cular disease by modifying risk factors such as unhealthy diet
and physical inactivity. The advice from DPAS is not compli-
cated. The basic guidelines suggest increasing consumption of
fruit and vegetables, legumes, whole grains, and nuts; limiting
energy intake from fats; limiting intake of sugars; and being
physically active. The physical activity guideline is perhaps the
most challenging for city dwellers because its goal of at least 60
minutes of regular, moderate- to vigorous-intensity exercise each
day that is age appropriate and involves a variety of activities is
often difﬁcult for them to achieve.
As obesity prevention plans will require fundamental social
and political changes, DPAS also provides detailed lists of
responsibilities of key stakeholders including WHO, inter-
national partners, nongovernmental organizations, and the
private sector. DPAS offers resources to assist different
stakeholders in its implementation. Frameworks such as
those shown below can be found in the ‘‘Implementation Tool-
box’’ section on the WHO DPAS Web site, http://www.who.int/
dietphysicalactivity/en/.
•
A Framework to Monitor and Evaluate Implementation
provides methods to measure progress when DPAS rec-
ommendations are implemented.
•
The WHO/Food and Agriculture Organization Fruit and
Vegetables for Health framework guides the develop-
ment of cost-efﬁcient and effective interventions for
Managing Childhood Overweight and Obesity
105

promotion of fruit and vegetable production and
consumption.
•
The Move for Health Initiative facilitates development of
long-term national and local physical activity policies and
programs to increase physical activity in all domains (lei-
sure time, transport, work) and settings (school, commu-
nity, home, workplace).
Possibly stimulated by the thinking that created DPAS, an
increasing number of nations have created health policies related
to healthful nutrition and activity. The Netherlands adopted a
national health care prevention policy in 2004, identifying
obesity as one of the three priorities, along with smoking and
diabetes. In early 2005, Spain adopted a national strategy for
nutrition, physical activity, and prevention of obesity. The same
year, the Slovenian Parliament approved its National Nutrition
Policy. This policy was one of the ﬁrst examples of high-level
political support for a national nutrition policy in Central and
Eastern Europe (WHO 2006). Several countries, including Brazil,
India, and China, have initiated monitoring programs related to
obesity and nutrition.
The value of these programs cannot be determined yet, as
they are still in their early stages and few data are available. Pre-
liminary experience suggests that a population-based approach
to modifying the obesogenic environment is worth a try because
the customary practice of expecting individuals to take total
responsibility for their diet and exercise choices has failed so
far. WHO recognizes that global childhood obesity is linked not
only to children’s behavior but also to social and economic devel-
opment and policies regulating agriculture, urban planning,
food processing, marketing, and education. Ensuring successful
obesity prevention strategies will take a coordinated effort
among such diverse groups as politicians and legislators, city
planners, schools, food producers, advertisers, parents, and the
medical community.
Goals for Government, Schools, Media and
Marketing, Parents, and Researchers
Government
Almost every aspect of government can have an inﬂuence on its
citizens’ nutrition and activity practices. The IOM suggests that
106
Worldwide Perspective

the federal government be responsible for coordinating federal
obesity prevention actions and programs, setting standards for
foods and beverages sold in schools, establishing principles
regarding advertising and marketing to children and youth,
and providing funding for obesity prevention research (IOM
2005). Activists in many countries campaign for the development
of schools that promote physical activity, for food and agricul-
tural policies that stimulate availability and affordability of fruits
and vegetables, and for urban planning that has built-in ways to
encourage physical activity.
A key role of government is to regulate the urban environ-
ment to create towns and cities that can sustain and support
good health. Access to safe spaces for play is particularly impor-
tant for children. This need must translate into urban planning
that includes building parks and playgrounds and bike paths
and pedestrian malls, restrains suburban sprawl, funds public
transportation, and makes automobile use less attractive and less
necessary. Urban environment and community design can have
a great impact on nutrition. The lack of full-service grocery
stores, farmers’ markets, or community gardens in many urban
centers sharply reduces access to affordable fresh fruits and veg-
etables. Opportunities to eat fast, energy-dense foods increase
when the presence of fast-food outlets is pervasive and unregu-
lated. Further, the location of schools can enhance or undermine
children’s physical activity. One study found that the primary
reason that children do not walk or bike to school is because their
school is too far away. Other concerns included too much trafﬁc,
no safe route, and crime in the neighborhood (CDC 2002).
Schools
Schools offer many opportunities for obesity prevention. They
are the place where children spend a large part of their lives.
Most schools serve at least one meal a day, and consequently
they are able to set positive examples that help children establish
healthful eating habits. In addition, schools can encourage chil-
dren to get exercise and can address nutrition and healthy life-
styles in the school curriculum. The IOM suggested that schools
can have an impact on students’ well-being by:
•
Improving the nutritional quality of foods and beverages
served and sold in schools and as part of school-related
activities
Managing Childhood Overweight and Obesity
107

•
Increasing opportunities for frequent, more intensive, and
engaging physical activity during and after school
•
Developing, implementing, and evaluating innovative
programs for teaching about wellness, healthful eating,
and physical activity. (IOM 2005)
The ways in which diets and activity can be improved are
exempliﬁed by a number of communities. In Berkeley, California,
a portion of the produce for cafeteria meals comes from student-
managed gardens (Ozer 2007). In Singapore, the Trim and Fit
Scheme reduced obesity among children by up to 50 percent
through changes in school catering and better nutrition and
physical education for students and teachers. Overweight chil-
dren were expected to do rigorous exercise during breaks and
before and after school until they lost a required amount of
weight. Although the program did result in weight loss, parents
complained that their children were being singled out and teased
by classmates. In March 2007, Trim and Fit was ended and the
program was to be replaced with a plan that encourages a health-
ful lifestyle for all schoolchildren instead of just the overweight
ones. Singaporean health ofﬁcials and educators believe that the
school-based intervention can beneﬁt a generation growing up
on fast food and computer games (AP 2007).
In the United States, school meals are available both from
the U.S. Department of Agriculture school breakfast and lunch
programs and from commercial venders that provide food for
cafeterias, vending machines, and snack bars. Government-
provided meals must meet federal nutrition standards, but com-
mercial foods are exempt from those requirements. Some school
administrators contend that budget pressures force them to sell
popular, but nutritionally lacking, foods. In response to schools
being criticized for offering children fast food and soda while
scaling back physical education classes and recess, some states
are limiting sales of soft drinks and commercial foods of low
nutritional value. Schools need adequate resources from federal
and state government funding to create school environments
that provide adequate physical activity and healthful foods and
beverages for students.
On the global level, DPAS states, ‘‘School policies and pro-
grams should support the adoption of healthy diets and physical
activity’’ (WHO 2003). As part of the implementation of DPAS, in
2008 WHO developed the School Policy Framework to guide
108
Worldwide Perspective

policy makers at national and local levels in the development
and implementation of policies that promote healthy eating and
physical activity in schools.
Marketing
Among the various environment inﬂuences on children and
youth, the media in its multiple forms have assumed a central
role. Advertising and marketing messages reach young consum-
ers through radio, television, magazines, computers, and cell
phones. Although children’s food choices are strongly inﬂu-
enced by their families, they are increasingly making decisions
based on advertising. Children are not ‘‘rational consumers’’—
that is, they do not evaluate information critically and weigh
the future consequences of their actions. When vigorous market-
ing of unhealthful foods is aimed directly at children, blaming
children for eating those foods is illogical. They need education
from parents, schools, government, and advertisers to help them
make healthful choices. If America’s young people are to avoid a
future of diet-related chronic diseases, they should limit those
high-calorie snacks, fast foods, and sugar-sweetened drinks the
focus of which comprise the majority of advertisements targeted
to children and youth.
Researchers report that children view an average of 40,000
television ads a year. A child watching Saturday morning televi-
sion may see one food commercial every ﬁve minutes, with most
featuring such energy-dense, minimally nutritious foods as
candy, sugared cereal, and fast food (Kotz and Story 1994).
Advertising does inﬂuence what foods children want and there-
fore what parents buy; companies would not spend millions of
dollars in advertising if it did not work. In 1997, the food indus-
try was the second largest advertiser in the United States, with
television as the most popular medium. Importantly, these
advertisement dollars are spent disproportionately on highly
processed and packaged foods. During that year, nearly seven
times as much money was spent advertising confectionery and
snacks (e.g., candy, gum, mints, cookies, crackers, nuts, chips)
than was spent advertising fruits, vegetables, grains, and beans.
In the same year, the food industry spent $7 billion on advertis-
ing, more than 20 times the $333 million spent by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture on nutrition education that year
(Gallo 1998).
Managing Childhood Overweight and Obesity
109

International studies have suggested that overweight
among children is related to the quantity of advertising on child-
ren’s television. A signiﬁcant association was found between
childhood overweight and the number of advertisements per
hour on children’s television in the United States, Australia,
and eight European countries. The authors proposed that these
ﬁndings support recommendations to reduce children’s expo-
sure to marketing practices that typically encourage high-
calorie, low-nutrient foods (Lobstein and Baur 2005).
How marketing inﬂuences children and youth is the focus of
the IOM report Food Marketing to Children and Youth: Threat or
Opportunity? The report provides a comprehensive review of
the scientiﬁc evidence on the inﬂuence of food marketing on
diets and diet-related health of children and youth. The study
was requested by the U.S. Congress and sponsored by the CDC.
The report states that ‘‘Industry should develop and strictly
adhere to marketing and advertising guidelines that minimize
the risk of obesity in children and youth’’ (IOM 2006). Respon-
sible marketing messages that encourage a healthy diet would
depict food in reasonable portion sizes, not portray overeating
as exciting or desirable. They would promote products that are
consistent with the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, including
fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat milk. They would
not portray healthful foods negatively. Marketers are also
encouraged to expand nutrition information at the point of pur-
chase and on food labels.
The concerns related to marketing inﬂuence are not unique
to the United States. Several countries have instituted restrictions
on food and beverage advertising to children. Marketing cam-
paigns and price incentives have an important impact on food
purchasing patterns in developing countries, where as much as
60 percent of household income is spent on food. A WHO forum
on marketing food and nonalcoholic beverages to children met in
Oslo, Norway, in 2006. The members reviewed the current inﬂu-
ences of marketing on children’s food preferences. They dis-
cussed how to get all stakeholders involved in managing and
limiting negative inﬂuences of marketing and advertising on
children’s dietary choices. Meeting participants recommended
that WHO should:
(i) support national action to protect children from marketing by
substantially reducing the volume and impact of commercial
110
Worldwide Perspective

promotion of energy-dense, micronutrient-poor foods and bever-
ages to children; (ii) address issues such as cross-border television
advertising and global promotional activities; and, (iii) consider
the development of an international code on the marketing of food
and beverages to children. (WHO 2006)
These conclusions and recommendations reﬂected the opin-
ions of the meeting participants and were not endorsed by WHO.
WHO is developing its own, similar recommendations for
national action and principles of good practices on the marketing
of food and nonalcoholic beverages to children. Publication is
expected in 2010.
In 2008, world obesity experts called on food and soft drink
manufacturers to adopt international standards to control the
marketing of ‘‘junk food’’ to children. Professor Arne Astrup,
president of the International Association for the Study of
Obesity, an association that represents 10,000 obesity specialists
in 55 countries, proposed tough measures to cut the promotion
of sweetened soft drinks and food products that are high in fats,
sugar, and salt (Rigby 2008). The proposed code would ban all
advertising of junk food and sweetened soft drinks to children
under 16 on television before 9:00 p.m. Using celebrities and car-
toons for this kind of advertising, already forbidden in Ireland,
would also be prohibited.
Health advocates who believe the food industry advertising,
marketing, and pricing practices contribute to childhood over-
weight and obesity urge such measures as requiring nutrition
information on restaurant and fast-food menus. They also sup-
port restrictions on ads aimed at children. Often these initiatives
encounter strong opposition from food manufacturers and con-
sumer groups that are concerned about the effects of these limita-
tions on their civil liberties. The challenge will be to ﬁnd ways
that all parties that have an interest in the issue will embrace
obesity prevention and to make the food and beverage industry
part of the solution.
Parents
An interaction between similar genetic background and environ-
ment makes obesity seem inescapable for some, as it ‘‘runs in the
family.’’ Obese children under three years of age without obese
parents are at low risk for obesity in adulthood, but among chil-
dren under 10 years of age, parental obesity more than doubles
Managing Childhood Overweight and Obesity
111

the risk of adult obesity (Whitaker et al. 1997). Although the
greatest inﬂuence parents have on child overweight and obesity
is genetic, genetics alone cannot explain the recent increases in
obesity throughout the world. Parents may transmit susceptibil-
ity, but an obesogenic environment must be present for obesity
to occur. Determining how much ‘‘nature’’ or ‘‘nurture’’ is
responsible for child overweight can be difﬁcult. Genetics and
conscious behavior interact when both parents and children gain
weight in households where energy-dense foods are freely avail-
able. Similarly, children’s physical activity is inﬂuenced by how
active their parents are.
Often, the best defense against child obesity is strong paren-
tal intervention and lifestyle change made by the whole family.
In most cases, the child is mimicking the parent’s approach to
physical activities and healthy eating patterns. Preventive inter-
ventions should occur at an age when children’s eating habits
are more easily inﬂuenced by parents and by environmental
changes. Young children have little control over their environ-
ment, which includes the availability of food and family activ-
ities. Because parents do have great inﬂuence over these factors,
preventive interventions may be most effective if targeted
toward parents of those children.
To help children maintain a healthy weight and lifestyle,
parents and caregivers can aim for these goals:
•
Be positive role models for their children regarding eating
habits
•
Promote healthful eating behaviors for the entire family
•
Provide an environment that makes healthful food and
beverage choices easy for children
•
Educate children to make healthful decisions about fre-
quency, portion size, and types of foods and beverages to
consume
•
Encourage everyday physical activity
Serve as Role Models
Helping children adopt healthy eating habits and be physically
more active is a family affair. When children see adults eating a
variety of nutritious foods, they will be more likely to want to
eat them, too. Studies demonstrate that child dietary behavior is
strongly inﬂuenced by parent role modeling, and, whether ap-
parent or not, research does show that parents continue to be role
112
Worldwide Perspective

models for adolescents (Brown and Ogden 2004). Perhaps the
single most effective way to change a child’s diet is for adults to
set a good example. Parents can be challenged to teach children
what to eat, how much to eat, and when to eat and to be consis-
tent and set limits when necessary.
Parents provide a positive role model by:
•
Eating healthy, nutritious foods
•
Controlling portion sizes
•
Limiting treats and high-calorie snacks
Parents can prevent children from picking up unhealthy
habits by avoiding:
•
Skipping breakfast
•
Eating a late dinner or snacking before going to sleep
•
Eating in front of the television
•
Eating when they are not hungry because of boredom or
stress
Involve the Entire Family
Children are not able to change their eating habits by themselves.
They need the help and support of their families and other care-
givers. Thus, successful prevention and treatment of childhood
obesity starts at home (Plourde 2006). The entire family should
be involved in health behavior change, including siblings, grand-
parents, and other caregivers. Successful childhood obesity pre-
vention and treatment depends on parents and other family
members to create a home environment that makes healthful eat-
ing a priority. Each family member can contribute. Even young
children can help with washing fruits and vegetables, setting
the table, or stirring ingredients.
Create an Environment That Makes Healthful Eating Easy
Children usually do not do the grocery shopping or food prepa-
ration themselves. Parents are the food policy makers at home.
A parent’s responsibility is to buy healthy groceries, serve nutri-
tious food, and to establish a routine for eating. Parents create a
healthy environment when they:
•
Avoid arguments about high-fat, high-sugar foods by not
bringing them into the house
Managing Childhood Overweight and Obesity
113

•
Offer whole-grain foods with meals and snacks
•
Serve water when a child is thirsty
•
Reduce the number of meals eaten out at fast-food and
other restaurants
•
Sit down together for family meals
Establishing a routine for eating means there is a set time for
breakfast, lunch, dinner, and snacks. Most children like to have a
schedule, and they become hungry at regular times. Consistent
meal times are vital to fostering a healthy response to hunger
and satiety signals. With irregular meal times or constant eating
or drinking, children may lose the ability to recognize internal
signals of hunger and fullness. Studies show that the more fami-
lies eat together, the more likely older children and adolescents
will consume fruits, vegetables, grains, and calcium-rich foods
(e.g., Gillman et al. 2000).
Educate Children to Select Nutritious Foods at Home and Away
from Home
Children are more apt to choose healthy meals when they are
involved in meal planning, shopping, and food preparation.
Parental guidance in food choices is necessary, but equally
important is teaching children consumer skills to help them
make informed choices. As they mature, children begin to make
their own choices at school and in other away-from-home set-
tings. Children of all ages, but particularly adolescents, imitate
their peers. Adolescent food habits can be negatively affected
when they consume ‘‘popular’’ foods such as potato chips,
sodas, and candy. These foods provide lots of carbohydrates
and fat and little protein, vitamins, or minerals—except for salt.
When parents withhold favorite foods, children crave those
foods and tend to overeat when they do have access to them
(Faith et al. 2004). Teens may turn to dieting methods to lose or
control weight, cutting out whole groups of foods (like grain
products), skipping meals, and fasting. These methods leave
out important foods necessary for growth and health. Other
weight-loss practices such as smoking, self-induced vomiting,
or using diet pills or laxatives are linked with serious long-term
health problems. Unhealthy dieting can actually cause weight
gain if it leads to a cycle of eating very little and then overeating
or binging on food. Unhealthy dieting also can put adolescents at
greater risk for emotional problems. Parents and responsible
114
Worldwide Perspective

adults can emphasize that the best way to lose weight is to eat the
right amounts of healthful foods and be physically active.
Encourage Everyday Physical Activity
Like adults, kids need daily physical activity. The Dietary Guide-
lines for Americans recommends at least an hour of exercise daily
for children and teenagers and 30 minutes a day for adults. The
activity does not have to happen all at once; several 10- or even
5-minute periods of activity throughout the day accomplish this
goal. Children who are not used to being active can be encour-
aged to start with any amount they can do and build up to 60
minutes a day. A pre-adolescent child’s body is not ready for
adult-style physical activity, so children should not be encour-
aged to participate in activities such as long jogs or lifting heavy
weights. Physical activities that kids choose to do on their own
often result in the best outcomes (WIN 2008).
Tips for parents from the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Weight Information Network include:
Set a good example. If your child sees that you are physi-
cally active and that you have fun doing it, he or she is more
likely to be active throughout life.
Encourage your child to join a sports team or class, such as
soccer, dance, basketball, or gymnastics at school or at your local
community or recreation center.
Be sensitive to your child’s needs. If your child feels
uncomfortable participating in activities like sports, help her or
him ﬁnd physical activities that are fun and not embarrassing,
such as playing tag with friends or siblings, jumping rope, or
dancing to his or her favorite music.
Be active together as a family. Assign active chores such as
making the beds, washing the car, or vacuuming. Plan active out-
ings such as a trip to the zoo, a family bike ride, or a walk
through a local park.
Limit screen time. The more hours a day children and teens
spend in front of a TV, video, or computer screen, the more likely
they are to be overweight (WIN 2008).
We Can! (Ways to Enhance Children’s Activity and Nutri-
tion) is a science-based program and Web site developed by
NIH that offers the following tips for parents:
•
Limit screen time to no more than two hours a day.
•
Do not put a TV in your child’s bedroom.
Managing Childhood Overweight and Obesity
115

•
Make screen time, active time by doing simple exercises
during commercial breaks.
•
Take a family walk or play ball at the park instead of
turning on the TV (WeCan! 2008).
Parents and others can download a free screen time log to help
assess the amount of time children spend watching TV, playing
video games, or using the computer for recreational purposes
(WeCan! 2008).
Parents of obese children face complex challenges, and it
may be difﬁcult for working parents to ﬁnd the time or energy
to cook nutritious meals or supervise outdoor playtime. Regard-
less of ability to achieve the diet and exercise interventions,
parents can send the overall message that they not only love
and accept their children as they are but also want to support
them in being healthy through making healthful food choices
and being physically active.
Research
Despite worldwide concern about obesity prevention, no one is
sure which policies and programs will actually reduce adult
and childhood weight gain. Given the lack of carefully controlled
studies, researchers cannot yet establish conclusively that more
access to recreation, more active commuting, or cutting out fast
food will reduce rates of obesity. More research is needed on a
national and an international scale. The misconception that
obesity is a problem afﬂicting only afﬂuent nations and house-
holds may be holding back needed research in poorer countries.
New international prevention strategies should be tested with
consideration of how the nutrition transition affects diets and
physical activity among individuals in developing countries.
The lack of deﬁnitive research has meant that health care
providers and policy makers do not have the kind of detailed
information they need to evaluate what might work to reverse
obesity trends. An important goal for researchers is to discover
effective interventions, particularly for children, which may
decrease the risk that they will become obese later in life. The
prevalence of overweight in the preschool child population has
seen a large increase in the last 20 years (Summerbell et al.
2005), creating an urgent need to reevaluate previous interven-
tions and establish new practice guidelines for practitioners. In
2006, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation requested that IOM
116
Worldwide Perspective

have an expert committee examine progress in preventing child-
hood obesity in the United States. The resulting report, Progress
in Preventing Childhood Obesity: How Do We Measure Up? pre-
sented speciﬁc actions for childhood obesity prevention. One
particularly telling point it makes is that lack of a system for
monitoring and evaluating progress has reduced the ability to
identify, apply, and circulate the lessons learned (IOM 2008).
The committee strongly encouraged ongoing surveillance and
monitoring systems to track effectiveness of existing policies
and nutrition programs, such as feeding programs, and assess-
ing their impact on child health. Because the obesity epidemic
is a serious public health problem, it compels immediate action
to reduce its prevalence as well as its health and social conse-
quences. The IOM committee felt strongly that actions should
be taken now based on the best available evidence—as opposed
to waiting for the best possible evidence.
NIH is a key contributor and the primary funding body for
research into the causes, consequences, and prevention of child-
hood obesity. Currently, NIH funds more than 90 percent of all
obesity research in the United States. The Strategic Plan for NIH
Obesity Research was published in 2004 to provide a guide for
coordinating obesity research activities across NIH. The plan’s
goals, and strategies for achieving them, include:
•
Research toward preventing and treating obesity through
lifestyle modiﬁcation
•
Research toward preventing and treating obesity through
pharmacologic, surgical, or other medical approaches
•
Research toward breaking the link between obesity and its
associated health conditions
•
Cross-cutting research topics, including health disparities,
technology, fostering of interdisciplinary research teams,
investigator training, translational research, and educa-
tion/outreach efforts (NIH 2004).
Because environmental, social, economic, and behavioral
factors act with genetic susceptibility to contribute to obesity,
NIH supports a broad range of investigation. The scope of
obesity research includes molecular, genetic, behavioral, envi-
ronmental, clinical, and epidemiologic studies. The National
Cancer Institute, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institute on Aging, Ofﬁce of Behavioral and Social
Managing Childhood Overweight and Obesity
117

Sciences Research, Ofﬁce of Dietary Supplements, and Ofﬁce of
Research on Women’s Health are some of the institutes that carry
out obesity research.
As diverse as these institutes are, most of the funded grants
for childhood obesity research focus on diet and physical activ-
ity, and very few examine pharmacological or surgical interven-
tions. In 2007, NIH initiated research that would evaluate the
beneﬁts and risks of bariatric surgery in adolescents. The Teen
Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (Teen-LABS)
study was designed to determine if surgery is an appropriate
treatment option for extremely overweight teens. During the
ﬁve-year study, researchers will compare data from 200 adoles-
cents scheduled for bariatric surgery with data from 200 adults
who had bariatric surgery. ‘‘We know that bariatric surgery is
not an easy way out for teens to control weight. They will still
need to eat less food and exercise more,’’ says Mary Horlick,
MD, project scientist for Teen-LABS at NIH. ‘‘We hope to learn
whether or not bariatric surgery is suitable for teens and if it will
help them remain at a healthy weight over the long-term’’ (NIH
2007). To participate in the study, young males and females must
be 12 to 18 years old and have been approved for bariatric sur-
gery. To justify this invasive surgical procedure, which carries
lifelong consequences, most pediatric weight-management
experts agree that candidates for surgery should have a BMI of
at least 40 as well as an identiﬁable physical or psychosocial
comorbidity of obesity. This standard is in contrast to NIH guide-
lines for adults, which specify that a BMI of at least 40 without
comorbidities justiﬁes this surgery. As with adults, teens should
have already tried other noninvasive approaches, and surgery
should not be the ﬁrst intervention.
There is currently no conclusive evidence that changes in the
nutrition environment will reduce rates of obesity. Nations,
states, and individuals are trying new obesity prevention strate-
gies. These practices can teach about effective ways to reduce
child obesity, but to realize their full promise, the policies, pro-
grams, and plans must be carefully evaluated. A prerequisite
for any effective public health intervention is a solid base of
knowledge about what does actually improve health. Building
this knowledge base will take time, attention, and funding; how-
ever, it is essential to halting the rise in adult and childhood
obesity.
118
Worldwide Perspective

Conclusion
Throughout the world, prevention of adult and childhood over-
weight and obesity presents community-wide as well as individ-
ual challenges. To tackle the obesity epidemic, all communities
should be healthful places to live, and healthy choices should
be easy to make for everyone. Obesity prevention demands a cul-
tural shift, one in which healthy environments, physical activity,
and healthy eating become the norm.
References
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). ‘‘The Use and Misuse of Fruit
Juice in Pediatrics.’’ Pediatrics 107, no. 5 (2001): 1210–1213.
American Medical Association (AMA). ‘‘Appendix: Expert Committee
Recommendations on the Assessment, Prevention, and Treatment of
Child and Adolescent Overweight and Obesity.’’ 2007. [Online
information; retrieved 1/8/09.] http://www.ama-assn.org/ama1/pub/
upload/mm/433/ped_obesity_recs.pdf.
Associated Press (AP). ‘‘Singapore to Scrap Anti-Obesity Program.’’
Washington Post, March 20, 2007.
Baker, J. L., L. W. Olsen, and T. I. Sorensen. ‘‘Childhood Body-Mass
Index and the Risk of Coronary Heart Disease in Adulthood.’’ New
England Journal of Medicine 357, no. 23 (2007): 2329–2337.
Barlow, S. E. ‘‘Expert Committee Recommendations Regarding the
Prevention, Assessment, and Treatment of Child and Adolescent
Overweight and Obesity: Summary Report.’’ Pediatrics 120, Suppl. 4
(2007): S164–S192.
Berkowitz, R. I., T. A. Wadden, A. M. Tershakovec, and J. L. Cronquist.
‘‘Behavior Therapy and Sibutramine for the Treatment of Adolescent
Obesity: A Randomized Controlled Trial.’’ Journal of the American
Medical Association 289, no. 14 (2003): 1805–1812.
Bowman, S. A., S. L. Gortmaker, C. B. Ebbeling, M. A. Pereira, and D. S.
Ludwig. ‘‘Effects of Fast-Food Consumption on Energy Intake and Diet
Quality among Children in a National Household Survey.’’ Pediatrics
113, no. 1, Pt. 1 (2004): 112–118.
Bowman, S. A., and B. T. Vinyard. ‘‘Fast Food Consumption of U.S.
Adults: Impact on Energy and Nutrient Intakes and Overweight
Status.’’ Journal of the American College of Nutrition 23, no. 2 (2004):
163–168.
References
119

Brown, R., and J. Ogden. ‘‘Children’s Eating Attitudes and Behaviour:
A Study of the Modelling and Control Theories of Parental Inﬂuence.’’
Health Education Research 19, no. 3 (2004): 261–271.
Burslem, Chris. ‘‘The Changing Face of Malnutrition.’’ IFPRI Forum
October (2004).
Bush, L. ‘‘Mrs. Bush’s Remarks at the 2007 National Prevention and
Health Promotion Summit.’’ 2007. [Online news release; retrieved 1/8/
09.] http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2007/11/20071127-3
.html.
Caballero, B. ‘‘The Global Epidemic of Obesity: An Overview.’’
Epidemiologic Reviews 29 (2007): 1–5.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). ‘‘Barriers to
Children Walking and Biking to School—United States, 1999.’’
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 51, no. 32 (2002):701–704.
Cole, T. J., M. C. Bellizzi, K. M. Flegal, and W. H. Dietz. ‘‘Establishing a
Standard Deﬁnition for Child Overweight and Obesity Worldwide:
International Survey.’’ British Medical Journal 320, no. 7244 (2000):
1240–1243.
Epstein, L. H., and J. N. Roemmich. ‘‘Reducing Sedentary Behavior:
Role in Modifying Physical Activity.’’ Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews
29, no. 3 (2001): 103–108.
Faith, M. S., R. I. Berkowitz, V. A. Stallings, J. Kerns, M. Storey, and A. J.
Stunkard. ‘‘Parental Feeding Attitudes and Styles and Child Body
Mass Index: Prospective Analysis of a Gene-Environment Interaction.’’
Pediatrics 114, no. 4 (2004): e429–e436.
Flegal, K. M., R. Wei, and C. Ogden. ‘‘Weight-for-Stature Compared
with Body Mass Index-for-Age Growth Charts for the United States
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.’’ American Journal
of Clinical Nutrition 75, no. 4 (2002): 761–766.
Flodmark, C. E., I. Lissau, L. A. Moreno, A. Pietrobelli, and K.
Widhalm. ‘‘New Insights into the Field of Children and Adolescents’
Obesity: The European Perspective.’’ International Journal of Obesity-
Related Metabolic Disorders 28, no. 10 (2004): 1189–1196.
Frank, L. D., M. A. Andresen, and T. L. Schmid. ‘‘Obesity Relationships
with Community Design, Physical Activity, and Time Spent in Cars.’’
American Journal of Preventive Medicine 27, no. 2 (2004): 87–96.
Gallo, A. E. ‘‘Food Advertising in the United States. America’s Eating
Habits: Changes and Consequences.’’ Washington, DC: Food and Rural
Economics Division, Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, 1998.
120
Worldwide Perspective

Gardner, G., and B. Halweil. ‘‘Overfed and Underfed: The Global
Epidemic of Malnutrition.’’ Worldwatch Paper 150. Washington, DC:
Worldwatch Institute, 2000.
Gillman, M. W., S. L. Rifas-Shiman, A. L. Frazier, H. R. Rockett, C. A.
Camargo, Jr., A. E. Field, C. S. Berkey, and G. A. Colditz. ‘‘Family Din-
ner and Diet Quality among Older Children and Adolescents.’’ Archives
of Family Medicine 9, no. 3 (2000): 235–240.
Hossain, P., B. Kawar, and M. El Nahas. ‘‘Obesity and Diabetes in the
Developing World—a Growing Challenge.’’ New England Journal of
Medicine 356, no. 3 (2007): 213–215.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). Preventing Childhood Obesity: Health in the
Balance, xix. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2005.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). Food Marketing to Children and Youth: Threat
or Opportunity? Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). Progress in Preventing Childhood Obesity:
How Do We Measure Up? Washington, DC: National Academies Press,
2008.
Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). ‘‘Generation M: Media in the Lives of
8 to 18 Year-Olds.’’ 2005. [Online information; retrieved 1/8/09.]
www.kff.org/entmedia/entmedia030905pkg.cfm.
King, H., R. E. Aubert, and W. H. Herman. ‘‘Global Burden of Diabetes,
1995–2025: Prevalence, Numerical Estimates, and Projections.’’ Diabetes
Care 21, no. 9 (1998): 1414–1431.
Kotz, K., and M. Story. ‘‘Food Advertisements During Children’s
Saturday Morning Television Programming: Are They Consistent with
Dietary Recommendations?’’ Journal of the American Dietetic Association
94, no. 11 (1994): 1296–1300.
Lobstein, T., and L. A. Baur. ‘‘Policies to Prevent Childhood Obesity in
the European Union.’’ European Journal of Public Health 15, no. 6 (2005):
576–579.
Lobstein, T., L. Baur, R. Uauy, and IASO International Obesity
Taskforce. ‘‘Obesity in Children and Young People: A Crisis in Public
Health.’’ Obesity Reviews 5, Suppl. 1 (2004): 4–104.
Ludwig, D. S., K. E. Peterson, and S. L. Gortmaker. ‘‘Relation between
Consumption of Sugar-sweetened Drinks and Childhood Obesity: A
Prospective, Observational Analysis.’’ Lancet 357, no. 9255 (2001):
505–508.
McDonald, N. C. ‘‘Active Transportation to School: Trends among U.S.
Schoolchildren, 1969–2001.’’ American Journal of Preventive Medicine 32,
no. 6 (2007): 509–516.
References
121

Musaiger, A. O. ‘‘Overweight and Obesity in the Eastern
Mediterranean Region: Can We Control It?’’ Eastern Mediterranean
Health Journal 10, no. 6 (2004): 789–793.
Nader, P. R., R. H. Bradley, R. M. Houts, S. L. McRitchie, and M.
O’Brien. ‘‘Moderate-to-Vigorous Physical Activity from Ages 9 to 15
Years.’’ Journal of the American Medical Association 300, no. 3 (2008):
295–305.
National Institutes of Health (NIH). Strategic Plan for NIH Obesity
Research. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health, 2004.
National Institutes of Health (NIH). ‘‘NIH Launches Study to Assess
Bariatric Surgery in Adolescents.’’ 2007. [Online news release; retrieved
1/8/09.] http://www.nih.gov/news/pr/apr2007/niddk-16.htm.
Ogden, C. L., R. J. Kuczmarski, K. M. Flegal, Z. Mei, S. Guo, R. Wei,
L. M. Grummer-Strawn, L. R. Curtin, A. F. Roche, and C. L. Johnson.
‘‘Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2000 Growth Charts for
the United States: Improvements to the 1977 National Center for
Health Statistics Version.’’ Pediatrics 109, no. 1 (2002): 45–60.
Ozer, E. J. ‘‘The Effects of School Gardens on Students and Schools:
Conceptualization and Considerations for Maximizing Healthy
Development.’’ Health Education & Behavior 34, no. 6 (2007): 846–863.
Painter, J., J. H. Rah, and Y. K. Lee. ‘‘Comparison of International Food
Guide Pictorial Representations.’’ Journal of the American Dietetic
Association 102, no. 4 (2002): 483–489.
Plourde, G. ‘‘Preventing and Managing Pediatric Obesity.
Recommendations for Family Physicians.’’ Canadian Family Physician 52
(2006): 322–328.
Rigby, N. ‘‘Obesity Experts Back Junk Food Marketing Ban.’’
International Association for the Study of Obesity/International
Obesity TaskForce; 2008. [Online information; retrieved 8/8/08.]
http://www.iotf.org/IASOmarketingreleaseMarch1508.htm.
Robinson, T. N. ‘‘Television Viewing and Childhood Obesity.’’ Pediatric
Clinics of North America 48, no. 4 (2001): 1017–1025.
St-Onge, M. P., K. L. Keller, and S. B. Heymsﬁeld. ‘‘Changes in Child-
hood Food Consumption Patterns: A Cause for Concern in Light of
Increasing Body Weights.’’ American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 78, no.
6 (2003): 1068–1073.
Subramanian, S. V., and G. D. Smith. ‘‘Patterns, Distribution, and
Determinants of Under- and Overnutrition: A Population-based Study
of Women in India.’’ American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 84, no. 3
(2006): 633–640.
122
Worldwide Perspective

Summerbell, C. D., E. Waters, L. D. Edmunds, S. Kelly, T. Brown, and
K. J. Campbell. ‘‘Interventions for Preventing Obesity in Children.’’
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 3 (2005): CD001871.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Dietary Guidelines for
Americans, 2005. 2005. [Online information; retrieved 1/8/09.] http://
www.health.gov/dietaryguidelines/dga2005/document/.
WeCan! ‘‘Helpful Ways to Reduce Screen Time.’’ 2008. [Online
information; retrieved 1/8/09.] http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/
public/heart/obesity/wecan/live-it/screen-time.htm.
Weight-control Information Network (WIN). ‘‘Helping Your Over-
weight Child.’’ 2008. [Online information; retrieved 1/8/09.] http://
www.win.niddk.nih.gov/publications/over_child.htm.
Whitaker, R. C., J. A. Wright, M. S. Pepe, K. D. Seidel, and W. H. Dietz.
‘‘Predicting Obesity in Young Adulthood from Childhood and Parental
Obesity.’’ New England Journal of Medicine 337, no. 13 (1997): 869–873.
World Health Organization (WHO). ‘‘Global Strategy on Diet, Physical
Activity and Health: Obesity and Overweight.’’ Geneva: WHO, 2003.
World Health Organization (WHO). ‘‘World Health Organization
Ministerial Conference on Counteracting Obesity.’’ Copenhagen,
Denmark: WHO Regional Ofﬁce for Europe, 2006.
World Health Organization (WHO). ‘‘Obesity and Overweight.’’ In
Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health. Geneva: WHO,
2008.
Xanthakos, S. A., S. R. Daniels, and T. H. Inge. ‘‘Bariatric Surgery in
Adolescents: An Update.’’ Adolescent Medicine Clinics 17, no. 3 (2006):
589–612; abstract x.
Yanovski, J. A. ‘‘Intensive Therapies for Pediatric Obesity.’’ Pediatric
Clinics of North America 48, no. 4 (2001): 1041–1053
References
123

This page intentionally left blank 

4
Chronology
1942
Louis Dublin, a statistician at Metropolitan Life Insur-
ance Company (MLIC), groups about 4 million people
who were insured with Metropolitan Life into catego-
ries based on their height, body frame (small, medium,
or large), and weight. People who maintained their
body weight at the average for 25-year-olds are found
to live the longest. As insurance companies look for cri-
teria by which to judge the desirability of applicants,
these ﬁgures become the acceptable height-weight
ranges for men and women and are called ‘‘ideal
weights’’ (MLIC 1942).
1943
Enough of the U.S. population is above ideal body
weight (IBW) that the MLIC declares, ‘‘Overweight is
so common that it constitutes a national health prob-
lem of the ﬁrst order’’ (MLIC 1943).
1951
Tillie Lewis starts a new food company based in Stock-
ton, California, that offers new low-calorie products.
Lewis becomes one of the earliest marketers of diet
foods with her Tasti-Diet line of artiﬁcially sweetened
fruits, soft drinks, puddings, jellies, and chocolate
sauce.
1952
Dr. Lester Breslow popularizes idea of optimum
weight for health. In a classic paper, Breslow notes that
125

1952
(cont.)
‘‘One out of six well people . . . are 20 percent or more
overweight’’ and that ‘‘Weight control is a major public
health problem’’ (Breslow 1952).
1954
The ﬁrst bariatric surgery is performed for which
documentation is submitted to a peer-reviewed jour-
nal. Dr. Arnold Kremen and Dr. John Linner at the Uni-
versity of Minnesota, while studying nutrition
absorption in dogs, discover that the dogs lost weight
after undergoing operations that bypassed much of
their intestines. In Dr. Linner’s private surgical prac-
tice, one of his patients asks him to use the technique
on her in the hope that she, too, will lose weight. With
the successful results of that procedure, bariatric sur-
gery is born.
1956
President Dwight Eisenhower establishes the Presi-
dent’s Council on Physical Fitness and Sports out of
concern that Americans are becoming less active. The
program is a partnership between the public, private,
and nonproﬁt sectors of society. The spark to develop
the Council comes from John Kelly, who was better
known as the father of actress Grace Kelly. John Kelly,
a wartime physical ﬁtness ofﬁcer, believes that the cur-
rent afﬂuent lifestyle makes life so easy and effortless
that adults and children are rapidly losing muscle tone.
Jack LaLanne brings his ﬁtness and diet television pro-
gram into living rooms throughout the United States.
His popular television series, The Jack LaLanne Show,
encourages viewers to get up from the chair and work
out. LaLanne’s belief that daily, vigorous, systematic
exercise and proper diet are keys to good health is an
idea supported by medical professionals in future
years.
1959
The MLIC replaces the term ‘‘ideal weight’’ with
‘‘desirable weight’’ (MLIC 1959) when it is discovered
that these weights are associated with the lowest mor-
tality among people from the United States and
126
Chronology

Canada who purchased life insurance policies from
1935 to 1954.
1960
Metrecal, a diet drink in a can, is introduced by the
Mead Johnson Company as a weight-loss aid. Metre-
cal, taken as directed, is a complete low-calorie meal
that does not require calorie counting or food prepara-
tion. It is the ﬁrst in a long line of successfully pro-
moted liquid diets that will include products such as
SlimFast beverages.
1963
Jean Nidetch, a housewife from Queens, New York,
starts the Weight Watchers Club, basing it on a plan
that helped her lose more than 50 pounds. She invites
her friends over weekly to discuss how to lose weight.
The club is successful because it provides motivation,
mutual support, and encouragement from people
who are all working on weight loss or maintenance.
Members can even become meeting leaders and share
the story of their personal success with others. This
enterprise will grow into Weight Watchers Inter-
national, a successful business with 1 million members
in groups all over the world.
1964
Dr. G. J. Hamwi develops a simple way to estimate
ideal body weight. His formulas for IBW will be a
popular method used in clinical practice for decades
to come.
1967
Surgeon Edward E. Mason at the University of Iowa
develops the ﬁrst gastric bypass surgery for weight
loss. Previous to this version, surgeons would just
remove part of the intestine, a procedure called intes-
tinal bypass, to reduce the number of calories the body
could absorb. For a further reduction in food intake,
Dr. Mason uses staples to create a small pouch in the
top of the stomach. Patients would feel full eating less
because there was not much room for food.
1970s
Jaw wiring is used for weight loss. This orthodontic
procedure prevents the mouth from opening more
Chronology
127

1970s
(cont.)
than a few centimeters. As a form of weight control, it
prevents consumption of solid food, thus causing a
reduction in calorie intake. It is suggested as a method
to be tried before surgery is attempted.
U.S. child obesity is estimated at 4 percent of the U.S.
population.
1972
Dr. Atkins’ Diet Revolution is published. Dr. Robert
Atkins, a cardiologist, recommends eating a diet high
in protein and fat and low in carbohydrates. He devel-
ops the plan as a way to reduce his own overweight
and claims that, by eating meat, ﬁsh, eggs, and cheese
and avoiding sugars and starches, anyone can lose
weight without counting calories. He believes this diet
will cause excess body fat to be burned for fuel and
will combat heart disease and diabetes. Although the
book is a best seller, the Atkins diet is not recom-
mended by conventional physicians and nutritionists
because it does not follow traditional nutrition
guidelines.
1974
The ﬁrst International Congress on Obesity is held in
London. There are 500 attendees from 30 countries.
This meeting is organized in recognition of the need
for continuing international assemblies of obesity
experts and policy makers. Researchers present their
latest ﬁndings by posting abstracts and by speaking at
invited lectures and symposia, demonstrating the need
for the International Journal of Obesity, a new journal
devoted to global work in the ﬁeld of obesity.
1980s
Body mass index (BMI) becomes an international stan-
dard for obesity measurement.
Liposuction is introduced in the United States. This
procedure of removing localized fatty deposits and
body contouring is revolutionized in 1985 when
Dr. Jeffrey A. Klein develops a technique which per-
mits liposuction using only local anesthesia and
requires small incisions and little blood loss. Procedure
128
Chronology

guidelines for this new, safer form of liposuction are
approved by the American Academy of Dermatology
in 1989, and numerous postgraduate courses help der-
matologists learn this technique to meet a growing
demand for what will become the most requested cos-
metic surgery procedure.
1982
The ﬁrst nonproﬁt professional organization to study
obesity is established. The Obesity Society is commit-
ted to encouraging research on the causes and treat-
ment of obesity and to keeping the medical
community and public informed of new advances.
1983
The MLIC height-weight tables are revised again when
it is discovered that the weights associated with lon-
gevity were higher than in the previous tables.
Depending on height, the new tables increase the
desirable weight 2 to 13 pounds for men and 3 to 8
pounds for women.
1984
The 7-Eleven convenience store outlets introduce a
new size of soda—the 44-ounce Super Big Gulp.
Dr. Michael Weintraub’s research on obese patients
shows that a combination of two drugs, phentermine
and fenﬂuramine (later known as fen-phen), are more
effective at producing weight loss than either of the
drugs alone, and in lower dosages with fewer side
effects. Fenﬂuramine has been used for decades as a
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved
weight loss medication, but the combination is not yet
sanctioned by the FDA.
1985
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) classiﬁes
obesity as a disease. Formerly, obesity was thought to
result from the single adverse behavior of eating inap-
propriate quantities. Studies that show that speciﬁc
biochemical alterations occur in humans and experi-
mental animals in response to environmental food
and activity factors indicate that obesity meets the def-
inition of a disease.
Chronology
129

1985 to
1998
BMI risk categories for Americans are deﬁned.
Between 1985 and 1998, the deﬁnition of overweight in
U.S. government publications is a BMI of at least 27.3
for women and 27.8 for men.
1988
The 7-Eleven stores introduce the giant 64-ounce Dou-
ble Big Gulp. There are nearly 800 calories in the big-
gest soft drink on the market.
1989
A research study by Wadden and others shows that
98 percent of dieters regain all lost weight within ﬁve
years (Wadden et al. 1989).
1990s
Leptin is discovered by several groups during this de-
cade studying obese mice that carry a gene that makes
them unable to produce any leptin. The hormone regu-
lates energy expenditure and food intake in rodents. In
response to increased fat storage, leptin is released into
the bloodstream and signals to the brain that the body
has had enough to eat. If no leptin is available, severe
obesity occurs. When leptin is given to the animals,
they decrease food intake and body weight. Although
thousands of mice may be leptin deﬁcient, fewer than
10 people in the world are obese because of absolute
leptin deﬁciency.
1990
The Nutrition Labeling and Education Act is signed
into law. This act is a new mandate for food manufac-
turers to provide a label with nutrient and calorie con-
tent for their products.
1991
An NIH panel endorses bypass surgery for obesity.
A panel of experts from NIH reviews studies and
results of surgical treatments for severely overweight
individuals. It concludes that surgical alterations of
the digestive system seem to work for many people
without severe side effects. They approve bariatric sur-
gery as an effective option for severely obese people
who have failed more moderate weight-reduction
strategies.
130
Chronology

The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI)
establishes the Obesity Education Initiative to aid in
decreasing the incidence of cardiovascular disease
and type 2 diabetes by reducing the prevalence of over-
weight and increasing physical activity in Americans.
1992
Dr. Atkins’ New Diet Revolution is published. This
updated version of Dr. Atkins’ diet becomes very
popular, and his company, Atkins Nutritionals, will
eventually have revenues that reach $100 million a
year.
The diet drug combination fen-phen is marketed
aggressively as a magic weight-loss pill. Hundreds of
clinics open speciﬁcally to prescribe this weight-loss
medication. The number of prescriptions written for
fen-phen grows from 60,000 in 1992 to 18 million in
1996. The drugs are sold under a variety of trade and
generic names, including Pondimin, Fastin, Lonamin,
Redux, and Adipex-P.
1993
In the ﬁrst decision of its kind, a federal court of
appeals panel rules that job discrimination against
severely obese people violates federal disability laws.
The defendant in the case maintains that she is not dis-
abled by her weight; however, under the law, discrimi-
nation based even on a perceived disability is illegal.
The FDA and the U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA) issue new regulations that specify the table
format and content required for nutrition labels on
most foods, now including processed meat and poul-
try products.
The National Weight Control Registry (NWCR) is
founded at the University of Colorado by Dr. James
Hill and Dr. Rena Wing. The NWCR is a long-term
study of individuals 18 years and older who have suc-
cessfully maintained at least a 30-pound weight loss
for a year or more. About half of the participants say
Chronology
131

1993
(cont.)
they lost weight on their own without any type of for-
mal program.
1995
Weighing the Options: Criteria for Evaluating Weight-
Management Programs is published by the Institute of
Medicine (IOM) of the National Academies. The report
gives detailed guidance on how the weight-loss indus-
try can improve its programs to help people be more
successful at long-term weight loss. It also provides
tips for consumers on selecting a reliable program that
will improve their chances of keeping lost weight off.
The International Obesity Taskforce (IOTF) is estab-
lished by Dr. W. P. T. James. A major concern of IOTF
is reversing the increase in childhood obesity around
the world.
The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends a
classiﬁcation for three grades of overweight using BMI
cutoff points of 25, 30, and 40. IOTF suggests an addi-
tional cutoff point of 35.
1996
The FDA approves the fat substitute olestra for use in
potato and corn chips and crackers. Because it passes
through the body unabsorbed, olestra is a zero-calorie
fat substitute. As part of the approval, the FDA
requires manufacturers to label all products made with
olestra with a statement informing consumers that
olestra may cause abdominal cramping and loose
stools in some individuals and that it reduces absorp-
tion of vitamins A, D, E, and K. These vitamins must
be added to products with olestra to compensate for
olestra’s effects on these nutrients. Procter & Gamble
sells products containing Olean, a brand name for oles-
tra. Procter & Gamble will conduct studies to monitor
olestra’s long-term effects, and the FDA will formally
review the studies within 30 months (HHS 1996).
The ﬁrst snack foods made with Olean are introduced
by Frito-Lay in Iowa, Wisconsin, and Colorado. The
foods are so popular that a store in Cedar Rapids,
132
Chronology

Iowa, takes mail orders from snack lovers all across the
country.
1997
A fen-phen link to heart valve damage is established
when the Mayo Clinic reports 24 cases of heart valve
disease in people who use the diet medication. The 24
women, who have no previous history of cardiovascu-
lar disease, show severe deformities and a buildup of a
plaque-like substance on the valves of their heart that
prevent them from sealing properly. This type of valve
damage is a silent condition, causing no symptoms
until the deterioration becomes life threatening and
requires surgery to repair. More investigation shows
that 271 of 291 patients who had taken fen-phen have
abnormal electrocardiograms. On September 15, with
growing evidence linking the drugs to potentially fatal
heart and lung disorders, the manufacturer, American
Home Products, removes the drug from the market.
In November 1997, a few months after the withdrawal
of fen-phen, the FDA approves Meridia, a drug that
falls into the same class of many antidepressants such
as Prozac. It is marketed as an alternative to fen-phen.
The FDA approves orlistat (brand name Xenical) as a
prescription medication to help people lose weight,
and Hoffmann–La Roche Inc. releases it onto the mar-
ket. Orlistat is in a group of weight-loss pills called
lipase inhibitors, which act in the gastrointestinal tract
to block the absorption of fat by inhibiting pancreatic
enzymes. Orlistat blocks about 30 percent of ingested
fat from being absorbed. Unlike other diet pills, it does
not interfere in any way with brain chemistry.
1998
An expert panel convened by NIH releases a report
that deﬁnes overweight as a BMI between 25 and 29.9,
and obesity as a BMI of 30 or greater. These deﬁnitions
will become widely used by the federal government
and the broader medical and scientiﬁc communities.
The cutoff points are based on evidence that health
Chronology
133

1998
(cont.)
risks increase more steeply in individuals with a BMI
of 25 or greater. The public begins to learn about the
switch from height-weight tables to BMI as a health
risk indicator when the government launches an initia-
tive to encourage healthy eating and exercise.
The NHLBI’s Clinical Guidelines on the Identiﬁcation,
Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in
Adults is published and distributed to primary care
physicians and other health care professionals so they
can begin using the new guidelines to treat their obese
patients. The report lays out a new approach for assess-
ing overweight and obesity, and it establishes evidence-
based principles for safe and effective weight loss for
the ﬁrst time. The guidelines also provide practical
strategies for implementing the recommendations.
1999
Studies show that leptin is not effective for human
weight loss. The discovery of the fat-regulating hor-
mone created great excitement when it was believed
that injecting obese patients with it could produce easy
weight loss. The hope among scientists and obese peo-
ple is dashed when clinical trials in humans show that
the hormone is not effective, as only a small amount of
weight is lost, even with high doses of leptin.
Singer Carnie Wilson makes her gastric bypass surgery
a public event and allows the procedure to be viewed
by more than 500,000 people as it is broadcast live over
the Internet. The 31-year-old woman weighed more
than 300 pounds before the procedure, which reduced
her stomach to the size of an egg.
Each American consumes an average of 155 pounds of
caloric sweeteners (sugars, honey, corn syrups) that
amount to more than 50 teaspoonfuls of added sugars
per person per day.
In one year, Jared Fogle’s weight decreases from 425 to
190 pounds as a result of his eating low-fat sandwiches
from the Subway food outlet (Subway 2008). The
134
Chronology

22-year-old, 6 foot, 2 inch, Indiana University student
says he created a 1,000-calorie-a-day Subway diet con-
sisting of little more than Subway sandwiches for a
year. Contradicting bad press that has convinced many
consumers that it is virtually impossible to lose weight
while eating convenience foods, Jared proves that a
low-fat, calorie-conscious, convenient diet can work.
2000
A historical moment occurs when the estimated num-
ber of overweight people in the world exceeds the
number of those who are underweight.
In January, the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) launches Healthy People 2010, a com-
prehensive, nationwide health promotion and disease
prevention agenda. The plan is designed to be a frame-
work for improving the health of all people in the
United States during the ﬁrst decade of the 21st cen-
tury. The promotion builds upon previous initiatives
that had been proposed over the preceding two deca-
des. The goals of increasing quality and years of
healthy life and elimination of health disparities are
broken down into objectives that will be used to mea-
sure progress. Each objective has a target to be
achieved by 2010.
The IOTF Childhood Obesity Working Group pub-
lishes standard deﬁnitions for overweight and obesity
in childhood. Prior to its publication, agreement has
been lacking about the deﬁnition of overweight and
obesity in childhood and adolescence, with only arbi-
trary cutoff points being used to identify childhood
obesity.
Based on the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveilance Sys-
tem, 46 percent of U.S. women and 33 percent of U.S.
men said they were trying to lose weight. (C. L. Bish,
2005).
2001
In the ‘‘Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Prevent
and Decrease Overweight and Obesity 2001,’’ U.S. Sur-
geon General David Satcher declares obesity to be a
Chronology
135

2001
(cont.)
public health epidemic that could be the cause of as
much preventable disease and death as cigarette smok-
ing. He says, ‘‘Health problems resulting from over-
weight and obesity could reverse many of the health
gains achieved in the U.S. in recent decades’’ (HHS
2001). This call to action is intended to promote the rec-
ognition of obesity as a health problem and to develop
programs to treat obesity and encourage people to
change their eating and exercise habits.
2002
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) releases a report
titled Weight Loss Advertising: An Analysis of Current
Trends, indicating that the use of false and misleading
claims in weight-loss advertising is widespread.
Researchers examine 300 weight-loss advertisements
taken from television, radio, the Internet, newspapers,
magazines, e-mail, and direct mail. They ﬁnd that
55 percent of weight-loss ads make claims that are mis-
leading, lack proof, or are obviously false. Although
the FTC study does not criticize speciﬁc products, it
provides examples of false or exaggerated claims and
warns that some weight-loss supplements lack safety
warnings and can be dangerous.
Obesity treatment gets a boost when the Internal Reve-
nue Service recognizes obesity as a disease and allows
payments for medically valid obesity treatments to be
claimed as a medical tax deduction.
2003
The FTC launches a campaign to educate U.S. media
outlets about false weight-loss claims. The promotion,
called the Red Flag Campaign, is an attempt to expose
advertisements that are fraudulent and scientiﬁcally
impossible. The FTC report, based on a 2002 Weight-
Loss Advertising Workshop, concludes that the claims
are not scientiﬁcally feasible at the current time for
nonprescription drugs, dietary supplements, creams,
wraps, and patches. The FTC produces a reference
guide so that media outlets can screen out bogus
136
Chronology

claims by checking through the list without having to
go into in-depth investigations on their own.
At a congressional brieﬁng in 2003, Surgeon General
Richard H. Carmona declares that obesity is an epi-
demic as he speaks about the ‘‘obesity crisis in
America.’’ He calls obesity a health crisis that is the
fastest-growing cause of disease and death in the
United States (Carmona 2003). Nearly two out of every
three Americans are overweight or obese. One out of
every eight deaths in the United States is caused by
an illness directly related to overweight and obesity.
In the ﬁrst-ever policy statement exclusively focused
on identifying and preventing childhood obesity, the
American Academy of Pediatrics asks pediatricians to
go beyond their routine tracking of height and weight.
The group wants doctors to use the body mass index
for children and adolescents. The policy instructs
pediatricians to promote healthy eating patterns and
physical activity at each ofﬁce visit.
In the United States, young people spend an average of
almost 6.5 hours a day with electronic media such as
televisions, radios, video players, and computers. That
ﬁgure represents an increase of more than an hour
since 2000.
The FDA eliminates the warning label on snack foods
containing olestra fat replacers that the agency had
required since 1996. After reviewing studies submitted
by Proctor & Gamble as well as adverse event reports
submitted by the Center for Science in the Public Inter-
est, the FDA concluded that the label statement was no
longer warranted. Studies of consumers who ate prod-
ucts containing olestra showed olestra caused only
mild gastrointestinal consequences, effects that also
occurred with consumption of full fat products (FDA
2003).
2004
The population obesity rate for American children ages
6 to 11 years is 19 percent, and for 12- to 19-year-old
Chronology
137

2004
(cont.)
adolescents, the rate is 17 percent. Foretelling a future
with more obese children and adolescents, data this
year show that more than 10 percent of younger chil-
dren (ages two to ﬁve) are overweight. That percentage
is up from 7 percent in 1994.
The Strategic Plan for NIH Obesity Research is released.
The NIH Research Task Force publishes this multifac-
eted agenda for the study of behavioral and environ-
mental causes of obesity along with the study of
genetic and biologic causes. The plan details co-
ordination of obesity research across NIH.
In February, the FDA bans the sale of all dietary sup-
plements in the United States that contain ephedrine.
The agency says these supplements create an unrea-
sonable risk of illness and injury.
A controversial independent ﬁlm called Super Size Me
by Morgan Spurlock is introduced as an exploration
of the prevalence of obesity in the United States. Spur-
lock eats only food from the McDonald’s menu for a
month. He starts as a healthy man, but as his experi-
ment progresses, he becomes overweight and experi-
ences issues with his health. This ﬁlm causes
McDonald’s to make alterations in their menu and is
followed by similar documentaries.
Research study reveals that 30 percent of children eat
fast food on a daily basis. The ﬁndings suggest that
fast-food consumption has increased ﬁvefold among
children since 1970.
To promote healthy lifestyles for adults and children in
all countries, WHO develops the Global Strategy on
Diet, Physical Activity and Health (DPAS). This pro-
gram is endorsed by the 57th World Health Assembly
in May 2004.
The IOTF report Obesity in Children and Young People: A
Crisis in Public Health, alerts that childhood obesity is
increasing in both developed and developing coun-
tries. The report, delivered to WHO while government
138
Chronology

ministers in Geneva are debating the adoption of the
Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health,
warns that obesity signiﬁcantly increases the risk that
children may develop type 2 diabetes, heart disease,
and a variety of adverse health consequences that
may not become evident until adulthood.
McDonald’s fast food outlets plan to phase out Super
Size french fries and soft drinks as the world’s largest
restaurant chain promotes its Eat Smart, Be Active ini-
tiative. McDonald’s is adding salads and moving to
provide more fruit, vegetable, and yogurt options with
children’s Happy Meals. The new program is designed
to put McDonald’s into a position of being part of the
solution to the obesity issue, rather than part of the
problem.
2005
The 2005 Dietary Guidelines for Americans is released.
The report gives advice on healthful food and physical
activity choices for the general public older than two
years of age. The basic premise of the Dietary Guidelines
is that nutrient needs are best met through consuming
foods. Each ﬁve-year revision of the guidelines is
based on analysis of the latest scientiﬁc information
by the Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee
and forms the basis for USDA and HHS program
and policy development. Because it contains technical
information, the Dietary Guidelines is generally more
accessible to policy makers, nutrition educators,
nutritionists, and health care providers than to the
general public. In order for individuals to follow
the guidelines in their daily life, the dietary recommen-
dations are presented as healthy eating patterns
such as the USDA Food Guide and the DASH (Dietary
Approaches to Stop Hypertension) Eating Plan.
The guidelines are depicted graphically as the Food
Guide Pyramid, which recommends types and
amounts of foods from seven food groups and daily
physical activity.
Chronology
139

2005
(cont.)
On April 14, a judge in a federal district court over-
turns the FDA ephedra ban as a result of a suit brought
by the Nutraceutical Corporation, a supplement manu-
facturer. The judge concludes that there is not enough
scientiﬁc evidence to prove that those products with
10 milligrams or less of ephedrine in a daily dose pose
a health risk.
A team of experts on aging and obesity concludes that
the steady rise in human life expectancy during the
past two centuries may soon come to an end. The epi-
demic of obesity and related health risks could cause
a decline in Americans’ life expectancy and could can-
cel out the life-extending beneﬁts of advances in medi-
cine. Further, it predicts that young people, who are
becoming obese at unprecedented rates, will experi-
ence the greatest loss of longevity. This prediction
leads to the controversial idea that children today
may live less healthy and shorter lives than their
parents.
An IOM report, Preventing Childhood Obesity: Health in
the Balance, offers a guide for coordinating contribu-
tions from government, schools, industry, media, and
families. The plan is the most comprehensive analysis
to date on the problems and potential solutions related
to the childhood obesity epidemic.
2006
A federal appeals court reinstates the FDA ban on
ephedra-containing supplements. The court rules that
more than 19,000 adverse events reported to the FDA
provide enough evidence to uphold the initial ban.
The FDA declares that no dose of ephedrine in dietary
supplements is safe and that sale of these products is
illegal.
The southeastern region of the United States has the
highest prevalence of obesity and overweight. With
prevalence equal to or greater than 30 percent of their
140
Chronology

population, Mississippi and West Virginia lead all the
states in number of citizens who are obese.
New York City’s Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene becomes the ﬁrst agency to require that any
restaurant chain with 15 or more nationwide outlets
show calorie information on menus, menu boards,
and food tags. That directive includes about 10 percent
of the restaurants in the ﬁve boroughs of New York
City—Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens, the Bronx, and
Staten Island. Advocates of similar menu-labeling
measures say this requirement paves the way for other
local and state governments to pass such ordinances.
The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation requests that
IOM have an expert committee examine the progress
that had been made in preventing childhood obesity
in the United States. The resulting report, Progress in
Preventing Childhood Obesity: How Do We Measure Up?
presents speciﬁc actions for childhood obesity preven-
tion. Lack of a system for monitoring progress was
identiﬁed as a stumbling block to evaluating ongoing
programs. The committee encouraged continuing sur-
veillance and assessment systems to track effectiveness
of existing nutrition programs.
2007
An over-the-counter version of the prescription
weight-loss drug orlistat is approved by the FDA. This
approval marks the ﬁrst time that the FDA has found
an over-the-counter weight-loss product to actually
work. The drug, sold under the brand name Alli, is a
reduced-strength version of Xenical and works in the
same way, decreasing absorption of fat in the intes-
tines. In addition to using the drug, Alli purchasers
are encouraged to follow an online diet plan that
includes menus and shopping lists and to join a net-
work of other Alli users who provide support.
The AMA begins a campaign to educate physicians
about how to prevent and manage childhood obesity.
Chronology
141

2007
(cont.)
The goal is to introduce obesity training as part of
undergraduate, graduate, and continuing medical
education programs. The committee creates 22 recom-
mendations for health care professionals who provide
obesity care to apply in their practices.
Progress toward coordinating the work of the federal
and state governments’ existing childhood obesity pre-
vention programs was made when HHS created the
Childhood Overweight and Obesity Prevention Initia-
tive. The Initiative encourages community-based inter-
ventions, such as the NIH We Can! (Ways to Enhance
Children’s Activity and Nutrition) program; the Presi-
dent’s Council on Physical Fitness and Sports’
National Fitness Challenge; and the National Center
for Physical Development and Outdoor Play, which
will help improve outdoor play for children in Head
Start programs.
The National Center on Health Statistics report Obesity
among Adults in the United States—No Change since
2003–2004 is the latest analysis based on the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey data. Its
contents may represent the ﬁrst sign that the obesity
epidemic could be peaking as a result of prevention
and management programs sponsored by the
government and health care organizations and by indi-
viduals’ personal effort to control weight. Although
the obesity prevalence at this time has not measurably
increased in the past few years, levels are still high.
More than one-third of adults (more than 72 million
people) were obese in 2005–2006. This ﬁgure includes
33.3 percent of men and 35.3 percent of women. These
percentages are not statistically different from 2003–
2004, when 31.1 percent of men and 33.2 percent of
women were obese.
2008
At 97 years old, Jack LaLanne, known as the godfather
of the American ﬁtness movement, is inducted into the
142
Chronology

California Hall of Fame by California ﬁrst lady Maria
Shriver.
In a progress review of the Healthy People 2010 (HP
2010) government initiative, representatives from the
FDA and NIH examine its objectives to promote
healthy weights among children and adolescents and
healthy eating among all Americans. Three targets are
directly related to obesity.
The ﬁrst target is to increase the proportion of adults
who are at a healthy weight to 60 percent of Ameri-
cans. The review shows that the proportion of adults
whose weight is in the healthy range was 32 percent
during 2003–2006, a decrease from 42 percent in the
years 1988–1994.
The second target is to reduce the proportion of
adults who are obese to 15 percent or less of the popu-
lation. In the review period, 33 percent of adults were
obese in 2003–2006 compared with a 1988–1994 base-
line of 23 percent.
The third goal is to reduce the proportion of children
and adolescents who are overweight or obese. The tar-
get for both children and adolescents is 5 percent.
Overweight and obesity in children and adolescents
increased from 11 percent in 1988–1994 to about 17 per-
cent in 2003–2006. Although data indicate that yearly
increases in overweight and obesity are slowing or
reaching a plateau, the number of people who have
an unhealthy weight remains unacceptably high. The
conclusion that can be drawn from this examination is
that, in 2008, Americans have made little progress
toward the HP 2010 targets.
In collaboration with the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation, IOM establishes the Standing Committee
on Childhood Obesity Prevention. The committee will
aid in integrating ideas and programs from govern-
ment, academia, and corporate sectors and will report
Chronology
143

2008
(cont.)
on the most promising solutions to preventing child-
hood obesity. It will continue to monitor progress
toward implementing the recommendations of its ﬁrst
report on preventing childhood obesity, released in
2005.
References
Bish, C. L. ‘‘Diet and Physical Activity Behaviors among Americans
Trying to Lose Weight: 2000 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance
System.’’ Obesity Research 13, no. 3 (2005): 596–607.
Breslow, L. ‘‘Public Health Aspects of Weight Control.’’ American
Journal of Public Health and the Nation’s Health 42, no. 9 (1952):
1116–1120.
Carmona, R. ‘‘The Obesity Crisis in America.’’ In Testimony before the
Subcommittee on Education Reform Committee on Education and the
Workforce United States House of Representatives, edited by Surgeon
General, U.S. Public Health Service. Washington, DC: U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, 2003.
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company (MLIC). ‘‘Metropolitan Life
Insurance Company. Ideal Weights for Men 1942.’’ Statistical Bulletin—
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company 23 (1942): 6–8.
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company (MLIC). ‘‘Metropolitan Life
Insurance Company. Ideal Weights for Women.’’ Statistical Bulletin—
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company 24 (1943): 6–8.
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company (MLIC). ‘‘New Weight
Standards for Men and Women.’’ Statistical Bulletin—Metropolitan Life
Insurance Company 40 (1959): 1–10.
Subway Restaurants. ‘‘All about Jared.’’ 2008. http://www.subway
.com/subwayroot/menunutrition/jared/jaredsStory.aspx.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). ‘‘FDA
Approves Fat Substitute, Olestra.’’ 1996. [Online press release;
retrieved 1/8/09.] http://www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/NEWS/
NEW00524.html.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). ‘‘The Surgeon
General’s Call to Action to Prevent and Decrease Overweight and
Obesity.’’ 2001. [Online information; retrieved 1/8/09.] http://
144
Chronology

www.surgeongeneral.gov/topics/obesity/calltoaction/Callto
Action.pdf.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). ‘‘FDA Changes Labeling
Requirement for Olestra.’’ 2003. [Online information; retrieved 1/8/
09.] http://www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/ANSWERS/2003/ANS01245
.html.
Wadden, T. A., J. A. Sternberg, K. A. Letizia, A. J. Stunkard, and G. D.
Foster. ‘‘Treatment of Obesity by Very Low Calorie Diet, Behavior
Therapy, and Their Combination: A Five-Year Perspective.’’
International Journal of Obesity 13, Suppl. 2 (1989): 39–46.
Chronology
145

This page intentionally left blank 

5
Biographical Sketches
T
his chapter presents short biographies of more than 50 people
who are important in the topic of obesity. The subjects of these
biographies include researchers, policy makers, people visible
in the media, and those who promote certain diet/exercise pro-
grams. The biographies range from businessperson Jean Nidetch,
founder of Weight Watchers, to Jack LaLanne, known as the
godfather of ﬁtness, to public personalities such as TV’s Oprah
Winfrey, who has battled obesity for many years, and Jared Fogle,
the man who lost 250 pounds by eating Subway sandwiches.
The chapter also highlights researchers such as Dr. Ethan
Sims, who coined the word ‘‘diabesity’’ to refer to obesity-
induced type 2 diabetes. This section also highlights people
who are considered to be controversial in the weight-
management ﬁeld, such as Dr. Robert Atkins, who developed
the Atkins diet, which is high in protein and fat and low in carbo-
hydrates, and Dr. Dean Ornish, who developed a high complex
carbohydrate diet that is low in fat.
Obesity is a global epidemic but the vast majority of the peo-
ple listed are from the United States. In addition, many more
men than women are proﬁled. At this time, more women are
entering this ﬁeld, and many of them will likely be notable
‘‘movers and shakers’’ in the future.
S. Daniel Abraham (1924–)
S. Daniel Abraham was born and raised in Long Beach, New
York. He served as an infantryman in the U.S. Army during
147

World War II. After the war, he bought a small pharmaceutical
company, Thompson Medical. In the late 1950s, he introduced
his ﬁrst diet product, Slim-Mint gum, which contained benzo-
caine and was supposed to decrease hunger. This was followed
in 1976 by Dexatrim, which was a one-a-day weight-loss pill that
contained phenylpropanolamine (PPA). It was reformulated
when PPA was linked to an increased risk of strokes. The
‘‘new’’ Dexatrim contained ephedrine, which was linked to
adverse health effects, and Dexatrim was reformulated again.
In the late 1970s, Abraham ‘‘shook up the weight-loss indus-
try’’ by producing the nutrition drink Slim-Fast, according to
Forbes. The drink made losing weight simpler. He sold the com-
pany to Unilever for $2.3 billion in 2000.
David Allison (1963–)
David Allison was born in New York City. He has a BA (Vassar
College, 1985) and a PhD (Hofstra University, 1990). He was a
researcher at New York Obesity Research Center from 1991 to
1994 and held assistant and associate professor posts at Colum-
bia University College of Physicians and Surgeons from 1994 to
2001. In 2001, he became professor of biostatistics, head of the
Section on Statistical Genetics, and director of the National Insti-
tutes of Health (NIH)–funded Clinical Nutrition Research at Uni-
versity of Alabama, Birmingham.
Allison’s research casts a wide net. He is particularly known
for his work on the relations among obesity, weight loss, and
mortality or longevity and for his work on the genetic and envi-
ronmental inﬂuences on obesity. He is also known for challeng-
ing conventional ideas, exploring novel hypotheses, and
holding himself and others to rigorous standards of evidence.
He has authored more than 300 scientiﬁc papers and edited ﬁve
books. Allison has received a number of awards, including the
Lilly Scientiﬁc Achievement Award (Obesity Society, 2002) and
the Andre Mayer Award (International Association for the Study
of Obesity [IASO], 2002). He received the Presidential Award for
Excellence in Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
(2006) and met with President George W. Bush in the Oval Ofﬁce.
When asked about his work, he responded, ‘‘Science is a
wonderful calling—a true vocation. I can imagine no better walk
of life than surrounding oneself with bright colleagues,
148
Biographical Sketches

exchanging ideas and pursuing unanswered questions’’ (Allison,
pers. comm.).
Arne Astrup (1955–)
Arne Astrup was born in Frederiksberg, Denmark. He obtained
his degrees in medicine (1981) and doctorate (1986) from the Fac-
ulty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen. Astrup is
professor and head of the Department of Human Nutrition at
the Royal Veterinary and Agriculture University of Copenhagen.
Some of his research investigates a newly discovered hormone,
adiponectin, which is thought to improve insulin sensitivity
and to decrease the risk of development of atherosclerosis.
Weight loss increases plasma adiponectin, which is a hormone
secreted by adipose tissue.
Astrup is internationally known for his leadership in the
ﬁeld of obesity. He is president of the International Association
for the Study of Obesity (2006–2010) and editor in chief of Obesity
Reviews (1999–). Some of his many awards include Knight of
the Order of Danneborg (1999), Servier Award for Outstand-
ing Obesity Research (1999), and IASO Andre Mayer Award
(1994).
Robert C. Atkins (1930–2003)
Robert C. Atkins was born in Columbus, Ohio. He received
his BA from the University of Michigan in 1951 and his MD
from Cornell Medical College in 1955. He was a physician and
cardiologist and the founder of the Atkins Center for Comple-
mentary Medicine. In 1963, he was gaining a lot of weight and
came upon an article in the Journal of the American Medical Associ-
ation stating that one does not have to go on a low-calorie diet to
lose weight but can choose a low-carbohydrate diet instead. He
subsequently built his diet around eating meat, shrimp, duck,
and ﬁsh and very little carbohydrates. As a result, he lost a lot
of weight easily. In a 2003 interview by Larry King on CNN,
Atkins was introduced as being ‘‘the world’s most controversial
diet guru.’’
Atkins is best known for his popular diet, which features
very low intake of carbohydrates and high intake of protein and
Biographical Sketches
149

fat. His diet allows steak, eggs, and cheese, but not chocolate. His
ﬁrst diet book, Dr. Atkins’ Diet Revolution: The High Calorie Way to
Stay Thin Forever, was published in 1972. The Atkins diet plan has
since been modiﬁed to include more carbohydrates, which are
gradually introduced after about a week, whereas it severely
restricts reﬁned carbohydrates to less than 50 calories daily, or
about 1 tablespoon of sugar. His books have appeared in the
number one spot on the New York Times best-seller lists.
A number of celebrities adopted the Atkins diet, including
Julia Roberts, Catherine Zeta-Jones, Brad Pitt, and Al Gore. Ste-
vie Nicks, of Fleetwood Mac, called Atkins ‘‘a God among
men.’’ He died in 2003 from injuries sustained by slipping on
ice. The headline for his obituary in The Guardian read, ‘‘Diet
guru who grew fat on the proceeds of the carbohydrate revolu-
tion’’ (Leith, 2003).
Richard L. Atkinson (1942–)
Richard L. Atkinson was born in Petersburg, Virginia. He gradu-
ated from Virginia Military Institute (1964) and received his MD
from the Medical College of Virginia (1968). He was a faculty
member at the University of Virginia (1977–1983), University of
California, Davis (1983–1987), Eastern Virginia Medical School
(1987–1993), and University of Wisconsin (1993–2002).
Atkinson is known for his pioneering research in virus-
induced obesity. Atkinson and his colleague Dr. Nikhil Dhurand-
har demonstrated that a human adenovirus (Ad-36) produces
obesity in animals and is associated with obesity in humans.
Their research was not initially accepted by the scientiﬁc com-
munity; in fact, it was dismissed and heavily criticized. Today,
their research is viewed as an important breakthrough that may
help to explain our worldwide obesity epidemic.
Atkinson also conducted some of the early research on intes-
tinal bypass surgery. His wife, Susan, learned about surgery in
her father’s laboratory, and she then taught Atkinson to perform
surgery on obese rats.
Atkinson is editor of the International Journal of Obesity
(2000–). He is clinical professor of pathology at Virginia
Commonwealth University and director of the Obetach Obesity
Research Center. Atkinson and Dr. Judith S. Stern are cofounders
150
Biographical Sketches

of the American Obesity Association (1995), a lay advocacy
organization that is now part of The Obesity Society (TOS).
Atkinson and Stern were the ﬁrst recipients, in 2006, of the
Atkinson-Stern Award for Distinguished Public Service,
awarded annually by The Obesity Society.
George Blackburn (1936–)
George Blackburn was born in McPherson, Kansas. He has an
MD (University of Kansas, 1965) and a PhD in nutritional bio-
chemistry (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1973). He pio-
neered the development of the Roux-en-Y bypass operation for
weight loss in very obese people.
Blackburn is the S. Daniel Abraham Associate Professor
of Surgery and Nutrition, associate director of the Nutrition
Division at Harvard Medical School, and director of the Center
for Nutrition Medicine at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.
He is committed to expanding research and treatment for
obesity and nutrition. Blackburn was past president of The
Obesity Society, American Society for Clinical Nutrition, and
American Society of Parenteral Nutrition. He cochairs the Reality
Coalition, an organization aiming to promote healthy, moderate
weight loss.
Blackburn has published more than 400 papers. Some of his
honors are the Grace Goldsmith Award (American College of
Nutrition, 1988) and Goldberger Award in Clinical Nutrition
(American Medical Association, 1998). He is an honorary
member of the American Dietetic Association (1992). He says of
his life and studies, ‘‘I want to leave the world better off than
when I received it’’ (Blackburn, pers. comm.).
Steven N. Blair (1939–)
Steven N. Blair was born in Mankato, Kansas. He received his BA
from Kansas Wesleyan University in 1962 and his PED in physi-
cal education from Indiana University. In 1966, he became physi-
cal education instructor at the University of South Carolina and
progressed through the ranks to professor. He worked at the
Dallas-based Cooper Institute for 22 years, where he was ﬁrst a
researcher, then director of research, and ultimately president
Biographical Sketches
151

and chief executive ofﬁcer. Blair returned to the University of
South Carolina in 2006 as professor.
He studies the associations between lifestyle and health,
with a speciﬁc emphasis on exercise, physical ﬁtness, body com-
position, and chronic disease. He found that American seniors
who get a regular dose of physical activity live longer than unﬁt
adults, regardless of their measure of body fat. He has published
more than 410 papers and chapters and served as senior scien-
tiﬁc editor for the U.S. Surgeon General’s Report on Physical Activ-
ity and Health.
According to Blair, ‘‘By 2030, approximately 70 million peo-
ple will be older than 65. Nearly one-third of Americans are
obese, and the majority of adults do not get enough physical
activity’’ (Blair, pers. comm.) Medical expenditures associated
with inactivity and obesity are greatest among older adults. He
continues, ‘‘This is a signiﬁcant economic burden to society by
an aging population that is inactive and obese.’’ Some of Blair’s
numerous awards and honors include three honorary doctorates,
the Surgeon General’s Medallion, and the Honor Award (Ameri-
can College of Sports Medicine).
He emphasizes that one does not have to be thin to beneﬁt
from being physically active. Thirty minutes of moderate-
intensity physical activity ﬁve days per week is enough to put
people in the moderate ﬁtness category. Blair acknowledges that
he is not as thin as he once was and that there is a history of
obesity and heart disease in his family. However, he is physically
active, having run close to 80,000 miles, and eats a healthy diet.
Claude Bouchard (1939–)
Claude Bouchard was born in Quebec, Canada. He has earned
bachelor’s (Laval University, 1962), master’s (University of
Oregon, 1963), and doctoral (University of Texas, Austin, 1977)
degrees. He held the Donald Brown Research Chair on Obesity
at Laval University from 1997 to 1999. Since 1999, he has served
as executive director of the Pennington Biomedical Research
Center in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, one of the world’s leading
nutrition and preventive medicine research centers.
Bouchard’s most inﬂuential work is in studying the
response of identical twins to long-term overfeeding. In his
study, twins were overfed a total of 84,000 calories over 12 weeks.
152
Biographical Sketches

They gained, on average, almost 15.5 pounds. Some sets of twins
were low gainers and others were high gainers, but individual
pairs of twins gained a similar amount of weight.
Bouchard has written several books and more than 800 sci-
entiﬁc papers. He was president of The Obesity Society from
1991 to 1992 and the International Association for the Study of
Obesity from 2002 to 2006) and was a member of the Board of
the American Obesity Association. Some of his honors include
the American College of Sports Medicine Citation (1992), an
honorary doctorate from the Royal Academy of Medicine of Bel-
gium, and the TOPS Award from The Obesity Society.
Bouchard is optimistic about research in obesity. However,
he is pessimistic about society’s ability to deal with the world-
wide problem, especially with prevention of obesity. He does
not foresee people changing their lifestyles so that everyone
becomes physically active and adopts a prudent diet (Bouchard,
pers. comm.).
George A. Bray (1931–)
George A. Bray was born in Evanston, Illinois. He has a BA from
Brown University and an MD from Harvard Medical School.
Bray is a leader in promoting the concept that obesity is a disease
and not the result of gluttony, sloth, and moral deﬁcit. He also
has an interest in the history of medicine.
He was the ﬁrst executive director of the Pennington Bio-
medical Research Center (1989–1998), where he is currently Boyd
Professor and professor emeritus of medicine at Louisiana State
University.
Bray’s contributions to the ﬁeld of obesity are impressive.
He is recognized among his peers in the ﬁeld for his research in
obesity and diabetes and has published more than 1,500 scientiﬁc
papers, reviews, books, and abstracts. He cofounded and was
president of The Obesity Society and was founder and editor of
three scientiﬁc journals. While editor of Obesity Research (now
Obesity), he wrote a series of 36 historical essays that have been
collected in a book called The Battle of the Bulge (Dorrance,
2007). He was president of the International Association for the
Study of Obesity and American Society for Clinical Nutrition,
and was a board member of the American Obesity Association.
Biographical Sketches
153

Examples of his many honors include the Bristol-Myers/
Squibb Mead Johnson Award in Nutrition, Fellow of American
Association for the Advancement of Science, Goldberger Award
in Nutrition (American Medical Association), and Stunkard Life-
time Award (Obesity Society). The Obesity Society gives the
George Bray Founder’s Award in recognition of people who
make signiﬁcant contributions to the ﬁeld that advance the clini-
cal or scientiﬁc basis for understanding or treating obesity.
Jane E. Brody (no dates available)
Jane E. Brody is a columnist for the New York Times. She received
her BS from Cornell University in 1962 and her MS from the Uni-
versity of Wisconsin School of Journalism in 1963. She joined the
New York Times in 1965, where she specialized in medicine and
biology and became the newspaper’s personal health columnist
in 1976. Her weekly column is syndicated in more than 100
newspapers. In one column, she wrote that the way to lose
weight in 2008 is the same as it has been every other year,
because the basics of good nutrition have not changed. She has
appeared on numerous radio and TV shows, which earned her
the title of ‘‘High Priestess of Health’’ from Time magazine
(Brody, 2008).
One of her ﬁrst books was Jane Brody’s Nutrition Book: A Life-
time Guide to Good Eating for Better Health and Weight Control (Ban-
tam, 1986). She has been awarded honorary degrees by four
universities.
Brody’s own diet focuses on vegetables, fruits, grains, pota-
toes, beans, and peas, along with low-fat dairy, ﬁsh and shellﬁsh,
lean meats, and poultry. She is active daily and walks, bikes,
swims, ice skates, plays tennis, hikes, gardens, and does cross-
country skiing. On her 50th birthday, Brody received a T-shirt
that said, ‘‘Still Perfect—After All These Years.’’ After she
stopped laughing, she realized that it should have said, ‘‘Still
Trying After All These Years’’ (Brody).
Kelly Brownell (1951–)
Kelly Brownell was born in Evansville, Indiana. He holds a BA in
psychology from Purdue University (1973) and a PhD from
154
Biographical Sketches

Rutgers University (1977). Brownell is professor of psychology,
epidemiology, and public health, and director of the Rudd
Center for Food Policy and Obesity at Yale University.
One of Brownell’s famous early studies was conducted in a
shopping mall, a train station, and a bus terminal in Philadel-
phia, where stairs and escalators were adjacent to each other.
He placed a simple, colorful sign that read, ‘‘Your Heart Needs
Exercise, Here’s Your Chance.’’ Brownell found that the number
of people using the stairs increased following placement of the
sign but that fewer obese people took the stairs.
Brownell coined the phrase ‘‘toxic environment,’’ which
applies to the many factors that have contributed to obesity.
These include food marketing directed at children, large portion
sizes, foods in schools, economic imbalance where healthy foods
cost more than unhealthy foods, lobbying strength of food and
agribusiness companies, and failure to harness the law in the ser-
vice of improving nutrition. One of his books, Food Fight
(McGraw-Hill 2003), cowritten with Katherine Battle Horgen,
details these environmental drivers of obesity and proposes a
number of possible policy solutions. He has applied the quote
from Mohandas Gandhi about social movements to the obesity
crisis: ‘‘First they ignore you. Then they laugh at you. Then they
ﬁght you. Then you win.’’
Brownell has written 14 books and published more than 300
scientiﬁc papers and articles. He consults with members of the
U.S. Congress, appears often on television, and is frequently
quoted in newspapers and magazines. In 2006, he was named
by Time magazine as one of the World’s 100 Most Inﬂuential Peo-
ple. One of his honors is his election to the National Academies
Institute of Medicine.
Henry Buckwald (1932–)
Henry Buckwald was born in Vienna, Austria. He has an MD
(Columbia University, 1957), an MS, and a PhD (University of
Minnesota). He is professor in the Department of Surgery at the
University of Minnesota and was holder of the Davidson Wan-
gensteen Chair in Experimental Surgery.
Buckwald is known for his work in bariatric surgery, espe-
cially with respect to its comorbid outcomes. He has helped to
Biographical Sketches
155

improve both the type of operations done and the overall quality
of bariatric surgeons. One of his seminal research studies, pub-
lished 40 years ago, demonstrated that even before weight loss
occurs, bariatric surgery improves insulin resistance and
decreases LDL, or ‘‘bad,’’ cholesterol.
Buckwald served as president of three organizations: the
Central Surgical Association, American Society for Bariatric Sur-
gery, and International Federation for the Surgery of Obesity. He
is head of the Obesity Coalition, a national organization that
includes most of the major academic groups in the United States;
one of its missions involves obesity management. He also is chair
of the American College of Surgeons National Faculty for Bariat-
ric Surgery (2003–). Buckwald is a member of the Minnesota Hall
of Fame (1988) in recognition of establishing the ﬁeld of meta-
bolic surgery, which later evolved into bariatric surgery.
Paul F. Campos (no date available)
Paul F. Campos is a native of Colorado. He has a bachelor’s, mas-
ter’s, and law degree from the University of Michigan (1982,
1983, and 1989, respectively). After obtaining his JD, he worked
for a Chicago law ﬁrm. In 1990, he joined the faculty at the Uni-
versity of Colorado Law School (Boulder), where he is now pro-
fessor of law. Campos writes a regular column on political,
social, and legal issues for the Rocky Mountain News.
Mr. Campos is the author of The Obesity Myth: Why America’s
Obsession with Weight is Hazardous to Your Health (Gotham 2004).
His book is an expose´ of the hysteria surrounding weight and
health in U.S. society. He has questioned the association between
obesity and higher mortality rates. Campos believes that the use
of the body mass index (BMI) accounts for the great increase in
obesity in the United States. According to Campos, if categorized
using BMI, Brad Pitt is overweight and George Clooney is obese.
Campos’s message is that perhaps fat is not all that bad. How-
ever, some of Campos’s conclusions serve to undermine the
credibility of the book. For example, he concludes that ‘‘Fat Poli-
tics’’ played a signiﬁcant role in the impeachment of President
Clinton (Campos, 2004).
156
Biographical Sketches

William J. Clinton (1946–)
William Jefferson Clinton was born in Hope, Arkansas. He served
as president of the United States from 1993 to 2001. President
Clinton has battled obesity all his life. Upon having quadruple
bypass surgery in 2004, he decided to help prevent overweight
in children. Using the resources of his foundation and teaming
up with the American Heart Association, President Clinton’s goal
is to reduce obesity-related health problems by starting children
on a lifelong path that includes proper diet and exercise. He is
leading by example by cutting down on french fries, eating more
fruits and vegetables, and exercising in the morning. He works
with the food and restaurant industries, the media, and schools
to help deliver his message. Two of his goals for schools are to
have programs to increase physical activity and to improve
lunches. He commented, ‘‘We’ve got too many kids too over-
weight and they’re walking time bombs’’ (Clinton, 2005).
President Clinton received the Atkinson-Stern Award for Distin-
guished Public Service from The Obesity Society (2007).
Jenny Craig (1932–)
Jenny Craig was born Genevieve Guidroz in Berwick, Louisiana,
and raised in New Orleans. She worked for a weight-loss com-
pany, Nutrisystem, then Craig and her husband, Sid, moved to
Australia for two years, where she started the Jenny Craig
Weight Loss Program in 1983 because no comprehensive
weight-loss program existed in Australia at that time. She knows
what it is like to be obese, having gained 50 pounds with the
birth of her second daughter. Jenny Craig, Inc. has weight-loss
centers in the United States, Canada, Puerto Rico, and New
Zealand. In 2002, the couple sold the majority of their interests
in Jenny Craig, Inc. to a New York and London–based private
investment ﬁrm, ACI Capital.
William H. Dietz (no dates available)
William H. Dietz has an MD from The University of Pennsylva-
nia (1970) and a PhD from the Massachusetts Institute of
Biographical Sketches
157

Technology. He is one of the ﬁrst researchers to pay attention to
the issues surrounding overweight in children and has pub-
lished more than 100 papers and is the editor of four books.
Dietz has served as the director of the Division of Nutrition
and Physical Activity at the Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention (CDC) since 1997. He is also a past president of the
American Society of Clinical Nutrition and The Obesity Society.
He helps states to develop and evaluate strategies to prevent
obesity. This approach is based, in part, on Dietz’s research indi-
cating that some process takes place during adolescence that
makes a person more susceptible to the complications of obesity
as an adult.
Some of his honors include election to the Institute of Medi-
cine of the National Academies (2000), recipient of the John
Stalker Award (American School Food Service Association), and
the George Bray Founders Award (Obesity Society, 2005).
In an interview on The Global Epidemic of Obesity, he was
asked the question: What can be done about obesity? In response
he encouraged adolescents to be ﬁt, to do things with their
friends, and to think about activities that are fun to do instead
of watching television. Soft drinks and 10-percent juice make
up 13 percent of the daily caloric intake of adolescents. Teenagers
should be encouraged to drink water when they are thirsty and
to start meals with soup or a salad to have less room for foods
high in calories (The Global Epidemic of Obesity, 2005).
Adam Drewnowski (1948–)
Adam Drewnowski was born in Warsaw, Poland. He has a BA
from Oxford University (1971) and a PhD from The Rockefeller
University (1978). He is director of the Nutritional Science Pro-
gram and director of the Center for Public Health Nutrition and
University of Washington (Seattle) Center for obesity research.
Drewnowski’s research focuses on the relationships
between poverty and obesity, links between diabetes and obesity
rates in vulnerable populations, and access to healthy foods.
According to Drewnowski, ‘‘Energy-dense foods rich in starch,
sugar or fat are the cheapest option for the consumer. As long
as the healthier lean meats, ﬁsh, and fresh produce are more
expensive, obesity will continue to be a problem for the working
poor’’ (Drewnowski, pers. comm.).
158
Biographical Sketches

Johanna Dwyer (1938–)
Johanna Dwyer was born in Syracuse, New York. She has a BS
(Cornell University, 1960), an MS (University of Wisconsin,
1962), and a second MS and an ScD (Harvard University School
of Public Health, 1969). She is professor of Medicine and Com-
munity Health at the School of Medicine and Freidman School
of Science Nutrition and Public Policy, Tufts University, and
senior nutritionist at the Ofﬁce of Dietary Supplements, NIH.
Dwyer was a member of the U.S. Dietary Guidelines Com-
mittee (2000) and the Food and Nutrition Board of the National
Academies (1992–2001). Her many honors include election
to the National Academies Institute of Medicine (2000) and
receipt of the Atwater and Elvejhem awards (American Society
of Nutrition [ASN], 2005). She is a past president of ASN and
the Society for Nutrition Education. She is also editor of Nutrition
Today.
Dwyer’s career has been devoted to expanding the scientiﬁc
basis for clinical and public health interventions, especially in
obesity and cardiovascular disease. She has published more than
475 scientiﬁc articles. Dwyer agrees with her mentor, Jean Mayer
(the late president of Tufts University), that ‘‘Nutrition is not a
discipline, but an agenda of problems that must be solved’’
(Dwyer, pers. comm.).
Katherine M. Flegal (1944–)
Katherine M. Flegal was born in Berkeley, California. She has a
PhD from Cornell University (1982) and completed a postdoc-
toral fellowship in epidemiology at the University of Pittsburgh
(1984). She was a research faculty member at the University of
Michigan from 1984 to 1987 prior to joining the National Centers
for Health Statistics at CDC, where she began serving in 1987.
Flegal is internationally known for her research in the epi-
demiology of obesity. She studies changing prevalences and epi-
demiologic trends of overweight in children and adults in the
United States as well as causes of death. To quote Flegal, ‘‘The
relation between weight and mortality is complex and varies
considerably by cause of death’’ (Flegal, pers. comm.). She deter-
mined that BMI is not a strong predictor of death rates. People
Biographical Sketches
159

who are overweight (BMI 25–29.9) typically live longer than
people who are normal weight (BMI 18–24.9). Obesity (BMI ≤
30.0) is associated with increased mortality from diabetes, car-
diovascular disease, and certain cancers, but not other causes
of death.
Flegal is associate editor of the American Journal of Epidemiol-
ogy and a member of the Advisory Committee, Endocrinologic
and Metabolic Drugs for the U.S. Food and Drug Adminis-
tration; Committee on Statistics, American Heart Association;
Center for Alaska Native Health Research, University of Alaska,
Fairbanks; and Center for Weight and Health, University of Cal-
ifornia, Berkeley.
Jared Fogle (1977–)
Jared Fogle was born in Indianapolis. He was featured in an
advertising campaign for Subway Restaurants, the national
chain that specializes in selling submarine sandwiches, because
of his ‘‘incredible story’’: When he was a junior in high school,
Fogle weighed 425 pounds and wore size 6 XL shirts. He blamed
the start of his weight problems on ‘‘the best birthday present of
my life,’’ a Nintendo video game system. He used a one-handed
approach to playing games: one hand on the controller and one
hand in a bag of chips (Nelson, 2006).
Fogle developed his own ‘‘Subway diet’’ by eating a 6-inch
turkey sub for lunch and a 12-inch sub, potato chips, and a Diet
Coke for dinner. After three months, he had lost almost 100
pounds. By the end of his diet, he had lost about 250 pounds. A
former dorm-mate wrote an article about Fogle’s weight-loss
experience, and a reporter for Men’s Health magazine included
Fogle’s Subway diet in an article entitled, ‘‘Crazy Diets That
Work.’’ He was ‘‘discovered’’ by the creative director at Sub-
way’s advertising agency. The restaurant chain started a regional
ad campaign in 2000 featuring Fogle. The commercial carried the
following disclaimer: ‘‘The Subway diet, combined with a lot of
walking, worked for Jared. We’re not saying this is for every-
one.’’ The campaign later went national, and Fogle has toured
the country for Subway with his ‘‘fat pants.’’ As of 2008, he has
kept the weight off for 10 years.
160
Biographical Sketches

Jeffrey M. Friedman (1954–)
Jeffrey M. Friedman was born in Orlando, Florida. He has a BS
(Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute), a combined MD and PhD
(Albany Medical College of Union University, 1977), and a PhD
in molecular biology (The Rockefeller University, 1986). He is
the Marilyn Simpson Professor and head of the Laboratory of
Molecular Genetics at The Rockefeller University.
One of Friedman’s publications in the journal Science was an
essay titled ‘‘A War on Obesity, Not the Obese’’ and was sub-
sequently included in The Best American Science and Nature Writ-
ing 2004 anthology (Houghton Mifﬂin, 2004). Interestingly, the
ﬁrst paper he wrote was rejected.
Friedman’s codiscovery of the hormone leptin (1994) and its
role in regulating body weight have changed our understanding
of the causes of human obesity. Some of his honors include elec-
tion to the Institute of Medicine of the National Academies
(2005), Distinguished Achievement in Metabolic Research
(Bristol-Myer Myer, 2001), and the Gairdner Foundation
International Award (2005).
M. R. C. Greenwood (1943–)
M. R. C. Greenwood was born in Gainesville, Florida. She has a
BA from Vassar College (1968) and a PhD from The Rockefeller
University (1973). She joined the faculty at the Institute of
Human Nutrition at Columbia University and served in that
capacity from 1969 to 1978. She returned to Vassar in 1978 and
became department chair and John Guy Professor of Natural Sci-
ences, which she held from 1986 to 1989. Greenwood moved to
the University of California, Davis (UC Davis), where she was
dean of Graduate Studies from 1989 to 1993; was chancellor of
the University of California, Santa Cruz from 1996 to 2004; and
served as provost and senior vice president of Academic Affairs
for the University of California from 2004 to 2005. Greenwood
is currently professor and director of the Foods for Health Pro-
gram at UC Davis.
Greenwood has played a leadership role in obesity research
and policy. She made signiﬁcant contributions to the way science
is conducted as associate director for Science at the Ofﬁce
Biographical Sketches
161

of Science, Technology and Policy during the Clinton
administration (1993–1995). She is one of the cofounders of The
Obesity Society and a past president (1987–1988). Her honors
include election to the Institute of Medicine of the National
Academies (1992). She is past president (1998–1999) and board
of directors member of the American Association for the
Advancement of Sciences.
According to Greenwood, ‘‘The impact of the obesity and
diabetes epidemic is only beginning to be felt. If we are going to
signiﬁcantly impact it we must enact new innovative policies in
health care, urban planning and personal options. This is a mas-
sive policy opportunity and challenge. How well we do will
determine the next generations’ quality of life’’ (Greenwood,
pers. comm.).
Barbara Hansen (1941–)
Barbara Hansen was born in Boston. She has a BS from the Uni-
versity of California, Los Angeles and a PhD from the University
of Washington, Seattle. Hansen is currently professor of internal
medicine and pediatrics and director of both the Center for Pre-
clinical Research and the Center for Obesity, Diabetes, and Aging
Research at the University of Tampa.
Hansen is internationally known for her research in obesity,
diabetes, and aging; she has published more than 200 scientiﬁc
publications. Her classic work, in the study of monkeys, demon-
strated that prevention of obesity by maintaining the weight
when the monkeys were young adults reduces the risk for the
development of type 2 diabetes in middle and old age. Her
research has added to the body of knowledge that humans (and
nonhuman primates) have an extraordinary ability to regulate
appetite, body weight, and body composition and that this
system is inﬂuenced by age-related changes and has a strong
genetic basis.
Some of her honors include membership in the Institute of
Medicine of the National Academies (1981), George Bray Found-
er’s Award (Obesity Society), and McCollum Award (American
Society for Clinical Nutrition). She has served as president of
The Obesity Society and of the International Association for the
Study of Obesity.
162
Biographical Sketches

According to Hansen, ‘‘The message about obesity that I like
the least in today’s media is—You did it to yourself,—and you
can ﬁx it! Neither is, in my view, accurate for the vast majority
of overweight persons. People need extensive and multipronged
new research to ﬁnd ways to help mitigate the negative conse-
quences of excessive adiposity. We must end the ‘blame the
patient approach’ and address the underlying mechanisms of
our extraordinary energy balance regulatory system’’ (Hansen,
pers. comm.).
Marion M. Hetherington (1961–)
Marion M. Hetherington was born in Helensburgh, Scotland. She
has a bachelor’s degree (University of Glasgow, 1982), trained as
a teacher, and received her doctorate (University of Oxford,
1987). She was awarded a Fulbright Scholarship in 1987 and
worked with Dr. Barbara J. Rolls at the Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine. Her Fogarty International Fellowship
allowed her to conduct research at the National Institutes of
Health, which she did from 1988–1990. Hetherington currently
holds the Caledonian Futures Professorship in Biopsychology at
Glasgow Caledonian University, where she has served since
2005. She is president-elect for the Society for the Study of Inges-
tive Behavior.
Hetherington is known for her work on short-term inﬂuen-
ces on food intake, including sensory-speciﬁc satiety. Her current
research focuses on early determinants of overeating in children.
She has studied the impact of school-based healthy eating inter-
ventions in areas of material deprivation in Glasgow.
James O. Hill (1951–)
James O. Hill was born in Crossville, Tennessee. He has a BS
from the University of Tennessee and a PhD from the University
of New Hampshire. He is professor of pediatrics and medicine at
the University of Colorado. Hill’s research interests are studying
how diet and physical activity affect body weight and how they
are connected to the obesity epidemic. His work with families
showed that small changes in diet and physical activity can be
Biographical Sketches
163

achieved and sustained and can help family members avoid
excessive weight gain.
Hill was chair of the World Health Organization (WHO)
Consultation on Obesity (1997) and president of The Obesity
Society and of the American Society of Nutrition (2008), and he
is a vice president of the International Association for the Study
of Obesity. He established the programs Colorado on the Move
(2002) and America on the Move (2003), which are regional and
national health initiatives, respectively, to help tackle the obesity
epidemic and inspire Americans to aim for healthier lifestyles.
He believes that the small-changes approach to lifestyle modiﬁ-
cation is the best way to reverse the obesity epidemic (Hill, pers.
comm.). Along with Dr. Rena Wing, he is also known for his
stewardship of the National Weight Control Registry, a database
of people who have lost weight.
According to Hill, ‘‘Most weight loss plans help you to lose
weight but they don’t help you keep it off. Weight loss and
weight loss maintenance can involve different strategies and the
real challenge is preventing weight regain’’ (Hill, pers. comm.).
Hill cowrote The Step Diet with Dr. John C. Peters and Bonnie T.
Jortberg to help people both lose weight and keep it off.
Hippocrates (460 BCE–370 BCE)
Hippocrates was born on the Greek island of Kos. He was the
founder of the Hippocratic School of medicine and is known as
the father of Western medicine. The Hippocratic Oath, taken by
current-day physicians, refers to the ethical practice of medicine.
Hippocrates was thousands of years ahead of his time when he
allegedly said that taking in more food than the constitution will
bear is very injurious to health when at the same time one uses
no exercise to carry off this excess. He warned his fellow Greeks
that sudden death is more common in those who are naturally
fat than in those who are lean.
Jules Hirsch (1927–)
Jules Hirsch was born in New York City. He is one of the few
physicians who went to medical school (University of Texas,
Austin, 1948) without having ﬁrst received a college degree. He
164
Biographical Sketches

is professor emeritus at The Rockefeller University. Some of his
honors include election to the Institute of Medicine of the
National Academies (1993) and a 2006 award from The Obesity
Society.
Hirsch is unofﬁcially known as ‘‘Dr. Fat Cell.’’ His classical
research found that obese people can have more fat cells, large
fat cells, or a combination of the two, compared with people
who are not obese. Further, he discovered that weight loss
decreases the size of fat cells but not the number of these cells.
He showed that different fat depots can respond differently to
hormones and other compounds. Hirsch has also conducted
research in psychology, reporting that people who have been
obese since childhood and lose weight as adults continue to
‘‘see’’ themselves as fatter than they really are.
Hirsch does not ‘‘want the treatment of obesity to slip out of
the scientiﬁc medical paradigm and into the realm of paramedi-
cal voodoo’’ (Hirsch, pers. comm.).
W. P. T. James (1938–)
W. P. T. (Phil) James was born in Liverpool, England. He has a
bachelor’s degree (University of London, 1959), a medical degree
(UCLH, London), and a DSc (1983).
James is literally an international ambassador whose travels
have highlighted the growing problem of childhood obesity in
developing countries. He is founder and head of the
International Obesity Taskforce (IOTF), which is part of IASO,
and chair of WHO’s Presidential Council of the Global Preven-
tion Alliance. IOTF is demanding that action be taken in
response to the childhood obesity crisis. James was responsible
for the WHO classiﬁcation of BMI for obesity. In the United
States, this classiﬁcation resulted in lowering the point at which
adults are considered overweight from a BMI of 27 to 25.
Some of his honors include Fellow of both the Royal College
of Physicians in London and in Edinburgh, Commander of the
British Empire for Services to Sciences, and an honorary doctor
of science from the City University of London. He was director
of the Rowett Research Institute in Aberdeen, Scotland, from
1982 to 1999, which made substantial contributions to health
and agricultural development around the world.
Biographical Sketches
165

James ‘‘considers the problem of preventing obesity an enor-
mous challenge because the ﬁne brain control of food intake
requires major environmental changes in the quality and amount
of food immediately available so that the appetite drive is
attempting to maintain rather than reduce weight in a free mar-
ket world where huge industrial pressures incite us to do even
less and eat more’’ (James, pers. comm.).
Robin B. Kanarek (1946–)
Robin B. Kanarek was born in Pittsburgh. She has a BA (Antioch
College, 1963) and a PhD (Rutgers University, 1974). Since 1976,
Kanarek has been at Tufts University and is the John Wade Pro-
fessor of Psychology.
Kanarek’s research focuses on the role of diet and exercise in
determining behavioral consequences of neuropeptides related
to food intake and on the effects of reﬁned carbohydrates on
development of obesity and diabetes. She demonstrated that in
addition to leading to obesity and its related metabolic deﬁcits,
intake of high reﬁned carbohydrates can result in impairments
in cognitive behavior. Kanarek is the coauthor or editor of three
books and more than 100 book chapters and papers. She is a
member of the Institute of Medicine’s Committee on Military
Nutrition Research, associate editor of Nutritional Neuroscience,
on the editorial boards of Physiology and Behavior and the Tufts
Diet and Nutrition Newsletter, and past editor in chief of Nutrition
and Behavior.
She believes that she is ‘‘extremely fortunate to have had the
opportunity to pursue independent research in areas related to
human health and to have done so with the input of outstanding
students and colleagues’’ (Kanarek, pers. comm.).
Janet C. King (1941–)
Janet C. King was born in Red Oak, Iowa. She received a bache-
lor’s degree from Iowa State University (1963) and a PhD from
University of California, Berkeley (UC Berkeley) (1972). Upon
graduation, she was immediately appointed to UC Berkeley’s
faculty in the Department of Nutritional Sciences and served
until 1995, where she also served as chair of the department
166
Biographical Sketches

and the graduate program. King directed the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) Western Human Nutrition Research Center
from 1995 to 2003. She is currently a senior scientist at Children’s
Hospital Oakland Research Center and holds professorial
appointments at UC Berkeley and UC Davis.
King is internationally known for her studies of effects of
maternal nutrition and the metabolic adjustments of pregnancy.
She studies effects of different diets on hormonal and metabolic
pathways linked to poor pregnancy outcomes in obese women.
King has served on numerous national and international
committees, including as chair of the Institute of Medicine of
the National Academies Food and Nutrition Board and Commit-
tee and as a member of the Dietary Guidelines Advisory Com-
mittee. Some of her many honors include election to the
Institute of Medicine National Academies (1994) and USDA
Research Service Hall of Fame (2007).
When asked about her work, King said, ‘‘I have the best job
in the world. I can’t think of any other job where you are paid
to pursue your passionate interests with talented colleagues,
friends and students while potentially improving the health of
mankind’’ (King, pers. comm.).
Ahmed Kissebah (1937–)
Ahmed Kissebah was born in Dumiat City, Egypt, also known as
the ‘‘Tip of the Earth’’ because it is the meeting point between the
Nile River and the Mediterranean Sea. He has an MD from Cairo
University (1961) and a PhD from the University of London
(1973). Since 1977, he has served as professor of medicine and
director of the TOPS (Take Off Pounds Sensibly) Obesity and
Medical Research Center at the Medical College of Wisconsin in
Milwaukee.
Kissebah’s most signiﬁcant research contribution is his rec-
ognition that the distribution of body fat has an impact on the
risk for obesity-related diseases. For example, obese women with
excess fat mainly around the waist, chest, neck, and arms (upper-
body obesity, or an apple shape) are at greater risk for develop-
ing type 2 diabetes than those with excess fat mainly about the
thighs and buttocks (a pear shape). He used two simple mea-
surements—circumference of the waist and the hip—to estimate
body fat distribution and from these calculated the waist-to-hip
Biographical Sketches
167

ratio (WHR). In women, lower-body obesity represented a WHR
of less than 0.76, and upper-body obesity represented a WHR of
greater than 0.85. Kissebah’s revolutionary work in this area is a
benchmark for many novel ideas in obesity research. He was also
part of an international team of scientists that discovered that a
gene on chromosome 15 regulates inﬂammation, a ﬁnding that
has major implications for obesity.
Kissebah is medical director of TOPS, whose members vol-
unteer for his studies, which has allowed him to study genetics
of obesity in families for more than three generations. Some of
his numerous honors include Outstanding Foreign Investigator
(Japan), Distinguished Armour Award (President of Egypt),
Princess Margaret Distinguished Research Award (United King-
dom), and King Faisel Distinguished Scientist Award (Saudi
Arabia).
When asked about his work, Kissebah responded, ‘‘I’m re-
ally grateful that I have had the opportunity to be part of the
change from simple anecdotal science to in-depth, state-of-the-
art technology and theorems that are bound to bring to the work
a new stream of discoveries and cures that were never dreamt
of’’ (Kissebah, pers. comm.).
C. Everett Koop (1916–)
C. Everett Koop was born in Brooklyn, New York. He has an AB
from Dartmouth (1937), an MD from Cornell Medical College
(1941), and a PhD from the University of Pennsylvania (1947).
He is professor of surgery at Dartmouth Medical School and
senior scholar of the C. Everett Koop Institute.
Koop spent the majority of his career as a pediatrician at
Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, where he was the surgeon-
in-chief. He is best known for starting the practice of placing
warning labels on packs of cigarettes when he was surgeon gen-
eral of the United States, from 1981 to 1989. He has said that, had
he remained in the post of surgeon general longer, he would
have tackled obesity.
He has received 35 honorary doctorates, the Legion of
Honor Medal (France, 1980), the Public Health Distinguished
Service Medal, and a National Academies Institute of Medicine
membership (1989). Koop won an Emmy Award in 1991 for a
television series on health care reform.
168
Biographical Sketches

In 1994, Koop founded Shape Up America! (www.shapeup
.org), a nonproﬁt national initiative that has raised the awareness
of healthy eating and increased physical activity for obesity pre-
vention and disease management. The organization’s Web site
is an excellent resource for the public, health care professionals,
educators, and the media.
John Kral (1939–)
John Kral was born in Go¨teborg, Sweden. He earned both his MD
(1967) and his PhD (1976) from the University of Go¨teborg. His
thesis was entitled ‘‘Surgical Reduction of Adipose Tissue.’’ Kral
was recruited to St. Lukes’ Hospital Center at Columbia Univer-
sity in New York City, where he established the program of sur-
gical treatment of obesity with a strong research component. He
moved to State University of New York Downstate Medical
Center in 1988 as professor of surgery and medicine and also
served as director of Surgical Services at Kings County Hospital
Center.
Kral is a pioneer in bariatric surgery and one of the cofound-
ers in 1983 of the American Society for Bariatric Surgery. He set
high standards for bariatric surgery, including evidence-based
protocols, and is known for his visionary approach to obesity
research. Kral has said, ‘‘The study of obesity provides a founda-
tion for understanding the entire human condition as it is
expressed in health and disease’’ (Kral, pers. comm.).
Ray Kroc (1902–1984)
Ray Kroc, founder of McDonald’s Fast Food Restaurants, was
born in Chicago. In 1941, he was the exclusive sales agent for
milkshake mixers. These mixers could prepare six shakes at a
time. In his work, he visited Dick and Mac McDonald, owners
of a fast-food emporium in San Bernardino, California. Later,
with the brothers as partners, Kroc opened a number of McDo-
nald’s franchises. He ﬁrst opened a McDonald’s Restaurant in
Des Plaines, Illinois, in 1954, and eventually bought the entire
franchise in 1961 for $2.7 million. Kroc said, ‘‘You are only as
good as the people you hire’’ and ‘‘We take the hamburger busi-
ness more seriously than anyone else.’’ This philosophy is
Biographical Sketches
169

exempliﬁed by the training of new McDonald’s franchise owners
and managers, who participate in a 10-day training course at
Hamburger University in Elk Grove, Illinois, where they receive
a bachelor of Hamburgerology with a minor in french fries (The
Economist, 2004). Kroc was the ultimate entrepreneur. ‘‘Creativity
is a high falutin’ word for the work I have to do between now
and Tuesday.’’
McDonald’s attracted children, in part, by using as its mas-
cot Ronald McDonald, a clown, who was created by Willard
Scott (later the NBC Today Show weatherman). By 1963, Ronald
McDonald was recognized by 95 percent of school children—
only Santa Claus was more commonly recognized (Brownell
and Horgen, 2003).
McDonald’s now has a global reach. The chain has sold
more than 100 billion hamburgers worldwide. The Economist
publishes the Big Mac Index using the ‘‘hamburger standard’’
to determine the value of the world’s currencies based on the
price of a Big Mac. In July 2007, the Big Mac price in the United
States was $3.41; the lowest price for the Big Mac was found in
Hong Kong at $1.54 and the highest was in Norway at $7.85
(The Economist, 2004).
Kroc also owned the San Diego Padres Major League Base-
ball team and he continued to be outspoken. In a 1974 game,
the Padres made three errors and a costly base-running blunder.
Kroc told the fans using the ballpark’s public address system, ‘‘I
suffer with you; I have never seen such stupid ball playing in
my life’’ (Pace, 1984).
Shiriki Kumanyika (1945–)
Shiriki Kumanyika was born in Baltimore. She has a BA (Syra-
cuse University, 1965), an MS (Columbia University, 1969), and
a PhD (Cornell University, 1978). She is a professor in the Depart-
ment of Biostatistics and Epidemiology at the University of
Pennsylvania’s School of Medicine.
Kumanyika has been engaged in obesity research since the
mid-1980s. She founded and chairs the African American Col-
laborative Obesity Research Network. Her work in this capacity
reﬂects her strong commitment to reducing obesity and related
health disparities in African American communities and to
increasing the engagement of African American scholars in
170
Biographical Sketches

obesity research. Kumanyika has served on numerous advisory
or expert panels and work groups related to nutrition and
obesity research and policy for a number of organizations, such
as the National Institutes of Health, National Academies Insti-
tute of Medicine, and WHO. Some of her honors include the Pop-
ulation Research Prize (American Heart Association, 2005), the
Symbol of H.O.P.E. (award of the American Journal of Health,
2006), and election to the National Academies Institute of Medi-
cine (2003).
Kumanyika loves her work and ﬁnds it hard to be idle.
She enjoys exercising and trying to keep up with the challeng-
ing global developments that affect population health and
well-being.
Jack LaLanne (1914–)
Jack LaLanne was born Franc¸ois Henri LaLanne in San
Francisco in 1914. He attended Oakland Chiropractic College in
San Francisco and has come to be known as the godfather of
physical ﬁtness. In the 1930s, LaLanne invented the Smith
Machine, a barbell on steel runners that could only move up
and down and is used for weight training. He opened the ﬁrst
modern health spa in the United States in 1946 and brought exer-
cise to television in 1951. The Jack LaLanne Show was broadcast on
TV for 34 years; it was the longest-running TV show that was
devoted to ﬁtness. He encouraged women to lift weights even
though it was thought at the time that weightlifting would make
women unattractive.
LaLanne was ahead of the whole-food movement when he
used to say, ‘‘If man made it, don’t eat it.’’ When asked what he
thought about organic foods, LaLanne replied, ‘‘It’s a bunch of
bull. If you want to eat more organic that’s ﬁne, but I don’t go
out of my way to get to organic vegetables.’’ When he was 70,
he demonstrated his ﬁtness by being handcuffed and shackled
and swimming 1.5 miles towing 70 boats carrying 70 people from
the Queen’s Way Bridge in California’s Long Beach Harbor to the
Queen Mary. At 94 years old, he still worked out every morning
for two hours. At 97 years old, Jack LaLanne was inducted into
the California Hall of Fame in 2008 by California ﬁrst lady Maria
Shriver.
Biographical Sketches
171

Antoine Lavoisier (1743–1794)
Antoine Lavoisier was born in Paris. During his lifetime, he stud-
ied chemistry, botany, astronomy, and mathematics at the Col-
lege of Mazarin (1754–1761) and law at the University of Paris
(1761–1763). He is known as the father of modern chemistry.
While working for the French government, he helped develop
the metric system of weights and measures. He is best known
for his discovery of the role that oxygen plays in combustion.
Using a calorimeter, designed by Pierre Laplace, a French physi-
cist and mathematician, Lavoisier demonstrated that burning
involves the combination of a substance with oxygen. He con-
ducted experiments that revealed that respiration was a slow
combustion of organic material using inhaled oxygen. This
research formed the basis for measuring calories in food.
Unfortunately, Lavoisier used the results of others without
acknowledging them. For example, Lavoisier tried to take credit
for the work of Joseph Priestley, who discovered that hydrogen
combined with oxygen results in water. Today, we call this
plagiarism.
Lavoisier was elected into the Royal Academy of Science in
1768 but later, in 1794, he was tried as a traitor, convicted, and
guillotined on May 8 by the French Revolutionists.
Lavoisier’s importance to science can be summarized by the
quote of one of his mathematician colleagues, M. LaGrane: ‘‘It
took them only an instant to cut off his head, but France may
not produce another like it in a century’’ (Guerlac, 1975).
Maimonides (1135–1204)
Maimonides (Moses Ben Maimon) was born in Cordoba, Spain.
He was thought to be the greatest physician of his time. He
treated luminaries like the Sultan Saladin and Richard the Lion-
heart. He wrote many medical texts, some of which have sur-
vived and have been translated into English. Comments he
made about obesity still apply to the 21st century: ‘‘Obesity is
harmful to the body and makes it sluggish. . . . Extremely obese
individuals should travel to the seashore, do much walking in
the sun, and bathe in the sea in order to lose weight. . . . Their
nutrition should consist of foods that are not very nourishing
172
Biographical Sketches

such as vegetables, [especially] onions and garlic . . . things
which strengthen without [adding] moisture, such as roasted
meat from non-fat meats. [The obese] should drink little and
should perform as much [physical exercise] as possible’’ (Gri-
vetti, 2003).
Jean Mayer (1920–1993)
Jean Mayer was born in Paris, the son of Andre Mayer, a famous
French physiologist. He received his PhD from Yale University.
Mayer was a World War II hero. He fought with the Free
French and Allied forces in North Africa, Italy, and France dur-
ing World War II and was awarded 14 military decorations,
including the Croix de Guerre. Mayer’s scientiﬁc career was a
distinguished one and spanned three continents. He was interna-
tionally known for his research in obesity and for the discovery
of how hunger is regulated by the amount of glucose in the blood
(i.e., glucostatic hypothesis). He was a professor at the Harvard
University School of Public Health and became president and
chancellor of Tufts University. He advised three U.S. presidents
—Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, and Jimmy Carter—and chaired
the 1969 White House Conference on Food, Nutrition and
Health. He also wrote a nutrition column for the Boston Globe.
Barbara J. Moore (1947–)
Barbara J. Moore was born in Paterson, New Jersey. She received
her BA from Skidmore College in 1969 and then studied archeol-
ogy in Israel and Greece. During that time she participated in a
dig at Tell Beer Sheba, where she discovered an oven from the
Iron Age. She has a PhD from Columbia University (1983), and
her postdoctoral training took place at the University of Califor-
nia, Davis, where she worked with Dr. Judith S. Stern. From
1987 to 1989, she served as an assistant professor at Rutgers
University.
Moore has extensive experience in developing programs
and policy at both the private and public levels. She left aca-
demia to become general manager of Program Development for
Weight Watchers International, a post she held from 1989 to
1993. She spent two years in Washington D.C., at the National
Biographical Sketches
173

Institutes of Health and the White House Ofﬁce of Science and
Technology Policy. She was recruited in 1995 by former U.S. Sur-
geon General Dr. C. Everett Koop for his newly founded Shape
Up America! initiative. In this role, she raised awareness of
obesity as a health issue and has developed responsible informa-
tion on weight management for the media, educators, health care
professionals, and policy makers. Moore is especially concerned
about the increase in childhood obesity. She believes, ‘‘Combat-
ing childhood obesity needs to become the ‘moral equivalent of
war’ for our nation, and will require nothing less than a complete
revolution in the way in which we work and live our lives, build
our communities and worksites, educate and nurture ourselves
and our children and set our public policy and budgetary prior-
ities’’ (Moore, pers. comm.).
Jean Nidetch (1923–)
Jean Nidetch was born in Brooklyn, New York. She started the
original Weight Watchers Club in the early 1960s by inviting
friends to her home in Queens, New York, weekly to exchange
information about how to lose weight. Through this exchange, a
number of recipes were shared and developed. Some of the early
recipes, such as making ketchup by boiling down tomato juice
and adding the artiﬁcial sweetener Sweet’N Low or making
milkshakes from powdered skim milk, ice cubes, Sweet’N Low,
and ﬂavored extracts, did not have a good taste. However, over
time, the group of friends honed their recipes to improve the
ﬂavor.
According to Nidetch, ‘‘Weight Watchers does not simply
give you a method of losing weight . . . it is a new way of life.
It is a boy whose whole life has changed because of some en-
couragement we gave him. This is what it is all about.’’ She
also is quoted as saying, ‘‘This is me and I am never going
to change, I’ll never get fat again. I don’t have to suffer. I don’t
have to starve. I don’t have to be on a diet. I am in control of
myself’’ (Kovatch, pers. comm.). The Ladies’ Home Journal recog-
nized her as ‘‘one of the most important women in the United
States.’’
174
Biographical Sketches

Dean Ornish (1953–)
Dean Ornish was born in Dallas. He has a BA from the Univer-
sity of Texas at Austin and an MD from Baylor College of Medi-
cine. He is president and founder of the Preventive Medicine
Research Institute in Sausalito, California, where he holds the
Safeway Chair. Over the last 30 years, Ornish directed clinical
research that demonstrated that comprehensive lifestyle changes
may begin to reverse even severe coronary heart disease. Medi-
care is now covering his weight-management program, which
is based on his research.
The ‘‘Ornish program’’ is a lifestyle program based on eat-
ing foods low in fat, exercising, and reducing stress. Ornish rec-
ommends that only 10 percent of calories in one’s diet come
from fat. In contrast, the average American takes in almost 35
percent calories from fat. His work was featured in a one-hour
documentary, which was broadcast on the PBS Nova series.
One of Ornish’s more provocative statements about the neg-
ative effects of a low-carbohydrate, high-fat, high-protein diet
was made when he participated in the 2002 USDA-sponsored
forum called ‘‘The Diet Debate.’’ Ornish made the following
comments at this event: ‘‘Even a single meal high in fat and cho-
lesterol makes your arteries constrict and your blood clot faster.
. . . It’s not just your heart that gets less blood ﬂow . . . it can also
cause sexual dysfunction. . . . What I have a hard time with is rec-
ommending that people consume meat, bacon, sausage, brie . . .
when thousands of studies have shown that these increase your
risk of heart disease and the most common types of cancer. . . .
I’d love to be able to tell people that bacon and eggs are health
foods, but they’re not’’ (Ornish, 2000).
Ornish was appointed to the White House Commission on
Complementary and Alternative Medicine Policy. In addition,
he received the Kellermann Memorial Award for distinguished
contributions in the ﬁeld of cardiovascular disease prevention
(International Academy of Cardiology). People magazine recog-
nized Ornish as ‘‘one of the most interesting people of 1996.’’ Life
magazine recognized him as ‘‘one of the 50 most inﬂuential
members of his generation.’’
Biographical Sketches
175

Xavier Pi-Sunyer (1933–)
Xavier Pi-Sunyer was born in Barcelona, Spain. He has a BA
(Oberlin College, 1955), an MD (Columbia College of Physicians
and Surgeons, 1959) and an MPH (Harvard University School
of Public Health, 1962). He is professor of Medicine at Columbia
University, director of the VanItallie Center for Weight Loss and
Maintenance, and chief of the Division of Endocrinology, Diabe-
tes and Nutrition.
Pi-Sunyer’s research interests are extensive and include
lipid and carbohydrate metabolism, obesity, and diabetes. He
has published more than 250 scientiﬁc papers and numerous
review articles and book chapters.
Pi-Sunyer is known for his leadership in the ﬁeld. He is past
president of a number of organizations, including the American
Diabetes Association, American Society for Clinical Nutrition,
and Obesity Society; chairman of the Task Force on Treatment
of Obesity of NIH; and a member of the board of directors for
Weight Watchers Foundation. Some of his numerous honors
include Fellow of the American Heart Association; Stunkard
Lifetime Career Award (Obesity Society, 2000); George Bray
Founders Award (Obesity Society, 2006); Luken Medal and Lec-
turer (American Diabetes Association, 1977); and two honorary
doctorates, from the University Rome and the University of
Barcelona.
Nathan Pritikin (1915–1985)
Nathan Pritikin was born in Chicago. He was a student at the
University of Chicago from 1933 to 1935, but he did not receive
a degree. He was diagnosed with heart disease when he was
only 41. He disobeyed his doctor’s advice to continue eating a
diet of butter, ice cream, and steaks. Instead, he created his own
diet, which was high in unreﬁned carbohydrates and very, very
low in fat. His blood cholesterol decreased from a high of 280 to
a low of 120. As a result, he no longer had heart disease. In
1976, he founded the Pritikin Longevity Center, which today
offers controlled diet, counseling in lifestyle change, and exercise
in a spa/resort setting.
176
Biographical Sketches

Pritikin had an ongoing feud with Dr. Robert Atkins. The
Pritikin diet was low in fat, while the Atkins diet was relatively
high in fat.
Barbara J. Rolls (no date available)
Barbara J. Rolls has a BA from the University of Pennsylvania
and a PhD from the University of Cambridge. She held several
research fellowships at the University of Oxford, and later, in
1984, she joined the Johns Hopkins University School of Medi-
cine faculty as a professor of psychiatry. In 1992, she became pro-
fessor of nutritional sciences and currently holds the Guthrie
Chair in Nutrition at the Pennsylvania State University.
She is the author of more than 200 original research articles
and ﬁve books, including The Volumetrics Weight-Control Plan:
Feel Full on Fewer Calories (HarperTorch, 2003), cowritten with
Robert A. Barnett, which reached number ﬁve on the New York
Times best-seller list in 2007, and The Volumetrics Eating Plan
(HarperCollins, 2005), which reached the top spot on the best-
seller list, also in 2007. Volumetrics is based on healthy strategies
to enhance satiety. Eating soup or salad before a meal for exam-
ple, will lead to eating fewer calories. This approach has been
widely used in weight-loss clinics and is being incorporated into
the Jenny Craig program.
Rolls is past president of both the Society for the Study of
Ingestive Behavior and The Obesity Society. Some of her numer-
ous awards include the Human Nutrition Award (American
Society of Nutritional Sciences), the International Award for
Modern Nutrition, honorary membership in the American
Dietetic Association, and the Centrum Center for Nutrition Sci-
ence Award. She is a Fellow of the American Association of the
Advancement of Science.
Wim H. M. Saris (1949–)
Wim H. M. Saris was born in Zwolle, the Netherlands. He has a
degree in human nutrition (1974, Wageningen University) and
an MD (1979) and a PhD (1982, Catholic University of Nijmegen).
He is professor and a member of the medical and health science
Biographical Sketches
177

faculty at Maastricht University. In 1992, Saris initiated the Nutri-
tion and Toxicology Research Institute, a collaborative program
focused on nutrition research, and was its ﬁrst scientiﬁc director,
from 1992 to 2005. He is currently a part-time corporate scientist
for human nutrition for the DSM Company at the Food Ingre-
dients site in Delft.
Saris’s current obesity research is related to the experimental
and public health aspects of obesity. He has written seven books
and more than 350 scientiﬁc papers. He serves on national and
international committees, including the Scientiﬁc Committee on
Food of the European Commission and the European Technol-
ogy Platform initiative Food for Life. He was president of the
Netherlands Association of the Study of Obesity and the Euro-
pean Pediatric Exercise Society. He coordinates the European
Union’s (EU) sixth framework research project, DiOGenes (diet,
obesity, and genes) the largest EU-funded obesity-related
research program, with 33 partners.
Saris believes that the problem of obesity health is the most
important global challenge, with far-reaching consequences for
the society (Saris, pers. comm.).
Ethan Allen Sims (1916–)
Ethan Allen Sims was born in Newport, Rhode Island. He is the
great-great-great grandson of Green Mountain Boys leader Ethan
Allen. (The Green Mountain Boys were the militia of the Vermont
republic in the decade prior to the American Revolution.) Sims
wrote a booklet on Ethan Allen the philosopher. He has a BA
from Harvard College (1938) and an MD from Columbia College
of Physicians & Surgeons (1942). Sims has spent his entire aca-
demic career at the University of Vermont, starting in 1950,
where he is professor of medicine emeritus. In 1991, the univer-
sity named its metabolic research unit The Sims Obesity/Nutri-
tion Research Center.
Sims is internationally known for his work in experimental
obesity and diabetes. To explain the relationship between obesity
and diabetes, he coined the word ‘‘diabesity.’’ This concept
describes the result of genes interacting with other genes and
environmental factors to produce obesity-induced type 2 diabe-
tes. To frame his work, he asked the question, What would hap-
pen if people who never had a weight problem deliberately got
178
Biographical Sketches

fat? His subjects, inmates at a state prison, volunteered to gain
weight. Over four to six months they increased their weight by
20 to 25 percent. Some had to consume 10,000 calories a day.
Two of his important conclusions were that some people put on
more weight easily and take weight off with more difﬁculty than
others. He was featured in an April 16, 2002, article in the New
York Times entitled ‘‘Is Obesity a Disease or Just a Symptom?’’
Sims published many papers with his wife, Doro. To celebrate
their collaborative research, they were both awarded honorary
doctor of science degrees from the University of Vermont in
1990. He was also honored for his extensive contributions to
clinical research by the creation of the Ethan Sims Clinical
Research Feasibility Fund Award from the National Institutes of
Health. The Obesity Society has honored Sims with the establish-
ment of the Ethan Sims Young Investigator Award. His outside
interests are nonmedical writing, mild exercise, music, and play-
ing the recorder.
Sachiko St. Jeor (1941–)
Sachiko St. Jeor was born in Los Angeles. She received her PhD
in nutrition from the Pennsylvania State University in 1980. She
is currently professor and chief, Division of Medical Nutrition,
and director of the Center for Nutrition and Metabolism in the
Department of Internal Medicine at the University of Nevada
School of Medicine in Reno.
St. Jeor’s research has focused on metabolism. The Harris
Benedict equation, developed in 1900, predicted the metabolic
rate for men and women based on their age, weight, and height.
With the changes in lifestyles since 1900, Dr. Mark D. Mifﬂin and
St. Jeor developed a new equation, named after the pair, that is 5
percent more accurate and is being recommended for use today.
She has developed methods for research diets used on metabolic
wards and dietary intake analysis programs.
St. Jeor has been a member of many national committees,
including the 1995 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee,
Weighing the Options (National Academies, Institute of Medi-
cine), Healthy Weight Roundtable (NIH), and Calcium Consen-
sus Panel (American Heart Association). Some of her honors
include the Medallion Award and the Award for Excellence
in the Practice of Dietetic Research (American Dietetic
Biographical Sketches
179

Association), and Fellow designations with the American
Dietetic Association, American Heart Association, and Society
of Behavioral Medicine.
Judith S. Stern (1943–)
Judith S. Stern was born in Brooklyn, New York. As a youth, she
was active in 4-H, where she was a cherry pie–baking champion.
She has a BS from Cornell University (1964) with honors and an
MS and a DSc from Harvard University School of Public Health
(1966, 1970, respectively), where she studied with Dr. Jean
Mayer, a leading researcher in obesity.
Stern was a faculty member at The Rockefeller University
from 1969 to 1974, where she worked with Dr. Jules Hirsch. She
joined the faculty at UC Davis in 1975, where she is now a distin-
guished professor in the Departments of Nutrition and Internal
Medicine.
Stern is known for her research in obesity and has published
more than 270 papers in scientiﬁc journals and one popular book,
The Fast Food Diet (Prentice-Hall, 1980). Her research has empha-
sized development of adipose tissue, physical activity including
what happens when you suddenly stop exercising, weight con-
trol in women, and use of dietary supplements. She was
president of the American Society for Clinical Nutrition and
The Obesity Society. She has served on a number of national
advisory committees including the Dietary Guidelines Advisory
Committee and Weighing the Options (National Academies,
Institute of Medicine). Stern is also known for her efforts in trans-
lating science for the public. She was a contributing editor and
columnist for Vogue magazine and has written more than 150
popular articles.
Stern’s honors include the New York State 4-H Community
Service State award (1960); election to the National Academies
Institute of Medicine (1995); fellow of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science (2009); and, along with Dr.
Richard L. Atkinson, being the ﬁrst corecipient of the Atkinson-
Stern Award for Distinguished Public Service (The Obesity Soci-
ety, 2006). Stern states, ‘‘Obesity is the #1 threat to our health in
the USA. Yet, our federal government discriminates against
obesity and people with obesity. It spends more than twice the
180
Biographical Sketches

amount of money for research in heart disease and CVD [cardio-
vascular disease].’’
Albert J. Stunkard (1922–)
Albert J. (Mickey) Stunkard obtained his MD from Columbia
University in 1945. He is professor of psychiatry emeritus at the
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine.
Stunkard is a pioneer in the study of eating behavior. He
was ﬁrst to describe ‘‘binge eating’’ and develop a treatment for
it (Stunkard and Allison, 2002).
Stunkard was also the ﬁrst researcher to describe ‘‘night-
eating syndrome’’ (NES), a new eating disorder linked to obesity.
NES is associated with not being hungry in the morning but
being hungry in the evening and experiencing insomnia
whereby one wakes up frequently during the night to eat.
Stunkard is currently conducting a large-scale study of the
growth and development of children at high risk of obesity. The
children in the study have been participating since three months
of age. The children’s mothers are either lean or obese. Some of
his major ﬁndings are related to food intake and body weight
during the ﬁrst year of life, the importance of sucking behavior
at three months in predicting body weight and adiposity ﬁve
years later, and the importance of rate of food intake in determin-
ing adiposity in subjects at high risk of obesity.
Two of Stunkard’s many honors include election to the
National Academies Institute of Medicine member (1988) and
creation of the Stunkard Lifetime Achievement Award (Obesity
Society, 2003) to recognize individuals who have made outstand-
ing contributions to the ﬁeld of obesity.
Stunkard was quoted as saying, ‘‘I began my career in
obesity research at the beginning of the obesity epidemic and
have continued it aggressively as the epidemic expanded. Per-
haps when I stop working on obesity waistlines will return to
normal’’ (Stunkard, pers. comm.).
Oprah Winfrey (1954–)
Oprah Winfrey was born in Kosciusko, Mississippi, into abject
poverty. She studied speech and the performing arts at
Biographical Sketches
181

Tennessee State University. She got a job in radio while in high
school and coanchored the local evening news when she was
19—the ﬁrst black woman to hold that job.
She is the multiple–Emmy award winning host of the Oprah
Winfrey Show, the highest-rated talk show in TV history. Winfrey
has been called the ‘‘ultimate media icon.’’ CNN has declared
her the ‘‘world’s most powerful woman.’’ Vanity Fair magazine
wrote that she has had ‘‘more inﬂuence on the culture than any
university president, politician, or religious leader, except per-
haps the Pope’’ (Harrow, 2004). Winfrey continues to ﬁght ‘‘the
battle of the bulge.’’ She has gone public with how difﬁcult it is
to lose weight, even considering that Winfrey is one of the
wealthiest people in the United States. She has a personal trainer
(Bob Greene) and a chef. She has said that if there was a pill or a
diet that magically caused weight loss, she would take it (Win-
frey, 1997).
Winfrey is committed to making the world a better place. In
1998, she started the Oprah’s Angel Network. This charity
encourages people to make a difference in the lives of the under-
privileged around the world. She also established the Oprah
Winfrey Leadership Academy for Girls in Johannesburg, South
Africa.
Rena Wing (1945–)
Rena Wing was born in New York. She has a BA from Connecti-
cut College (1967) and a master’s and doctorate from Harvard
University (1971). Wing spent almost 25 years at the University
of Pittsburgh before moving to Brown University’s Alpert Medi-
cal School in 1998. Currently, she is professor of psychiatry and
human behavior and director of the Weight Control and Diabetes
Research Center at Miriam Hospital.
Wing is internationally known for her research on behav-
ioral treatment of obesity and its application to type 2 diabetes.
She was responsible for designing and overseeing the life-
style intervention that was used in the NIH-funded Diabetes Pre-
vention Program, which was effective in reducing the risk of
developing diabetes. In 1994, Wing developed the National
Weight Control Registry (NWCR) with Dr. James Hill. The
NWCR includes more than 5,000 individuals who have been suc-
cessful in losing weight and maintaining it and has been very
182
Biographical Sketches

important in increasing understanding of long-term weight-loss
maintenance.
Wing is known for her leadership in obesity and diabetes.
She was a member of the NIH Task Force on Prevention and
Treatment of Obesity; a member of the Council of the National
Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases at NIH;
and president of the Society of Behavioral Medicine. She has
published more than 250 peer-reviewed articles in the area of
obesity treatment and prevention. Her honors include the TOPS
Award for outstanding achievement (Obesity Society, 2001) and
the Distinguished Contributions award (Behavioral Medicine
and Psychology Council of the American Diabetes Association).
Wing believes, ‘‘We have made progress in proving that
even modest weight loss has tremendous health beneﬁts and
helping people achieve initial weight losses; now we need to
focus on improving weight loss maintenance’’ (Wing, pers.
comm.).
References
Allison, David. Interview with author, 2008.
‘‘Big Mac’s Makeover.’’ The Economist, Business Section, October 14,
2004.
Blackburn, George. Interview with author, 2008.
Blair, Steven N. Interview with author, 2008.
Bouchard Claude. Interview with author, 2008
Brody, Jane. ‘‘No Gimmicks: Eat Less and Exercise More.’’ New York
Times, January 1, 2008.
Brody, Jane. American Entertainment International Speakers Bureau.
www.aeispeakers.com.
Brownell, K. D., and K. B. Horgen. Food Fight: The Inside Story of The
Food Industry, America’s Obesity Crisis, and What We Can Do about It.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003.
Campos, Paul. The Obesity Myth. New York: Gotham Books, 2004,
192–193.
Clinton, William Jefferson. Interview with Dr. Sanjay Gupta, CNN,
August 7, 2005.
Drewnowski, Adam. Interview with author, 2008.
Biographical Sketches
183

Dwyer, Johanna. Interview with author, 2008.
Flegal, Katherine. Interview with author, 2008.
‘‘The Global Epidemic of Obesity: An Interview with William Dietz.’’
eJournal USA: Global Issues, January 2005, 16–19.
Greenwood, M. R. C. Interview with author, 2008.
Grivetti, Louis J. Spring Seminar Series, Oxford Brookes University,
2003.
Guerlac, Henry. Antoine-Laurent Lavoiser: Chemist and Revolutionary.
New York: Scribner, 1975.
Hansen, Barbara. Interview with author, 2008.
Harrow, Susan. The Ultimate Guide to Getting Booked on Oprah. Larkspur,
CA: Harrow Communications, 2004.
Hill, James O. Interview with author, 2008.
Hirsch, Jules. Interview with author, 2008.
James, W. P. T. Interview with author, 2008.
Kanarek, Robin. Interview with author, 2008.
King, Janet. Interview with author, 2008.
Kissebah, Ahmed. Interview with author, 2008.
Kovatch, Karen. Weight Watchers International. Interview with author,
2008.
Kral, John. Interview with author, 2008.
Leith, William. ‘‘Robert Atkins. Diet Guru Who Grew Fat on the
Proceeds of the Carbohydrate Revolution.’’ The Guardian, April 19,
2003.
Moore, Barbara J. Interview with author, 2008.
Nelson, A. ‘‘Jared Chews the Fat at MU.’’ Columbia Daily Tribune,
January 18, 2006.
Ornish, Dean. ‘‘The Great Diet Debate—What Is the Best Way to
Stay Slim.’’ United States Department of Agriculture, February 24,
2000.
Pace, Eric. ‘‘Ray A. Kroc Dies at 81; Builds McDonald’s Chain. New
York Times Obituary, January 15, 1984.
Saris, Wim. H. M. Interview with author, 2008.
Stunkard, A. J., and K. C. Allison. ‘‘Two Forms of Disordered Eating in
Obesity: Binge Eating and Night Eating.’’ International Journal of Obesity
27 (2002):1–12.
184
Biographical Sketches

Stunkard, A. J. Interview with author, 2008.
Winfrey, Oprah. Oprah: Make the Connection, Video, Director: Holly
Dale, 1997.
Wing, Rena. Interview with author, 2008.
Biographical Sketches
185

This page intentionally left blank 

6
Data and Documents
L
isted here are selected facts and ﬁgures and tools for assess-
ing and managing obesity that were current as of 2009. More
detailed information about each of these items is provided in
chapters 1 through 3.
Data
•
An estimated 65 percent of adult Americans are over-
weight, and 30 percent—or 72 million—are obese (Ogden
et al. 2007). Figure 6.1 shows increasing percentage of
obesity by state in the United States from 1990 to 2006. The
dramatic increase in obesity in the United States is illus-
trated by maps that show the rise in prevalence of obesity
across each state from 1990 to 2006.
•
Overweight and obesity increases risk for developing
more than 35 major diseases, heart disease, hypertension,
type 2 diabetes, respiratory problems, osteoarthritis,
gallbladder disease, and certain types of cancer (NHLBI
1998).
•
The most immediate consequence of overweight as per-
ceived by children is social discrimination. This experi-
ence is associated with poor self-esteem and depression
(HHS 2001).
•
Attempting to lose weight is a common pursuit for many
Americans. A study published in 2005 reported that
46 percent of U.S. women and 33 percent of U.S. men said
they were trying to lose weight (Bish et al. 2005).
187

•
The success rate for dieting is approximately 3 to 5 percent
(NHLBI 1998).
•
At this time no reliable data are available to show that any
diet plan will work better than the others over the long
term (Bessesen 2008).
•
One pound of body fat stores about 3,500 calories.
•
A 15-minute brisk walk uses 100 kilocalories (Kcal) of
energy.
•
A Burger King Double Whopper with Cheese and a Jack
in the Box Bacon Ultimate Cheeseburger each contain
about 1,000 calories (Burger King 2008; Jack in the Box
2008).
•
Americans eat more food than ever before—an average
increase of more than 300 calories per day compared with
that consumed in 1985 (Putnam, Allshouse, and Kantor
2002).
188
Data and Documents
FIGURE 6.1
Obesity Trends* Among U.S. Adults
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), 1990, 1998, 2007
(*BMI ≥30, or about 30 lbs. overweight for 5´4´´ person)
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. [Online information, retrieved 01/29/09] http://www.cdc.gov/
nccdphp/dnpa/obesity/trend/maps/index.htm

•
In the 1950s, the standard-size Coca Cola was about
6 ounces. At many U.S. convenience stores today,
64-ounce soft drinks (or 2 quarts) are common.
•
In 2000, a historical moment occurred when the estimate
of the number of overweight people in the world ex-
ceeded the number of people suffering from malnutrition
(Gardner and Halweil 2000).
•
One of the most alarming trends in recent years has been
the rise in worldwide childhood obesity. At least 20 mil-
lion children under the age of ﬁve years are overweight
(WHO 2008).
•
Type 2 diabetes, closely linked to overweight and obesity
and previously considered an adult disease, has increased
dramatically in children and adolescents (CDC 2007).
•
In 1942, the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company’s stan-
dard height-weight tables for men and women, shown in
Table 6.1, were transformed from a record of national
averages of weight in relation to age, sex, and height to
become widely used for determining ‘‘ideal’’ body
weights.
•
Body mass index (BMI) equals a person’s weight in kilo-
grams divided by height in meters squared (BMI = kg/
m2). Table 6.2 provides precalculated values. One uses the
table ﬁnding his or her height in the left-hand column and
move across the row to his or her weight. The number at
the top of that intersecting column is the BMI for that
person’s height and weight.
•
Overweight is deﬁned as a BMI of equal to or greater than
25. Obesity is deﬁned as a BMI of 30 and above. A BMI of
30 is about 30 pounds overweight.
•
Skinfold tests estimate body composition from caliper
measurements of a fold of skin, which are then used in the
Siri equation to estimate percentage of fat. In women, the
triceps, suprailiac, and thigh skinfolds are measured, and
in men, the chest, abdominal, and thigh skinfolds are
used. The Jackson and Pollock (1978) equation for men
and the Jackson, Pollock, and Ward (1980) equation for
women have been extensively cross-validated with other
body composition measures (see Table 6.3). Standard
errors range from 3.6 percent to 3.8 percent. The potential
Data
189

TABLE 6.1
1942–1943 Metropolitan Life’s Height and Weight Tables
Table 6.1a Proposed range of ideal weights for women, ages 25 and over, Metropolitan Life Insur-
ance Company
Height
(with shoes)
Weight in pounds (as ordinarily dressed)
Small frame
Medium frame
Large frame
5´0´´
105–13
112–20
119–29
5´1´´
107–15
114–22
121–31
5´2´´
110–18
117–25
124–35
5´3´´
113–21
120–28
127–38
5´4´´
116–25
124–32
131–42
5´5´´
119–28
127–35
133–45
5´6´´
123–32
130–40
138–50
5´7´´
126–36
134–44
142–54
5´8´´
129–39
137–47
145–58
5´9´´
133–43
141–51
149–62
5´10´´
136–47
145–55
152–66
5´11´´
139–50
148–58
155–69
6´0´´
141–53
151–63
160–74
Table 6.1b Ideal weights for men, ages 25 and over, Metropolitan Life Insurance Company
Height
(with shoes)
Weight in pounds (as ordinarily dressed)
Small frame
Medium frame
Large frame
5´2´´
116–25
124–33
131–42
5´3´´
119–28
127–36
133–44
5´4´´
122–32
130–40
137–49
5´5´´
126–36
134–44
141–53
5´6´´
129–39
137–47
145–57
5´7´´
133–43
141–51
149–62
5´8´´
136–47
145–56
153–66
5´9´´
140–51
149–60
157–70
5´10´´
144–55
153–64
161–75
5´11´´
148–59
157–68
165–80
6´0´´
152–64
161–73
169–85
6´1´´
157–69
166–78
174–90
6´2´´
163–75
171–84
179–96
6´3´´
168–80
176–89
184–202
Source: Metropolitan Life Insurance Company. ‘‘Ideal Weights for Men 1942.’’ Statistical Bulletin of the Metropolitan
Life Insurance Company 23 (1942): 6–8. Metropolitan Life Insurance Company. ‘‘Ideal Weights for Women 1943.’’
Statistical Bulletin of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company 24 (1943): 6–8. Table graphics downloaded from
Czerniawski.

TABLE 6.2
Body Mass Index Table
Normal
Overweight
Obese
Extreme Obesity
BMI
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
Height
(inches)
Body Weight (pounds)
58
91
96
100 105 110 115 119 124 129 134 138 143 148 153 158 162 167 172 177 181 186 191 196 201 205 210 215 220 224 229 234 239 244 248 253 258
59
94
99
104 109 114 119 124 128 133 138 143 148 153 158 163 168 173 178 183 188 193 198 203 208 212 217 222 227 232 237 242 247 252 257 262 267
60
97
102 107 112 118 123 128 133 138 143 148 153 158 163 168 174 179 184 189 194 199 204 208 215 220 225 230 235 240 245 250 255 261 266 271 276
61
100 106 111 116 122 127 132 137 143 148 153 158 164 169 174 180 185 190 195 201 206 211 217 222 227 232 238 243 248 254 259 264 269 275 280 285
62
104 109 115 120 126 131 136 142 147 153 158 164 169 175 180 186 191 196 202 207 213 218 224 229 235 240 246 251 256 262 267 273 278 284 289 295
63
107 113 118 124 130 135 141 146 152 158 163 169 175 180 186 191 197 203 208 214 220 225 231 237 242 248 254 259 265 270 278 282 287 293 299 304
64
110 116 122 128 134 140 145 151 157 163 169 174 180 186 192 197 204 209 215 221 227 232 238 244 250 256 262 267 273 279 285 291 296 302 308 314
65
114 120 126 132 138 144 150 156 162 168 174 180 186 192 198 204 210 216 222 228 234 240 246 252 258 264 270 276 282 288 294 300 306 312 318 324
66
118 124 130 136 142 148 155 161 167 173 179 186 192 198 204 210 216 223 229 235 241 247 253 260 266 272 278 284 291 297 303 309 315 322 328 334
67
121 127 134 140 146 153 159 166 172 178 185 191 198 204 211 217 223 230 236 242 249 255 261 268 274 280 287 293 299 306 312 319 325 331 338 344
68
125 131 138 144 151 158 164 171 177 184 190 197 203 210 216 223 230 236 243 249 256 262 269 276 282 289 295 302 308 315 322 328 335 341 348 354
69
128 135 142 149 155 162 169 176 182 189 196 203 209 216 223 230 236 243 250 257 263 270 277 284 291 297 304 311 318 324 331 338 345 351 358 365
70
132 139 146 153 160 167 174 181 188 195 202 209 216 222 229 236 243 250 257 264 271 278 285 292 299 306 313 320 327 334 341 348 355 362 369 376
71
136 143 150 157 165 172 179 186 193 200 208 215 222 229 236 243 250 257 265 272 279 286 293 301 308 315 322 329 338 343 351 358 365 372 379 386
72
140 147 154 162 169 177 184 191 199 206 213 221 228 235 242 250 258 265 272 279 287 294 302 309 316 324 331 338 346 353 361 368 375 383 390 397
73
144 151 159 166 174 182 189 197 204 212 219 227 235 242 250 257 265 272 280 288 295 302 310 318 325 333 340 348 355 363 371 378 386 393 401 408
74
148 155 163 171 179 186 194 202 210 218 225 233 241 249 256 264 272 280 287 295 303 311 319 326 334 342 350 358 365 373 381 389 396 404 412 420
75
152 160 168 176 184 192 200 208 216 224 232 240 248 256 264 272 279 287 295 303 311 319 327 335 343 351 359 367 375 383 391 399 407 415 423 431
76
156 164 172 180 189 197 205 213 221 230 238 246 254 263 271 279 287 295 304 312 320 328 336 344 353 361 369 377 385 394 402 410 418 426 435 443
Source: National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. ‘‘Clinical Guidelines on the Identiﬁcation, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults—the Evidence Report.’’ 1998. [Online information; retrieved 1/12/09.]
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/obesity/bmi_tbl.pdf.

errors are increased when these equations are used on
populations who are young or old, very lean and muscu-
lar, or obese.
•
‘‘MyPyramid Calorie Levels’’ is a chart that shows the
appropriate calories needed for males and females by age
and activity level (see Table 6.4).
•
‘‘MyPyramid Food Intake Patterns’’ identiﬁes suggested
amounts of food to consume from the various food groups
at 12 different calorie levels (see Table 6.5).
•
A daily food record helps people keep track of when they
eat, what and how much they are eating, and their hunger
level (see Table 6.6).
192
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.3
Determining Percentage of Body Fat Using Skinfold Calipers
Females:
Body density = 1.0994921 – 0.0009929 * sum + 0.0000023 * sum2
– 0.0001392 * age
(sum means the sum of triceps, suprailiac, and thigh skinfold measurements)
Males:
Body density = 1.1093800 – 0.0008267 * sum + 0.0000016 * sum2
– 0.0002574 * age
(sum means the sum of chest, abdominal, and thigh skinfold measures; *=times (multiplied by)
How to measure body area skinfolds:
Chest—A diagonal pinch halfway between the armpit and the nipple
Suprailiac—A diagonal pinch just above the front forward protrusion of the hip bone
Abdominal—A vertical pinch about one inch from the belly button
Thigh—A vertical pinch halfway between the knee and top of the thigh
Triceps—A vertical pinch halfway between the shoulder and the elbow
Estimation of percentage of fat with the Siri equation
A commonly used equation for estimating percentage of fat from body density is the 1961 Siri formula
(below). Body density can be determined with skinfold measurement as follows:
Siri percentage fat = [(495/body density) – 450] * 100
A limitation to this formula is that it assumes the density of fat-free mass to remain a constant across the
population. Actual percentage of fat tends to be slightly higher than the measured percentage in lean, muscu-
lar individuals and lower in obese individuals.
Sources: Jackson and Pollock (1978), ‘‘Generalized Equations for Predicting Body Density of Men.’’ Br J Nutr 40(3):
497–504.
Jackson, Pollock, and Ward (1980), ‘‘Generalized Equations for Predicting Body Density of Women.’’ Med Sci Sports
Exerc 12(3): 175–181.
Siri (1993). ‘‘Body Composition from Fluid Spaces and Density: Analysis of Methods. 1961.’’ Nutrition 9(5): 480–
491; discussion 480, 492.

TABLE 6.4
MyPyramid Calorie Levels
Activity
level
MALES
Activity
level
FEMALES
Sedentary* Mod. active*
Active*
Sedentary* Mod. active*
Active*
AGE
AGE
2
1000
1000
1000
2
1000
1000
1000
3
1000
1400
1400
3
1000
1200
1400
4
1200
1400
1600
4
1200
1400
1400
5
1200
1400
1600
5
1200
1400
1600
6
1400
1600
1800
6
1200
1400
1600
7
1400
1600
1800
7
1200
1600
1800
8
1400
1600
2000
8
1400
1600
1800
9
1600
1800
2000
9
1400
1600
1800
10
1600
1800
2200
10
1400
1800
2000
11
1800
2000
2200
11
1600
1800
2000
12
1800
2200
2400
12
1600
2000
2200
13
2000
2200
2600
13
1600
2000
2200
14
2000
2400
2800
14
1800
2000
2400
15
2200
2600
3000
15
1800
2000
2400
16
2400
2800
3200
16
1800
2000
2400
17
2400
2800
3200
17
1800
2000
2400
18
2400
2800
3200
18
1800
2000
2400
19–20
2600
2800
3000
19–20
2000
2200
2400
21–25
2400
2800
3000
21–25
2000
2200
2400
26–30
2400
2600
3000
26–30
1800
2000
2400
31–35
2400
2600
3000
31–35
1800
2000
2200
36–40
2400
2600
2800
36–40
1800
2000
2200
41–45
2200
2600
2800
41–45
1800
2000
2200
46–50
2200
2400
2800
46–50
1800
2000
2200
51–55
2200
2400
2800
51–55
1600
1800
2200
56–60
2200
2400
2600
56–60
1600
1800
2200
61–65
2000
2400
2600
61–65
1600
1800
2000
66–70
2000
2200
2600
66–70
1600
1800
2000
71–75
2000
2200
2600
71–75
1600
1800
2000
76 and up
2000
2200
2400
76 and up
1600
1800
2000
*Calorie levels are based on the Estimated Energy Requirements (EER) and activity levels from the Institute of Medi-
cine Dietary Reference Intakes Macronutrients Report, 2002.
SEDENTARY = less than 30 minutes a day of moderate physical activity in addition to daily activities.
MOD. ACTIVE = at least 30 minutes up to 60 minutes a day of moderate physical activity in addition to daily
activities.
ACTIVE = 60 or more minutes a day of moderate physical activity in addition to daily activities.
Source: USDA (2005).

TABLE 6.5
MyPyramid Food Intake Patterns
MyPyramid
Food Intake Patterns
The suggested amounts of food to consume from the basic food groups, subgroups, and oils to meet recommended nutrient intakes at 12 different calorie levels. Nutrient and energy con-
tributions from each group are calculated according to the nutrient-dense forms of foods in each group (e.g., lean meats and fat-free milk). The table also shows the discretionary calorie
allowance that can be accommodated within each calorie level, in addition to the suggested amounts of nutrient-dense forms of foods in each group.
Daily Amount of Food From Each Group
Calorie Level1
1,000
1,200
1,400
1,600
1,800
2,000
2,200
2,400
2,600
2,800
3,000
3,200
Fruits2
1 cup
1 cup
1.5 cups
1.5 cups
1.5 cups
2 cups
2 cups
2 cups
2 cups
2.5 cups
2.5 cups
2.5 cups
Vegetables3
1 cup
1.5 cups
1.5 cups
2 cups
2.5 cups
2.5 cups
3 cups
3 cups
3.5 cups
3.5 cups
4 cups
4 cups
Grains4
3 oz-eq
4 oz-eq
5 oz-eq
5 oz-eq
6 oz-eq
6 oz-eq
7 oz-eq
8 oz-eq
9 oz-eq
10 oz-eq
10 oz-eq
10 oz-eq
Meat and Beans5
2 oz-eq
3 oz-eq
4 oz-eq
5 oz-eq
5 oz-eq
5.5 oz-eq
6 oz-eq
6.5 oz-eq
6.5 oz-eq
7 oz-eq
7 oz-eq
7 oz-eq
Milk6
2 cups
2 cups
2 cups
3 cups
3 cups
3 cups
3 cups
3 cups
3 cups
3 cups
3 cups
3 cups
Oils7
3 tsp
4 tsp
4 tsp
5 tsp
5 tsp
6 tsp
6 tsp
7 tsp
8 tsp
8 tsp
10 tsp
11 tsp
Discretionary calorie allowance8
165
171
171
132
195
267
290
362
410
426
512
648
1Calorie Levels are set across a wide range to accommodate the needs of different individuals. The attached table ‘‘Estimated Daily Calorie Needs’’ can be used to help assign individuals to the food intake pattern at a particular calorie level.
2Fruit Group includes all fresh, frozen, canned, and dried fruits and fruit juices. In general, 1 cup of fruit or 100% fruit juice, or 1/2 cup of dried fruit can be considered as 1 cup from the fruit group.
3Vegetable Group includes all fresh, frozen, canned, and dried vegetables and vegetable juices. In general, 1 cup of raw or cooked vegetables or vegetable juice, or 2 cups of raw leafy greens can be considered as 1 cup from the vegetable group.
4Grains Group includes all foods made from wheat, rice, oats, cornmeal, barley, such as bread, pasta, oatmeal, breakfast cereals, tortillas, and grits. In general, 1 slice of bread, 1 cup of ready-to-eat cereal, or 1/2 cup of cooked rice, pasta, or cooked
cereal can be considered as 1 ounce equivalent from the grains group. At least half of all grains consumed should be whole grains.
5Meat & Beans Group in general, 1 ounce of lean meat, poultry, or ﬁsh, 1 egg, 1 Tbsp. peanut butter, 1/4 cup cooked dry beans, or 1/2 ounce of nuts or seeds can be considered as 1 ounce equivalent from the meat and beans group.
6Milk Group includes all ﬂuid milk products and foods made from milk that retain their calcium content, such as yogurt and cheese. Foods made from milk that have little to no calcium, such as cream cheese, cream, and butter, are not part of the
group. Most milk group choices should be fat-free or low-fat. In general, 1 cup of milk or yogurt, 1 1/2 ounces of natural cheese, or 2 ounces of processed cheese can be considered as 1 cup from the milk group.
7Oils include fats from many different plants and from ﬁsh that are liquid at room temperature, such as canola, corn, olive, soybean, and sunﬂower oil. Some foods are naturally high in oils, like nuts, olives, some ﬁsh, and avocados. Foods that are
mainly oil include mayonnaise, certain salad dressings, and soft margarine.
8Discretionary Calorie Allowance is the remaining amount of calories in a food intake pattern after accounting for the calories needed for all food groups—using forms of foods that are fat-free or low-fat and with no added sugars.
Source: USDA (2005).

TABLE 6.6
Example of a Daily Food Record
Time
Amount
Food Eaten
How Prepared
How Hungry
Am I? (0 = not
hungry, 5 = very
hungry)
6 a.m.
1 cup
1% milk
In bowl
1
2 cups
Cheerios
In bowl
2 tbsp
White sugar
In bowl
2 cup
Black coffee
Brewed
2 tbsp
fat-free nondairy
creamer
In coffee
10 a.m.
2–3 inch diameter
Chocolate chip
cookies
From grocery
bakery
3
Noon
2 slices
Ham, deli sliced
In sandwich
4
1 slice
American cheese
In sandwich
1 leaf, 2 slices
Iceberg lettuce,
pickle slices
In sandwich
1 tsp
Mustard
In sandwich
2 tbsp
Kraft real
mayonnaise
In sandwich
2 slices
Orowheat 100%
whole-wheat bread
In sandwich
1 bag (1.4 oz.)
Doritos Corn Chips
16 oz.
Sprite
Bottle
5 p.m.
2 cups
Lasagna noodles
with meat Stouffer’s
frozen dinner
Baked
4
2 slices
White Italian bread
Toasted
2 tsp
Promise light
margarine
Spread on toast
8 p.m.
2 cups
Ben and Jerry’s
Vanilla ice cream
In bowl
2

•
The chart shown in Table 6.7 helps sort through the vari-
ous types of diets that exist today. It lists some of the most
common diet plans, examines their advantages and dis-
advantages, and provides the dietary basis behind their
potential beneﬁts.
•
The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI)
Expert Panel’s treatment decision process provides a step-
by-step approach to managing overweight and obese
patients with its algorithm for the assessment and treat-
ment of overweight and obesity (see Figure 6.2).
•
The Practical Guide to the Identiﬁcation, Evaluation, and
Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults (NHLBI
and NAASO 2000) is based on the results from scientiﬁc
studies. Figure 6.3 shows how evidence-based methodol-
ogy ranks scientiﬁc evidence according to freedom
from bias.
196
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.7
Types of Diet Plans, with Claims and Advantages
Diet Plan Characteristics
Examples
Claims/Advantages
Calorie controlled, low fat,
high carbohydrates
Weight Watchers, volumetrics,
Ornish, Pritikin
Balanced plan
Ease into maintenance
High protein, high fat, low
carbohydrates
Atkins, Scarsdale, Carb Addicts,
Sugar Busters Quick Weight Loss,
Protein Power, South Beach—
initial stage
Quick initial weight loss
No measuring
No hunger
High protein, moderate fat,
moderate carbohydrates
Zone, South Beach—later stages
Use fat for energy
No hunger
Include a wide variety of foods
Meal replacement
Jenny Craig, Nutrisystems
Portion controlled
No meal preparation
Liquid protein shakes/bars
Optifast, Medifast, Health
Maintenance Resources, Cambridge,
Slim-Fast
Minimal dealing with food
Quick initial weight loss
Others: May have very speciﬁc
recommendations that make
them unique; however, diet
composition is generally similar
to low fat or low carbohydrate,
low calorie
Fit for Life, Food Combining, Fat
Flush, Eat for Your Blood Type,
Suzanne Somers
Quick initial weight loss
Structured plan

FIGURE 6.2
Algorithm for the Assessment and Treatment of Obesity

Documents
Clinical Guidelines on the Identification,
Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight
and Obesity in Adults: The Evidence Report
At the time these guidelines were released in September 1998 by NHLBI,
they were a state-of-the-art review of the scientiﬁc evidence on the effects
of treatment of overweight and obesity. The guidelines prescribed a new
approach for the assessment of overweight and obesity. According to the
198
Data and Documents
FIGURE 6.3
Evidence Categories
Evidence
Category
Source of Evidence
Deﬁnition
A
Randomized controlled
trials (rich body of data)
Evidence is from endpoints of well-designed RCTs (or trials that
depart only minimally from randomization) that provide a consistent
pattern of ﬁndings in the population for which the recommendation
is made. Category A therefore requires substantial numbers of
studies involving substantial numbers of participants.
B
Randomized controlled
trials (limited body
of data)
Evidence is from endpoints of intervention studies that include only
a limited number of RCTs, post hoc or subgroup analysis of RCTs,
or meta-analysis of RCTs. In general, Category B pertains when
few randomized trials exist, they are small in size, and the trial
results are somewhat inconsisten, or the trials were undertaken
in a population that differs from the target population of the
recommendation.
C
Nonrandomized trials
Observational Studies
Evidence is from outcomes of uncontrolled or nonrandomized trials
or from observational studies.
D
Panel Consensus
Judgment
Expert judgment is based on the panel’s synthesis of evidence from
experimental research described in the literature and/or derived
from the consensus of panel members based on clinical derived
from the consensus of panel members based on clinical criteria. The
category is used only in cases where the provision of some guidance
was deemed valuable but an adequately compelling clinical literature
addressing the subject of the recommendation was deemed
insufﬁcient to justify placement in one of the other categories
(A through C).
Source: from The Practical Guide to the Identiﬁcation, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults.
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and North American Association for the Study of Obesity. Bethesda, MD:
National Institutes of Health; 2000. NIH Publication number 00–4084, October 2000.

report, assessment of overweight required evaluation of three measures—
BMI, waist circumference, and an individual’s risk factors for health con-
ditions associated with obesity. The guidelines also formally established
the risks associated with excess weight. The message that the guidelines
were meant to convey to physicians and the public was that overweight
and obesity should be taken seriously as a medical condition.
In order to recommend the most appropriate treatment, the NHLBI
Expert Panel conducted an extensive review of the scientiﬁc evidence on
overweight and obesity. Evidence from nearly 400 randomized con-
trolled trials (RCTs) was considered. Their recommendations used an
evidence-based methodology whereby evidence is ranked according to
freedom from bias. Figure 6.3 summarizes the categories of evidence
and includes a deﬁnition for each category.
The primary purpose of the report was to provide standards for
physicians and health professionals, health care policy makers, and
researchers to use for assessing and treating overweight and obese
patients.
Individuals can access the full report, the evidence tables, a BMI
calculator and BMI table, and additional practical information from
the NHLBI Web site at http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/obesity/
index.htm.
Print copies are available by writing to the NHLBI Information
Center
P.O. Box 30105
Bethesda, MD 20824-0105.
NHLBI is in the process of developing new evidence-based updates
of the existing guidelines for high blood pressure, cholesterol, and
obesity as elements of integrated, comprehensive guidelines for reduc-
ing cardiovascular disease. The expected release date for an update of
the current obesity guidelines is Spring 2010.
The abbreviated table of contents below shows the extent of the entire
report. The excerpt ‘‘Summary of Evidence-Based Recommendations’’ is
taken from the Executive Summary section beginning on page xi.
Table of Contents
Executive Summary xi
1. Introduction 1
A. Rationale for Guidelines Development 1
B. Objectives of the Guidelines 2
C. Guideline Development Methodology 2
D. Statement of Assumptions 5
E. Intended Users of These Guidelines 5
Documents
199

2. Overweight and Obesity: Background 6
A. Health and Economic Costs 6
1. Prevalence and Time Trends 6
2. Demographic Variations in Overweight and Obesity Preva-
lence 9
3. Economic Costs of Overweight and Obesity 9
B. Prevention of Overweight and Obesity 11
C. Health Risks of Overweight and Obesity 12
1. Morbidity 12
2. Overweight/Obesity and Morbidity in Minority Populations 23
3. Obesity and Mortality 23
D. Weight Loss and Mortality 25
E. Environment 26
F. Genetic Inﬂuence in the Development of Overweight and
Obesity 27
3. Examination of Randomized Controlled Trial Evidence 29
A. Why Treat Overweight and Obesity? 29
1. Blood Pressure 29
2. Serum/Plasma Lipids and Lipoproteins 33
3. Impaired Glucose Tolerance and Diabetes 39
4. Decreases in Abdominal Fat with Weight Loss 41
B. What Treatments are Effective? 42
1. Dietary Therapy 42
2. Physical Activity 44
3. Combined Therapy 47
4. Behavior Therapy 48
5. Pharmacotherapy 53
6. Surgery 54
7. Other Interventions for Overweight and Obesity Treatment 55
4. Treatment Guidelines 56
A. Overview 56
B. Assessment and Classiﬁcation of Overweight and Obesity 56
1. Assessment of Overweight and Obesity 56
2. Classiﬁcation of Overweight and Obesity 58
C. Assessment of Risk Status 62
D. Evaluation and Treatment Strategy 65
E. Exclusion from Weight Loss Therapy 70
F. Patient Motivation 70
G. Goals of Weight Loss and Management 71
1. Weight Loss 71
2. Weight Maintenance at Lower Weight 72
3. Prevention of Further Weight Gain 73
H. Strategies for Weight Loss and Weight Maintenance 73
1. Dietary Therapy 73
2. Physical Activity 77
200
Data and Documents

3. Behavior Therapy 81
4. Combined Therapy 83
5. Pharmacotherapy 83
6. Surgery 86
I. Smoking Cessation in the Overweight or Obese Patient 91
J. Role of Health Professionals in Weight Loss Therapy 92
5. Summary of Recommendations 95
6. Future Research 98
A. Intervention Approaches 98
B. Causes and Mechanisms of Overweight and Obesity 99
C. Abdominal Fat, Body Weight and Disease Risk 99
D. Assessment Methods 99
7. Appendices 100
Appendix I.A.1 Guidelines Development Methodology 100
Appendix I.A.2 Literature Review 109
Appendix II Description of Evidence 112
Appendix III Special Populations 117
Appendix IV Obesity and Sleep Apnea 137
Appendix V Body Mass Index Chart—How to Measure Obesity 139
Appendix VI Practical Dietary Therapy Information 141
Executive Summary
A. Advantages of Weight Loss
The recommendation to treat overweight and obesity is based not only
on evidence that relates obesity to increased mortality but also on RCT
evidence that weight loss reduces risk factors for disease. Thus, weight
loss may not only help control diseases worsened by obesity, it may also
help decrease the likelihood of developing these diseases. The panel
reviewed RCT evidence to determine the effect of weight loss on blood
pressure and hypertension, serum/plasma lipid concentrations, and
fasting blood glucose and fasting insulin. Recommendations focusing
on these conditions underscore the advantages of weight loss.
1. Blood Pressure
To evaluate the effect of weight loss on blood pressure and hyperten-
sion, 76 articles reporting RCTs were considered for inclusion in these
guidelines. Of the 45 accepted articles, 35 were lifestyle trials and 10
were pharmacotherapy trials. There is strong and consistent evidence
from these lifestyle trials in both overweight hypertensive and nonhy-
pertensive patients that weight loss produced by lifestyle modiﬁcations
reduces blood pressure levels. Limited evidence exists that decreases in
abdominal fat will reduce blood pressure in overweight nonhyperten-
sive individuals, although not independent of weight loss, and there is
Documents
201

considerable evidence that increased aerobic activity to increase cardio-
respiratory ﬁtness reduces blood pressure (independent of weight loss).
There is also suggestive evidence from randomized trials that weight
loss produced by most weight loss medications, except for sibutramine,
in combination with adjuvant lifestyle modiﬁcations will be accompa-
nied by reductions in blood pressure. Based on a review of the evidence
from the 45 RCT blood pressure articles, the panel makes the following
recommendation:
Weight loss is recommended to lower elevated blood pressure in overweight
and obese persons with high blood pressure. Evidence Category A.
2. Serum/Plasma Lipids
Sixty-ﬁve RCT articles were evaluated for the effect of weight loss on
serum/plasma concentrations of total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, very
low-density lipoprotein (VLDL)-cholesterol, triglycerides, and HDL-
cholesterol. Studies were conducted on individuals over a range of
obesity and lipid levels. Of the 22 articles accepted for inclusion in these
guidelines, 14 RCT articles examined lifestyle trials while the remaining
8 articles reviewed pharmacotherapy trials. There is strong evidence
from the 14 lifestyle trials that weight loss produced by lifestyle modiﬁ-
cations in overweight individuals is accompanied by reductions in
serum triglycerides and by increases in HDL-cholesterol. Weight loss
generally produces some reductions in serum total cholesterol and
LDL-cholesterol. Limited evidence exists that a decrease in abdominal
fat correlates with improvements in lipids, although the effect may not
be independent of weight loss, and there is strong evidence that
increased aerobic activity to increase cardiorespiratory ﬁtness favorably
affects blood lipids, particularly if accompanied by weight loss. There is
suggestive evidence from the eight randomized pharmacotherapy trials
that weight loss produced by weight loss medications and adjuvant life-
style modiﬁcations, including caloric restriction and physical activity,
does not result in consistent effects on blood lipids. The following rec-
ommendation is based on the review of the data in these 22 RCTarticles:
Weight loss is recommended to lower elevated levels of total cholesterol,
LDL-cholesterol, and triglycerides, and to raise low levels of HDL-cholesterol
in overweight and obese persons with dyslipidemia. Evidence Category A.
3. Blood Glucose
To evaluate the effect of weight loss on fasting blood glucose and fasting
insulin levels, 49 RCT articles were reviewed for inclusion in these
guidelines. Of the 17 RCT articles accepted, 9 RCTarticles examined life-
style therapy trials and 8 RCT articles considered the effects of pharma-
cotherapy on weight loss and subsequent changes in blood glucose.
There is strong evidence from the nine lifestyle therapy trials that weight
loss produced by lifestyle modiﬁcation reduces blood glucose levels in
202
Data and Documents

overweight and obese persons without diabetes, and weight loss
reduces blood glucose levels and HbAlc in some patients with type 2
diabetes; there is suggestive evidence that decreases in abdominal fat
will improve glucose tolerance in overweight individuals with impaired
glucose tolerance, although not independent of weight loss; and there is
limited evidence that increased cardiorespiratory ﬁtness improves glu-
cose tolerance in overweight individuals with impaired glucose toler-
ance or diabetes, although not independent of weight loss. In addition,
there is suggestive evidence from randomized trials that weight loss
induced by weight loss medications does not appear to improve blood
glucose levels any better than weight loss through lifestyle therapy in
overweight persons both with and without type 2 diabetes. Based on a
full review of the data in these 17 RCT articles, the panel makes the fol-
lowing recommendation:
Weight loss is recommended to lower elevated blood glucose levels in over-
weight and obese persons with type 2 diabetes. Evidence Category A.
B. Measurement of Degree of Overweight And Obesity
Patients should have their BMI and levels of abdominal fat measured
not only for the initial assessment of the degree of overweight and
obesity, but also as a guide to the efﬁcacy of weight loss treatment.
Although there are no RCTs that review measurements of overweight
and obesity, the panel determined that this aspect of patient care war-
ranted further consideration and that this guidance was deemed valu-
able. Therefore, the following four recommendations that are included
in the Treatment Guidelines were based on nonrandomized studies as
well as clinical experience.
1. BMI To Assess Overweight and Obesity
There are a number of accurate methods to assess body fat (e.g., total
body water, total body potassium, bioelectrical impedance, and dual-
energy X-ray absorptiometry), but no trial data exist to indicate that
one measure of fatness is better than any other for following overweight
and obese patients during treatment. Since measuring body fat by these
techniques is often expensive and is not readily available, a more practi-
cal approach for the clinical setting is the measurement of BMI; epi-
demiological and observational studies have shown that BMI provides
an acceptable approximation of total body fat for the majority of
patients. Because there are no published studies that compare the effec-
tiveness of different measures for evaluating changes in body fat during
weight reduction, the panel bases its recommendation on expert
judgment from clinical experience:
Practitioners should use the BMI to assess overweight and obesity. Body
weight alone can be used to follow weight loss, and to determine efﬁcacy of
therapy. Evidence Category C.
Documents
203

2. BMI To Estimate Relative Risk
In epidemiological studies, BMI is the favored measure of excess weight
to estimate relative risk of disease. BMI correlates both with morbidity
and mortality; the relative risk for CVD [cardiovascular disease] risk fac-
tors and CVD incidence increases in a graded fashion with increasing
BMI in all population groups. Moreover, calculating BMI is simple,
rapid, and inexpensive, and can be applied generally to adults. The
panel, therefore, makes this recommendation:
The BMI should be used to classify overweight and obesity and to estimate
relative risk of disease compared to normal weight. Evidence Category C.
3. Assessing Abdominal Fat
For the most effective technique for assessing abdominal fat content, the
panel considered measures of waist circumference, waist-to-hip ratio
(WHR), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and computed tomography.
Evidence from epidemiological studies shows waist circumference to be
a better marker of abdominal fat content than WHR, and that it is the
most practical anthropometric measurement for assessing a patient’s
abdominal fat content before and during weight loss treatment. Com-
puted tomography and MRI are both more accurate but impractical for
routine clinical use. Based on evidence that waist circumference is a bet-
ter marker than WHR—and taking into account that the MRI and com-
puted tomography techniques are expensive and not readily available
for clinical practice—the panel makes the following recommendation:
The waist circumference should be used to assess abdominal fat content.
Evidence Category C.
4. Sex-Speciﬁc Measurements
Evidence from epidemiological studies indicates that a high waist cir-
cumference is associated with an increased risk for type 2 diabetes, dys-
lipidemia, hypertension, and CVD. Therefore, the panel judged that sex-
speciﬁc cutoffs for waist circumference can be used to identify increased
risk associated with abdominal fat in adults with a BMI in the range of
25 to 34.9. These cutpoints can be applied to all adult ethnic or racial
groups. On the other hand, if a patient is very short, or has a BMI above
the 25 to 34.9 range, waist cutpoints used for the general population may
not be applicable. Based on the evidence from nonrandomized studies,
the panel makes this recommendation:
For adult patients with a BMI of 25 to 34.9 kg/m2, sex-speciﬁc waist cir-
cumference cutoffs should be used in conjunction with BMI to identify
increased disease risks. Evidence Category C.
C. Goals for Weight Loss
The general goals of weight loss and management are to reduce body
weight, to maintain a lower body weight over the long term, and to
204
Data and Documents

prevent further weight gain. Evidence indicates that a moderate weight
loss can be maintained over time if some form of therapy continues. It is
better to maintain a moderate weight loss over a prolonged period than
to regain from a marked weight loss.
1. Initial Goal of Weight Loss from Baseline
There is strong and consistent evidence from randomized trials that
overweight and obese patients in well-designed programs can achieve
a weight loss of as much as 10 percent of baseline weight. In the diet tri-
als, an average of 8 percent of baseline weight was lost. Since this aver-
age includes persons who did not lose weight, an individualized goal
of 10 percent is reasonable. The panel, therefore, recommends that:
The initial goal of weight loss therapy should be to reduce body weight by
approximately 10 percent from baseline. With success, further weight loss can
be attempted if indicated through further assessment. Evidence Category A.
2. Amount of Weight Loss
Randomized trials suggest that weight loss at the rate of 1 to 2 lb/week
(calorie deﬁcit of 500 to 1,000 kcal/day) commonly occurs for up to 6
months.
Weight loss should be about 1 to 2 lb/week for a period of 6 months, with the
subsequent strategy based on the amount of weight lost. Evidence Category B.
D. How To Achieve Weight Loss
The panel reviewed relevant treatment strategies designed for weight
loss that can also be used to foster long-term weight control and preven-
tion of weight gain. The consequent recommendations emphasize the
potential effectiveness of weight control using multiple interventions
and strategies, including dietary therapy, physical activity, behavior
therapy, pharmacotherapy, and surgery, as well as combinations of these
strategies.
1. Dietary Therapy
The panel reviewed 86 RCT articles to determine the effectiveness of
diets on weight loss (including LCDs, very low-calorie diets (VLCDs),
vegetarian diets, American Heart Association dietary guidelines, the
NCEP’s Step I diet with caloric restriction, and other low-fat regimens
with varying combinations of macronutrients). Of the 86 articles
reviewed, 48 were accepted for inclusion in these guidelines. These
RCTs indicate strong and consistent evidence that an average weight
loss of 8 percent of initial body weight can be obtained over 3 to 12
months with an LCD and that this weight loss effects a decrease in
abdominal fat; and, although lower-fat diets without targeted caloric
reduction help promote weight loss by producing a reduced caloric
intake, lower-fat diets with targeted caloric reduction promote greater
Documents
205

weight loss than lower-fat diets alone. Further, VLCDs produce greater
initial weight losses than LCDs (over the long term of >1 year, weight
loss is not different than that of the LCDs). In addition, randomized tri-
als suggest that no improvement in cardiorespiratory ﬁtness as mea-
sured by VO2 max appears to occur in obese adults who lose weight
on LCDs alone without physical activity. The following recommenda-
tions are based on the evidence extracted from the 48 accepted articles:
LCDs are recommended for weight loss in overweight and obese persons.
Evidence Category A. Reducing fat as part of an LCD is a practical way to
reduce calories. Evidence Category A.
Reducing dietary fat alone without reducing calories is not sufﬁcient for
weight loss. However, reducing dietary fat, along with reducing dietary carbo-
hydrates, can facilitate caloric reduction. Evidence Category A.
A diet that is individually planned to help create a deﬁcit of 500 to 1,000
kcal/day should be an intregal part of any program aimed at achieving a weight
loss of 1 to 2 lb/week. Evidence Category A.
2. Physical Activity
Effects of Physical Activity on Weight Loss
Twenty-three RCT articles were reviewed to determine the effect of
physical activity on weight loss, abdominal fat (measured by waist cir-
cumference), and changes in cardiorespiratory ﬁtness (VO2 max). Thir-
teen of these articles were accepted for inclusion in these guidelines. A
review of these articles reveals strong evidence that physical activity
alone, i.e., aerobic exercise, in obese adults results in modest weight loss
and that physical activity in overweight and obese adults increases car-
diorespiratory ﬁtness, independent of weight loss. Randomized trials
suggest that increased physical activity in overweight and obese adults
reduces abdominal fat only modestly or not at all, and that regular
physical activity independently reduces the risk for CVD. The panel’s
recommendation on physical activity is based on the evidence from
these 13 articles:
Physical activity is recommended as part of a comprehensive weight loss
therapy and weight control program because it: (1) modestly contributes to
weight loss in overweight and obese adults (Evidence Category A), (2) may
decrease abdominal fat (Evidence Category B), (3) increases cardiorespiratory
ﬁtness (Evidence Category A), and (4) may help with maintenance of weight
loss (Evidence Category C).
Physical activity should be an integral part of weight loss therapy and
weight maintenance. Initially, moderate levels of physical activity for 30 to 45
minutes, 3 to 5 days a week, should be encouraged. All adults should set a
long-term goal to accumulate at least 30 minutes or more of moderate-
intensity physical activity on most, and preferably all, days of the week. Evi-
dence Category B.
206
Data and Documents

Effects of Physical Activity and Diet on Weight Loss (Combined Therapy)
Twenty-three RCT articles were reviewed to determine the effects on
body weight of a combination of a reduced-calorie diet with increased
physical activity. Fifteen of these articles were accepted for inclusion in
the guidelines. These articles contain strong evidence that the combina-
tion of a reduced-calorie diet and increased physical activity produces
greater weight loss than diet alone or physical activity alone, and that
the combination of diet and physical activity improves cardiorespiratory
ﬁtness as measured by VO2 max in overweight and obese adults when
compared to diet alone. The combined effect of a reduced calorie diet
and increased physical activity seemingly produced modestly greater
reductions in abdominal fat than either diet alone or physical activity
alone, although it has not been shown to be independent of weight loss.
The panel’s following recommendations are based on the evidence from
these articles:
The combination of a reduced calorie diet and increased physical activity is
recommended since it produces weight loss that may also result in decreases in
abdominal fat and increases in cardiorespiratory ﬁtness. Evidence Category A.
3. Behavior Therapy
Thirty-six RCTs were reviewed to evaluate whether behavior therapy
provides additional beneﬁt beyond other weight loss approaches, as
well as to compare various behavioral techniques. Of the 36 RCTs
reviewed, 22 were accepted. These RCTs strongly indicate that behav-
ioral strategies to reinforce changes in diet and physical activity in obese
adults produce weight loss in the range of 10 percent over 4 months to 1
year. In addition, no one behavior therapy appeared superior to any
other in its effect on weight loss; multimodal strategies appear to work
best and those interventions with the greatest intensity appear to be
associated with the greatest weight loss. Long-term follow-up of
patients undergoing behavior therapy shows a return to baseline weight
for the great majority of subjects in the absence of continued behavioral
intervention. Randomized trials suggest that behavior therapy, when
used in combination with other weight loss approaches, provides addi-
tional beneﬁts in assisting patients to lose weight short-term, i.e., 1 year
(no additional beneﬁts are found at 3 to 5 years). The panel found little
evidence on the effect of behavior therapy on cardiorespiratory ﬁtness.
Evidence from these articles provided the basis for the following recom-
mendation:
Behavior therapy is a useful adjunct when incorporated into treatment for
weight loss and weight maintenance. Evidence Category B.
There is also suggestive evidence that patient motivation is a key com-
ponent for success in a weight loss program. The panel, therefore, makes
the following recommendation:
Documents
207

Practitioners need to assess the patient’s motivation to enter weight loss
therapy; assess the readiness of the patient to implement the plan and then take
appropriate steps to motivate the patient for treatment. Evidence Category D.
4. Summary of Lifestyle Therapy
There is strong evidence that combined interventions of an LCD,
increased physical activity, and behavior therapy provide the most suc-
cessful therapy for weight loss and weight maintenance. The panel
makes the following recommendation:
Weight loss and weight maintenance therapy should employ the combina-
tion of LCD’s, increased physical activity, and behavior therapy. Evidence
Category A.
5. Pharmacotherapy
A review of 44 pharmacotherapy RCT articles provides strong evidence
that pharmacological therapy (which has generally been studied along
with lifestyle modiﬁcation, including diet and physical activity) using
dexfenﬂuramine, sibutramine, orlistat, or phentermine/fenﬂuramine
results in weight loss in obese adults when used for 6 months to 1 year.
Strong evidence also indicates that appropriate weight loss drugs can
augment diet, physical activity, and behavior therapy in weight loss.
Adverse side effects from the use of weight loss drugs have been
observed in patients. As a result of the observed association of valvular
heart disease in patients taking fenﬂuramine and dexfenﬂuramine alone
or in combination, these drugs have been withdrawn from the market.
Weight loss drugs approved by the FDA [U.S. Food and Drug
Administration] for long-term use may be useful as an adjunct to diet
and physical activity for patients with a BMI of ≥30 with no concomitant
obesity-related risk factors or diseases, as well as for patients with a BMI
of ≥27 with concomitant risk factors or diseases; moreover, using weight
loss drugs singly (not in combination) and starting with the lowest effec-
tive doses can decrease the likelihood of adverse effects. Based on this
evidence, the panel makes the following recommendation:
Weight loss drugs approved by the FDA may be used as part of a compre-
hensive weight loss program, including dietary therapy and physical activity
for patients with a BMI of ≥30 with no concomitant obesity-related risk factors
or diseases, and for patients with a BMI of ≥27 with concomitant obesity-
related risk factors or diseases. Weight loss drugs should never be used without
concomitant lifestyle modiﬁcations. Continual assessment of drug therapy for
efﬁcacy and safety is necessary. If the drug is efﬁcacious in helping the patient
to lose and/or maintain weight loss and there are no serious adverse effects, it
can be continued. If not, it should be discontinued. Evidence Category B.
6. Weight Loss Surgery
The panel reviewed 14 RCTs that examined the effect of surgical proce-
dures on weight loss; 8 were deemed appropriate. All of the studies
208
Data and Documents

included individuals who had a BMI of 40 kg/m2 or above, or a BMI of
35 to 40 kg/m2 with comorbidity. These trials provide strong evidence
that surgical interventions in adults with clinically severe obesity,
i.e., BMIs ≥40 or ≥35 with comorbid conditions, result in substantial
weight loss, and suggestive evidence that lifelong medical surveillance
after surgery is necessary. Therefore, the panel makes the following
recommendation:
Weight loss surgery is an option for carefully selected patients with clini-
cally severe obesity (BMI ≥40 or ≥35 with co-morbid conditions) when less
invasive methods of weight loss have failed and the patient is at high risk for
obesity-associated morbidity or mortality. Evidence Category B.
E. Goals For Weight Loss Maintenance
Once the goals of weight loss have been successfully achieved, mainte-
nance of a lower body weight becomes the challenge. Whereas studies
have shown that weight loss is achievable, it is difﬁcult to maintain over
a long period of time (3 to 5 years). In fact, the majority of persons who
lose weight, once dismissed from clinical therapy, frequently regain it
—so the challenge to the patient and the practitioner is to maintain the
weight loss. Successful weight reduction thus depends on continuing a
maintenance program on a long-term basis. In the past, obtaining the
goal of weight loss has been considered the end of weight loss therapy.
Observation, monitoring, and encouragement of patients who have suc-
cessfully lost weight should be continued long term. The panel’s recom-
mendations on weight loss maintenance are derived from RCT evidence
as well as nonrandomized and observational studies.
1. Weight Maintenance Phase
RCTs from the Behavior Therapy section above suggest that lost weight
usually will be regained unless a weight maintenance program consist-
ing of dietary therapy, physical activity, and behavior therapy is contin-
ued indeﬁnitely. Drug therapy in addition may be helpful during the
weight maintenance phase. The panel also reviewed RCT evidence that
considered the rate of weight loss and the role of weight maintenance.
These RCTs suggest that after 6 months of weight loss treatment, efforts
to maintain weight loss are important. Therefore, the panel recommends
the following:
After successful weight loss, the likelihood of weight loss maintenance is
enhanced by a program consisting of dietary therapy, physical activity, and
behavior therapy which should be continued indeﬁnitely. Drug therapy can also
be used. However, drug safety and efﬁcacy beyond 1 year of total treatment have
not been established. Evidence Category B.
A weight maintenance program should be a priority after the initial 6
months of weight loss therapy. Evidence Category B.
Documents
209

Strong evidence indicates that better weight loss results are achieved
with dietary therapy when the duration of the intervention is at least 6
months. Suggestive evidence also indicates that during dietary therapy,
frequent contacts between professional counselors and patients promote
weight loss and maintenance. Therefore, the panel recommends the
following:
The literature suggests that weight loss and weight maintenance therapies
that provide a grater frequency of contacts between the patient and the practi-
tioner and are provided over the long term should be utilized whenever possible.
This can lead to more successful weight loss and weight maintenance. Evidence
Category C.
Source: National Heart, Blood and Lung Institute.
‘‘Executive Summary.’’ In Clinical Guidelines on the Identiﬁcation,
Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults
NIH Publication No. 98-4083. Bethesda,
MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
1998, xxi–xxix.
‘‘The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to
Prevent and Decrease Overweight and
Obesity’’
On December 13, 2001, U.S. Surgeon General David Satcher declared
that the nationwide rise inoverweight and obesity was a major public
health issue facing the United States. The surgeon general’s report
emphasized the magnitude of the concern by drawing on statistical
data showing the rising trend in obesity and overweight in the United
States and documenting the associated health risks and economic
impact. In the Foreward, Dr. Satcher states, ‘‘Many people believe
that dealing with overweight and obesity is a personal responsibility.
To some degree they are right, but it is also a community responsibility’’
(p. xiii).
Satcher acknowledged that no clear evidence was available to
determine how to effectively prevent and reduce obesity and overweight.
He reasoned that this lack of information demanded a concerted
national public health response. The ‘‘Call to Action’’ urged a co-
operative effort from individuals, families, communities, schools, work
sites, organizations, and the media to ﬁnd new ways to reduce and pre-
vent overweight and obesity. The goal of the ‘‘Call to Action’’ is to set
priorities, establish strategies and actions at multiple levels, and pro-
vide a starting point for groups and individuals to address this national
health problem.
210
Data and Documents

In preparing the report, the Surgeon General’s Ofﬁce held a public
comment period to gather ideas from clinicians, researchers, consumers,
and advocates. The sessions generated numerous community-based
strategies that were organized into ﬁve key settings: families and com-
munities, schools, health care, media and communications, and work
sites. Interventions for the settings were further grouped into categories
of communication, action, research, and evaluation (CARE).
Two excerpts are shown here. The ﬁrst is a statement of principles
established to help meet these new public health objectives, and the sec-
ond is a portion from Section 2 that provides an example of how the
CARE framework was used to develop public health programs and
implement strategic actions that may reduce overweight and obesity
in the United States.
The Surgeon General’s Call To Action To Prevent and Decrease
Overweight and Obesity
Principles:
Overweight and obesity have reached nationwide epidemic propor-
tions. Both the prevention and treatment of overweight and obesity
and their associated health problems are important public health goals.
To achieve these goals, the Surgeon General’s Call To Action To Prevent
and Decrease Overweight and Obesity is committed to ﬁve overarching
principles:
1. Promote the recognition of overweight and obesity as
major public health problems.
2. Assist Americans in balancing healthful eating with
regular physical activity to achieve and maintain a
healthy or healthier body weight.
3. Identify effective and culturally appropriate interven-
tions to prevent and treat overweight and obesity.
4. Encourage environmental changes that help prevent
overweight and obesity.
5. Develop and enhance public-private partnerships to help
implement this vision.
Section 2. Posing Questions and Developing Strategies
Developing a Public Health Response
CARE To Address Overweight and Obesity
Current knowledge is clear on many issues: the prevalence of over-
weight and obesity is high, and that of obesity is increasing rapidly;
Documents
211

adolescents who are overweight are at high risk of becoming overweight
or obese adults; overweight and obesity increase the risk for serious dis-
eases such as type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and high blood cholesterol;
and overweight and obesity are associated with premature death and
disability. It is also known that a healthy diet and adequate physical
activity aid in maintaining a healthy weight and, among overweight or
obese persons, can promote weight loss. Knowledge is less clear, how-
ever, on some very important questions. How can overweight and
obesity be prevented? What are the most effective prevention and treat-
ment strategies? How can the environment be modiﬁed to promote
healthier eating and increased physical activity? Determining the
answers to these questions demands a national public health response.
Assembling the components of this response has begun.
Developing a Public Health Response
In December 2000, the Surgeon General hosted a public Listening Ses-
sion on overweight and obesity. The meeting—Toward a National
Action Plan on Overweight and Obesity: The Surgeon General’s Initia-
tive—began a developmental process that led to this Surgeon General’s
Call To Action To Prevent and Decrease Overweight and Obesity. A menu of
important activities has been assembled from comments received dur-
ing the Surgeon General’s Listening Session, a public comment period,
and the National Nutrition Summit. The menu, which is presented in
the following section, highlights areas that received signiﬁcant attention
during one or more of these events. Although not meant to be prescrip-
tive, the menu should establish useful starting points as individuals and
groups focus their own skills, creativity, and inspiration on the national
epidemic of overweight and obesity.
The discussions at the Surgeon General’s Listening Session centered
on activities and interventions in ﬁve key settings: families and com-
munities, schools, health care, media and communications, and work-
sites. The key actions discussed are presented for each of these settings.
Many of these actions overlap the different settings and can be applied
in several or all environments.
CARE To Address Overweight and Obesity
The key actions are organized by setting in a framework called CARE:
Communication, Action, and Research and Evaluation.
Communication: Provision of information and tools to motivate
and empower decision makers at the governmental, organizational,
community, family, and individual levels who will create change toward
the prevention and decrease of overweight and obesity.
212
Data and Documents

Action: Interventions and activities that assist decision makers
in preventing and decreasing overweight and obesity, individually or
collectively.
Research and Evaluation: Investigations to better understand the
causes of overweight and obesity, to assess the effectiveness of interven-
tions, and to develop new communication and action strategies. Within
the CARE framework, effective actions must occur at multiple levels.
Obviously, individual behavioral change lies at the core of all strategies
to reduce overweight and obesity. Successful efforts, however, must
focus not only on individual behavioral change, but also on group inﬂu-
ences, institutional and community inﬂuences, and public policy.
Actions to reduce overweight and obesity will fail without this multidi-
mensional approach. Individual behavioral change can occur only in a
supportive environment with accessible and affordable healthy food
choices and opportunities for regular physical activity. Furthermore,
actions aimed exclusively at individual behavioral change, while not
considering social, cultural, economic, and environmental inﬂuences,
are likely to reinforce attitudes of stigmatization against the overweight
and obese.
Setting 1: Families and Communities
Families and communities lie at the foundation of the solution to the
problems of overweight and obesity. Family members can share their
own knowledge and habits regarding a healthy diet and physical activ-
ity with their children, friends, and other community members. Empha-
sis should be placed on family and community opportunities for
communication, education, and peer support surrounding the mainte-
nance of healthy dietary choices and physical activity patterns.
Communication
1. Raise consumer awareness about the effect of being over-
weight on overall health.
2. Inform community leaders about the importance of
developing healthy communities.
3. Highlight programs that support healthful food and
physical activity choices to community decision makers.
4. Raise policy makers’ awareness of the need to develop
social and environmental policy that would help com-
munities and families be more physically active and
consume a healthier diet.
5. Educate individuals, families, and communities about
healthy dietary patterns and regular physical activity,
based on the Dietary Guidelines for Americans.
Documents
213

6. Educate parents about the need to serve as good role
models by practicing healthy eating habits and engaging
in regular physical activity in order to instill lifelong
healthy habits in their children.
7. Raise consumer awareness about reasonable food and
beverage portion sizes.
8. Educate expectant parents and other community mem-
bers about the potentially protective effect of breast-
feeding against the development of obesity.
Action
1. Form community coalitions to support the development
of increased opportunities to engage in leisure time
physical activity and to encourage food outlets to
increase availability of low-calorie, nutritious food items.
2. Encourage the food industry to provide reasonable food
and beverage portion sizes.
3. Increase availability of nutrition information for foods
eaten and prepared away from home.
4. Create more community-based obesity prevention and
treatment programs for children and adults.
5. Empower families to manage weight and health through
skill building in parenting, meal planning, and behav-
ioral management.
6. Expand efforts to encourage healthy eating patterns, con-
sistent with the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, by nutri-
tion assistance recipients.
7. Provide demonstration grants to address the lack of
access to and availability of healthy affordable foods in
inner cities.
8. Promote healthful dietary patterns, including con-
sumption of at least ﬁve servings of fruits and vegeta-
bles a day.
9. Create community environments that promote and sup-
port breastfeeding.
10. Decrease time spent watching television and in similar
sedentary behaviors by children and their families.
11. Provide demonstration grants to address the lack of pub-
lic access to safe and supervised physical activity.
214
Data and Documents

12. Create and implement public policy related to the provi-
sion of safe and accessible sidewalks, walking and
bicycle paths, and stairs.
Research and Evaluation
1. Conduct research on obesity prevention and reduction to
conﬁrm their effects on improving health outcomes.
2. Determine the root causes, behaviors, and social and eco-
logical factors leading to obesity and how such forces
vary by race and ethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic
status.
3. Assess the factors contributing to the disproportionate
burden of overweight and obesity in low-income and
minority racial and ethnic populations.
4. Develop and evaluate preventive interventions that tar-
get infants and children, especially those who are at
high risk of becoming obese.
5. Coordinate research activities to reﬁne risk assessment,
to enhance obesity prevention, and to support appropri-
ate consumer messages and education.
6. Study the cost-effectiveness of community-directed strat-
egies designed to prevent the onset of overweight and
obesity.
7. Conduct behavioral research to identify how to motivate
people to increase and maintain physical activity and
make healthier food choices.
8. Evaluate the feasibility of incentives that support health-
ful dietary and physical activity patterns.
9. Identify techniques that can foster community motiva-
tion to reduce overweight and obesity.
10. Examine the marketing practices of the fast food industry
and the factors determining construction of new food
outlets.
Setting 2: Schools
Schools are identiﬁed as a key setting for public health strategies to pre-
vent and decrease the prevalence of overweight and obesity. Most chil-
dren spend a large portion of time in school. Schools provide many
opportunities to engage children in healthy eating and physical activity
and to reinforce healthy diet and physical activity messages. Public
Documents
215

health approaches in schools should extend beyond health and physical
education to include school policy, the school physical and social envi-
ronment, and links between schools and families and communities.
Schools and communities that are interested in reducing overweight
among the young people they serve can consider options listed below.
Decisions about which options to select should be made at the local
level.
Communication
1. Build awareness among teachers, food service staff,
coaches, nurses, and other school staff about the contri-
bution of proper nutrition and physical activity to the
maintenance of lifelong healthy weight.
2. Educate teachers, staff, and parents about the importance
of school physical activity and nutrition programs and
policies.
3. Educate parents, teachers, coaches, staff, and other adults
in the community about the importance they hold as role
models for children, and teach them how to be models
for healthy eating and regular physical activity.
4. Educate students, teachers, staff, and parents about the
importance of body size acceptance and the dangers of
unhealthy weight control practices.
5. Develop sensitivity of staff to the problems encountered
by the overweight child.
Action
1. Provide age-appropriate and culturally sensitive instruc-
tion in health education that helps students develop the
knowledge, attitudes, skills, and behaviors to adopt,
maintain, and enjoy healthy eating habits and a physi-
cally active lifestyle.
2. Ensure that meals offered through the school breakfast
and lunch programs meet nutrition standards.
3. Adopt policies ensuring that all foods and beverages
available on school campuses and at school events con-
tribute toward eating patterns that are consistent with the
Dietary Guidelines for Americans.
4. Provide food options that are low in fat, calories, and
added sugars, such as fruits, vegetables, whole grains,
and low-fat or nonfat dairy foods.
216
Data and Documents

5. Ensure that healthy snacks and foods are provided in
vending machines, school stores, and other venues
within the school’s control.
6. Prohibit student access to vending machines, school
stores, and other venues that compete with healthy
school meals in elementary schools and restrict access in
middle, junior, and high schools.
7. Provide an adequate amount of time for students to eat
school meals, and schedule lunch periods at reasonable
hours around midday.
8. Provide all children, from prekindergarten through
grade 12, with quality daily physical education that
helps develop the knowledge, attitudes, skills, behaviors,
and conﬁdence needed to be physically active for life.
9. Provide daily recess periods for elementary school stu-
dents, featuring time for unstructured but supervised
play.
10. Provide extracurricular physical activity programs, espe-
cially inclusive intramural programs and physical activ-
ity clubs.
11. Encourage the use of school facilities for physical activity
programs offered by the school and/or community-
based organizations outside of school hours.
Research and Evaluation
1. Conduct research on the relationship of healthy eating
and physical activity to student health, learning, atten-
dance, classroom behavior, violence, and other social
outcomes.
2. Evaluate school-based behavioral health interventions
for the prevention of overweight in children.
3. Develop an ongoing, systematic process to assess the
school physical activity and nutrition environment, and
plan, implement, and monitor improvements.
4. Conduct research to study the effect of school policies
such as food services and physical activity curricula on
overweight in children and adolescents.
5. Evaluate the ﬁnancial and health impact of school con-
tracts with vendors of high- calorie foods and beverages
with minimal nutritional value.
Documents
217

Setting 3: Health Care
The health care system provides a powerful setting for interventions
aimed at reducing the prevalence of overweight and obesity and their
consequences. A majority of Americans interact with the health care sys-
tem at least once during any given year. Recommendations by pediatric
and adult health care providers can be inﬂuential in patient dietary
choices and physical activity patterns. In collaboration with schools
and worksites, health care providers and institutions can reinforce the
adoption and maintenance of healthy lifestyle behaviors. Health care
providers also can serve as effective public policy advocates and further
catalyze intervention efforts in the family and the community and in the
media communications settings.
Communication
1. Inform health care providers and administrators of the
tremendous burden of overweight and obesity on the
health care system in terms of mortality, morbidity,
and cost.
2. Inform and educate the health care community about the
importance of healthy eating, consistent with the Dietary
Guidelines for Americans, and physical activity and ﬁtness
for the promotion of health.
3. Educate health care providers and administrators to
identify and reduce the barriers involving patients’ lack
of access to effective nutrition and physical activity
interventions.
4. Inform and educate the health care community about
assessment of weight status and the risk of inappropri-
ate weight change.
5. Educate health care providers on effective ways to pro-
mote and support breastfeeding.
Action
1. Train health care providers and health profession stu-
dents in effective prevention and treatment techniques
for overweight and obesity.
2. Encourage partnerships between health care providers,
schools, faith-based groups, and other community
organizations in prevention efforts targeted at social and
environmental causes of overweight and obesity.
218
Data and Documents

3. Establish a dialogue to consider classifying obesity as a
disease category for reimbursement coding.
4. Explore mechanisms that will partially or fully cover
reimbursement or include as a member beneﬁt health
care services associated with weight management,
including nutrition education and physical activity
programs.
Research and Evaluation
1. Develop effective preventive and therapeutic programs
for obesity.
2. Study the effect of weight reduction programs on health
outcomes.
3. Analyze the cost-effectiveness data on clinical obesity
prevention and treatment efforts and conduct further
research where the data are inconclusive.
4. Promote research on the maintenance of weight loss.
5. Promote research on breastfeeding and the prevention
of obesity.
6. Review and evaluate the reimbursement policies of pub-
lic and private health insurance providers regarding
overweight and obesity prevention and treatment efforts.
Setting 4: Media and Communications
The media can provide essential functions in overweight and obesity
prevention efforts. From a public education and social marketing stand-
point, the media can disseminate health messages and display healthy
behaviors aimed at changing dietary habits and exercise patterns. In
addition, the media can provide a powerful forum for community mem-
bers who are addressing the social and environmental inﬂuences on
dietary and physical activity patterns.
Communication
1. Emphasize to media professionals that the primary con-
cern of overweight and obesity is one of health rather
than appearance.
2. Emphasize to media professionals the disproportionate
burden of overweight and obesity in low-income and
Documents
219

racial and ethnic minority populations and the need for
culturally sensitive health messages.
3. Communicate the importance of prevention of over-
weight through balancing food intake with physical
activity at all ages.
4. Promote the recognition of inappropriate weight change.
5. Build awareness of the importance of social and environ-
mental inﬂuences on making appropriate diet and
physical activity choices.
6. Provide professional education for media professionals
on policy areas related to diet and physical activity.
7. Emphasize to media professionals the need to develop
uniform health messages about physical activity and
nutrition that are consistent with the Dietary Guidelines
for Americans.
Action
1. Conduct a national campaign to foster public awareness
of the health beneﬁts of regular physical activity, health-
ful dietary choices, and maintaining a healthy weight,
based on the Dietary Guidelines for Americans.
2. Encourage truthful and reasonable consumer goals for
weight loss programs and weight management products.
3. Incorporate messages about proper nutrition, including
eating at least ﬁve servings of fruits and vegetables a
day, and regular physical activity in youth-oriented TV
programming.
4. Train nutrition and exercise scientists and specialists in
media advocacy skills that will empower them to dis-
seminate their knowledge to a broad audience.
5. Encourage community-based advertising campaigns to
balance messages that may encourage consumption of
excess calories and inactivity generated by fast food
industries and by industries that promote sedentary
behaviors.
6. Encourage media professionals to utilize actors’ inﬂuen-
ces as role models to demonstrate eating and physical
activity lifestyles for health rather than for appearance.
7. Encourage media professionals to employ actors of
diverse sizes.
220
Data and Documents

Research and Evaluation
1. Evaluate the impact of community media advocacy cam-
paigns designed to achieve public policy and health-
related goals.
2. Conduct consumer research to ensure that media mes-
sages are positive, realistic, relevant, consistent, and
achievable.
3. Increase research on the effects of popular media images
of ideal body types and their potential health impact,
particularly on young women.
Setting 5: Worksites
More than 100 million Americans spend the majority of their day at a
worksite. While at work, employees are often aggregated within systems
for communication, education, and peer support. Thus, worksites pro-
vide many opportunities to reinforce the adoption and maintenance of
healthy lifestyle behaviors. Public health approaches in worksites
should extend beyond health education and awareness to include work-
site policies, the physical and social environments of worksites, and
their links with the family and community setting.
Communication
1. Inform employers of the direct and indirect costs of
obesity.
2. Communicate to employers the return-on-investment
(ROI) data for worksite obesity prevention and treat-
ment strategies.
Action
1. Change workﬂow patterns, including ﬂexible work
hours, to create opportunities for regular physical activ-
ity during the workday.
2. Provide protected time for lunch, and ensure that healthy
food options are available.
3. Establish worksite exercise facilities or create incentives
for employees to join local ﬁtness centers.
4. Create incentives for workers to achieve and maintain a
healthy body weight.
Documents
221

5.
Encourage employers to require weight management
and physical activity counseling as a member beneﬁt in
health insurance contracts.
6. Create work environments that promote and support
breastfeeding.
7. Explore ways to create Federal worksite programs pro-
moting healthy eating and physical activity that will set
an example to the private sector.
Research and Evaluation
1. Evaluate best practices in worksite overweight and
obesity prevention and treatment efforts, and dissemi-
nate results of studies widely.
2. Evaluate economic data examining worksite obesity pre-
vention and treatment efforts.
3. Conduct controlled worksite studies of the impact of
overweight and obesity management programs on
worker productivity and absenteeism.
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
‘‘The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to
Prevent and Decrease Overweight and Obesity.’’
Rockville, MD: Ofﬁce of the Surgeon General, 2001.
Principles v; Section 2. Posing Questions and Developing Strategies 15–24.
Strategic Plan for NIH Obesity Research
The U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) supports research that
provides a scientiﬁc evidence base for public policy decisions.The NIH)
invests more than $28 billion annually in medical research and is the
primary federal agency for conducting and supporting medical
research. It consists of 27 institutes and centers and provides direction
and ﬁnancial support through competitive grants to researchers in the
United States and throughout the world. Currently, the NIH funds
more than 90 percent of all obesity research in the United States.
Obesity research is by nature multidisciplinary, involving a broad
range of studies, including molecular, genetic, behavioral, environmen-
tal, clinical, and epidemiologic investigations. In light of this diversity,
Elias A. Zerhouni, MD, director of the NIH, created the NIH Obesity
Research Task Force to intensify basic and clinical research and to help
coordinate obesity research across the NIH’s institutes and centers. In
2004, the Task Force developed and published theStrategic Plan for
222
Data and Documents

NIH Obesity Research. The plan is a guide for supporting innovative
and collaborative research in a comprehensive way.
The plan’s obesity research goals range from identiﬁcation of the
underlying causes to potential behavioral, pharmacologic, and surgical
treatments to reduction of associated diseases to translation of basic sci-
ence results into useful advice for the public. The excerpt illustrates the
diversity and collaboration in ongoing NIH research efforts, with exam-
ples related to the development of clinical nutrition research units
(CNRUs), methods of health behavior surveillance, the effectiveness of
low- and high-carbohydrate diets and bariatric surgery, and the crea-
tion of new, standardized mouse models to help study obesity.
Strategic Plan for NIH Obesity Research
Appendix B: Examples of Ongoing
NIH Efforts
Introduction
This Appendix highlights examples of ongoing NIH efforts relevant to
obesity research. These efforts are among the strategies and opportuni-
ties supported by the NIH to achieve its goals for: research toward pre-
venting and treating obesity through lifestyle modiﬁcation; research
toward preventing and treating obesity through pharmacologic, surgi-
cal, or other medical approaches; research toward breaking the link
between obesity and its associated health conditions; and cross-cutting
research topics, including technologies, fostering of multidisciplinary
and interdisciplinary research teams, investigator training, translational
research and education/ outreach efforts.
Clinical Nutrition Research Units (CNRUs) and Obesity/Nutrition
Research Centers (ONRCs):
The CNRU/ONRC program provides important resources for
the obesity research community. There are ten CNRUs and four
ONRCs, located throughout the country. These Centers are integrated
arrays of research, shared resources, educational, clinical, and training
opportunities. These Centers pursue basic and clinical research, includ-
ing such cross-cutting areas as multidisciplinary research and transla-
tional research, and offer a rich environment for research training
related to obesity and nutritional sciences.
Advances in obesity research are derived from such fundamental
disciplines as biochemistry, molecular biology, genetics, and physiology;
and such medical specialties as internal medicine, pediatrics, and sur-
gery. Because of its interdisciplinary nature, obesity research can beneﬁt
from close interactions among researchers; health services providers,
and educators. Supported by the NIH, the core centers for shared
research facilities at CNRUs and ONRCs are a valuable way to promote
Documents
223

multidisciplinary interactions, fostering and strengthening obesity
research within a broad nutritional science context.
The CNRUs and ONRCs conduct research on treatment and pre-
vention of obesity and eating disorders, understanding of the control
and modulation of energy metabolism as related to obesity, and under-
standing and treatment of other health conditions associated with
abnormalities of energy balance and weight management. As one objec-
tive, these Centers strive to promote basic and clinical science studies to
advance understanding of the complex interrelationships among genetic
factors and the environment in obesity and other health conditions, such
as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer. The CNRUs/ONRCs are
poised to stimulate and support development and use of state-of-the-art
techniques to study nutritional factors and their inﬂuence on these and
other health conditions. Another objective of the Centers is to encourage
translational studies that apply newer basic science ﬁndings to the diag-
nosis and management of obesity and other chronic health conditions.
All CNRUs and ONRCs are required to conduct clinical studies.
The clinical investigation component facilitates translation of research
into practical treatment strategies for patients, provides Center investi-
gators with clinical samples and patient data needed for their research,
and serves as a bridge between clinical and basic science investigators.
Most of the Centers have a clinic population with adequate representa-
tion of women and minorities who can readily participate in research
studies. The availability of such a population plays a major role in
attracting investigators to the ﬁeld of obesity research, and also can
facilitate the design of pilot and feasibility projects (discussed below).
The emphasis on clinical research in the CNRUs and ONRCs further
provides a natural interaction with the NIH-supported General Clinical
Research Centers (GCRCs). The GCRCs are an additional resource for
experimental design and instrumentation to advance the pursuit of
pathophysiological mechanisms of obesity-related diseases in humans.
Another valuable aspect of the CNRUs and ONRCs is an associated
pilot and feasibility program. This program provides support for new
investigators or for established investigators who are moving into areas
of research relevant to the goals of the Centers. Projects evaluating the
effectiveness of model programs for translating research in biomedical
and behavioral science into routine clinical care also are encouraged.
The combination of the shared core resources, clinical research expertise,
and support for pilot and feasibility studies also permits the CNRUs and
ONRCs a way to move quickly to study ‘‘natural experiments.’’ For exam-
ple, protocols could be designed to assess the efﬁcacy of proposed policy
changes in schools concerning food offerings and/or physical activity, or
to study obesity-focused efforts of food companies or restaurants.
Finally, many of the CNRUs/ONRCs are co-located at institutions
with Schools of Public Health and CDC [Centers for Disease Control
224
Data and Documents

and Prevention]-supported Prevention Centers. Thus, these locations
should be primed to respond to new initiatives, especially those target-
ing prevention at the community and population level.
Preventing and Treating Obesity Through Behavioral and Environmental
Approaches To Modify Lifestyle
Environmental approaches to obesity prevention:
As a result of a recently launched NIH initiative in this area, a variety of
new studies are now under way to develop and test environmental
modiﬁcations aimed toward preventing obesity in children as well as
adults. Environments targeted by these studies that are relevant to chil-
dren include, for example, child care centers, schools, after-school pro-
grams, and the home; studies relevant to adults include, for example, a
cafeteria-based study based in a community center. In addition to
designing interventions to be tested, two of the projects will be ‘‘natural
experiments’’ to evaluate the impact on health outcomes of new school
policies, developed by policy-makers in Seattle and California that relate
to commercial advertising, the sale of energy-dense foods, and other
issues. Among the studies being supported as a result of this initiative,
some have a particular focus on minority populations disproportion-
ately affected by obesity, including African Americans and American
Indians.
Diabetes Prevention Program Outcome Study (DPPOS):
A follow-up study of participants in the DPP clinical trial (described
previously) will examine the durability of the DPP interventions on pre-
vention or delay of type 2 diabetes and its cardiovascular complications;
heart disease is the major cause of death in people with type 2 diabetes.
The DPPOS will additionally examine the ability to maintain weight loss
in the participants over extended periods of time.
Look AHEAD (Action for Health in Diabetes) clinical trial:
This multi-center, NIH-sponsored clinical trial will examine the health
effects of an intervention designed to achieve and maintain weight loss
over the long term through decreased caloric intake and increased
physical activity. Look AHEAD has a goal of enrolling 5,000 obese
patients with type 2 diabetes, including both men and women and
members of minority groups, and following them for up to 11.5 years
to study the impact of the weight loss intervention on cardiovascular
disease, the complication of diabetes that causes the greatest rates of ill-
ness and death.
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES):
The NIH provides additional resources to NHANES, a series of
surveys conducted by the National Center for Health Statistics of
the CDC.
Documents
225

The goals of NHANES include estimating the number of people in
the U.S. who have selected diseases, analyzing risk factors for diseases,
and studying the relationship between diet, nutrition, physical activity,
and health. Measurement of body composition and cardiorespiratory ﬁt-
ness are two of the components of NHANES currently supported by the
NIH. The body composition measure will provide information on fat
mass and percent body fat for the U.S. population, and the cardiorespi-
ratory ﬁtness measure will provide information on ﬁtness for those ages
12 to 49 years. These data provide detail beyond body mass index and
reported physical activity to be linked with other important health sta-
tus and public health information.
In addition, the NIH has supported improvements in the methods
for assessing diet and physical activity, including the addition of an
objective measure of physical activity—key elements for understanding
population targets for interventions to prevent and treat obesity. The
NIH will also explore the potential of supporting a longitudinal compo-
nent to NHANES to examine changes in weight over the lifetime in
diverse population groups.
National and regional surveillance of health behaviors:
The NIH provides support for cancer control supplements and
other data elements within the National Health Interview Survey and
the California Health Interview Survey. These surveys result in
representative data concerning diverse health behaviors, including diet
and physical activity.
Current NIH efforts are focusing on using these surveys to better
understand disparities in levels of physical activity among different
race/ethnic groups and to develop capacity for analyzing associations
between the environment and physical activity. Such efforts comple-
ment data from NHANES because they provide larger samples for spe-
ciﬁc racial and ethnic groups at high risk for obesity and more
extensive coverage of regional and state diversity in obesity related
health behaviors.
Weight-loss maintenance:
Because maintenance of weight loss is a critical yet particularly difﬁcult
element of obesity treatment and prevention, the newly launched
Weight Loss Maintenance Trial will compare different strategies for
maintaining weight loss over a period of 21/2 years in approximately
800 adults who are at high risk for cardiovascular disease and who are
successful in losing a targeted amount of weight over the short term
through lifestyle changes.
Long-term evaluation of factors associated with childhood obesity or its
associated health problems:
Investigators in the intramural program at NIH are conducting a longi-
tudinal study in which 250 children who are either overweight or at risk
for overweight are extensively evaluated for factors that may predict
226
Data and Documents

development of obesity or its associated health conditions, including
genetic variation, metabolic and cardiovascular differences, food intake,
total and resting energy expenditure, psychological functioning, eating
disorders, and physical activity behaviors. These children are being fol-
lowed for 15 years, and should provide valuable information on risks
for the development of obesity and its medical complications.
The Girls Health Enrichment Multi-site Studies (GEMS):
This research effort is a two-phase program to develop and pilot-
test interventions to prevent obesity in African American girls ages
8 to 10 years, a group at high risk of developing obesity. During
Phase 1, several distinct interventions addressing diet, physical activity,
and psychosocial and family inﬂuences were developed and pilot
tested. During Phase 2, two ﬁeld centers are testing separate 2-year
interventions to reduce excessive weight gain in African American girls
ages 8–10 years. One study is testing a family-based program that coun-
sels and teaches 300 girls and their parents or caregivers to eat healthy
diets, drink fewer sweetened beverages, and increase their physical
activity. The second study of 260 girls is testing an intervention that
encourages girls to attend after-school dance classes set up in the com-
munity to increase their physical activity and also delivers a home-
based intervention to reduce girls’ TV watching to reduce the amount
of time they are sedentary and exposed to food advertising and eating
opportunities.
The PREMIER trial—to determine the effectiveness of multicomponent
lifestyle intervention programs in lowering blood pressure:
A total of 810 participants were randomly assigned to receive one of 3
interventions over an 18 month period: 1) an intensive behavioral inter-
vention to facilitate their achieving lifestyle changes that are currently
recommended for blood pressure control—reduced salt intake,
increased physical activity, and weight control or weight loss, as needed;
2) this same intervention coupled with a behavioral intervention to pro-
mote consumption of the DASH [Dietary Approaches to Stop Hyperten-
sion] diet (an eating pattern rich in fruits, vegetables, and low fat dairy
products; low in total and saturated fat and cholesterol; and moderately
high in protein), which has been shown to lower blood pressure; or 3)
advice alone.
The Dietary Composition, Obesity, and Cardiovascular Risk study:
This study investigates the effects of energy density and three different
macronutrient (protein, fat, carbohydrate) compositions of diet on coro-
nary heart disease risk factors (LDL-cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, rem-
nant lipoprotein c, Lp(a) cholesterol, insulin, glycosylated hemoglobin,
glucose, and blood pressure) in the fasting and nonfasting state (4 hours
after a meal) in 80 men and women (men ages 50 to 67 years and post-
menopausal women under 65 years) with elevated LDL-cholesterol
(130 mg/dL or greater) and overweight or obese (BMI 28–38 kg/m2). A
Documents
227

12-week controlled diet feeding study followed by participants’ prepar-
ing their own foods on their assigned diets for 1 year investigates the
effects of energy density and various macronutrient composition
(calories, fat, protein, carbohydrate, and dietary glycemic index) on
energy balance and cardiovascular disease risk factors such as body
weight and composition, physical activity, blood pressure, and plasma
lipoproteins. This study plans to ﬁnd out whether diets low in caloric
density, regardless of overall fat intake or glycemic index, will have a
more favorable effect on coronary heart disease risk factors, body weight
and composition, and energy expenditure than a diet with higher caloric
density and high glycemic index.
Dietary Macronutrients and Weight Loss:
This trial investigates whether the macronutrient composition of the diet
(the relative amount of fat, protein, and carbohydrate) can help promote
weight loss and its maintenance. The trial compares the effects on
weight loss and weight maintenance of four diets differing in macronu-
trient composition in 800 overweight or obese adults over a two-year
period. The diets are all low in saturated fat. The four diets are a moder-
ate fat diet and a low fat diet, each at two levels of protein. Participants
are counseled to follow these diets using a state-of-the art behavioral
program.
Low and high carbohydrate diets:
The Safety and Efﬁcacy of Low and High Carbohydrate Diets study is
assessing the short-term and long-term clinical effects of different diets
in 360 obese men and women.
Participants in a 26-week behavioral weight loss program will be
randomized to a diet featuring low carbohydrate, unlimited fat and pro-
tein, or to a conventional diet of high carbohydrate and low fat. Short-
term (weeks 12–26) and long-term (weeks 52–104) effects of each dietary
approach will be evaluated and compared in terms of changes in weight
and body composition, metabolic and organ function, and exercise
endurance.
Behavioral Change Consortium:
This initiative was designed to stimulate investigations of innovative
strategies designed to achieve long-term healthy behavior change. A
large number of the funded projects are focusing speciﬁcally on physical
activity and/or dietary behaviors. These projects include
The SENIOR Project; Youth Environments Promoting Nutrition and
Activity; Promoting Healthy Lifestyles: Alternative Models’ Effects;
Project HOPE; Exercise Advice by Human or Computer; Reducing Dis-
ease Risk in Low-income, Postpartum Women; and Health Promotion
Through Black Churches. In addition, consortia working groups in
nutrition and physical activity have been established to coordinate
cross-site analyses of common research measures.
228
Data and Documents

Maintenance of long-term behavior change:
As a result of another NIH effort, new research is beginning on the biop-
sychosocial processes and interventions that target long-term mainte-
nance of behavior change, including behavior relevant to overweight
and obesity such as physical activity.
Obesity and the built environment—improving public health through
community design:
The built environment encompasses all of the buildings, spaces, and
products created or modiﬁed by people, including, for example: build-
ings (housing, schools, workplaces), land use (industrial or residential),
public resources (parks, museums), zoning regulations, and transporta-
tion systems. An NIH-sponsored conference was held to provide a
forum to discuss how different elements of the built environment may
contribute to obesity via access to food and physical activity, and how
environmental health research and interventions could address this
public health problem. The goals of the conference included developing
research and practice agendas to examine the relationship between the
built environment and obesity, enhancing interagency coordination
and partnerships, and examining evidence-based strategies for interven-
tion. Results of this conference are now being considered in the planning
of future research efforts.
Preventing and Treating Obesity Through Pharmacologic, Surgical, or
Other Medical Approaches
Life-cycle of a fat cell:
A new series of NIH supported studies is characterizing how fat cells
are formed and what determines their numbers and location in the body.
Knowledge gained from this research will help in the understanding of
obesity and other metabolic conditions.
Calcium as a potential supplement to prevent weight gain:
Intramural NIH investigators are studying the role of calcium supple-
mentation for prevention of weight gain. An ongoing 340-person
randomized, controlled clinical trial of dietary supplementation with
1500 mg/d of calcium carbonate will determine whether calcium intake,
which is considered an easily modiﬁable dietary factor, can affect future
weight gain in overweight and obese adults.
Investigations of drug therapy in children and adolescents:
Therapy for signiﬁcantly overweight children and adolescents with
obesity-related health conditions is also being studied by intramural
investigators.
Two ongoing randomized, placebo-controlled trials in the NIH
Intramural Research Program are studying promising pharmacologic
interventions: metformin for children ages 6 to 12 years, and orlistat
for adolescents, ages 12 to 17 years.
Documents
229

Bariatric surgery:
For people who are extremely obese, expected weight loss from behav-
ior change alone may not be sufﬁcient to have a major impact on health
and is unlikely to be sustained. Bariatric surgical procedures, which
restrict stomach size and/or lead to decreased absorption of nutrients,
are being increasingly performed to treat severe obesity. These proce-
dures can have dramatic beneﬁts (such as improved glycemic control
or even reversal of type 2 diabetes), but also carry substantial risks,
including death. The NIH has now established a Bariatric Surgery Clini-
cal Research Consortium, the Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Sur-
gery (LABS), to facilitate and accelerate research in this area. This
consortium will help pool the necessary clinical expertise and adminis-
trative resources to facilitate the conduct of multiple and novel clinical
studies in a timely, efﬁcient manner. Development of a database using
standardized deﬁnitions, clinical protocols, and data collection instru-
ments will enhance the ability to provide meaningful evidence-based
recommendations for patient evaluation, selection, and follow-up care.
This database, in turn, will promote rapid dissemination of research
ﬁndings to healthcare professionals. In addition, this consortium will
serve as a resource for basic and clinical studies which can explore the
mechanisms by which surgery affects obesity-related comorbid condi-
tions, energy expenditure, nutrient partitioning, appetitive behaviors,
and psychosocial factors. This may lead to improved understanding of
the factors underlying the development of obesity, with implications
for new strategies for prevention and treatment.
Beyond BMI—Identifying additional traits associated with obesity that
could facilitate large-scale genetics studies:
In rare cases, an individual may have a single genetic variation that
leads to obesity, but for most obese people, the combined inﬂuences of
variations in multiple genes likely contribute to excess weight gain.
The search for genes that contribute to obesity may be greatly enhanced
by the optimal selection of obesity-associated physical, molecular, or
behavioral traits (phenotypes) to evaluate. Correlating the presence of
an obesity-associated phenotype with a particular genetic variation can
help lead scientists to genes that inﬂuence obesity. Although BMI, a
measure of weight relative to height, has been useful for epidemiologic
and other studies, other phenotypes may prove to be even more inform-
ative for genetic research. These may include, for example, traits meas-
urable by imaging techniques, molecular analyses, and/or behavioral
assessments. A recent NIH-sponsored workshop brought together exter-
nal experts to recommend methods for measuring various obesity asso-
ciated phenotypes that would be practical to implement in a large-scale
human genetics study. As a result of this workshop, new initiatives are
planned to take advantage of molecular tools in model organisms to
230
Data and Documents

expand the list of potential drug targets and to link genetics to pre-obese
metabolic states.
Longitudinal studies will be needed to connect genes, metabolism
and subsequent development of obesity.
Enhancing research on mouse models by facilitating characterization of
the mice:
The NIH has established a set of centers to provide, high quality meta-
bolic and physiologic analysis of mouse models of obesity, diabetes, dia-
betic complications, and related disorders.
Source: National Institutes of Health (NIH).
Strategic Plan for NIH Obesity Research. NIH publication No. 04-5493.
Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health, 2004. Appendix B 69–75.
References
Bessesen, D. H. ‘‘Update on Obesity.’’ Journal of Clinical Endocrinology &
Metabolism 93, no. 6 (2008): 2027–2034.
Bish, C. L., H. M. Blanck, M. K. Serdula, M. Marcus, H. W. Kohl III, and
L. K. Khan. ‘‘Diet and Physical Activity Behaviors among Americans
Trying to Lose Weight: 2000 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance
System.’’ Obesity Research 13, no. 3 (2005): 596–607.
Burger King. ‘‘U.S. Nutritional Information: Core Menu Items January
2008.’’ 2008. [Online information; retrieved 1/12/09.] http://
www.bk.com/Nutrition/PDFs/brochure.pdf.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). ‘‘Childhood
Overweight: Consequences.’’ Atlanta: CDC, 2007.
Gardner, G., and B. Halweil. ‘‘Overfed and Underfed: The Global
Epidemic of Malnutrition.’’ Washington, DC: Worldwatch Institute,
2000.
Jack in the Box. ‘‘Burgers and More.’’ 2008. [Online nutritional
information; retrieved 1/12/09.] http://www.jackinthebox.com/
ourfood/dynamic/nutrition.php?cat=1.
Jackson, A. S., and M. L. Pollock. ‘‘Generalized Equations for Predicting
Body Density of Men.’’ British Journal of Nutrition 40, no. 3 (1978): 497–
504.
Jackson, A. S., M. L. Pollock, and A. Ward. ‘‘Generalized Equations for
Predicting Body Density of Women.’’ Medicine & Science in Sports &
Exercise 12, no. 3 (1980): 175–181.
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI). Clinical Guidelines
on the Identiﬁcation, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity
References
231

in Adults: The Evidence Report. Bethesda, MD: National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, 1998.
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) and North
American Association for the Studyof Obesity (NAASO). The Practical
Guide to the Identiﬁcation, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and
Obesity in Adults. NIH Publication Number 00-4084.Bethesda, MD:
National Institutes of Health, 2000.
Ogden, C. L., M. D. Carroll, M. A. McDowell, and K. M. Flegal KM.
‘‘Obesity among Adults in the United States—No Change since 2003–
2004.’’ Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics, 2007.
Putnam, J., J. Allshouse, and L. S. Kantor. ‘‘U.S. Per Capita Food
Supply Trends: More Calories, Reﬁned Carbohydrates, and Fats.’’ Food
Review 25, no. 3 (2002): 1–4.
Siri, W. E.. ‘‘Body Composition from Fluid Spaces and Density:
Analysis of Methods. 1961.’’ Nutrition 9, no. 5 (1993): 480–491;
discussion 480, 492.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). ‘‘MyPyramid Food Intake
Pattern Calorie Levels.’’ 2005. [Online information; retrieved 1/12/09.]
http://www.mypyramid.gov/downloads/MyPyramid_Calorie
_Levels.pdf.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). ‘‘The Surgeon
General’s Call to Action to Prevent and Decrease Overweight and
Obesity.’’ Rockville, MD: Public Health Service, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, 2001.
World Health Organization (WHO). ‘‘Obesity and Overweight.’’ In
Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health. Geneva: WHO,
2008.
232
Data and Documents

7
Directory of Agencies, Programs,
and Organizations
S
ome of the information provided below is adapted from the
Web sites of the agencies, programs, and organizations listed
below. Use common sense when accessing information, and
ask the following questions: Does the organization have any spe-
cial interest that might make them put a spin on the information?
What is the source of funding? These questions should be consid-
ered when viewing all Web sites, including those that are con-
sumer oriented as well as those from nonproﬁt organizations,
industry, or the government.
The organizations are listed according to the following
categories:
1. Government agents and national programs and
initiatives
2. International agencies and organizations
3. Non-proﬁt, professional, and trade organizations
Government Agencies and National
Programs and Initiatives
National organizations have several functions. Some pro-
mote health (e.g., U.S. Department of Agriculture), study differ-
ent diseases (e.g., National Institutes of Health), or collect and
233

disseminate statistics about the health of the nation (e.g., Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention).
Agricultural Research Service (ARS)
Jamie L. Whitten Building
1400 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20250
Phone: 202-720-3656
Web site: www.ars.usda.gov
E-mail: Agsec@usda.gov
ARS is the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) primary
research agency for scientiﬁc information. Its research covers
the study of agriculture anywhere from the growing ﬁelds to
the dining table. ARS ensures that American agricultural prod-
ucts are safe and of good quality and competitive within the
world economy. The agency also determines the best nutrition
to keep people healthy throughout the life cycle. It has developed
a number of high-ﬁber, low-calorie products that are used by
food companies as fat substitutes. Oatrim, for example, is used
in products such as frozen dinners and other products to lower
their calorie and cholesterol content. The ARS National Research
Program on Obesity aims to carry out research on obesity pre-
vention by coordinating human nutrition with ARS crop studies,
animal breeding, and new product and food-processing
research. The agency’s obesity research areas are based on learn-
ing what people eat, what the body needs, and how to modify
foods to be more beneﬁcial.
Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion (CNPP)
3101 Park Center Drive, 10th Floor
Alexandria, VA 22302-1594
Phone: 703-305-7600
Fax: 703-305-3300
Web site: http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/
The Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion, created in 1994,
is an agency of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. It conducts
research into consumer food behaviors in areas such as analysis
in nutrition knowledge and attitudes, dietary survey methodol-
ogy, and nutrition education techniques. Estimates of the overall
nutrient content of the U.S. food supply, measured since 1909, are
234
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

maintained by the CNPP. A staff of expert nutritionists, dieti-
tians, economists, and policy experts link up-to-date scientiﬁc
research with messages about healthful nutrition for the Ameri-
can public.
The Center is the agency that publishes and publicizes the
Dietary Guidelines for Americans, which are the basis for
government nutrition policy and nutrition education activities.
The Dietary Guidelines are jointly reviewed and updated every
ﬁve years by the USDA and the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS). The CNPP develops educational tools
to help Americans put the Dietary Guidelines into practice such
as the Food Guide Pyramid, MyPyramid Tracker, MyPyramid
for Kids, Steps to a Healthier Weight, and, more recently, MyPyr-
amid PodCasts.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
1600 Clifton Road
Atlanta, GA 30333
Phone: 404-498-1515, 800-311-3435
Web site:http://www.cdc.gov
E-mail: cdcinfo@cdc.gov
CDC, under the Department of Health and Human Services, is
the agency that tracks and investigates public health trends. It
publishes weekly data on all deaths and diseases reported in
the United States in the publication Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report.The Web site is a frequently updated resource for
fact sheets related to obesity prevention and provides an interac-
tive body mass index calculator.
CDC created the Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity and
Obesity (DNPAO) to help prevent and control obesity by pro-
moting regular physical activity and good nutrition. The Divi-
sion’s obesity prevention activities include translating results of
research into practical advice for medical professionals and the
public. The Research to Practice Series discusses the implications
of the newest studies on nutrition, physical activity, and obesity
research. The series includes free tools, such as print-ready bro-
chures and PowerPoint programs, for health professionals to
summarize and translate scientiﬁc evidence for the general pub-
lic. Some series offerings are ‘‘How to Use Fruits and Vegetables
to Help Manage Your Weight’’ and ‘‘Do Increased Portion Sizes
Affect How Much We Eat?’’ Another DNPAO activity is
Government Agencies and National Programs and Initiatives
235

promoting obesity prevention and control at work sites. The
Division conducts demonstration projects at CDC work sites
and then adapts effective strategies into interactive Web-based
tools that employers cans use to design their own programs.
Physical activity guidelines are also being developed in partner-
ship with the President’s Council on Physical Fitness and Sports.
On an international basis, DNPAO collaborates with the World
Health Organization as leaders in building worldwide research
to study effective public health practices that may combat
obesity.
Economic Research Service (ERS)
1800 M Street NW
Washington, DC 20036-5831
Phone: 1-800-999-6779
Web site:http://www.ers.usda.gov/
E-mail: InfoCenter@ers.usda.gov
ERS is part of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Its job is to be
the primary source of economic information and research about
food and farming for policy makers and the public. One of ﬁve
areas of ERS research is a goal to promote a healthy, well-
nourished population. With respect to obesity, data are used to
study how obesity is affected by food supply and national eating
patterns. ERS publishes consumer-friendly reports and Amber
Waves, a magazine that contains in-depth feature articles,
research ﬁndings, and previews of ongoing research.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, MD 20857-0001
Phone: 1-888-463-6332
Web site: http://www.fda.gov
Contact: http://www.fda.gov/comments.html
The FDA is a federal regulatory agency within HHS. It reviews
toxicological research and clinical trials in order to approve or
reject new drugs for the marketplace. The FDA Center for Food
Safety and Applied Nutrition is responsible for taking action
against any unsafe dietary supplement after it reaches the mar-
ket. The FDA relies on consumers reports of serious events
through the MedWatch Program. An example of FDA action
236
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

against unsafe dietary supplements was the case of ephedrine-
containing weight-loss products. Numerous adverse events were
reported to the administration, including chest pain, heart
attacks, strokes, and death. In 2004, the FDA issued a ruling pro-
hibiting the sales of dietary supplements containing ephedrine.
The FDA Web site has useful information for consumers and
educators. Topics include dietary supplements, food labeling
and nutrition, medical devices, and drugs. A free electronic
newsletter about dietary supplements often contains information
about ingredients used in weight-loss products. The site also
provides information about the FDA program to combat obesity.
Food and Nutrition Service (FNS)
3101 Park Center Drive
Alexandria, VA 22302
Phone: 703-305-2281
Web site and contact: http://www.fns.usda.gov/fns/
default.htm
The Food and Nutrition Service is a branch of the USDA that
serves to provide families and children in need with easier access
to nutritious foods through education and food assistance pro-
grams. FNS is responsible for the National School Lunch Pro-
gram; Food Stamp Program; and Women, Infant and Children
Food Assistance Program. FNS recognizes that obesity is a seri-
ous health concern in the United States, and its goal is to educate
the public, especially children in school, so that they can make
healthy food choices.
HealthierUS
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Ofﬁce of Public Health and Science
Ofﬁce of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion
1101 Wootton Parkway, Suite LL100
Rockville, MD 20852
Phone: 240-453-8280
Web site: www.healthierUS.gov
E-mail: info@nhic.org
The HealthierUS initiative was started by President George W.
Bush in 2002. The underlying premise is that increasing personal
ﬁtness and becoming healthier are critical steps to achieving a
Government Agencies and National Programs and Initiatives
237

better and longer life. The initiative focuses on promotion of four
key messages: (1) be physically active every day, (2) eat a nutri-
tious diet, (3) get preventive screenings, and (4) make healthy
choices.
At the level of the federal government, the President’s Coun-
cil on Physical Fitness and Sports was revitalized, and certain
federal agencies were directed to review their policies related to
the four areas and propose revisions, including new actions.
Media-Smart Youth: Eat, Think, and Be Active
P.O. Box 3006
Rockville, MD 20847
Phone: 800-370-2943
Web site: http://www.nichd.nih.gov/msy/
E-mail: NICHDInformationResourceCenter@mail.nih.gov
Created by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, Media-Smart Youth is
an after-school program designed to educate young people ages
11 to 13 on how the media can lead to poor health choices in their
lives. Educating children about the media is important because
many children spend hours watching television, playing video
games, or surﬁng the Web. All of these activities take time away
from physical activity. This is not speciﬁcally an obesity preven-
tion program, but it helps young people to think critically about
how media have a major inﬂuence on their attitudes about health
so they can make smart choices about nutrition and physical
activity. This program is available to after-school providers or
activity leaders to help encourage children to be active every day.
National Cancer Institute (NCI)
NCI Public Inquiries Ofﬁce
6116 Executive Boulevard
Room 3036A
Bethesda, MD 20892-8322
Phone: 800-422-6237
Web site: www.cancer.gov
E-mail: cancergovstaff@mail.nih.gov.
NCI was established in 1937 under the National Cancer Institute
Act and is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NCI is
involved with research, education, training, and support for
238
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

cancer centers. NCI has funded several studies relating obesity
and cancer risks. Its Web site provides fact sheets that make the
research studies understandable to the general public.
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI)
P.O. Box 30105
Bethesda, MD 20824-0105
Phone: 301-592-8573
Web site: http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/index.htm
E-mail: nhlbiinfo@nhlbi.nih.gov
NHLBI is part of NIH. Its primary mission is to support basic
and applied research related to heart, lung, and blood diseases.
NHLBI established the Obesity Education Initiative (OEI) in
1991 to help decrease the incidence of cardiovascular disease
and type 2 diabetes by reducing the prevalence of overweight
and increasing physical activity in Americans. The OEI uses both
population-based and high-risk-individual strategies to further
its goals. The population approach focuses on the general popu-
lation with activities that include promotion of physical educa-
tion and a nutrition curriculum in schools nationwide and
Hearts N’ Parks, a community-based venture in partnership with
the National Recreation and Park Association, to encourage
increased physical activity every day. The high-risk category of
tactics targets individuals who are experiencing, or are at
increased risk for, the adverse health effects associated with over-
weight and obesity. To provide a basis for intervention, an expert
panel issued the Clinical Guidelines on the Identiﬁcation, Evaluation,
and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults: The Evidence
Report in June 1998. It enumerated the ﬁrst federal clinical prac-
tice guidelines that analyze overweight and obesity issues using
an evidence-based approach and provided practical strategies
for applying the recommendations.
NHLBI offers education activities for health care professio-
nals and holds conferences for researchers at the NIH center.
The Web site offers a wealth of information for the public, health
professionals, and researchers. The site includes the latest health
news, tools, and tutorials. Online slides and an electronic text-
book on obesity also can be viewed. NHLBI provides patient
and public obesity treatment recommendations in its Aim for a
Healthy Weight guide.
Government Agencies and National Programs and Initiatives
239

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases (NIDDK)
Ofﬁce of Communications & Public Liaison
Building 31, Room 9A06
31 Center Drive, MSC 2560
Bethesda, MD 20892-2560
Phone: 301-496-3583
Web site: http://www.niddk.nih.gov
NIDDK is one of the institutes at NIH. It conducts and supports
basic and clinical research on diabetes and digestive and kidney
diseases. Within NIDDK is the Ofﬁce of Obesity Research; this
ofﬁce is part of NIDDK because obesity is estimated to be a pre-
cipitating cause for 80 percent of type 2 diabetes and its compli-
cations. Given that obesity and its medical costs are increasing,
and to emphasize the importance of obesity, some researchers
suggest that NIDDK’s name should be changed to National Insti-
tute of Obesity, Diabetes, and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
(NIODDK).
The NIDDK Web site has a section titled Health Information
for the Public. Weight control is one of the topics (see also the
entry on Weight-control Information Network below).
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
9000 Rockville Pike
Bethesda, MD 20892
Phone: 301-496-4000
Web site: http://www.nih.gov/about/contact.htm (includes
addresses for the 27 institutes and centers)
E-mail: NIHinfo@od.nih.gov
The National Institutes of Health is part of HHS. It is the chief
federal agency responsible for conducting and supporting
research. NIH obesity studies range from small pilot projects to
multicenter clinical trials and include lifestyle, pharmacological,
and other approaches. The research focuses on diagnosis, pre-
vention, and treatment as well as building a scientiﬁc evidence
base for public policy decisions. A major NIH objective is to
develop ways to explain research results from clinical trials to
the medical community and the public. NIH is appropriated
about $28 billion annually by the U.S. Congress. Eighty percent
240
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

of this money is used for funding research grants in the United
States and some foreign countries.
In 2004, the NIH Obesity Research Task Force published the
Strategic Plan for NIH Obesity Research, a multifaceted agenda for
the study of behavioral and environmental causes of obesity in
conjunction with the study of genetic and biologic causes. The
plan detailed coordination of obesity research across NIH.
The names of the 27 institutes and centers reﬂect their
emphasis, such as National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute,
National Cancer Institute, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism, and Center for Complementary and Alternative
Medicine. There is not a National Institute of Obesity, despite
obesity’s economic and health impacts on American people.
National Recreation and Park Association (NRPA)
22377 Belmont Ridge Road
Ashburn, VA 20148
Phone: 703- 858-2162
Fax: 703-729-4753
Web site: http://www.nrpa.org
E-mail: info@nrpa.org
NRPA has expertise in mobilizing communities, providing
community-based physical activity programs, and identifying
barriers to physical activity. The agency formed a partnership
with NHLBI to get Americans moving to help reduce overweight
and obesity.
Ofﬁce of the Surgeon General (OSG)
5600 Fishers Lane, Room 18-66
Rockville, MD 20857
Phone: 301-443-4000
Web site: www.surgeongeneral.gov/topics/obesity
Contact: http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/contactus.html
The OSG is part of the Department of Health and Human Serv-
ices. The surgeon general, appointed by the president, is a com-
missioned ofﬁcer in the Public Health Service who holds the
rank of a three-star vice admiral while in ofﬁce.
One of the jobs of the surgeon general is to provide the best
scientiﬁc information about how to improve health and reduce
Government Agencies and National Programs and Initiatives
241

the risk of illness and injury. Its Childhood Overweight and
Obesity Prevention initiative includes sections titled ‘‘Over-
weight and Obesity: Health Consequences’’ and ‘‘Overweight
and Obesity: What You Can Do.’’ Its Web site contains the report
‘‘The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Prevent and Decrease
Overweight and Obesity,’’ in addition to information on health
consequences of obesity.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
1400 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20250
Web site: http://www.usda.gov
E-mail for secretary of Agriculture: AgSec@usda.gov
The USDA is the primary government agency for agriculture,
food, and human nutrition. It has a number of divisions, includ-
ing the Agricultural Research Service and Economic Research
Service. One of its mission areas is to improve health in the
United States. For example, the USDA’s Center for Nutrition Pol-
icy and Promotion links scientiﬁc research to dietary guidance,
nutrition policy coordination, and nutrition education. The Web
site provides a link to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans as well
as information about physical activity and long-term weight loss.
The USDA’s National Agricultural Library is accessible by e-mail
(http://www.nal.usda.gov) where requests can be made for cop-
ies of published research articles. Navigating this site is difﬁcult
in part because of the many links. However, it is worth the time
to explore because of the extensive amount of information about
obesity available there.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)
200 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20201
Phone: 202-619-0257, 1-877-696-6775
Web site: http://www.hhs.gov
Contact: http://www.hhs.gov/feedback.html
HHS is the United States’ primary government agency that aims
to protect the health of Americans. It has 11 operating divisions
to administer more than 300 programs. Some of these divisions
include NIH, FDA, and CDC. The 2005 Dietary Guidelines for
Americans and ‘‘The Surgeon General’s Call to Action’’ releases
242
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

are published by HHS. Its Web site features daily health tips,
which are available in audio and text format, and links to other
sites, such as Healthier US.gov, which provides information on
physical ﬁtness, nutrition, and how to make healthy choices.
Interactive games are also available to help children and teens
learn about healthy eating and physical ﬁtness.
Weight-control Information Network (WIN)
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease
1 WIN Way
Bethesda, MD 20892-3665
Phone: 877- 946-4627
Web site: http://www.win.niddk.nih.gov/
E-mail: win@info.niddk.nih.gov
WIN is an information service of the NIDDK at the National
Institutes of Health. Its focus is on getting up-to-date, science-
based information to the public and media about weight control.
WIN’s information covers the range from underweight to normal
weight to obesity. WIN provides information about risks associ-
ated with overweight/obesity, with special emphasis on diabe-
tes. Its booklets, some of which can be downloaded through its
Web site, cover topics such as determining a healthy weight,
being active no matter one’s size, bariatric surgery, and treating
obesity using prescription medications. Many of the booklets
are also in Spanish. WIN encourages anyone to duplicate and
distribute copies of any of the booklets, as the information on
the WIN Web site is not copyrighted.
International Agencies and Organizations
Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
Nations (FAO)
Liaison Ofﬁce
2175 K Street NW, Suite 500
Washington, DC 20037
Phone: 202-653-2400
Web site: http://fao.org
E-mail for world headquarters: FAO-HQ@fao.org
International Agencies and Organizations
243

FAO is one of the agencies of the United Nations. Its major activ-
ity in the area of food and nutrition is an international effort to
reduce malnutrition and hunger. Although obesity is not as big
a problem as is hunger, it is rapidly increasing in developing
nations. FAO identiﬁes the problem in the report The Nutrition
Transition and Obesity. FAO’s approach to preventing the problem
from getting worse is to educate the public in every country.
FAO’s objectives are to promote good nutrition and physical
activity and agriculture policy that encourage the consumption
of healthy foods.
Health Canada (HC)
Public Affairs
BrookeClaxton Building
Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0K9
Canada
Web site: http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/index-eng.php
E-mail: Info@hc-sc.gc.ca
Health Canada is the national department responsible for help-
ing Canadians achieve good health while respecting individual
choices and circumstances. The HC Ofﬁce of Nutrition Policy
and Promotion deﬁnes, promotes, and implements evidence-
based nutrition policies and standards.
The Web site provides information about health-related
legislation and activities and has a page called Healthy Living,
where articles can be retrieved such as ‘‘Obesity (Its Your
Health),’’ ‘‘Risk Factors for Heart Disease,’’ and ‘‘Canada’s Food
Guide to Healthy Eating.’’ It also provides links to other Cana-
dian government sites that contain additional information about
obesity.
International Association for the Study of Obesity (IASO)
231 North Gower Street
London NW1 2NR
United Kingdom
Phone: +44-0-20 7691 1900
Web site: www.iaso.org
E-mail: enquiries@iaso.org
IASO is a registered charity in the United Kingdom. It is an
international organization that serves as an umbrella for 52
244
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

national obesity associations representing 56 countries. As a
representative organization, it works for development of effec-
tive policies for obesity prevention and management throughout
the world. Its Web site features an obesity experts forum as well
as links to journals specializing in research on obesity and related
health problems. IASO publishes the International Journal of
Obesity, the International Journal of Pediatric Obesity, and Obesity
Reviews. Another Web site features is ‘‘Latest News,’’ which pro-
vides links to relevant activities and meetings of organizations
that are doing obesity research.
International Federation for the Surgery of Obesity (IFSO)
IFSO Executive Secretariat
Bruennsteinstr. 10
81541 Munich
Germany
Phone: +49-89-4141 92 50
Fax: +49-89-4141 92 45
Web site: www.isfo.com
E-mail: Heather.Wynn@medc.de
IFSO is an innternational organization that serves as an umbrella
for 34 national associations of bariatric surgeons. Its goal is to
bring together surgeons and allied health professionals such as
anesthesiologists, dietitians, internists, nurse practitioners, nutri-
tionists, and psychologists who are involved in the treatment of
very obese patients. The main goal of IFSO is to optimize the
treatment of severely obese patients. The organization has also
produced a set of guidelines for selection criteria for patients
and minimal requirements for bariatric surgeons. IFSO is com-
mitted to creating a system of accreditation for individual sur-
geons and bariatric centers around the world. The Web site
contains information about treatments, scientiﬁc articles, and
meetings. IFSO organizes a yearly World Congress, which, along
with its online forum, provides an opportunity for surgeons to
exchange knowledge on surgical treatment of severely obese
patients; to present new techniques, research, and concepts; and
to meet the experts in the ﬁeld. The Web site also has interactive
movies about obesity discussing causes and risks as well as
descriptions of various bariatric surgical procedures. It provides
links to its publication Obesity Surgery Journal as well as a listing
of bariatric surgeons.
International Agencies and Organizations
245

International Obesity Taskforce (IOTF)
231 North Gower Street
London NW1 2NR
United Kingdom
Phone: +44-0-20 7691 1900
Web site: www.iotf.org
E-mail: inquiries@iaso.org / obesity@iotf.org
IOTF is part of the International Association for the Study of
Obesity. It works with partners in the Global Prevention Alliance
to support new strategies to improve diet and activity and pre-
vent obesity. As a global network of experts on obesity and the
advocacy arm of IASO, IOTF works with the World Health
Organization and other private and public groups. With a special
emphasis on preventing childhood obesity, its goal is to alert
people around the world about the urgency of the obesity prob-
lem and to persuade governments to act now. Publications and
research news about a range of obesity-related issues can be
accessed through the IOTF Web site. The site also presents useful
links to government agencies, academic institutions, and resour-
ces for health-related information.
World Health Organization (WHO)
United Nations Liaison Ofﬁce
1889 F Street, NW, Room 369
Washington, DC 20006
Phone: 202-974-3299
Web site: http://www.who.int/en/
E-mail: info@who.int.
WHO is the directing and coordinating authority for health
within the United Nations. It has six general goals, including
promoting development; fostering health security; strengthening
health systems; harnessing research, information, and evidence;
improving performance; and enhancing partnerships. In 2002,
WHO worked with FAO to issue the joint Expert Consultation
Diet, Nutrition and the Prevention of Chronic Diseases. This publica-
tion was followed in May 2004 by WHO’s landmark Global Strat-
egy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health (DPAS), developed to
promote healthy lifestyles for adults and children in all countries.
DPAS is a framework to reduce noncommunicable diseases such
as obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease by modifying
246
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

risk factors of unhealthy diet and physical inactivity. In the area
of obesity, WHO partners with the International Association for
the Study of Obesity, primarily through the International Obesity
Taskforce. The WHO Web site provides a wealth of fascinating
information about international health topics, programs and
projects, and interactive pages with data and statistics about
obesity in individual countries around the world.
Nonprofit, Professional, and
Trade Organizations
American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP)
1140 Tomahawk Creek Parkway
Leawood, KS 66211
Phone: 800-274-2237
Web site: www.aafp.org
AAFP, a national organization, represents 94,000 family physi-
cians, family medicine residents, and medical students. The
organization has released a guide for family physicians to help
their overweight patients and launched a 10-year ﬁtness initia-
tive called Americans in Motion. The organization asserts that
ample evidence supports recognizing both childhood over-
weight and adult obesity as diseases and reimbursement from
insurance companies to family physicians who provide reason-
able diagnosis and treatment of overweight and obesity. The
Web site has a number of sections that provide excellent informa-
tion for families, including answers to common questions and
weight issues for children. Links to other sites are available as
well (e.g., HHS, Ofﬁce of Disease Prevention and Health Promo-
tion, Reuters Health), which provide information about obesity.
AAFP produces a semi-monthly, peer-reviewed journal entitled
American Family Physician.
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)
141 Northwest Point Blvd.
Elk Grove Village, IL 60007-1098
Phone: 847-434-4000
Fax: 847-434-8000
Web site: www.aap.org/obesity
E-mail: kidsdocs@aap.org
Nonprofit, Professional, and Trade Organizations
247

AAP is a national professional association for pediatricians dedi-
cated to the health of all infants, children, adolescents, and
young adults. AAP was instrumental in developing a major
breakthrough in medical policies and guidelines for childhood
obesity as part of the important publication ‘‘Expert Committee
Recommendations Regarding the Prevention, Assessment, and,
Treatment of Child and Adolescents.’’ The AAP Web site has
links to tools and books for patients and parents including
Parenting Corner Q&A and A Parent’s Guide to Childhood Obesity:
A Road Map to Health, which offers practical advice on how
parents can help their children manage their weight. The site also
has information about high blood pressure and children and cau-
tions about the increased risk in children who are overweight.
Pediatrics, the peer-reviewed journal of the AAP, has been pub-
lished since January 1948.
American Cancer Society (ACS)
P.O. Box22538
Oklahoma City, OK 73123-1538
Phone: 866-228-4327
Web site: www.cancer.org
Contact: http://www.cancer.org/asp/contactUs/cus
_global.asp
ACS is a nonproﬁt organization funded by donations. It is dedi-
cated to helping patients and their friends and family learn more
about cancer. The ACS Web site is extensive and informative.
People can get help in making decisions about cancer treatment
and ﬁnding treatment centers. A survivor network is also coordi-
nated through ACS’s Web site. ACS’s advocacy activities have
inﬂuenced Congress and state governments and the organization
has been instrumental in obtaining more than $1 billion annually
for the National Cancer Institute for research.
With respect to obesity, people who are overweight or obese
are at increased risk for developing certain cancers, and ACS
presents research about the relationship between obesity and
cancer. A page entitled ‘‘Take Control of Your Weight’’ includes
guidelines for weight loss and a chance to plan a healthful diet
with a virtual dietitian. Many of the materials on the site have
been translated into Spanish and several Asian languages.
248
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

American College of Physicians (ACP)
190 North Independence Mail West
Philadelphia, PA 19106-1572
Phone: 800-523-1546
Web site: http://acponline.org/
Contact: http://www.acponline.org/cgi-bin/feedback
ACP is a national organization of physicians who specialize in
the prevention, detection, and treatment of chronic illnesses such
as diabetes and obesity. Established in 1915, ACP is a member-
ship organization for physicians who treat adults. It publishes
the Annals of Internal Medicine, a widely cited medical journal.
On its Web site is a section for patients with information about
obesity. The Internal Medicine Report section gives access to
published papers and videos about important medical and
health issues.
American College of Preventive Medicine (ACPM)
1307 New York Ave., N.W., Suite 200
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: 202-466-2044
Fax: 202-466-2662
Web site: www.acpm.org
E-mail: info@acpm.org
ACPM is a national professional society for U.S. doctors. The
organization of about 2,000 members focuses on disease preven-
tion and health promotion in individuals and in population
groups. Preventive medicine–trained physicians work in pri-
mary care, in public health and government agencies, in work-
places, and in academia. ACPM has released an ofﬁcial position
statement about the optimal diet for weight control that discour-
ages the use of fad diets. The organization sponsors the American
Journal of Preventive Medicine and a series of articles, some of
which are related to obesity. However, these articles are only
available to members and thus the direct impact on the public
is limited.
American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM)
401 West Michigan Street
Indianapolis, IN 46202-3233
Phone 317-637-9200
Nonprofit, Professional, and Trade Organizations
249

Web site: http://acsm.org
Contact: http://www.acsm.org/_frm/departments/
indexnew.asp?area=general
ACSM is a nonproﬁt organization whose 20,000 members have
expertise in the areas of sports medicine, exercise physiology,
physical activity, and cardiovascular health. ACSM collaborates
with other organizations and issues consensus statements. These
so-called Position Stands are published in the College’s scientiﬁc
journal, Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise. The ACSM Web
site has a news release section that provides information about
obesity and nutrition, including ‘‘Dispelling the Top 10 Nutrition
Myths.’’
American Council on Science and Health (ACSH)
1995 Broadway, 2nd Floor
New York, NY 10023-5860
Phone: 866-905-2694
Fax: 212-362-4919
Web site: http://acsh.org
E-mail: acsh@acsh.org
ACSH is a nonproﬁt, consumer education consortium. Its board
of experts comprises 350 physicians, scientists, and policy advis-
ers. These experts review ACSH reports and participate in edu-
cational activities. ACSH is concerned with issues relating to
food, nutrition, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, lifestyle, the envi-
ronment, and health. Some of its publications include ‘‘Health
Effects of Obesity,’’ ‘‘Foods are not Cigarettes: Why Tobacco Law-
suits Are Not a Model for Obesity Lawsuits,’’ and ‘‘Childhood
Obesity.’’ The News Center section of its Web site displays a list
of articles from ACSH that have been published in the popular
press. ACSH receives much of its funding from industry.
American Diabetes Association (ADiabA)
1701 North Beauregard Street
Alexandria, VA 22311
Phone: 1-800-342-2383
Web site: www.diabetes.org
E-mail: stepoutadmin@diabetes.org
250
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

The American Diabetes Association is a nonproﬁt health organi-
zation whose mission is to ﬁnd ways to prevent, cure, and man-
age diabetes. It funds research, publishes scientiﬁc ﬁndings,
and provides information and other services to people with dia-
betes. Both consumers and health professionals may become
members. Because the American Diabetes Association and the
American Dietetic Association are both referred to as ADA, for
our purposes we refer to the American Diabetes Association as
ADiabA and to the American Dietetic Association as ADietA.
There is excellent information about obesity on the ADiabA
Web site. For example, it has sections on weight loss and exercise,
recipes for healthy eating, research updates, and an easy-to-use
body mass index calculator.
American Dietetic Association (ADietA)
120 South Riverside Plaza, Suite 2000
Chicago, IL 60606
Phone: 800-877-1600
Web site: www.eatright.org
E-mail: media@eatright.org
ADietA, in contrast to ADiabA, is a professional organization of
dietitians with expertise in nutrition, food, and health. ADietA
is the largest organization of food and nutrition professionals in
the world, with more than 68,000 members. Dietitians play an
important role in helping people manage and prevent over-
weight and obesity by showing them how to formulate reason-
able weight goals and personalized eating patterns that can be
sustained over the long term. ADietA publishes the Journal of
the American Dietetic Association and position papers on health
issues, including weight control. The Web site has a variety of
information about food and nutrition as well as a referral service
that can link consumers with registered dietetic professionals. It
also provides daily nutrition news and interesting tidbits of
information. For example, in the United States, the average
amount of weight that a new college student gains is about 15
pounds; this phenomenon is called the ‘‘freshman 15.’’ In Can-
ada, new students’ weight gain is only 5 pounds and is known
as the ‘‘freshman 5.’’
Nonprofit, Professional, and Trade Organizations
251

American Heart Association (AHA)
National Center
7272 Greenville Avenue
Dallas, TX 75231
Phone: 1-800-242-8721
Web site: www.americanheart.org
Contact: http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?
identiﬁer=10000046&title=generalquestions
AHA is a nonproﬁt, national voluntary health agency with pro-
fessional and public members. The organization supports heart
disease research, scientiﬁc meetings, and advocacy. It publishes
several scientiﬁc journals and magazines for people concerned
about prevention and treatment of heart disease. A subscription
to Heart Insight, a quarterly patient magazine, is free to people
who live in the United States. On the Web site, at HeartHub,
there is a video on healthy eating, a body mass index calculator,
and tips on eating well and losing weight. Downloadable publi-
cations are available in both English and Spanish, such as
‘‘How Can I Manage My Weight?’’ (¿Co´mo puedo controlar mi
peso?), and ‘‘Losing Weight the Healthy Way’’ (Controlando su
peso).
American Institute for Cancer Research (AICR)
1759 R Street NW
Washington, DC 20009
Phone: 1-800-843-8114
Web site: www.aicr.org
E-mail: aicrweb@aicr.org
AICR encourages research on the relationship of nutrition,
physical activity, and weight management to cancer risk; inter-
prets the scientiﬁc literature; and educates the public about the
results.
It also supports health professionals with educational mate-
rials and advice in planning programs on diet, nutrition, and
cancer prevention. AICR’s second expert report, Nutrition, Physi-
cal Activity, and the Prevention of Cancer: A Global Perspective, con-
ﬁrmed the relationship between excess body fat and increased
cancer risk. AICR experts stressed that many cancers are pre-
ventable. In fact, maintaining a healthy weight may be the single
most important way to protect against cancer.
252
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

Information on its Web site changes often in response to
popular news stories. The section Ever Green, Ever Hungry fea-
tured articles about preventing winter weight gain and ﬁndings
linking food, activity, and body weight to risk of colon cancer.
One article listed is ‘‘Eat to Satisfy your Body—Not to Satisfy
Your Friends.’’ Subscription to AICR’s e-newsletter is free.
American Medical Association (AMA)
515 N. State Street
Chicago, IL 60610
Phone: 800-621-8335
Web site: www.ama-assn.org
AMA, founded in 1847, is a membership organization of physi-
cians. It publishes one of the most widely read medical journals,
the Journal of the American Medical Association. In collaboration
with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and
the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, AMA has published a
series of clinical guidelines entitled Roadmaps for Clinical Prac-
tice. Case Studies in Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, one
of the publications in this series, contains booklets that provide
speciﬁc, focused tactics to identify and treat diseases such as
obesity during routine medical care. The ‘‘Assessment and Man-
agement of Adult Obesity’’ road map is available online (AMA
2007). In January 2007, AMA released the report Expert Committee
Recommendations on the Assessment, Prevention, and Treatment of
Child and Adolescent Overweight and Obesity, which will have far-
reaching effects on how childhood obesity is identiﬁed and
treated in the United States. The AMA Web site provides links
to reports, publications, and resources about the health effects
of overweight and obesity.
American Public Health Association (APHA)
800 I Street NW
Washington, DC 20001-3710
Phone: 202-777-2742 (APHA)
Web site: www.apha.org
E-mail: comments@apha.org
APHA is a public health organization that has been working to
improve public health since 1872. The Association’s goal is to
protect Americans from preventable health threats and to ensure
Nonprofit, Professional, and Trade Organizations
253

that health promotion, disease prevention, and preventive health
services are accessible to everyone in the United States. As an
organization, it works with members of Congress, regulatory
agencies, and other public health organizations to inﬂuence pol-
icies and set priorities on a wide variety of issues that include
children’s health, managed care, disease control, health dispar-
ities, bioterrorism, international health, and tobacco control. The
APHA has announced that preventing obesity in children is one
of the most important public health issues facing the United
States today. It encourages development of new approaches and
partnerships to address the problem. The Association issues pol-
icy statements about obesity prevention, including ‘‘Support for
Nutrition Labeling in Fast-Food and Other Chain Restaurants’’
in 2005 and ‘‘Urgent Call for a Nationwide Public Health Infra-
structure and Action to Reverse the Obesity Epidemic’’ in 2006.
In the American Journal of Public Health, published for public
health workers and academics, special emphasis is given to
analysis of current public health issues in a historical context.
The Web site provides tools and plans for both individual
and community efforts to tackle obesity. Its newsroom has topi-
cal press releases such as ‘‘Purchasing Behavior Inﬂuenced by
Calorie Information. It Worked for Jared!’’ (see the biographical
proﬁles of Jared Fogle in Chapter 5). This topic of this press
release, a study of New York City fast-food chains, demonstrated
that when calorie information was displayed on deli cases near
the register, consumers bought food containing about 52 fewer
calories.
American Society of Bariatric Physicians (ASBM)
2821 South Parker Road, Suite 625
Aurora, CO 80014
Phone: 303-770-2526
Web site: http://www.asbp.org/
E-mail: jrobinson@nasbp.org
ASBM is a national medical society of doctors offering medical
treatment of obesity (bariatrics), weight loss, and dieting. Its
Web site has a section for the public (Frequently Asked Ques-
tions) about the growing problem of obesity and tips on weight
loss. The Locate a Physician section lists names, addresses, and
phone numbers of bariatric physicians. Currently no evaluation
mechanism is in place to regulate the quality of physicians.
254
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

ASBM’s Web site contains up-to-date information and news
about the ﬁeld of obesity treatment and medical weight loss.
American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric
Surgery (ASMBS)
100 SW 75th Street, Suite 201
Gainesville, FL 32607
Phone: 352-331-4900
Web site: www.asbs.org
E-mail: info@asmbs.org
ASMBM was founded in 1983. It is a nonproﬁt medical organiza-
tion made up of surgeons and other healthcare professionals. As
declared on the home page of its Web site, its vision ‘‘is to
improve public health and well being by lessening the burden
of the disease of obesity and related diseases throughout the
world.’’ It publishes the scientiﬁc journal Surgery for Obesity and
Related Diseases. ASMBS offers educational programs for physi-
cians, other health care professionals, and the public about bari-
atric surgery and guidelines for ethical patient selection and
care. The Society promotes outcome studies and measures of
quality assurance to improve the safety and effectiveness of
obesity surgeries.
The Web site has accessible information about extreme
obesity, bariatric surgery, and diabetes. A section helps calculate
BMI and assigns an obesity classiﬁcation based on BMI. For
example, Class I Obesity is a BMI ranging from 30 to 34.9.
Calorie Control Council (CCC)
5775 Peachtree-Dunwoody Road, Suite 500-G
Atlanta, GA 30342
Phone: 404-252-3663
Web site: http://www.caloriecontrol.org/
E-mail: webmaster@caloriecontrol.org
The Calorie Control Council is nonproﬁt organization supported
by 60 companies that manufacture or sell low-calorie and
reduced-fat foods and beverages. The Council provides under-
standable information about low-calorie sweeteners like aspar-
tame, saccharin, and sucralose and about fat replacers like
polydextrose and olestra for consumers interested cutting
dietary calories and fat. CCC has sponsored research on low-
Nonprofit, Professional, and Trade Organizations
255

calorie ingredients, foods, and beverages including studies about
safety, metabolism, consumer use, and public opinion of food
additives.
Center for Consumer Freedom (CCF)
P.O. Box 34557
Washington, DC 20043
Phone: 202-463-7112
Web site: http://www.consumerfreedom.com
E-mail: http://www.consumerfreedom.com/contact.cfm
CCF is a nonproﬁt organization whose mission is to promote per-
sonal responsibility and protect consumer choice through activ-
ism and print, radio, and television advertisements like the one
entitled ‘‘You Are Too Stupid . . . to make your own food
choices.’’ Each year, CCF issues its Tarnished Halo awards to
animal-rights and environmental activists, public interest advo-
cates, trial lawyers, and food and beverage crusaders who claim
that they know what is best for the general public. CCF has
opposed the regulation of the food and restaurant industry. For
example, it is against posting calories on menu boards of fast-
food restaurant chains.
Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI)
1875 Connecticut Ave. NW, Suite 300
Washington, DC 20009
Phone: 202-332-9110
Web site: www.cspinet.org
Founded in 1971, CSPI is an advocacy organization for science-
based information about nutrition and health, food safety, alco-
hol policy, and sound science. CSPI’s goals are to counter the
food industry’s inﬂuence on public opinion and public policies
and to lobby for government policies that are consistent with sci-
entiﬁc evidence. CSPI also aims to educate the public. Its
monthly newsletter, Nutrition Action Health letter, has about
900,000 subscribers in the United States and Canada. It periodi-
cally reviews fad diets and issues about overweight and obesity.
CSPI has been on the forefront of the efforts to require nutrition
facts on packaged foods and to have calories of fast foods avail-
able at the point of purchase. It has also conducted studies on
the nutrition
256
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

quality of restaurant meals. CSPI works to improve food safety in
an effort to decrease the number of food-borne illnesses. Its Web
site has a section devoted to obesity. The section Current Press
Releases has displayed such items as ‘‘New Poll Shows Calories
Hard for New Yorkers to Guess’’ and ‘‘With Calories Hard to
Guess, Washington Voters Want Answers on Menus.’’
Consumers Union (CU)
1101 17th Street, NW, Suite 500
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: 202-462-6262
Fax: 202-265-6262
Web site: http://consumersunion.org
Contact: http://custhelp.consumerreports.org/cgi-bin/
consumerreports.cfg/php/enduser/ask.php
CU is a nonproﬁt, independent testing and information organi-
zation. It publishes Consumer Reports. It does not accept adver-
tisements so as to remain independent of bias. CU has reviewed
weight-loss supplements and diets and diet programs. Because
many consumers log on to the Web for weight-loss advice, Con-
sumer Reports has rated dieting information sites and ranked the
ones that are most helpful. The Consumer Reports Web site fea-
tures a page entitled ‘‘4 Ways to Keep Your Child at a Healthy
Weight.’’
Council on Size and Weight Discrimination (CSWD)
P.O. Box 305
Mt. Marion, NY 12456
Phone: 610-70-8166
Web site: http://cswd.org
E-mail: info@cswd.org
CSWD is a nonproﬁt group that is working to change attitudes
about body weight on the job, in the media, and for medical
treatment. Its Web site has pages with facts and suggestions such
as ‘‘How to Fight Weight Discrimination,’’ ‘‘10 Steps to Loving
Your Body Just As It Is,’’ and ‘‘Ten Reasons to Give Up Dieting.’’
It also presents information and guidelines on how to become
active in ﬁghting weight discrimination.
Nonprofit, Professional, and Trade Organizations
257

Endocrine Society
8401 Connecticut Avenue, Suite 900
Chevy Chase, MD 20815
Phone: 301-941-0200
Web site: http://www.endo-society.org
E-mail: societyservices@endo-society.org
The Endocrine Society, formed in 1916, supports research on hor-
mones and the clinical practice of endocrinology. Worldwide, it
has more than 14,000 members who represent medicine, molecu-
lar and cellular biology, genetics, immunology, education, indus-
try, and health care ﬁelds. The members are committed to
research and treatment of endocrine disorders, including diabe-
tes, infertility, osteoporosis, thyroid disease, and obesity and
lipid abnormalities.
The Society has developed clinical practice guidelines that
are offered to clinicians as the most recent advances and new
strategies to improve care by reducing variations in practice,
reducing medical errors, and providing consistent quality of care
for diagnosing and treating obese or overweight patients. The
Society selects topics for guidelines by examining areas where
no guidelines are in place or where existing guidelines are out-
of-date. Each guideline is created by a task force of experts who
rely on evidence-based reviews of the literature to provide sup-
port for the recommendations. In 2007, the Endocrine Society
released the guideline ‘‘Prevention and Treatment of Pediatric
Obesity.’’ The guideline’s recommendations include deﬁning
childhood overweight and obesity using BMI percentiles and
supporting diet and physical activity modiﬁcation as the corner-
stones of prevention and as a prerequisite for other treatment.
The group advocates that schools encourage and allow 60
minutes of moderate to vigorous daily exercise in all grades.
The guideline also discusses policies for bariatric surgery in
young people. The Society’s Web site supplies information about
obesity surgery, including the conditions that affect long-term
success.
Institute of Medicine (IOM) of the National Academies
500 Fifth Street NW
Washington, DC 20001
Phone: 202-334-2352
Fax: 202-334-2158
258
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

Web site: http://iom.edu
E-mail: iomwww@nas.edu
The National Academy of Sciences (NAS), signed into being by
President Abraham Lincoln in 1863, was mandated to ‘‘investi-
gate, examine, experiment, and report upon any subject of sci-
ence or art’’ (National Academies 2008) whenever called upon
to do so by any department of the government. NAS eventually
expanded to include the National Research Council (1916),
National Academy of Engineering (1964), and Institute of Medi-
cine (1970). Collectively, the organizations are known as the
National Academies. IOM is a nonproﬁt organization whose
present-day goal is to provide unbiased, science-based informa-
tion concerning health policy to policy makers, professionals,
and the public. It publishes reference values for nutrient intakes
such as calories, carbohydrates, and fats, which are periodically
updated.
The IOM, in conjunction with the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation, assessed the progress made in response to the 2005
IOM report Preventing Childhood Obesity: Health in the Balance.
The report provided a guide with detailed actions for
government, industry, media, communities, schools, and fami-
lies for prevention and treatment of obesity in children and
youth. The assessment report, Progress in Preventing Childhood
Obesity: How Do We Measure Up? launched a call to action for
key stakeholders to continue to monitor effectiveness of new pol-
icies and programs and to widely publicize the most promising
practices. The IOM Web site includes published reports about
obesity including such fact sheets as what the government,
industry, and foundations can do to respond to childhood
obesity. This page features links to current projects, many of
which are devoted to the study of obesity in adults and children.
International Food Information Council (IFIC)
1100 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 432
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: 202-296-6540
Web site: http://iﬁc.org
E-mail: foodinfo@iﬁc.org
IFIC provides information on food safety, nutrition, and health to
health professionals, educators, journalists, and government
Nonprofit, Professional, and Trade Organizations
259

ofﬁcials who are responsible for relaying this information to the
public. They examine the latest research and break it down into
understandable information for consumers. The IFIC media
guide on food safety and nutrition lists experts and their contacts
in a number of different specialties.
IFIC is supported by the food, beverage, and agricultural
industries. It produces a bimonthly newsletter on current topics
in food safety and nutrition. The IFIC Web site has resources that
are understandable and useful for consumers and health profes-
sionals. It contains a glossary of food-related terms, brochures
and fact sheets, videos on current health topics, and a newsroom
ﬁlled with the latest health information. IFIC developed a part-
nership with America on the Move, the Food Marketing Insti-
tute, and the President’s Council on Physical Fitness and Sports
to create Kidnetic. This is a Web site program for kids and their
parents to learn about nutrition and health in a fun and interac-
tive way. It provides kid-friendly recipes, games, and physical
activity ideas.
IFIC is based in Washington, DC, and focuses primarily on
U.S. issues; however, it also contributes to an informal network
of food information organizations in Europe, Asia, Australia,
Canada, Japan, New Zealand, and South Africa.
National Association to Advance Fat Acceptance (NAAFA)
P.O. Box 22510
Oakland, CA 94609
Phone: 916-558-6880
Web site: www.naafa.org
e-mail: info@naafa.org
NAAFA works to eradicate stigma and discrimination based on
body size. The tools used are public education, advocacy, and
support for association members. It is a forum where issues
affecting fat people can be discussed in an unbiased setting.
NAAFA provides a legal aid program called FLARE (Fat Legal
Advocacy, Rights, and Education) to help people facing size-
related discrimination. NAAFA offers its members activities
and opportunities to get more information and a chance to help
the ﬁght against size discrimination. The NAAFA newsletter
has up-to-date listings of research, legal, and legislative issues
and schedules for the Association’s meetings and programs.
The Fat Activist Task Force encourages letter-writing campaigns
260
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

that protest or praise advertising and media targets that portray
obese people. Local NAAFA chapters throughout the United
States are led by volunteers and carry out NAAFA’s mission at
the local level. Most chapters hold local meetings and sponsor
workshops and support groups. A wide range of special interest
groups (SIGs) within NAAFA that provide programs for mem-
bers sharing common concerns include Big Men’s Forum, Cou-
ples SIG, Diabetic SIG, Military Issues SIG, and Weight Loss
Surgery Survivors SIG. Each year NAAFA holds a national meet-
ing that allows members from around the United States to net-
work. These meetings present educational and social activities
such as workshops, rallies, sightseeing trips, swim parties, and
fashion shows.
Speciﬁc resources available on the NAAFA Web site include
guidelines for health care providers, facts about hypertension,
and myths about weight loss and fat people. Pamphlets are avail-
able for download on the following topics: ‘‘Airline Tips for
Large Passengers,’’ ‘‘Declaration of Health Rights for Fat Peo-
ple,’’ and ‘‘Joining the Size Acceptance Revolution.’’
The Obesity Society (TOS)
8630 Fenton Street, Suite 814
Silver Spring, MD 20910
Phone: 301-563-6526
Web site: http://www.obesity.org/
Founded in 1982, TOS is the leading scientiﬁc society dedicated
to the study of obesity. It supports obesity research, education,
and advocacy. The organization publishes research on the causes
and treatment of obesity, keeps the medical community and pub-
lic informed of new advances, and aims to improve the lives of
people with obesity. It publishes the journalObesity.
In November 2004, TOS’s Council developed a new strategic
plan to expand and deﬁne the Society’s focus. It is committed to
advancing public policy changes that focuses on assessment,
prevention, and treatment of obesity. TOS’s advocacy program
objectives include developing programs designed to prevent
obesity, ensuring that all people have access to quality medical
care for obesity treatment, and increasing funding for obesity
research. In pursuing these objectives, he Obesity Society works
with the U.S. Congress, the U.S. Surgeon General, and CDC. At
the presidential nominating conventions in 2008, The Obesity
Nonprofit, Professional, and Trade Organizations
261

Society presented a forum entitled ‘‘The Challenge of Obesity for
Policy Makers: Recommendations for the Next Administration,’’
which featured roundtable discussions with policy makers at
both the national and local level, in addition to representatives
of Barack Obama and John McCain, the Democratic and
Republican Party nominees in the 2008 presidential election,
respectively.
The Society has issued numerous position statements that
represent the organization’s ofﬁcial stance, such as ‘‘Guidance
for Industry on Developing Products for Weight Management,’’
‘‘Position on Orlistat as an Over-the-Counter Drug,’’ ‘‘National
Coverage Determination for Bariatric Surgery,’’ and ‘‘Comments
on Medicare Policy.’’ For consumers, the Web site offers fact
sheets: ‘‘Obesity and Diabetes,’’ ‘‘Obesity and Cancer,’’ and
‘‘Childhood Overweight, Obesity, Bias, and Stigmatization’’ are
some examples.
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF)
Route One and College Road East
P.O. Box 2316
Princeton, NJ 08543-2319
Phone: 877-843-7953
Web site: http://www.rwjf.org
E-mail: http://www.rwjf.org/global/contactus.jsp
RWJF is a philanthropic organization devoted to improving
health policies and practices. It works with individuals, univer-
sities, and organizations to address health problems at their
roots. RWJF focuses on improving health care to help Americans
lead healthier lives. The foundation acknowledged the obesity
epidemic in the United States by declaring to help reverse it by
2015. Its strategies include investing in research to prevent
obesity, action to bring about results, and advocacy to educate
policy makers.
The RWJF childhood obesity prevention program offers
funding for studies that test ways to improve childhood physical
activity and nutrition. The Web site presents research results,
such as one entitled ‘‘U.S. Secondary Schools Serving Up Unheal-
thy Foods.’’ The study, published in the journal Pediatrics,
showed that the foods and food policies in U.S. public schools
become less healthy as students progress from elementary to
high school. The Foundation developed the Sports4Kids
262
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

program, which enables kids to become more physically active at
school through organized recreational activities at recess and
after school. RWJF is working on bringing affordable and nutri-
tious foods to urban areas nationwide by collaborating with the
Philadelphia Food Trust advocacy organization.
Rudd Center for Food Policy and Obesity
309 Edwards Street
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520-8369
Phone: 203-432-6700
Web site: yaleruddcenter.org/
E-mail: rudd.center@yale.edu
Founded in 2005, the Yale University Rudd Center for Food Pol-
icy and Obesity is a nonproﬁt research and public policy organi-
zation. Its global goals are to prevent obesity, improve dietary
choices, and transform the way in which overweight and obese
persons are viewed by the public. To pursue universal health
changes, the Rudd Center interacts with the media, industry
and government, and grassroots activists. The Center depends
upon experts from around the world who represent varied opin-
ions about obesity-related issues in science, law, business, and
bioethics. It describes its work as being at the intersection of sci-
ence and public policy. The Rudd Center’s current research stud-
ies are designed to increase understanding of the factors that
affect how we eat, how we discriminate against overweight and
obese people, and how we can change.
Through its Web site, details of these studies and informa-
tion about obesity are available to the general public, health care
professionals, policy makers, schools, and educators. Podcasts,
handouts, faculty presentations, and a free monthly newsletter
are also some of the resources.
Shape Up America!
6707 Democracy Boulevard, Suite 306
Bethesda, MD 20817
Phone: 301-493-5368
Web site: http://www.shapeup.org
E-mail: http://www.shapeup.org/contact/contact_std1.php
Nonprofit, Professional, and Trade Organizations
263

Shape Up America! is a national initiative founded in 1994 by
former Surgeon General C. Everett Koop to promote awareness
of obesity as a major public health priority and to provide
responsible information on healthy weight management. Its mis-
sion is based on the scientiﬁc evidence that obesity is a serious
health condition and not just an appearance problem. The
organization aims to increase cooperation among national and
community organizations to make healthy weight and increased
physical activity a possibility for all Americans. It seeks to edu-
cate the public on how to achieve a healthful weight through
increased physical activity and healthy eating. The Shape Up
America! Web site is designed to give information to the public,
health care professionals, educators, and the media. The profes-
sional center contains tools and reports on obesity assessment,
treatment, and monitoring. For individuals, there are interactive
assessment tools, meal planning guides, and recipes. The Parents
Guide for the Assessment and Treatment of the Overweight Child pro-
vides helpful information for a parent or caregiver of an over-
weight child on how to increase the chances of successful
weight management. A key message is that treatment of child-
hood obesity should improve the lifestyle of the entire family
and not just focus on the child. Ideas and tips for achieving that
goal are included in the Guide.
Shaping America’s Youth (SAY)
120 NW 9th Avenue, Suite 216
Portland, OR 97209-3326
Phone: 800-SAY-9221 (800-729-9221)
Fax: 503-273-8778
Web site: www.shapingamericasyouth.com
E-mail: info@shapingamericasyouth.com
SAY, founded by Kate and David McCarron, is an innovative
effort to prevent and reduce childhood obesity. It holds town hall
meetings to talk with parents and children to ﬁnd out what infor-
mation they want and need to create a community-based action
plan. SAY’s goal is to provide the latest and most comprehensive
information on community efforts that are directed at improving
the health of American youth.
Its Web site has an online survey to collect demographic and
funding information about programs throughout the United
States that strive to improve childhood nutrition and physical
264
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

activity. SAY is a national clearinghouse for this collected infor-
mation. The site also offers childhood obesity funding opportu-
nities, publications, schedules of SAY Town Meetings, and other
resources related to childhood obesity.
Trust for America’s Health (TFAH)
1730 M St. NW, Suite 900
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: 202-223-9870
Fax: 202-223-9871
Web site: http://healthyamericans.org
E-mail: info@tfah.org
TFAH is a nonproﬁt, nonpartisan organization that works to
make disease prevention a national priority. TFAH supports a
strong and responsive public health system that is vital for pre-
venting disease. On the Web site, the yearly Public Policy Prior-
ities are set forth. Each year, TFAH produces a report on the
national status of obesity entitled ‘‘F as in Fat: How Obesity Pol-
icies are Failing in America,’’ which includes a review of federal
and state obesity policies and obesity facts for each state. The
‘‘How Healthy Is Your State’’ drop-down menu for individual
states includes obesity rates in adults and children, hypertension
rates, diabetes rates, and percentage of adults who are physically
inactive as well as per capita medical costs of obesity.
Veterans Administration National Center for Health
Promotion and Disease Prevention
3022 Croasdaile Drive, Suite 200
Durham, NC 27705
Phone: 919-383-7874
Web site: www.healthierusveterans.va.gov
Contact: HealthierUSVeterans@va.gov.
In February 2006, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and
HHS launched an initiative called HealthierUS Veterans. Based
on the presidential initiative HealthierUS, this initiative seeks to
improve the health of veterans and their families across the coun-
try. A particular focus is placed on obesity and diabetes, as they
are major health concerns for veterans and the VA health care
system. The HealthierUS Veterans Web site features the My
HealtheVet link, which offers tools for tracking food intake and
Nonprofit, Professional, and Trade Organizations
265

physical activity. The toolkit on the Web site provides a guide for
local and state-based VA agencies to implement programs such
as The MOVE! Weight Management Program, a patient-
centered plan to help veterans lose weight and keep it off. Other
features on the Web site are brochures such as ‘‘Eat Healthy, Be
Active and ‘‘Get Fit for Life,’’ a virtual grocery store tour, and
public service announcement video segments. Obesity preven-
tion interventions that are ongoing in local VA agencies are listed
on the Web site. For example, veterans can participate in the
‘‘Step Up to Your Health: Stair Use’’ promotion or a ‘‘Learn
Healthier Cooking Skills for a Healthier You’’ class.
William J. Clinton Foundation (WJCF)
55 West 125th Street
New York, NY 10027
Web site: http://www.healthiergeneration.org/contact.aspx
E-mail: Info@HealthierGeneration.org
WJCF, in partnership with the American Heart Association and
along with coleader Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger of Cali-
fornia, has created the Alliance for a Healthier Generation. Its
mission is to eliminate childhood obesity in the United States
and to encourage young people to develop lifelong, healthy hab-
its. To foster these changes, which can make a difference to a
child’s health, the Alliance calls upon schools, industry, health
care, the community, and children themselves to make strides
against obesity in the following ways.
The school programs focus on creating real, practical solu-
tions to childhood weight management through healthier food
choices and opportunities for activity in schools. The Foundation
created the Healthy Schools Program and Kids Movement to put
healthy foods and beverages in vending machines and cafeterias,
to increase opportunities for students to exercise and play at
school, and to provide resources for teachers and staff to become
healthy role models. Through the industry programs, WJCF
works with the food industry to persuade food purveyors, res-
taurants, and fast-food outlets to produce healthier drinks,
snacks, and meals that are available to children. It is also helping
the health care industry to better understand, diagnose, and treat
childhood obesity.
The idea behind the Kids Movement plan was to motivate
children to take charge of their health and to lead their own Go
266
Directory of Agencies, Programs, and Organizations

Healthy movement. Details about the Let’s Just Play Go Healthy
Challenge, is found at http://www.nick.com/shows/lets_just
_play/index.jhtml/. Nickelodeon and the American Heart Asso-
ciation teamed up with the William J. Clinton Foundation.
References
American Medical Association (AMA). Roadmaps for Clinical Practice
series: Assessment and Management of Adult Obesity. 2007. [Online
information; retrieved 1/12/09.] http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/
category/10931.html.
National Academies. ‘‘About the NAS.’’ 2008. [Online information;
retrieved 1/12/09.] http://www.nasonline.org/site/PageServer?
pagename=ABOUT_main_page.
References
267

This page intentionally left blank 

8
Selected Print and
Nonprint Resources
T
his chapter offers a collection of resources in a variety of formats
to help you get more speciﬁc or individualized information on
the subject of obesity. Examples are provided from government
agencies, nonproﬁt organizations, scientiﬁc experts, magazines,
popular authors, and movie producers. This list is not all-
inclusive, but it provides an inventory of obesity-related referen-
ces, scientiﬁc and popular books, paper- and Web-based reports
and guidelines, and journals and magazines that provide in-
depth information about such areas as weight loss plans and scien-
tiﬁc research. Another section includes newsletters that are helpful
for keeping up-to-date about obesity prevention and management.
Web sites developed by experts provide accurate information, sta-
tistics, and science. Interactive Web sites have practical tools to
assess food choices. Motivational sites encourage physical activity
and healthful eating with games, quizzes, and other interactive
features that are meant to appeal to adults as well as children and
teens. A list of movies is included that present interviews from
some of America’s experts in obesity, a look at the consequences
of fast-food meals, and obesity stereotyping. Databases provide a
range of information from the general to the scientiﬁc that can be
useful for a further exploration of obesity in adults and children
throughout the world. Finally, a list of calculators and counters
aid in food measurement and keeping track of calories, body mass
index (BMI), or childhood growth.
269

Books
Reference Works
2008 Health & Nutrition Yearbook. Editors of Tufts Health &
Nutrition Letter, 2008, 200 pp. Publisher: D. B. Lee, Tufts
Health & Nutrition Letter. Web site: http://www.tuftshealth
letter.com/
The 2008 Health & Nutrition Yearbook is based on a full year’s
content of the Tufts Health & Nutrition Letter. It is organized and
indexed for easy reference. The book covers health topics like
weight control, vitamins, sugar substitutes, antioxidants, and
arthritis. Also included is a section titled ‘‘Ask Tufts Experts.’’
Alternative Sweeteners, Third Edition, Revised and Expanded.
L. O’Brien-Nabors and Robert C. Gelardi. Marcel Dekker,
Inc.; New York, 1991, 553 pp. ISBN: 0-8247-0437-1
The number of alternative sweeteners is large enough for
O’Brien-Nabors and Gelardi to write a 553-page book about
them. Each review of a sweetener is extensive. For example, the
chapter on sucralose is 22 pages long. This third edition
includes numerous new types of sweeteners. These individual
reviews include scientiﬁc information, technical applications,
and regulatory ratings. Sweeteners are compared with sucrose
(table sugar). Many of the sweeteners have fewer calories than
sucrose. The authors work for the Calorie Control Council, a
nonproﬁt organization funded by industry.
Handbook of Nutraceuticals and Functional Foods. Robert E. C.
Wildman. CDC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 2007, 541 pp.
ISBN 0-8493-6409-4
This authoritative handbook has 28 review articles written by
experts. The underlying premise is that people can make their
diet more healthful by adding dietary supplements or foods
that have been formulated or fortiﬁed to include health-
promoting factors. Several chapters discuss obesity, including
one that covers using protein as a functional food ingredient for
weight loss.
270
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Scientific Works
The China Study. Colin T. Campbell and Thomas M.
Campbell II. Dallas: Benbella Books, Inc., 2006, 417 pp. ISBN:
1-932100-66-0
Collin T. Campbell, professor emeritus at Cornell University,
and Thomas M. Campbell II are both graduates of Cornell.
They wrote this book based on research they conducted in a 20-
year project in partnership with Cornell, Oxford University, and
the Chinese Academy of Preventive Medicine that examined
the lifestyle factors and diseases of 65 rural parts of China and
Taiwan. This study was termed ‘‘The China Study,’’ and it
reported more than 8,000 statistically signiﬁcant associations
between lifestyle, diet, and disease variables. This book
examines the associations discovered through this study. Issues
discussed include the diseases of afﬂuence (obesity, heart
disease, cancer, and diabetes), how to eat, and why this
information has not yet been publicized.
Obesity. Elliott M. Blass. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer
Associates, Inc., 2008. 457 pp. ISBN-13: 978-0-87893-209-2
Elliott M. Blass is an expert in the ﬁeld of obesity. In this book
he brought together experts from different areas of obesity such
as epidemiology, gastrointestinal physiology, drug addiction,
exercise science, and agricultural policy to write chapters that
represent all ﬁelds related to obesity. Examples of chapters
include ‘‘Environmental Food Messages and Childhood
Obesity’’ and ‘‘Exercise for Obesity Treatment and Prevention:
Current Perspectives and Controversies.’’
Progress in Obesity Research: 8. Bernard Guy-Grand and
Gerard Ailhaud. London: John Libbey & Co, Ltd. 1999, 864
pp. ISBN: 0-86196-581-7
The International Congress on Obesity is sponsored by the
International Association (IASO). Internationally known experts
on obesity gather every four years to discuss recent
advancements in the ﬁeld. This book presents topics that
formed the basis of presentations from the 1998 meeting in
Paris. This meeting was the ﬁrst international congress of the
‘‘leptin era’’ and the last congress of the millennium. In the
Books
271

foreword, the editors wrote, ‘‘Most importantly, we do hope
that these Proceedings will represent a landmark in getting all
policy makers to consider the obesity epidemic very seriously
by taking into account the thorough work of the International
Obesity Task Force publicized by the World Health
Organization. In this respect, the food and agricultural industry
should play an increasing role in preventing this epidemic in
developed and developing countries.’’ In the decade since the
publication of this reference book, the global epidemic has
gotten much worse.
Progress in Obesity Research: 9. G. Medeiros-Meto, A. Hal-
pern, and Claude Bouchard. Montrouge John Libbey Eurotext
Ltd., 2003, 1080 pp. ISBN: 2-7420-0406-2
This is another in the series of books based on the conferences
of the International Association for the Study of Obesity. This
meeting was held in 2002 in Sao Paulo, Brazil. The chapters
range from basic information to applied research. Chapters
cover the international perspective on obesity drug therapy, the
roles of behavior modiﬁcation in the management of obesity,
and an evaluation of the costs of obesity.
Popular Books
These are examples of popular diet books. Listing a book does
not mean that it is an approved diet. Some fad diets are
included here to aid in identifying false claims. Check the
Federal Trade Commission report listed in this chapter, entitled
Weight Loss Advertising. It provides criteria for evaluation of
diets and claims.
The Alternative Day Diet: Diet Only Half the Time. James B.
Johnson. G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 2008, 288 pp. ISBN-13: 978-0-
399-15493-5
The diet approach described in The Alternative Day Diet is a
modiﬁed fast. No foods are off limits. The ‘‘down days’’ are
days on which dieters must limit themselves to 300 to 500
calories. For the down days in the ﬁrst few weeks, dieters are
advised to sip protein shakes throughout the day. This is a
classic fad that overpromises weight loss. One claim is that this
272
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

diet will turn on a ‘‘skinny gene’’ to help the user shed the
pounds and live a longer life. The author is a plastic surgeon.
Don’t Eat This Book: Fast Food and the Supersizing of
America. Morgan Spurlock. Berkeley, CA: Penguin, 2005, 320
pp. ISBN-10: 0399152601
After ﬁlming his movie Super Size Me, Morgan Spurlock wrote
this book to summarize the conclusions of his 30-day
McDonald’s fast-food diet. He discusses why he believes so
many Americans are obese today. It includes details of inter-
views he held with law ofﬁcials, marketing professionals, and
obesity experts.
Eat, Drink, and Be Healthy: The Harvard Medical School Guide
to Healthy Eating. Walter C. Willett, MD, and Patrick J.
Skerrett. New York: Free Press, 2001, 348 pp. ISBN-10:
0743266420
Eat, Drink, and Be Healthy is codeveloped with the Harvard
School of Public Health. This book sorts through diet myths
and explains how weight control is one of the single most
important health beneﬁts. Chapters include ‘‘Carbohydrates for
Better and Worse’’ and ‘‘Surprising News about Fat and
Healthy Weight.’’ Also included are menu plans and recipes to
make choosing the right foods easy.
Ending the Food Fight: Guide Your Child to a Healthy Weight
in a Fast Food/Fake Food World. David Ludwig and Suzanne
Rostler. New York: Houghton Mifﬂin, 2007, 352 pp. ISBN-10:
0547053681
David Ludwig is a pediatrician and an endocrinologist at
Children’s Hospital in Boston and the director of the Optimal
Weight for Life (OWL) program, which helps treat children
who are overweight or obese. Suzanne Rostler is a dietitian at
the OWL clinic. They collaborated on this book to give parents
advice on how to help their children who have unhealthy
weight. This book includes topics such as eating to feel full and
getting physical. A nine-week program with 50 recipes and
shopping lists is outlined.
Books
273

Fast Food Nation. Eric Schlosser. New York: HarperCollins,
2001, 416 pp. ISBN-10: 0-06-083858-2
Journalist Schlosser, in Fast Food Nation, takes an inside look at
the fast-food industry. He has been investigating the industry
for years, and he discusses what he has found in great detail in
this book, including how it has created the obesity epidemic,
insight on how the food is prepared and produced, and how
the industry targets our younger population through advertis-
ing. Some of the chapters are titled ‘‘Why the Fries Taste So
Good,’’ ‘‘On the Range, What’s in the Meat,’’ and ‘‘The Ameri-
can Way.’’
Fat Families, Thin Families: How to Save Your Family from the
Obesity Trap. Amy Hendel, PA. Dallas: Benbella Books, Inc.,
2008, 475 pp. ISBN-10: 9781933771496
Amy Hendel is a physician assistant, journalist, and health
television correspondent. Her book is aimed at being a guide
for families who want a healthier lifestyle. Topics include
healthy rules for shopping, avoiding emotional eating, practical
tips on how to make healthy choices, and recipes even for busy
schedules.
Fat Land: How Americans Became the Fattest People in the
World. Greg Critser. New York: Houghton Mifﬂin, 2002, 256
pp. ISBN-10: 0618164723
Greg Critser explains how the United States came to be over-
whelmingly obese by using examples of the effects of class,
politics, culture, and economics. As a past overweight
American himself, he is able to provide an inside look at the
challenges associated with being overweight. Chapters
included are ‘‘Supersize Me,’’ ‘‘What the Extra Calories Do To
You,’’ and ‘‘What Can Be Done.’’
Food Fight. Kelly D. Brownell, PhD, and Katherine B. Horgen,
PhD. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004, 356 pp. ISBN-13:
9780071438728
This book, written by Yale University’s Brownell and Horgen,
looks at how we live in a ‘‘toxic environment’’ when it comes to
dietary health. It explores the factors that have created an
274
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

increase in disease and an expanded waistline in the United
States. Food Fight includes an explanation on how the
unhealthful environment was created, what allows it to exist in
our society, and what steps need to be taken to improve it.
Food Politics. Marion Nestle, PhD, MPH. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 2002, 457 pp. ISBN-13:
9780520254039
Food Politics, written by New York University Professor Marion
Nestle, takes an inside look at how food companies’ main goal
of selling more product and getting consumers to eat more
affects our health. Points covered include ways that food
companies undermine dietary advice and how kids and schools
are exploited.
Good Calories, Bad Calories: Challenging the Conventional
Wisdom on Diet, Weight Control, and Disease. Gary Taubes.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2007, 601 pp. ISBN-13:
9781400040780
Gary Taubes is a science writer. This book explores how the
types of foods we consume are the key link to health. Emphasis
is focused on the roles of fat and cholesterol, the roles of
carbohydrates, and how these nutrients affect obesity and
weight regulation.
Mayo Clinic on Healthy Weight. Donald D. Hensrud, MD,
Editor-in-Chief. Rochester, MN: Mayo Clinic, 2000, 200 pp.
ISBN-10: 1-893005-05-4
This book does not lay out a weight-loss diet, but it does pro-
vide the information that the physicians and dietitians at the
famous Mayo Clinic give patients about weight control. The
nondiet approach provides realistic guides for getting moti-
vated and meal planning. It is well organized with informative
headings and illustrated with helpful charts.
Mindless Eating: Why We Eat More Than We Think. Brian
Wansink, PhD. New York: Bantam Dell, 2006, 276 pp. ISBN-
13: 9780553384482. ISBN-13: 9780739340370 (compact disc)
Books
275

Brian Wansink is a professor at Cornell University who has
spent time at the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
Mindless Eating examines the variables that cause one to
consume food. Topics include the marketing of foods,
environmental cues that inﬂuence our eating behavior,
experiments that look at dietary decisions, and how to
‘‘mindlessly eat better.’’
Tyler’s Honest Herbal, 4th Edition. Steven Foster and Varro E.
Tyler. Haworth Press, 1999, 442 pp. ISBN-10: 0-7890-0705-3
A number of dietary supplements for weight loss contain herbs
or herbal extracts. The Honest Herbal was originally published in
the late 1970s. It continues to be the most referenced, quoted,
and controversial book on herbs. Varro Tyler is distinguished
professor emeritus at Purdue University. The authors write that
herbs can make a signiﬁcant positive contribution to health but
that scientiﬁc studies need to be done to show how, and if, the
herbs can be effective for weight loss.
The Volumetrics Eating Plan: Techniques and Recipes for
Feeling Full on Fewer Calories. Barbara J. Rolls. New York:
HarperCollins, 2005 (trade paper), 2007; 317 pp. ISBN-13: 978-
0-06-073730-6
The Volumetrics Eating Plan, by Pennsylvania State University
professor and researcher Barbara J. Rolls is a companion to
Volumetrics: Feel Full on Fewer Calories. It provides strategies and
easy-to-prepare recipes designed to help people eat more
slowly and feel full on fewer calories.
The Volumetrics Weight-Control Plan: Feel Full on Fewer
Calories. Barbara J. Rolls and Robert A. Barnett. New York:
Harpertorch, 2003, 369 pp. ISBN-10: 0-380-82117-6
Professor Rolls, a well-respected researcher on food intake and
weight management, and Robert A. Barnett, a nationally known
food writer, collaborated on this book, which shows how to eat
enough food to be satisﬁed, meet nutritional needs, and still
lose weight. The volumetrics plan is developed from studies
about the science of satiety and what researchers have learned
about the food choices that make people feel full. The authors
teach how to eat low-calorie-dense, high-volume foods to feel
276
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

full even while eating fewer calories. The emphasis is on devel-
oping lifelong healthy eating skills. Some of the foods featured
are hot soups (they have to be eaten slowly) and large salads.
Recipes and meal plans are included.
What to Eat: An Aisle-by-Aisle Guide to Savvy Food Choices
and Good Eating. Marion Nestle, PhD, MPH. New York: North
Point Press, 2006, 611 pp. ISBN-13: 9780865477049
This book is written by Professor Marion Nestle from New York
University. With all the confusion about what to eat or how to
shop for the most healthful foods, What to Eat provides a step-
by-step guide on how to make the best of a supermarket visit.
The book explores each section of a typical supermarket and
explains in common language ways to avoid the label confusion
associated with shopping.
Women Afraid to Eat: Breaking Free in Today’s Weight-
Obsessed World. Frances M. Berg. Hettinger, ND: Healthy
Weight Network, 2001, 380 pp. ISBN-10: 0-918532-62-0
Women Afraid to Eat provides an overview of current social and
medical pressures to be thin. True stories of women illustrate
the consequences of weight loss and dieting and the effects of
starvation. The observations are backed up with research and
statistics. The author devotes the second half of her book to
suggestions on how women can be healthy no matter what
their weight. She calls for changes in our weight-obsessed soci-
ety and in the way overweight women are treated and asks for
acceptance of all sizes. The information in the book is useful for
health professionals, parents, coaches, and anyone who is con-
cerned about women’s health.
Reports
CDC Growth Charts: United States. National Center for
Health Statistics. http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts
By plotting height and weight measurements on an appropriate
age-and-gender-speciﬁc growth chart, health care providers can
monitor growth and identify potential health- or nutrition-
related problems in children. Most of the data used to construct
Reports
277

these charts come from the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES), which has collected height
and weight information on the American population since the
early 1960s. In 2000 the CDC released new growth charts for
children. The CDC charts replace the older versions of charts
for children’s height and weight based on data organized in
1977 since children are taller and heavier these days. By using
these charts you can compare growth in infants from birth, chil-
dren, and adolescents to age 20 with a nationally representative
reference population based on young people of all ages and
racial or ethnic groups.
Childhood Obesity: Harnessing the Power of Public and
Private Partnerships. S. Maelpati, H. Pirani, D. Surie, D.
Dietz. J. Lee. National Institute for Health Care Management
Foundation. 1225 19th St., NY Suite 710. Washington, DC
20036. Web site: http://www.NIHCM.org
In this report the National Institute for Health Care
Management Foundation (NIHCM) highlights some
outstanding collaboration between state health agencies and
private health plans to reduce overweight and obesity in
children. The NIHCM Foundation mission is to encourage
cooperation between the public and private sectors to ﬁnd
creative solutions to American health care system problems.
The report proﬁles cases of partnerships in Massachusetts,
Pennsylvania and Tennessee and North Carolina. The report
identiﬁes eight vital components that interact to form a
coordinated school health approach. These include: 1. Health
education. 2. Physical education. 3. Health services. 4. Nutrition
services. 5. Counseling and psychological services. 6. Healthy
school environment. 7. Health promotion for staff. 8. Family
and community involvement.
Comprehensive Report on 2000 Growth Charts. Series Report
11, Number 246. 2000. 201 pp. PHS 2001-1695. Web site: http://
www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/
This comprehensive report from the CDC contains the database
used for the 2000 CDC pediatric growth charts for boys and
girls. The methodologies used and detailed statistical
presentations are included in this expanded report. Differences
278
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

between the 1977 and the 2000 growth charts are illustrated,
and users are shown how to make the transition to using the
2000 CDC Charts. These charts may be used by health care
workers and researchers interested in surveillance, food
assistance, and other activities that rely on following the growth
of infants, children, and adolescents in the United States.
Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to Nutrient
Requirements. J. M. McGinnis, Chair. Food and Nutrition
Board of the Institute of Medicine and Health Canada.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006, 560 pp.
ISBN-10: 0-309-10091-7
This report from the National Academies is a summary of eight
volumes combined in one reference volume. It is organized by
nutrient and reviews the function of each nutrient, its food
sources, and recommendations for people for maintenance
of health and reduction of risk of chronic diseases such as
cardiovascular disease (CVD) and some cancers. It describes the
estimated average requirements by gender and age. It also
gives estimates as to tolerable upper levels to avoid toxicity of
some nutrients.
F as in Fat: How Obesity Policies are Failing in America. J.
Levi, L. M. Segal, and E. Gadola. 1707 H Street NW, 7th Floor.
Washington, DC: Trust for America’s Health, 2008, 144 pp.
Web site: http:// www.rwjf.org/ﬁles/research/fasinfat2007.pdf
This is the fourth annual edition of F as in Fat. It is a report
about the weaknesses of current policies and the need to
develop ‘‘grand scale changes’’ to address the obesity crisis.
Some of the federal and state policies examined include school
nutrition and physical activity requirements, community
approaches (e.g., snack taxes, smart growth community design
initiatives), and other public health programs. Updates are
provided on obesity-related state and federal legislation and ini-
tiatives. Results from an experts survey and a public opinion
survey are presented. The recommendations are targeted at dif-
ferent stakeholders and consist of the following: (1) schools and
school districts should take responsibility for feeding students
well; (2) employers should have healthier work environments;
(3) the food, beverage, and marketing industries should provide
Reports
279

consistent nutrition labeling based on product size; and (4) the
federal government should update agricultural policy to
encourage healthy eating and revise the Food Pyramid so that
it is less confusing.
Food Marketing to Children: Threat or Opportunity? J. M.
McGinnis, J. A. Gootman, and V. I. Kraak, Editors.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006, 536 pp.
ISBN-10: 0-309-09713-4
This report is a comprehensive review of scientiﬁc publications
in the area of the inﬂuence of marketing on nutritional beliefs,
choices, practices, and outcomes for children and youth. Many
of these advertised products are high in calories, fat, and sugar.
Consumption of these foods is linked to childhood obesity.
Implementation of the WHO Global Strategy on Diet, Physical
Activity and Health. WHO Consultation on Obesity. Geneva:
World Health Organization, 1998, 276 pp. Web site: http://
www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/implementation/en/
Although this report was published in 1998, many of the
concerns and challenges are current. It is a comprehensive
report about the global public health problem of obesity. Data
include global prevalence and trends, costs of overweight and
obesity including health consequences, and health beneﬁts and
risks of weight loss. An interesting part of this report is the
‘‘What Has Been Done since 2004?’’ section, which shows what
entire countries and concerned social and economic groups
have done to implement this global strategy since its adoption
by the WHO member states in May 2004.
Preventing Childhood Obesity: Health in the Balance. J. P.
Koplan, C. T. Liverman, and V. A. Kraak, Editors. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press, 2005, 436 pp. ISBN-10: 0-309-
09196-9
This committee report from the National Academies examines
the environmental, social, medical, and historical factors
inﬂuencing childhood obesity. Because of the increase in
childhood obesity throughout the United States, policy makers
are encouraged to recognize it as one of the most critical public
health threats today. The book offers a prevention-based action
280
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

plan that identiﬁes promising short-term and longer-term inter-
ventions. It also recommends roles that various sectors of soci-
ety should play to ﬁnd solutions to the growing problem.
Thought Leader Insight & Analysis: Obesity. Dublin, Ireland:
Research and Markets, 2008, 114 pp. Web site: http://
www.researchandmarkets.com/reports/604940/
Thought Leader Insight & Analysis is based on interviews with
seven anonymous, internationally recognized thought leaders.
They determined that obesity is not treated like other chronic
diseases such as diabetes and CVD. To quote the report, ‘‘The
medical justiﬁcation for treating obesity is not directly tied to
hard outcomes and the pharmacoeconomics do not yet
motivate 3rd-party payers to broadly reimburse for pharmaco-
therapies.’’ The panel gave its perspectives on the ‘‘pipeline’’ of
obesity drugs, efﬁcacy, and side effects. The drugs evaluated
included those that act in the brain as well as on the periphery
and those that can promote food absorption. The online bro-
chure is useful because it lists drugs and the manufacturers.
The report is very expensive, at more than $6,000. It is not tar-
geted to consumers.
Weight Loss Advertising. R. L. Cleland, W. C. Gross, L. D.
Koss, M. Daynard, and K. M. Muolo. Washington, DC:
Federal Trade Commission, 2002, 40 pp + Appendix
Weight Loss Advertising is a report by the Federal Trade
Commission (FTC) with the Partnership for Healthy Weight
Management, a coalition of representatives from science,
academia, heath care professions, government, commercial
enterprises, and organizations whose mission is to promote
sound guidance on strategies for achieving and maintaining a
healthy weight. The report concludes that false or misleading
claims, such as exaggerated weight loss without diet or
exercise, are widespread in advertisements for weight-loss
products. The agency identiﬁed claims that should be rejected
by responsible advertising outlets because, based on current sci-
entiﬁc knowledge, they are impossible to accomplish. This
report was the basis for an FTC education campaign that
encourages the media to reject weight-loss product advertising
Reports
281

on any product that contains any of the following seven false
‘‘red ﬂag’’ claims:
Causes weight loss of 2 pounds or more a week for a month, or
more without dieting or exercising
Causes substantial weight loss, no matter what or how much the
consumer eats
Causes permanent weight loss even when the consumer stops using
the product
Blocks the absorption of fat or calories to enable consumers to lose
substantial weight
Safely enables consumers to lose more than 3 pounds per week for
more than four weeks
Causes substantial weight loss for all users
Causes substantial weight loss by wearing it on the body or rubbing
it into the skin
Guidelines
Clinical Guidelines on the Identiﬁcation, Evaluation, and
Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults. Bethesda,
MD: National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease, 1998,
228 pp. Item No.: 98-4083. Web site: http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/
guidelines/obesity/ob_home.htm
These are the ﬁrst federal government guidelines to addresses
obesity and overweight. The guidelines are evidence based
using an extensive review of the scientiﬁc literature. They are
written for health professionals who work with overweight and
obese patients. The Preface (xvii) includes a table that displays
the classiﬁcations for overweight and obesity by BMI; waist
circumference; and associated disease risk for type 2 diabetes,
hypertension, and CVD. For example, if one’s BMI is between
30.0 and 34.9 (Class I Obesity) and waist circumference is ≤35
inches, disease risk is high. Females with a waist circumference
of ≥35 inches and a BMI of 30.0–34.9 have a very high disease
risk. Men with a waist circumference of ≤40 inches and ≥40
inches have a high and very high risk of disease, respectively.
These parameters do not take into account physical activity.
282
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Scientiﬁc evidence shows that one can have Class I Obesity and
not be at high risk of other diseases, especially if physically ﬁt.
Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2005. U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of
Agriculture. Alexandria, VA: USDA Center for Nutrition
Policy and Promotion. Web site: htpp://www.health.gov
/dietaryguidelines/dga2005/document/default.htm
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans, originally issued in 1980, is
revised every ﬁve years. A committee is appointed by the
secretaries of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) and USDA. The purpose of the guidelines is to
provide science-based advice to promote health for Americans
over two years of age. The 2005 guidelines placed stronger
emphasis on reducing calorie consumption and increasing
physical activity than did previous versions. The food and exer-
cise plans for the Dietary Guidelines are graphically presented by
the Food Guide Pyramid. The guidelines are intended for the
public, policy makers, and nutrition educators. They can be
downloaded from the Web site, along with the consumer bro-
chure ‘‘Finding Your Way to a Healthier You.’’
Healthy People 2010 Initiative. Web site: www.healthy
people.gov/
In January 2000, HHS launched Healthy People 2010, a
comprehensive, nationwide health promotion and disease
prevention agenda. It was designed to be a framework for
improving the health of all people in the United States during
the ﬁrst decade of the 21st century. The promotion was built
upon previous initiatives that had been proposed over the
preceding two decades. The goals of increasing quality and
years of healthy life and eliminating health disparities were
broken down into objectives that would be used to measure
progress. Each objective had a target to be achieved by the year
2010. Three targets directly related to obesity were to:
Increase the proportion of adults who are at a healthy weight to a
target level of 60 percent of Americans
Reduce the proportion of adults who are obese to 15 percent
Guidelines
283

Reduce the proportion of children and adolescents who are
overweight or obese
Goals were set separately for each childhood age grouping,
with the overall reduction to be measured from a baseline of
11 percent to 5 percent of children and adolescents who are
overweight. By 2008, the United States had made little progress
toward those targets. In fact, the midcourse review indicated
that the obesity situation was getting worse. From this central
site, a number of other government Web sites can be accessed to
ﬁnd information about obesity and weight control.
Journals and Magazines
Consumer Reports. Consumers Union (CU). 1101 17th Street
NW Suite 500. Washington, DC 20036. Web site: http://
consumersunion.org
Consumer Reports is published monthly by Consumers Union, a
nonproﬁt, independent testing and information organization. It
does not accept advertisements and thus is truly independent
and a reliable source of information. Consumer Reports has
reviewed weight-loss supplements and diets and diet pro-
grams. Searching its Web site by subject matter using the phrase
‘‘weight loss diets’’ yields, for example, an article about banning
the sales of over-the-counter weight-loss products to people
under 18 in Florida. Also posted is a letter from CU editors that
calls for ﬁling criminal charges against a company that uses
ephedra/ma huang in their products. Links are provided to
articles published in scientiﬁc journals.
International Journal of Obesity. R. L. Atkinson and I.
Macdonald, Editors. Nature Publishing Group, London.
ISSN: 0307-0565; ESSN: 1476-5497. Web site: http://www
.nature.com/ijo. E-mail: c-zulkey@northwestern.edu
The International Journal of Obesity is the ofﬁcial research journal
of the IASO, an organization that serves as an umbrella for 52
national obesity associations in 56 countries. The monthly
journal publishes research papers on basic, clinical, and applied
studies.
284
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Journal of the American Dietetic Association. L. Van Horn,
Editor. Elsevier Inc., Philadelphia, PA. ISSN 0002-8223. Web
site: www.adajournal.org. E-mail: https://secure.nejm.org/
services/contactus/contact_home.aspx
The Journal of the American Dietetic Association is the ofﬁcial
journal of the American Dietetic Association. It is a source for
the practice and science of food, nutrition, and dietetics. It
publishes original research articles, reviews, position papers,
and abstracts of papers published in other journals. The journal
publishes articles across a range of research and practice ﬁelds,
such as medical nutrition therapy, public health nutrition, food
science and biotechnology, food service systems, leadership and
management, and dietetics education.
New England Journal of Medicine. J. M. Drazen, Editor.
Massachusetts Medical Society. ISSN: 0028-4793. Web site:
http://www.nejm.org
The New England Journal of Medicine is published weekly and is
the ofﬁcial journal of the Massachusetts Medical Society.
Articles are targeted to physicians and other health care
professionals. It publishes primary research articles, review
articles, and commentaries. It is an important source of medical
news, including emerging information on obesity, and articles
from new issues are often also reported in newspaper, radio,
and television stories.
Nutrition Today. Johanna Dwyer, Editor-in-Chief. Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins. ISSN: 0029-666X. Web site: http://www
.nutritiontoday.com
Nutrition Today is published six times a year. It is primarily for
nutritional professionals but is easy to read and valuable to
consumers. It helps people clear a pathway through today’s
maze of fad diets and cure-all claims.
Obesity. R. N. Bergman, Editor-in-Chief. Nature Publishing
Group, Cambridge, MA. ISSN: 1930-7381; EISSN: 1930-739X.
Web site: http://www.obesity.org
Obesity (formerly known as Obesity Research) is the ofﬁcial
research journal of The Obesity Society. It publishes research
Journals and Magazines
285

articles, review articles, commentaries, public health and
medical developments, and abstracts from its annual meeting.
It is published monthly.
Obesity Reviews. A. Astrup, Editor. Blackwell Publishing.
ISSN: 1467-7881. Web site: http://www.iaso.org
Obesity Reviews, published bimonthly, is the ofﬁcial review
journal of the IASO. Some reviews are available for free and can
be downloaded. Examples of reviews include ‘‘Childhood
Obesity: Are We Missing the Big Picture?’’ ‘‘International
School-based Interventions for Preventing Obesity in Children,’’
and ‘‘Fasting: The Ultimate Diet?’’
Prevention. Liz Vaccariello, Editor-in-Chief. Rodale, Inc. ISSN:
0032-8006. Web site: http://www.prevention.com
Prevention magazine is published monthly. One focus of the
publication is on maintaining good health. A number of articles,
such as ‘‘Get a WOW BODY: Speed That Metabolism and Break
That Plateau,’’ are based on questionable notions. The articles
are often written in a question-and-answer format. Its Web site
offers several free Prevention newsletters, including ‘‘Eat Up,
Slim Down’’ and ‘‘Walk Off Weight,’’ as well as periodic news
alerts. Many of its articles, while eye-catching, are not based on
scientiﬁc evidence.
Newsletters
Berkeley Wellness Letter. John Edward Swartzberg, Editorial
Chair. University of California, Berkeley. ISSN (printed):
0748-9234
The Berkeley Wellness Letter is a nutrition, ﬁtness, and self-care
newsletter published by the University of California, Berkeley.
The newsletter has articles that support a positive, day-to-day
approach to a healthful, active life. It includes both scientiﬁc
and practical health guides from the latest research and con-
ducts the most advanced tests to long-used home remedies and
common sense. A goal for the newsletter’s Web site is to
develop a series of articles and fact sheets on the subjects of
nutrition, longevity, and ﬁtness, including ‘‘Guide to Dietary
286
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Supplements,’’ which will eventually be an online encyclopedia
of wellness.
Consumers Magazines Digest. Kristen McNutt, President of
Consumer Choices Inc., Editor. Web site: http://
www.mcnuttwebsite.com
This online newsletter is written by Kristen McNutt, president
of Consumer Choices Inc. She is a professional nutrition
communicator. The newsletter features stories about nutrition,
food safety, functional foods, and health-related topics. The free
newsletter is available electronically and is meant to be an edu-
cation service for food and health professionals. The Digest
reviews nutrition topics that appear in about 40 current U.S.
and Canadian magazines. Some articles include ‘‘What Celeb-
rity Success Stories Omit about Weight Loss Surgery’’ (Glamour),
‘‘People Underestimate the Calories in ‘Junk’ ’’ (Men’s Health),
‘‘Move It to Lose It’’ (Good Housekeeping), ‘‘Sleep Off the
Pounds’’ (Health), Every Bit Helps’’ (O Magazine), ‘‘Scary Fair
Food’’ (Parents), and ‘‘Weight Discrimination’’ (Health).
Nutrition Action Health Letter. Center for Science in the
Public Interest. 1875 Connecticut Ave. NW, Suite 300.
Washington, DC 20009. Phone: 202-332-9110. Web site: http://
www.cspinet.org
Nutrition Action Health Letter is published monthly by the
Center for Science in the Public Interest, an advocacy
organization for nutrition and health, food safety, alcohol
policy, and sound science. This newsletter has about 900,000
subscribers in the United States and Canada. It periodically
reviews fad diets and is usually a good source of information.
The newsletter reports the results of studies it has conducted
such as the calories and nutritional quality of restaurant meals
and calorie labeling on menu boards of fast-food restaurant
chains.
Nutrition Perspectives. S. Zidenberg-Cherr, Editor. Depart-
ment of Nutrition. University of California, Davis, CA 95616.
Ofﬁce: 530-752-3387. E-mail: szsidenbergcherr@ucdavis.edu
Nutrition Perspectives is published bimonthly by the Department
of Nutrition of the University of California, Davis. This
Newsletters
287

newsletter summarizes the latest nutrition research and food-
related programs (e.g., ‘‘Can Tomatoes Carry the Cure for Alz-
heimer’s?’’). Obesity research and programs are reviewed.
Shape Up America! Newsletter. Barbara J. Moore, PhD, Editor-
in-Chief. E-mail: newsletter@shapeup.org
This newsletter is for consumers interested in learning more
about obesity prevention and treatment. It features stories about
people’s weight-loss experiences. For example, the ‘‘My Story’’
section published an article about a man named Dennis who
lost 85 pounds over ﬁve months. Following publication, a
reader wrote to comment that she was disappointed to see an
article about what she thought was unhealthy because so much
weight was lost without medical supervision. The editor, Dr.
Moore, replied that when very obese people (Dennis weighed
290 pounds) start a diet, the decrease in calories is signiﬁcant. A
large part of early weight loss is water weight and some protein
and fat. Dennis had also stopped drinking alcohol, which con-
tributed to the decrease in his caloric intake. Moore added that
after the initial weight-loss period, weekly weight loss should
be closer to 2 pounds. In addition to personal stories, some
articles relate experiences in communities. For example,
acknowledging the observation that almost one-half of people
age 12–21 years do not participate in vigorous physical activity
on a regular basis, the newsletter published a report about how
to get kids to increase their physical activity via intramural
sports programs and other after-school activities.
Tufts Health & Nutrition Letter. D. B. Lee, Publisher. Web site:
http://www.tuftshealthletter.com
The Tufts Health & Nutrition Letter was started in 1983 by then
Tufts University President Jean Mayer as an outreach program
of Tufts University and the Friedman School of Nutrition
Science & Policy. By calling upon experts from the areas of
clinical nutrition, social and public policy, and biomedicine,
Tufts Health & Nutrition Letter’s aim is to provide the
trustworthy and scientiﬁcally authoritative health and nutrition
advice that can directly improve consumers’ health. The
newsletter has covered weight control in articles including
‘‘What Does the Latest Research on Weight Mean to You?’’
288
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

‘‘Diet or Exercise, It’s Calories That Count,’’ and ‘‘Gut-Check
Time: Why Belly Fat Poses Extra Risks’’. Articles appear about
vitamins, sugar substitutes, antioxidants, and arthritis, and the
newsletter features a section called ‘‘Ask Tufts Experts.’’
Web Sites
General Web Sites
Baylor College of Medicine. Web site: http://www.bcm.edu
/cnrc/resources/hottopics.html#obesity
Baylor College of Medicine maintains a Web site containing
information about childhood obesity. It lists reports such as,
‘‘Healthy Weight Initiative’’ (American Dietetic Association), ‘‘I´s
Dieting OK for Kids?’’ (Nemours Foundation), ‘‘Keeping Kids
Healthy: Obesity, Nutrition & Physical Activity’’ (Center for
Health and Health Care in Schools), and ‘‘Soft Drinks in
Schools’’ (American Academy of Pediatrics).
Diabetes in Control. Dave Joffe, Editor-in-Chief. Steve Freed,
Publisher. Web site: http://www.diabetesincontrol.com/
index.php. E-mail: diabetes@topica.email-publisher.com
This online newsletter for health care professionals contains
current news on diabetes that can be helpful to consumers. A
number of the articles are about obesity. Newsletters include
summaries of research articles such as ‘‘Gastric Bypass Surgery
Reverses Metabolic Syndrome and ‘‘Studies Question Health
Beneﬁt of Post-Exercise Meals.’’ Live Webcasts can also be
accessed at the Web site.
Healthy Living. Brooke Claxton Building. Ottawa, Ontario
K1A 0K9. Web site: http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hl-vs/index-eng.
php. E-mail: Info@hc-sc.gc.ca
Healthy Living is a Web site of Health Canada where articles
such as ‘‘Obesity (It’s Your Health),’’ ‘‘Risk Factors for Heart
Disease,’’ and Canada’s Food Guide to Healthy Eating’’ may be
accessed. The primary focus is promoting healthy eating and
healthy weights. Also provided are links to other Canadian
government sites that provide additional information about
obesity.
Web Sites
289

International Food Information Council (IFIC). Web site:
http://www.iﬁc.org/nutrition/obesity/index.cfm
The International Food Information Council’s Web site provides
information on food safety and nutrition to health
professionals, educators, journalists, and government ofﬁcials
who are responsible for relaying this information to the public.
It includes a section titled ‘‘Overweight, Obesity & Weight
Management,’’ which examines the latest research and breaks it
down into understandable information for the general public.
Its Web site has resources such as a glossary of food related
terms, brochures and fact sheets, videos on current health
topics, and a newsroom ﬁlled with the latest health
information. IFIC partners with America on the Move, Food
Marketing Institute, and the Presidents Council on Physical
Fitness and Sports to create a Web site, called Kidnetic, for kids
and their parents to learn about nutrition and health in a fun
and interactive way (http:/kidnetic.com). It provides recipes,
games, and exciting ways to obtain physical ﬁtness. IFIC is
supported by the food, beverage, and agricultural industries.
MedlinePlus®. U.S. National Library of Medicine and
National Institutes of Health. Web site: www.nlm.nih.gov/
medlineplus
This Web site has information for both health professionals and
consumers. It contains extensive information from NIH and
other trusted sources on more than 600 diseases and conditions.
Available on the Web site are a medical encyclopedia and a
medical dictionary, health information in Spanish, information
on prescription and nonprescription drugs, health information
from the media, and links to thousands of clinical trials.
Rudd Center for Food Policy and Obesity. Yale University.
New Haven, CT. Web site: http://www.yaleruddcenter.org/
The Yale Rudd Center aims to draw attention to weight bias
and prejudice. Its goal is to develop strategies to address the
issue with young people, families, teachers, employers, and
health care professionals. The Web site provides comprehensive
lists of research articles, research tools, and PowerPoint
presentations for educators, students, and researchers who are
290
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

interested in studying weight bias. All the materials on this site
may be downloaded for free.
Weight-control Information Network (WIN). National Insti-
tute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease (NIDDK).
1 WIN Way. Bethesda, MD 20892-3665. Web site: http://win
.niddk.nih.gov/publications/better_health.htm
WIN is an information service of NIDDK. Its focus is on
providing information about body weight to the public and
media. The coverage of WIN reports and articles ranges from
underweight to normal weight to obesity. WIN provides
information about risks associated with overweight and obesity
with special emphasis on diabetes. WIN Notes is a quarterly
newsletter for consumers and health professionals. Also
available is a series of booklets in English and Spanish that
cover topics such as what is a healthy weight, getting active
and healthy eating, and physical activity across the life span.
Some of these booklets can be downloaded from the Web site.
Interactive for General Population
MyPyramid Tracker. Web site: http://www.mypyramidtracker
.gov/
MyPyramid Tracker allows the user to assess his or her diet and
physical activity. This tool can automatically calculate energy
intake by subtracting one’s physical activity from the energy
intake (food calories). This site translates the principles of the
USDA and HHS Dietary Guidelines for Americans for the
consumer. Other sites related to MyPyramid include
MyPyramid for Preschoolers and MyPyramid Menu Planner.
Rethink Your Drink. Web site: http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/
dnpa/healthyweight/healthy_eating/drinks.htm
This Web site lists the calorie content in various beverages and
suggests substitutions that will help to decrease calories. For
example, a 20-ounce bottle of nondiet cola has 227 calories. The
suggested replacement is a beverage with zero calories such as
diet soda or water. Another recommendation is to substitute a
12-ounce medium cafe´ latte with whole milk, containing 265
calories, with the same drink using fat-free milk, with just 125
Web Sites
291

calories. Another section of the Web site covers portion sizes
and calories, including learning how to read nutrition fact labels
carefully.
Shape Up America! Cyberkitchen. Web site: http://www
.shapeup.org/atmstd/kitchen/page0.php
Shape Up America! founded in 1994, is a national initiative to
promote awareness of obesity as a major public health priority
and to provide responsible information on healthy weight
management. The organization’s Cyberkitchen is an interactive
guide to healthy eating and weight management and teaches
the user how to balance the food eaten with physical activity.
Clicking on ‘‘I’m new here; show me what to do’’ leads to a
tailored approach based on one’s nutrition needs and eating
style. Based on age, height, weight, gender, and physical
activity, an estimated calorie goal is provided that can be
adjusted if the user wants to lose or gain weight. The site also
allows monitoring of daily dietary fat using the fat grams
calculator. Suggestions are made as to how to burn extra
calories or add extra calories. Recipes and a shopping list based
on meal choices can be generated. The site is easy to use and
helps people plan in advance what to eat.
Treatment Guidelines Implementation Tool for Palm OS and
PocketPC2003 Devices. Web site: http://hp2010.nhlbihin.net/
bmi_palm.htm
This tool is based on the NIH Clinical Guidelines for Overweight
and Obesity and it is part of the Obesity Education Initiative at
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. It is intended for
health care professionals to use in patient care. Included is an
automatic BMI calculator that can be downloaded to any
handheld device that uses a Palm operating system.
Interactive for Children and Adolescents
BAM! Body and Mind Food & Nutrition. Web site: http://
www.bam.gov/sub_foodnutrition/index.html
BAM! Body and Mind is a resource developed for students by
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that offers
292
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

interactive content on health, safety, and science topics. Lessons
are taught using games, challenges, and age-appropriate lan-
guage. There is a section on energy, which reviews components
of the kids’ ‘‘energy equation’’: food + sleep + physical activity
= energy. Users are prompted to think about the barriers to and
beneﬁts of acting on each component of the equation and
develop a plan to put health knowledge into practice. The page
entitled ‘‘Power Packing’’ describes how to pack tasty power
lunches; ‘‘Fuel Up for Fun’’ has snack ideas to produce energy
for physical activity; ‘‘Dining Decisions’’ is a game based on
healthful food choices; and ‘‘Cool Treats’’ are recipes for quick
and healthy snacks. The site also features success stories and an
online calendar for tracking physical activity.
Eat Smart. Play Hard. Web site: http://www.fns.usda.gov/
eatsmartplayhardkids/
The Eat Smart. Play Hard. campaign was launched by the
USDA’s Food and Nutrition Service in 2000. This Web site
encourages children and adults to eat healthful food and be
physically active every day with kid-friendly, entertaining tech-
niques. They can follow Power Panther, the campaign spokes-
character, and his nephew Slurp in exploring the Power Tunes
Store, Theater, Fitness Center, Eat Smart Grill, Fun Times
Arcade, and Travel Center. Behind each door in this virtual
community is a location where everyone can learn healthy life-
style skills through geography, music, reading, and science
activities. All the resources on the site, including games and
activities for children, brochures for parents, and educational
tools for health professionals and educators, are consistent with
messages from the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the
MyPyramid Food Guidance System.
Go With the Whole Grain for Kids Web site: http://www
.bellinstitute.com/bihn/index.aspx?cat_1=83
This site provides worksheets, fact sheets, and a slide program.
Grain Boy and Grain Girl, the energetic Whole Grain Heroes,
explain what whole grains are, the beneﬁts of eating whole
grains, how to identify whole-grain foods, and how many serv-
ings of whole grains are recommended each day.
Web Sites
293

Kidnetic. International Food Information Council (IFIC). Web
site: http://www.kidnetic.com/
Kidnetic is a Web site for kids and their parents to learn about
the body, nutrition, and health in a fun and interactive way. It
provides kid-friendly recipes, games, and exciting ways to
obtain physical ﬁtness. The International Food Information
Council, an organization supported by food, beverage, and agri-
cultural industries, has partnered with America on the Move,
Food Marketing Institute, and the Presidents Council on Physi-
cal Fitness and Sports to create this Web site.
Media-Smart Youth: Eat, Think, and Be Active. Web site:
http://www.nichd.nih.gov/msy/
Created by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, the Media-Smart Youth
program is an after-school program designed to help children
learn about how to make smart food choices. It educates chil-
dren on how the media can lead to poor health choices in their
lives. Educating children about the media is important because
many children spend hours watching television, playing video
games, or surﬁng the web. All of these activities take time away
from physical activity. They can lead to poor health choices
based on the messages they display. This program is available
to after-school providers or activity leaders for children to incor-
porate activities into their daily routines.
MyPyramid for Kids. Web site: http://mypyramid.gov/KIDS/
This Web site is designed for children 6 to 11 years old. It is the
application of the Dietary Guidelines for Americans using
MyPyramid. The site includes games, posters, worksheets to
help kids track how their food choices match up to the
recommendations of MyPyramid, tips for families, and
classroom materials. One game, called ‘‘Blast Off,’’ provides a
‘‘mission brieﬁng’’ once the child enters his or her ﬁrst name,
age, and gender, which serves to ‘‘fuel up MyPyramid rocket
ship with smart food choices and 60 minutes of physical
activity to ﬂy to Planet Power!’’ The target is 1,800 calories for
the day. If, for example the child chooses a banana and yogurt
for breakfast, that adds 270 food calories of fuel. The game is
fun even if the user is older than 11 years old.
294
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Nutrition Explorations. Web site: http://www.nutrition
explorations.org
The National Dairy Council, a nonproﬁt organization, is
supported by dairy producers. Its interactive Web site is for
educators, parents, and kids. The kids’ area of the Web site
contains interactive games and activities, including ‘‘Fueled for
Fun,’’ ‘‘Monster Nutrition,’’ and the Nutrition Tracker to record
meals and check serving sizes. ‘‘Food Riddles’’ poses food-
related jokes in form of riddles, such as the following:
Q: How do you make a strawberry shake?
A: You take it to a scary movie!
Q: What grain-group food do ghosts like for breakfast?
A: Scream of Wheat!
For educators, free school nutrition kits, nutrition expedition
programs, and nutrition lessons are available. Parents may take
advantage of back-to-school nutrition tips such as, ‘‘Jump start
the day with breakfast.’’ The ‘‘Ask the Expert’’ section allows
people to ask questions.
Spot the Block: Get Your Food Facts First. Web site: http://
www.SpotTheBlock.com
To reach ‘‘tweens’’ (youth ages 9 to 13) in an effective and
engaging way, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is
partnered with Time Warner’s Cartoon Network to promote
Spot the Block to tween audiences. Spot the Block is an
educational campaign that encourages viewers to look for
(spot) and use the nutrition facts (the block) before making food
choices. The Cartoon Network features animated on-air spots,
popular animated characters, and a Web site featuring the ani-
mated spots along with interactive nutrition messages and a
nutrition label game. The two organizations are working
together to prevent overweight and obesity in the early years,
which can ultimately help young people stay healthy and pre-
vent health problems in adulthood.
We Can! Ways to Enhance Children’s Activity & Nutrition.
Web site: http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/
obesity/wecan/
Web Sites
295

We Can! stands for Ways to Enhance Children’s Activity &
Nutrition. We Can! is a national education program of the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute designed for parents
and caregivers to help children 8–13 years old stay at a healthy
weight. We Can! was launched in June 2005, and since that time
schools, hospitals, parks and recreation departments,
universities, private companies, and many other organizations
have joined the movement. The goal of the We Can!
partnerships is to build collaborations, preventive strategies,
outreach efforts, and improved communication channels to
circulate We Can! messages and materials to parents,
caregivers, and youth ages 8–13 across the United States. Three
behaviors are emphasized: improved food choices, increased
physical activity and reduced screen time. We Can! is
summarized by three phrases: learn it; live it, get involved.
Links to individual sections are provided. Each section has
background information and an action plan.
Movies
Fast Food Nation. Date: 2006. Length: 106 min. Source:
directed by Richard Linklater; executive producer Eric
Schlosser Web site: http://www.fastfoodnationdvd.com
Based on the book of the same title by Eric Schlosser, this ﬁlm
depicts the process of how the food served at fast-food restau-
rant chains reaches our plate. Processing, marketing, and the
lives of those involved in the fast-food business are displayed
in this ﬁlm.
Killer at Large. Date: 2008. Length: 106 min. Source: Shinebox
Media Productions; produced by Bryan Young; directed by
Neil LaBute. Web site: http://www.killeratlarge.com (content
not yet available)
This documentary ﬁlm explores a variety of topics concerning
the obesity epidemic in the United States. It provides interviews
from some of America’s experts and policy makers in obesity,
including Richard L. Atkinson, Kelly Brownell, Dick Cheney,
Bill Clinton, Michael Pollan, and former Surgeon General
Richard Carmona. The ﬁlm looks at school lunch and physical
activity programs, media inﬂuences, lack of government
296
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

programs, and what is being done to decrease the occurrence of
obesity. It also examines speciﬁc examples of community
initiatives, such as incorporating gardens in schools to teach
children about food and nutrition. This movie explains causes,
regulations, and possible solutions to the obesity epidemic in
the United States.
The Nutty Professor. Date: 1996. Length: 96 min. Source:
directed by Tom Shadyac; produced by Brian Grazer and
Russell Simmons. Web site: http://www.nuttyprofessor.com
The Nutty Professor is a comedy ﬁlm about a 400-pound
professor of genetics, played by Eddie Murphy. The professor
discovers a concoction that instantly sheds pounds. This movie
provides an insight into the harsh stereotypes that go hand in
hand with being overweight.
Super Size Me. Date: 2004. Length: 100 min. Source: Kathbur
Pictures, Inc.; produced and directed by Morgan Spurlock.
Web site: not available
Morgan Spurlock takes on the fast-food world by restricting his
meals to only those foods available from McDonald’s restau-
rants for 30 days in a row. His aim was to see if any health
implications are associated with eating only fast food. As Spur-
lock embarks on this journey, he interviews obesity experts
throughout the country to provide insight on the impact of the
fast-food industry on the obesity epidemic in the United States.
Databases
CDC National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and
Health Promotion, Division of Nutrition and Physical
Activity. Web site: http://www.cdc.gov/NCCDPHP/DNPA/
This Internet-based, searchable directory presents information
on physical activity programs involving state departments of
health. It is searchable by state and other key categories and
includes brief program descriptions with information about
partner organizations, status, scope, target population, setting,
purpose, program components, evaluation, and products.
Databases
297

Contact information for programs within each state is also
provided.
Combined Health Information Database (CHID). National
Institutes of Health, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Web site: http://www.cehn.org/cehn/
resourceguide/chid.html
CHID is a bibliographic database that displays titles, abstracts,
books, fact sheets, and health information and health education
resources. CHID provides a lists of a wealth of health
promotion, education, and audiovisual materials as well as
program descriptions that are not indexed elsewhere.
Economic Research Service (ERS). 1800 M Street NW.
Washington, DC 20036-5831. Web site: http://www.ers
.usda.gov/
ERS is part of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Its mission is
to be the primary source of economic information and research
in the United States. With respect to obesity, data are gathered
to study obesity, including the food supply and eating patterns.
International Bariatric Surgery Registry (IBSR). University of
Iowa. Web site: http://www.healthcare.uiowa.edu/surgery/ibsr/
The purpose of IBSR is to promote the best care for patients
who are having surgical treatment for severe obesity. IBSR is a
centralized database of clinical research information for
physicians with an interest in patient outcomes and assessment
of medical treatment effectiveness. Results are used to study
patient selection, practice variation, and surgical techniques in
the treatment of obesity.
MedlinePlus®. Web site: http://medlineplus.gov/. U.S.
National Library of Medicine and National Institutes
of Health
This Web site directs both professionals and consumers to up-
to-date, authoritative information about health questions. It con-
tains details drawn from the world’s largest medical library, the
National Library of Medicine, on more than 600 diseases and
conditions. It also has links to a medical encyclopedia, a
298
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

medical dictionary, a drug/herbal index, and extensive infor-
mation on prescription and nonprescription drugs. A news ser-
vice for medical news reports is updated daily, and links to
thousands of clinical trials are provided. Many of the links give
health information in Spanish.
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). 3311 Toledo
Road. Hyattsville, MD 20782. Web site: http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs
NCHS, the United States’ health statistics agency, compiles
statistical information to guide actions and policies to improve
the health of Americans as well as to serve as a public statistics
resource on health topics including overweight prevalence,
exercise and physical activity, nutrition, and diet. NCHS uses a
number of different sources (e.g., birth and death records,
medical records, interview surveys, direct physical exams,
laboratory testing) to gather information about health issues.
Results are presented in various simple and complex formats.
For example, Data Briefs take a complex data subject and
summarizes it into text and graphics that are easy to
comprehend. Health Data Interactive presents tables with more
complex national health statistics that can be customized by
age, gender, race/ethnicity, and geographic location to explore
different trends and patterns.
National Weight Control Registry (NWCR). Phone: 800-606-
NWCR (6927). Web site: http://www.nwcr.ws
The NWCR was developed by Rena R. Wing and James O. Hill.
Their research study has developed this database of people
who have been successful at long-term maintenance of substan-
tial weight loss. The registry includes people who are 18 years
or older who have lost at least 30 pounds and have maintained
a weight loss of at least 30 pounds or more. Enrollees are peri-
odically asked to complete questionnaires about their success at
losing weight, current weight maintenance strategies, and other
health-related behaviors. NWCR members have lost an average
of 66 pounds and kept it off for 5.5 years. Weight losses range
from 30 to 300 pounds, and the duration of successful weight
loss ranges from 1 to 66 years. Common strategies include the
following: (1) 78 percent eat breakfast every day; (2) 75 percent
Databases
299

weigh themselves at least once a week; (3) 62 percent watch less
than 10 hours of TV per week; and (4) 90 percent exercise, on
average, about one hour per day. The registry provides links to
published scientiﬁc journal articles describing the eating and
exercise habits of NWCR participants who have successfully
lost weight, the behavioral strategies they use to maintain their
weight, and the effect of successful weight-loss maintenance on
other areas of their lives.
Nutrition.gov. Web site: http://www.nutrition.gov
The nutrition.gov Web site is managed by the staff at the Food
and Nutrition Information Center (FNIC). FNIC has a staff of
trained nutrition professionals, most of whom are registered
dietitians, who provide science-based guidance on food and
nutrition and are available to answer food and nutrition ques-
tions online. Specialized nutrition information is provided
about infants, children, teens, adult women and men, and
seniors.
Some of the topics include practical information on dietary
supplements, ﬁtness, and how to keep food safe. The site has
the latest nutrition news and features links to interesting sites.
The Web site also has links to all online federal government
information about nutrition, healthy eating, physical activity,
and food safety. Many of these resources are in Spanish.
U.S. Physical Activity Statistics. Web site: http://apps.nccd
.cdc.gov/PASurveillance/StateSumV.asp
This site provides information about prevalence of people in
each state meeting physical activity recommendations. In 2007,
less than 40 percent of the population of two states, Louisiana
and Mississippi, met the requirements, and more than
50 percent of the population of nine states met the requirements
(Alaska, Idaho, Maine, Montana, Oregon, Utah, Vermont,
Wisconsin, and Wyoming). In 2001, more than 50 percent of
people in 16 states met the requirements (Alaska, Arizona,
Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Massachusetts, Maine, Montana, New
Hampshire, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Vermont, Washington,
Wisconsin, and Wyoming). Data may be retrieved for an
individual state broken down by age groups from 18 to 65+.
300
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

WHO Global InfoBase. Web site: http://www.who.int/bmi/
index.jsp
The Global Database on Body Mass Index is an interactive
surveillance tool for monitoring BMI around the world. The
database displays adult underweight, overweight, and obesity
prevalence rates by country, year of survey, and gender. The
database is updated daily and has a search function that allows
users to customize a data search that provides maps, tables,
graphs, and downloadable documents. Obesity rates can be
compared between chosen countries to highlight the scale of
this global epidemic.
In June 2007, the World Health Organization launched a
remodeled version of the Global InfoBase that is viewer
friendly, is easy to navigate, and makes country data easily
accessible. The WHO Global InfoBase contains reports on 180
out of 192 WHO member states, contains more than 130,000
data points from more than 2,800 sources, and allows each
record to be linked back to all its survey information, including
the primary source.
Food and Nutrition Experts
Calculators and Counters
Adult Energy Needs and BMI Calculator. Agricultural
Research Service, USDA/ARS Children’s Nutrition Research
Center. Web site: http://www.bcm.edu/cnrc/caloriesneed.htm
To use this online calculator, enter the sex, height, weight, age,
and activity level (about 20 to 50 percent of your calorie needs
are determined by physical activity) to get one’s BMI and
calories needs per day to maintain current weight.
Body Fat Lab, Shape Up America! Web site: http://www
.shapeup.org/bodylab/frmst.html
The Body Fat Lab provides a tool to determine percentage of
body fat and its role in overall health. BMI can be calculated at
this interactive Web site.
Food and Nutrition Experts
301

‘‘Body Mass Index Table.’’ National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute. Web site: http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/
obesity/bmi_tbl.htm
This table shows BMI by seeing where one’s height and body
weight intersect on the chart. A version is also available to
download and print.
The Calorie Counter, 4th Edition. Annette B. Natow, Ph.D., and
Jo-Ann Heslin, M.A., R.D. New York: Pocket Books, 2007, 688
pp ISBN-10: 1-4165-0982-8
The Calorie Counter provides nutrition information such as
calories, fat, protein, carbohydrates, and other nutrients for
items at chain restaurants and for take-out foods. It also lists
brand name foods found in grocery stores, energy bars and
drinks, and ethnic foods. This book is small and easy to carry
while shopping or dining out, and it contains more than 20,000
listings.
USDA National Nutrient Data Laboratory. Web site: http://
www.ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnrc/ndl
The USDA National Nutrient Data Laboratory is a comprehen-
sive tool for evaluating the nutritional value of 7,519 foods.
These USDA databases are the foundation of most public and
commercial nutrient databases used in the United States and a
number of foreign countries. In addition, these data are used by
food companies, trade associations, and research institutions.
302
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Glossary
adipocytes
Fat cells.
adipose tissue
Fat tissue in the body.
anorexiant
A drug, a process, or an event that leads to ano-
rexia, or lack of appetite.
appetite
Feelings of hunger and desire to eat.
bariatric
Pertaining to bariatrics, the ﬁeld of medicine con-
cerned with obesity and weight loss.
bariatric surgery
Also known as gastrointestinal surgery; sur-
gery on the stomach and/or intestines to help patients with
extreme obesity to lose weight.
BIA
Bioelectrical impedance analysis; a way to estimate the
amount of body weight that is fat and nonfat by measuring
the speed of a low-level electrical current as it moves through
the body.
blood glucose
Glucose in the blood stream; blood sugar.
BMI
Body mass index; relates an individual’s weight relative
to his or her height. BMI is a person’s weight in kilograms (kg)
divided by his or her height in meters (m) squared. It also can
be calculated by multiplying weight in pounds by 703 and then
dividing that number by the individual’s height in inches
squared. The easiest way to ﬁgure BMI is to look it up in a table.
calipers
A metal or plastic tool similar to a compass used to
measure the diameter of an object. The skinfold thickness in sev-
eral parts of the body can be measured with skin calipers to
determine the lean body mass.
303

calorie
A unit of energy in food. Calories in foods may come
from carbohydrates, proteins, fats, and alcohol. Carbohydrates
and proteins have 4 calories per gram. Fat has 9 calories per
gram. Alcohol has 7 calories per gram.
carbohydrate
Carbohydrates have 4 calories per gram. Simple
carbohydrates are sugars. Complex carbohydrates include both
starches and ﬁber. Carbohydrates are found naturally in foods
such as breads, pasta, cereals, fruits, vegetables, and milk and
dairy products.
central fat distribution or abdominal fat
Waist circumference
is an index of body fat distribution. In android type (apple
shaped) patterns, fat is deposited around the waist and upper
abdominal area and appears most often in men. The gynoid type
(pear shaped) distribution of body fat is usually seen in women.
The fat is deposited around the hips, thighs, and buttocks.
childhood (pediatric) obesity
See childhood overweight.
(Though the term ‘‘childhood obesity’’ is commonly used, most
health care providers refrain from using the term ‘‘obesity’’ in
relation to children and adolescents. Instead, the condition is
referred to as ‘‘overweight.’’)
childhood overweight
The condition of children whose weight
ranks above the 95th percentile of body mass index for age.
comorbidities
Two or more diseases or conditions existing
together in an individual.
CVD
Cardiovascular disease; a disease of the heart or blood
vessels; any abnormal condition characterized by dysfunction
of the heart or blood vessels.
DEXA
Dual energy X-ray absortiometry; a method used to esti-
mate total body fat and percentage of body fat.
dexfenﬂuramine
A weight-loss drug in a class of drugs called
anorectics that decreases appetite. This drug, sold in the United
States under the brand name Redux, was withdrawn from the
U.S. market in 1997 because of its association with heart valve
dysfunction.
diabetes
Any of several metabolic disorders marked by
increased blood glucose, excessive discharge of urine, and per-
sistent thirst.
304
Glossary

diastolic blood pressure
The minimum pressure that remains
within the artery when the heart is at rest.
diet
What a person eats and drinks, or any type of eating plan.
energy balance
The state in which the total energy intake
equals total energy needs.
energy deﬁcit
The state in which total energy intake is less than
total energy needed.
energy expenditure
The amount of energy, measured in
calories, that a person uses to breathe, circulate blood, digest
food, maintain posture, and be physically active.
ephedrine
A sympathomimetic drug that can be used as an
appetite suppressant; it stimulates thermogenesis, or the genera-
tion of body heat.
epidemic
The occurrence of more cases of a disease than would
be expected in a community or region during a given time period.
From the Greek epi- (upon) + demos, (people or population).
fat
A major source of energy in the diet. All food fats have 9
calories per gram. Fat stores in the body are called adipose tissue.
fenﬂuramine
A weight-loss drug in a class of drugs called
anorectics that decrease appetite. This drug, sold in the United
States under the brand name Pondimin, was withdrawn from the
U.S. market in 1997 because of its association with heart valve
dysfunction.
gastric banding
An obesity surgery option that limits the
amount of food the stomach can hold by sectioning it off with a
band near its upper end. The band creates a small pouch, which
delays the emptying of food from the pouch and causes a feeling
of fullness.
gastric bypass
A surgical procedure that combines the creation
of a small stomach pouch to restrict food intake with the con-
struction of a bypass of the duodenum to prevent food absorp-
tion of some food.
genotype
Describes the entire genetic makeup of an individual
or the hereditary factors that deﬁne the fundamental constitution
of an organism.
glucose
A building block for most carbohydrates. Digestion
causes some carbohydrates to break down into glucose. After
Glossary
305

digestion, glucose is carried in the blood and goes to body cells,
where it is used for energy or is stored.
high blood pressure
Hypertension. An optimal blood pressure
is less than 120/80 mmHg. With high blood pressure, the heart
works harder and chances of a stroke, heart attack, and kidney
problems are greater.
hypertension
Abnormally elevated blood pressure.
incidence
The rate at which a certain event occurs. In epidemi-
ology, it is the number of new cases of a speciﬁc disease occur-
ring during a certain period.
insulin
A hormone made by the pancreas that helps move glu-
cose (sugar) from the blood to muscles and other tissues. Insulin
controls blood sugar levels.
Kcal
Kilocalorie.
LBM
Lean body mass; the weight of the body minus the fat
mass.
LCD
Low-calorie diet; a caloric restriction of about 800 to 1,500
calories (approximately 12 to 15 kcal/kg of body weight) per day.
leptin
A hormone secreted by fat cells that has a central role in
fat metabolism. Leptin was originally thought to be a signal to
lose weight, but it may instead be a signal to the brain that there
is fat in the body.
Lipase
An enzyme found in the bowel that assists in lipid
absorption by the body.
lipids
Organic (carbon containing) substances that do not dis-
solve in water. Lipids include fats, waxes, and related compounds.
macronutrients
Nutrients in the diet that are the key sources of
energy, namely protein, fat, and carbohydrates.
meta-analysis
Process of using statistical methods to combine
the results of different studies. A frequent application is pooling
the results from a set of randomized controlled trials, none
of which alone is powerful enough to demonstrate statistical
signiﬁcance.
metabolic
Relating to metabolism, the whole range of bio-
chemical processes that occur within living organisms. Metabo-
lism consists of anabolism (the buildup of substances)
and catabolism (the breakdown of substances). The term is
306
Glossary

commonly used to refer speciﬁcally to the breakdown of food
and its transformation into energy.
metabolic syndrome
A disorder characterized by a cluster of
health problems including increased waist circumference, high
blood pressure, and abnormal lipid and blood sugar levels.
normal weight
A classiﬁcation of BMI between 18.5 and 24.9.
nutrition
The process of the body using food to sustain life; the
study of food and diet.
obesity
An excessive amount of body fat in relation to lean
body mass, or a body weight. It is a BMI of 30 or greater.
obesogenic
Environmental factors that may promote obesity
and encourage the expression of a genetic predisposition to gain
weight.
orlistat
A lipase inhibitor used for weight loss by reducing the
amount of fat the body absorbs by about 30 percent.
OTC
Over the counter; refers to nonprescription drugs.
overweight
An excess of body weight but not necessarily body
fat; a body mass index of 25 to 29.9.
pharmacotherapy
Treatment of disease through the use of
drugs.
phentermine
A drug used as an anorectic.
prevalence
The total number of cases of a disease in a given
population at a speciﬁc time.
protein
One of the three nutrients that provide calories to the
body. Protein is an essential nutrient that helps build many parts
of the body, including muscle, bone, skin, and blood. Protein pro-
vides 4 calories per gram and is found in foods like meat, ﬁsh,
poultry, eggs, dairy products, beans, nuts, and tofu.
RCT
Randomized controlled trial; an experiment in which sub-
jects are randomly allocated into groups to receive or not receive
an experimental prevention or therapeutic product. RCTs are
generally regarded as the most scientiﬁcally rigorous method of
hypothesis testing available.
RMR
Resting metabolic rate; accounts for 65 to 75 percent of
daily energy expenditure and represents the minimum energy
Glossary
307

needed to maintain all physiological cell functions in the resting
state. The principal determinant of RMR is lean body mass.
satiation
Feeling of fullness that controls the meal size and
duration.
satiety
Quality or state of being fed or gratiﬁed to or beyond
capacity.
sedentary
Having low activity or exercise levels.
sibutramine
A drug used for management of obesity that helps
reduce food intake.
SSRI
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; a neurochemical
that enhances satisfaction from eating.
systolic blood pressure
The maximum pressure in the artery
produced as the heart contracts and blood begins to ﬂow.
type 2 diabetes
The most common form of diabetes; occurs
when the body is resistant to the action of insulin and the pan-
creas cannot make sufﬁcient insulin to overcome this resistance;
can be associated with obesity.
underwater weighing
A method for determining body compo-
sition; also called hydrostatic weighing.
VLCD
Very-low-calorie diet; a doctor-supervised diet that typ-
ically uses commercially prepared formulas to promote rapid
weight loss in patients who are moderately to extremely obese.
People on a VLCD consume about 800 calories per day or less.
308
Glossary

Index
Abdominal fat: assessment, 203,
204; as health risk indicator,
12, 201–207; reduction,
206–207
Abraham, S. Daniel, 147–148
Acomplia, 72–73
Ad36 virus, 48–49, 150
Adenovirus, avian, 48–49
Adiponectin, 149
Adipose tissue, 12, 149.
See also Body fat; Fat cells
Adolescent obesity: bariatric
surgery, 102–103, 118; BMI
ranges, 10–11; drug therapy,
102, 229; food choices, 114–115,
139, 158; interventions, 98–103;
longevity and, 140; prevention,
107–109, 143–144; trends, 15–16;
type 2 diabetes and, 16, 98,
139, 189.
See also Childhood obesity
Adult obesity: bariatric surgery,
76; BMI ranges, 10, 11, 130; in
older adults, 11, 76, 152;
prevention, 99; trends, 14–17,
46, 188.
See also Men; Women
Adult-onset diabetes. See Type 2
diabetes
Advertising/marketing: food
choices, effect on, 109–110; on
television, 109–111; truth-in-
advertising laws, 67; weight-
loss product claims, 51,
136–137
Agricultural Research Service
(ARS), 234
Alli, 72, 141
Allison, David, 148–149
American Academy of Family
Physicians (AAFP), 247
American Academy of Pediatrics
(AAP), 247–248
American Cancer Society (ACS),
248
American College of Physicians
(ACP), 249
American College of Preventive
Medicine (ACPM), 249
American College of Sports
Medicine (ACSM), 249–250
American Council on Exercise
(ACE), 12
American Council on Science and
Health (ACSH), 250
American Diabetes Association
(ADiabA), 250–251
American Dietetic Association
(ADietA), 56, 251
American Heart Association
(AHA), 56, 252
American Home Products, 70
American Institute for Cancer
Research (AICR), 252–253
309

American Medical Association
(AMA), 4, 99–100, 253
American Public Health
Association (APHA), 253–254
American Society for Metabolic
and Bariatric Surgery (ASMBS),
255
American Society of Bariatric
Physicians (ASBM), 254–255
Amphetamines, 63
Anthropometry, 10.
See also Body mass index (BMI)
Apidex-P, 131
Appetite: control, 49, 68, 71–73;
diet foods, effect on, 56, 57;
intake regulation, 27; liquid
calories and, 23; suppressant
drugs, 63–65, 71
‘‘Apple shaped’’ body type, 12,
167
Arthritis, 30, 48
Artiﬁcial sweeteners, 56
Astrup, Arne, 111, 149
Atkins, Robert, 128, 131, 147,
149–150
Atkins’ diet plan, 55, 128, 131,
149–150
Atkinson, Richard L., 49, 150–151
Australia, 90, 91, 110
Avian adenovirus, 48–49
Banting, William, 3
Bariatric surgery: for
children/adolescents, 102–103,
118; complications/risk factors,
75–77; controversies, 76; gastric
banding, 74–75; gastric bypass,
73–75, 126, 127, 130–131, 134,
151; history of, 73–74, 126, 127,
150, 169; research studies, 155–
156, 208–209, 230; Roux-en-Y
bypass operation, 151;
weight-loss data, 76
Behavioral Change Consortium,
228
Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System, 135, 188
Behavioral therapy, 207–208
Bioelectrical impedance analysis
(BIA), 12, 13–14
Blackburn, George, 151
Blair, Steven N., 151–152
Blood cholesterol: abdominal fat
association, 205; high levels, 16,
30, 41; orlistat use study, 72;
research studies, 227–228;
weight loss and, 202
Blood glucose: abdominal fat
association, 203; BMI range
relationship, 111; increased
levels, 41; orlistat use study,
72; weight loss and, 202–203.
See also Type 2 diabetes
Blood pressure: abdominal fat
association, 201; high (hyper-
tension), 16, 30, 69, 72, 201–202;
lifestyle changes, effects of, 227;
weight loss and, 201–202
Body fat: abdominal fat, 12, 201–
207; adipose tissue, 12, 149;
assessment, 11–14, 192, 203,
204; distribution, 167–168;
essential, 12; fat cells, 19, 26–
27, 165, 229; genetic tendencies
to store, 28, 42–43, 168;
kilocalories and, 18, 188;
liposuction, 77–78, 128–129;
measurement, 4–9, 12–14, 189,
192; nonessential, 12.
See also Body mass index (BMI)
Body frame size, 4–5
Body mass index (BMI):
abdominal fat assessment and,
203, 204; age-related differen-
ces, 11, 92–93; calculation, 7–9,
189, 191, 203–204; as inter-
national standard, 128; longev-
ity and, 47; racial and ethnic
differences, 11; ranges, 8–11,
92–93, 130, 132, 133–134, 165;
310
Index

risk categories, 130; v. height-
weight tables, 134.
See also Body fat
Body type, 3, 7, 12, 167
Bouchard, Claude, 152–153
Bray, George A., 153–154
Brazil, 90–91, 106
Breslow, Lester, 125–126
Brody, Jane, 154
Brownell, Kelly, 154–155
Buckwald, Henry, 155–156
Bush, George W., 237
Bush, Laura, 104
Bypass surgery, 73–75, 126, 127,
130–131, 134, 151
Calcium, 229
Calorie Control Council (CCC),
255–256
Calorie intake recommendations,
18–20, 53–55, 193–194.
See also Diet plans; Energy
intake; Low-calorie products
Campos, Paul F., 156
Canada, 5, 127, 244
Cancer, 28–30, 47–48
Carbohydrates: fruits/vegetables,
54, 101–102; sugar, 23, 101, 134;
whole grains, 101, 194.
See also Fast-food; Soft drinks
Cardiovascular disease (CVD): in
China, 105; fen-phen and, 70,
133; risk factors, 12, 29–30, 47,
75, 204
CARE (communication, action,
research, and evaluation)
framework: families and
communities, 213–215; health
care, 218–219; key actions, 212–
213; media and
communications, 219–221; as
public health response, 211–
213; schools, 215–217;
worksites, 221–222
Carmona, Richard, 29, 45, 137
Center for Consumer Freedom
(CCF), 46–47, 256
Center for Nutrition Policy and
Promotion (CNPP), 234–235
Center for Science in the Public
Interest (CSPI), 58–59, 256–257
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), 10, 92–93,
235–236
Child Obesity Working Group
(IOTF), 135
Childhood obesity: advertising,
effect of, 109; bariatric surgery,
102–103, 118; BMI ranges, 10–
11, 92–93, 132; discrimination,
social, 31, 187; electronic media
inﬂuences, 25, 34, 97, 108; food
choices, 96, 109–115, 139, 158;
food guides, 100–102, 235;
interventions, 98–103, 111–116;
leptin deﬁciency, 27; longevity
and, 140; obesogenic environ-
ment, 96–97; parental guidance,
111–116; portion size study, 22;
preschool children, 16, 31, 116–
117; prevention, 103–119, 137,
141–144; research, 157–158,
227–228; risk factors, 96–98;
standard deﬁnition of, 135;
treatment, 98–103, 230, 248;
trends, 15–16, 91–93, 106, 137–
139, 142, 189; type 2 diabetes
and, 16, 98, 139, 189; weight
categories, 92–93.
See also Adolescent obesity
Childhood Overweight and
Obesity Prevention Initiative,
142
Children. See Childhood obesity
China, 90, 98, 105, 106
Chitosan, 68–69
Choco Lady, 68
Chronic disease, 78–80, 97–98
Chunming, Chen, 105
‘‘Class III obesity,’’ 9
Index
311

Clinical Nutrition Research Units
(CNRUs) and
Obesity/Nutrition Research
Centers (ONRCs), 223–224
‘‘Clinically severe obesity,’’ 9
Clinton, William Jefferson, 157,
266–267
Cognitive restructuring, 61–62
Coin-operated scales, 6
Comorbidities, 76, 102, 118, 155–
156, 209
Consumers Union (CU), 257
Convenience foods. See Fast-food
Council on Size and Weight
Discrimination (CSWD), 257
Craig, Jenny, 50, 157, 177, 196
Daily food record, 192, 195
Densitometry, 12–13
Depression, 31, 187
Desirable weight, 4–5, 126–127
Desoxyephedrine, 63
DEXA scanner, 12, 13
Dexatrim, 64–65, 148
Dexfenﬂuramine, 208
Dhurandhar, Nikhil, 48–49
Diabesity, 147, 178–179
Diabetes. See Type 2 diabetes
Diabetes Prevention Program
Outcome Study (DPPOS), 225
Diet foods, 56–57, 67, 125, 127,
132–133
Diet plans: calorie counting, 205–
206; claims/advantages, 51,
196; early weight-loss plans, 3–
4; eDiets, 51; high-protein diets,
3, 55, 128, 149–150, 175, 196;
liquid, 50, 127, 148, 196; low-
calorie diets, 50–51, 205–206;
low-carbohydrate, 55, 175, 196,
228; low-fat diets, 55, 175, 176–
177, 196; ‘‘miracle’’ products,
51–52, 67–68; success rates, 49–
59, 188; unhealthy practices,
114–115; very-low-calorie diets,
50–51, 205–206. See also speciﬁc
diet plans
Dietary Composition, Obesity,
and Cardiovascular Risk study,
227–228
Dietary fat, 54–57, 132–133, 206
Dietary ﬁber: fruits/vegetables,
54, 101–102; high-ﬁber prod-
ucts, 57; supplements, 68–69;
whole grains, 101, 194
Dietary Guidelines for Americans,
22, 52–53, 102, 139, 235.
See also CARE (communication,
action, research, and
evaluation) framework
Dietary Macronutrients and
Weight Loss trial, 228
Dietz, William H., 78, 157–158
Dinitrophenol, 4
Discrimination: childhood obesity
and, 31, 187; eradication, 32, 44–
45, 257, 260–261; in health care
settings, 31; job discrimination,
31, 131
Disease: arthritis, 30, 48; cancer,
28–30, 47–48; chronic, 78–80,
97–98; comorbidities, 76, 102,
118, 155–156, 209; Guillain-
Barre´ syndrome, 76–77; mortal-
ity rates, obesity related, 42, 47;
obesity as risk factor for, 29–30,
187, 201–204; obesity classiﬁed
as, 41–45, 73, 78–80, 130, 136.
See also Cardiovascular disease
(CVD); Type 2 diabetes
Double Big Gulp, 130
Dr. Atkins’ Diet Revolution
(Atkins), 128, 150
Dr. Atkins’ New Diet Revolution
(Atkins), 131
Drewnowski, Adam, 158
Drugs, weight-loss: approval
standards (FDA), 69, 71–73;
health risks, 64–65, 70, 138, 141;
nonprescription, 63–68, 102;
312
Index

prescription, 69–73, 129, 133,
208. See also speciﬁc drugs
Dual energy X-ray absorptiome-
try (DEXA), 12, 13
Dublin, Louis, 4–5, 125
Duchess of Windsor, 1
Duodenal switch/biliopancreatic
diversion, 74, 75
Dwyer, Johanna, 159
Eat for Your Blood Type diet plan,
196
Eat Smart, Be Active initiative
(McDonald’s), 139
Economic consequences of
obesity, 32–33, 152
Economic Research Service (ERS),
236
eDiets, 51
Eisenhower, Dwight, 126
Electronic media, role in obesity,
25, 34, 97, 108, 115–116, 137
Endocrine Society, 258
Energy intake, 18–23, 53–57, 101.
See also Calorie intake
recommendations
Energy-dense foods, 93–94, 107,
112, 158, 225
Ephedra, 64–65, 140
Ephedrine, 64, 140
Epidemiological studies, 47, 56,
203–204
Europe, obesity trends, 91, 189
Evidence-based research method-
ology, 196, 198, 199
Exercise. See Physical activity
‘‘Extreme obesity,’’ 9
Families: education, food choice,
100–102, 114–115; education,
lifestyle, 213–215; genetic
tendencies, 28–29; inﬂuence of,
48; parental guidance, 111–116;
physical activity, 115–116,
213–215
Fast-food: availability, 20–24, 33–
34, 138–139, 169–170; calorie
statistics, 188; children, con-
sumption by, 96; nutrition
information requirements, 111;
restaurants, 21, 103, 134–135,
138–139, 160, 169–170.
See also Restaurant food
Fastin, 131
Fat, dietary, 54–57, 132–133, 206
Fat cells, 19, 26–27, 165, 229
Fat substitutes, 56, 132–133
Fat-blocking agents: chitosan, 68–
69; lipase inhibitors, 72, 102,
133, 141, 208
Federal Trade Commission (FTC),
67–68, 136–137
Fenﬂuramine, 70, 129, 208
Fen-phen, 70, 129, 131, 133
Fiber, dietary: fruits/vegetables,
54, 101–102; high-ﬁber prod-
ucts, 57; supplements, 68–69;
whole grains, 101, 194
Fit for Life, 196
Flegal, Katherine M., 47, 159–160
Fogle, Jared, 134–135, 160
Food: calories, intake
recommendations, 18–20, 53–
55, 193–194; daily food record,
192; energy-dense, 93–94, 107,
112, 158, 225; nutritional label-
ing, 22–23, 57–59, 111, 130, 132,
137; portion size, 20–23, 33–34,
54–55; production/marketing,
19–20, 93–94; pyramid (FGP),
22, 52–53, 100–101, 139, 235;
serving size, 22–23, 55, 101. See
also speciﬁc food-related categories
Food and Agricultural
Organization of the United
Nations (FAO), 243–244
Food and Drug Administration
(FDA): desoxyephedrine
approval, 63; ephedra/
ephedrine ban, 65–66, 138, 140;
Index
313

FDA (cont.)
nutritional labeling regulations,
132; olestra approval, 132–133,
137; orlistat approval, 141;
responsibilities, 236–237;
rimonabant ban, 73; weight-
loss drug approval standards,
69, 71–73
Food and Nutrition Service (FNS),
237
Food Guide Pyramid (FGP), 22,
52–53, 100–101, 139, 235
Food labels, 22–23, 57–59, 111, 130,
132, 137
Food production, 19–20, 93–94
Framingham Heart Study, 48
Franklin, Benjamin, 1
Friedman, Jeffrey M., 161
Fruit, 54, 101–102, 102
Fruit juice, 100–101
Gastric banding, 74–75
Gastric bypass surgery, 73–75,
126, 127, 130–131, 134, 151
Genes: fat storage tendencies, 28,
42–43, 168; obesity and, 26–29,
42–43; research studies, 167–
168, 230–231; ‘‘thrifty gene’’
hypothesis, 28
Genomics, 28
Ghrelin, 27
Girls Health Enrichment Multi-
site Studies (GEMS), 227
Global Strategy on Diet, Physical
Activity and Health (DPAS),
105–109, 138
Global trends: cardiovascular
disease, 105; nutrition
transition, 90, 93–94, 116;
obesity, 89–92, 95, 104–106, 135,
189; obesity prevention, 105–
109, 138–139; type 2 diabetes,
97–98; undernutrition, 90–91,
104. See also speciﬁc countries/
regions;
World Health Organization
(WHO)
Globesity, 89–90
Government agencies, 233–243.
See also speciﬁc agencies
Graham, Sylvester, 2
Greenwood, M. R. C., 161–162
Guillain-Barre´ syndrome, 76–77
Hamwi, G. J., 6, 127
Hansen, Barbara, 162–163
Health Canada (HC), 244
Health care system: obesity,
economic consequences, 32–33,
152; physician-patient relation-
ship, 78–80; preventive pro-
grams, 99–100, 218–219;
provider education, 78–80, 134,
218–219; weight stigma in, 31
Health Maintenance Resources,
50, 61
HealthierUS, 237–238
Healthy People 2010, 17, 135, 143
Heart disease. See Cardiovascular
disease (CVD)
Height-weight tables: criticism of,
5–6; MLIC standard, 4–6, 61,
125, 129, 189, 190; v. BMI
ranges, 134
Herbal supplements, 65–66
Hetherington, Marion, 163
High blood pressure, 16, 30, 69,
72, 201–202
High-protein diets, 3, 55, 128,
149–150, 175, 196
Hill, James O., 62–63, 131,
163–164
Hippocrates, 1, 29, 164
Hirsch, Jules, 164–165
Horlick, Mary, 118
Hormones: adiponectin, 149;
insulin, 203; leptin, 26–27, 130,
134, 161; thyroid, 3–4
Hydrostatic weight
measurement, 12–13
314
Index

Hypertension, 16, 29, 30, 69,
201–202
Ideal body weight (IBW), 4–7, 125,
127, 189
India, 49, 90, 98, 106
Industrial diet, 95–96
Institute of Medicine (IOM),
106–108, 116–117, 140–141,
258–259
Insulin, 203.
See also Type 2 diabetes
International agencies, 243–247.
See also speciﬁc agencies
International Association for
the Study of Obesity (IASO),
244–245
International Congress on
Obesity, 128
International Diabetes Federation,
97–98
International Federation for the
Surgery of Obesity (IFSO),
245
International Food Information
Council (IFIC), 259–260
International Obesity Task Force
(IOTF), 9, 91, 98, 132, 135, 246
Interventions: CARE framework,
211–222; with children/
adolescents, 98–103; dietary,
100–102; multidimensional
approach, 213; parental
guidance, 111–116; public
health response, 210–222;
types of, 34, 79–80
James, W. P. T., 132, 165–166
Japan, 68, 90
Jaw wiring, 77, 127–128
Jenny Craig Weight Loss
Program, 50, 157, 177, 196
Juice drinks, 100–101
‘‘Junk food,’’ 111.
See also Fast-food
Kaiser Permanente, 32, 79, 97
Kanarek, Robin B., 166
Kellogg’s Safe Fat Reducer, 3–4
Kelly, John, 126
Kilocalories (Kcal), 18, 188.
See also Calorie intake
recommendations
King, Janet, 166–167
Kissebah, Ahmed, 167–168
Klein, Jeffrey A., 128
Koop, C. Everett, 168–169, 264
Kral, John, 169
Kremen, Arnold, 73, 126
Kroc, Ray, 169–170.
See also McDonald’s
Kumanyika, Shiriki, 170–171
Lakdawalla, Darius, 26
LaLanne, Jack, 126, 142–143, 171
Latin America, 98
Lavoisier, Antoine, 172
Leptin, 26–27, 130, 134, 161
Lewis, Tillie, 125
Life expectancy: decrease, 29,
140; increase, 17; mortality
rates, obesity related, 42, 47;
physical activity, 152; weight
relationship, 5, 29, 127, 129,
159–160
Lifestyle therapy, 202–203, 208,
227–228
Linner, John, 73–74, 126
Lipase inhibitors, 72, 102, 133,
141, 208
Liposuction, 77–78, 128–129
Lonamin, 131
Longevity. See Life expectancy
Look AHEAD (Action for Health
in Diabetes) clinical trial, 225
Low-calorie diets (LCDs), 50–51,
205–206
Low-calorie products, 56–57, 125,
127, 132–133
Low-carbohydrate diets, 55, 175,
196, 228
Index
315

Low-fat diets, 55, 175, 176–177,
196
Ma Huang, 64
Macronutrients, 55, 205, 228.
See also Carbohydrates; Dietary
fat; Protein
Maimonides (Moses Ben
Maimon), 172–173
Malnutrition, 189
Marketing. See
Advertising/marketing
Mason, Edward E., 127
Maternal high blood pressure,
30
Mayer, Jean, 159, 173
McCarron, David, 103
McClellan, Mark, 43
McDonald’s, 21, 138–139, 169–170
Media: advertising/marketing,
109–111; education about, 238;
electronic, 25, 34, 97, 108, 115–
116, 137; preventive efforts, role
in, 219–221; self-image, inﬂu-
ence on, 2–3.
See also Television viewing
Media-Smart Youth: Eat, Think,
and Be Active, 238
Medications, weight-loss: appro-
val standards (FDA), 69, 71–73;
health risks, 64, 70, 138, 140;
nonprescription, 63–68, 102;
prescription, 69–73, 129, 133,
208. See also speciﬁc medications
Medifast, 50, 196
Men: BMI ranges, 10, 130; body
fat measurement, 187, 192;
gender differences, 95–96;
weight-loss data, 50, 135, 187
Mental health disorders, 29, 30,
31, 187
Meridia (sibutramine), 71–72, 102,
133, 208
Metabolic rate, 19, 25–26, 42
Metabolife 356, 65
Metrecal, 127
Metropolitan Life Insurance
Company (MLIC): ‘‘desirable
weight,’’ 126–127; standard
height-weight tables, 4–6, 61,
125, 129, 189, 190
Middle East, 98
Mifﬂin, Mark, 179
‘‘Miracle’’ diet products, 51–52,
67–68
Moore, Barbara J., 173–174
‘‘Morbid obesity,’’ 9
Mortality rates, obesity related,
42, 47
Move for Health Initiative, 106
MyPyramid Calorie Levels, 52,
53, 192, 193, 194
MyPyramid Food Intake Patterns,
52, 53, 192, 194
MyPyramid for Kids, 235
National Association to Advance
Fat Acceptance (NAAFA),
260–261
National Cancer Institute (NCI),
117, 238–239
National Center for
Complementary and
Alternative Medicine
(NCCAM), 66–67
National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS), 14–15
National Health and Nutrition
Examination Surveys
(NHANES), 9, 47, 225–226
National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute (NHLBI), 51, 131, 134,
196–210, 239
National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases
(NIDDK), 240, 243
National Institutes of Health
(NIH): bariatric surgery
approval, 130; on BMI
assessment, 9, 133–134;
316
Index

childhood obesity, 117–118;
obesity as disease, 130; obesity
research, 81, 197–198, 222–231,
240–241
National Recreation and Park
Association (NRPA), 241
National Restaurant Association,
24
National Weight Control Registry
(NWCR), 62, 131–132, 182–183
Nauru island, 89–90
Neurotransmitters, 71
New York State Restaurant
Association (NYSRA), 59
Nidetch, Jean, 127, 174.
See also Weight Watchers
Night-eating syndrome (NES), 181
Nonproﬁt organizations, 247–267.
See also speciﬁc agencies; speciﬁc
organizations
Noradrenaline, 71
Nutrisystems, 50, 196
Nutrition Labeling and Education
Act (NLEA), 57–58, 130
Nutrition transition, 90, 93–94, 116
Nutritional labeling, 22–23, 57–59,
111, 130, 132, 137
Oatrim, 234
Ob genes, 26–27
Obesity: background/history, 1–
4, 129, 164, 172–173; categories,
9, 92–93, 98; disease
classiﬁcation, 73, 78–80, 129,
136; as epidemic, 17, 27, 33–34,
45–49, 162
Obesity Education Initiative
(OEI), 131, 239
Obesity prevention strategies:
childhood obesity, 141–144;
lifestyle changes, 80–81, 225–
229; medical approaches, 103–
119, 229–231
Obesity Society, The, 129, 153–154,
261–262
Obesity surgery. See Bariatric
surgery
Obesity treatment: algorithm,
197; assessment, 196–197;
behavioral therapy, 207–208;
childhood obesity, 98–103, 230,
248; clinical guidelines, 196–
210; as a disease, 43–44; goals,
49–50, 61, 204–205; interven-
tions, 34, 79–80, 98–100; lifestyle
therapy, 202–203, 208, 227–228;
long-term success, 62–63;
maintenance, 70, 209–210, 226–
227; programs, 3–4, 49–55, 103,
205–209, 248; social support
network, 62.
See also Bariatric Surgery;
Drugs, weight-loss; Interven-
tions; Physical activity
Obesity trends: in adults, 14–17,
188; in children/adolescents,
15–16, 91–93, 106, 137–139,
141–143, 189; in developing
countries, 89, 90, 95, 104; global,
89–92, 95, 104–109, 135, 138–
139, 189; globesity, 89–90; in
urban areas, 89–90, 93–96; in
U.S., 14–17, 46, 137–139, 140–
141, 187–189
Obesogenic environment: change,
strategies for, 60–62; children
in, 96–97; factors contributing
to, 33–34, 93
Ofﬁce of the Surgeon General
(OSG), 241–242
Older adults: BMI ranges, 11;
obesity surgery, 76; physical
activity, 152; weight-loss data,
76
Olean, 56, 132–133
Olestra, 56–57, 132–133, 137
Optifast, 50, 196
Orlistat, 72, 102, 133, 141, 208
Ornish, Dean, 55, 147, 175, 196
Ornish program, 55, 147, 175, 196
Index
317

Overeaters Anonymous (OA), 50
Over-the-counter (OTC) weight-
loss medication, 63–68, 141
‘‘Pear shaped’’ body type, 12,
167
Pedometers, 60
Penny scales, 6
Personal weight management
plans, 53–55, 60
Pharmacotherapy, 208.
See also Drugs, weight-loss
Phentermine, 70, 129, 208
Phenylpropanolamine, 64
Philipson, Tomas, 26
Physical activity: for
children/adolescents, 96–97,
115–116; inactivity, 24–25, 34,
93–97; metabolism, effect on,
25–26; for older adults, 152; as
preventive, 80–81; in schools,
25, 34, 216–217; statistics, 188;
true beneﬁts, 59; weight loss
and, 206–207
Physical inactivity, 24–25, 34,
93–97
Physicians: obesity training, 99–
100, 134, 141–142;
physician-patient relationship,
78–80
Pi-Sunyer, Xavier, 176
Pondimin, 131
‘‘Popcorn test,’’ 21–22
‘‘Portion distortion,’’ 20–21
Portion size: as compared with
serving size, 22–23; increase,
20–22, 33–34; limiting, 54–55
Poverty, obesity and, 95–96, 158
Pregnancy risks, 30
PREMIER trial, 227
Preschool children, 16, 31, 116–117
President’s Council on Physical
Fitness and Sports, 126, 236,
238, 260
Prevention strategies: childhood
obesity, 103–119; community-
based strategies, 211–222;
lifestyle changes, 80–81, 225–
229; medical approaches,
229–231
Pritikin, Nathan, 55, 176–177
Pritikin diet program, 55, 176–
177, 196
Professional organizations, 247–
267. See also speciﬁc organizations
Protein, 18, 54, 55.
See also Diet plans
Protein Power diet, 196
Public health: interventions, 210–
222; obesity crisis, 17, 31–34,
45–49; programs, 253–254
Quetelet, Adolphe, 9
Randomized controlled trial
(RCT) evidence, 201–209
Red Flag Campaign, 67–68, 137
Reduced-calorie foods, 56–57,
125, 127, 132–133
Redux, 131
Research studies: bariatric
surgery, 155–156, 208–209, 230;
childhood obesity, 157–158, 227;
evidence-based methodology,
196, 198, 199; genetic, 167–168,
230–231; hormones, 258;
obesity, 222–231, 240–241; ran-
domized controlled trials, 201–
209; type 2 diabetes, 225
Restaurant food: meal consump-
tion data, 23–24, 58; nutrition
information requirements, 54,
59, 111, 141.
See also Fast-food
Rimonabant, 72–73
Robert Wood Johnson Founda-
tion (RWJF), 141, 143–144,
262–263
Rolls, Barbara J., 22, 177
Roux-en-Y bypass operation, 151
318
Index

Rubens, Peter Paul, 1
Rudd Center for Food Policy and
Obesity, 263
Samoa, 90
Saris, Wim H. M., 177–178
Satcher, David, 17, 45–46, 135–
136, 210
Scarsdale diet, 196
Schools: obesity prevention, 107–
109; physical activity, 25, 34,
216–217; public health strategy
implementation, 215–217
Sedentary activities. See Electronic
media, role in obesity;
Television viewing
Selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs), 71
Self-monitoring weight-loss strat-
egies, 60
Serotonin, 71
Serving size, 22–23, 55, 101
7-Eleven stores, 129, 130
Sex-speciﬁc waist circumference
measurement, 204
Shape Up America!, 169, 174,
263–264
Shaping America’s Youth (SAY),
103, 264–265
Sibutramine (Meridia), 71–72, 102,
133, 208
Sims, Ethan Allen, 147, 178–179
Singapore, 108
Siri equation, 189, 192
Skinfold thickness measurement,
12, 14, 189, 192
Sleep, 27, 30
Sleep apnea, 30, 41
Slim-Fast, 127, 148, 196
Slovenia, 106
Social discrimination: childhood
obesity and, 31, 187; eradica-
tion, 32, 44–45, 257, 260–261; in
health care settings, 31; job
discrimination, 31, 131
Social support network, 62
‘‘Socially contagious’’ obesity, 48
Soft drinks: consumption
increase, 23, 101; replacements
for, 100, 158; size increase, 21,
129, 130, 189
South Beach diet, 196
South Paciﬁc, 89–90
Spain, 106
Spurlock, Morgan, 138
St. Jeor, Sachiko, 179–180
Starvation, 18
Stern, Judith S., 180–181
Stigma, weight-related, 31–32, 44–
45, 92.
See also Discrimination
Stimulus control, 60–61
Stunkard, Albert J., 181
Subway restaurants, 134–135, 160
Sugar: in beverages, 23, 101;
consumption data, 134;
replacements for, 54, 56.
See also Soft drinks
Sugar Busters, 196
Super Big Gulp, 129
Super Size Me (ﬁlm), 138
Supplements, 65–66
Surgery. See Bariatric surgery
Suzanne Somers diet plan, 196
Symonds, Brandreth, 16
Take Off Pounds Sensibly (TOPS),
50
Teenagers. See Adolescent obesity
Television viewing: advertising,
109–111, 136–137; by
children/adolescents, 34, 97;
frequency, 25, 34; limiting,
115–116
‘‘10 percent solution’’ weight loss,
49
Thinness, 48
Thompson, Tommy, 43
‘‘Thrifty gene’’ hypothesis, 28
Thyroid hormone, 3–4
Index
319

Trade organizations, 247–267. See
also speciﬁc organizations
Treatment. See Obesity treatment
‘‘Triggers’’ for overeating, 60–61
Trim and Fit Scheme, 108
Trust for America’s Health
(TFAH), 265
Truth-in-advertising laws, 67
Type 2 diabetes: abdominal fat
correlation, 12; blood glucose
levels, 202–203; in children/
adolescents, 16, 98, 139, 189;
diabesity, 147, 178–179; global
statistics, 97–98; obesity correla-
tion, 29–31, 40–43, 47, 97–98,
187; orlistat use study, 72;
research, 225; waist circumfer-
ence correlation, 12, 204;
waist-to-hip ratio correlation,
167–168.
See also Blood glucose
Undernutrition, 90–91, 104
Underwater weighing, 12–13
United States: adult obesity, 11,
14–17, 188; childhood obesity,
91, 92, 137–139; obesity trends,
187–189; state statistics, 46,
141
Urban obesity, 89–90, 93–96
U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA), 52–53, 131, 242
U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS), 17,
237–238, 242–243
Vegetables, 54, 102
Venus of Willendorf, 1
Very-low-calorie diets (VLCDs),
50–51, 205–206
Veterans Administration National
Center for Health Promotion
and Disease Prevention,
265–266
Video games, 97
Virus-induced obesity theory,
48–49, 150
Volumetrics, 177, 196
Wadden, T.A., 130
Waist circumference measure-
ment, 12, 204
Waist-to-hip (WHR) ratio mea-
surement, 167–168
Wansink, Brian, 21–22
Weight loss (NHLBI clinical
guidelines): advantages, 201–
203; goals, 204–205; mainte-
nance, 209–210; measurement,
203–204; strategies, 205–209
Weight measurement methods,
4–14, 28–33, 125
Weight regain: data, 49, 62;
obesity-related disease and, 43;
post bariatric surgery, 74; post
weight-loss drug discontinu-
ation, 72, 73
Weight stigma, 31–32, 44–45, 92.
See also Discrimination
Weight Watchers, 50, 127, 174,
196
Weight-control Information Net-
work (WIN), 243
Weight-loss surgery. See Bariatric
surgery
Weintraub, Michael, 129
Whole grains, 101, 194
William J. Clinton Foundation
(WJCF), 266–267
Wilson, Carnie, 74, 134
Winfrey, Oprah, 147, 181–182
Wing, Rena, 62–63, 131, 182–183
Women: BMI ranges, 10, 130;
body fat distribution, 167–168;
body fat measurement, 187,
192; calorie intake, 53–54;
cardiovascular disease, 70, 133;
gender differences, 95–96;
obesity statistics, 95; waist-to-
hip ratio measurement, 167–
320
Index

168; weight consciousness, 2–3;
weight-loss data, 50, 62, 135,
187; weight-loss goals, 61, 187
Work sites, role in preventive
efforts, 221–222
World Health Organization
(WHO): general goals, 246–247;
globesity, 89–90; obesity
strategies, 105–111, 132, 139;
overweight calculation, 9
Xenical, 72, 133, 141
Zerhouni, Elias A., 222
Zimulti, 72–73
Zone diet, 196
Index
321

This page intentionally left blank 

About the Authors
Judith S. Stern, ScD, is internationally known for her research in
nutrition. She is a distinguished professor at the University of
California, Davis and a member of the prestigious Institute of
Medicine of the National Academies. She is cofounder of the
American Obesity Association and served on the National Insti-
tutes of Health Obesity Task Force. Dr. Stern has received numer-
ous awards, including Fellow of the American Heart Association
and the Charles A. Black Award from the Council for Agricul-
tural Science and Technology. She has published more than 260
research papers and more than 150 articles in the popular press.
Alexandra Kazaks, PhD, is a nutrition researcher at the Univer-
sity of California, Davis. Dr. Kazaks is a respected consultant
for two national health organizations. She has frequently
appeared as a featured speaker lecturing about diabetes, weight
management, and complementary and alternative health issues.
Dr. Kazaks and Dr. Stern have written more than a dozen joint
publications.
323

