Studies in N atural.Language and Linguistic Theory 
VOLUME 52 
Managing Editors 
Liliane Haegeman, University of Geneva 
Joan Maling, Brandeis University 
James McCloskey, University of California, Santa Cruz 
Editorial Board 
Carol Georgopoulos, University of Utah 
Guglielmo Cinque, University of Venice 
Jane Grimshaw, Rutgers University 
Michael Kenstowicz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Hilda Koopman, University of California, Los Angeles 
Howard Lasnik, University of Connecticut at Storrs 
Alec Marantz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
John J. McCarthy, University of Massachusetts, Amherst 
Ian Roberts, University of Stuttgart 
The titles published in this series are listed at the end of this volume. 

OBJECTS AND OTHER SUBJECT 
Grammatical Functions, 
Functional Categories and Configurationality 
edited by 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES 
University of Iowa, Iowa City 
and 
STANLEY DUBINSKY 
University of South Carolina. Columbia 
KLUWER ACADEMIC PUBLISfJERS 
DORDRECHT I BOSTON I LONDON 

I 
ol 
. 0  
, 
I 
A C.I.P. Catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress. 
ISBN 1-4020-0064-2 
Published by Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
P.O. Box 17, 3300AA Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 
Sold and distributed in North, Central and South America 
by Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
101 Philip Drive, Norwell. MA 02061, U.S.A. 
In all other countries. sold and distributed 
by Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
P.O. Box 32 2, 3300AH Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 
Printed on acid-free paper 
All Rights Reserved 
© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers 
No part of the material protected by this copyright notice may be reproduced or 
utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical; 
including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and 
retrieval system, without written permission from the copyright owner. 
Printed in the Netherlands. 

DEDICATION 
F or David Perlmutter and Paul Postal 
While they might not agree with many of the answers in this volume, were it not fQr 
their groundbreaking work, many of the questions might never have been asked .
.
 

· 
I 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . ix 
FORWaRD 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 xi 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ............................ xv 
PART I: OVERVIEW 
1. WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY / Remarks on 
Grammatical Functions in Transfonnational Syntax 
. . . . . . . . . I 
2. MARK C. BAKER / Phrase Structure as a Representation of "Primitive" 
Grammatical Relations 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 
3. FREDERICK J. NEWMEYER / Grammatical Functions, Thematic 
Roles. and Phrase Structure: Their Underlying Disunity 
. . . . . . 53 
4. ALEX ALSINA / Is Case Another Name for Grammatical Function? 
Evidence from ObjôcrAsymmetries 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77 
PART II: OBJECTS 
5. HOWARD LASNIK / Subjects. Objects, and the EPP 
. . . . . .  " 
103 
6. LISA deMENA TRAVIS / Derived Objects in Malagasy 
. . . . . . . 123 
PART III; SUBJECTS 
7. JAMES McCLOSKEY / The Distribution of Subject Properties in 
Irish 
.
.
.
. .
. .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. .. .
.
.
.
.
.
. .
.
. .
.
. .. 157 
8. GRANT GOODALL / The EPP in Spanish 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193 
9. DIANE MASSAM / On Predication and the Status of Subjects in 
Niuean 
.
.
. .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. .
.
.
. . . .
.
. . .
. .
.
.
. .
.. 225 
10. WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY / Functional 
Architecture and the Distribution of Subject Properties 
.
.
.
.
.
.
 247 
REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 281 
AUTHOR INDEX 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 297 
SUBJECT INDEX 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 I 


LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS 
Alex Alsina 
Department de Traducci6 i Filologia 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra 
La Rambla, 30-32 
08002 Barcelona. SPAIN 
alex.alsina@trad.upf.es 
Mark Baker 
Linguistics Department 
Rutgers University 
18 Seminary Place 
New Brunswick NJ 08901. USA 
mabaker@ruccs.rutgers.edu 
William D. Davies 
Linguistics Department 
University of Iowa 
Iowa City. IA 52242, USA 
william-davies@uiowa.edu 
Stanley Dubinsky 
Linguistics Program 
University of South Carolina 
Columbia, SC 29208, USA 
dubinsky@sc.edu 
Grant Goodall 
Department of Languages and Linguistics 
The University of Texas at EI Paso 
500 W. University Avenue 
EI Paso. TX 79968, USA 
ggoodal1@utep.edu 
Howard Lasnik 
Department of Linguistics 
University of Connecticut 
341 Mansfield Road 
Storrs. CT 06269, USA 
lasnik@sp.uconn.edu 
Diane Massam 
Department of Linguistics 
University of Toronto 
130 S1. George Street 
Toronto, ON, M5S 3Hl, CANADA 
dmassam@chass.utoronto.ca 
Jim ëcCloskey 
Department of Linguistics 
University of California, Santa Cruz 
Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA 
mcclosk@ling.ucsc.edu 
Frederick J. Newmeyer 
Department of Linguistics 
University of Washington 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA 
fjn@u.washington.edu 
Lisa deMena Travis 
Department of Linguistics 
McGill University 
1085 Dr. Penfield Avenue 
Montreal. QC H3A lA7, CANADA 
ltravi@po-box.mcgill.ca 


FORWORD 
The initial idea for this volume began with discussions with Brian Joseph and 
Geoffrey Huck about a book that would explore the place of grammatical 
relations/functions in Principles and Parameters Theory and Minimalism. 
It was 
clear to both of them that (i) gramatical functions played a much more essential 
role in these theories than was generally acknowledged, and (ii) those new to the 
discipline very often had no appreciation for the origins and significance of such 
notions. 
We briefly considered the possibility of writing a monograph surveying the 
recent developments in this area of syntactic theory, but we realized that there was a 
rich body of relevant work being done on this topic. It seemed that many working in 
P&P and Minimalism were unaware of the very significant work being pursued in 
this area, and of its relationship to earlier work and work in other paradigms. Thus 
was born the idea for a workshop that would bring together leading scholars in 
syntax to explore the place of grammatical functions (GFs) in 
. 
theories of syntax. This idea evolved into a three day workshop (supported by 
NSF grant and by the USC College of Liberal Arts), held in July 1999 at the 
Linguistic Institute in Urbana-Champaign (UI-UC). 
The workshop 
presentations and commentary from: Alex Alsina 
(Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 
Barcelona), Mark Baker (Rutgers University), Richard Campbell (Oakland U / 
Microsoft Research), William Davies (University of Iowa), Stanley Dubinsky 
(University of South Carolhia), Samuel Epstein (University of Michigan), Patrick 
Farell (UC, Davis), Grant Goodall (University of Texas, EI Paso), Howard Lasnik 
(Connecticut University), James McCloskey (University of California, Santa Cruz), 
Frederick Newmeyer (University of Washington), Norvin Richards (MIT), Daniel 
Seely (Eastern Michigan University), and Lisa Travis (McGill University). 
The workshop took place 25 years after Perlmutter and Postal gave their lectures 
on Relational Grammar at the LSA Summer Institute. Their course on RG remains 
one of the most widely attended Institute courses on record and, perhaps, given the 
15-20 years of vigorous research activity that it spawned, one of the more influential 
Institute courses ever given. Taking as its starting point the view that grammatical 
functions are primitive notions of the theory, work done in RG was a startling 
generative departure from the Standard Theory view, and attempted to explain a 
wide variety of clause-level phenomena in a wide variety of languages. In the time 
since that course, the role of gramatical functions has undergone some shifts in 
transformational syntax. These shifts have been in part in reaction to some of the 
discoveries in relationally-based theories and in part due to theory-internal 
developments. 
The 25th anniversary of the Amherst lectures seemed like an 
appropriate time to examine the current status of grammatical functions in 
transformational syntax. 
Some 100 institute participants attended the public presentations and discussion 
of the 1999 workshop, and these included scholars representing an exceptionally 
broad range of theoretical perspectives. One of the NSF reviewers suggested that 
Davies and Dubinsky might learn a lot about current theoretical perspectives on 
grammatical functions, and indeed we did (as most likely did many others in 
attendance). 
Some of the questions that 
were addressed in the 
workshop 

, 
\ 
xii 
presentations included: 
• 
What are the number and status of subject positions? 
• 
How many of these positions might be active in any one language? 
• 
Can any properties of these positions be considered universal? 
• 
What is the status and content of the EPP? Is the EPP active in all languages? 
Is the EPP manifested in the same way in all languages in which it is active? 
Should the EPP be abandoned altogether? 
• 
What is the status of objects? Are subjects and objects to be distinguished or 
are they more similar than has been suspected? Do all languages make the use 
of the full range of objects ano object positions? 
• 
In 
what 
ways 
are 
the 
abstract 
configurational 
representations 
of 
the 
transformational theory representations of grammatical functions? 
• 
All in all what is the status of grammatical functions in current transformational 
theory and what are the acceptable levels of variation from language to 
language that allow these notions to be viable and interesting before they should 
be abandoned simply as epiphenomenal mnemonic terms? 
During and following the workshop, it became clear that a number of the 
presentations had converged in very interesting ways, and merited being brought 
together in print. 
After receiving encouragement for this venture from several 
quarters and enlisting the enthusiastic participation of several key contributors, we 
set about the task of pulling this volume together. 
We are proud of the product of the efforts of the workshop participants and 
contributors. a volume that we hope will be of value both in assessing recent 
progress in the field. and in framing important questions for future research. As this 
book neared completion. we found that it likely has a wider audience than we had 
originally planned. 
While we had originally conceived of this volume as a 
collection of papers on a special topic. it turns out that the book has potential as a 
reader for an advanced course in syntax (or a syntax seminar). In fact. both 
reviewers made just this point, suggesting that its value as a class text would be 
enhanced with the inclusion of additional background infonnation about RG. LFG, 
and HPSG, setting the stage for the papers included here and providing some theory 
comparison. 
However, rather than changing the focus of the book and delaying 
production significantly, we have opted to describe how the book might be used in a 
course, based on a successful course in which we used the papers in this volume. 
The course, as we taught it, involved a comparison of RG and P&P theory, however 
it would have been quite plausible to frame the course using LFG or HPSG as a 
theoretical counterpoint to the P&P model. 
The syllabus of the course was 
structured as follows: 
(1) A review of VP-shells and to Agr projections. This unit focused on chapters 
9 and 10 of Radford's (1997) text. 
a. 
In covering the material on VP-shells (chapter 9), reference was made to 
Sportiche's (1988) article on the VP-intemal subject hypothesis, to Larson's 
(1988) article on VP-shells, and to the ensuing debate (in lackendoff 1990 
and Larson 1990). 

I 
I 
xiii 
b. In covering the material on Agr Projections (chapter 10), we also examined 
Pollack's (1989) article in Linguistic Inquiry and Lasnik and Saito's (1991) 
CLSpaper. 
(2) A survey of Relational Grammar theory. This part of the course used Blake's 
(1990) handbook as a guide, and included chapters from the Studies in Relational 
Grammar volumes and other key articles. 
a. 
In introducing the theory, we examined Perlmutter and Postal's (1983b) 
chapter on proposed laws of basic clause structure, as well as Keenan and 
Comrie's (1977) article on the noun phrase accessibility hierarchy. 
b. We next looked at "clause internal revaluations" and read Permutter (1984a) 
on the inadequacy of monostratal theories of passive, along with Bell (1983) 
on advancements and ascensions in Cebuano, Chung (1976) on an object 
creating rule in Bahasa Indonesia, Dubinsky (1990) on Japanese direct to 
indirect object demotion, and Perlmutter (1984b) on inversion in Italian, 
Japanese, and Quechua. 
c. In covering the topic of reflexives and impersonals, we read Perlmutter 
Postal's (1984) chapter on impersonal passives and Rosen's (1984) 
on the interface between semantic roles and initial grammatical relations. 
d. The unit on multnode networks and clause union covered Aissen 
Perlmutter's (1976) article on clause reduction in Spanish, Perlmutter 
Postal's (1983a) chapter on the Relational Succession Law, Gibson and 
Raposo's (1986) article on clause union, Rosen's (1983) paper on universals 
of union, Davies and Rosen's (1988) article on multi-predicate union, and 
Dubinsky's (1997) application of multi-predicate union to Japanese passives. 
e. 
The phenomenon of antipassive was covered by reading Davies' (1984) 
chapter in Studies in Relational Grammar 2 and Davies and Sam-Colop's 
(1990) article in Language. 
(3) Current research in the syntax of grammatical jUnctions. The second half of 
the course used this volume as a text, and also made reference to a number of other 
key 
chapters 
and 
articles 
dealing 
with 
grammatical 
relations from 
P&P 
perspectives. This other material included parts of Mark Baker's (1988a) book on 
incorporation, Bobaljik and Jonas' (1996) article on subject positions and TP, Cole 
and Hermon's (1981) article on subjecthood and islandhood. Guilfoyle, Hung, and 
Travis' (1992) article on SPEC of IP and SPEC of VP, Eric Haeberli's (2000) 
paper on the EPP and Case, sections from Teun Hoekstra's (1984) book on 
transitivity, Kyle Johnson's (1991) article on object positions, and James 
McCloskey's (1997) article on subject positions. 


xv 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
For their help and counsel in the early conceptualization of the workshop on 
"The Role of Grammatical Functions in Transfonnational Syntax" and the inception 
of the process that led to this book, we would like to thank Mark Baker, Paul 
Chapin, and Alec Marantz. We also owe thanks to the speakers and attendees of this 
workshop, for their presentations and their discussion of these, which ultimately 
enriched this volume. We thank Liliane Haegeman and one anonymous reviewer of 
this volume for their helpful comments, both on the individual chapters and on the 
overall organization of the book. We also wish to acknowledge Jacqueline 
Bergsma, Anne van der Wagt, and Susan Zwartbol-Jones ofK1uwer Academic 
Publishers for all their help in the editing process, as well as Theresa McGarry of the 
University of South Carolina Linguistics Program for her diligence and hard work 
editing the final typescript. We are indebted to the NSF (Grant #SBR 9817364), the 
College of Liberal Arts at the University of South Carolina, and the University of 
Iowa Arts and Humanities Initiative for support of the workshop and this volume. 
We want to thank our families (Melissa and Elijah Dubinsky; Pat Weir, 
Davies, and Kate Davies) for putting up with us, and for all their good vibes 
support, during our absences and unexpected presences. 
Finally, we would like to thank each other. We certainly had an awfully 
time putting this all together. 

, 
1 

WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
REMARKS ON GRAMATICAL FUNCTIONS IN 
TRANSFORMATIONAL SYNTAX 
The broad topic for this volwne is the role of grammatical functions in 
transformational syntax, that is, what role the notions subject and object play in the 
theory of grammar. There has been a long-standing debate in the field regarding the 
status of grammatical functions as theoretical primitives or defined notions. The 
Chomskyan school has consistently stated the position set out in Chomsky's 1965 
Aspects of the Theory of Syntax that grammatical functions are secondary notions 
that are definable on the basis of phrase structure representations of sentences. 
Work in other syntactic frameworks (first in Relational Gramar starting in the 
1970's and later in Lexical-Functional Grammar starting in the 1980's) challenged 
this position, demonstrating the efficacy of capturing cross-linguistic generalizations 
in terms of gramatical functions 
and questioning whether or not these 
generalizations were available in theories with defined grammatical functions. 
Developments in Chomskyan theory involved more and more explicit reference 
to grammatical functions (particularly subject), and after the publication of 
Chomsky 1981 (Lectures on Government and Binding), the place of grammatical 
functions in work based on his theories evolved in distinct ways. Some authors 
challenged the basic claims of Relational Grammar, while others sought to 
incorporate into Government and Binding theory some of the insights that had 
crystalized in the RG and LFG literature. Further developments in Government and 
Binding theory in the 1980's and precursors to Chomsky's Minimalist Program in 
the late 1980's and early 1990's incorporated yet more references to grammatical 
functions, including the notion object. 
It has been 25 years since the introduction of Relational Grammar theory by 
Perlmutter and Postal at the 1974 Linguistic Society of America Linguistics 
Institute, and many of the insights of linguists working in that theoretical framework 
have been incorporated in one way or another into the Chomskyan framework. And, 
with the advent of a more highly articulated phrase structure in the late 1980's and 
the 1990's and highly abstract configurational representations, there is the 
appearance that grammatical function-based notions permeate the formalism. 
However, explicit examination of the role of grammatical functions in the theory has 
been lacking. It is thus an appropriate time to re-examine the status of grammatical 
William D. Davies and Stanley Dubinsky (eds.), Objects and other subjects: 
Grammaticalfunctions,functional categories, and configurationality, 1-19. 
ΐ 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands. 

, 
\ 
2 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
functions and determine whether they are interesting viable notions or should simply 
be abandoned as epiphenomenal mnemonic terms. 
The collection of papers in this volume addresses the role of subject and object 
in the theory largely by making specific proposals about phenomena in a range of 
languages. 
Most conclude that the properties of objects and subjects can be 
attributed to functional or phrase structural properties and include novel proposals 
for the representation of these properties. 
. 
In this chapter, we outline some of the foundational developments in the role of 
granunatical functions in syntactic description and analysis, beginning with 
Chomsky 1965 (section 1). In section 2, we treat, in somewhat more detail, recent 
developments in the treatment of subjects and objects. Section three elaborates on 
points of convergence achieved by the chapters in this volume, and points the way to 
a typology of language architecture and to further research in the area. 
1. A POINT OF DEPARTURE 
The assumption that GFs such as subject and direct object are definable in terms of 
phrase structure configurations, rather than being primitives of the theory, is a 
position which was first articulated in Chomsky 1965. Therein, Chomsky clearly 
distinguished GFs from granunatical categories such as NP, asserting that "the 
notions in question have an entirely different status" (p. 68) and that the functional 
information is redundant and "can be exacted directly from the rewriting rules of the 
base, without any necessity for ad hoc extensions and elaborations .. .to provide 
specific mention of grammatical function" (p. 73). Thus, it is assumed in Chomsky 
1965 that GFs are defined notions, defined in terms of phrase structure 
configurations and perhaps only relevant to deep structure. I The general definitions 
that Chomsky assumes for grammatical functions are as follows: (i) Subject-of = 
[NP,S], (ii) Predicate-of = [VP.S], (iii) Direct-Object-of= [NP,VP]. and (iv) Main­
Verb-of = [V,VP] (p. 71). Thus, by these definitions in a structure such as (1), 
sincerity is the subject and the boy is the direct object. 
(1) 
S 
ó 
NP 
Aux 
VP 
I 
I 
6 
N 
M 
V 
NP 
I 
I 
I 
/"-.. 
sincerity 
may frighten 
Det 
N 
I 
I 
the 
boy 
This position is reasserted in Chomsky 1981, in reaction to certain advances in 
the theories of Relational Grammar and the nascent Lexical Functional Grammar: 

GRAMMATICAL FUNCTIONS IN TRANSFORMATIONAL SYNTAX 
the less fully such notions as .•. gramatical relations ... are reducible to primitives .. , the 
greater the indeterminacy of gramars selected on the basis of primary linguistic data. 
There is. however, little reason to suppose that such indetenninacy exists beyond 
narrow bounds. Insofar as this is true, we should be skeptical about theories with a 
primitive basis containing concepts that cannot plausibly be assumed to enter into the 
detennination of the primary linguistic data. (p. 16) 
3 
While it appears that little has changed within transfonnational syntax with respect 
to the starus of GFs as theoretical primitives, in fact, the role of GFs has changed 
dramatically, albeit incremental1y, in part in reaction to developments in 
nontransfonnational theories and in part due to theory-internal developments. GFs 
played no appreciable role in early Standard Theory treatments; however, the notion 
of subject was accorded a new and significant status in Chomsky 1973b. where 
reference is made in the Specified Subject Condition, "where by 'specified subject' 
we mean a subject NP that contains either lexical items or a pronoun that is not 
anaphoric" (p.239). In this paper the GF definitions (in particular subject, p.239) 
that Chomsky (1965) provided for the base component were extended to derived 
structures. 
Thus, in "Conditions on Transformations", the GF subject took on a 
significantly different role than it had previously had: it was a central concept in a 
key grammatical principle and it also had a wider application, relevant to derived 
phrase strucrures rather than simply base strucrures. 
Concurrently and subsequently, new nontransformational paradigms arose in 
which GFs played a central role and were accorded the starus of primitives. 
Beginning with Perlmutter and Postal 1972 and gaining significant status at the 1974 
LSA Linguistic Instirute (Perlmutter and Postal 1974), Relational Grammar (RG) 
sought to account for a wide range of cross-linguistic regularities in terms of GFs. 
In a spate of influential papers (Chung 1976, Pennutter and Postal 1977, Perlmutter 
1978, Postal 1977), basing its empirical results on a much wider range of languages 
than ever before, RG presented a serious challenge to the notion that GFs are 
derived notions by providing insightful universal and language-particular analyses 
utilizing GFs as core primitives of the grammar (and, correspondingly, that the 
configurational positions of phrases in a sentence are merely artifacts of how a 
particular language presents these primitives). Work in RG not only gave a central 
role to the OF subject but also to the GFs direct object, indirect object, and others, 
examining a number of clause-level and sentence-level strucrures which crucially 
referred to these GFs. 
Additionally, the late 1970s saw the rise of another 
relationally-based theory, Lexical Functional Grammar, as embodied in Bresnan 
1978, 1980 and the papers in Bresnan 1982b. Like RG, LFG accorded GFs a central 
role in the analysis of universal and language-particular phenomena, and treated 
them as undefined primitives of the theory. 
After the publication of Chomsky 1981, the place of grammatical relations in 
work based on his theories evolved in distinct ways. First, a few authors, such as 
Hoekstra (1984) and Marantz (1984), explicitly challenged the basic claims of RG 
theory. Others, such as Baker (1988) and Burzio (1986). attempted to build into GB 
some of the insights that had crystallized in RG and LFG literature. 
Baker's 
incorporation fonnalism was designed in large part to account for revaluations to 
object, which include the clause union/reduction phenomena treated extensively in 

. 
\ 
4 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
Aissen & Perlmutter 1976 and Gibson & Raposo 1986. 
Burzio, for his part, 
formalized an account of unaccusativity first presented in Perlmutter 1978. 
At the same time, the publication of the GS theory in Chomsky 1981 and 1982 
involved the further intrusion of GFs as undefined (or inconsistently defined) 
theoretical objects. In Chomsky 1981 (209-222), for example. the term SUBJECT is 
introduced into the calculation of "governing category". 
SUBJECT is used there to 
refer both to NPs occurring in the traditional. configurationally defined "subject 
position" (i.e. the immediate NP daughter of a clause or NP node), as well as to 
AGR (which is asserted to be the "nominal" content of INFL). On this formulation. 
the notion SUBJECT is no longer a purely configurationally defined relation, but one 
which identifies its referents variously on the basis of either configuration or 
labelling properties. 
With the articulation of the Extended Projection Principle 
(EPP). or more specifically the extended part of the EPP (Chomsky ) 982: 10), GFs 
came to play an even more critical role in the central assertions of the theory. Here 
it is stated that ''the requirement that a clause have a subject is independent of the 
Projection Principle" and that this requirement is "a general principle governing D­
structures, hence also governing structures derived from them". The "subject" of the 
EPP, however, is not the same as SUBJECT (since clauses of Romance languages are 
held to have "subject positions" in addition to the SUBJECT [i.e. AGR] which they 
would possess anyway). 
Putting this inconsistency aside, the EPP elevated the 
notion "subject" (albeit a configurationally defined notion) to the level of a UG 
determinant of core grammar (Chomsky 1982: 13). 
Since the mid-1980's, various developments in GS theory and what has evolved 
into Minimalism have further unsettled the traditional view of GFs in 
transformational syntax. One of these, the VP-lNTERNAL SUBJECT HYPOTIESIS (see 
Kitagawa 1986 and Sportiche ) 988 among others), resulted in the abandonment of a 
singular. configurationally defined "subject position", inasmuch as this hypothesis 
provides separately for deep (i.e. thematic) and surface (i.e. inflectional) subject 
positions. 
This notion that all subjects are derived led subsequently to a 
reexamination of the category INFL itself, and to proposals in which its various 
functional components are separated out into independently headed projections. The 
view (expressed first in Pollock 1989) that AGR and Tense reside in separate 
functional categories has opened the door for further discussion of the positions and 
properties of subjects, such as found in Guilfoyle, Hung, & Travis 1992, Sobaljik & 
Jonas 1996, McCloskey 1997. 
At the same time that the notion "subject" has come under renewed scrutiny, 
there has arisen a corresponding interest in the traditional object functions of direct 
object (DO) and indirect object (10). Drawing on the VP-internal subject hypothesis 
discussed above, Larson (1988) proposed a view of multiple object constructions in 
which the underlying positions of direct and indirect objects are comparable to that 
of subjects and direct objects. That is, just as the clausal subject occupies a D­
structure spec,VP position superior to the complement, the direct object of a 
ditransitive verb is claimed to occupy a spec.VP (of a lower VP) and be superior to 
the indirect object complement in D-structure. This analogy is illustrated in (2), 
where VP1 in (2a) should be compared to VP2 in (2b) . 

GRAMMATICAL FUNCTIONS IN TRANSFORMATIONAL SYNTAX 
(2)a. 
Greer likes Speer. 
VP, 
b. 
	 
NP 
V' 
6. 
ñ 
Greer 
V 
NP 
I 
.6-
like 
Speer 
Greer sent a letter to Speer. 
VP, 
 
NP 
V' 
6. 
6 
Greer V 
VP2 
	 
NP 
V' 
ò	 
a letter 
V 
I 
PP 
 
5 
send 
to Speer 
Larson's approach is developed further in Pesetsky 1995, where VPs having non­
lexical heads (such as VPl in (2b» are done away with and replaced by lexical 
projections (sometimes having phonologically null heads). The essence of these 
proposals was to divorce phrase structure from traditional constituency tests, in 
favor of representations in which thematic hierarchies "map directly to a syntactic 
analog (much like the initial layer of structure in RG), a topic taken up by Baker in 
chapter 2. 
While the D-structure representation of object GFs evolved in the manner shown 
above, the inflectional status of objects also underwent a metamorphosis. Following 
Pollock's (I989) proposal to separate the nominal (AGR) properties of inflection 
from Tense, Chomsky (1991) proposed separate AGR projections for subject and 
object (AgrS and AgrO). Under this proposal, both subjects and objects are derived 
categories, each coming to occupy the Spec of its respective functional category. 
This proposal had the consequence of doing away with the traditional 
configurational difference between subjects and objects (inasmuch as both are now 
claimed to occupy a Spec position), and replacing this with a difference that resides 
either in the labeling function (i.e. AgrS vs. AgrO) or in the configurational position 
of the Agr phrases relative to lexical projections (whether an AgrP selects or is 
selected by vP). 

, 
\ 
6 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
2. RECENT VIEWS ON GRAMMATICAL FUNCTIONS 
2.1 On the subject of subjects 
As noted above, the notion "subject" and its role in the gramar evolved 
considerably over the past three decades. 
While a configurational definition of 
subject remained intact and relatively unchanged from Aspects to LGB and into 
Barriers (the only change coinciding 
with 
the 
introduction of the 
CP/IP 
nomenclature), the role of subject became increasingly important. 
This is 
epitomized by the Extended Projection Principle of Chomsky 1982, which explicitly 
requires all clauses to have subjects, defined therein as [NP,S]. 
Since then, 
speculation has arisen regarding whether all languages obey the EPP and whether 
some languages satisfy the EPP in alternative ways. Additionally, developments in 
clausal architecture have radically reshaped the configurational definition of subject 
and, in fact, have cast doubt on whether a unitary notion of subject can be identified, 
as taken up in part III of this volume. 
An early step in what McCloskey (1997) tenns the "deconstruction" of a unitary 
subject was the introduction of the VP·internal subject hypothesis. This notion, that 
the subject originates in the VP and then in most (but not all) languages moves to 
spec,IP, entails the positing of two subject positions. 
Some of the most striking 
evidence for this hypothesis comes from Sportiche's (1988) analysis of quantifier 
float. 
(3)a. 
Tous les enfants ont 
vu 
ce film. 
all 
the children have seen this movie 
b. 
Les enfants (*tous) ont 
tous vu 
(*tous) ce 
film. 
the children 
have all 
seen 
this movie 
Sportiche adduces evidence for a VP·internal position for subjects in order to 
explain the fact that the quantifier tous 'aU' in (3b) can appear between the auxiliary 
and main verbs, but not in other plausible positions (such as before the auxiliary 
verb or after the main verb). 
Sportiche suggests that for French (and the English 
analog), the NP complement of the quantifier may raise independently to spec,IP, 
leaving the quantifier stranded as shown in (4). 
(4) 
[IP [NP les enfants]1 ont [vp [op tous tl ] vu ce film 11 
Of course, (3a) is derived by having the entire QP move from spec,VP to spec,IP. 
These facts, together with other considerations (e.g. adverb placement), provide 
evidence of a VP·internaJ position for the subject. 
FUrther evidence for a VP· 
internal subject position came from languages for which it was argued that the 
subject of the sentence never raises to spec,IP but remains in the VP at S-structure. 
Such proposals include Kuroda 1988 for Japanese and McCloskey 1 991 for Irish. 

GRAMMATICAL FUNCTIONS IN TRANSFORMATIONAL SYNTAX 
7 
The notion of two subject positions was developed further by Guilfoyle, Hung, 
and Travis (1992), who present an analysis of Austronesian languages that makes 
crucial use of the two subject positions, spec,VP and spec,IP. In their analysis, they 
extend the potential of a non-unitary notion of subject, and argue that the properties 
most often associated with a single argument and identified as "subject properties" 
can actually be split between two arguments in certain constructions in these 
languages.· So, for example, in the Tagalog examples below (Guilfoyle, Hung, and 
Travis 1992:(25» babae 'woman' possesses all subject properties in (Sa), while the 
subject properties are split in (5b) between babae and bigas 'rice'. 2 
(5)a. 
Mag-aalis 
ng-bigas sa-sako para sa-bata' ang-babae. 
AT -take.out Acc-rice OBL-sack for OBL-child TOP-woman 
'The woman will take rice out of the sack for the child. ' 
b. 
AaHsin 
ng-babae 
sa-sako 
para sa-bata' 
ang-bigas. 
TT-take.out GEN-woman oBL-sack for OBL-child TOP-rice 
'The woman will take the rice out of the sack for the child.' 
Under their analysis of (Sa), the VP-intemal subject babae moves from spec,VP to 
spec,IP ( at the end of the clause), thus filling both subject positions. In (Sb), babae 
remains in the spec,VP subject position, while the theme bigas moves to spec,IP. 
This is illustrated in (6)-n.b. t2 is the trace orv movement. 
(6)a. 
b. 
[IP [I' mag-aalis2 [yp t\ 
ang-babae\ IP] 
t2 ng-bigas sa-sako para-sa-bata' ]] 
lIP [I' aalisin2 
[yp ng-babae 
t2 tt 
ang-bigast IP] 
sa-sako para-sa-bata' ]] 
Under Guilfoyle, Hung, and Travis' analysis, typical Tagalog subject properties 
such as reflexive antecedence and being controlled are characteristic of the spec,VP 
position, while the properties of floating quantifiers and extraction accrue to spec,IP. 
When a single argument fills both positions (via movement), as is the case for babae 
in (Sa), that argument exhibits all subject characteristics. In (5b), however, the deep 
subject babae originates in spec,VP and resides there at S-strucrure, while the object 
bigas moves out of the VP complement position coming to occupy the surface 
subject position spec.IP at S-structure. Accordingly, the subject properties in (5b) 
are split between these two arguments. 
More recent accounts, particularly spurred on by the disassembling of INFL in 
Pollock 1989, have proposed yet other subject positions. In work on the Icelandic 
transitive expletive construction, Bobaljik and Jonas {I 996) have argued that there is 
a subject position outside ofVP but lower than spec,AgrSP (which Teplaced spec,IP 
as the identified S-structure subject position following Chomsky 1991). 
They 
identify this position as spec, TP. In the Icelandic construction, both spec,AgrSP and 
spec,TP are occupied by phonetic material. As McCloskey (1997) points out, with 

, i 
8 
WnLlAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBll'lSKY 
two subject positions in the inflectional layer, this either brings to three the number 
of identified subject positions or casts doubt on the VP-internal subject position. 
Additionally, Branigan (1996), Cardinaletti (1997), Kiss (1996), and Haegeman 
(1996) have proposed additional subject positions outside of the thematic and 
inflectional layers. For example. Branigan (1996) suggests that EPP features drive 
movement into spec,CP in verb-second languages. In such a proposal spec,CP thus 
becomes a GF position in those languages which have EPP-motivated movement to 
positions outside the inflectional layer. 
Curent theoretical proposals, calling for mUltiple "subject" positions and for the 
parcelling out of "subject" properties among them, are reminiscent of RG proposals 
of ten to twenty years earlier. The VP-internal subject position, assumed in most 
curent work, has its analogue in the RG concept "initial subject". Analogous to 
current theoretical proposals for derived "subject positions" (in the inflectional layer 
of the clause), RG theory recognized the distinct status of "final subjects" in 
triggering agreement and füeding word order rules (among other things). 
For 
example, Bell (1976) proposed distinct grammatical properties for initial and final 
subjects in Cebuano, a proposal quite similar to that offered (in the current model) 
by Guilfoyle, Hung. and Travis for other Austronesian languages. 
2.2 Objects and other objects 
Unlike subject, the definition of the GF notion direct object was less troublesome to 
Chomsky's transformational theory at the outset. It was, by and large, assumed that 
direct objects of simple clauses (such as her in (7a» are not derived. Subsequently, 
Chomsky'S (1981) adoption of the Projection Principle entailed that no surface 
direct object can be derived from any other position. 
This helped provide 
justification for the exceptional case marking (ECM) analysis of accusative 
infinitival subjects, by which him in (7b) is a deep and surface subject despite its 
accusative case.l 
. (7)a. 
b. 
James saw her . 
Garth wants [5 him to leave] 
Thus, the Projection Principle divided the class of apparent surface direct objects 
into true direct object complements (7a) and accusative infinitival subjects (7b). 
Under these assumptions, direct object is trivially defined as the NP sister ofV. 
This situation changed with the publication of I.-arson 1988, in which the position 
of a deep direct object was claimed to be dependent upon the valency of the verb. 
As shown in section 1 (example (2», the direct object of a transitive verb is analyzed 
as the NP sister of V, while the direct object of a ditransitive verb is claimed to 
occupy spec, VP (of a lower VP). Thus. under a Larsonian approach to D-structure, 
object properties can no longer be attributed to a singular, configurational definition 
of the notion direct object. 

GRAMMATICAL FUNCTIONS IN TRANSFORMATIONAL SYNTAX 
9 
While the Larson (and later. Pesetsky 1995) approach to lexical insertion did 
muddy the definition of deep-subject, it left intact the notion that direct objects are 
not derived (at least in contrast to the VP-intemal subject hypothesis which held that 
subjects occupy distinct thematic and inflectional positions). However, following 
Pollock's (1989) division of INFL into distinct AGR and Tense components, 
Chomsky (1991) proposed an inflectional position for objects parallel to that of 
subjects. Based on work by Kayne (1989), Chomsky takes Pollock's AGR to be a 
"subject-agreement element" (AgrS), and suggests that there is an "object-agreement 
element (AgrO) ... [that has] VP as its complement". On this view, (7a) would have 
the following representation at LF. 
As (8) illustrates, under the multiple Agr-projection hypothesis (as per Chomsky 
1991) coupled with the VP-intemal subject hypothesis. all subjects and all direct 
objects are derived (at leďst by LF).4 Rounding out the picture, Bowers (1993) 
proposes a functional projection PredP which is instantiated inside the inflectional 
layer (IP) and outside the thematic layer (VP) and which mediates the relation 
between the subject and the VP. 
Unlike Larson's 1988 VP-shell analysis the 
instantiation of PredP is independent of the thematic requirements of the verb 
(which makes it distinct from the agentive vP proposed in Chomsky 1995, whose 
presence is triggered by the thematic structure of the verb). Thus, by 1993 we find 
proposals that collectively introduce functional projections corresponding to the 
three GFs (subject, direct object, predicate) that Chomsky rejected as being part of 
phrase structure in Aspects. Recent proposals (Franco 1993, Koizurni 1995. and 
Sportiche 1996) have gone further, and provided for a separate agreement element 
for indirect objects (AgrIO) which also projects a phrase. 
Taken all together, these proposals lead to important questions about the place of 
functional projections in Universal Gramar. 
One can ask whether there is a 
universal stock of functional projections instantiated in every language or whether a 
universal repertoire of such projections forms an inventory out of which individual 
languages select a subset. Alongside this question is the issue of whether functional 
projections are instantiated in some fixed and universal hierarchy or whether the 
relative dominance of individual functional projections might vary parametrically 
from one language to another. Indeed these questions have been the subject of some 
discussion in the literature and the positions taken on these issues vary across a 
spectrum (see Iatridou 1990, Nash & Rouveret 1997, and Tlmiinsson 1996 for 
discussion). On one end of this spectrum is the more restrictive view that the set of 
functional categories and their relative dominance is fixed by UG. At the other is 
the suggestion that the inventory of functional projections and their relative 
dominance varies from language to language. As an example of the kind of debate 
that surounds the instantiation of particular functional projections, one might 
compare Koizurni 1995 (which maintains that English has an AgrIO projection, in 
addition to AgrO) with Montrul 1998 (which assumes that AgrIO is specific to 
languages that have dative clitics, such as French and Spanish). 
In this volume 

10 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
(chapter 6), Travis claims that Malagasy has no derived objects (and presumably no 
equivalent of AgrO). There is even some question as to whether a particular 
functional projection is uniformly instantiated in all construction in a given 
language. As an example of this, Lasnik (chapter 5) proposes that AgrO is of.tional 
in English, leading to the possibility of both derived and underived objects. There 
are various proposals regarding the relative dominance of functional projections 
(especially AgrS and T). 
Pollock t 989 posits TP above AgrP, while many 
subsequent analyses reverse this. The relative dominance of AgrS and T may in fact 
correlate with other aspects of language structure, such as word order. We find that 
proposals for V -initial languages converge on the view that T dominates AgrS 
(McCloskey, chapter 7; Massam, chapter 9). In chapter 10, we propose a language 
typology that reflects, among other things, the parametric variation of T I Agr 
dominance. 
3. THE STATE OF FUNCTIONAL ART 
In the ensuing discussion, we will point to a range of converging opinions on the 
status of subjects and objects cross-linguistically, as revealed in the chapters that 
follow. We will also indicate where the evidence either leads to divergent opinions 
about functional structure, or is simply inconclusive. Finally, we will sketch out 
what we believe to be an overarching set of functional parameters, which lead to a 
predictive typology of possible language classes and which may provide 
explanations for attested typological variation. 
In what might be viewed as a relatively surprising result, two of the chapters in 
section one point to ways in which P&P theory has come to incorporate grammatical 
functions as primitives, albeit not always in the most straightforward manner and 
through rather different subparts of the theory. Baker (in chapter 2) suggests that 
phrase structure representations have evolved in such a way that at the thematic 
layer phrase structure is a representation of grammatical functions, where 
grammatical functions are encoded through configurational superiority. As these 
phrase structures are determined neither by traditional constituency tests nor by any 
language-particular properties. curent Chomskyan theory essentially shares with 
explicitly relational theories the notion that grammatical relations are primitives. 
Taking a far different tack. Alsina (in chapter 4) investigates the application of the 
notions structural Case and inherent Case to distinguishing objects in multiple object 
constructions. 
He notes that various properties of objects in languages (e.g., 
pronoun incorporation, lexical binding) consistently accrue to structurally Case­
marked objects as opposed to inherently Case-marked objects but that the thematic 
role of the argument targeted for inherent Case is not consistent between languages. 
On this basis, he suggests that the structural vs. inherent Case distinction has been 
used as another means of encoding distinctions between "object" GFs. 
In chapter 2. Baker shows that configurational prominence can uniformly 
represent both intraclausal relational prominence and interclausal "embedding" 
prominence. Thus, the subject of a matrix clause has configurational prominence 
over its same-clause object and over its embedded clause subject. In an effort to 

GRAMMATICAL FUNCTIONS IN TRANSFORMATIONAL SYNTAX 
II 
achieve greater uniformity of representation, Baker suggests reducing all 
grammatical prominence (inter- and intra- clausal) to embedding prominence. He 
implements this through the adoption of a lexical decomposition strategy that 
requires at least one syntactic predicate for each subcategorized argument. 
By 
assuming, for instance. that a subject is in the specifier of a vP and that an object is 
in spec,VP, the intraclausal superiority of subject over object can be treated as 
arising out of an embedding asymmetry. 
While lexical decomposition can clearly be used as a vehicle for mapping out 
relational prominence, Newmeyer (in chapter 3) points out that lexical semantic 
representations (LSR) cannot take the place of syntactic grammatical functions. He 
notes that there are important reasons for representing relational prominence 
syntactically, and reminds us that syntactically unaccusative structures can arise out 
of a varied set of lexical semantic representations (a point made early on in Rosen 
1984). Since the set of possible argument structures is much smaller than the set of 
possible semantic representations, and since the mapping from semantic 
representations to argument structures is not fixed (as documented in Grimshaw 
1979), there is still a need for an autonomous level of deep syntactic structure in 
which "grammatical functions, thematic roles, and constituent structure are not 
[necessarily] in alignment". 
3. 1 Subject attributes through the clause 
There are a number of syntactic properties that are characteristic of a single 
nominal in English. 
These properties include being the controllee in control 
structures, bearing nominative case and triggering agreement on the verb. and 
obligatorily undergoing raising in appropriate contexts. 
(9)a. 
h. 
(10)a. 
b. 
Vanessa tried to phone Andrew. 
* Andrew tried Vanessa to phone. 
Amy appears to be out of the office. 
* Appears Amy to be out of the office. 
Such properties have come to be known as "subject" properties inasmuch as they 
accrue to a single constituent referred to as the Subject in English. 
However, 
looking over a range of languages one finds that these properties can be distributed 
among distinct constituents in different languages. 
In order to understand the 
mechanism by which these properties are concentrated in a single constituent or 
divided among several. one must understand them to be reflexes of formally distinct 
syntactic attributes. Reviewing the list of properties just presented, we can ascribe 
controlleehood as arising from configurational or thematic salience, nominative case 
and agreement as arising from the interaction of an argument and a functional head 

12 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
or feature, and obligatory raising as being driven by an EPP (D) feature of the 
clause. 
Taking these three syntactic attributes to be primitive, we find that in English the 
thematically/configurationally highest argument is the orie which checks nominative 
case and triggers agreement and is also the same argument which responds to the D­
feature in T. Accordingly, the full range of "subject" properties is mapped ta a 
single argument in English. However, this is not the case cross-linguistically. In 
Spanish, for example, the three syntactic attributes just described are not necessarily 
localized in the same argument. As Goodall shows in Chapter 8, arguments other 
than the thematic subject may satisfy the EPP, checking off a D-feature in T. 
(t 1) 
A quien habia visto la madre de Juan? 
who 
had 
seen the mother of 
'Who had Juan's mother seen?' 
According to Goodall, in (1 1), a quien checks off the D-feature as wen as a Q­
feature in T, satisfying the EPP. In languages such as Irish and Niuean, we find that 
the EPP feature does not interact with any argument. As McCloskey (Chapter 7) 
and Massam (Chapter 9) show, there is no EPP position in the clause. 
Consequently, thematic subjects only display a subset of the English "subject" 
properties described above (raising is optional in these languages). 
This is 
illustrated in (12) for Niuean (with data from Seiter 1983), where lama 'boy', the 
subject of the embedded clause, has raised to be subject of the matrix clause (12b). 
(12)a. 
Kua kamata ke 
hala he 
tama e 
akau. 
PERF begin 
SBJ cut 
ERG boy 
ABS tree 
'The boy has begun to cut down the tree . •  
b. 
Kua 
kamata e 
tama ke 
hala e 
akau. 
PERF begin 
ASS boy 
SBJ. cut 
ABS tree 
'The boy has begun to cut down the tree. ' 
Finally. we find that a single one of these attributes may be associated with more 
than one argument. Massam proposes that in Niuean the subject and object of a 
transitive clause occupy multiple specifier positions of the same functional 
projection. Since they have the same configurational salience, they are equally able 
to undergo optional raising. as illustrated in (13), where the object of-the embedded 
clause, akau 'tree', has raised to be subject of the matrix clause. 
(13) 
Kua 
kamata e 
akau ke 
hala he 
tama. 
PERF begin 
ABS tree SBJ cut 
ERG boy 
'The tree was begun to be cut by the boy. ' 

GRAMATICAL FUNCTIONS IN TRANSFORMATIONAL SYNTAX 
1 3  
Thus it is the many-to-one mapping from syntactic attributes to a single argument, 
which creates the illusion ofa single set of "subject" properties in English (and other 
languages like it). The cross-linguistic evidence presented in this volume shows that 
the notion of subject is epiphenomenal rather than primitive. 
It is also the case that the syntactic attributes which contribute to the 
epiphenomenon of subject are themselves parameterized rather than universal. For 
instance, we. find that agreement heads (or features) can be obligatory or optional. 
Irish clauses do not require the presence of a nominal argument, thereby allowing 
for unaccusative predicates whose sole argument is prepositional. 
(14) 
Bhreathaigh at: ab 
aimsir. 
became-fine on the weather 
'The weather became nice. • 
(McCloskey, ch. 7) 
In Niuean, on the other hand, the absolutive argument is obligatory. 
Another parameterized syntactic attribute that plays a central role in the 
determination of clausal . behavior is the EPP. 
We find, from cross-linguistic 
evidence, that the presence of an EPP feature appears to be universal. That is, the 
head ofTP (or its equivalent) is always found to bear a category feature that induces 
movement into the inflectional layer of the clause. In this regard, though, languages 
vary according to whether this feature is D or V. In D-prominent languages, such as 
English, French, and Spanish. the EPP feature in T forces the appearance of a DP in 
spec,TP. In V-prominent languages, such as Bulgarian, Irish, and Niuean, the EPP 
feature induces the movement of V (or some projection of V) to T and yields (in 
most instances) V-initial word order. 
In V-prominent languages. EPP properties 
normally associated with the thematic subject arc absent, since the EPP does not 
affect the distribution of any nominal element. 
Accordingly, in these languages, 
raising is optional as in (12), subject expletives are absent, and subject island effects 
are frequently missing. 
For instance, Bulgarian allows extraction from sentential 
subjects, as in (15) (Davies and Dubinsky, Chapter 1 0). 
(15) 
na kakvol mislis 
[če 
fda otide tl ] bese vaZno 
za nego] 
to what 
you. think that to go 
was important for him 
'To what do you think that to go was important for him?' 
The choice of V- or D- prominence also interacts with another parameter that 
detennines the relative superiority of T (or the EPP feature) and Agr/Case. 
This 
parameter, as far as we can determine, is only active in D-prominent languages. 
Irish and Niuean, in addition to being V-prominent, also feature a T(-like) projection 
higher than Agr/Case. 
In contrast, English is D-prominent and has Agr above T. 
Spanish, while D-prominent like English, is like Irish in having T above Agr. This 
difference between Spanish and English results in certain key differences between 
these two languages. 
Unlike English, the thematic subject in Spanish need not 
occupy the preverbal position, since it only need check Agr/Case features lower in 
the clause. 
At the same time, unlike Irish, some DP element must check the 0-

1 4  
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
feature in T higher up. This results in a obligatory "subject'.'-like position, which is 
sometimes filled by a nominal locative or by the trace of a moved wh-operator. The 
choice ofEPP feature coupled with the relative height of T and Agr leads to a range 
of language types, as expressed in the foHowing table. 
D-prominent EPP 
V-prominent EPP 
T/Agr 
Spanish 
Irish 
Agr/T 
English 
--
3.2 Object properties 
Lasnik (chapter 5) proposes that, while overt movement to check features is in 
general obligatory, AgrO in English is optionally present. 
Because of this, he 
argues, direct objects in English can be underived. As an illustration of this, he 
shows first that extraction from object NPs is ruled out when the object does raise to 
spec,AgrOP in order to bind a reflexive pronoun, as in (16). 
( 1 6) 
??Which senator did the special prosecutor question 
[ two friends of _ ] during each other's trials. 
When derivation is not motivated by binding requirements, the object may remain 
underived, thereby facilitating extraction, as in (1 7). 
( 1 7) 
Which senator did the special prosecutor question 
[ two friends of _ ] \during the president's trial. 
Lasnik concludes from this and other evidence that, at least for English, the AgrO 
can be distinguished from AgrS by its optionality. Similarly, Travis (chapter 6) 
proposes for Malagasy that the analog of the AgrO projection (AspP) is inert. She 
provides evidence that a number of constructions, previously assumed to involve 
derived objects, in fact involve derived subjects instead. She shows that Malagasy 
fails to have the equivalent of AgrO in its clause structure. Thus, both Lasnik and 
Travis agree that objects may be distinguished functionally from subjects, in at least 
some languages, in that the former may or must remain in their base-generated 
position within a basic transitive clause. This state of affairs is comparable to that of 
Niuean, for which Massam (chapter 9) claims that the Ergative argument is 
underived. 
In their account of objects, both Lasnik and Travis take the lower Agr/ Asp 
projection to be intermediate between the two verbal projections (vP and VP). in 
keeping with recent proposals by Koizumi (1995). According to this view of clause 
structure the inflectional and thematic space cannot be divided into distinct layers, 
since an inflectional projection intervenes between two lexical ones, as in (18). 

GRAMMATICAL FUNCTIONS IN TRANSFORMATIONAL SYNTAX 
(I 8) 
[AgrP • • •  Agr [vp ... V [AgrP • • •  Agr [vp ... V .. .  Jm 
1 5  
While this perspective erases a useful distinction between the inflectional and 
thematic space within the clause, it does simplify the representation of Agr. 
With 
this representation it is not necessary to distinguish between AgrS and AgrO, since 
the internal and external core arguments of the clause each have their own 
immediately dominating Agr projection. In examining Irish, McCloskey provides 
evidence that all inflectional projections are higher than vP so that there appears to 
be, at least in some languages, a strict separation of thematic and inflectional layers. 
At the same time, there also seems to be no cJear consensus regarding the 
interpretability of functional heads and features. For Lasnik, agreement is mediated 
by the purely inflectional head Agr, while Travis suggests that the relevant 
projection is an Asp(ect) phrase. If Agr (and other similar features) are in fact borne 
by interpretable heads, then the motivation is reduced for drawing a clear division 
between inflectional and thematic layers of structure. 
At this point, though. the 
divergence of opinions on this point reduces the motivation for further speculation 
on this issue. 
3.3 Functional parameters and typological variation 
It is possible to identify a number of parameters of functional projections that 
account for some of the typological variation presented above. One such parameter 
is the nature of the EPP feature that resides in T. We suggested above (consistent 
with proposals by Massam & Smallwood 1 997, Massaro 2000b, and Rackowski & 
Travis 2000) that this can be characterized as V-prominence vs. D-prominence; that 
is, this feature on T will force either V -movement or D-movement. Languages such 
as English, French and Spanish are D-prominent, while languages such as Bulgarian, 
Irish, Malagasy. and Niuean are V-prominent. 
A second, cross-cutting parameter is the relative height of the functional 
projections T and Agr. While we propose (in Chapter 10) that T always commands 
Agr projections (or features) in V-prominent languages, in D-prominent languages 
there is evidence of a split. In his proposal for Spanish, Goodall provides evidence 
that T is higher than Agr, showing that a non-nominative DP argument will satisfy 
the strong D-feature in T when the nominative thematic subject is postverbal. 
Conversely, in our account of English EPP effects, we provide evidence for the 
curent view that one Agr projection is above T. 
In our account of English. the 
superiority of T over Agr (coupled with D-prominence) is shown to explain the 
concentration of "subject" properties in a single argument. 
A final parameter of functional projections is the obligatory vs. optional nature of 
Agr heads or features. Starting with the assumption that there are two possible Agr 
heads or sets of features assąciated with transitive predicates-a high Agr feature 
(commonly referred to as AgrS) and a low Agr feature (AgrO)-the possibility 
exists for onc or the other or both of these features to be optional in a language. For 
instance, Lasnik proposes that the lower Agr in English is only optionally 
instantiated. Putting a slightly different face on this, only the higher Agr feature in 

, 
I 
1 6  
WILLIAM D. DAVmS AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
English is obligatory. What this means is that ALL English clauses must have the 
higher Agr feature. that which has been associated with nominative Case and 
agreement. 
Thus, regardless of transitivity, there must always be a nominative 
argument in the clause. When the higher Agr feature is obligatory, the same Agr 
feature associated with the thematic subject of a transitive clause will need to also be 
checked by the single argument of an intransitive clause (whether unergative or 
unaccusative). This is schematized in (I 9). 
(19)a. 
Transitive clause: 
[ Thematically-high-arg AgrX [ Thematically-Iow-arg (AgrY) ... JJ 
b. 
Intransitive clause: 
[ Single-argument AgrX ... ]] 
This state of affairs results in a case/agreement system traditionally characterized as 
nominative/accusative, in which AgrX is AgrS (or Nominative) and AgrY is AgrO 
(or Accusative). The need, in English, for a nominative argument in each clause 
might be seen as one side of the "coin" that motivated the Final I Law and other 
similar proposals (with the D-prominence of the EPP being the other side of that 
"coin"). 
In some ways, what Massam proposes for Niuean is the inverse of Lasnik's 
proposal for English. 
Citing the optionality of the Ergative argument and the 
obligatory nature of the Absolutive, Massam proposes an obligatory Absolutive 
feature in vP. 
In Massam's analysis then, the obligatory Agr feature is the 
configurationally lower one (in that it is checked by the lower of two arguments). In 
this circumstance, the same Agr feature associated with the thematic object of a 
transitive clause will need to also be checked by the single argument of an 
intransitive clause (whether unergative or unaccusative). It is this same Agr feature 
that is checked by the thematic subject of a transitive clause when the thematic 
object undergoes noun incorporation with the verb. This case system is schematized 
in (20). 
(20)a. 
Transitive clause: 
[ Thematically-high-ar8x [Thematically-Iow-argy AgrX AgrY ... ]] 
b. 
Transitive NI clause: 
[ Thematically-high-arg AgrY [ Thematically-low-arg 
... ]] 
c. 
Intransitive clause: 
[ Single-argument AgrY ... ]] 
The result of this is, of course, a case/agreement system characterized as 
ergative/absolutive, in which AgrX is Ergative and AgrY is Absolutive. The view 
adopted here unifies derivation of Accusative objects in English and Absolutives in 
Niuean, in that both reference the same (i.e. lower) Agr feature. The difference 

GRAMATICAL FUNCTIONS IN TRANSFORMATIONAL SYNTAX 
17 
bet,ween them, then, has simply to do with optionality/obligatoriness o f  the relevant 
Agr features. 
This approach to case/agreement is similar to that developed by 
Bobaljik (1992), but consistent with proposals by Levin and Massam 1985 and 
Massam 1985. 
Characterized as the "absolutive-as-accusative" analysis, the 
agreement features of absolutive arguments are checked in spec,AgrO and those of 
ergative arguments are checked in spec,AgrS.6 It should be clear from the discussion 
so far how distinct Agr realization requirements in these languages lead naturally to 
the traditional nominative/accusative and ergativeJabsolutive characterizations. 
A third possible parameterization for agreement features is seen in McCloskey's 
analysis of Irish clause structure. Irish, like English and Niuean, instantiates two 
distinct Agr heads (or features), with the higher being characterized as Nominative 
(since it can mark intransitive arguments). However, according to McCloskey, both 
Agr heads are optional. 
The result of this is that some Irish clauses have only a 
single prepositional argument. and involve no checking of case/agreement (I 4). The 
optionality of Agr features, which can be distinguished as ''high'' and "low", gives 
rise to the following range of clause structure types. 
High Agr optional 
High Agr obJigatory 
Low Agr optional 
Irish 
English 
(nominative/accusative) 
Low Agr obligatory 
Niuean 
(ergative/absoluti ve) 
--
Irish, then. is a language which exhibits an extreme case of "subjectlessness". Irish 
contrasts most strongly with English, which has a D-oriented EPP, an obligatory 
(nominative) Agr feature, AND a requirement that both of these reference the same 
argument. It contrasts with Spanish, which has D-prominence in EPP and obligatory 
(nominative) Agr. 
And. it contrasts with Niuean. which has an obligatory 
(absolutive) 
Agr feature. 
A 
V-prominent EPP 
coupled with 
an 
optional 
(nominative) Agr feature leads Irish to exhibit no clausal requirements suggestive of 
having to have subjects. 
4. CONCLUSION 
This discussion leads us naturally to the question of where does this discussion leave 
us. On the one hand, individual grammatical functions (such as subject) appear not 
to be as much unanalyzable primitives as has been imagined in theories such as RG, 
LFG, and HPSG. On the other hand, subjects (or particular subject properties) are 
clearly distinct from objects (or their analogous object properties) in ways that are 
not fully understood and which suggest the existence of some primitive (possibly 
feature based) distinction. The papers that follow do not provide definitive answers 
to all the questions that arc addressed in this volume, and in fact raise a number of 
additional questions about the status 
of grammatical functions 
in syntactic 
representations. 
They do. however, exhibit significant agreement on a number of 

, 
\ 
18 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
issues, such that the resulting convergences dearly provide a path for future research 
in this area. 
For example, the EPP, however it may ultimately be characterized, is clearly 
associated with subjects and not objects. It is also clear from some of the chapters in 
this volume that the derivation of subjects and objects out of the thematic layer into 
the inflectional layer of a clause is detennined independently for each relation in the 
grammar of a given language. Thus, to the extent that objects are optionally derived 
in English, for example (Lasnik, chapter 5), their grammatical status is distinct from 
subjects in ways that have yet to be determined. The resulting situation appears to 
be as follows: (i) specific properties generally related to grammatical functions (such 
as agreement) have autonomous reflexes in the grammar and are often implemented 
here as distinct functional heads (e.g., Agr); (ii) at the same time, the relation 
between a particular property type (such as agreement) and its associated 
grammatical functions (such as subject and object) is not unifonn across all 
grammatical functions. So, while (i) suggests that there is no discrete gramatical 
reflex for any particular grammatical function, (ii) suggests that there is more to the 
distinction between particular grammatical functions than "all and only" the 
functional properties that have been taken account of thus far. This then surely 
argues for further exploration into the underlying role of GFs as determinants of 
grammatical structure. 
The sort of conclusion that the work in this volume points to was in many 
respects anticipated in Keenan's 1976b 'Towards a universal definition of 
"subject"'. In that paper, Keenan attempts to arrive at a definition of the notion 
subject by testing 30 some properties (some of which had been widely used as 
traditional diagnostics for identifying subjects) against data from a variety of 
languages. With respect to these properties he notes that no one of them is "both 
necessary and sufficient for an NP in any sentence in any L [language] to be the 
subject of that sentence." Keenan concludes that '''subject' does not represent a 
single dimension of linguistic reality. It is rather a cluster concept, or as we shall 
say, a multi-factor concept." Appealing to the metaphor of 'intelligence', which is 
recognized as "a combination of abilities", he draws an analogy between it and the 
properties that he attributes to the subject relation. He goes on to say, "Being a 
subject is ... more like being intelligent than .. .like being a prime number." At the 
same time he suggests (hopefully) that "the concept of subject might coincide 
with ... groupings of [these] properties, though in the worst of cases each 
[property]. .. would be an independent factor." 
ENDNOTES 
I 
Despite the fact that Chomsky uses thc tcons "logical subjecf' and "grammatical subject" in his 
discussion of grammatical functions, the structural definitions that he supplies for GFs are most directly 
applicablc to deep structure configurations. As he notes (in note 32, pp. 220-221). the existence of 
sentences containing PP subjects or two initial NPs may necessitate a distinct set of OF definitions 
relevant to swface structure. 
1 
In the glosses, AT stands for AGENT TOPIC and 1T stands for THEME TOPIC. The other abbreviations 
are: TOPOC), ACC(USA TIVE), OBL(lQUE), and GEN{lTIVE). 

GRAMMATICAL FUNCTIONS IN TRANS FORMA TIONAL SYNTAX 
19 
Of course, the asertion that him is a surface subject (8b) is of dubious status given the wealth of 
evidence to the contraty in Postal 1974, which has since been rerecognized as compelling beginning with 
Lasnik and Saito 1991. 
Empirical evidence for such a move is obvious in languages with overt object agreement (as in many 
languages of Afica and the Americas) as well as in participial agrement in Romance languages, as 
triggered by leftward movement of the object, as in the French example in (ib), as pointed out to us by 
Liliane Haegeman .. 
(i)a. 
Jean a detroit Is preuve . 
• Jean has destroyed the evidence. ' 
b. 
Jean l'a detrWte . 
• Jean has destroyed it.' 
The notion "derived", as it pertains to movement ITom lexical to inflectional pOSitions, remains 
somewhat unclear as used in the curent literature. One might take uderived object" to mean "any object 
that moves from a base position into an inflectional one". One might alternatively take it to mean "an 
object that moves ITom a base position into an inflectional one before spell-out (i.e. overtly)". 
An alternative view (as represented by Bittner 1988, Campana 1992, and Murasugi 1992) is what 
Campana characterizes as the "ergative-as-accusative" analysis, in which, under Minimalist assumptions, 
absolutive DPs have their features checked in spec,AgrS while ergative DPs have their features checked 
in spec,AgJO. 

• 
1 

MARK C. BAKER 
PHRASE SlRUCTURE AS A REPRESENTATION OF 
"PRIMITIVE" GR.AMJ.A TICAL RELA nONS 
One of the defining properties of the nan:owly Chomskian approach to syntax' over 
the years has been its corrunitment to the idea that grammatical relations such as 
subject and object are not primitives of grammatical theory. Rather, these notions, 
inherited from traditional grammar, are to be understood in terms of more basic 
syntactic relationships, in particular phrase structure configurations. This view gives 
phrase structure a kind of primacy in Chomskian theory that it does not have in other 
frameworks. In this conceptually oriented paper, I want to reexamine this distinctive 
claim, reviewing the old controversy between Chomskian theory and Relational 
Grammar (RG) and related frameworks that that claim was part of. In the course of 
this, I will consider what the ongoing legacy of these debates is in the "post-RG" 
syntactic theories of the 2000s. This issue is roughly equivalent to the question of 
what the characteristic phrase structure representations of Chomskian theory 
actually mean within the network of assumptions that they are now embedded in. 
My basic claim is that the meaning of the old slogan has changed somewhat over 
time, as ideas about phrase structure have changed, in ways that have not been fully 
realized. In particular, the Chomskian notion of phrase structure has come partially 
unhinged from its origins as a representation of basic constituency facts. As a result, 
it is now fair to say that phrase structure is essentially a representation of 
grammatical function relationships, not fundamentally different in kind from the 
representations posited by the Relational Grammarians and others. However, I will 
argue that Chomskian phrase structure is a particularly good representation of 
grammatical relations. 
In particular, it is superior to relational nets or the f­
structures of Lexical Functional Grammar (LFG) in that it captures certain basic 
properties of linguistic prominence that are not captured by these more general and 
flexible-looking representational schemes. . Thus, while the meaning of the claim 
that grammatical relations are derived from phrase structure has shifted over timeċ 
that claim is still meaningful. Finally, I will ask why it is that phrase structure is 
such a successful representation, showing how this relates to lexical semantic work 
on the decomposition of verbs into more basic components. 
. 
21 
William D. Davies and Stanley Dubinsky (eds.), Objects cznd other subjects: 
Grammatical functions, functional categories, and configurationality, 21-5 1. 
e 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the NetherlandS. 

, 
\ 
22 
MARK C. BAKER 
1. THE ORIGINS OF THE CHOMSKIAN VIEW 
To put these issues into context, let us begin by reviewing how the claim that 
grammatical relations are expressed in phrase structure arose. 
In fact, it emerged 
rather naturally out of the sequence of topics that were investigated and came to be 
partially understood by generative grammar. 
However, my focus will be on the 
idealized conceptual order of the ideas, rather than trying to trace their actual 
historical order in detail. 
This conceptual order also reflects the way that 
Chomskian syntax is often presented to students in textbooks and syntax courses, 
and this may be of more current significance than the history itself. 
The first step is motivating that there is such a thing as phrase structure for 
languages like English, showing how this phrase structure can be established using 
traditional constituency tests. For example, one of the less obvious features of 
English syntax is that there is a verb phrase that contains the verb and the direct 
object, together with some particles and PPs, but not the subject. (It is my infonnal 
experience that when introductory linguistics students are asked out of the blue 
which is more closely related to the verb, the subject or the object, they have no 
clear intuitions: 50% chose one and 50% the other prior to seeing any arguments.) 
However, one can show that the verb and the NP that follows it fonn a unit with a 
familiar battery of tests, including movement (la), replacement with a pronoun (l b), 
deletion (lc), and coordination ( I d). 
(1 )a. 
Sue said she would eat the octopus, and [vp eat the octopus] she 
did 
- .  
b. 
Sue will [vp eat the octopus], and John will [vp do so] too. 
c. 
Sue will [vp eat the octopus], and John will [vp - ]  too. 
d. 
Chris will [vp chop the vegetables] and [vp eat the octopus]. 
Once this notion of phrase structure is firmly in place, it is a rather trivial 
observation that subjects and objects always come in a fixed position in the phrase 
structure. In particular, the direct object is the only noun phrase that is contained in 
the VP but not in any smaller phrase. The subject is consistently contained in the 
clause but not inside the VP. Indirect objects in a sentence like Chris gave the book 
to Pat are uniquely contained in a prepositional phrase headed by to. And so on.2 
Since there is such a close relationship between the traditional grammatical 
functions and phrase structure positions, it seems ulUlccessary to refer to both in 
one's syntactic theory. Now, some representation of constituency is needed in the 
grammar anyway, to characterize which sets of words can be moved as a unit, or can 
be deleted, or can be replaced with a pronoun. 
Therefore, Chomsky (1965) 
eliminated subject and object with the following definitions in terms of phrase 
structure: 

PHRASE STRUCTURE AS A REPRESENTATION OF GRAMATICAL RELATIONS 
23 
(2)a. 
Subject is "NP immediately dominated by S" ([NP, S]). 
b. 
Object is ''NP immediately dominated by VP" ([NP, VPD. 
c. 
Indirect object is "NP immediately dominated by PP headed by to" 
([NP, PPD· 
Logically speaking, the alternative reduction would have been to eliminate 
phrase structure in favor of grammatical relations. However, that makes little sense. 
For example, one wants to say that as flat as a pancake is a phrase in (3), even 
though it has little to do with the traditional grammatical relations. 
(3) 
Chris pounded the clay [as flat as a pancake]. 
Thus, phrase structure is more general and easier to motivate independently than 
grammatical relations. So if one can only keep one, it should be phrase structure. 
Basically, Chomsky's suggestion was an Occam's razor-style argument par 
exceIIance. 
Next, investigation into other fancier phenomena reveals that there are many 
ways in which SUbjects, objects, and other phrases behave differently from one 
another. At the level of basic description, the operative generalizations can be stated 
in terms of grammatical relations. The following are familiar examples from the 
history of the field: 
(4)a 
Only subjects can be controlled in non finite clauses. 
b. 
The antecedent of a reflexive must be a subject. 
c. 
The direct object becomes the subject of a passive verb. 
d. 
Only the direct object can incorporate into the verb, etc., etc. 
But using the equivalencies in (2), these statements can be rephrased in terms of 
phrase structure, as follows. 
. 
(5)a. 
Only the highest NP in a nonfinite clause can be controlled. 
b. 
The antecedent of a reflexive must be the NP immediately dominated 
by S. 
c. 
The NP in VP moves to the Specifier of IP if the verb is passive. 
d. 
Only the nominal that is the sister of the verb can incorporate into it, 
etc., etc. 
, 
: . = ", 

24 
MARK C. BAKER 
In terms of the discussion so far, clearly nothing is lost by this translation. One 
might argue that nothing is gained by it either, except parsimony. But parsimony is 
something, the proper Chomskian would reply. For better or worse, the choice to 
develop one's principles of grammar around statements like those in (5}-or more 
basic statements from which these can be derived-accounts for the characteristic 
phrase-structure-centric cast of Chomskian theory. In this theory, establishing the 
structure is paramount to doing an analysis, and phrase structural relations such as 
"sisterhood", "government", "containment" and "c-command" usually figure 
prominently in the account. 
2. THE RELATIONAL GRAMMAR CRITIQUE 
A cogent and influential critique of this structurally oriented approach to 
syntactic theory was mounted in the 1970s and early 1980s. This critique was 
presented first and most prominently by the Relational Gramarians in articles like 
those in Perlmutter (1983c), but it was also adopted and extended by the papers in 
Bresnan (1982b) within Lexical Functional Gramar. It has also influenced other, 
less generatively-minded linguists to various degrees. sometimes consciously. and 
sometimes not. As a result. most other theories of grammar are much less concerned 
with establishing the phrase structure of a clause than narrowly Chomskian work is. 
Often. the mater of phrase structure does not even come up in these works. 
The RG critique starts with the observation that traditional constituency tests like 
those in (1) for English often do not apply in other languages, or if they do they give 
quite different results. Indeed, the tests that reveal a VP constituent in English are 
actually somewhat rare crosslinguistically. 
There is nothing exactly like VP­
fronting, or VP ellipsis, or VP conjunction in Warlpiri (Simpson 1 991) or 
Malayalam (Mohanan 1982) or Mohawk, tor example. The weak interpretation of 
these results would be that there is no evidence for a VP node in these languages. 
Typically, however, people took the stronger interpretation, that these observations 
showed that there was no VP in these languages. This conclusion was motivated by 
a tacit positivist-style assumption that any phrase that exists in a language should be 
detectable by this kind of evidence. 
Now if languages differ in substantial ways in their phrase structures, this affects 
the feasibility of defining grammatical relations in terms of phrase structure, as in 
(2). For example, ifthere is no VP in Warlpiri or Malayalam or Mohawk, then one 
cannot distinguish the object from the subject in terms of elementary phrase 
structure configurations. There may simply be no phrase that contains the object but 
not the subject in these languages. 
This could have turned out to be a positive result if the grammatical relations of 
these languages turned out to be substantially different from those of English. Thus, 
the next step is to look at grammatical phenomena other than simple constituency 
tests, to see if generalizations like those in (4) are valid crosslinguistically. Suppose, 
for example, that both the "subject" and the "object" in Warlpiri or Malayalam could 
be the antecedents of simple reflexives, and that both could be" controlled by matrix 
clause constituents when in a nonfinite embedded clause. This would fit beautifully 

I 
t· ,. 
t., 
I 
PHRASE STRUCTURE AS A REPRESENT A TION OF GRAMATICAL RELATIONS 
25 
with the fact that these languages seem to have no VP, so both the subject and the 
object are immediate constituents of the clause. Phrase structure would vary across 
languages, and this would be a puzzle for strong views about Universal Grammar. 
But grammatical relations would also vary across languages, in a way that is 
correlated with the variations of phrase structure. 
This would be striking 
crosslinguistic evidence that phrase structure is central to syntactic theory. 
However, this was not generally what was found (although see fil. 3 for some 
possible cases of this type). On the contrary, the Relational Gramarians found a 
rather impressive array of evidence that OR-related generalizations like (4) are more 
stable and robust across languages than basic constituency is. 
For example, 
Perlmutter and Postal (1977) focused on the passive, comparing (4c) to (Sc). They 
showed that there are many languages in which it is not so attractive to think of 
passive as involving the movement of an NP from inside the VP to outside the VP as 
in (5c). In part, this is because it might be dubious whether there is a VP at all in the 
language in question. Also, on a more surface level, there are many languages in 
which passive sentences do not differ from active sentences in word order, but only 
in the case marking of noun phrases, or in the agreement inflections on the verb. For 
such languages, "movement" does not seem like a good way to think about the 
passive. (6) is one of Perlmutter and Postal's examples from Cebuano. 
(6)a 
Magluto' 
ang 
babaye ug bugas. 
ACTIVE 
cook-ACT NOM woman 
rice 
'The woman will cook rice. • 
b. 
Luto'on 
sa 
babaye ang 
bugas. PASSIVE 
Cook-PASS OEN woman NOM rice 
'The rice will be cooked by the woman.' 
However, if one thought of passive in terms of the traditional grammatical 
relations, then one could recognize a fundamental unity between (6b) and its English 
equivalent, a unity that has little to do with surface wOTd order or constituency. In 
both languages the normal object becomes the subject, displacing the usual subject 
and creating an intransitive clause. 
Described in these terms, the passive is 
consistent across languages, whereas the observed differences are purely a mater of 
how the two languages encode subjects and objects. 
In English, the subject is 
realized as the first NP in the sentence (the NP dominated only by the clause), 
whereas in Cebuano it is realized as a postverbal NP preceded by the nominative 
case particle ang. Crucially, these differences are observable even in simple, active 
clauses. Thus, they are independent of the passive per se, and passive is better stated 
in a format that abstracts away from these matters. In other words, passive should 
be stated purely in terms of "primitive" grammatical functions. And it is not only 
passive that works like this, but a host of syntactic phenomena, including control, 
reflexivization, dative shift phenomena, incorporation, complex predicate forming 
processes, and so on. 

26 
MARK C. BAKER 
With these empirical observations in hand, the Relational Grammarians and 
related approaches offered the 
following deduction. 
Grammatical relation 
phenomena are relatively consistent across languages. 
Phrase structure is not 
consistent across languages. Therefore. it is wrong to derive grammatical relation 
phenomena from phrase structure. Rather, they should be retained as elements of 
syntactic analysis in their own right, as "primitives" of syntactic theory. It is merely 
a coincidence that in English there happen to be one-to-one correspondences 
between structure and grammatical relations that make a reductive approach 
conceivable. 
When the theory is developed in this way, phrase structure is much 
less important than on the Chomskian approach and can be left to the periphery of 
the theory. The urgent task is to determine what the grammatical relations are in any 
given clause. 
In practice, the Relational Grammarians rarely said much about phrase structure 
issues, beyond the basic facts that concerned the embedding of clauses and NPs. In 
particular, it paid little attention to the details of word order and its relationship to 
constituency. 
On this point, LFG illustrates the basic logic of the situation more 
clearly. 
LFG holds that every sentence has at least two representations that are 
quasi-independent of each other: a functional structure that is established by looking 
at GR-sensitive phenomena, and a constituent structure that is established by basic 
word order considerations. Phrase structure exists on this view-it is just not very 
interesting, not very relevant to other syntactic phenomena, and certainly not very 
stable across languages. 
3. THE CHOMSKIAN REACTION 
With this historical perspective in mind, the question of primary interest here is 
how has Chomskian theory responded in practice to the RG critique and the 
empirical facts that motivated it? How does Chomskian theory now compare to the 
theory before as a result of these issues being raised? 
As is often the case on maters of high-level theoretical comparison. direct 
engagement over these issues was relatively light. 
Perhaps the most prominent 
direct responses to the RG critique were some passages of Chomsky (1981). In 
section 2.7, he questioned whether there was really a unified phenomenon of passive 
in the sense that Perlmutter and Postal (1977) assume. He claimed instead that there 
were simply various language specific constructions in various languages that 
happened to resemble the English passive to a greater or lesser degree. One of the 
interesting examples that he cites was the yi-Ibi- alternation in Navajo. which does 
not fit comfortably under the usual passive rubric, but yet has some similarities to 
passive, both structurally and functionally (see Speas 1990 for more data and a 
Chomskian analysis). For example. (7b) is like a passive in that involves preposing 
and highlighting the thematic object, but it is unlike the passive in that the agent is 
not marked as oblique. nor can it be omitted in the context of an overt theme. 

PHRASE STRUCTURE AS A REPRESENTATION OF GRAMATICAL RELATIONS 
27 
(7)a. 
Ashkii at'eed yiyiHts!. 
ACTIVE 
Boy 
girl 
saw 
'The boy saw the girl. ' 
b. 
Ashkii at'eed biBst!. 
PASSIVE? 
Boy 
girl 
saw 
'The boy was seen by the girl. ' 
Whether we call this a passive or not is an uninteresting tenninological question. 
Chomsky suggests; it has the properties it does, whatever we call it. There is no 
universal passive to have a universal theory of. he argued, just particular passives to 
have particular theories of. Then in section 2.8, Chomsky proceeded to sketch a 
way of generalizing his theory to the passive in Japanese, which was at the time 
thought to be a nonconfigurational language, lacking a VP. 
However, these relatively direct responses had fairly little impact on the 
subsequent developmept of the theory. in practice. The real influence of Relational 
Grammar came tacitly as various people tried to incorporate the impressive data and 
empirical generalizations that the Relational Grammarians discovered and described 
into their Chomskian theories (see, for example, Marantz (I984), Baker (1988), 
Speas (1990), among others). This proved interesting when it converged with 
considerations that arose internal to the Chomskian program itself as that program 
tried to pursue a finer-grained understanding of English and a greater degree of 
crosslinguistic generality in its own tenns. 
The key shift of perspective was learning to be distrustful of the traditional 
constituency tests. It is a cruciaJ (partly tacit) assumption of the RGILFG critique 
that these traditionaJ constituency tests are reliable methods for establishing phrase 
structure relationships. They reason that since constituency tests are not available or 
give different results in other languages, phrase structure does not exist or is 
fundamentally different in other languages. But that conclusion does not neceħsarily 
follow. It could be that constituency tests give different results not because phrase 
structure is different, but because the internal workings of the tests themselves are 
different. In the ultimate scheme of things, there should be a substantive theory of 
VP preposing, a theory of ellipsis, and a theory of what can be a pro-form, as well as 
a theory of passivization and a theory of control. There is no a priori reason to think 
that these theories will be simple or trivial. Once we understand clefting better, 
there may be excellent reasons why (say) a VP can be clefted in some languages and 
constructions but not in others. 
In the earliest transformational syntax - often 
recapitUlated in the earliest syntax teaching - the theories of movement. deletion. 
pronominalization, and conjunction are indeed rather triviaJ, offering a way to break 
into the system. If there were nothing else to say about them, then the simple claim 
that phrases move, delete. are replaced, and are combined as units might indeed lead 
to the stronger claim that all phrases should be recognizable in this way. But this is 
surely an oversimplification, mistaking the first draft of an understanding of these 
phenomena for a mature one. 
Thus, it is quite reasonable to concede to the 
Relational Grammar critique that traditional constituency tests are not reliable 

" 
1 
28 
MARK. C. BAKER 
crosslinguistically without conceding that phrase structure itself is not present 
crosslinguistically. 
Now suppose that English-like phrase structure exists in a 
language like Malayalam even though it cannot be detected by English-like 
movements and deletions. Then the grammatical relations of subject and object can 
still be defined in terms of that phrase structure, and passive, control, and reflexive 
binding in Malayalam can be analyzed in terms of notions like c-command. 
It is instructive to see how these concerns about constituency tests arose internal 
to Chomskian syntax itself, before considering further how they affect the 
comparison with RG and its allies. For various reasons, Chomskian" theory in the 
1980s and 1990s was led to enrich its stock of phrases beyond what was accepted 
previously. For example. it was argued that bare adjectival predicates form a "small 
clause" constituent with their NP subjects, at least in some contexts (Chomsky 1981. 
Stowell 1983). Later, Abney (1987) argued the determiner in English heads its own 
phrase, DP, distinct from the NP that is headed by the noun itself. 
As a third 
example, Larson (1988) argued that the two complements of a triadic verb in 
English constitute a phrase of their own, specifically a VP headed by a trace of the 
overt verb. 
(8)a. 
Mary considers [John overly proud ofhimself7*herseIf]. 
b. 
Mary bought lop that fNP picture of John n. 
c. 
Mary gave [each worker tv his paycheck]. 
Small Clauses 
Functional heads 
Larsonian shells 
But if one accepts these kinds of phrase structures, then one is clearly forced to 
acknowledge that not all phrases can be revealed by traditional phrase structure tests 
in any simple way. 
There is sporadic constituency evidence in favor of these 
innovations, but many of the traditional phrase structure tests do not apply to these 
new phrases. For example. many phrase types in English can be clefted, including 
DPs, PPs, APs, and CPs. 
However, one cannot cleft a small clause, the NP 
complement of a determiner, or a Larsonian shell: 
(9)a. 
*It's [John overly proud ofhimselt] that Mary considers -- . 
b. 
"'It's [picture of John] that Mary Dought that --. 
c. 
"'It's [each worker tv his paycheck] that Mary gave -. 
Small Clauses 
Functional heads 
Larsonian shells 

PHRASE SlRUCTURE AS A REPRESENTATION OF GRAMMATICAL RELATIONS 
29 
If these phrase structure proposals are at all on the right track, then there are 
many phrases that are not readily detected by movement, even in highly 
configurational English. The same holds true for pronominalization and ellipsis: 
these phrases are not readily omitted or replaced by a pronoun. 
( lO)a. 
b. 
*Mary considers [him smart]. and Bill considers (it) too. 
*Mary thinks that [John is nice]. and Bill wonders if (it). 
*Mary answered the third question correctly, 
and Bill answered the (it) too. 
Small Clauses 
Functional heads 
c. 
*Mary threw [John tv his jacket] and Bill handed (it). 
Larsonian shells 
Why does one get these patterns of facts, with some phrases being cleftable (or 
elidable, or pronominalizable) and others not? In many cases, this is still not well­
understood, but it is assumed that there should be an explanation internal to the 
workings of (say) clefiing. In some cases reasonable proposals have been put on the 
table. For example. (9a) and (9c) might be out because there is no source of Case 
checking for the NP at the beginning of the clefied constituent within that 
constituent; this could lead to a Case theory violation. On the other hand, (9b) might 
be out because the functional head D or C is not strong enough to license a trace as 
its complement, according to the Empty Category Principle or its descendents in 
more recent theory. Similarly, Loebeck (1995) among others proposes substantive 
syntactic conditions on which phrases can be elided and which cannot. In general. 
these gaps in the distribution of clefting and ellipsis are interesting syntactic puzles, 
but they do not look especially mysterious or problematic for the overall framework. 
Rather. they should be amenable to the usual kind of syntactic inquiry. 
These kinds of issues would need to be faced by Chomskian theory anyway in 
the course of pursuing its own agenda, even if there were no language other than 
configurational English. From this perspective, when the RG critique points out that 
second position clitics in Warlpiri (Simpson 1991) and clefiing in Malayalam 
(Mohanan 1982) do not reveal a VP constituent, there is no particular surprise. One 
does not automatically assume that Warlpiri and Malayalam do not have a VP, but 
only that the structure of phrases in those languages somehow interacts with the 
nature of cliticization or clefting to have this effect. This could have as much to do 
with the nature of clefting in these languages as it does with phrase structure proper. 
Now, if we no longer trust traditional constituency tests to reveal to us the basic 
phrase structure of a construction in a language in any straightforward way, how can 
that phrase structure be determined? There could be many ways, some easier to 
apply in one language and others easier to apply in another language. But if one is 
committed to the idea that phenomena like passive. control, and reflexives are 
structurally determined along the lines summarized in (5), then it is legitimate to 

30 
MARK C. BAKER 
infer from these phenomena the phrase structures that are needed to make them work 
properly. If c1efting and cliticization and word order do not work smoothly from 
these structures, those are problems to be solved, but not necessarily reasons to hold 
back. In short, Chomskian syntax plunges ahead and assumes that the structures it 
needs to work properly are present. 
Many particular examples of this characteristic approach could be cited. An 
early example is Chomsky's (1981) discussion of Japanese, in which he uses [NP, S] 
terminology that implies a certain kind of phrase structure for Japanese grammatical 
functions, even though these do not correspond to a directly observable "D­
structure" or "S-structure." Hale's (1 983) approach to Warlpiri is similar: he argues 
that 
a 
configurational 
"L-structure" 
exists 
for 
Warlpiri 
alongside 
the 
nonconfigurational "C-structure" that determines word order and clitic placement. 
This is similar to the "two independent levels" view of LFG, but with the significant 
difference that for Hale the representation of grammatical functions (his L-structure) 
has the formal properties of a phrase marker, over which predicates like c-command 
are defined. 
Similarly. when I studied noun incorporation in languages like Mohawk in Baker 
( l988), I simply assumed that direct objects were the only NPs that were structural 
sisters of the verb, and used that as the basis for a structural explanation of why only 
direct objects can be incorporated. I then took the overall success of this account to 
be evidence that languages like Mohawk do in fact have phrase structures 
comparable to English, not worrying about how this fit with other issues about word 
order and constituency in the language (until later: see Baker (1991, 1996c» . 
Another landmark in this changing attitude toward phrase structure is Larson's 
(1988) study of double object constructions in English. In these constructions, 
phrase structure does not seem to reveal any difference between the positions of the 
Prime Minister and a letter in a sentence like I sent the Prime Minister a letter. 
Both seem to be objects in the sense of being NPs immediately dominated by VP. 
However, Barss and Lasnik (1986) showed that there are differences between the 
two for most binding phenomena: the first object can bind the second but not vice 
versa. Barss and Lasnik look at this apparent conflict between phrase structure and 
binding theory and ask whether pure c-command is really the right condition on 
binding. 
However, Larson takes a markedly different approach: he takes it as 
established that c-command is the right condition on binding, and uses the binding 
facts to infer a novel phrase structure for English double object constructions. Thus, 
for him, GR-related phenomena are (almost) enough to establish phrase structure. In 
fact, Larson does make an effort to show that there is converging evidence for the 
structures he proposes from traditional phrase structure tests, such as conjunction. 
But his independent evidence is slender and debatable (see Jackendoff (1 990) vs. 
Larson (I 990», and it is clear that this is not what is driving his account. Nor did 
anyone ever arrive at these phrase structures purely by traditional constituency tests. 
Conceptually rather similar is the work on scrambling and word order in 
languages like Japanese and ' Hindi inspired by Saito (1 985) and Hoji (I 985), in 
which configurational structure is inferred indirectly and freedom of word order is 
derived from movement processes that fit within the internal logic of the system. 

PHRASE STRUCTURE AS A REPRESENTATlON OF GRAMATICAL RELA TrONS 
3 1  
. While many other examples could be given, the last one I will mention is Speas 
(1990), who considers nonconfigurationality in general, and Navajo in particular. 
She discusses the basis for inferring that a familiar phrase structure is present in 
languages in which it is not obvious. Among other things, she clearly makes the 
point that absence of evidence for configurational phrase structure is not evidence of 
absence of configurational phrase structure in the Chomskian ethos. 
She also 
proposes some analyses of nonconfigurationality as it is found in particular 
languages. 
This work might strike the W1sympathetic outside observer as a circular reaction 
to the RG critique: it assumes that phrase structure is fundamental, rather than 
gramatical relations, but in practice its evidence for phrase structure in many 
languages comes primarily from grammatical relation phenomena. But there is a 
more useful way to look at the comparison. 
How did Relational Gramarians establish in practice that a certain NP was a 
subject at some level of a clause, and that another NP was an object? Since for them 
gramatical relations were primitive, there was no automatic way to decide this that 
was guaranteed to be reliable. 
One could not be certain, for example, that the 
subject would be in a particular position in the clause, or that it would have a certain 
theta role, or that it would bear a certain Case ending. Any of these facts might be 
relevant to identifying the subject in particular languages, depending on the basic 
linking rules ofthę language, but none of them was decisive a priori. Rather, in the 
best cases, the relational analysis of the clause was established by the convergence 
ofa variety of kinds of evidence, as an inference to the best overall explanation. 
How does this compare to the way that contemporary Chomskian approaches 
establish the phrase structure analysis of a clause? I see the two methodologies as 
fundamentally the same. 
Also for the Chomskian there is no single source of 
evidence that is guaranteed in advance to work. In particular, data from traditional 
constituency tests may weJl be relevant, but they are not a priori decisive until one 
knows how those tests work in the particular language under study. 
Like the 
relational analysis, the phrase structural analysis is established by the general pattern 
of evidence, as an inference to the best overall explanation. And that is as it should 
be in any theory. The best theory is not the one that brings everything into line with 
its one favorite fact, but the one that finds the greatest degree of harmony and 
convergence among all the facts. 
If all this is so, then the fundamental difference between contemporary 
Chomskian theory and classical Relational Grammar is not exactly where one might 
think, based on casual exposure to the old slogans. Relational Grammar assumed 
that grammatical functions were universal, foundational to syntax, and could be 
identified in particular cases (only) by understanding the system as a whole. That 
was the practical content of their claim that grammatical relations were primitive. 
Chomskian theory does not differ markedly from RG in these respects. Therefore, I 
think it is reasonable to say that grammatical relations are, in the relevant sense, 
"primitive" in Chomskian theory too. 
The real difference between the two 
approaches is not so much in the status of grammatical relations as primitive or not, 
but rather in the kind of representational system that is used to represent 
grammatical relations. For the relational grammarians, the representation of choice 

32 
MARK C. BAKER 
was a relational network, whereas for Chomskian theory the proper representation of 
"primitive" grammatical relations is a phrase marker. 
4. IS PHRASE STRUCTURE A GOOD REPRESENTATION FOR 
GRAMMATICAL RELATIONS? 
This does not mean that the differences between RG style approaches and current 
Chomskian theory are small or insignificant. The fact that their main difference is in 
their representational schemes does not mean that they are mere notational variants. 
If we look at phrase structures not as replacing grammatical relations but as 
representing them, the next logical question is whether they constitute a good 
representation or not. Do the system's important formal properties accurately reflect 
the basic qualities of the thing being represented? 
If so, then it is a good 
representation. 
Or is it an arcane device, the basic topology of which has no 
theoretical relevance, interfering with the ability to capture generalizations rather 
than enhancing it? 
In that case, it is a bad representation system-a relic that 
preserves some of the idiosyncratic history of the field but is now more confusing 
and distracting than it is worth. 
Then it might be a good idea to get rid of it, 
replacing it with a "cleaned up" representation that was designed to present 
grammatical relations in language-neutral terms from the start, such as a relational 
network or an f-structure. 
One can make a case that phrase structure does in fact happen to be a very good 
representational system for grammatical relations, better at capturing their basic 
nature than its competitors. To see how, compare the RG representation for a simple 
English sentence like I persuaded John thai Mary wil cheal Bil. 
These are 
compared in (I I). 
(1 1)a. 
RG relational network 
P 
2 
3(?) 
persuade I 
John 
p 
2 
cheat Mary Bill 

PHRASE SlRUCTIJRE AS A REPRESENTATION OF GRAMATICAL RELATIONS 
33 
b. 
Chomskian phrase structure 
e 
IP 
* 
I' 
, 
INFL 
vP 
* 
NP 
v' 
I
* 
I 
v 
VP 
* 
NP 
V' 
I
* 
John 
V 
CP 
I
* 
persuade 
C 
IP 
I 
ð 
that 
INFL 
vP 
I
3 
will NP 
v' 
I
* 
Mary 
v 
VP 
* 
NP 
V 
I 
I 
Bill 
cheat 
To a substantial extent, these two representations say the same things: that Mary 
is the subject of the embedded clause and John its object; that this embedded clause 
as a whole bears some grammatical relation (indirect object?) to the matrix verb; that 
I and John are the subject and object of the matrix clause, respectively. However, 
they express these relationships in representations that have different topologies. 
The relational net expresses subjecthood by writing a number l over the nominal 
that is on the same level as some P symbol that marks the predicate. 
The 
Chomskian phrase structure expresses subjecthood by (in this version) putting the 
nominal in the specifier of a v node that selects a verb phrase. To this degree, the 
two representations say the same things. But do they say them equally well? 
There are some relatively minor differences worth pointing out immediately. 
The most obvious one is that the RG representation is (in this case) more succinct 
and easier to type. All things being equal, that is an advantage to the RG approach. 
(Although ease of typing and reading was not overall a major priority in the RG 
family of theories, 
as 
one can see by looking at the Arc-Pair grammar 
representations in Johnson and Postal 1980.) The RG representation also clearly 

, 
\ 
34 
MARK C. BAKER 
abstracts 
away 
from 
language 
particular 
details such 
as word order and 
morphological marking. As part of this. it does not represent various elements of the 
clause that have no obvious significance for core grammatical relations phenomena, 
including the tense particles and complementizers. On the other hand, these "minor 
categories" are present in the Chomskian representation. 
Indeed, they are full 
partners in the representation, entering into the same basic structural relations of 
head, complement, and specifier as any other element. Which is the better choice 
here could be debated. Proponents of the relational net (or LFG's f-structure) could 
argue that these representations factor the linguistic information into modular parts, 
where the elements represented in the relational net have extensive interactions with 
each other but do not interact extensively with the linguistic elements not 
represented at this level. 
On the other hand. suppose that there is no clear 
modularity in this respect. but rather there are significant interactions between 
subjects and objects on the one hand and tense and complementizers on the other 
hand. 
This state of affairs would tell in favor of the Chomskian representation. 
which has all of these elements present in the same representation on the same 
terms. 
While there are things to be said in favor of both views, I suspect that the 
implicit claim of the Chomskian representation is more correct on this point. For 
example, it is clear that the nature of the Inft and Complementizer has important 
effects on how the subject is Case-marked, whether it is controlled or not, and even 
whether it can raise into the matrix clause, as shown by the familiar data in (12). 
(l2)a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
I predict that she will win. 
1 want PRO to win. 
*1 predict that PRO will win. 
I am expected - to win. 
*1 am expected that - will win. 
Thus, there do seem to be the kinds of interactions between the "minor" 
categories of C and IntI and grammatical function phenomena that justify including 
them 
in 
the 
same 
representation. 
I f 
nothing 
else. 
there 
is 
a 
psychological/methodological advantage to this: if syntacticians are always required 
to write these minor categories into their representations, they do not have the luxury 
of forgetting that syntactic theory ultimately needs to account for their properties 
too. 
But perhaps the most important property of the Chomskian 
mode of 
representation-and the one that I will focus on-is the distinctive way that it 
represents the prominence of one nominal over another. 
Languages are full of 
asymmetrical relationships, in which element A can be somehow dependent ·on 
element B but not vice versa. The most theory-neutral word for this phenomena that 

PHRASE SlRUCTURE AS A REPRESENTATION OF GRAMATICAL RELATIONS 
35 
is more or less accepted by all generative approaches is "prominence": we say that B 
has' prominence over A. 
Now all the theories that accept the Relational Grammar critique (RO, LFG, 
I-IPSG, etc.) end up distinguishing two distinct kinds of prominence. First there is 
prominence internal to a single clause, the prominence that subjects have over 
objects and objects have over indirect objects. 
Keenan and Comrie's 
(1977) 
Accessibility Hiererachy was one important view of this kind. Relational Granunar 
spoke of the Relational Hierarchy; HPSG calls it the Obliqueness Hierarchy. It is 
also closely related to the Thematic Hierarchy used in LFG and many other 
approaches. Whatever the tenninoJogy, the relevant hierarchy expresses the kind of 
prominence that the matrix subject I has over the matrix object John, and that the 
embedded subject Mary has over the embedded object Bil in the sentence 
represented in (1 1). RG in particular built this hierarchy deeply into its tenninology, 
calling subjects Is, objects 2s, and indirect objects 3s. They also referred to it as an 
"advancement" when passive made an object into a subject or dative shift made an 
indirect object into a direct object. 
I will call this phenomenon "Relational 
Prominence", to coin a tenn that is relatively neutral among the variants. 
These theories also have a second kind of prominence. which I will call 
"Embedding Prominence." This is a kind of prominence that comes as a result of 
embedding one clause (or other linguistically complex expression) inside another, 
which all theories do in one form or another to capture the basic recursiveness of 
natural language. This is the kind of prominence that the subject of a matrix clause 
has over the subject of the clausal complement in a sentence like (1 1), or that the 
object of a matrix clause has over the object of the clausal complement in such a 
sentence. 
Relational and Thematic Hierarchies say nothing about this kind of 
prominence by their basic nature. Both I and Mary are subjects in ( I I). and both 
bear an agent thematic role, albeit in different clauses. Therefore, the two cannot be 
distinguished by Relationalffhematic Hierarcbies; they are not different in their 
Relational Prominence. Similarly, both John and Bill are direct objects bearing a 
theme/patient role in (1 1), so they too tie in terms of Relational Prominence. Any 
prominence that matrix clause constituents have over embedded clause constituents 
must be a different kind of prominence altogether. Again RG's tenninology is 
instructive: the subject of an embedded clause could become the subject of a matrix 
clause as in the RG analysis of raising, but this was not represented by a change of 
number. Rather, it was a change in what the number was connected to; it was called 
an "ascension", not a "advancement". 
These two logically distinct kinds of 
promi.nence are summarized in (13). 
(13)a. 
Relational Prominence, of subjects over objects over indirect objects. 
1>2>3> . . .  , and/or Agent>Theme>Goal>Oblique .... 
(the prominence of l over John, Mary over Bil in ( I I)) 
b. 
Embedding Prominence, of elements in a matrix clause over elements 
in embedded clauses. 
(the prominence of I and John over Mary and Bill in (1 1).) 

36 
MARK C. BAKER 
The logical distinctness of these two kinds of prominence is also illustrated by 
two kinds of "command" relationships that were proposed in the 1 980s as 
alternatives to the Chomskian notion of c-command. introduced by Reinhart (1 976, 
1983). 
Bresnan (1 982a) proposed a notion of f-command for certain kinds of 
control and anaphora, which was explicitly sensitive only to the embedding 
prominence in (13b). 
X f-commanded Y if Y was part of a clause that was 
embedded in the clause in which X bore its basic grammatical relation. There was 
no f-command asymmetry between the subject and object of the same clause. On 
the other hand, Grimshaw (1987) proposed a notion of a-command that was 
explicitly sensitive only to the relational prominence in (13a); no a-command 
relation held between phrases that were not co-arguments of a single head. 
Against this background, it is a striking topological property of the Chomskian 
representation in (l Ib) that it represents the prominence of subjects over objects in 
exactly the same way as it represents the prominence of matrix subjects over 
embedded subjects. The Chomskian prominence predicate of choice is not the 
Relational Hierarchy, or f-command, but its distinctive notion of c-command. This 
is stated crucially in terms of phrase structure relationships as given in (14). (Here I 
emphasize the common conceptual core that all versions of c-command share, 
abstracting away from different proposals about exactly which phrases are crucial 
for c-command.) 
(14) 
X c-commands Y if the first phrase (of a certain kind) that properly 
contains X also contains Y. 
This definition, together with the characteristic style of representation in (1 1) 
covers both relational prominence and embedding prominence in a uniform way. 
The subject I of the matrix clause c-commands the object John of that clause 
(relational prominence) according to this definition; it also bears the same 
relationship of c-command to the subject Mary of the embedded clause (embedding 
prominence). This makes the implicit claim that these two logically different kinds 
of prominence are really equivalent for natural language syntax. Indeed, I think this 
can be understood as the fundamental empirical claim that is being made by the 
Chomskian commitment to phrase structure representation in the post-RG era, when 
traditional constituency tests are given no analytical priority and phrase structure is 
understood abstractly as a representation of grammatical relations. 
This is 
summarized in (15). 
(15) 
Central claim of phrase structure: Relational prominence and 
embedding prominence are cquivarent; they are the same with respect 
to syntax. 
The Chomskian phrase structure is a uniquely revealing and truthful 
representation precisely to the extent that (15) is borne out by empirical research. 
And borne out by empirical research it seems to be. Well over a decade since 
their original proposals, Bresnan's f-command and Grimshaw's a-command stand as 

PHRASE STRUCTURE AS A REPRESENTA TlON OF GRAMMATICAL RELATIONS 
37 
minor historical curiosities, largely ignored even by their original proposers, 
compared to the continuing utility, power, and elegance of Reinhart's c-command. 
There are many linguistic phenomena in many languages that are in fact sensitive to 
relational prominence and embedding prominence in just the same way. I will give 
an illustrative sampling of this in very brief terms. All of the following examples 
have the same format. The (a) example shows that the subject has prominence over 
the object for some linguistic phenomenon. 
The (b) example shows that the 
relationship is asymmetrical, in that the object does not have equivalent prominence 
over the subject The contrasts between (a) and (b) illustrate relational prominence. 
The (c) example shows that the matrix subject has the same kind of prominence over 
the subject of an embedded clause; the (d) example shows that the embedded subject 
does not have prominence over the matrix subject. Thus, (c) and (d) illustrate 
embedding prominence. The analogies (a):(b)::(c):(d) show the equivalence of the 
two kinds of prominence for syntax. As such, they support the interrelated ideas of 
c-command and phrase structure representation. (16) illustrates the equivalence of 
the two for bound variable anaphora in English-the question of whether a pronoun 
contained in a given noun phrase can be understood nonreferentially as a variable 
bound by a quantified noun phrase elsewhere in the sentence. This interpretation is 
possible only when the guantifier c-commands the pronoun (Reinhart 1 983). 
(16)a. 
Every boy persuaded his mother that video games are good for you. 
b. 
* Her son persuaded every woman that video games are good for you. 
c. 
Every boy persuaded the principal that his mother sang professionally. 
d. 
* Her son persuaded the principal that every woman sang 
professionally. 
(17) presents data about when a pronoun can be understood as having the same 
reference as a proper name elsewhere in the sentence. This is possible only if the 
pronoun does not c-command the proper name (Reihart 1983; known as Condition C 
in Chomsky 1981). 
(17)a. 
• He persuaded John 's mother that video games are good for you. 
b. 
Her son persuaded Martha that video games were good for you. 
c. 
*He persuaded the principal thatJohn 's mother sang professionally. 
d. 
Her son persuaded the principal that Martha sang professionally. 
( 1 8) concerns the distribution of reciprocal anaphors in English, where the 
antecedent must c-command the anaphor, not vice versa (Chomsky 1981). 

. 
\ 
38 
(J 8)a 
b. 
c. 
d. 
MARK C. BAKER 
John and Mary persuaded each other's parents that video games are 
good. 
??Each other's children persuaded Joe and Martha that video games 
are good. 
John and Mary persuaded the principal that each other's parents sing 
professionally. 
*Each other's children persuaded the principal that John and Mary 
sing professionally. 
(19) gives data from multiple questions in English. Here the more prominent (c­
commanding) wh-phrase must be the one that moves to clause initial position, while 
the 
less prominent (c-commanded) wh-phrase remains in its base position 
(Superiority, (Chomsky 1973a» . 
(I9)a. 
Who persuaded whom that video games are good for you? 
b. 
*Who(m) did who persuade that video games are good for you? 
c. 
(?) Who said that who plays too many video games? 
d. 
*Who did who say plays too many video games? 
(20) illustrates Negative Polarity Licensing, in which a contextually restricted 
item like anyone must be c-commanded by an item with inherent negative force like 
nobody. 
(20)a 
Nobody persuaded anyone that video games are good for you. 
b. 
* Anyone persuaded nobody that video games are good for you. 
c. 
(?)Nobody persuaded the principal that anyone was sick. 
d. 
* Anyone persuaded the principal that nobody was sick. 
Finally. (21) shows the same kind of parallelism between embedding prominence 
and relational prominence in the domain ofNP movement. Underlying objects can 
become subjects on the surface if there is no thematic subject in the clause (RG's 
Unaccusative Advancement), but underlying subjects cannot become surface objects 
under the same conditions, as shown in (2 1a) vs. (21 b). 
Similarly, embedded 
subjects can become matrix subjects when there is no thematic subject already there, 
but matrix subjects never become embedded subjects under comparable conditions. 
as shown by (21 c) vs. (21 d) . 

PHRASE STRUCTURE AS A REPRESENTATION OF GRAMMATICAL RELATIONS 
39 
(21)a 
John fell t. 
b. 
*t shouted John. 
c. 
John seemed [t to win the race]. 
d. 
*t to say [that John seemed that it would rain]. 
In RG terms, advancements and ascensions seem to be a natural class, following 
the same principles, as opposed to retreats and descents. 
Thus, relational 
prominence and embedding prominence are in fact equivalent for a large and varied 
set of natural language phenomena., just as the Chomskian mode of representation 
predicts. 
Of course, there has not been much controversy over whether something like 
phrase structure exists for English. With the RG critique in mind, it behooves us to 
see whether the equiValence of these two kinds of prominence is crosslinguistically 
robust, holding even in languages for which the importance of phrase structure has 
been questioned. 
Unfortunately, the data on this point are still somewhat 
fragmentary: there are only a handful of typologically interesting non-Indo­
European languages for which phenomena like disjoint reference and bound variable 
anaphora have been tested systematically. However, the results we have suggest 
that this conclusion is indeed valid crosslinguisticaIly. For example, Lasnik (1 989: 
ch. 9) shows that the same "condition C" pattern shown in (17) for English is found 
in far Eastern languages like Thai: 
(22)a. 
* Khaw chOOp cOOn. 
He 
likes 
John 
b. 
(Not applicable; Condition B intervenes) 
c. 
• Khaw khit wait. cOOn chalaat. 
He 
think that John 
is.smart. 
d 
cOOn khit waa khaw chalaal 
John think that he 
is.smart 
The same is true in the African language Edo (Stewart, personal 
communication), and many others. A more striking case comes from anaphors in 
Malayalam, which Mohanan (I982) argues to be a nonconfigurational language with 
no VP. 
Still, it is true that the matrix subject in Malayalam can equally be the 
antecedent of a reflexive anaphor contained in the direct object or of one contained 
in the subject of the embedded clause. 
However, the reverse relationships are 
impossible (see also Mohanan 1980). 

. 
I 
40 
(23)a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
MARK C. BAKER 
Raajaawe [swaruam bharyaye] !!ul!i. 
King-NOM selfs 
wife-ACC pinched 
'The king pinched his own wife.' 
*Raajaawine[swaruam haarya] 
!!u!!i. 
King-ACC selfs 
wife-NOM pinched. 
'His own wife pinched the king.' 
[Raajaawinc[swamam bhaarya] 
!lu!!i 
eona] bhatane 
king-ACC self's 
wife-NOM pinched that 
Soldier-ACC 
mantri 
wiswasippiccu. 
minister-NOM believe-made. 
'The minister convinced the soldier that his own wife pinched the 
king.' 
(Not presented) 
The same pattern is found with zibun 'self in Japanese, a language once thought 
to be nonconfigurational because of its extensive scrambling. 
This characteristic c-command pattern can even be found in Mohawk, a more 
radically nonconfigurational language on the surface. 
Mohawk does not have 
quantified NPs for independent reasons (Baker 1995), but according to Reinhart 
(1983) bound variable anaphora effects can be detected even with names as 
antecedents. If a pronoWl is understood as a bound variable, it will give a "sloppy 
identity" reading in ellipsis contexts. Thus, (24a,c) in Mohawk show that matrix 
subjects are prominent over both direct objects and embedded subjects by this test, 
but objects are not prominent over the subject of the same clause «24b» . 
(24)a. 
Sak 
rao-tshenv erhar wa-ho-nut-e' 
tanu' Tyer oni. 
Sak 
his-pet 
dog fact-helhim-feed-punc and Tyer too 
'Sak fed his pet dog , and Tyer did too.' (sloppy OK: Tyer fed Tyer's 
dog) 
h. 
#Sak rao-tshenv erhar wa-ho-kari-' 
tanu' Tyer oni. 
Sak his-pet 
dog fact-he/him-bite-punc and . Tyer too 
'His pet dog bit Sak, and Tyer too.' (not sloppy: *Tyer's dog bit Tyer) 
c. 
Uwari ako-ya'tuni wa'-uk-hrori-' 
wa'te-w-atya'k-c' tanu' Sosan 
Mary her-doll 
fact-shelme-tell-punc fact-it-break-punc and Susan 
oni. 
too 
'Mary told me that her doll broke, and Susuari did too.' 
(sloppy OK: Susan told me that Susan's doll broke.) 

!-
' -
PHRASE STRUCTIJRE AS A REPRESENTATION OF GRAMMATICAL RELATIONS 
41 
d. 
(#}Rao-skare' 
wa'-uk-hrori-' 
tsi wa-hrv-hey-e' 
ne Sak, tanu' 
his-girlfriend fact-she/me-tell-punc that fact-he-die-punc ne Sale and 
Tyer oni. 
Tyer too. 
'His girlfriend told me that Sak died, and Tyer too.' 
(sloppy predicted bad: *Tyer's girlfriend told me that Tyer died.) 
Again the special topology of the Chomskian representation scheme is 
supported.3 
Non-structural theories that distinguish relational prominence and embedding 
prominence typically also have to say something special about what happens when 
the two types of prominence conflict with one another. This issue can also be 
illustrated with the example in (I I) I persuaded John that Mary will cheat Bil. In 
such a sentence, will John, the matrix object of persuade have prominence over 
Mary the embedded subject, or will the embedded subject have prominence over the 
matrix object? 
No answer emerges naturally from the nonstructural theory, 
precisely because the two types of prominence are independent. It could be that 
relational prominence is more important, so that all subjects will take precedence 
over all objects, regardless of the embedding relationships. Or it could be that 
embedding is more important, so that all matrix clause nominals take priority over 
all embedded nominals. Or maybe no prominence difference is defined in this 
situation. Or maybe prominence is unstable, varying from language to language or 
from sentence to sentence, depending on other factors. 
The nonstructural theories 
simply make no principled claim here. 
In contrast, the Chomskian approach extends to this situation automatically, with 
favorable results.4 Since relational prominence and embedding prominence are the 
same thing on this view, there is no special problem of comparing apples to oranges. 
It is all apples: c-command is well-defined in these situations, and should give the 
right results (as long as the phrase structures are correct). 
For example, the 
Chomskian approach clearly predicts that in a structure like (l Ib) the matrix object 
will have prominence over the embedded subject, not vice versa This is because the 
first phrase that contains the matrix object-the VP-contains a phrase that properly 
contains the embedded subject-namely, the CP complement. Thus, the matrix 
object c-commands the embedded subject in this construction. This is correct, as 
show by the asymmetries in (25). (25a) illustrates bound variable anaphora; (25b) 
illustrates Condition C effects, (25c) the binding of reciprocal anaphors. (25d) 
Superiority, (25e) the licensing of negative polarity items, and (25t) NP movement. 
(25)a. 
John persuaded every child that his mother had baked cookies. 
• John persuaded her child that every woman had baked cookies. 
b. 
*John persuaded her that Mary's mother had made cookies. 
John persuaded Martha 's daughter that she had made cookies. 

, 
I 
42 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
MARK C. BAKER 
I persuaded John and Mary that each other's parents had called the 
police. 
*1 persuaded each other 's children that Joe and Martha had called the 
police. 
(?)Who(m) did you persuade that who had called the police? 
*Who did you persuade whom had called the police? 
?lohn persuaded nobody that anyone had called the police. 
• 10hn persuaded anyone that nobody had called the police. 
10hn expected Mary [t to call the police ]. 
*lohn persuaded t [that Mary seems that it will rain]. 
In fact, the predictions here are more subtle than simply saying that embedding 
prominence is stronger than relational prominence across the board. If that were so, 
then one would also expect the matrix object to have prominence over noun phrases 
that are inside a clausal subject as well. However, c-command does not make this 
prediction: the first phrase that properly contains the matrix object would be the 
matrix VP, and this does not contain a clausal subject. 
Therefore, neither NP c­
commands the other in this configuration, and the Chomskian approach predicts no 
asymmetry in prominence here. This is also correct: (26) shows that the matrix 
object does not have prominence over the subject of a clausal subject. 
(26)a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
·That he raised funds legally discredited every politician. 
That Mary raised funds illegally discredited her in the eyes of the 
public. 
??That each other's parents called the police upset John and Mary. 
*Who(m) did (the fact) that who raised funds illegally discredit? 
*That anyone raised funds illegally discredited nobody in the party. 
For example, if the quantified matrix object in (26a) had prominence over the 
embedded subject pronoun, one would expect that the pronoun could be interpreted 
as a bound variable, contrary to fact. Similarly, if the wh-phrase object in the base 
structure of (26d) had prominence over the embedded subject, then it should be 
possible for it to move to Spec, CP and license the other as a wh-phrase in situ, in 
accordance with Superiority; nevertheless ' (26d) is unacceptable. 
The other 
examples show similar results based on the other conditions sensitive to c-command. 
In short, the Chomskian approach makes accurate predictions in this domain 
precisely because it collapses the two kinds of prominence into one in a certain way. 
Therefore, there are no conflicts between two different kinds of prominence of the 

PHRASE STRUCTURE AS A REPRESENTA nON OF GRAMATICAL RELA nONS 
43 
kind that would require special regulations in other frameworks. 
Thus, the 
technique of using phrase structure relationships to represent grammatical functions 
is a good representation system, both because it captures the fact that clause-internal 
prominence and cross-clausal prominence are equivalent for many relations and 
languages, and because it defines accurately how potential conflicts in prominence 
are resolved. This is the real empirical substance to the claim expressed somewhat 
misleadingly as "Grammatical functions are defined in terms of phrase structure 
relationships. " 
The Chomskian approach can also be compared to the nonconfigurational 
binding approach developed within HPSG by Pollard and Sag (1994). Pollard and 
Sag replace c-command with o-command, which they define recursively as follows: 
(27)a. 
b. 
Let Y and Z be synsem objects with distinct LOCAL values, Y 
referential. 
Then Y locally o-commands Z just in case Y is less 
oblique than Z. 
Y o-commands Z, if there is an X such that X contains Z, and 
Y locally o-commands X. 
Their first step is to define local o-command, which is a straightforward version 
of the Relational Prominence idea: subjects are less oblique than objects, objects are 
less oblique than indirect objects, and so on. 
Then (27b) works embedding 
prominence into the definition, by saying that X o-commands Y if it is less oblique 
than Y or if it is less oblique than something Y is embedded in. 
In this way, 0-
command matches the empirical successes of c-command, while being compatible 
with a theory in which subject and object are not characterized in terms of phrase 
structure. This is the next best thing to the Chomskian approach. However, one can 
still argue that the Chomskian approach is conceptually better, because the HPSG 
condition in (27) is really just a thinly disguised disjunction. It regulates the way that 
relational prominence 
interacts 
with 
embedding prominence by 
brute 
force 
stipulation, and other kinds of interactions could have been described just as easily. 
The correct generalization about prominence emerges more organically and more 
necessarily out of the 
Chomskian system, 
arising from the nature of the 
representational system itself. That, in short, is the proof that this is a good system 
of representation. 
5. WHY IS PHRASE STRUCTURE A GOOD REPRESENTATION FOR 
GRAMMATICAL RELATIONS? 
However, it is still fair to ask why the Chomskian representation is so sucùssful in 
this respect. 
Before accusing other theories of having veiled stipulations and 
arbitrmy disjunctions, it is wise to take stock of one's own theory. Could it be that 
the Chomskian solution is also a cleverly disguised disjunction. built into the 
representation system where one might forget about it? 
Why should clause-internal 
relational prominence be equivalent to cross-clausal embedding prominence for 

. 
I 
44 
MARK C. BAKER 
many syntactic purposes? Is there really a substantive generalization being captured 
here? Or was it simply a lucky historical accident that Chomskian theory stwnbled 
onto an attractive representation for grammatical functions by studying the quirks of 
constituent structure in English? I close this paper with some speculative remarks 
on this conceptual question. 
Of course, it is desirable to say that this was not an accident, that English phrase 
structure turns out to be telling the truth for good reasons. What would those be? If 
one thinks about it, the purpose of a phrase structure representation is essentially to 
represent embedding prominence: X is a phrase in structure Y if and only if the 
words contained in X are a unit that is formed tirst and then combined with other 
material to form Y. (Here I use sequential derivational terminology, following 
Chomsky's (1995) conception of Merge, but this is not crucial.) In other words, X is 
embedded in Y. 
As already mentioned, this notion of embedding canot be 
eliminated: any theory must somehow represent an embedding relation, given the 
recursive nature of natural languages. 
Thus, if embedding prominence clearly 
exists. and if there is only one kind of prominence in point of fact, then c/ause­
internal relation.al prominence must really be a type of embedding prominence. 
This could be the deeper conceptual claim that would make the Chomskian phrase 
structure representation scheme more than a disguised stipulation. 
. 
In order to take this last step toward explanation, we must take a particular stand 
on certain details internal to the Chomskian approach, which I have remained 
neutral on so far. In particular, we must take a stand on exactly where the subject is 
generated. There have been. at least three views about this in recent times, which are 
compared schematically in (28). 
(28)a. 
Chomsky 1986a 
IP 
	 
NP 
I 
Mary I 
I 
will 
VP 
I 
V' 
3 
V 
NP 
I 
I 
kill 
John 

f 
[ 
I 
I 
J 
i 
PHRASE STRUCTURE AS A REPRESENTATION OF GRAMATICAL RELATIONS 
45 
b. 
Fukui and Speas 1986 
IP 
3 
NP 
I' 
I
4 
e 
VP 
t:   
Mary 
V 
NP 
I 
I 
kill 
John 
c. 
Hale and Keyser 1993, Chomsky 1995 
IP 
- 
NP 
r 
I
3 
e 
I 
vP 
2 
NP 
v 
I 
t: I 
4 
Mary 
v 
VP 
I 
4 
CAUSE V 
NP 
I 
I 
BE-KILLED John 
(28a) is the oldest view, familiar from Chomsky (1981, 1 986a). [t holds that the 
subject is generated outside of the VP, where it receives a special, designated 
external theta role from the VNP. However, there is no real understanding on this 
view why the subject should be treated in this particular way-why most verbs 
should have one and only one argument that is designated as being external (see also 
Williams (1 981), who takes this as an axiom). (28b) is one of the early versions of 
the so-called VP-intemal subject hypothesis. 
This is the idea that there are no 
external arguments in the original sense, but rather the subject ends up outside the 
VP on the surface as a result of a raising operation, triggered by the need to get 
Case. This view as such also does not lead to a full understanding of the origins of 
relational prominence, since both NPs are arguments of the same verb. It is merely 
stipulated on this view that one NP is theta-marked within V -bar and the other 
within VP. 

46 
MARK C. BAKER 
However, (26c)-currently the most commonly assumed version of the VP 
internal subject hypothesis-raises some new possibilities. It was proposed by Hale 
and Keyser (1993) in their effort explain theta-theory, and endorsed (with some 
modifications) by Chomsky (1995). Kratzer (1996) also proposes a similar idea, 
although she calls the higher head Voice. What is crucially different about this 
proposal is that the subject and the object are technically the arguments of two 
different verbal heads. both of which are in principle meaningful. This raises the 
possibility that the prominence relation between the subject and the object could be 
derived from the compositional relationship between the verbal heads that they are 
arguments o£ If so. then relational prominence is truly reduced to a special case of 
embedding prominence. 
The attractiveness of this approach comes from its ability to capitalize on a 
parallel between phrase structure and lexical semantics. From the standpoint of 
lexical semantics, many transitive verbs like kil are analyzed as accomplishments. 
These are taken to be internally complex: they consist of a process or activity 
component that is joined with a change of state component in such a way that the 
activity causes ·the change of state. This semantic complexity can be detected by 
certain characteristic patterns of entailment that these verbs enter into, familiar since 
the days of Generative Semantics. 
For example, the transitive accomplishment 
sentence Mary opened the door entails the intransitive change-of-state sentence The 
door opened (Dowty 1979, Parsons 1990). 
Even more strikingly, transitive 
accomplishment sentences with certain adverbs seem to have a scope ambiguity that 
suggests that the sentences are internally complex. Thus Mary opened the door 
again has a stronger reading, that Mary again caused the door to be open, and a 
weaker reading. that Mary merely caused it that the door was again open (see the 
above references, and also von Stechow (1995» . This lexical semantic research 
converges with the syntactic research that points toward (28c), suggesting that the 
lower verbal head in the structure stands for the resulting (change ot) state and the 
higher verbal head stands for the causing activity. Now the theme argument John is 
naturally a part of the description of the resulting state; the state is characterized as a 
property (being dead, or better, having been killed) holding of the referent of John. 
Therefore it is natural for John to form a syntactic constituent with the lower verb. 
In contrast, the agent Mary does not play a role in describing the resulting state. The 
referent of Mary only plays a role in the activity that causes this state. Thus Mary 
naturally fonns a syntactic constituent with the higher verbal head but not with the 
lower one. Put another way, the causing activity is a two-place relation that holds of 
a causing agent and a caused change of statc. Thus, the corresponding head in the 
syntax is the head of a phrase that contains an NP expressing the causing agent and a 
VP expressing the caused change of state. The change of state in tum is made up of 
two elements: a thing and a property that (begins to) hold of that thing. Thus. the 
syntactic head corresponding to the property forms a phrase with an NP that denotes 
a thing. the theme. These are the natural embedding relationships, with the change 
of state being a constituent of the causing event, but not vice versa. Then thc 
"relational prominence" of Mary over John in Mary killed John is really the same 
thing as the "embedding prominence" of Mary over John in a fully biclausal 

I 
f 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
PHRASE STRUCTURE AS A REPRESENTATION OF GRAMATICAL RELATIONS 
47 
structure Mary caused (it) that John died. Both are rooted in the fundamental 
composition of atomic predicates with their arguments.s 
This reasoning can be generalized to derive other instances of relational 
prominence from basic embedding relationships as well. For exampleŻ direct objects 
c-command NPs that are contained in to-phrases and other arguments expressed as 
PPs within the verb phrase. In RG terms. "2s" outrank "3s" on the Relational 
Hierarchy. In Baker (1996c. to appear), I explore a way of deriving this from a 
further decomposition ofthe verb. as shown in (29). 
(29) 
IP 
2 
NP 
r 
I
2 
e 
I 
vP 
L:1m N' 
I
/ 
Mary v 
VP 
I
6 
CAUSE NP 
V' 
I
6 
the book V 
I 
BE 
AP 
* 
A 
PP 
I 
/'->. 
PUT 
on the table 
Here the accomplishment verb put is decomposed first into a causative element and 
an intransitive/inchoative element as before. Thep this second element is further 
decomposed into an adjectival element PUT which denotes a pure property and a 
predicative element BE that creates a state out of the property by predicating it of an 
entity. (By this label, I do not mean to imply that the actual English verb be has 
precisely this function; see Baker (to appear) for details on the relationship of BE to 
copular particles in English and other languages.) This decomposition is motivated 
by various syntactic facts from the literature on unaccusativity and adjectival 
passives, facts that show that theme arguments are internal arguments of verbs but 
external arguments of derivationally related adjectives (Burzio 1986, Levin and 
Rappaport 1986. Cinque 1990). This is directly expressed in (29), in which the 
theme the book is outside the projection of the adjectival element PUT, but inside 
the projection of the operator that verbalizes that root. In contrast, phrases bearing 
theta roles other than theme can be the internal arguments of adjectives. as the 
locative phrase is in (29). 
This phrasal structure also represents the natural 
embedding relationships expected for compositional semantics, understood as 
follows. CAUSE is a verbal operator that takes two arguments, an NP (its agent) 

48 
MARK C. BAKER 
and a VP (its resulting state) and creates an event. BE is a verbal operator that takes 
two arguments, an NP (the theme) and an AP (a property) and creates the state of the 
property holding ofthe theme. Finally, the A optionally takes a PP (which describes 
a goal, a source, or other kinds of path) and creates a property. Then, in the surface 
syntax of English PUT incorporates into BE, and PUT +BE incorporates into 
CAUSE to derive the complex vcrb, spelled out in the phonology as put. 
The important point is that on this view one never has to stipulate any relational 
prominence between the two NP arguments of a single head. 
The issue doesn't 
arise, simply because none of the subatomic predicates takes more than one NP 
argument. 
They all take one NP argument plus possibly an internally complex 
verbal or adjectival argument. On this kind of view, relational prominence can be 
eliminated from the theory in favor of embedding prominence across the board. 
Of course, in laying out this view I have focussed on the success stories and the 
easier cases. It is still an urgent open question how this program can be insightfully 
generalized to the full range of multi-argument verbs. 
To take a harder case, 
consider a stative transitive verb like like. This verb also takes both a subject and an 
object. 
Moreover, the usual syntactic evidence shows that the subject has 
prominence over the object, just as with other transitive verbs. 
(3 0) a. 
Every boy likes his mother. 
.. Her son likes every woman. 
b. 
'" He likes John 's mother. 
John 's mother likes him. 
Bound variable anaphora 
Condition C. 
c. 
John and Mary like each other's parents. Reciprocal anaphors 
? Each other's parents like John and Mary. 
d. 
Who likes whom? 
*Who(m) does who like? 
e. 
Nobody likes anybody around here. 
* Anybody likes nobody aroWld here. 
f. 
John is liked t by everyone. 
Superiority 
Negative Polarity Licensing 
NP movement 
Indeed, 
stative 
verbs 
like 
like 
behave 
no 
differently 
from 
agentive 
accomplishment verbs like kill or persuade in these respects. Therefore, one would 
like to account for this prominence in the same way, by reducing it to c-command 
defined over embedding structures that are motivated by semantic compositionality. 
The problem is that there is not such good lexical semantic motivation for 
decomposing verbs like like. The same lexical semantics literature that uncovers 
internal complexity for accomplishment verbs typically claims that stative verbs are 
conceptually simple (see, for example, Dowty 1979). What we want is a structure 
like (3 1), where X and Y are meaningful elements such that X+Y equals like. 

PHRASE S1RUCTURE AS A REPRESENTATION OF GRAMATICAL RELATIONS 
49 
(3 1) 
IP 
 
NP 
I 
r 
/ 
e 
I 
vP 
t: r 
Mary 
v 
VP 
I
. 
X 
v 
NP 
I 
I 
y 
Jolm 
Conceivably, one could tough it out and say that like simply means "cause to be 
LIKED" just as kill means "cause to be KILLED (i.e. dead)." But this seems ad hoc. 
Also. there is no clear adverbial evidence for internal complexity in this case: Mary 
will like John again canot mean "Mary will cause [John again be. liked). .. 
On the other hand, it is true that dyadic stative predicates such as like vary 
significantly how they are expressed across languages. 
Some languages use 
complex periphrastic expressions for them, such as "Anger is on me towards you" 
(Irish). This fact is peculiar if these predicates are semantically as simple as the 
literature says. 
Also, stative transitive verbs often have certain affinities to 
adjectives across languages. For example, they allow degree-like expressions that 
other transitive verbs do not Thus, in English I like Chris a lot means "I like Chris 
to a large degree", whereas in I walk the dog a lot, a lot has a frequency reading 
(similar to often) not a degree reading. Thus, while I do not have a specific proposal 
to defend here, there is some cause for optimism that close investigation of these 
predicates cross linguistically will point to a reasonable decomposition for them 
too-perhaps one involving an adjective and a verbalizing operator of some kind. 
Win or lose, this seems like an important next step for this research tradition to take. 
6. CONCLUSION 
In this paper. I have argued that the Chomskian approach to grammatical 
relations doesn't necessarily differ from Relational Grammar and other theories not 
oriented around phrase structure in quite the way that has traditionally been claimed. 
It should be conceded that grammatical relations canot always be reduced to phrase 
structure relationships that can be established by independent syntactic tests. In that 
sense. grammatical relations are primitive. Nevertheless. it can still be claimed that 
phrase structure relationships are a particularly good representation of grammatical 
relations, because they express in an organic way the deep interrelationship between 
relational prominence and embedding prominence. These two kinds of prominence 
must be kept distinct in most other representation schemes, and this leads to missed 

50 
MARK C. BAKER 
generalizations and stipulations. Finally, I raised the question of whether there was 
a deeper grounding for Chomskian phrase structure representations so that the 
equivalence of relational prominence and embedding prominence would not be a 
bad theoretical pun but rather an explanatory reduction. In some cases, it looks like 
this deeper grounding can come from the compositionality of lexical semantics. 
However, more careful work needs to be done in this area before we can be sure that 
the project of reducing relational prominence to embedding prominence can be 
carried through with full generality. 
NOTES 
By the "narrowly Chomskian approach to syntax" I mean the approach that Chomsky himself and 
those who follow him most closely have taken to syntax over the years, as contrasted to other generaJive 
approaches (which are Chomskian in a broader sense). I use this terminology because the official labe1 of 
that approach has changed over the years that are relevant to this overview, from the Extended Standard 
Theory, to Government and Binding Theory, to Principles and Parameters, to the Minimalist Program. 
However, as far as I can se the basic notion of the relationship between grammatical relations and phrase 
structure has remained relatively constant through all these changes of label. Thus, I can abstract away 
from these evolutions in the framework, for the most part. 
For simplicity, in this article I put aside the complex question of what the grammatical relations are 
in a so-called double object construction like Chris gave Pat the hook, about which much has been 
written in the Iitemture on grammatical relations. Suffice it only to say that all of the classes of theories 
considered here have ways to generalize their basic premises to this ease, for bener or for worse. 
Of course, the world is a complicated place, and there is also evidence that might be interpreted as 
pointing the other way. For example, some syntactic relationships might be clause bounded as well as 
sensitive to c-commandlprominence. For such relationships, the difference between c-command and 
relational prominence will be subtle at best. Negative polarity licensing in English might be a case in 
point. for speakers who find (20c) marginal. Reflexive anaphora is another in languages that do not 
pennit examples like (ISe). However, it is not particularly problematic for the Chomskian view that 
some linguistic relationships are subject to additional conditions. All that is necessary is that there be 
enough cases that run off pure c-command to show that it does not represent a spurious generalization. 
More interestingly, Baker (1991. 1996c) shows that Condition C and wh-extraction in Mohawk seem 
to be sensitive to embedding prominence but not to relational prominence: these relations do not show 
subject-object asymmetries. but they do show differences between the constituents of a main clause and 
the constituents of an embedded clause. This looks a bit like f-command. However, in those works I 
argued that this is because Mohawk has a different kind of phrase structure, with overt subjects and 
objects (but not clauses) dislocated from their base positions. Similar facts hold in Warlpiri (Simpson 
(991). These patterns can be interpreted as another kind of evidence in favor of phrase structure theories. 
As far as I know, these clause-internal binding asymmetries disappear only in languages like Mohawk 
and Warlpiri that are nonconfigurational, allowing extensive free word order and argument drop. Thus, 
there do seem to be correlations between some GR-sensitive behavior and surface word order properties. 
Such correlations are expected in structure-based theories, but not in theories that completely divorce 
things like binding theory from word order and constituency. expressing them at different levels of 
representation. This might show that there are limits to the RG critique. with different language types 
showing systematic differences in GR-behavior after all, although in a limited domain. See Baker (2000) 
for fuller discussion of these cases and their implications. 
This is particularly true if VP-shell structures in the sense of Larson 1988 are adopted (as in (1 1», 
although some of the basic cases can be derived even without this innovation. 

PHRASE STRUCTURE AS A REPRESENTATION OF GRAMATICAL RELA nONS 
5 1  
This view does not entail that Mary killed John is derived from a structure that is identical to Mary 
caused John to die in all respects, only that both structures involve similar embedding relationships that 
are interpreted compositionally. On the contrary, the embedded phrase in one case is a VP, and in the 
other it is at least an IP headed by to. Therefore, syntactic and semantic differences that are attributable to 
this difference in structure are expected. 

, 
\ 

r 
I 
l 
 
!' 
t 
FREDERICK J. NEWMEYER 
GRAMA TICAL FUNCTIONS, TIEMATIC ROLES, 
AND PHRASE SlRUCTURE: THEIR UNDERL YING 
DISUNITY 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The purpose of this chapter is to argue against a position that nobody would have 
thought to adopt throughout most of the history of transformational syntax: the 
'Deep Alignment Hypothesis' (DAH)! According to the DAH, grammatical 
functions ( or relations). thematic roles, and configurational structure are in 
alignment at an underlying grammatical level. That is, a particular value for one 
implies a particular value for the others. Section 2 below traces the gradual 
development of the DAH over the past several decades. Section 3 critiques the 
hypothesis, arguing that the generalization that it embodies cannot be sustained. 
Section 4 is a brief conclusion. 
2. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE DEEP ALIGNMENT HYPOTHESIS 
As transformational grammar progressed in the 19705 and early 1 980s, the 
interdependency between grammatical functions and thematic roles became 
increasingly central to the theory (§2.l). Mark Baker's Uniformity of Theta 
Assignment Hypothesis (UTAH) and associated hypotheses led ultimately to the 
proposal that they are fully aligned at the deepest level of syntactic representation 
(§2.2). 
2. J Grammaticalfunctions and thematic roles 
In the earliest, i.e. pre-1970s, versions of transformational grammar, little appeal 
was made either to grammatical functions or to thematic roles. Chomsky in Aspects 
of the Theory of Syntax (Chomsky 1965) recognized the fact that notions such as 
'Subject-of' and 'Direct-Object-of' had played a central role in traditional 
grammatical description, but that they had no independent theoretical status in 
transformational syntax. He suggested (p. 71) that they might be defined 
derivatively, based on phrase structure configuration. Hence, a 'subject' was a deep 
53 
William D. Davies and Stanley Dubinslcy (eds.). Objects and other subjects: 
Grammatical functions. jUnctional categories. and configuratfona/fty. 53-75. 
© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands 

, \ 
S4 
FREDERICK J. NEWMEYER 
structure NP immediately dominated by S and a 'direct object' a deep structure NP 
immediately dominated by VP. However, in Aspects no grammatical process was 
posited that needed to make reference to either construct. Interestingly, he dismissed 
the idea that such relations had surface structure relevance and tentatively suggested 
(p. 221) that 'Topic-of and 'Comment-of were the surface analogues to 'Subject­
of and ·Predicate-of. 
Thematic roles were introduced into transformational grammar in Jeffrey 
Gruber's 1965 dissertation (Gruber 1976) and were exploited in the analysis of 
diverse syntactic phenomena in Fillmore (1968) and Jackendoff (1972). The relevant 
generalizations all held at derived, rather than deep, levels of structure. So Fillmore 
appealed to a hierarchy of a-roles (or 'case-roles', as he called them) as a 
determining factor in the choice of surface structure subject and Jackendoff 
attempted to account for conditions on passivization and anaphor-antecedent 
relations in reflexivization in terms of a similar hierarchy. 
A curious reversal occurred in the dozen or so years after 1970. Gradually, 
grammatical functions came to be seen as relevant to transformationally derived 
levels of structure, rather than D-structure, while thematic roles were appealed to in 
the explanation of 'deeper' processes. For example, the first appearance of 
grammatical functions in a theoretical statement was in Chomsky (I973a: 239), 
where they were built into a condition on the application of transformational rules: 
(1) 
No rule can involve, X, Y in the structure: 
•
•
•
 [a. •
•
•
 Z . . .  
- WYV . . . ] . . .  
where Z is the specified subject of WYV in a 
In Lectures on Government and Binding (LGBJ. their theoretical relevance was 
entirely surface-oriented. Here' Chomsky introduced a novel gramatical function 
'SUBJECT', defined as 'the subject of an infinitive, an NP or a small clause . . .  ' 
(Chomsky 198 1 :  209). 'SUBJECT' was employed in the definition of 'governing 
category' (p. 21 1): 
(2) 
/3 is a governing category for a if and only if /3 is the minimal 
category containing <X, the governor of <X, and a SUBJECT accessible 
to (l. 
Since the notion 'governing category' was a crucial component of the binding theory 
and the binding theory was presumed to apply at S-structure, the grammatical 
relevance of the function 'SUBJECT' was at the surface. 
The primary relevance of a-roles, on the other hand, was at D-structure. In 
addition to playing a role in a multitude of lexical rules, specific a-role labels 
entered - differently in different approaches - into the statement of the D­
structure linking between thematic structure and phrase structure. By the late 1970s, 
no significance was attached to the a-role borne by an element ofS-structure. 

I 
GRAMATICAL FUNCTIONS, THEMATIC ROLES, AND pHRASE STRUCTURE 
55 
The seeds of a possible alignment between grammatical functions, a-roles, and 
configuration were sown early on in LGB thanks to two central principles of UG 
proposed there - the Projection Principle and the Theta-Criterion. The former can 
be thought of as a strengthened version of the Structure-Preserving Constraint 
!" ' 
(Emonds 1976). It requires that the subcategorization properties of lexical heads 
(e.g. verbs, nouns, adjectives, and prepositions) be represented at all three syntactic 
levels: D-structure, S-structure, and Logical Form. In other words, the Projection 
Principle entails that grammatical configurations (minor deletions and local 
movements exempted) remain unchanged throughout the derivation. A predicate that 
takes a subject, direct object. and an indirect object, say, at one stage in a derivation, 
must take them at all stages. 
The Theta-Criterion demands a biunique relation between arguments and a­
roles: 
Each argument bears one and only one a-role and each 8-role is asigned to one and only one 
argument (Chomsky 1981: 36) 
The Theta-Criterion thus prevents movement of an NP into a structural position to 
which a a-role had already been assigned. In conjunction with a couple subsidiary 
assumptions, a consequence of the Theta-Criterion was that all thematic information 
relevant to the derivation had to be present at D·structure. 
Chomsky's introduction of the Theta-Criterion was accompanied by surprisingly 
little discussion, most of which took place in a footnote (p. 139). He acknowledged 
the immediate roots of the principle in Freidin (1978)'s Functional Uniqueness 
Principle, but neglected to mention that a very similar condition was a centerpiece of 
Case Grammar (Fillmore 1968). Chomsky remarked that the Theta-Criterion, 'while 
not unatural, is not obviously correct' (p. 139), noting that it was violated in 
Jackendoff (1972), where John in John deliberately rolled down the hil was 
assigned two a-roles: Agent and Theme. Perhaps the major virtue of the Theta­
Criterion. as things were viewed at the time, was an explanation of the apparent fact 
that the landing site of a movement rule is always to a position to which no a-role is 
assigned (e. g., COMP and the subject of a passive or raising predicate). As first 
noted in Borer (I980), if movement were to take place to a position assigned a a­
role, then the combination of that a-role and the one possessed by the moved 
element would lead to a Theta-Criterion violation. 
The Projection Principle and the Theta-Criterion combined to reinforce the trend 
toward more 'abstract' analyses of grammatical phenomena that was initiated in 
Chomsky (1973a) and to invite even increased degrees of abstractness. For example, 
given the Projection Principle, traces of movement are required in order that the 
subcategorizational position of the moved element be represented structurally. 
Furthermore, given the subsidiary assumption that subcategorization is uniform 
across different uses of the same lexical item, the Projection Principle demands PRO 
subjects for infinitives. Since the verb hope has an embedded subject in (3a), it has 
to have one in (3b) as well: 
(3)a 
John hopes [that he will be able to leave early]. 

56 
FREDERICK J. NEWMEYER 
b. 
John hopes [ PRO to be able to leave early]. 
Analogously, the Theta-Criterion demands a PRO subject for infinitives in order to 
prevent two different roles being assigned to the matrix subject. Note that in the 
following sentence, the subject argument of the higher verb is an Experiencer (or 
perhaps a Theme) and that of the lower an Agent. PRO is therefore necessary to 
avoid a Theta-Criterion violation: 
(4) 
Mary yearns [PRO to convince John that she is qualified]. 
Furthermore, the Theta-Criterion mandated a small clause analysis of certain 
predication structures. As pointed out in Williams (1994), in a sentence like (Sa), 
arrive and sad assign different a-roles to John. Therefore. given the Theta-Criterion, 
(Sa) would have to be underlain by biclausal (5b):2 
(5)a. 
John left the room angry. 
b. 
John left the room [pRO angry]. 
2.2 
The UTAH and its consequences 
The next major step toward the triple alignment of gramatical functions. thematic 
roles. and constituent structure was taken in Baker (1988). The centerpiece of that 
book is the Uniformity of Theta Assignment Hypothesis (UTAH). formulated as 
follows: 
Identical thematic relationships betwen items are represented by identical structural 
relationships betwen those items at the level ofD-structure. (Baker 1988: 46) 
In other words, if Agents are encoded as deep subjects in one derivation, they are 
encoded as deep subjects in all derivations. Baker provided both conceptual and 
empirical motivation for the UTAH. Conceptually, he noted, the UTAH, in 
conjunction with the Projection Principle. 'constrain[s] the theory and makers] it 
interesting' (p. 5 1). The Projection Principle, by itself: is compatible with base 
generation of whatever complex structure. leaving it with no 'empirical bite', as 
Baker put it. The UTAH, on the other hand. 
leads away from base generation in many cases. Yet unless the transformational 
component is limited by principles like the Projection Principle. it makes little 
difference what D-structure is asigned to a given fonn. because anything could happen 
en route to the interpreted levels of PF and LF. In this case, the UTAH would have little 
empirical content However, in a theory which contains both. each provides a check 
against the undisciplined avoidance of the other. This is the kind of situation which can 
give rise to deep and true explanation. (Baker 1988: 51) 
Baker derived his major empirical support for the UTAH from the incorporation 
structures that he analyzed in a multitude of languages. For example, many 

GRAMATICAL FUNCTIONS. TIlEMA TIC ROLES, AND PHRASE STRUCllJRE 
57 
languages have a morphological causative with a biclausal causative as a thematic 
paraphrase. Consider the following pair from Chichewa: 
(6)a 
Mtsikanaa-na-chit-its-a 
kuti mtsuko 
u-gw-e 
girl 
SP-PAST -do-cause-ASP that waterpot PAST-fall-ASP 
'The girl made the waterpot fall' 
b. 
Mtsikana a-na-u-gw-ets-a 
mtsuko 
girl 
SP-PAST -OP-fall-CAUS-ASP waterpot 
'The girl made the waterpot fall' 
The UTAH demands that these two sentences be derived from the same underlying 
structure, where (6b) is dØived by movement of the verb -gw- 'fall': 
(7) 
S 
Ώ 
S 
 
ï 
NP 
VP 
NP 
VP 
I 
 
I 
 
girl 
V 
S 
girl 
V 
S 
I 
/'-.. 
í 
î 
make 
NP 
VP 
V 
V 
NP 
VP 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
pot 
V 
falli 
make pot 
V 
I 
I 
fall 
̀ 
Baker argued that if we assume a movement analysis in such cases, we can appeal to 
the Empty Category Principle (ECP) and other constraints for an explanation of 
those situations in which incorporation fails.3 In other words. a unique mapping of 
a-roles onto grammatical structure was seen to be an essential component of the 
explanation of the cross-linguistic distribution of incorporation structures. 
The year 1993 saw the birth of two research programs based on Baker's work, 
the central theme of each being the extension of the idea that seemingly monoclausal 
structures derive from complex embedding structures. One trend, represented by 
Hale and Keyser (1993), has caried out the syntactic derivation of such structures 
wholly within the lexicon. The UTAH, for Hale and Keyser, is instantiated at the 
most abstract level of lexical structure, the level of Lexical Relational Structure 
(LRS). Syntactic movement applies within the lexicon, deriving D-structure 
representations. Movement is posited to take place even in languages in which 
incorporation is not evident on the surface. For example, Hale and Keyser derived 
the predicate of sentence (8) as is illustrated in (9), in which the lower N (shelf) first 
incorporates with the P and then with the successive higher Vs: 
(8) 
She shelved her books. 

. 
\ 
58 
(9) 
FREDERICK J. NEWMEYER 
V' 
-----
V 
VP 
I 
, 
shelvej 
V' 
NP 
 
/ 
her books V 
I 
pp 
/'-.. 
P 
NP· 
I 
I 
t; 
N 
I 
Hale and Keyser followed Baker in appealing to the ECP to explain why certain 
incorporation structures fail to occur. For example, (10) is underivable from its most 
plausible underlying structure, (1 1). The minimality condition on government for the 
ECP is violated, since the preposition is a closer potential governor of the trace than 
is the noun landing site: 
(10) 
(1 1) 
·He shelved the books on. 
V' 
------
V 
VP 
-----
NP 
V' 
I 
/ 
(books) 
V 
PP 
/'.. 
/'.. 
N 
V 
P 
NP 
I 
I 
I 
shel£ 
on 
N 
I 
ti 
Most significantly for our interests, Hale and Keyser argued that an unexpected, but 
welcome, consequence of this complex embedding approach to denominal verbs and 
related constructions was the possibility of effecting an identity between positions in 
LRS and thematic roles. Thus if the highest V in (9), by virtue of its position in the 
tree and/or its taking VP as a complement, could uniformly be interpreted as 
'causal', then the thematic role 'Agent' might tum out to be nothing more than the 
role borne by any external argument of a V in that position. Along the same lines, 

GRAMMATICAL FUNCTIONS, TIiEMA TIC ROLES, AND PHRASE STRUCTURE 
59 
the external argument of the lower V would receive the role 'Theme' and the 
internal argument of the P the role 'Location'. 
In a paper published the same year, Baker (1 993) came to many of the same 
conclusions as Hale and Keyser, but maintained a strictly syntactic (as opposed to 
lexical) approach to the movements involved in the derivation of semantically 
complex predicates. Baker's approach 
. , .  assumes that there are notions like agent and patient, instrument, benefactive, and locative 
that are (in part) consistent and recognizable across peoples and cultures. [).structure is then 
constructed directly from these categories ... (Baker 1993: 32; emphasis added) 
Note that this assumption takes us one step beyond the UTAH. IfD-structure is to be 
constructed directly from Agents, Patients, and so on, tht.n a D-structure like (9) for 
sentence (8) is mandated even in the absence of overt incorporation structures. 
Deriving (8) and the sentence She put her books on the she{ffrom markedly different 
D-structures would necessarily complicate the 'construction process' mapping 
thematic roles onto constituent structure. In other words, given the extended UTAH, 
it follows that that the subcategorizational properties of lexical items can be derived 
from their semantic properties, or given more curent phraseology, that 'c-selection' 
can be derived from 's-selection'. 
Baker's 1993 paper added a novel argument for the decomposition approach to 
semantically complex predicates (see also his chapter in this volume). He noted that 
there are two kinds of prominence relations that are important in syntax. One is 
intraclausal 'relational prominence' - that of subjects over direct objects, direct 
objects over indirect objects, and so on. The other is 'embedding prominence', that 
of the subject of a main clause over the subject of a dependent clause, for example. 
Historically, generative syntacticians have treated the two types of prominence very 
differently. But, Baker argues, if seemingly simple mono clausal structures are 
derived from more complex lexico-semantically derived structures, then relational 
prominence falls out as a subcase of embedding prominence. 
Baker's approach was extended still further in Chomsky ( 1 995). Chomsky 
argued for a complex embedding approach to all seemingly simple transitive 
structures. For example, he proposed to derive (13) from (12). where 'vP', 'v" and 
'v' are 'light' VPs, V's, and Vs respectively: 
(12) He read the book. 
(13) 
vP 
-----
D 
v' 
I 
-----
he 
v 
VP 
. 
. 
V 
v 
V 
DP 
I '  
I 
I 
 
read 
e 
the book 

. 
\ 
60 
FREDERICK J. NEWMEYER 
Such an analysis was dictated by the extended UTAH, as well as by a natural 
extension of the 
• Larsonian shell' approach to structure (Larson 1 988) and 
mechanisms internal to the Minimalist Program itself.4 
The intimate association of roles and relations inherent in the models proposed in 
the mid 1990s by Hale and Keyser, Baker, and Chomsky was almost, but not quite, 
in keeping with a full-fledged DAH. One obstacle remained to its complete 
realization. The total alignment of thematic relations with grammatical functions had 
always seemed to be extremely problematic, given the evident many-to-few relation 
between them. After all, more than a dozen a-roles have been proposed, while 
subject-of, direct-object-of, and indirect-object-of make up the stock of grammatical 
functions in the standard inventory. The inclusion of notions such as 'oblique', 
'object of comparative', 'embedded subject', and so on as possible gramatical 
functions does little to engineer an alignment between them and a-roles. Even if we 
confme our attention to (presumptively) underlying subjects of main clause 
transitives, this grammatical function may be represented by an Agent (14a), Patient 
(I 4b), Experiencer (14c), Recipient/Goal (I4d), Comitative (1 4e), LocativefTheme 
(1 4f), Instrument (14g), and no doubt many other roles: 
( 14)a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
Mary killed John. 
Mary underwent an unpleasant dental procedure. 
Mary hates John. 
John received a package from Mary. 
Mary met Alice. 
Mary contains billions of DNA molecules. 
The crane loaded the truck. 
How, then, could there possibly be a one-to-one relation between functions and 
roles? Dowty (1991) proposed a solution. He argued that the proliferation of a-roles 
seen in the literature could be dispensed with in favor of two cluster-concepts called 
'Proto-Agent' and ·Proto-Patient'. The particular role borne by a particular argument 
is determined by the number of entailments that the verb gives it. Dowty outlined 
these entailments as follows: 
(27) 
Contributing properties for the Agent Proto-Role: 
3. 
volitional involvement in the event or state 
b. 
sentience (and/or perception) 

GRAMATICAL FUNCTIONS, THEMATIC ROLES, AND PHRASE STRUCTIJRE 
61 
c. 
causing an event or change of state in another participant 
d. 
movement (relative to the position of another participant) 
e. 
exists independently of the event named by the verb 
(28) 
Contributing properties for the Patient Proto-Role: 
a. 
undergoes change of state 
b. 
incremental theme 
c. 
causally affected by another participant 
d. 
stationary relative to movement of another participant 
e. 
does not exist independently of the event, or not at all 
(Dowty 199 1 :  572) 
In Dowty's view, the argument whose predicate entails the greatest number of Proto­
Agent properties will be lexicalized as the subject of the predicate; the argument 
having the greatest number of Proto-Patient entailments will be lexicaJized as the 
direct object 
Baker (1997) saw the proto-role hypothesis as a way of getting the DAH to 
work. He wrote: 
However, an absolute version of the UTAH [i.e., the DAH 
- FJN] can still be 
maintained in the face of [examples such as (14a-g)J if one adopts Dowty's (1991) idea 
that the basic thematic roles are prototype concepts ruther than categorically defined 
ones. On this view, it is possible to say that John in [(I4d)], the crane in [(14g)], and 
Mary in [(14c)J are all (proto)-agents. and as such belong in the subject position. This is 
justified by the fact that each of these NPs shares certain semantic entailments with the 
prototypical agent Mary in [(14a)J, although they do not ail share the same ones. (Baker 
1997: 109) 
Nothing now seemed to stand in the way of effecting a deep alignment between 
grammatical function. (proto-)thematic role. and constituent structure. The DAH, as 
a consequence, has become a central ingredient of most theorizing within the 
Minimalist Program. 
3. AGAINST THE DEEP ALIGNMENT HYPOllIESIS 
The remainder of this chapter will present arguments against the DAH, Section 3.1 
will suggest that a D-structure level must be posited at which grammatical functions 
do not line up with a-roles. The follOWing section 3.2 will question the linchpin of 
the DAH, namely, Dowty's proto-role approach. And §3.3 will rebut the idea that 

62 
FREDERICK J. NEWMEYER 
the semantic decomposition demanded by the DAH serves to reduce relational 
prominence to embedding prominence. 
3. 1 
The independent need for D-structure 
It will be argued here that there is a need for a level with the properties of classical 
D-structure, in which grammatical functions, thematic roles, and constituent 
structure are not in alignment. Such a consequence guts the DAH of its most 
appealing feature, namely, that it enables a 'minimalist' correspondence among 
these three seemingly disparate constructs. 
In the theory defended in Levin and Rappaport Hovav 1995, each verb is 
associated .with two lexical representations: a Lexical Semantic Representation 
(LSR) and an Argument Structure (AS; also called a 'Lexical Syntactic 
Representation'). At LSR, predicates are decomposed into syntactically relevant 
units of meaning. At this level we find structures parallel to those posited by Hale 
and Keyser for their level of 'Lexical Relational Structure' and by Baker for his 
underlying syntactic level. In other words, the DAH is realized at the level of LSR. 
Linking rules map LSR onto AS. The information in a verb's AS. together with the 
projection principle and the Theta-Criterion, determine the syntactic configuration 
that a verb is found in. In the words of Levin and Rappaport Hovav, 'the relation 
between argument structure and the D-structure syntactic representation [is 1 
"trivial'" (p. 22). 
Now let us consider the phenomenon of unaccusativity. Levin and Rappaport 
Hovav argue that it is 'syntactically represented but semantically determined' (p. 
30). What they mean is that all unaccusatives have the same AS, in which there 
exists a sale internal argument and no external argument. Furthermore, 
unaccusativity is a property of semantically characterizable classes of predicates. 
That is, general liDking rules relate the LSRs of unaccusative predicates to their AS 
representations. Significantly for our purposes, Baker endorses their analysis and 
comments that if they are correct, 'then the absolute UTAH [i.e., the DAH - FJN] 
is supported' (Baker 1997: 1 15). 
The problem, however, is that there is a great disparity between the LSR of any 
given unaccusative predicate and its AS. In particular, several diferent LSRs are 
linked to the same unaccusative AS. For example, one class of unaccusative, that 
containing certain change of state verbs, has biclausal LSRs, as illustrated in the 
following LSR that Levin and Rappaport Hovav (1995: 83) propose for break:s 
(15) 
break [[x DO-SOMETHING] CAUSE [y BECOME BROKEN}1 
On the other hand. verbs of existence and appearance such as exist and appear, 
which also have an unaccusative AS, have much simpler, monoclausal, LSRs.6 Now, 
if the arguments for a particular LSR cary over, as it seems reasonable to assume, to 
arguments for a particular structure conforming to the DAH, then Baker would need 
operations corresponding to Levin and Rappaport Hovav's linking rules mapping the 
underlying syntactic representations for break and exist onto identical L NP] (i.e. 

GRAMATICAL FUNCTIONS, TIlEMATIC ROLES, AND PHRASE STRUCTURE 
63 
syntactically unaccusative) structures. And that would involve an implicit 
recognition that a shallower level like D-Structure is needed. The DAH would 
remain, in effect, holding of lexical relations, but not (deep) syntactic ones. 
The idea, inherent to the DAH. that syntactic subcategorization can be derived 
from semantic role was central to Generative Semantics (Green 1974, McCawley 
1 976) and has been revived within Principles-and-Parameters approaches (Pesetsky 
1982; Chomsky 1 986b). There is little reason to believe it, however. Some of the 
more convincing rebutals to Generative Semantics outlined in detail the difficulties 
with such a program (see especially Oehrle 1976; 1977; Wasow 1 976). Wasow 
called attention to the intransitive verb elapse: 
My dictionary defines it as follows: '(of time) to slip by or pass away'; yet slip by may 
optionally take an object (The hours slipped by them unnoticetI), whereas elapse may 
not (·771e hours elapsed them unnoticed). Or consider the difference between dine, 
devour, and eat with respect to transitivity; dine is intransitive. devour requires an 
object, and eat takes an optional object Although the meanings of these words are 
subtly different. nothing in those differences predicts the difference with respect to 
transitivity (i.e., all seem to designate two-place predicates involving both some sort of 
food and a consumer offood). (Wasow 1976: 282) 
Grimshaw (1979) documents a number of interesting mismatches between s­
selection and c-selection. For example, she compares the verbs ask and inquiret both 
of which s-select a question: 
(16)a. 
b. 
I asked what the time was. 
I inquired what the time was. 
Only ask, however, c-selects NP: 
(17)a. 
b. 
I asked the time. 
'" I inquired the time. 
The only attempt of which I am aware to subvert Grimshaw's conclusiont the appeal 
to Case theory in Pesetsky 1982, has been demonstrated to be inadequate in 
Rothstein 1992. It would appear, then, that the subcategorizational properties of 
heads need to be formulated at a level of D-structure. not at a level in which the 
DAH holds. 
The nonsemantic basis for strict subcategorization holds even for those predicates 
instrumental in the formulation of the DAH. Consider shelve, for example: 
Hale and Keyser's proposal claims that the NP sheifsatisfies the Location role in We 
shelved the books. However, We shelved the books on the top shelf has an overt 
Location, hence a double filling of the Location role. This of course violates UTAH, 
since it is impossible for two different NPs with the same a-role to be in the same 
underlying syntactic position. In addition it violates the Theta-Criterion; it should be 
just as bad as, say, He opened the door with a la!y with a skeleton key. But it's perfect 
(lackendoff 1997: 232) 

, 
, 
64 
FREDERICK J. NEWMEYER 
As has frequently been noted (see, for example, Pullum 1996), the complex 
embedding structures necessitated by the DAH bear a striking resemblance to the 
structures posited within the Generative Semantics framework. Generative 
semanticists too appealed to the semantic parallels between such pairs as shelve the 
books and cause the books to be put on the shelf in order to argue that at a deep level 
of syntactic representation they had to have the same structure. Literally scores of 
rebuttals appeared in the literature in the 1970s, arguing that such an idea is 
fundamentally deficient. These rebuttals were accepted by the community of 
generative syntacticians which evolved into the Principles-and-Parameters school, 
among whose practitioners include Chomsky, Hale, Keyser, and Baker. The 
question, then, is why if these rebuttals were forceful in the year 1970 they are not 
forceful 30 years later.7 
It is worth citing the principal arguments from one of these earlier rebuttals, 
namely Fodor 1970. Fodor challenged the generative semantic derivation of kill and 
cause to die from the same underlying syntactic structure - a derivation adopted in 
its essentials by advocates of the DAH (see Baker in this volume). Fodor gave three 
reasons against such a derivation. First, he asked how, if kil is decomposed in the 
syntax, one might explain the ungrammaticality of(18): 
(I 8) 
*Mary killed John and it surprised me that he did so. (i.e. that he died) 
If John is underlyingly the subject of a predicate with the semantics of die (or the 
unaccusative object of that predicate), then we should expect it to pass the 'do so 
test', given that the following is grammatical: 
(19) 
Mary caused John to die, and it surprised me that he did so. 
Second, Fodor suggested that a decomposition approach should predict, contrary 
to fact. that (20) is grammatical: 
(20) 
*Mary killed John on Sunday by stabbing him on Saturday. 
Since (21) is grammatical, why shouldn't (20) be grammatical as well?: 
(21) 
Mary caused Bill to die on Sunday by stabbing him on Saturday. 
Finally, Fodor asked why we get the following contrast: 
(22)a. 
b. 
Maryj caused Johnj to die by _ij swallowing his tongue. 
Maryj killed Johnj by Ø .j swallowing his tongue. 
Again, we would expect the adjunct phrase to be able to modify both Mary and 
John, given that John is the underlying single argument of the intransitive (or 

GRAMATICAL FUNCTIONS, TIlEMA TIC ROLES, AND PHRASE STRUCTURE 
65 
unaccusative) die. Suffice it to say that none of these questions arise if kill is not 
lexically decomposed in the syntax. 
It has been suggested (in Harley 1995 and by Lisa Travis, personal 
communication) that Fodor's arguments are not transferable to current work 
involving decomposition, since the structures posited by generative semanticists and 
those posited by Baker, et aI. differ in a crucial way.s To be specific, generative 
semanticists posited an S node separating the parts of the decomposed predicate, 
while current work has a VP (or vP). If the processes that Fodor appealed to in order 
to subvert generative semantics were sensitive to sentential boundaries, but not 
'lesser' ones, then one would not predict the grammaticality of(18) and (20), nor the 
ambiguity of (22b). One cannot, of course, dismiss such a possibility out of hand. 
Nor should one jump to accept it. Until the properties of 'light VPs' are better 
understood and elaborated, appeal to them to rescue the DAR from a version of 
Fodor's assault remains pure speculation. 
To summarize, the decomposition structures demanded by the DAR do not 
render superfluous a level with the properties of D-structure. This level is needed in 
any event, thereby undermining any argument based on simplicity or elegance that 
might be advanced in favor of the DAH. 
3.2 
Problems with proto-thematic-roles 
As was pointed out in §2.2, Baker appeals to Dowty's prototype approach to a-roles 
in order to bring the number of such roles into alignment with the number of 
grammatical functions at a deep level of syntax. Unfortunately for this approach 
(and for the DAH), it is not difficult to find transitive verbs whose subjects and 
objects do not measure up to Dowty's thematic criteria for them. Baker (in this 
volume) recognizes the problem with like. But consider also such stative predicates 
as receive, inherit, undergo. and sustain. To illustrate, let us measure sentence (14d), 
repeated as (23), against Dowty's proto-Agent entailments: 
(23) 
(24)a. 
h. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
John received a package from Mary. 
VOLITION: Mary 
SENTIENCEIPERCEPTION: d.n.a 
CAUSATION: Mary 
MOVEMENT: the letter 
INDEPENDENT EXISTENCE: John. Mary 
John is a 'Proto-Agent' 'Only by one-half of one test, while Mary passes two and one 
half. Hence, one would predict that Mary, not John, should be subject. 

. 
\ 
66 
FREDERICK J. NEWMEYER 
One might, on the other hand, choose to interpret Dowty's criteria as governing 
the necessary properties of the roles associated with each predicate, rather than 
focusing on individual sentences (such as (23» in which that predicate occurs.9 By 
this interpretation, the verb receive fares no better, as (25) illustrates. 
(25) 
Proto-Agt properties 
[recipient) 
[theme) 
[source] 
Volition 
no 
no 
no 
Sentience 
no 
no 
no 
Cause 
no 
no 
no 
Movement 
no 
yes 
no 
Independent existence 
yes 
yes 
yes 
Total 
1 
2 
1 
Proto-Pat properties 
[recipient) 
(theme) 
(source] 
Change of state 
no 
no 
no 
IncreDlental theme 
no 
no 
no 
Causally affected 
yes? 
yes 
no 
Relatively stationary 
yes 
no 
no 
No independ. existence 
no 
no 
no 
Total 
2 
1 
0 
If the assigrunents in (25) are correct, then for the verb receive, the theme should be 
the subject and the recipient should be the direct object, i.e., we should have 
sentences like *A package received John from Mary. As far as subject properties are 
concerned, the theme necessarily moves and has an independent existence, while the 
only necessary property of the recipient is its independent existence. (Note that 
sentences like The wall received a coat of paint illustrate that the recipient need not 
be sentient.) As far as object properties are concerned, recipients are, I beJieve, 
always causally affected by another participant and stationary relative to the 
movement of another participant.1o 
Passive sentences (and Dlost likely A·movements in general) pose a lethal 
problem for the attempt to link the DAH and the hypothesis of proto·thematic-roles. 
Consider the active-passive pair (26a·b). For the past two decades, or longer, it has 
been assumed that (26b) has a derivation scheDlatica1ly represented as (27) (though 
the intennediate trace in [Spec, VP] is a Dlore recent innovation): 
(26)a. 
b . 
Mary ate the chicken. 
The chicken was eaten by Mary. 

GRAMATICAL FUNCTIONS, THEMATIC ROLES, AND PHRASE STRUCTURE 
67 
(27) 
IP 
----
DP 
é 
the chickenj 
was 
DP 
I 
1; 
V' 
- 
V' 
PP 
ê 
ë 
V 
DP 
P 
DP 
I 
I 
I 
I 
eaten 
lj 
by 
Mary 
Such a derivation, however, seems to violate the UTAH even in its originaJ (weaker) 
version. Mary has identical a-roles in (26a) and (26b) and, therefore, by the VT AH, 
would have to be in identicaJ D-structure positions in those two sentences. I I  But 
agent phrases of passives have not been anaJyzed as originating in deep subject 
([Spec. IPD position since before Emonds (1970) - and the Theta..criterion. of 
course, explains why they canot originate there. So we have a fundamental conflict 
between the UTAH and the Theta-Criterion. Worse, however, is the fact that (27) 
leads to the assignment of the wrong a-roles, given a Dowtyan analysis. The 
argument with the most proto-Agent properties is not a deep subject; indeed the 
deep subject, being empty, has no thematic properties at all. That presents no 
problems for a semanticist like Dowty, who rejects null elements in syntactic 
derivations, but is highly problematic for the DAB. Even worse, the agent phrase 
can be omitted: 
(28) 
The chicken was eaten. 
As Dowty makes clear in his paper, in sentences with only one DP argument, that 
argument is assigned the subject position by default. But in (26b). the chicken needs 
to be an underlying direct object. 
One concludes from the failure of the prototype approach to thematic roles that 
we need a deep syntactic level in which the grammaticaJ functions borne by NP 
arguments are not in a one-to-one relation with their thematic statuS.12 
3.3 . Relational prominence and embedding prominence 
As noted in §2.2, Baker (1993, this volume) argues that relational prominence and 
embedding prominence reflect the same underlying generalization. Specifically, 
relational prominence is argued to be a type of embedding prominence, a result that 
can he derived, it is claimed, only if seemingly simple monoclausal structures are 
derived from more complex (lexico-semantically) decomposed structures. This 

, 
I 
68 
FREDERICK J. NEWMEYER 
section challenges that line of argumentation. It will suggest that Baker's 
identification of the two types of prominence is essentially correct. However, such 
an identification can be achieved without the semantic decomposition demanded by 
the DAH. In both cases, we simply have the prominence that is inherent in the 
asymmetrical c-command relation - a relation that governs many other types of 
gramatical asymmetries. 
Baker demonstrates that a large set of syntactic generalizations holding within 
simple clauses are manifested in (tmcontroversial) embedding structures. For 
example, consider botmd variable anaphora (29a-d), Condition C effects (30a-d), 
antecedenee of reciprocals (3 la-d), and NP movement (32a-d). The (a) examples in 
each set show relational prominence of subjects over objects, while the (b) examples 
show that objects do not manifest the same prominence over subjects. The (e) 
examples show that a matrix subject has embedding prominence over an embedded 
subject, and the (d) examples show that embedded subjects do not have prominence 
over matrix subjects: 
Bound variable anaphora: 
(29)a. 
Every boy persuaded his mother that video games were good. 
b. 
• Her son persuaded every woman that video games were good. 
c. 
Every boy persuaded the principal that his mother sang professionally. 
d. 
• Her son persuaded the principal that every woman sang 
professionally. 
Condition C 
(30)a. 
* He persuaded John 's mother that video games were good. 
b. 
Her son persuaded Martha that video games were good. 
c. 
*He persuaded the principal that John 's mother sang professionally. 
d. 
Her son persuaded the principal that Martha sang professionally. 
Antecedence of reciprocals 
(3 1)a. 
John and Mary persuaded each other's parents that video games were 
good. 
b. 
??Each other's children persuaded Joe and Martha that video games 
were good. 
c. 
John and Mary persuaded the principal that each other's parents sang 
professionally. 

GRAMATICAL FUNCTIONS, lHEMA TIC ROLES, AND PHRASE STRUCTURE 
69 
d. 
·Each other's children persuaded the principal that John and Mary 
sang professionally. 
NP-movement 
(32)a 
John fell t. 
b. 
·t shouted John. 
c. 
John seemed to win the race. 
d. 
*t said [that John seemed that it would rain] 
Baker attempts to derive the ungrammaticality of the (b) sentences from that of the 
(d) sentences by arguing that for all practical purposes the former have the same 
structure as the latter. That is, the structural relation between the subject and object 
in (a-b) parallels that between the matrix subject and the embedded subject in (c-d). 
In other words, a consequence of decomposition is that the subjects and objects in 
the (a) and (b) sentences are arguments of different predicates. The relevant 
constraints, then, would treat the (a-b) relation identically to that of the (c-d) 
relation. 
Before proceeding further, it is worth pointing out that identifYing the two types 
of prominence in the way desired by Baker is incompatible with conflation applying 
in the lexicon a la Hale and Keyser. In their approach. the (a-b) and (c-d) sentences 
would be structurally different throughout the syntactic derivation. Given that the 
generalizations governing the distribution of data in (29)-(32) are syntactic, rather 
than lexical. the Hale-Keyser approach has no formal mechanism available for 
deriving relational prominence from embedding prominence. 
Even in Baker's approach, in which conflation is purely syntactic, it is not clear 
that the semantically decomposed structures are sufficiently parallel to those in 
which sentential embedding uncontroversially exists in order for the prominence 
relations to be regarded as identical in the two types of structures. For example. he 
derives sentence (33) as illustrated in (34): 
(33) 
Mary will kill John. 

. \ 
70 
(34) 
FREDERICK J. NEWMEYER 
IP 
-----
NP 
I 
Mary; 
II 
-------
I 
I 
will 
I 
lj 
vP 
-------
NP 
v 
I 
v' 
--------
VP 
/ 
CAUSE 
V 
NP 
I 
I 
BE-KILLED 
John 
Tree (34), however, is not the structure of(35): 
(35) Mary will cause John to be killed. 
Sentence (35) has an internal INFL and therefore an internal IP. In order for the 
prominence relations in (33) to parallel those in (35), the VP separating CAUSE 
from BE-KILLED in (33) has to 'count' as the same as the IP separating cause and 
be killed in (35). But is that a reasonable assumption? Recall from §3.l the 
suggestion that Fodor's arguments against deriving kill from cause to die do not 
apply to Baker's minimalist version of this derivation because Baker does not posit 
an internal IP. So, to escape the Fodorian refutation, VP and IP must have crucially 
diferent properties. Again, in the absence of a theory elucidating the behavior of the 
constituents of light VPs, we have no way of knowing whether prominence relations 
within them should or should not be expected to parallel prominence relations where 
a full IP occurs. 
The principal objection, however, to decomposition as a means of unifying 
relational and embedding prominence is that it is unnecessary to take this step to get 
the desired result. In the two most frequently adopted approaches to phrase structure 
- the 'classic' view that allows ternary branching and the 'minimalist' approach 
that unites binary branching with Larsonian shells -the two types of prominence 
are already united by means of the asymmetrical c-command relation. In the former 
approach. which goes back at least to Rosenbaum (1967) and has been defended 
more recently in Jackendoff (1990). embedded sentences are sisters to V and any 
other complements to that V. Hence, any element internal to that embedded S will 
necessarily be asymmetrically c-commanded by any element in the higher 
sentence.13 In the latter approach (see Larson 1988), in which SUbcategorized 
complements are nested, the geometry assumed demands that any element in a 
higher clause will asymmetrically c-command any element in a lower clause. Given 
the practically universal assumption that subject projections are higher than object 
projections. the asymmetrical c-command relation will be available via the 

GRAMATICAL FUNCTIONS, THEMATIC ROLES, AND PHRASE SlRUCTIJRE 
71 
specifier/complement relation. Hence, if we adopt one ofthese two approaches there 
is no reason to decompose simplex clauses, since asymmetrical prominence is an 
automatic consequence of asymmetrical c-command. 
Only in an approach that assumes binary branching but rejects Larsonian shells 
would embedding prominence not fall out from asymmetrical c-command. 
However, few, if any, linguists take such a position, since Larson provided the 
strongest empirical argument Jor binary branching - it is necessary if binding 
principles are defined on c-command relations. Without Larsonian shells, therefore, 
binmy branching is not a particularly compelling theoretical innovation (but see 
Kayne 1984, 1994).14 
'The most serious problem for the idea that capturing prominence relations 
demands semantic decomposition is it leads to the posi.ing of decomposition where 
few would find it palatable. To begin, (36-38) below demonstrate the prominence of 
subject NPs over NPs in adjunct PPs: 
Bound variable anaphora: 
(36)a. 
Every boy slept [in his own bed] 
b. 
* He slept [in every boy's bed] 
Condition C: 
(37)a. 
John slept [in his bed] 
b. 
* He slept [in John 's bed] 
Antecedence of reciprocals: 
(38)a. 
John and Mary live in Chicago [near each other's children] 
b. 
*Each other's children live in Chicago [near John and Mary] 
Presumably, then, following Baker, PP adjuncts of the intransitive verbs sleep and 
live have to be associated with some predicate other than those verbs and hence 
adjunct boundaries have to be structurally parallel to clausal boundaries. Otherwise, 
the structural relation between every boy and his in (36a) would not parallel that in 
(29c); the structural relation between he and every boy's in (36b) would not parallel 
that in (29d); and so on. But what predicate? One with a locative reading? If so, then 
what argument(s) would this predicate take that would allow the structure to be true 
to both the semantics and to the proto-thematic role hypothesis and at the same time 
not block coreference in the (a) sentences of{36-38)? The answers to these questions 
are by no means obvious. 
IS 
A parallel point could be made with respect to movements within clauses. 
Consider the fact that manner adverbs can be fronted within a clause, but sentence­
adverbs cannot be lowered into the VP (with a preservation of the sentence-adverb 
reading): 
. 

, 
I 
72 
FREDERICK J. NEWMEYER 
Adverb movement 
(39)a. 
John cut the salami carefully 
b. 
CarefullYi John cut the salami tl 
(40)a. 
Incredibly, John cut himself 
b. 
*lj John [vpeut himselfincrediblyiJ 
Since asymmetrical NP movement within a clause, as in (32a.b), suggests to Baker 
that the subject and object are arguments of different predicates, by parity of 
reasoning, given (39·40), subjects and manner adverbs must be as well. Again, one 
wonders what those two predicates might be. 
Head movements pose an even more serious challenge to the idea that all 
prominence relations reduce to embedding prominence, through the vehicle of 
semantic decomposition. So, within a CP, V may be raised to INFL, but !NFL may 
not be lowered to V; INFL may be raised to COMP, but COMP may not be lowered 
to !NFL: 
(41)a. 
IP 
/ 
Spec, IP 
I' 
, 
I 
VP 
tsr 
(42)a. 
CP 
/ 
Spec, CP 
C' 
/ 
C 
IP 
4 
Spec, IP 
I' 
I 
I 
b. 
IP 
0 
Spec, IP 
I' 
ì 
VP 
è 
Spec, VP 
V' 
I 
V 
b. 
CP 
0 
Spec, CP 
C' 
1 
C 
IP 
5 
Spec, IP 
I' 
I 
I 

GRAMMATICAL FUNCTIONSt THEMATIC ROLES, AND PHRASE STRUCTIJRE 
73 
Such facts put advocates of semantic decomposition on the horns of a dilemma. On 
the one hand, they might attempt to be consistent and derive these asymmetrical 
movement possibilities by positing alternative structures to (4I a-b) and (42a-b) that 
parallel those needed to capture the asymmetrical movement possibilities exhibited 
in (32a-d). One wonders what those structures would look like. On the other hand, 
they might opt out from a decomposition analysis and simply take the traditional 
position that the asymmetry of movement follows from asymmetry of c-command. 
But if so, then why wouldn't asymmetrical c-command suffice to explain (32a-d) as 
well? 
In factt cases of grammatical asymmetries resulting from one element displaying 
prominenCe over another are legion. For example, verbs select the complementizer 
of the subordinate clauses that they introduce, while complementizers never choose 
the verb of the higher clause; complementizers play a role in the choice of INFL 
within their clause, but not vice-versa; and it is the TNS feature of INFL that 
determines verbal morphology, not the other way around. With respect to sequence 
of tense phenomena, it is the tense of the higher clause that determines the 'tense 
shift' in the lower clause, it is not the lower tense that determines the higher. And 
deletion rules as well, exhibit prominence: 
(43)a. 
b. 
I'll sweep the floor only because Arthur will __ too. 
*1 will _ too, only because Arthur will sweep the floor. 
In each of these cases, the prominence relation is a simple reflection of asymmetrical 
c-command. Given the wealth of grammatical generalizations that exhibit this 
structural relation, it is hardly surprising that it governs intraclausal relational 
prominence as well. There is no need to resort to semantic decomposition. 
This section will conclude on a more speCUlative note. Insofar as it makes sense 
to think of one form of prominence being derivative of another form, it seems more 
plausible to regard embedding prominence as being derivative of relational 
prominence, rather than vice-versa. By several criteria, relational prominence is 
more basic. First, and trivially, every sentence has a main clause, but not all have 
(superficial) dependent clauses. Hence relational prominence is always overtly 
manifested, while embedding prominence is only sometimes manifested. The idea of 
embedding prominence driving relational prominence therefore has a cart-before­
the-horse feel to it. It is also worth pointing out that the text count of utterances with 
relative or complement clauses is vastly lower than those with main clauses alone 
(Biber 1989). If grammatical principles are derivative to some degree of facts ahout 
language use (a position characteristic of, but not unique to the 'functionalist' school 
- see also Hawkins 1994, Newmeyer 1998) - then the idea of a priority status for 
embedding prominence seems particularly problematic. 
Second, it has long been known (see Ross 1973a) that subordinate clause 
phenomena form a proper subset of main clause phenomena. Again. why would 
grammar be designed so that principles governing the latter would be beholden to 
those governing the former? Third, there are learnability arguments for the centrality 

, 
, 
74 
FREDERICK J. NEWMEYER 
of main clauses (or main clauses plus the left edges of subordinate clauses). 
Lightfoot (1991) argues that all the child needs to construct his or her grammar are 
cues from the matrix S. Again, the centrality of embedding structures is called into 
question. And finally, linguistically-informed research in language evolution is 
virtually unanimous on the idea that subordinate clauses are a later development 
than simple clauses (see, for example, Bickerton 1990, Carstairs-McCarthy 1999). It 
seems odd that if the latter existed prior to the former, prominence relations within 
them would have had to 'wait' until the arrival of subordinate clauses. 
In short, there appear to be no convincing argument for the semantic 
decomposition required by the DAH on the basis of the parallels between relational 
prominence and embedding prominence. Such a conclusion, therefore. further 
undermines the DAH. 
4. CONCLUSION 
Much current minimalist work assumes that grammatical functions, thematic roles, 
and configurational structure are in alignment, that is, a particular value for one 
implies a particular value for the others. It has been argued that such a view is 
untenable. The intuitions of earlier generations of formal syntacticians are correct -
while the three constructs are not randomly associated, they cannot be linked in a 
one-to-one fashion. 
NOTES 
I would like to thank Robert Chametsky, William Davies, Stanley Dubinsky, Heidi Harley, Julia 
Herschensohn, and Ray lackendoff for their belpful oomments on an earlier version of this paper. No 
doubt I wil come to wish that I had followed their advice more closely. 
2 
Chomsky was later to reformulate the Theta-Criterion as a property of chains, as follows: 
Each argument 11 appears in chain oontaining a unique visible a-position P, and each a-position P is 
visible in a chain containing a unique argument 11. (Chomsky 1986b: 97) 
He wrote that 'this fonnulation of lite Theta-Criterion permits a a-position to receive mUltiple 8-
roles, as in [(Sa)]' (p. 97). I confess that I do not understand how this could be so. 
l 
For example, the ECP prevents an incorporation which would lead to an embedded underlying subject 
becoming a derived oblique ($the girl fall-made onlto the pot) or one in which a verb in a sentential 
subjcct is incorporated ({thaI the pot foil] made the girl laugh Ύ$ the pot fall-made the girl laugh). In 
neither case is the trace of movement properly governed. 
4 
Stanley Dubinsky has observed (p.c.) that Larsonian shells go hand-in-hand willt a decomposition 
approach. While lItey do not necessarily involve extra (abstract) lexical heads (and their projections), they 
do involve extra (empty) heads (and their projections). The head of a shell is therefore neither lexical nor 
clearly functional. It is worth pointing out that Baker (1997: 123) assumes Larsonian shells and Larson 
(1988) the UTAH. For extensive discussion of this and related points, see Chametsky (200). 
, 
Levin and Rappaport Hovav note lItat the causer is often an Agent, but it need not be: natural forces 
such as earthquakes can fill the higher external argument position, for example. 
6 
Unfortunately, Levin and Rappaport Hovav do not provide explicit LSRs for any verbs in this class. 

GRAMATICAL FUNCTIONS, TIlEMA TIC ROLES, AND pHRASE STRUCTURE 
75 
7 
What would lead Chomsky to embrace an approach that he had once spumed? My (highly 
speculative!) answer is that it derives from his abandonment. in the course of the 1 9705, of an 
independent level of semantic representation. That move created a dynamic encouraging the importation 
of purely semantic constructs, such as thematic roles, directly into the syntax. Hence the Theta-Criterion. 
And given the Theta-Criterion, the DAH and the decomposition that it enrails follow as a matter of course 
(see §2.1 and 2.2). 
8 
Harley (1995: §3.2.1.3) suggests that Fodor's arguments do not go through becausc the event structure 
of kiD is not the same as that of cause to die. In the former, she argues. there is one event, in the latter, the 
causation is a separate event from the dying. The two-event structure of cause to die provides two 
possible domains for do so ellipsis, adjunction of time adverbials. and control of instrumental adverbials. 
9 
Though Baker (1997) in his discussion of Dowty's hypothesis, does appear to adopt the latter 
interpretation. 
10 Dowty's theory countenances cases in which neither argument 'wins'. Thus, according to him,feor 
and frighten and other such pairs arise precisely because the arguments are so close in tenns of their 
proto-Agent and proto-Patient entailments. It is not clear how a theory that works this way would fit into 
the DAH view that is being critiqued here. 
11 Baker. lohnson. and Roberts (1989), however. dispute this claim. In their analysis the UTAH is not 
violated, since passive morphology absorbs the external thematic role and the agent PP (when present) 
acts as a doubled clitic. Discussion and criticism of their approach would take us too far afield. 
11 For other critiques of the proto-role hypothesis, se lackendoff (1996) and Croft {1998}. 
13 If lackendoff is correct, then, as he notes, linear precedence as well as c-command will be a relevant 
factor in determining relational prominence (on this point, se also Bam and Lasnile 1986 and Williams 
1994). 
14 
I thank William Davies and Stanley Dubinsky (p. c.) for the observations of this paragraph. 
IS 
William Davies and Stanley Dubinsky (p.c.) sUggest that the approach advocated in Pesetsky (J 995) 
would readily accommodate the presence of a locative predicate in (36-38). While such is indeed the case, 
it is important to point out that Pesetsky adopts a much weaker theory than the DAR His 'Universal 
Alignment Hypothesis' does not demand that there be a biunique relationship between thematic roles and 
syntactic positions, but only that the linking patterns between the two be predictable. Thus Pesetsky is not 
required to posit decomposition in as many circumstances as is Baker and, in general, canot derive 
relational prominence from embedding prominence. In fact, as I understand Pesetsky's approach, it is 
fully compatible with my hypothesis that prominence relations fall out from asymmetrical c-command. 


ALEX ALSINA 
IS CASE ANOTHER NAME FOR GRAMATICAL 
FUNCTION? EVIDENCE FROM OBJECT 
ASYMMETRIES· 
The facts of double object constructions in languages where objects are not 
distinguished by means of grammatical (or overt) case have been accounted for in a 
variety of ways often making crucial use of notions such as grammatical functions, 
grammatical relations, or Case, depending on the theoretical framework. Within 
GB,l one of the most successful approaches assumes that objects are distinguished 
by means of a contrast in terms of Case (Baker 1988a,b). According to this approach, 
an object has different syntactic properties depending on whether it has inherent or 
structural Case. The question· that I want to raise is whether the term Case as used 
for this purpose is justified on cross-linguistic grounds. It could be that the term 
Case captures important properties common to languages both with and without 
grammatical case or it could be that it is just a way of avoiding the term 
"grammatical function" in a framework that claims not to have grammatical 
functions as primitive notions and that, by referring to two different concepts 
(namely, grammatical case and grammatical function), it complicates the 
formulation of a cross-linguistic theory of object asymmetries. 
I will proceed as follows. First, I will show that the notion of gramatical 
function is captured in GB by means of Case and will argue that, despite claims to 
the contrary, it is not a derived notion, but a primitive notion, of the GB framework. 
In section two, I will present the facts of object asymmetries in languages such as 
Cbichewa and show how the abstract Case distinctions are used to account for these 
facts. In section three, I will examine equivalent facts in a case-marking language 
(Catalan) and will propose the most reasonable correspondence between abstract 
Case and grammatical case in this language. In section four, I will show that there 
are serious problems with positing a single universal distinction in terms of Case for 
a cross-linguistic analysis of object asymmetries. Finally, I will conclude that the 
Case theory proposed for languages like Chichewa by Baker 1988a,b cannot be 
extended to languages with overt case and that, therefore, in languages without 
grammatical case, Case is not case, but simply another name for "grammatical 
function." 
77 
William D. Davies and Stanley Dubinsky reds.), Objects and other subjects: 
Grammatica/functions, functional categories, and conjigurationaiity, 77-102. 
(Q 2001 KJuwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands. 

, 
\ 
78 
ALEX ALSINA 
I .  ABSTRACT CASE AND GRAMMATICAL FUNCTIONS 
In this section I will point out some differences and similarities between the use 
of abstract Case in some versions of GB and the use of grammatical functions in 
other frameworks. A standard claim has been that grammatical functions are 
primitive theoretical constructs in frameworks such as Relational Grammar, or RG, 
(as presented in Perlmutter and Postal 1983b, among others) and Lexical-Functional 
Grammar, or LFG, (as in Bresnan 1982b, among others) but are derived notions in 
GB. In RG and LFG, grammatical functions such as subject are said to be primitive 
because they cannot be derived from theoretical constructs whose purpose is not 
exclusively that of defining grammatical functions. This is true whether grammatical 
functions are treated as atomic notions, that is, not decomposable into smaller 
notions, as in many versions of these frameworks, where the notions "subject" or 
"object" are not taken to be made up of smaller elements, or are treated as the 
combination of features whose sole purpose is to define grammatical functions. For 
example, in the version of LFG found in Bresnan and Kanerva 1989. Bresnan and 
Moshi 1 991, and Alsina and Mchombo 1 993, grammatical functions can bc regarded 
as composed of the features [±rJ and [:1:0]. These features have no other role but to 
defme and classify grammatical functions. Therefore, even in these versions of LPG, 
grammatical functions should be seen as primitives of the theoretical framework, 
since the constructs from which grammatical functions are derived have no other 
purpose but to define and classify grammatical functions. 
In contrast with RG and LFG, GB does not use grammatical function labels such 
as subject or object as primitive notions of the framework, since it is claimed that 
these labels merely describe specific phrase structure configurations. The term 
"subject," for example, describes the XP position in Spec ofI'. None of the elements 
involved in the representation of the notion of subject in GB is designed exclusively 
for the definition of grammatical functions. The elements involved are X' Theory 
and syntactic categories such as I (for "Inflection") all of which have a variety of 
uses in the framework. This is a debatable point, although I will not dwell on it here, 
as we could perhaps argue that the functional category I has as its main function 
defining the grammatical function "subject." Among its other functions is that of 
being the position in which tensed auxiliaries can appear in English (the other 
position in which they can appear being C). However, since not all languages exhibit 
the special distribution of auxiliaries found in English, it appears that the association 
of I with tensed auxiliaries is a language-particular property of this category. It 
might then be argued that the only universal role of the category I is defining the 
notion of subject. (I has been replaced in this function by other categories in 
subsequent developments of the framework; in some versions, T or AgrS can be 
viewed as fulfilling the same role.) 
However, the notion of grammatical function as used in frameworks like LPG is 
captured in GB not only by means of particular phrase structure configurations, but 
also by means of the notion of abstract Case. Different grammatical categories are 
assumed to assign different types of abstract Cases to the categories that they 
govern: I (at least, tensed I) assigns nominative Case and V can assign accusative 
Case. It is important to note that, although terms such as Case, nominative. and 

IS CASE ANomER NAME FOR GRAMMATICAL FUNCTIoN? 
79 
accusative are used. these tenns do not refer to what is generally taken to be 
grammatical case. It is for the purpose of distinguishing abstract Case fonn 
grammatical case that the word "Case" is spelled with a capital when referring to 
abstract Case. Grammatical case (also called morphological case) describes a system 
of overt oppositions that serve to identify the grammatical function or the thematic 
role of the various dependants in a clause. In a language like Latin, nominative case 
identifies subjects of tensed clauses, among other uses, and accusative case marks 
the objects of certain verbs and prepositions, the subjects of certain infinitival 
clauses, etc. Despite the correlation that exists in languages like Latin between 
grammatical case and grammatical function, it is not possible to reduce gramatical 
functions to gramatical -case. For ęxample, not aU languages have a system of 
grammatical case; yet, presumably all languages hnve different grammatical 
functions. Chichewa is an example of a language without grammatical case in which 
the distinction between grammatical functions such as subject and object is 
manifested in a variety of ways. And even in languages with a rich system of 
grammatical case, such as Icelandic, case and gramatical function need to be kept 
distinct. This is a point made by Holmberg and Platzack 1995:29ff, where a 
distinction is made between lexical Case and structural Case. which seems to 
correspond, at least roughly, to the distinction between grammatical case and 
grammatical function respectively. 
-
The basic assumption in GB Case Theory is that all languages use abstract Case, 
even though not all languages have grammatical case. Since all NPs (at least, overt 
NPs) need abstract Case, as required by the Case Filter, and different features of 
abstract Case are assigned to different positions in phrase structure, abstract Case 
can be seen as a mechanism that licenses different grammatical functions. Thus, a 
subject- of a tensed clause is not only an NP in Spec on', but an NP with nominative 
Case, and an object is not only an NP in the complement position of a verb (or a 
preposition), but an NP with accusative Case. In this way, the representation of 
grammatical functions in GB can be viewed as being decomposed into two parts: 
phrase structure configuration and licensing by Case. These two facets of the 
representation of grammatical functions in GB are not redundant, because the phrase 
structure configuration of a partiCUlar grammatical function does not correspond to a 
unique Case feature. This is the situation. for example. with the grammatical 
function subject (Spec ofI'). as it is assigned nominative Case in tensed clauses, but 
not in non finite clauses. 
Abstract Case becomes crucial in distinguishing grammatical functions in the 
analysis of double object constructions. Many theories within GB, such as Baker 
1 988a,b, rely primarily on different Case features to capture the distinction between 
the two objects. The fundamental difference between a primary and a secondary 
object is captured as the difference between structural Case and inherent Case, two 
different types of Cases.2 In such theories. even though there may be a variety of 
phrase structure configurations for objects, the two types of Cases are not 
automatically predictable on the basis of phrase structure.3 Thus. the distinction 
between structural and inherent Case emerges as the relevant means of capturing the 
different behavior of the two objects in a double object construction. 

, 
\ 
80 
ALEX ALSINA 
The abstract Case distinction between structural and inherent Case, as used in 
Baker 1 988a,b, is equivalent to other distinctions proposed in the literature involving 
the terminology of grammatical functions, instead of Case. On the assumption that 
abstract Case is distinct from grammatical case, the contrast between structural and 
inherent Case is a primitive distinction of the framework (not derived from more 
elementary concepts) whose purpose is to characterize two different grammatical 
functions, sometimes called primary and secondary object. In this light, then, the 
often cited claim that GB does not have primitive grammatical functions is not 
correct. At least in theories such as Baker 1 988a,b, there are primitive grammatical 
functions, although the tenninology used to refer to them (structurally Case-marked 
NP vs. inherently Case-marked NP) does not make this obvious. 
A plausible definition of grammatical function in a framework-neutral fashion is 
that a particular grammatical function (GF) denotes a class of morpho syntactic 
positions (or expressions) that are in covariation (formal interdependence) or in 
complementary distribution and, for any given predicate, have the same mapping to 
semantic roles (including possibly the nul mapping).4 (See Bresnan and Moshi 
1990: 165-1 66 and Bresnan 2000:94 for similar characterizations of grammatical 
functions.) For example, in Chichewa, a particular thematic role may be expressed 
as an NP adjacent to the verb in the VP or as an object marker prefixed to the verb 
stem or as no overt expression provided it can be interpreted as a displaced (or wh-) 
constituent. We can see that these different expressions behave as a class, among 
other reasons, because they are in complementary distribution (at least, in part): for 
example, a given semantic role may be encoded alternatively either as an NP in the 
VP or as an object marker, but not as both at the same time. Also, if an operation on 
the verb (such as passivization) causes the resulting structure to lack one of these 
expressions, the structure will also lack the other expressions belonging to the same 
class. In LFG, this class of expressions is called unrestricted object; in GB, it is 
called structurally Case-marked object. These two tenns are synonymous, since they 
denote the same reality, which is a class of expressions; therefore, they denote a 
grammatical function. The concept of structural Case in OB is a primitive notion and 
its sole purpose is to define a OF. Therefore, grammatical functions in GB are 
primitive notions of the framework, as they are made up of elements whose sole 
purpose is to define GFs. 
What this paper examines is to what extent it is appropriate to try to account for 
object asymmetries in languages with grammatical case and in languages without 
grammatical case by positing one single set of theoretical distinctions. The 
conclusion is relevant both for theories in which these theoretical distinctions are 
called grammatical functions and for theories in which they are called different types 
of Case. As we have seen, grammatical functions and abstract Case are different 
names for the same concept. 
2. CHICHEWA 
The distinction between inherent and structural Case is appealed to in Baker 
1 988a,b in order to account for certain asymmetries among objects. These 

; 
΍ 
i 
1 
IS CASE ANOTIlER NAME FOR GRAMATICAL RJNCTION? 
81 
asymmetries follow from the theoretical differences between these two types of 
Cases. Inherent Case is assumed to be assigned to a particular thematic role. whereas 
structural Case is not tied to any particular thematic role. The assignment of 
structural Case requires adjacency, whereas inherent Case does not impose this 
restriction. Structural Case, but not inherent Case, is affected by certain operations 
such as passivization and object marking. 
When a clause includes a beneficiary or goal object, as well as a theme or patient 
object, the former is assumed to be assigned structural Case, whereas the latter is 
assigned inherent Case. Although structural Case can be assigned to any thematic 
role, inherent Case can only be assigned to themes or patients (as well as to some 
other roles. which we will not be concerned with here). As a result of this, a 
beneficiary or goal object must be assigned structural Case. as it cannot be assigned 
inherent Case and all NPs must have Case. Chichewa is assumed to be a language in 
which verbs can assign at most one structural Case. Since structural Case is assigned 
to the beneficiary or goal object. the theme or patient object cannot also receive 
structural Case, and so must be assigned inherent Case. 
Thus, we can explain the word order asymmetry shown in (I) between a 
beneficiary and a theme object cooccuring in a clause in Chichewa:s 
(I)a. 
Nkhandwe zi-ku-meny-er-a 
ana 
nJo vu. 
10 foxes 
10 S-PR-hit-AP-FV 2 children 9 elephant 
'The foxes are hitting the elephant for the children. • 
b. 
*Nkhandwe zi-ku-meny-er-a 
njovu 
a vna. 
10 foxes 
10 S-PR-hit-AP-FV 9 elephant 2 children 
'The foxes are hitting the elephant for the children.' 
Since the beneficiary NP is assigned structural Case, it must be adjacent to the 
verb, as in (Ia). The theme NP, which is assigned inherent Case. need not be 
adjacent to the verb. The form in (Ib) violates the adjacency requirement on the 
assignment of structural Case. 
These two objects also differ in that only one of them, the beneficiary. can be 
expressed by means of an object marker: 
(2)a. 
Nkhandwe zi-ku-wa-meny-er-a 
nJo w 
(aVna). 
10 foxes 
10 S-PR-2 O-hit-AP-FV 9 elephant 2 children 
'The foxes are hitting the elephant for them (the children) .• 
b. 
*Nkhandwe zi-ku-i-meny-er-a 
ana 
(njo ·vu). 
10 foxes 
10 S-PR-9 O-hit-AP-FV 2 children 9 elephant 
'The foxes are hitting it for the children (the elephant). • 
On the assumption that an object marker is a manifestation of the structural Case 
feature of the verb (Baker 1 988b:371), we explain that the beneficiary argument. but 
not the theme argument, can be expressed by means of an object marker. The object 

82 
ALEX ALSINA 
marker uses up the single structural Case feature of the verb, making it impossible 
for the verb to take an NP that needs structural Case, such as the beneficiary NP in 
(2b). Instead, when an object marker is present, the verb can take an NP that is 
assigned inherent Case, such as the theme NP in (2a).6 
A similar contrast between the beneficiary and the theme arguments occurs when 
the verb is passivized: 
(3)a. 
AVna 
a-ku-meny-er-edw-a 
nJo vu 
(ndi nkha-ndwe). 
2 children 2 S-PR-hit-AP-PAS-FV 9 elephant by 1 0  foxes 
'The elephant is being hit for the children (by the foxes).' 
b. 
*Njovu 
i-ku-meny-er-edw-a 
ana 
(ndi nkha-ndwe). 
9 elephant 9 S-PR-hit-AP-P AS-FV 2 children by 1 0  foxes 
'The elephant is being hit for the children (by the foxes).' 
Assuming that the passive morpheme removes the verb's structural Case, it 
follows that, in a language like Chichewa, the verb can only assign inherent Case. 
Thus, the beneficiary NP can move to the subject position. where it receives 
structural (nominative) Case, whereas the theme argument appears in object position 
with inherent Case, as in (3a). If the theme NP should appear in subject position. as 
in (3b), the beneficiary NP, in object position. would not be able to satisfy the Case 
Filter, as it cannot receive inherent Case from the verb and the verb has no other 
Case but inherent Case. 
As we have seen, the distinction between inherent and structural Case can be 
used very successfully to account for syntactic asymmetries among objects in a 
language like Chichewa. At this point it should be noted that the role of this Case 
distinction in explaining object asymmetries is similar to other distinctions proposed 
in the literature. The Case distinction is equivalent to the distinction between Direct 
Object and Direct Object Chomeur found in classical RG treatments of double 
object constructions in languages like Chichewa. It is also equivalent to the 
distinction between primary and secondary object proposed by Dryer 1 986 and to 
the distinction between unrestricted object and restricted object found in Bresnan 
and Moshi 1 990 and Alsina and Mchombo 1 993. We should ask ourselves whether 
there is an advantage in attributing this distinction to Case theory, a theory that also 
has to deal with systems of overt case-marking. 
. 
If the theory summarized here inyolving an abstract Case distinction can be 
extended in a natural way from languages without grammatical case to languages 
with grammatical case, then there is good reason to assume that the same principles 
underlie both types of languages and that the relevant notion involved is abstract 
Case. If, on the other hand, that theory cannot be extended in a natural way to 
languages with a system of grammatical case, it will be necessary to admit that overt 
case 
distinctions and 
the distinctions among objects in 
languages 
without 
grammatical case are of a completely different nature and should not be subsumed 
under the notion of abstract Case. 

IS CASE ANOmER NAME FOR GRAMATICAL FUNCTION? 
83 
3. CATALAN 
In this section, we will examine a language that makes a distinction among 
objects manifested in the overt marking of these objects. Unlike Chichewa, where 
objects are not marked in any way that can help identify their thematic roles, Catalan 
(like the other Romance languages and like many other languages) marks the objects 
of a double object construction differently depending on their thematic role. For 
example, the goal (or indirect object) is marked with dative case, manifested as the 
preposition a when the argument is expressed as an NP or by means of specific clitic 
forms when the argument is expressed as a pronominal clitic, whereas the theme (or 
direct object) is in the accusative case, nonnally unmarked on NPs and characterized 
by a different set of clitics. Example (4) illustrates the difference in case-marking 
between the two object NPs in Catalan - the accusative theme I'amagatall and the 
dative goal a la rala. 
(4) 
El gat ha ensenyat I' 
arnagatall 
a 
la rata. 
the cat has shown 
the hiding place OAT the rat 
'The cat showed the rat the hiding place. • 
The first question to ask is whether both the theme and the goal complement in 
this clause are objects of the verb: given that one of them (the goal) is introduced by 
a preposition,' it might appear reasonable to suggest that the goal argument is in fact 
not an object of the verb, but an object of the preposition, and that the prepositional 
phrase is an oblique complement of the verb. However, there is abundant evidence 
showing that the goal argument in an example like (4) is an object. Alsina 
1996a:1 50-160 argues for the claim that the dative object in Catalan is an object and 
not an oblique complement, because it behaves like a direct object, and unlike an 
oblique, with respect to eight different phenomena, which we review in the 
following paragraph. 
(I) Personal pronouns with an object function are obligatorily expressed as 
clitics, with optional doubling; this is true both of direct objects and of indirect 
objects. Oblique phrases containing personal pron01UlS, on the other hand, are only 
optionally expressed as clitics, hi or en, and then without the possibility of doubling 
by independent pronouns. (Similar facts are noted by Kayne 1975:171 for French.) 
(2) Pronominal clitics representing an object, direct or indirect alike, express person 
and number distinctions, whereas the oblique clitics (hi and en) do not. (In addition, 
third person direct object clitics also express gender distinctions.) Also, there is no 
fonnal distinction between direct and indirect object in first and second person clitic 
forms, which is an indication of the commonality between the two objects. For 
example, the first person singular clitic form is em, the corresponding plural form is 
ens, etc., and each one can represent both a direct and an indirect object. (3) The 
reflexive clitic signals a binding relation between the logica) subject and an object, 
either direct or indirect, but never with an oblique argument. (4) In Catalan. object 
clitics, direct or indirect alike, can be modified by the "floating" quantifiers tot 'all', 
or cadascun 'each', but oblique c1itics cannot. (The corresponding fact is noted by 

84 
ALEX ALSINA 
Perlmutter 1984b301-302 for Italian; see also Kayne 1975 for French.) (5) As 
observed by Suiier 1988:427 for Spanish, objects, both accusative and dative, 
contrast with obliques with respect to pronominal coreference: a pronominal object 
must be diSjoint in reference with the subject of its clause, while a pronominal 
oblique (i.e., a pronominal object of an oblique preposition) is free to refer to the 
subject of its clause. (6) As reported in Demonte 1987 for Spanish, a possessive 
pronoun contained in the accusative object can be bound by a quantified dative 
object, as wen as by a quantified subject, but not by a quantified oblique. Likewise, 
a possessive pronoun contained in a dative object can be bound by a quantified 
accusative object, but not by a quantified oblique. (7) As noted in Rigau 1988:505ff, 
when the resumptive pronoun strategy is used in relative clauses in Catalan, strong 
(or emphatic) pronouns cannot be used as resumptive pronouns functioning as 
subjects or objects, both direct and indirect objects, although they can when 
functioning as the objects of prepositional obliques. (8) Like direct objects and 
subjects, indirect objects can be the target of secondary predication, whereas 
obliques cannot. 
All of these facts show that the dative or indirect object behaves like the 
accusative or direct object and unlike prepositional obliques. Therefore, we can 
confidently conclude that the dative object is an object, like the accusative object. 
Having established that a sentence such as (4) contains two objects, we need to 
decide which of the two should be assumed to have structural Case and which 
inherent Case. Given the assumption that inherent Case is tied to a particular 
thematic role, whereas structural Case is not, accusative case fits the description of 
structural Case better than dative does. For example, the single object of a 
monotransitive verb is generally (although not always) accusative and it may bear a 
variety of thematic roles; in contrast, goal and experiencer objects are typically 
dative, whether they occur with another object or as the single object. When an 
object does not bear a thematic role to the verb, as in raising to object (or ECM) 
constructions, the object is always accusative, as in El (acc.) considero un amic 'I 
consider him a friend'. The assumption that accusative is (generally) structural Case 
and dative is inherent Case is also made for Italian in Belletti and Rizzi 1988, for 
Spanish in Sui'ier 1 988, and for German in Haegeman 1 99 1 :  1 74-1 75. 
This assumption is consistent with the claim that structural Case is assigned 
under adjacency, whereas inherent Case is not. The unmarked order of two objects 
following the verb in Catalan is for the accusative object to follow the verb 
immediately and precede the dative object, as illustrated by the contrast between (4) 
and (5). 
(5) 
?*El gat ha ensenyat a 
la rata r amagatall. 
the cat has shown 
DA T the rat the hiding place 
'The cat showed the rat the hiding place. ' 
If accusative is structural Case and structural Case is assigned under adjacency, 
we have an explanation for the contrast between (4) and (5). In (4) the structurally 
Case-marked NP I'amagatall is adjacent to its Case-assigner, the verb, but in (5) it is 

IS CASE ANOTIER NAME FOR GRAMATICAL FUNCTION? 
85 
not, as the dative object appears between the two. The dative object, not being 
subject to the adjacency requirement, on the assumption that dative is inherent Case, 
can appear separated from the verb, as in (4). 
The contrast between the dative and the accusative object with respect to 
passivization can also be explained by appealing to the assumption that dative is 
inherent Case and accusative is structural Case. In the passive fonn in (6), the 
subject can only correspond to the accusative object of the active fonn, as in (6a), 
never to the dative object, as shown in (6b). 
(6)a. 
L' amagatall 
ha estat ensenyat a 
la rata. 
the hiding place has been shown 
OAT the rat 
'The hiding place was shown to the rat. ' 
b. 
*AJ0 
la rata ha 
estat ensenyada I' 
amagatall. 
DAT/0 the rat has been shown 
the hiding place 
'The rat was shown the hiding place. ' 
Given the standard assumption that the passive morpheme absorbs structural 
Case, a passive verb fonn cannot assign structural Case. If accusative case is 
structural Case, it follows that a passive verb form cannot take an accusative object. 
The NP that would be assigned accusative case in the active fonn must move to the 
Spec of IP in the passive structure so that it can receive Case. Since the passive 
morpheme does not absorb inherent Case, the object that is assigned inherent (i.e., 
dative) Case remains in the position where it is assigned Case. 
The facts about passivization are a strong indication that Catalan is not open to 
an analysis in which verbs can assign two structural Cases. There are languages for 
which such an analysis has been proposed, for example. Kinyarwanda and Japanese 
according to Baker 1988a:] 77. A feature of such languages is that either object in a 
double object construction can be the passive subject. which does not occur in 
Catalan. 
We have seen up to this point that both a language with grammatical case, such 
as Catalan, and a language without grammatical case, such as Chichewa, can be 
argued to use the distinction between structural and inherent Case. To the extent that 
this distinction has identical or similar consequences in the two languages, it 
reinforces the hypothesis that there is a universal theory of abstract Case. Under this 
view, grammatical case is one of the possible manifestations of abstract Case, but 
not the only one or a necessary one. A particular abstract Case assignment may or 
may not have a reflex in terms of overt case, depending on the language, but 
whatever other reflexes it has should be unifonn across languages. This is what we 
see in both Catalan and Chichewa regarding linear order of objects and choice of 
subject in passivization. In both languages, the NP with structural Case is adjacent to 
the verb and, therefore. precedes the other object in the active fonn and is the only 
possible subject in the passive fonn. 

, 
I 
86 
ALEX ALSINA 
4. PROBLEMS 
In spite of what the previous sections have shown, there are problems in trying to 
derive the facts of double object constructions in both types of languages (with and 
without grammatical case) from a single set of asswnptions about structural and 
inherent Case. These problems include: (a) differences regarding the correspondence 
between thematic roles and abstract Case, (b) differences regarding the ability of 
objects to be expressed by means of morphologically incorporated pronouns, (c) ' 
differences regarding the ability of the objects to be affected by lexical binding 
processes, and (d) differences regarding the ability of the putative inherently 
Case-marked object to appear as the sole object of the construction. If both 
languages are assumed to distinguish the two objccts of a double object construction 
by means of the distinction bctween structural and inherent Case and if this Case 
distinction has a uniform effect cross-linguistically (except with respect to whether it 
is manifested overtly or not), we predict that both languages should exhibit the same 
asymmetries among objects. But the fact is that the two languages behave differently 
in all four respects mentioned above. 
4. J Thematic role diferences 
The restrictions concerning which thematic roles may or may not be assigned 
inherent Case are different in Catalan and Chichewa. In Chichewa. goals, 
beneficiaries, and agents (causees in causative constructions) must be assigned 
structural Case. In examples (1)-(3), this phenomenon is illustrated with a 
beneficiary object. We can tell that the beneficiary must be assigned structural Case 
because it has to be adjacent to the verb when expressed as an object NP, it may be 
expressed by means of an object marker, and it has to be the subject of a passive 
form. The same facts are found with the goal object of a verb like pats-a 'give" 
which indicates that it too must be assigned structural Case. The agent causee object 
in causative constructions in Chichewa shows the same behavior as goal and 
beneficiary objects with respect to word order, object marking. and passivization. as 
is shown in Alsina 1 992. The following example illustrates this point with respect to 
word order: 
(7)a. 
NuVngu 
i-na-phik-its-a 
kadzidzi mallngu. 
9 porcupine 9 S-PS-cook-CST -FV 1 a owl 
6 pumpkins 
'The porcupine made the owl cook the pwnpkins. • 
b. 
*NuVngu 
i-na-phik-its-a 
maungU 
kadzi-dzi. 
9 porcupine 9 S-PS-cook-CST-FV 6 pwnpkins la owl 
'The porcupine made the owl cook the pwnpkins. ' 
The NP kadzidzi in (7) is the agent of the caused event, the cooking event. The 
assumption that this NP can only be assigned structural Case by the verb correctly 
accounts for the fact that it must appear adjacent to the verb, as in (7a), and cannot 

f . 
I 
! 
I 
\ 
IS CASE ANOmER NAME FOR GRAMATICAL FUNCTION? 
87 
be separated from it by another NP, as in (7b). This assumption. coupled with the 
assumption that Chichewa verbs can assign at most one structural Case. explains 
that it is the causee (the agent of the caused event), and not the cooccurring object, 
that can be expressed by means of an object marker and can be the subject of the 
passive form. 
In contrast with the analysis that we are driven to assume for Chichewa, the 
Catalan facts indicate that the appropriate analysis for Catalan is exactly the 
opposite. Examples (4)-(6) show that the goal object is marked with dative case. 
Having assumed that dative case is the morphological manifestation of inherent 
Case in Catalan, we have to conclude that the goal object is assigned inherent Case 
in Catalan. Beneficiary objects behave like goal objects in Catalan in that they too 
must be assigned dative case. The following example illustrates this point: 
(8)a. 
Li 
preparen 
una bona acollida, a 
la princesa. 
pro-3sg-dat prepare-3sg a 
good welcome DAT the princess 
'They are preparing a good welcome for the princess. ' 
b. 
No Ii 
podrlis 
areglar el cotxe, al 
director. 
not pro-3sg-dat will-be-able-2sg to-fix 
the car 
DAT-the director 
'Y ou will not be able to fix the car for the director.' 
In addition, the agent of a caused event in a causative construction in Catalan is also 
expressed as a dative object when the construction includes an accusative object. 
(9)a. 
Faran 
signar el document a 
tots els propietaris. 
will-make-3pl sign 
the document DAT all 
the owners 
'They will make all the owners sign the document. ' 
b. 
No Ii 
facis 
pintar tota la paret. 
not pro-3sg-dat make-2sg paint all the wall 
'Don't make him paint all the wall. ' 
In (9a), tots els propietaris is the agent of signar 'sign' and it is a dative object, as 
can be seen by the case marker a and because it can be replaced by a dative cHtic. In 
(9b). the agent of the caused event is represented by the dative dilic Ii, which clearly 
indicates that it is a dative object. 
According to Chomsky (1986b: 193-194), Case assignment is subject to the 
following uniformity condition: a verb that assigns inherent Case to an NP must also 
9-mark that NP (also assumed by Baker (1988a:1 I4, 1988b:366». This condition 
does not explicitly require inherent Case to be tied to the same thematic role or set of 
thematic roles in all languages, but it does imply this if we couple it with the 
assumption that a-marking is uniform cross-linguistically (as in Baker's (1 988a) 
UTAH). If we assume that a specific a-role cannot be assigned inherent Case 
because it is not a-marked by the verb (as is claimed by Baker 1988a,b for goals and 

88 
ALEX ALSINA 
beneficiaries), then this a-role should not be assigned inherent Case in any language. 
In addition, the a-marking requirement on the assignment of inherent Case runs into 
problems with causatives in Catalan. If we make the standard assumption that the 
causative verb,Jer in Catalan ([aran in (9a) andJacis in (9b» , a-marks only one NP 
argument, the causer, it follows that the causee is a-marked by the embedded verb, 
which assigns it the a-role of agent, experiencer, etc., but does not receive Case from 
this verb, since the causee should be the structural subject of the embedded verb and 
a verb cannot assign Case to its subject. It seems necessary to assume that the 
causative verb assigns Case to the causee even though it does not 8-mark this 
argument, but the Case assigned to the causee is inherent (dative), in violation of the 
uniformity condition just stated. 
In summary, objects whose thematic role is agent, beneficiary or goal must be 
assigned structural Case in Chichewa, whereas the same objects must be assigned 
inherent Case in Catalan, at least when they cooccur with an accusative object. 
4.2 Diforences regarding incorporated pronouns 
One of the important differences between structural Case and inherent Case in 
Chichewa is that object markers absorb (or manifest) the verb's structural Case, but 
not its inherent Case. This is assumed in Baker I 988b:371 following Borer 1984 and 
others. That means that an argument that is assigned structural Case by the verb may 
be expressed by means of an object marker, but an argument that is assigned 
inherent Case may not. Given the assumption that the beneficiary must be assigned 
structural Case in Chichewa, while the theme or patient may be assigned either 
structural or inherent Case, the beneficiary receives the single structural Case of the 
verb and the theme is left with inherent Case. Thus, only the beneficiary object can 
be expressed by means of an object marker, as illustrated in (2). 
This contrast between beneficiary and theme object is replicated in other double 
object constructions in Chichewa. A goal object or an agent object may be expressed 
by means of an object marker, like a beneficiary object, whereas the cooccuring 
object lacks this property. We can observe this contrast in a causative construction 
where the objects involved are an agent and a theme or patient 
{l O)a. 
b. 
NuVngu 
i-na-mu-phik-its-a 
maungu 
(kadzi-dzi). 
9 porcupine 9 S-PS-I O-cook-CST -FV 6 pumpkins 1 a owl 
'The porcupine made it cook the pumpkins (the owl).' 
*Nuvngu 
i-na-wa-phik-its-a 
kAdzi-dzj (maiingu). 
9 porcupine 9 S-PS-6 O-cook-CST-FV l a  owl 
6 pumpkins 
'The porcupine made the owl cook them (the pumpkins).' 
If we assume, as we did earlier, that the agent object must receive structural Case. it 
follows that it can be expressed by means of an object marker, as in (lOa). Since the 

t . 
I 
! 
f 
1 
J 
! 
! 
· IS CASE ANOTHER NAME FOR GRAMMATICAL FUNcrION? 
89 
patient object cannot also be assigned structural Case, it receives inherent Case and 
so cannot be expressed by means of an object marker. 
In Catalan, the linguistic fonn that corresponds most closely to object markers in 
Chichewa is what is known as pronominal clitics. There are some differences 
between object markers in the Bantu languages and pronominal clitics in Romance. 
For example, object markers in Chichewa are verbal prefixes occupying a specific 
slot in the verb fonn, between the tense marker and the verb root; in contrast, 
pronominal cIitics in Catalan appear sometimes preceding the verb and sometimes 
following it, depending on the verbal morphology. However, they are very similar as 
far as their syntactic and semantic properties are concerned. They both have a 
pronominal interpretation. they are referentially dependent on a discourse topic, they 
are noncontrastive, they show fonnal agreement with their antecedent, etc. (see 
Bresnan and Mchombo 1987). Therefore, it is reasonable to consider object markers 
in Bantu and pronominal clitics in Romance to be the same kind of linguistic device, 
which we can call morphologically incorporated pronouns. 
In Catalan, as in Chichewa, the structurally Case-marked object can be expressed 
by means of a morphologically incorporated pronoun. The object with structural 
Case, manifested as accusative case, in Catalan can be represented as a pronominal 
ctitic, as in (1 Ia), corresponding to (4), and in (l Ib), corresponding to (9a). 
(l1)a. 
EI gat I' 
ha ensenyat a 
la rata. 
the cat pro 3sg ace has shown 
OAT the rat 
'The cat showed it to the rat. ' 
b. 
EI 
faran 
signar a 
tots els propietaris. 
pro 3sg acc will-make-3pl sign DAT all the owners 
'They will make all the owners sign it. • 
However, unlike what happens in Chichewa, the inherently Case-marked object in 
Catalan can also be expressed by means of a morphologically incorporated pronoun. 
Since structural and inherent Case are morphologically distinguished in Catalan as 
accusative and dative case respectively, the pronominal clitics that correspond to 
objects with inherent, or dative, Case are morphologically different from those that 
correspond to objects with structural, or accusative, Case. Thus, examples (12a) and 
(12b) correspond to (4) and (9a) with the inherently Case-marked object expressed 
by means of an incorporated pronominal. 
. 
(12)a. 
b. 
EI gat Ii 
ha ensenyat I' amagatall. 
the cat pro-3sg-dat has shown 
the hiding place 
'The cat showed it the hiding place.' 
Els hi 
faran 
signar el document. 
pro 3pJ dat will·make-3pl sign the document 
'They will make them sign the document. ' 

90 
ALEX ALSINA 
In (1 I), the pronominal clitic r or el is the accusative object and, in (12), the 
pronominal clitics Ii and els hi are the dative object. In fact, both objects can 
simultaneously be expressed as pronominal clitics, as shown in (13):7 
(13)a. 
b. 
EI gat I' 
hi 
ha ensenyat. 
the cat pro 3sg acc pro dat has shown 
'The cat showed it to it. • 
Els hi 
faran 
signar. 
pro 3pl dat will-make-3pl sign 
'They will make them sign it. ' 
Thus, while Chichewa does not allow its inherently Case-marked objects to be 
expressed by means of morphologically incorporated pronouns, Catalan does. There 
is no apparent reason why. this difference should exist. The two languages differ 
with respect to the presence or absence of grammatical case. The abstract Case 
distinction. present in both languages, is manifested as a grammatical case 
distinction in Catalan, but not in Chichewa. There is no explanation for why this 
superficial difference between the two languages should also have an effect in 
whether inherently Case-marked objects can be expressed as incorporated pronouns 
or not. Note, furthermore, that Catalan is a problem for the claim that incorporated 
pronominals are the manifestation of structural Case, as assumed by Baker 1988b 
and others. 
. 
4.3 Diferences regarding lexical binding 
Processes of lexical binding affect the argument structure of a verb by binding two 
of the thematic roles of the verb, with the result that one single grammatical function 
corresponds to the two bound arguments. The reciprocal morpheme in Chichewa 
involves such a process, as has been argued in Alsina 1993, 1 999, 2001, Bresnan 
and Mchombo 1985, Dalrymple, Mchombo, and Peters 1994, Mchombo 1992, 1993. 
There is considerable evidence for this claim. For example, like other processes that 
affect argument structure, such as causativization, reciprocalization can feed other 
processes that affect argument structure and processes that change the syntactic 
category of the lexical item. In this respect, the reciprocal morpheme differs 
markedly from object markers (including the reflexive morpheme, which patterns 
like an object marker): a verb form containing the reciprocal morpheme can be 
causativized or nominalized, whereas a verb form containing an object marker 
cannot be either causativized or nominalized (see Alsina 2001). Such differences can 
be explained by assuming that object markers are the overt expression of an object 
function, but a reciprocal morpheme performs an operation on argument structure by 
which two thematic roles are expressed as one single grammatical function. 
As a result of this, a reciprocalized verb form in Chichewa has one object less 
than the same verb without the reciprocal morpheme. If we compare the double 
object construction in (1) with its reciprocalized counterpart in (14a), we observe 

IS CASE ANOTHER NAME FOR GRAMATICAL FUNCTION? 
91 
that the latter has one object less than the fonner. Another important feature of the 
reciprocal morpheme is that it treats the two objects of a double object construction 
in an asymmetrical fashion: the beneficiary object can be affected by the process of 
lexical binding, as we see in (1 4a), but the theme or patient object cannot be affected 
by this process when a beneficiary object is present, as in (14b). 
(14)a.
Nkha-ndwe zi-ku-meny-er-an-a 
nJo vu. 
1 0  foxes 
10 S-PR-hit-AP-RCP-FV 9 elephant 
'The foxes are hitting the elephant for each other. t 
b. 
*Nkhandwe zi-ku-meny-er-an-a 
a vna. 
10 foxes 
10 S-PR-hit-AP-RCP-FV 2 children 
'The foxes are hitting each other for the children. ' 
o 
Thus, the reciprocal morpheme reflects the same asymmetry among objects as 
object markers: in a construction with a theme object and a beneficiary object, the 
beneficiary can be affected by the reciprocal morpheme, but the theme object 
cannot. A theory that accounts for object asymmetries by appealing to a distinction 
between structural and inherent Case could account for the facts illustrated in (14) 
by assuming that the reciprocal morpheme absorbs the verb's structural Case (as is 
done in Baker 1 988b:385, following a comparable analysis in Marantz 1984). Given 
the assumption that in Chichewa verbs can assign at most one structural Case, once 
the verb's structural Case has been removed by the reciprocal morpheme, the verb 
cannot take an object, such as a beneficiary object, that must be assigned structural 
Case, which explains the unacceptability of (14b). But such a verb can take an 
object, such as a theme or patient, that can be assigned either structural or inherent 
Case. (14a) is granunatical because the object is a theme and can, therefore, be 
assigned inherent Case. 
Catalan also has a process of lexical binding: the so-called reflexive clitic, 
esls 'lse in the third person, involves a lexical binding process when it has a reflexive 
or reciprocal interpretation. Evidence that we are dealing with a process of lexical 
binding, and not with the overt expression of an argument, is found in Alsina 1993, 
1996a (see also Grimshaw 1982 for the corresponding phenomenon in French and 
Marantz 1 984 and Sells, Zaenen, and Zee 1987 for other languages). Although the 
reflexive elitie is morphologically the same type of element as other verbal clitics, it 
has different syntactic effects from those of other verbal clities. For example, a 
nominalized infinitive cannot contain any verbal elitic except for the reflexive clitic 
(see Aisina 1996a). 
If we take a verb in Catalan either of whose objects can be animate, we find that 
either ofthem can be affected by the reflexive clitic. 
(1 5)a. 
Les noies s' 
han ensenyat les fotos. 
the girls REF have shown 
the photos 
'The girls showed each other the photos. ' 

92 
ALEX ALSINA 
b. 
Les noies s' 
han ensenyat al 
public. 
the girls REF have shown 
DA T -the audience. 
'The girls showed themselves (leach other) to the audience. • 
Since the reflexive clitic in Catalan has essentially the same syntactic behavior as 
the reciprocal morpheme in Chichewa, we would expect them to be subject to the 
same syntactic constraints. (These two morphemes differ, though, in terms of their 
semantic properties: whereas the reciprocal morpheme in Chichewa only allows a 
reciprocal interpretation, the reflexive clitic in Catalan allows either a reciprocal or a 
reflexive interpretation. The choice between these two interpretations for the 
reflexive c1itic in Catalan does not have any relevant syntactic consequences.) Thus, 
we would expect that only an object that needs structural Case could be affected by 
this process of lexical binding, just as in Chichewa. Since the theme of a verb like 
ensenyar 'show', which corresponds to the accusative object in an example like (4), . 
is the argument that needs structural Case, we expect this argument to be able to be 
affected by the process of lexical binding of the reflexive clitic, as we see in (lSb). 
But we would not expect the goal argument of this verb, which takes dative case 
(i.e., inherent Case) when expressed as an object, to be affected by this process. Yet, 
contrary to our expectation, the goal argument can be lexically bound by the 
reflexive clitic, as we see in (1 Sa}. 
In order to explain the facts of the process of lexical binding in Catalan, we 
would have to assume that the morpheme responsible for this operation is not 
restricted to absorb only structural Case as in Chichewa, but absorbs either structural 
or inherent Case. Once again, Chichewa and Catalan differ in a way that is 
independent of their difference regarding the presence or absence of grammatical 
case distinctions. And, again, Catalan turns out to be the problem case for 
generalizing the assumption in Baker 1988b and others that lexical binding absorbs 
structural Case. The fact that Catalan, unlike Chichewa, has a morphological 
correlate of the distinction between structural and inherent Case does not provide an 
explanation for the difference with respect to lexical binding. 
4.4 Diferences regarding inherent Case as the sole Case 
Chichewa and Catalan differ with respect to whether a verb taking one single object 
(i.e., internal argument) can assign it inherent Case. There is evidence that a verb in 
Chichewa assigns inherent Case to an object that cooccurs with an object that 
receives structural Case. This is the situation in double object constructions, which 
has been illustrated in the preceding paragraphs. The fact that one of the two objects 
in a double object construction lacks the ability to be expressed by means of an 
object marker or as the passive subject can be explained by assuming that this object 
has inherent Case. We can assume that the other object in a double object 
construction is assigned structural Case, because it can be expressed by means of an 
. object marker, can appear as the passive subject, etc. For example, the asymmetries 
between the two objects illustrated in (I}-(3) indicate that the beneficiary is assigned 
structural Case, whereas the theme or patient is assigned inherent Case. 

IS CASE ANOTHER NAME FOR GRAMATICAL FUNCTION? 
93 
There is also evidence that a Chichewa verb can assign structural Case to the 
single object (i.e., internal argument) of the construction. For example, the single 
internal.argumenű of a monadic verb such as meny-a 'hit', shown in (16a) with this 
argument expressed as an object NP, can be expressed by means of an object 
marker, as in (l6b), and can be expressed as the subject of a passive form, as in 
(16c). 
(l6)a. 
b. 
c. 
Nkhandwe zi-ku-meny-a 
nJo vu. 
10 foxes 
10 S-PR-hit-FV 9 elephant 
'The foxes are hitting the elephant. • 
Nkhandwe zi-ku-i-meny-a 
(njo-vu). 
10 foxes 
10 S-PR-9 O-hit-FV 9 elephant 
'The foxes are hitting it (the elephant). • 
Njovu 
i-ku-meny-edw-a 
(ndt nkha-ndwe). 
9 elephant 9 S-PR-hit-PAS-FV by 1 0  foxes 
'The elephant is being hit (by the foxes). t 
The fact that the single internal argument in this construction can be expressed 
by means of an object marker, (16b), or as the passive subject, (l6c). is evidence 
that this argument can be assigned structural Case. However, while there is no 
evidence that the single internal argument of a verb can be assigned inherent Case in 
Chichewa. there is no evidence either that it cannot be assigned inherent Case: we 
can assume either that the object NP in (16a) is necessarily assigned structural case 
or that it has an ambiguous analysis with either structural or inherent Case. 
The possible morphosyntactic expressions of an inherently Case-marked object 
in Chichewa are a proper subset of the possible morphosyntactic expressions of a 
structurally Case-marked NP. If the single object of a verb in Chichewa appears as 
an NP following the verb, we cannot tell whether it is assigned inherent Case or 
structural Case, since both types of Case assignment are compatible with this 
morphosyntactic expression. There are some morphosyntactic expressions in 
Chichewa that are only compatible with the assignment of structural Case, such as 
object markers and passivization. But there are no morphosyntactic expressions in 
Chichewa that are only compatible with the assignment of inherent Case. Thus, the 
facts in Chichewa are equally consistent with the assumption that the single internal 
argument of a verb is assigned structural Case obligatorily as with the assumption 
that it is assigned either structural or inherent Case. In the latter case, any 
monotransitive construction would have an ambiguous analysis: in one analysis, the 
object is assigned structural Case and, in the other, it is assigned inherent Case. The 
Chichcwa data underdetermine the choice of theory. 
In order to narow down the theoretical options, we should turn to languages 
similar to Chichewa as far as object asymmetries are concerned, but in which the 
assignment of inherent Case is unequivocally signaled by the morpho syntax. An 
instance of such a language would be Tzotzil, as described by Aissen 1983. In this 

. 
\ 
94 
ALEX ALSINA 
language, in a clause with a goal object and a theme object. the verb agrees in person 
and number with the goal object and not with the theme object, and, when the verb 
is passivized, the goal, and not the theme, becomes the subject. It seems reasonable 
to assume that the phenomena of object agreement and passivization in Tzotzil are 
comparable to object marking and passivization in Chichewa, in the sense that both 
phenomena are sensitive to the distinction between structural and inherent Case: the 
verb agrees with the NP it assigns structural Case to and the passive morphology 
absorbs structural Case. 
A relevant property of Tzotzil is that. whenever the clause contains two objects 
(or, more appropriately, two internal arguments) and in no other case, the verb 
includes the suffix -be. In the following examples, from Aissen 1983:280, 282, we 
see that a verb with one single object does not include this suffix, as in (1 7a), 
whereas the same verb taking two objects does include this suffix, as in (1 7b). 
(17)a. 
b. 
c. 
Ba y-ak' -0 
?une. 
go E3-give-A3 PTS 
'He went to give it.' 
Ti mi c-av-ak' -b-on 
?ep tak'ine. 
if ASP-E2-give-BE-AI much money 
'If you will give me a lot of money. ' 
Ti mi c-av-ak'-be-0 
?ep 
tak'ine. 
if ASP-E2-give-BE-A3 much money 
'If you will give him plenty of money. ' 
[Not: 'If you will give me plenty of money. 'J 
When the verb has a theme object as its sole internal argument, it agrees with it, 
as shown in (1 7a). When the verb takes a goal object, in addition to the theme 
object, it agrees with the goal object, and not with the theme object, as the contrast 
in (J 7b) and (17c) illustrates. As in Chichewa, the goal in a double object 
construction in Tzotzil would be assigned structural Case, whereas the theme object 
would be assigned inherent Case. Since the verb agrees with the NP it assigns 
structural Case to, it foHows that it agrees with the goal object. The fact that the verb 
only agrees with one of its objects indicates that verbs in Tzotzil, as in Chichewa, 
can assign at most one structural Case. Passivization reveals the same asymmetry in 
Tzotzil, as shown in Aissen 1983:283: the goal argument of a verb like 'give' can be 
its passive subject, but never the theme argument. That follows from the assumption 
that the passive morphology absorbs structural Case from the verb, so that the NP 
that needs structural Case, in our example, the goal, cannot receive it from the verb 
and must move to the subject position to receive structural Case. 
The suffix -be in Tzotzil appears on verbs that take a goal and a theme or patient 
objects, with meanings like 'give' or 'sell'; it also appears on verbs that take a 
beneficiary object, in addition to a theme or patient object, with verbs meaning 
'kill', 'bring', etc.; and also on the causative verb ?ak' in the Clause Union 

IS CASE ANOlliER NAME FOR GRAMATICAL FUNCTION? 
95 
construction when and only when the complement clause is transitive. The fact that 
this suffix appears on the causative verb depending purely on the transitivity of the 
complement clause indicates that it is not an applicative affix. The most plausible 
analysis' of this suffix is that it registers or marks the assignment of inherent Case. 
But in order to make this analysis work, we have to assume that inherent Case is a 
last resort option: a verb can only assign inherent Case when it has used up its 
structural Case. So. when the verb has one single object. it must assign structural 
Case to this object and, so, the suffix -be cannot appear on the verb. When the verb 
has two objects. the verb must assign structural Case to one of them and, since the 
. verb can assign no more than one structural Case it must assign inherent Case to the 
remaining object so that it will not remain Caseless. In this situation, the suffix -be 
must appear on the verb. as it marks the assignment of inherent Case.8 (The choice 
of which object is assigned inherent Case in Tzotzil is subject to essentially the same 
restrictions as in Chichewa.) 
Thus, Tzotzil is identical to Chichewa regarding the type of object asymmetries 
that it exhibits. The main difference is that Tzotzil has an overt encoding of the 
assignment of inherent Case: the suffix -be indicates unambiguously that inherent 
Case is assigned by the verb in which it appears. That allows us to deduce that 
inherent Case is never assigned to the single object of a verb, since that suffix never 
appears on a monotransitive verb. This can be explained by assuming that inherent 
Case is assigned only as a last resort. Chamorro, a language like Chichewa and 
Tzotzil as far as object asymmetries are concerned, also signals the assignment of 
inherent Case: in this language, it is the NP with inherent Case that has a special 
marking and, as in Tzotzil, this marking only appears when the verb can be argued 
to have used up (or lack) its structural Case (see Gibson 1980 and Gibson and 
Raposo 1986). This being the situation in Tzotzil and Chamorro. as we have no 
evidence indicating that it is otherwise in Chichewa, we should assume that inherent 
Case is also a last resort option in Chichewa and, ideally, we should assume that this 
is a universal property. 
In contrast with this, in Catalan there is direct evidence that inherent Case can be 
assigned to the single object of a mono transitive verb. Although it is reasonable to 
argue that the unmarked case feature for the single object of a verb is accusative 
case, therefore, structural Case, there are many intransitive verbs that take a dative 
object, that is, an inherently Case-marked object. The following examples illustrate 
clauses in Catalan whose single object is a dative object: 
(18)a. 
b. 
Ja 
he 
vist com somreies 
a 
la dependenta. 
emph. have-! sg seen how smiled-2sg OAT the shop attendant 
<I saw how you were smiling at the shop attendant. ' 
No Ii 
menteixis, si vols 
que t' 
ajudi. 
not pro-3sg-dat lie-2sg 
if want-2sg that you heIp-3sg 
<Don't lie to him, if you want him to help you! 

, 
\ 
96 
ALEX ALSINA 
Verbs such as somriure, used in (1 8a), and mentir, in (18b), can be used either 
without any object or with a dative object, but cannot be used with an accusative 
object. We can, thus, conclude that such verbs lexically (or inherently) require their 
object to take dative case. Other verbs take an optional accusative object, in addition 
to a dative object, sometimes also optional. Some of these verbs would be escriure 
'write', pegar 'hit', respondre 'reply', etc. It is important to note that, regardless of 
whether one or both of their objects are expressed, the case on the object depends on 
its thematic role and not on there being another object in the clause. 
(19)a. 
b. 
Encara no Ii 
he 
escrit (la carta). 
still 
not pro-3sg-dat have-l sg written the letter 
'I haven't written (the letter) to him yet.' 
Per que Ii 
heu 
pegat (una cleca)? 
why 
pro-3sg-dat have-2pl hit 
a 
slap 
'Why did you hit her/give her a slap?' 
These examples show that, with verbs such as escriure or pegar. the goal object 
is invariably a dative object, whether the theme object is expressed or not. 
Given the assumption that, in Catalan, as in case-marking languages in general, 
dative case is inherent Case and accusative case is structural Case, we have to 
conclude that inherent Case can be assigned in Catalan to the single object of a verb. 
This shows yet another difference between languages like Chichewa and languages 
like Catalan: the single object of a verb cannot be assigned inherent Case in 
Chichewa, but it can in Catalan. In Chomsky's (l986b:1 93-204) discussion of 
inherent Case, there is no indication that inherent Case cannot be assigned to the 
single NP argument of a lexical item. In this respect, then, the situation in Chichewa 
would be unexpected. 
5. CONSEQUENCES 
The preceding section has brought out four differences between Catalan and 
Chichewa regarding structural and inherent Case. In the first place, the same 
thematic roles require a different Case assignment in these two languages: a verb 
meaning 'give' will assign structural Case to the goal and inherent Case to the theme 
in Chichewa, but will have the reverse assignment of Case in Catalan. In the second 
place, the two languages differ with respect to whether incoIporated pronominals are 
sensitive to the distinction between the two types of Case: an incorporated 
pronominal may correspond only to an object with structural Case in Chichewa, but 
may correspond two both types of objects in Catalan. In the third place, lexical 
binding also treats inherently Case-marked arguments differently in the two 
languages: such arguments may be involved in a lexical binding relation in Catalan, 
but not in Chichewa. And in the fourth place, inherent Case is a last resort option in 
Chichewa, but not in Catalan: as a result, the single object of a verb may be assigned 
inherent Case in Catalan, but not in Chichewa. 

IS CASE ANOTHER NAME FOR GRAMATICAL FUNCTION? 
97 
What poses a problem for Case Theory is not so much that a particular property 
in Chichewa or Catalan contradicts some assumption standardly made within this 
theory, but that there are systematic differences in the behavior and distribution of 
the two types of Cases in the two languages. As a result, there cannot be a unified 
theory of Case that is cross-linguistically valid. Catalan raises a problem for the 
unifonnity condition on the assignment of inherent Case, since causees may be 
assigned inherent (dative) Case without receiving a a-role from the Case assigner. 
This language is also a problem for the assumptions that incorporated pronominals 
are a manifestation of structural Case and that lexical binding processes absorb 
structural Case. And Chichewa is a problem for the possibility of using inherent 
Case independently of the presence of structural Case. If each language were 
considered separately, any of these problems could be solved by modifying the 
relevant assumption accordingly. The problem becomes insoluble when we consider 
both languages: we cannot have a single universal principle about the distribution 
and properties of structural and inherent Case because we would not be able to 
accommodate the facts of both languages. 
According to the theory presented here, all of the differences mentioned are 
independent of each other and independent of the obvious difference that 
distinguishes these two languages, namely, whether or not abstract Case is 
manifested as grammatical case. One of the fundamental ideas of Case Theory is 
that grammatical case is just one of the ways in which abstract Case can manifest 
itself. The presence or absence of grammatical case in a language, therefore, is just a 
superficial fact, which is not predicted to have any consequence in the syntax of the 
languages involved. Given this theory, the four differences between Chichewa and 
Catalan discussed in the previous section, in addition to the difference regarding the 
presence or absence of grammatical case, would have to be treated as an accidental 
clustering of properties. Each of these different properties would have to be treated 
as the result ·of a different setting of the corresponding parameter of variation. 
Following is a formulation of these different parameters of variation: 
(20) 
CASE-THEORETIC PARAMETERS: 
1 .  An NP whose thematic role is agent, beneficiary or goal (a) never 
is assigned inherent Case. 
(b) always 
2. An inherently Case-marked argument may not 
correspond to an incorporated pronominal. 
3. An inherently Case-marked argument may not be 
involved in lexical binding. 
4. Inherent Case is a last resort option. 
(a) ON 
(b) OFF 
(a) ON 
(b) OFF 
(a) ON 
(b) OFF 

, 
I 
98 
ALEX ALSINA 
5. The distinction between structural and inherent Case is 
(a) ON 
manifested as an overt distinction between accusative and 
(b) OFF 
dative case respectively. 
Since these five parameters are formally independent of each other and have a 
binary setting. we predict the existence of 32 (25) different languages, as far as these 
parameters are concerned. Chichewa happens to have setting (a) for parameters I, 2, 
3, and 4 and setting (b) for parameter 5. Catalan has the opposite settings:9 (b) for 
parameters 14 and (a) for parameter s. Crucially. there is no reason to expect that 
the choice of one setting for a given parameter will restrict the setting for another 
parameter. Given this view. the combinations of parameter settings found in Catalan 
and Chichewa are just two out of 32 possible combinations of parameter settings. 
What this implies is that the clustering of properties found in Catalan and Chichewa 
is accidental, in that it is no more to be expected than any other combination of 
properties. For example, for a theory with the parameters in (20), a language with 
the same parameter settings as Chichewa except for parameter I, with setting (b) 
instead of setting (a), is as much to be expected as Chichewa. The problem is that 
such a language is not known to exist. One of the predicted features of this language 
is that example (2a) would be ill-formed, as the object marker refers to the bene­
ficiary Object, which would receive inherent Case, whereas example (2b), with the 
theme object expressed by means of an object marker, would be grammatical, as the 
theme would receive structural Case: exactly the opposite of Chichewa. 
The fact is that the clustering of properties found in Chichewa and Catalan can 
be shown not to be accidental. Languages that exhibit the kinds of object 
asymmetries discussed here consistently pattern either with Chichewa or with 
Catalan. Specifically, if a language distinguishes its objects by means of 
grammatical case, it will have the properties found in Catalan. One of the two case 
features is more marked than the other (morphologically, in that it is more 
consistently and distinctly marked, and thematically, in that it is assigned on the 
basis of thematic roles or argument structure, etc.). The marked case feature is 
conventionally known as dative and it is assigned to arguments whose thematic roles 
are typically goals, beneficiaries, and experiencers and, depending on the language, 
may include others such as possessors. agents in causative constructions, etc. 
Examples of languages that distinguish their objects by means of grammatical case 
are Latin, Turkish, Malayalam, Basque. Kannada, German, etc. Thus, parameter I 
consistently would take on setting (b) in these languages. If these languages have 
incorporated pronominals, they correspond to both accusative and dative objects, as 
would be required by setting (b) of Parameter 2. An example of a non-Indo­
European language whose incorporated pronominals correspond to both accusative 
and dative objects is Basque (see Mejias-Bikandi 
1990 and Davies and 
Martinez-Arbelaiz 1 995, among others). If a language with dative and accusative 
case has a process of lexical binding, this process affects both arguments that get 
dative case and arguments that get accusative Case. An example, again 
non-Indoeuropean, of a such a language is Kannada, as shown in Mohanan and 
Mohanan 1998. Finally, languages with dative and accusative case always have 

IS CASE ANOTHER NAME FOR GRAMMATICAL FUNCTION? 
99 
some construction where a dative object appears as the sole object of the 
construction. We can see, then, that the clustering of properties found in Catalan 
should not be the result of setting five different parameters at random, but is 
cross-linguistically the only attested possibility for case-marking languages and our 
theory should be able to capture this cross-linguistic fact 
Leaving aside case-marking languages, languages without grammatical case fall 
into several subtypes, as has been shown in work by Baker 1988a, Bresnan and 
Moshi 1 990, Alsina 1 996b, among others. One of the major divisions separates 
asymmetrical languages from symmetrical languages. using Bresnan and Moshi's 
1990 terminology. In Baker's Case Theory, the division corresponds to languages 
whose verbs can assign at most one structural Case (asymmetrical), such as 
Chichewa, and to languages whose verbs can assign more than one structural Case 
(symmetrical), such as Kichaga. Asymmetrical language3 exhibit the kinds of object 
asymmetries found in Chichewa. Symmetrical languages don't, although they can 
have asymmetries in the ordering of object NPs and of object markers, as shown in 
Alsina 1996b, and possibly in other areas. What is cross-linguistically consistent is 
that, if a language lacks gramatical case and it has thematically conditioned object 
asymmetries, it will not allow inherent Case to be assigned to goals, beneficiaries, 
agents, etc., as required by setting (a) of parameter 1. In other words, the fact that a 
caseless language, i.e., a language with parameter 5 set to (b), has parameter 1 set to 
(a) cannot be an accident. Likewise, the fact that such a language has setting (a) for 
parameters 2, 3, and 4 cannot be assumed to be the result ofa random setting of the 
parameters. 
What this shows is that the facts of languages with grammatical case and the 
facts of languages without grammatical case cannot be explained by appealing to 
one single set of abstract distinctions responsible for object asymmetries. By 
committing ourselves to the idea that grammatical case distinctions are just one of 
the possible ways in which abstract Case distinctions are manifested and by 
assuming that object asymmetries in languages without grammatical case are also 
manifestations of abstract Case, we are making it impossible for us to have a 
restrictive cross-linguistic theory of object asymmetries. The first thing that needs to 
be recognized is a fundamental division between languages with grammatical case 
and languages without grammatical case. For languages with grammatical case, and 
only for such languages, it is appropriate to use the tenn "case." In such languages, 
some of the asymmetries among objects can be attributed to grammatical case 
distinctions. In languages without grammatical case, "case" is not an appropriate 
term to use to refer to the abstract distinction responsible for the kind of object 
asymmetries found in languages like Chichewa. If the abstract distinction found in 
these languages is assumed to be of a fundamentally different nature from case, 
there is no reason to expect parallel behaviors in languages with case and languages 
without case. 
10 
The fact that, for example, an NP with inherent Case, to use the Case-Theoretic 
terminology, behaves very differently in a language with grammatical case and in a 
language without grammatical case is a problem for Case Theory, but is not a 
problem for a theory that recognizes the fundamentally different nature of object 
asymmetries in the two types oflanguages. To be more precise, it is not a problem, 

: 
I 
1 00 
ALEX ALSINA 
but an artifact of Case Theory. In order to claim that there can be such a thing as an 
NP with inherent Case in a language without grammatical case, we have to assume 
that there is a concept named abstract Case present in languages both with and 
without grammatical case that underlies the surface realization of arguments. If we 
reject this assumption and instead assume that case (or Case) is just grammatical 
case, there can be no such thing as an NP with inherent Case in a language without 
grammatical case. 
What is the abstract distinction responsible for some of the object asymmetries in 
a language like Chichewa? Leaving aside Case-Theoretic approaches, most theories 
have assumed distinctions in terms of grammatical functions (or grammatical 
relations). Perlmutter and Postal 1983b, Aissen 1 983, and others within the classical 
RG framework assume a distinction between Direct Object and Direct Object 
Chomeur. Dryer 1986 assumes a distinction between primary and secondary object. 
Bresnan and Moshi 1990, Alsina and Mchombo 1 993, and others within the LFG 
framework assume the distinction between unrestricted object and restricted object. 
Since the Case-Theoretic distinction between structural and inherent Case for 
languages without grammatical case plays the same role as these other distinctions, 
we could say that the Case-Theoretic distinction is also a distinction in terms of 
grammatical function, with the peculiarity that the name "grammatical function" is 
replaced by the name "Case." As has been argued in this paper, this terminological 
replacement is not innocuous: the use of the term "Case" leads us to expect that the 
abstract distinction responsible for object asymmetries in languages like Chichewa is 
the same as the distinction responsible for object asymmetries in case-marking 
languages. As we have seen, this expectation is incorrect and we should therefore 
use different terms for the different concepts involved. 
One could object to the assumption made in this paper that dative case is 
inherent Case and accusative case is structural Case in languages with grammatical 
case. We could, instead, say that both dative and accusative case arc types of 
structural Case. If we adopted this position, the distinction between structural and 
inherent Case posited for languages like Chichewa would have no correlate in 
languages with grammatical case. In such a view, the abstract distinction responsible 
for object asymmetries in Chichewa would be different from the abstract distinction 
responsible for object asymmetries in Catalan: in one type of language, we would be 
talking of structural and inherent Case, whereas, in the other, we would be talking of 
dative and accusative Case (two kinds of structural Case). Although we would be 
using the term Case in both situations, we would still have to posit two different sets 
of abstract distinctions and we would have to explain why languages with 
grammatical case do not have the structuraVinherent distinction for objects and why 
languages without grammatical case do not have the accusative/dative distinction. 
This alternative position accepts the idea that the distinction responsible for object 
asymmetries is a different one in the two types of languages considered, but chooses 
to give an illusion of theoretical Wlity by using the term "Case" for both. 
A clarification is in order. Some frameworks that explicitly posit grammatical 
functions as notions not defined configurationally have evolved in recent years by 
introducing a level of argument structure. which is parallel to other syntactic levels 
such as the level that represents grammatical functions. The introduction of argu-

IS CASE ANOTHER NAME FOR GRAMATICAL FUNCTION? 
101 
ment structure has implied filling this level with content, and some of its content is 
information that was previously assumed to be part of grammatical functions. In 
such a framework, where the work previously perfonned by grammatical functions 
is now factored out into argument structure and grammatical functions, we should 
ask ourselves whether the abstract distinction responsible for object asymmetries in 
languages like Chichewa should still be seen as part of grammatical functions, or is 
more appropriately treated as part of argument structure. I have argued elsewhere 
(Alsina 2001) that this distinction is part of argument structure. So, rather than 
calling it a distinction at the level of grammatical functions. we should consider it a 
distinction at the level of argument structure. This does not alter the conclusion that 
the terminology of Case Theory is not appropriate for capturing the distinction in 
question. 
I I  
NOTES 
This paper has benefited from comments by the audience at the workshop OD The Role of 
Grammatical Functions in Transformational SyntlX. July J().1l. ]999. University of Dlinois at Urbana­
Champaign, by two anonymous reviewers, and by the editors of this volume William Davies and Stanley 
Dubinsky. 
I use the term OB to refer to a class of theoretical frameworks that has been called "Government and 
Binding," "Principles and Pammeters," and "Minimalist Program." Its main features are set down in work 
by Chomsky (1981, 1986b, 1993, 1995). 
1 
In the discussion that follows, I present one particular version of Case TheoIY, in other words, one 
particular theory that makes use of the terms "Case," "structural Case," "Inherent Case," etc. This is 
Baker's (1988a,b) theory, which haS been successfully applied to explain the facts of object asymetries 
in languages like Chichewa. There are many other theories that use those terms, including some that 
differ from Baker's (1988a,b) in that they attempt to unifY structural and inherent Case, sucb as Lasnik 
1995a, Collins and Thr.insson 1996, and Boech 2000, among others. I will not bring these theories into 
the discusion, as they have not been applied to the range of facts under consideration in this paper. 
3 
In Baker 1988a,b, what appears to be an NP in object position can be an NP complement of V, an NP 
complement of an empty P that projects a PP complement of V, or an NP subject of an ECM 
construction. The NP in any of these positions can be assigned structural Case, whereas inherent Case can 
only be assigned to the NP complement of V. The fact that the NP complement of V can be assigned 
either structural or inherent Case implies that the assignment of these two types of Cases is not absolutely 
predictable. 
4 
More precisely, if A and B are morphosyntactic positions and are in covariation or in complementary 
distribution and, for any given predicate, have the same mapping to semantic roles, we say that A and B 
ƈ the same OF. This definition refers to morphosyntactic positions. which has to be understod as types 
of overt expresions, such as "accusative noun phrase," "noun phrase adjacent to the verb," "pronominal 
or agreement affix on the verb," etc. This characterization excludes "deep" gramatical relations: a 
d-structure direct object, for example, is not a type of overt expressions; no overt formal feature 
distinguishes a subject derived from (or coindexed with) a d-structure object position from a subject not 
so derived. Therefore, a d-structure direct object is not a OF as defined here. 
5 
The Chichewa data in this paper are taken from Alsina 1993. Transcription is according to the 
standard orthography, with the addition of hyphens in verb forms to sepamte mOIphemes and of tone 
markings as follows: as illustrated with the vowel 'a', long vowels may be low a-, high ii, rising aV, and 
falling ii, and short vowels are either high a, or low, which is unmarked. EvCty noun in Chichewa belongs 

, 
I 
1 02 
ALEX ALSINA 
to one of eighteen noun classes, denoted in the glosses by numbers. (See Bresnan and Kanerva 1989:41 
for a table of the noun class prefixes iȫ Chichewa.) The following abbreviations are used in the glosses: 
AP: 
CST: 
FV: 
applicative 
causative 
final vowel 
0: 
PAS: 
PR: 
object marker 
passive 
present 
PS: 
RCP: 
s: 
past 
reciprocal 
subject marker 
The optional NP, given in parentheses in (2a), that agres in noun class with the object marker is not 
an object NP, but an NP external to the VP, which can either precede or follow the VP and is fu:ely 
ordered with the subject NP, when there is one, as has been shown by Bresnan and Mchombo 1987. It can 
be seen as a doubling NP, as in clitic doubling constructions, as suggested by Baker 1 988b, or as a topic 
anaphorically linked to the object marker, as analyzed by Bresnan and Mchombo 1987. 
The forms Ii and els hi of (12) are phonologically identical to the forms l'hi and els hi of (13) 
respectively, belonging to the dialect of Barc:elona (see Bonet 1995 for details about clitic forms). We can 
tell that the latter correspond to both the accusative and the dative object, because, if, instead of a third 
person dative object clitic, we should use a first or second person object clitic, combined with an 
accusative clitic, the fonn would be distinct from the dative clitic alone: for example, with the first person 
clitic, Em foran signor el document 'They will make me sign the document' vs. Me'l Jaran signar 'They 
will make me sign it'. 
In Aissen's 1983 analysis, developed within the framework of RG, the sufix -be is assumed to be a 
morphological reflex of the advancement of indirect object to direct object. This analysis is very similar 
to the one presented in the text in terms of empirical predictions. There are theoretical differences: in 
Aissen 1983, the advancement of indirect object is obligatory and restricted to clauses containing a direct 
object. The assumption that indirect object advancement is obligatory explains why goals, beneficiariȬs, 
and agent causees of transitive verbs never appear as anything but objects. The theory in the text does not 
require an equivalent assumption. Restricting indirect object advancement to clauses containing a direct 
object explains the fact that -be only appears on verbs with two objects (or internal arguments). This 
restriction achieves the same result as the assumption that inherent Case is a last resort option. 
The formulation ofpanuneter 1 is an oversimplification as regards its setting (b): the assignment of 
dative case in Catalan is not constrained only by thematic roles (see Alsina 1 996a). 
10 
A reviewer observes that Catalan seems to be a symmetrical language with the restriction that the 
dative NP canot fiU the subject position in the passive. If 'symetrical language' means a language 
whose verbs do not assign inherent Case and we assume that case-marking languages such as Catalan are 
symmetrical languages, then we have to conc:lude that dative is not inherent Case. That means that 
case-marlring languages have a distinction between dative and accusative case (a distinction not found in 
caseless languages), whereas caseless languages of the asymetrical type have a distinction between 
structural and inherent Case (a distinction not found in case-marking languages). Therefore, the abstract 
distinction needed for object asymetries in caseless languages is different from the abstract distinction 
needed in case-marking languages, which is the conclusion this paper is arguing for. In other words, we 
canot assume, as has ben standard in the OB literature, that the distinction between structural and 
inherent Case, posited for caseless languages like Chichcwa, is the abstract distinction fOWld in languages 
such as Catalan. Thus, Catalan and Chichewa are very different as regards object asymetries. but they 
are comparable (contrary to what the anonymous reviewer claims) and it is by comparing them that we 
can dispel the entrenched belief that the same set of distinctions in terms of abstract Case underlies both 
languages with morphological case and those without it. 
II 
Not all work within OB proposes to handle object asymmetries of the type fOWld in Chichewa by 
means of Case-Theoretic distinctions. Alternative approaches within OB include Marantz 1993 and 
Woolford 1993, which space limitations prevent us from discussing here (but see Alsina 1996b for a 
critique of Woolford 1993). 

t 
HOWARD LASNIK 
SUBJECTS, OBJECTS, AND THE EPP* 
l .  INTRODUCTION 
It has been generally assumed that there is a major asymmetry between 'subject' and 
'object' in English-type languages. In overt syntax, subject must raise out of its VP­
internal position to the Spec of a functional head. while object remains inside the 
VP.1 Over the last several years, however, substantial evidence has come to light 
indicating that object, like subject, raises out of its initial position, hence, that the 
asymmetry is only apparent 
I will review this evidence, concluding that it is 
decisive. Subject raises to [Spec, Agrs] and object to [Spec, Agro], driven by an 
EPP requirement of Agr. 
Nonetheless, I will show that a residue of the original 
asymmetry remains, as overt 'object shift' in English is, contrary to the situation 
with subjects, optional. 
I will suggest that that residual asymmetry is to be 
instantiated in terms of optionality of Agro VS. obligatoriness of Agrs. If Agro is 
present, overt raising will be forced by its EPP requirement, and if an NP raises to 
satisfy that requirement, its Case will be checked. If Agro is absent, there will be no 
overt raising; the nominal's Case will be checked by covert raising of its formal 
features to the V, or, alternatively, be licensed in situ by the Agree operation of 
Chomsky (1998). 
2. BASIC EVIDENCE FOR OBJECT SHIFT IN ENGLISH 
Lasnik and Saito (1991), reviving and extending some of the arguments of Postal 
(1974), propose that the exceptionally Case-marked subject of an infinitival clause 
moves into the higher clause. The arguments are to the effect that ECM subjects act 
as if they are higher than elements in the higher clause.2 Some representative 
examples showing 'high' behavior for ECM subjects are as follows, illustrating, 
respectively, Condition A satisfaction, Weak Crossover mitigation, and Negative 
Polarity Item licensing: 
(1) 
'I:he DA proved [two men to have been at the scene of the crime] 
dwing each other's trials 
103 
William D. Davies and Stanley Dubinsky (eds.), Objects and other subjects; 
Grammatical junctions, junctional categories, and configurationality, 103-12l. 
© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands. 

. \ 
104 
(2) 
(3) 
HOWARD LASNIK 
The DA proved [no suspecÌ to have been at the scene of the crime] 
during hisj trial 
The DA proved [noone to have been at the scene] during any of the 
trials 
For the large majority of speakers I have interviewed, (1) - (3) contrast significantly 
with corresponding examples with finite complements: 
(4) 
?*The DA proved [that two men were at the scene of the crime] 
during each other's trials 
(5) 
?*The DA proved [that no suspeclj was at the scene of the crime] 
during hisj trial 
(6) 
?*The DA proved [that noone was guilty] during any ofthe trials 
Under the standard assumption that c-command is involved in all of these 
phenomena, and given that the adverbial clauses containing the items that need to be 
licensed are all in the higher clause, the improved status of (1) - (3) vis-a·vis their 
finite counterparts indicates that the ECM subjects must have raised into the higher 
clause as well. If they remained in the lower clause, they could not c-command an 
item in the higher clause. The Lasnik and Saito arguments were all of this general 
character (and represent just one among several types of arguments presented by 
Postal). 
As observed by Postal and by Lasnik and Saito, in the kinds of paradigms just 
considered, the behavior ofECM subjects is comparable to that of transitive objects. 
The following examples parallel (1) - (3): 
(7) 
The DA accused two men during each other's trials 
(8) 
The DA discredited no suspecÍ during hisj trial 
(9) 
The DA cross-examined none ofthe witnesses during any of the trials 
For Postal, this kind of parallelism constituted evidence that the ECM subject raises 
into object position. Lasnik and Saito examined this possibility but rejected it for 
two reasons. First, the possibility of movement into a a-position had been seriously 
challenged since Chomsky ( 1 981) (though the challenges were not entirely 
conclusive, as also discussed by Lasnik and Saito, following McCawley (1 988». 
Second, under reasonable (though not universally accepted) assumptions about 
clause structure, even direct object is not high enough to c-command into an 
adverbial adjunct. 
So, under those assumptions, even object raises. 
The null 

SUBJECTS, OBJECTS, AND THE EPP 
lOS 
hypothesis is that object and ECM subject raise to the same higher position (a non­
e-position, if Chomsky is correct). 
3. 'ĖIGH' BEHAVIOR AND MOVEMENT: OVERT OR COVERT? 
The clausal phrase structure proposed by Chomsky (1991) provides a possible target 
for the raising motivated by the above phenomena: [Spec, Agro], where Agro is a 
functional head just above VP. Chomsky suggested that such raising exists, but that 
it is covert, happening in the LF component. Given the word order of English, VO 
rather than av, overt raising seemed impossible. However, there are long-standing 
reasons to think that covert raising does not affect binding possibilities. 
For 
example, Chomsky (1981), based on the following examples, argues that QR and LF 
wh-movement do not remedy Condition C violations. 
(10) 
Which book that Johnj read did hej like 
(1 1) 
*Hej liked every book that Johnj read 
(12) 
*1 don't remember who thinks that he; read which book that Johni 
likes 
Chomsky's point is that following QR, the LF of (1 1) would be structuraIly parallel 
to the S-structure (and LF) of (10), where John is outside the c-comrnand domain of 
he. Thus, as in (10), there should be no Condition C effect, if LF is the level 
relevant to that condition. 
Similarly for (12) following LF wh-movement. The 
conclusion of Chomsky (1981) was that S-structure is crucial to at least one of the 
binding conditions. 
Barss (1986) draws the same conclusion for Condition A, based on examples like 
the following: 
(13) 
John; wonders which picture ofhimselfi Mary showed to Susan 
(14) 
*Johnj wonders who showed which picture ofhimselfi to Susan 
(13) shows that an anaphor within the embedded CP Spec can be licensed by an 
antecedent in the matrix subject position. Given this fact, the ungrammaticaJity of 
(14) is surprising ifanaphors can be licensed by virtue of their LF positions, since it 
was standardly assumed at the time that in LF, the wh-phrase which picture of 
himself moves to the embedded CP Spec position, where it takes scope. Thus. at LF. 
the configurational relation between himself and its antecedent is virtually identical 
in (13) and'(I4). Hence, the ungrammaticality of(14) shows that anaphors must be 
licensed at a level prior to LF. e.g., S-structure (and possibly at LF as well; the 
example is moot on this point). 

106 
HOWARD LASNIK 
Under the minimalist asswnption that there is no level of S-structure, there must 
be another way to capture these facts. At least these LF operations, QR and wh­
movement, have no effect on binding possibilities. Therefore, the operations don't 
exist or they apply in such a way that binding possibilities don't change.3 Lasnik and 
Saito (1991) and den Dikken (1995) draw the same conclusion about the 'expletive 
replacement' operation proposed by Chomsky (1986). As shown just below, in the 
existential analogues of (I) - (3) above, the 'associate' of the expletive doesn't 
display the 'high' behavior that is exhibited when that NP becomes the overt subject 
of the infinitival. 
(15) 
*The DA proved [there to have been two men at the scene of the 
crime] during each other's trials 
(16) 
*The DA proved [there to have been no suspecÊ at the scene of the 
crime] during his, trial 
(17) 
*The DA proved [there to have been noone at the scene] during any of 
the trials 
The superficially peculiar agreement properties of existential sentences (apparent 
agreement with a non-subject: There are/*is women in the room) implicate some 
sort of movement operation affecting the associate (to get it near enough to Agrs). 
But that movement operation must be very different from the one affecting direct 
objects and ECM subjects, since in the latter instances we do get high behavior. 
4. THE NATURE OF OBJECT SHIFT IN ENGLISH 
4.1 Overt Object Shift and the Split-VP Hypothesis 
In several papers,4 I have proposed that this near paradoxical state of affairs can be 
understood in terms of overt raising of object and ECM subject and overt raising of 
V to a still higher position. The movement of the associate of an expletive, on the 
other hand, is covert movement of formal features alone, hence does not create any 
of the relevant binding or licensing configurations. S The 'split-VP' hypothesis of 
Koizumi (1993) and Koizumi (1995). which I adopt in its essentials. provides the 
needed structure for the overt raising examples. The relevant portion of an ECM 
structure with raising is as follows: 
(18) 
She will prove Bob to be guilty 

SUBJECTS, OBJECTS, AND THE EPP 
(19) 
AgrsP 
4 
NP 
Agrs' 
I
4 
she Agrs 
TP 
* 
T 
VP 
I
4 
will 
NP 
V' 
tshe 
4 
V 
AgroP 
I
* 
prove NP 
I 
Bob Agro 
v 
VP 
I 
V' 
3 
AgrsP 
- 
tprove 
NP 
to be guilty 
tBob 
107 
If the adverbials in (I) - (3) are attached in the vicinity of the lower matrix VP 
(perhaps right adjoined to that VP), the binding and licensing receive a natural 
account. Further, it is now natural to assume that the 'EPP' requirement driving 
raising to 'subject position' resides in Agr, hence is also responsible for raising to 
'object position', under the plausible assumption of Chomsky (1991) that 'Agrs' and 
'Agro' are merely mnemonic, there really being just Agr, which can occur in various 
places in the structure. This result constitutes part of the promised asymmetry 
reduction.6 An additional argument for overt raising of an object or an ECM subject 
has to do with the Pseudogapping ellipsis construction. This construction is 
exemplified in (20).7 
(20) 
Mary hired John, and Susan will fife Bill 
Following Jayaseelan (1990), in Lasnik (I995d) I argue that the construction 
involves VP ellipsis. with the remnant having escaped from the ellipsis site via a 
movement operation. Departing from Jayaseelan, I argue that the movement 
operation is not Heavy NP Shift but rather raising to [Spec, Agro].s The structure of 
the second conjunct of (20) will be as follows, with the lower VP (in bold face) 
deleted. 

108 
(21) 
NP 
I 
Susan 
Agrs 
HOWARD LASNIK 
TP 
- 
T 
I 
will 
VP 
- 
NP 
V' 
tSusan * 
V 
AgroP 
* 
NP 
Agro' 
I
- 
Bill 
Agro 
VP 
I 
V' 
+ 
V 
NP 
I 
t8m 
hire 
Note that it is hard to see how covert feature raising could create the observed 
ellipsis configuration. 
Thus, there is additional good reason for thinking we are 
dealing with overt movement. Now notice that an ECM subject also makes a good 
Pseudogapping remnant: 
(22) 
The DA proved Jones (to be) guilty and the Assistant DA will tw&¥6 
Smith (18 Be gHilt:y 
As in the binding and licensing paradigms seen earlier, objects and ECM subjects 
pattern together; both evidently undergo overt raising. 
Even the complements of unaccusativc verbs display the high behavior I am 
taking as indicative of object shift. Uriagereka (1 988) observes that in the following 
example, the reciprocal can successfully take the associate as its antecedent, which 
is unexpected on the assumption that the position of complements is lower than that 
ofadjuncts. 
(23) 
There arrived two knights on each other's horses 
Uriagereka actually argues that LF expletive replacement, as in Chomsky (J 986), is 
involved here. But, as noted above, there are very strong reasons for doubting that 
the LF movement of the associate of an expletive qua associate creates new binding 

SUBJECTS, OBJECTS, AND TIlE EPP 
109 
possibilities, a point already made by Lasnik and Saito (1991). 
Given that, it is 
reasonable to conclude that in (23) two knights overtly raises to a position above the 
adjunct. 
Since we have already seen the same phenomenon with transitives, the 
account should be the same: the raising is to [Spec, Agro]. Pseudogapping provides 
further evidence, as painted out by Roger Martin (personal communication) . .  Martin 
observes that the associate of an expletive makes a reasonably acceptable 
Pseudogapping remnant: 
(24) 
?There arrived an instructor but there didn't aFfiw a professor 
On the account of Pseudo gapping of Lasnik (l995d). briefly summarized above, a 
professor has overtly raised to [Spec, Agro]. 
4.2 Apparent Obligatoriness of Object Shift 
Note that all of these phenomena just indicate that object shift is possible, available 
when necessary but not necessarily obligatory, a potential difference from subject 
shift. There is actually one phenomenon discussed by Postal (1974) and Lasnik and 
Saito (1991), but not yet discussed here, that argues that object shift is obligatory. 
Postal's statement of the argument is based on "a fundamental pronominalization 
constraint" due to Langacker (1969) which states that a pronoun canot both precede 
and command its antecedent. There are a number of more recent formulations of 
this constraint, including the noncoreference rule of Lasnik (1976) and Binding 
Condition C of Chomsky (198 1). Any of these formulations can correctly 
distinguish Postal's (25) from (26), but only if the embedded subject in (25) has 
necessarily raised into the higher clause.9 
(25) 
* Joan believes himj to be a genius even more fervently than Bobj does 
(26) 
Joan believes hej is a genius even more fervently than Bobj does 
So far, then, the asymmetry seems to be successfully eliminated. 
English has overt 
object shift, and it is obligatory, parallel to subject shift. However, I now must turn 
to some reasons for thinking that object shift is not obligatory. 
5. THE OPTIONALITY OF OBJECT SHIFT 
5. 1 Barrierhood of Subject vs. Object 
The first argument that object shift does not always take place. is, in its essentials, 
due to Branigan (1992). 
It is based on the 'subject condition' effect. by which 
extraction out ora subject is much less acceptable than extraction out of an object: 
(27) 
?*Who was [a picture of t] selected 

. \ 
1 10 
HOW ARC LASNIK 
(28) 
Who did you select [a picture of t] 
Branigan's point is that if object and subject both raise overtly, to [Spec, Agro] and 
[Spec, Agrs] respectively. whatever constraint is responsible for subject condition 
effects cannot distinguish (27) from (28). since, given the cyclic principle, in both 
instances the island-creating movement to [Spec, Agr] would precede the wh­
movement. In Lasnik (1995d). I offered a technical way to make the distinction, 
even ifboth subject and object raise. However. Takahashi (1994) provides the basis 
for a principled account of subject condition effects under which the crucial factor 
is, in fact, movement. Under plausible assumptions, Takahashi is able to deduce in 
approximately the following way that a moved item is an island: Movement creates 
a chain, which is, by hypothesis, a set of copies. Typically, all but the highest are 
ultimately deleted. But if extraction has taken place out of a high copy, it will no 
longer be identical to the lower ones it left behind. Reasonably, deletion 'under 
identity' will now fail. Assuming the deletion is necessary. the result is an ill­
formed structure. Since (28) is fine, there is thus reason to believe that in that 
example the direct object is in situ. Of course, this does not entail that there is no 
object shift at all in English, just that it is not obligatory. And, as already noted in 
Lasnik (1995d), when the object is a Pseudogapping remnant, extraction from it is 
seriously degraded: 
(29) 
Bill selected a painting of John, and Susan should ü a photograph 
of Mary 
(30) 
?*Who will Bill select a painting of, and who will Susan seIet a 
photograph of 
This fact is quite consistent with an approach to the subject condition along the lines 
of Takahashi's, given the argument above that a Pseudogapping remnant has 
necessarily undergone overt object shift. 
There is a related prediction. which, though the judgments are subtle, seems to 
me basically correct. Recall the high binding behavior of objects shown in (7) - (9) 
above. I argued that such behavior implicates overt object shift. Extraction out of 
an object should thus be incompatible with high binding by the object, since high 
binding entails that the object has raised while extraction out of the object demands 
that the object not have raised. These contradictory requiýements should lead to 
deviance. The following paradigms tend to bear that out. 
(3 1) 
The special prosecutor questioned two aides of a senator during each 
other's trials 
(32) 
??Which senator did the special prosecutor question two aides of 
during each other's trials 

i 
I 
SUBJECTS. OBJECTS. AND THE EPP 
1 1 1  
That the deviance of (32) is due to the high binding can be seen by comparing (32) 
to a parallel example without an anaphor: 
(33) 
Which senator did the special prosecutor question two friends of 
during the president's trial 
Negative polarity item licensing gives similar results, though. again. the judgments 
are delicate: 
10 
(34) 
The mathematician proved few theorems about MerseJUle numbers 
during any of the lectures 
(35) 
nWhich numbers did the mathematician prove few theorems about 
during any of the lectures 
(36) 
Which 
numbers did the mathematician prove few theorems about 
during the conference lectures 
These paradigms argue, contra Lasnik (1 99Sd), that when an object has overtly 
raised (as evidenced by 'high' behavior) it is an island for extraction, and, therefore, 
since objects are not invariably islands, that such raising is optional. 
5.2 Verb NP Particle/Verb Particle NP 
The next argument is based on verb-particle constructions. 
Jolmson ( 1991) 
persuasively argues that the order V-NP-prt arises from the raising of the NP from 
its base position, and the further raising of the V portion of the 'particle-verb'. Pairs 
like the following, then, indicate that the raising ofthe NP is optional: 
(37) 
Mary called up friends of John 
(38) 
?Mary called friends of John up 
Now notice that when the NP precedes the particle, extraction out of the NP is 
seriously degraded: 
(39) 
Who did Mary call up friends of 
(40) 
?*Who did Mary call friends of up 
Plausibly, (40) constitutes a violation of just the same type as the subject condition: 
a moved item is an island. 
Kayne (1 985) first discussed a very interesting verb-particle construction, later 
analyzed by Jolmson (1991) in terms relevant to the present discussion. Jolmson 

1 12 
HOWARD LASNIK 
provides an insightful account of examples like (41) involving overt raising of the 
ECM subject John. 
1 1  
(4 1) 
Mary made JOM out to be a fool 
Both Kayne and Johnson convincingly treat (41) as an infinitival counterpart of (42) 
(42) 
Mary made out that John is a fool 
Now observe that the raising seen in (41) is optional. For most speakers, (43) is an 
acceptable alternative to (41). 
(43) 
Mary made out John to be a fool 
Under the natural assumption, Johnson's, that the raising of John in (41) is object 
shift, we have yet another instance of optional object shift. Note. in passing, that the 
extraction test used just above cannot be used here or in any ECM constructions, 
since the ECM subject, even when it doesn't raise into the matrix clause, has already 
raised into embedded subject position. 
Thus extraction out of that subject is 
expected to be inhibited regardless, and that expectation is fulfilled: 
(44) 
7* Who did Mary make friends of out to be fools 
(45) 
?*Who did Mary make out friends ofto be fools 
Compare a standard ECM construction: 
(46) 
7*Who did Mary consider friends of to be fools 
Actually, (44) seems a bit worse than the other two examples, possibly related to the 
fact that prior to wh-movement, friends of who has undergone two instances of 
raising in that example. but just one in the others. 
5.2 A Scope Ambiguity 
An observation about scope that Zubizarreta (1982) attributes to Chomsky, and that 
is discussed again by Chomsky (1995), provides further evidence for the optionality 
of object shift with ECM subjects. Chomsky presents the following paradigm: 
(47)a. 
(it seems that) everyone isn't there yet 
b. 
everyone seems [I not to be there yet] 

SUBJECTS, OBJECTS, AND THE EPP 
1 13 
Chomsky (p.327) argues as follows: "Negation can have wide scope Over the Q in 
[47a] ••. but not in [47b]", concluding that " ... reconstruction in the A-chain does not 
take place, so it appears." Suppose Chomsky is correct that with A-movement, there 
is no reconstructiori capable of giving the configuration necessary for this scope 
effect, i.e., capable or replacing the raised quantifier back into the lower clause.12 
The question now arises as to the behavior ofECM constructions with respect to this 
scopal property. The make-out ECM construction behaves exactly as expected. 
When the word order makes it clear that a universal ECM subject has raised, that 
subject canot be interpreted inside the scope of negation in the complement clause, 
as seen in (48) . 
(48) 
The mathematician made every even number out not to be the sum of 
two primes 
The only reading is the highly implausible one where the mathematician was 
engaged in the futile activity of trying to falsely convince someone that no even 
number is the sum of two primes (and not the far more plausible one where she is 
merely trying to convince someone that Goldbach's conjecture is false). Thus, even 
with strong pragmatic bias towards wide scope for the negation, it still isn't 
available, consistent with the raising analysis combined with Chomsky's claim. The 
alternative word order for (48). with every even number unraised, does allow narrow 
scope for the universal, for those speakers who accept the word order in the first 
place: 
(49) 
The mathematician made out every even number not to be the sum of 
two primes 
(49) has the plausible reading missing in (48). 
Now what of standard ECM constructions? Chomsky (1995) already implied 
that in that circumstance, a universal in subject position can take scope below 
complement clause negation, giving the following example: 
(50) 
I expected [everyone not to be there yet] 
Chomsky does not explicitly claim that (50) is a standard ECM construction, but I 
assume that that is his intention. However, the situation is somewhat equivocal, 
since, as shown by Bresnan (1972), expect has multiple sub categorization frames 
(including one like want, which Lasnik and Saito (1991), essentially following 
Bresnan, argue does not involve raising into the higher clause).13 Chomsky's 
observation stands, though, since even with unequivocal ECM verbs like believe and 
prove, my informants find narrow scope possible, even if somewhat disfavored, 
unlike the situation with raising to subject or with the make-NP-out construction. 
Some representative examples are as follows: 

, 
\ 
1 1 4 
(51) 
(52) 
HOWARD LASNlK 
I believe everyone not to have arrived yet 
I proved every Mersenne number not to be prime 
Those same informants (along with everyone else, I believe) disallow narow scope 
for the universal when it undergoes passive/raising to subject position: 
(53) 
Everyone is believed not to have arrived yet 
(54) 
Every Mersenne number was proved not to be prime 
In (54), there is strong pragmatic bias towards narow scope, but it is still not 
available. Only the wildly false wide scope reading exists. Since we have seen 
strong evidence for raising in ECM constructions, and for Chomsky's claim about 
lack of reconstruction with A-movement, the possibility of narrow scope for the 
universal in (51) and (52) again indicates that object shift is optiona1. 
5.4 Quantifier Lowering? 
There is another scope 'reconstruction' phenomenon that suggests the same 
conclusion. 
In Lasnik (1998b) and Lasnik (1998a), I point out that standard 
'Quantifier Lowering' effects fail to obtain in a wide variety of cases. For example, 
(56) is the paraphrase for the 'lowered' reading of (55): 
(55) 
Someone is likely to solve the problem 
(56) 
It is likely that someone will solve the problem 
But in numerous structurally parallel sentences. paraphrase of this sort fails. 
Consider the following example: 
(57) 
No large Mersenne number was proven to be prime 
(57) cannot accurately be paraphrased by (58). 
(58) 
It was proven that no large Mersenne number is prime 
Similar paraphrase failure occurs in the following pair: 
(59) 
Noone is certain to solve the problem 
(60) 
It is certain that noone will solve the problem 

I 
1 
SUBJECTS, OBJECTS, AND THE EPP 
1 15 
(59) describes a situation where the problem under discussion is of at least middling 
difficulty, and the potential problem solvers aren't omniscient. (60), on the other 
hand, is a sentence about either an impossible problem or a hopelessly inept group 
of solvers. 
Significantly, though the judgments are subtle, the failure of 'Quantifier 
Lowering' seen in classic raising examples like (57) is also mirrored in the raising 
particle construction. Compare (61) with (62): 
(61) 
The DA made no defense witnesses out to be credible 
(62) 
The DA made out that no defense witnesses were credible 
On pragmatic grounds, the only remotely plausible interpretation of (61) would be 
one synonymous with (62). 
But that interpretation is very difficult to obtain. 
Instead, the sentence has only the bizare interpretation where the DA perhaps had 
the intention of trying to show that (some of) the defense witnesses were credible, 
but never acted on that intention. This is now as expected, if scope reconstruction 
(at least of certain types) is not available with A-movement, given the raising 
analysis of the make-NP-out construction. 
As also expected, (63) does have a 
reading like that of (62). 
(63) 
The DA made out no defense witnesses to be credible 
Now notice that in a standard ECM configuration, the same complement can be 
interpreted with low scope for the negative expression: 
(64) 
The DA proved no defense witnesses to be credible 
(64) does have a possible sensible reading, similar to that of (62). Given that such 
'reconstructed' readings are not possible when there has been demonstrable overt 
raising, as in (61) or (65), one is led to the conclusion that there has been no such 
raising in (63). 
(65) 
No defense witnesses were proved to be crediblŌ by the DA 
Finally. note that if the ECM subject has to be 'high' in order to license some 
element in the higher chiuse, then the lower reading for that ECM subject becomes 
impossible. The embedded clause in (66) cannot be interpreted as "No defense 
witnesses were credible", the way it can in (64). 
(66) 
The DA proved [no defense witnesses to be credible] during any of 
the trials 
This provides further confirmation for the approach adopted here. 

. 
\ 
1 16 
HOWARD LASNlK 
6. ARGUMENTS FOR OBLIGATORY OBJECT SHIFT, 
AND POTENTIAL REPLIES 
As opposed to these arguments for optionality, there are two arguments in the 
literature to the effect that object shift in English is obligatory. I turn to those now. 
The first was already mentioned. based on Postal's (25), repeated here: 
(67) 
* Joan believes himj to be a genius even more fervently than Bobj does 
Optional raising cannot explain the Condition C effect found here; if the ECM 
subject can remain in the lower clause, it should avoid illicitly binding Bob, contrary 
to fact. But this phenomenon is, perhaps, not as problematic for the analyses 
presented above as it might first appear. After all, it is not uncommon for 'object 
shift' to be obligatory with pronouns even when it is optional with lexical NPS.14 In 
fact, even in English. there is evidence for this state of affairs. Recall that in the 
make-out construction discussed above, many speakers allow the ECM subject to the 
right of out alongside the structure with that NP to the left: 
(68) 
Mary made John out to be a fool 
(69) 
Mary made out John to be a fool 
If, as assumed above, an example like (68) exhibits overt raising, it is reasonable to 
conjecture that there has been no overt raising in (69). Significantly the analogue of 
(68) but with a pronoun as ECM subject is ·still good, but the analogue of(69) is bad, 
even for the many speakers who find (69) itself fully acceptable: 
(70) 
Mary made him out to be a fool 
(71) 
*Mary made out him to be a fool 
This same pattern with a direct object has been familiar from the earliest days of 
generative grammar, as in this pair from Chomsky (1955): 
(72) 
The detective brought him in 
(73) 
*The detective brought in him 
As proposed by Johnson (1991), these patterns are strongly indicative of some sort 
of obligatory movement with a pronoun. 
But this does not undermine the 
conclusion above that object shift in English is generally optional. The examples 
with pronouns presumably involve a cliticization process independent of typical 
object shift. Note, in this connection, that if the pronouns in the above examples are 
made 'strong' through focus, they can remain low: 

I 
SUBJECTS, OBJECTS, AND THE EPP 
(74) 
Mary made out IDM to be a fool 
(75) 
The detective brought in InM 
1 17 
Given this, one might expect that (67) can be salvaged by focusing him. But that 
expectation is unfulfilled: 
(76) 
• Joan believes IDMj to be a genius even more fervently than Bobj 
does 
However, the impossibility of anaphoric connection here has nothing to do with 
Condition C. Rather, the focus itself undermines anaphora, as evidenced by the 
. following pair, where neither raising nor Condition C is at issue: 
(77) 
After I talked to himj, Bobj left 
(78) 
* After I talked to InMit Bobj left 
The second argument for obligatory object shift appears in Tanaka (I 999). 
Tanaka claims that when a simple sentence contains both an interrogative direct 
object and an interrogative temporal expression, it is necessarily the former that 
undergoes wh-movement: 
(79) 
?Whom did the DA accuse during which trial 
(80) 
?*During which trial did the DA accuse whom 
Tanaka observes that Superiority, as subsumed under the Minimal Link Condition, 
can account for this. That is, if at the point when wh-movement applies, the direct 
object is higher than the temporal adverb, then wh-movement of the adverb will be a 
longer move than wh-movement of the direct object would be. This tends to argue 
for obligatory object shift, since, under plausible assumptions about initial phrase 
structure, that would be needed to guarantee that direct object is higher than 
adverb. IS However, it is not clear that Tanaka's generalization is correct. 16 For many 
speakers. the following two examples do not contrast, as reported by Boskovic 
(1997): 
(81) 
What did John buy when 
(82) 
When did John buy what 
On these judgments, we actually now have another argument for optionality of 
object shift.17 (81) is derived if object shift takes place (again, if we assume with 
Tanaka and Boskovi6 that the shifted object is higher than the adverb, an assumption 

:
,
 
1 1 8  
HOWARD LASNlK 
that also played a crucial role in the account of the binding and licensing facts 
discussed earlier). (82) is derived if object shift does not take place (and if the base 
position of object is lower than that of adverb). 
There is a related argument for obligatory object shift which I now turn to. 
While Boskovic5 and Tanaka disagree about objects vs. temporal adverbs. they agree 
about ECM subjects vs. temporal adverbs. both claiming that when the two 
expressions are in competition, it is the ECM subject which must undergo wh­
movement. Tanaka's examples are (83) - (84), and Boskovic5's are (85) - (86). 
(83) 
?Whom did the DA prove to be innocent during which trial 
(84) 
?*During which trial did the DA prove whom to be innocent 
(85) 
Whom did John prove to be guilty when 
(86) 
?*When did John prove whom to be guilty 
For (83 ) - (84), there might be the interfering factor I alluded to in note 16 above. 
(85) - (86), to the extent that they contrast with (8 t) - (82), do seem to argue for 
obligatory overt object shift ofECM subjects, Bo!lcovic's conclusion. However, the 
scope facts examined above argue that the movement is optional. I see no way to 
reconcile these two arguments, so I will merely note that I find the scope facts 
somewhat clearer than the contrast between (85) and (86). Perhaps significantly, the 
Superiority contrast seems considerably sharper in the make-NP-oul ECM 
construction, where there is word order evidence that object shift has taken place: 
(87) 
Whom did the DA make out to be guilty when 
(88) 
?*When did the DA make whom out to be guilty 
Judgments really begin to fail at this point, but I think that with the make out-NP 
order. which, by hypothesis has no overt object shift, the Superiority effect is 
lessened: 
(89) 
??When did the DA make out whom to be guilty 
There is surely such a contrast in simpler verb-particle constructions: 
(90) 
?*When did you call whom up 
(91) 
When did you call up whom 
This is just as expected on the Johnson-style raising analysis. 

: 
I 
f 
I 
I 
l 
SUBJECTS, OBJECTS, AND THE EPP 
1 19 
7. THE REMAINING QUESTION 
The last question I will consider is how the optionality of object shift can be stated. 
In Lasnik (199Sd), I argued that the driving force for the overt movement of the NP 
is a strong 'EPP' feature in Agro. Following Chomsky (1991), I took Agro to be the 
same item as Agrs, the labels merely mnemonic. Overt 'object shift' is then 
analyzable as the same phenomenon as the standard EPP. I assume that Case 
checking does not provide the driving force for the movement. Rather, it is just a 
side effect of EPP satisfaction;18 there is no requirement that Case per se be checked 
overtly (though it must be checked eventually; it is a weak feature). One way to 
make the raising optional might be to abandon the idea that Agro is the same item as 
Agrs, assuming, instead. that only the latter obligatorily has an EPP requirement. 
Agro would only optionally have the property. This is conceivable, but I am not yet 
ready to give up the uniformity of Agr. Some of the discussion in Chomsky (1995, 
p.3S0) hints at an alternative possibility (though not one that Chomsky himself 
winds up pursuing). Chomsky reasons that "If Agr has no strong feature, then PF 
considerations, at least, give no reason for it to be present at all, and LF 
considerations do not seem relevant." He thus suggests, in passing. that "Agr exists 
only when it has strong features."J9 Along these lines, suppose, then, that the 
optionaIity of raising is the optionality of AgrO.20 If Agro is present, overt raising 
will be forced by its EPP requirement, and if an NP raises to satisfy that 
requirement, its Case will be checked.21 If Agro is absent, there will be no overt 
raising;22 the nominal's Case will be checked by covert raising of its formal features 
to the V, or, alternatively, be licensed in situ by the Agree operation of Chomsky 
(1998).23 This leaves us with the question of why Agrs is obligatory while Agro is 
not, which is exactly the question of why the standard asynunetric EPP apparently 
holds. And at present, contrary to what I hoped when I began this investigation, I 
have no more to contribute to this question than anyone else does. 
ENDNOTES 
• 
I would like to acknowledge the helpful questions and suggestions of Daniel Seely. Rich Campbell, 
Stan Dubinsky, William Davies, two reviewers, and all the participants of my spring 199 syntax seminar 
and of the 1999 LSA Linguistic Institute Workshop on The Role of Grammatical Functions in 
Transfonnational Syntax. This paper was completed while I was a Fellow at the Center for Advanced 
Study in the Behavioral Sciences. I am grateful for the financial support provided by the John D. and 
Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, grant #95·32005·0. 
• 
For the purposes of this paper, by 'object' I will mean the nominal expression that receives acusative 
Case. 
2 
Postal presented scores of arguments over 40 pages of text. Here, I will just be concerned with a 
narrow range of the types Postal examined. 
] 
The one, partial, exception to this that I am familiar with is the 'inverse linking' construction first 
discussed by May (1977). In sentences like (i). the pronoun can apparently be understood as bOWld by a 
quantifier that does not c-command it in overt syntax. 
(i) 
Someone from [every California city1. hates iti 

, 
I 
120 
HOWARD LASNIK 
Note, though, that Condition A type binding still fails: 
(ii) 
·Someone from [every California city]; hates itselti 
I do not understand why this should be, or, in fact, why (i) does not run afoul of the Weak Crossover 
constraint. 
( 
See Lasnik (l995b), Lasnik (1995c), and Lasnik (1 995d). 
S 
I take the basic idea and consequences of feature movement from Chomsky (1995). 
However, 
Chomsky claims that the feature movement at issue, while not creating new scope possibilities, does 
create new binding possibilities. (IS) - (17) above cast doubt on Chomsky's claim about binding. See 
Lasnik (1995b), Lasnik (1995c), and Lasnik (1997) for extensive discussion. 
6 
For two reasons, I take the EPP requirement to be independent of Case checking. First. I argued in 
Lasnik (I995d) that not just nominal expressions but also PPs move to [Spec, Agro). 
Second, subject 
poSition of an ECM infinitive is not a Case checking position, yet movement to that position does take 
place, as win be amply documented below. 
7 
See Levin (1979) for extensive discussion and documentation of this construction. 
8 
Pseudogapping is possible with the first object in a double object construction as remnant But the 
first object in a double object construction is resistant to undergoing HNPS: 
(i) 
?John gave Bill a lot of money, and Mary will giYe Susan a let efmeRB 
(ii) 
• John gave t a lot of money the fund for the preservation of VOS languages 
Conversely, the Ό object is a poor Pseudogapping remnant, but frely undergoes HNPS: 
(iii) 
• John gave Bill a lot of money, and Mary will gi¥e-BtQ a lot of advice 
(iv) 
John gave Bill t yesterday more money than he had ever sen 
9 
There is a potential interfering factor in (25) (a Condition B effect with the pronoun in the elided 
VP), which Lasnik and Saito (1991) control for by giving the modification in (I), in which Bob does not 
c-command into the elided VP. 
(i) 
·loan believes him; to be a genius even more fervently than Bob;'s mother does 
10 
Daniel Seely (personal communication) points out that (i) is somewhat better than the example in the 
text. 
(i) 
Which actress do you think that Bill found no pictures of t. during any of the searches 
It is not clear why that should be. Seely also suggests another test, which, all else equal, seems to indicate 
that the proposal here is on the right track. He observes that if the anti-c-command constraint on parasitic 
gaps of Chomsky (1982) is valid. then high binding should be inconsistent with parasitic gap licensing. 
The relevant example is extremely complex. but to Seely's ear, and to mine, it is quite degraded, as 
predicted: 
(ii) 
Which men; did the DA prove Ii to be there after each otherj's lawyers had sued p.g.; 
II 
Postal (1974) had a very sƑmilar argument ror raising based on the jigure-tJut construction, as in (i) 
(though, as Postal shows, possibilities for raising are very limited here). 
(i) 
I figured it out to be more than 300 miles from here to Tulsa 

SUBJECTS, OBJECTS. AND THE EPP 
121 
Il In fact, Chomsky argues that there is no A-movement reconstruction at all. See Lasnik (1999) for 
extensive discussion, including further arguments for lack of such reconstruction and consideration of 
arguments to the contraJy. 
U 
Like believe, and unlike want, expect allows pasive-raising: 
(i) 
There is expected to be a storm 
But unlike believe, and like want, expect allows a PRO subject of its complement: 
(ii) 
Mary expects [pRO to solve the problem] 
14 
See Diesing (1996) and Johnson (1991) for discussion. 
15 
Curiously. on Tanaka's assumptions about basic phrase structure (essentially those of Larson (1988» . 
nothing yet follows, since the base position of the object is already higher than the adverb. 
16 
The relative heaviness of the two wh-phrases (;Culd be playing a role in Tanaka's examples. In fact, if 
we reverse the heaviness, (80) becomes perfect, as far as I can tell: 
(i) 
When did the DA accuse which defendant 
17 
Bo!kovic's acount is actually somewhat different. For reasons of space, I will not go into it here. 
II That is, Agr has no Case feature of its own. When T or V along with its Case feature merges with 
Age, then a nominal expression that has raised to [Spec, AgrJ will be in a Case checking configumtion, 
even though the raising was driven by the EPP. 
I' I now do not actually view the EPP requirement as a mater of feature checking in the technical sense. 
Following Chomsky (1998), though in a somewhat different framcwork of assumptions, I take it that it is 
simply the requirement that a particular head have a specifier. Se Lasnik (2001) for evidence in favor of 
this approach. 
20 See Kim (1997) for arguments that the position of a Pseudogapping remnant has a focus feature. 
Given the optionality of (the target of) raising that I have suggested, a fruitful line of inquiry would center 
on focus effects with raised objects and ECM subjects in general. 
II As mentioned above, the obligatory raising of pronouns, I take to be an independent phenomenon, 
related to the clitic-Iike nature of unstresed object pronOWlS in English. 
II 
Except for weak pronouns, which obligatorily cliticize to the verb, I assume. 
23 Though se Lasnik (In pres) for arguments that feature movement cannot be entirely eliminated. 
Regardless of whether feature movement or Agree is adopted, there is an important question pointed out 
by a reviewer: Since V is capable of checking Case by itself in the absence of Ageo, this possibility 
should also obtain in the presence of Agro. But then, given strictly cyclic derivation, under the long­
standing assumption that A-movement is impossible for a nominal whose Case has been checked (se, for 
example. Chomsky 1986, p.l99), raising to [Spec, Ageo} should never be possible. For present pwposes, 
I will adopt the 'derivation by phase' approach to the cycle of Chomsky (1999). Since the lower VP in 
the split VP (corresponding to Chomsky's V) is not a phase. checking can be delayed until the higher VP 
(Chomsky's v), the next phase. 


LISA DEMENA TRA VIS 
DERIVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
Austronesian languages have been used to raise questions about the status of the 
subject. I 
For example, Schachter (1976, 1996) shows that Tagalog (from the 
Western Malayo-Polynesian branch of Austronesian) divides its subject properties 
over two NPs (the Topic and the Actor) and suggests that it is inappropriate to talk 
about the grammatical relation of subject in such a language. With the introduction 
of VP internal subjects in the GBIMP framework (see e.g. Fukui & Speas 1986, 
Kitagawa 1986, Kuroda 1988, Koopman & Sportiche 1991), it has become possible 
to give this observation a structural correlation by placing the Actor in Spec, VP and 
the Topic in Spec, IP along the lines of Guilfoyle, Hung and Travis (1992) (GHT). 
In other words, with the assumption that all subjects are, in some sense, derived. we 
are able to separate the notion of the base-generated subject from the notion of the 
surface subject. Further, we might speculate that there are some languages that 
never make use of the derived subject position. In such a language (possibly a VSO 
language like Niuean - see Massam and Smallwood 1997, Massam 1998, this 
volume), the surface subject would remain in Spec, VP. 
Even more recently, it has been proposed within the Minimalist framework that 
not only subjects but also objects move from a base-generated position to a derived 
position. If this is true, we can now ask questions about objects that formerly were 
only asked about subjects. For instance, is an object in its base-generated position or 
in a derived position in the overt syntax? 
Can both positions be filled 
simultaneously? The question I would like to address in this paper, does a given 
language - in this case Malagasy, another Western Malayo-Polynesian language ­
make use of its derived object position? If GHT are right, then Malagasy can fill 
both the base-generated subject position (Spec, VP) and the derived subject position 
(Spec, IP) simultaneously in the surface syntax. I will claim that Malagasy object 
phenomena are quite different and that Malagasy does not have more object-like 
pOSitions than other languages, but rather has fewer. In more theoretical terms, I 
will argue that Malagasy has no derived objects. This means that Malagasy treats its 
objects like Niuean treats its subjects. What Niuean lacks in subject flexibility, 
Malagasy lacks in object flexibility. 
An important theoretical issue can be addressed in the context of the 
generalizations given here which is the status of grammatical functions as 
primitives. In order even to describe the phenomena addressed in this paper, there is 
a need to have a notion of two subjects and two objects - one base-generated, one 
123 
William D. Davies and Stanley Dubinsky (eds.), Objects and other subjects: 
Grammatical functions. functional categories, and configurationality, 123- /55. 
ctl 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands. 

, 
I 
124 
LISA DEMENA TRAVIS 
derived - and each of these needs its own structural position so that both may be 
filled. 
In the last part of the paper. I will speculate on the reason why a language such 
as Malagasy might lack derived objects suggesting that languages, or certain 
structural domains within languages. may be either argument checking or predicate 
checking. 
1. DERIVED OBJECTS 
Derived objects, while fairly new to the syntactic theory which developed into the 
Minimalist Program, have existed in earlier versions of Standard Theory (e.g. 
Rosenbaum 1967) and have a long tradition in Relational Grammar (RG) where 
many phenomena such as Raising to Object, Possessor Raising, and Applicatives 
have been subsumed under a rule of Ascension or Advancement to 2. 
In this 
section, using RG terminology, I introduce briefly three phenomena that have been 
characterized by derived objects - Raising to Object, Possessor Raising, and 
Applicatives - that will be further investigated in Malagasy. I will then show -
using Possessor Raising as an example - how Baker (1988) incorporates these 
phenomena into GB theory without postulating object movement. Finally, I will 
introduce an additional object raising phenomenon, object shift. and show how the 
early Minimalist Program (Chomsky 1993) accounted for these moved objects, as 
well as the previously mentioned derived objects again using raised possessors to 
exemplify the mechanisms. 
1. 1 Derived objects in Relational Grammar: Ascension to 2 
Raising to Object constructions where the thematic subject of a lower verb behaves 
like the grammatical object of a higher verb are the archetypal derived object 
constructions. A typical example of this is given in (1) below where the children is 
the thematic subject of the lower verb phrase do their homework. 
Raising to Object (RtoO) 
(1 )a. 
We expect [ that the children will do their homework. ] 
b. 
We expect [ the children ] [ to do their homework. ] 
In Relational Grammar terms, the embedded I (subject) has become the matrix 2 
(object). 
In (2) below we see a case of Possessor Raising which again is arguably an 
example of a derived object. In the example presented here, agreement in Southern 
Tiwa suggests that the possessor of a direct object triggers the same type of 
agreement on the verb as does the indirect object in a double object construction. 

DERIVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
Possessor Raising CPR) 
(2) 
Southern Tiwa (Allen et a1. 1 990:339) 
a. 
Ben-khwian-mu-ban 
2so: 1 so\A-dog-see-PAST 
'You (SG) saw my dog.' 
b. 
B!m-khwian-wia-ban 
2SG: 1 SG\A-dog-give-p AST 
'You (sa) gave me the dog. ' 
125 
In A11cn et aI's analysis, the reason why the agreement in (2a) and (2b) are the same 
is that in both cases the subject 'you' is 2sg, the surface object is Isg while the 
underlying object (,dog') is singular. Important for their paper is the fact that, in 
both cases, this agreement is triggered by a derived object. In the case of (2a), the 
final 2 is the possessor of the object. In the case of (2b), the final 2 was the original 
goal. This latter phenomenon where an oblique becomes an object is discussed next. 
Applicatives have also received a derived object analysis, notably in the work of 
Chung (1976). In the example in (3) below, we see how the suffix -lean on the verb 
changes Ali from being an object of the preposition kepada in (3a) to being the 
object of the verb in (3b). 
AppJicatives 
(3) 
Indonesian (Chung 1983:219) 
a. 
Saja mem-bawa surat itu 
kepada Ali. 
I 
TRANS-bring letter DET to 
Ali 
'I brought the letter to Ali. ' 
b. 
Saja mem-bawa-kan Ali surat itu. 
I 
TRANs-bring-to Ali letter DET 
'I brought Ali the letter. ' 
In RtoO, Possessor Raising, and Applicatives, we have seen three environments 
where objects are created through a derivation of some sort. 
Clearly, not a11 
languages exhibit these phenomena. In showing that a language does not have them, 
therefore, one hasn't necessarily shown that derived objects are ruled out in 
principle. What is surprising about Malagasy, however, is that it appears to have a 
fonn of all three, but each with a twist. In ECM constructions, the apparent raised 
object in fact remains within the lower clause. In Possessor Raising and Applicative 
constructions, the raised NP must become a subject rather than an object. It is for 
this reason that I will claim that Malagasy rules out derived objects in principle 
rather than simply lacking the appropriate environments which might make use of 
the derived object position. 
Before turning to the Malagasy facts, however, I will show how derived object 
phenomena are treated in the Government Binding framework of Chomsky (1981), 
and its descendant framework, the Minimalist Program. 

126 
LISA DEMENA TRAVIS 
1.2 Derived objects in GB and the Minimalist Program 
As 
mentioned 
above, 
the 
Minimalist 
Program 
even 
in 
its 
earliest form 
(Chomsky 1993) has allowed derived objects. A step towards this. however, was 
introduced by Baker (1 988) in his discussion of grammatical function changing 
rules. He gathered the three derived object phenomena mentioned above Wlder the 
mechanism of incorporation. At the time of his work, however. the possibility of 
derived objects had not yet been introduced. Therefore, while these objects share 
with other objects the grammatical case relation with the verb, technically they do 
not share the structural position of other objects. 
As we shall see below, this 
relationship of case assignment was done via the Government Transparency 
Corollary (GTC). 
1.2.1 Grammatical Function changing (Baker 1988) 
Baker (1988) subsumes applicatives, possessor raising, and ECM under into one 
phenomenon by having all three sensitive to head-movement. What is common to 
all three constructions is that head movement occurs from a complement of the verb 
into the verb leaving an NP in need of case. Further, this head movement leaves the 
projection of the head transparent to government by the verb. 
Since the verb will 
now govern and assign case to the stranded NP, the NP will appear to be the object 
of the verb though, in fact, it will not have changed its hierarchical position in the 
tree. 
We can see how this is done in the case of Possessor Raising shown below.2 First 
an example is given from Oneida. 
Here the head of the object of the verb nuhs 
'house' is incorporated into the verb leaving the possessor John stranded. Since the 
head of the object NP has moved out of the projection, the projection is transparent 
to government and case-assignment by the verb. The possessor is therefore assigned 
accusative case by the verb and therefore has the appearance of being the object of 
the verb. 
Possessor Raising as N-incorporation 
(4) 
Oneida (Baker 1 988: I l l) 
Wa-hi-nuhs-ahni:nu: John 
PAST-l sS/3M-house-buy John 
'I bought John's house. ' 

DERIVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
127 
(5) 
S 
------
NP 
VP 
I 
* 
I 
V 
NP 
/'-.. 
/'-.. 
N 
V 
NP 
N 
I 
I 
I 
I 
housej 
buy John 
É 
In Relational Grammar, Possessor Raising and ascension rules in general are 
restricted by the Relational Succession Law given below in (6) below. 
(6) 
Relational Succession Law (Perlmutter 1983a:35) 
An ascendee assumes within the clause . . .  into which it ascends the gramatical 
relation ofits host NP (the NP ... out of which it ascends) 
... 
If an element is raised out of an object, then we expect it to become an object. In 
.Baker's theory of incorporation, the apparent object creating rules are restricted by 
the Government Transparency Corollary given in (7). 
(7) 
Government Transparency CorollarY (GTC, Baker 1988:64) 
A lexical category which has an item incorpomted into it governs everything which the 
incorpomted item governed in its original structural pouition. 
The GTC is similar to the Relational Succession Law in that where the verb 
originally governs the host, it now governs the element stranded within the host. 
This means that if it assigned case to the host, it will. now assign case to the NP 
within the host. 
1.2.2 Object movement to AgrO 
The notion of derived object is introduced early in the Minimalist Program. The 
reasons for proposing a derived object position were both conceptual and empirical. 
The conceptual reason had to do with the symmetry between structural case assigned 
to subject via a spec-head configuration with a functional category (thought at the 
time to be AgrS) and the structural case assigned to object via a spec-head 
configuration with a functional category (thOUght at the time to be AgrO). One of 
the main empirical reasons came from the phenomenon of object shift in 
Scandinavian languages (see Holmberg 1986). An example is given below of object 
shift in Icelandic where the specific object below can appear to the right of negation 
as in (8a) or to the left of negation as in (8b). 

. \ 
128 
LISA DEMENA TRAVIS 
Specific Objects 
(8) 
Icelandic (from Holmberg 1 986:2 17) 
a. 
Jon keypti ekki bokina 
Jon bought not 
the. book 
'Jo.n didn't buy the book: 
b. 
Jon keypti boldna ekki 
Jon bought the.book not 
Bobaljik and Jonas (I 996) account for this variability in the positioning of the object 
through movement to a derived object position outside of the VP shown below in 
(9). 
(9) 
AgrO 
------
Spec 
AgrO' 
(adapted from Bobaljik and Jonas 1996) 
 
-----
the.bookj Af 
VP 
* 
not 
Once we introduce the possibility of having the structural object position as a 
Spec of a functional category which is filled through movement, a11 of the derived 
object constructions discussed above can be done through similar movement. 3 For 
example, Possessor Raising would be done in a similar manner with now the 
Possessor moving out of the object NP into the derived object position as shown in 
(10) below. For reasons too varied to go into here. I assume that the position of the 
derived object is within the VP, crucially below the position of the base-generated 
Agent in Spec, VP. Further, I assume the landing site is Spec of a projection of 
Aspect located between two VP shells.4 

DERIVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
Possessor Raising 
(10) 
vP 
-----
Spec, vP 
v' 
-----
v 
AspP 
I 
------
boughty 
Spec, AspP 
Asp' 
I 
. 
Johni 
Asp 
VP 
I 
 
tv 
NP 
tv 
/"-... 
É 
house 
129 
Note that in the example above, the logical object position and the derived object 
position are filled with lexical material simultaneously. 
2. DERIVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
2.1 Backgroundfacts 
Before turning to the problem of derived object in Malagasy. we must establish 
some preliminary facts concerning the syntax of this language. It is a Western 
Malayo-Polynesian (WMP) language, spoken in Madagascar. It is VOS and has 
fairly strict word order. Like many other WMP languages, it has a rich system of 
verbal morphology which allows arguments and non-arguments to appear in subject 
position. 
An example is given below in (I I) where (1 1a) has Actor Topic (AT) 
morphology !lnd the highest argument (here the Agent) is in the sentence-final 
subject position (subjects are given in bold). In (l Ib), the verb bears Theme Topic 
(Tf) morphology and the Theme is in subject position. In (I I c), the verb bears 
Circumstantial Topic (CT) morphology and the benefactive NP is in subject 
position. Note that in (l Ib) and (l Ic) the Agent, ny lehilahy 'the man', appears 
directly following the verb when it is not in the subject positioIl:. 
(1 1) 
Malagasy verbal morphology' 
a. 
Manasa 
lamba ho an'ny 
ankizy ny lehilahy. 
PRES. AT. wash clothes for ACC'DET children DET man 
'The man washes clothes for the children. ' 
b. 
Sasan' 
ny 
lehilahy ho an'ny 
ankizy 
ny lamba. 
IT.wash' DET man 
for ACC'DET children DET clothes 
'The clothes are washed by the man for the children. ' 

130 
c. 
LISA DEMENA TRAVIS 
Anasan' ny 
lehilahy ny 
lamba ny 
ankizy. 
CT. wash' DET man 
DET clothes DET children 
'The children are washed clothes for by the man . •  
2.2 Raising to Object 
One of the interesting things about the VOS order is that, being very different from 
English, it can often offer evidence for phenomena that might be obscured in an 
SVO language. The particular phenomenon that J have in mind here is the Raising 
to Object construction. 
This is particularly interesting in the context of work on 
derived objects. There has been a long and well-known debate on whether English, 
in fact, has actual movement in Raising to Object (RtoO) constructions. In most 
cases, if there were to be movement, it would be string vacuous as shown in (12) 
below.6 
(12) 
The children believe the dog to be sleeping. 
Certainly 'the dog' is the logical subject of the embedded clause and it receives case 
from the matrix verb. The question is whether this NP remains in the embedded 
subject position or whether it has moved to a matrix object position. 
In Malagasy, the issue appears to be simplified. As we can see in the pair of 
examples below, the subject of the embedded clause appears in sentence final 
position in the non-RtoO construction, but appears in (embedded) sentence initial 
position in the RtoO construction. (The non-RtoO embedded clause is also placed to 
the right of the matrix subject Rakoto while the RtoO embedded clause is placed to 
its left.)' 
(13) 
a. 
Raising to Object in Malagasy 
Nanantena 
Rakoto [fa 
nianatra 
tsara ny 
ankUy] 
pST.hope.AT Rakoto 
COMP PST. AT. study good DET children 
'Rakoto hoped that the children studied well. • 
b. 
Nanantena ny ankizy 
[ho nianatra 
tsara] Rakoto 
PST.AT.hope the children PRT PST.AT.study good Rakoto 
'Rakoto hoped that the children studied well.' 
Pearson (2001) argues we can see that the NP ny ankizy 'the children' is in object 
position in (l13)b by looking at adverb placement facts. 
The data and the 
judgements that he provides are given below. 

DERIVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
(14) 
? Nilaza 
an-dRabe tamin-katezerana rho mpangalatra] 
PST-NomP.say ACC-Rabe pST-with-anger 
PRT thief 
Rasoa 
Rasoa 
'Rasoa said angrily ofRabe that (he was) a thief.' 
131 
On the basis o f  these data, we could say that Malagasy clearly has derived objects 
while in English it is less clear. In spite of this, I will argue that Malagasy crucially 
does not have derived objects while English does. I will return to the case of RtoO 
constructions later after I have outlined my reasons for believing that Malagasy does 
not allow derived objects. 
In the next two sections, I will suggest that Malagary, while it has applicative­
like constructions and it appears to have possessor raising out of logical objects, in 
each case the raised NP becomes the subject rather than the object. 
2.3 Applicatives 
As mentioned in section 1 above, in both the frameworks of Relational Grammar 
and GB/MP, applicative constructions provide a place where arguably one would 
expect to find derived objects. 
In Relational Gramar terms this would be 
characterized as advancement from 3 to 2. As Baker (1988) shows, applicatives can 
affect a range of arguments. 
He contends, however, that they are restricted to 
benefactives, instrumentals, and (less commonly) locatives - all arguments of the 
verb. Some of his examples are given in (15) below. 
(15) 
a. 
b. 
c. 
Applicatives (Baker 1 988:244)8 
Benefactive (Chichewa) 
Mlimi a-ku-dul-ir-a nkandwe mitengo 
farmer cut-for 
fox 
trees 
'The farmer is cutting trees for the fox. • 
Instrumental (Chichewa) 
Fisi 
a-na-dul-ir-a mpeni chingwe 
hyena cut-with 
knife 
rope 
'The hyena cut the Tope with a knife. • 
Locative (Kinyarwanda) 
Umwaana y-a-taa-ye-mo amaazi igitabo 
child 
throw-in 
water 
book 
'The child threw the book into the water.' 
Kimaragang Dusun, a language closely related to Malagasy, also appears to have 
an applicative c,?nstruction as discussed by Kroeger {l990).9 

1 32 
LISA DEMENA TRAVIS 
(16) 
Locative alternations in Kimaragung Dusun 
a. 
O-jJo-suwang okuh 
ditih 
sada sid pata'an 
AT-QBln-enter l .SG.NOM this.ACC fish LQC basket 
'I will put this fish in the basket. ' 
b. 
m-poN-suwang okuh 
do pata'an do 
sada 
AT-QBlt-enter 
l .SG.NOM ACC basket ACC fish 
'I will fill the basket with fish.' 
Turning now to Malagasy, we see that it too has a way of promoting a locative to a 
term, but interestingly promotion is always to subject. In Malagasy this is done by 
the Circumstantial Topic morphology mentioned above. 
Below I give a range of 
examples that show just how productive this process is. It not only allows locatives 
to become subjects, but also benefactives, instrwnentals, time, price, and manner. . 
Further, while some of these promoted objects are c1earll in the subject position 
(sentence finally), others must appear in a clefied position. I 
( 1 7) 
Malagasy Circumstantial Topic 
(b-f from Rajemisa-Raolison: 1 12-1 13) 
a. 
Benefactive 
Nividian'ny 
lehilahy lamba 
ny ankizy 
PST-cT -buy-DET man 
clothing DET child 
'The man bOUght the clothing for the children.' 
b. 
Instrumental 
Anapahany bozaka ny antsinay 
cT-cut-3sG grass 
DET knife-IpL.EXC 
'He cuts the grass with our knife. • 
c. 
Locative 
Itoeranay 
Ity trano ity 
cT-live-lpL.EXC this house this 
'We live in this house. ' 
d. 
Time 
I I  
Rahampitso no handehanantsika 
tomorrow 
PRT FUT-CT-go-I PL. INC 
'It is tomorrow that we will go. ' 
e. 
Price 
Valopolo no 
nividianany 
hena omaly 
eighty 
PRT pST-CT-sell-3sG meat yesterday 
'It was for eighty that he sold the meat yesterday. ' 

f. 
MalUler 
DERIVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
Amin-kafaliana lehibe no iarahabanay 
anao, Tompokolahy 
with-joy 
great PRT CT-greet-1PL.EXCL 2SG sir 
'It is with great joy that we greet you, sir. ' 
133 
GHT account for the ability for an oblique to become a subject via P­
incorporation.12 In Relational Grammar, we might expect advancement to 2 of the 
formerly oblique item. 
Given Baker's notion of P-incoIporation, it should be that 
the V+P complex can govern and assign case to the stranded P-object making it act 
like an object. 
Given a derived object version of the applicative construction, it 
should be that the stranded P-object could move to a derived object position to 
receive case from the V+P complex. 
Perhaps unexpectedly, then, what happens is that the stranded P-object becomes 
the subject rather than the object. 
In Relational Grammar terms, there is 
advancement from 3 to I .  GHT have no account for this, in fact. 13 What I suggest is 
that there is no derived object position for Malagasy, forcing all processes that 
would otherwise promote an NP to object, to promote this NP to subject.14 In other 
words, where other languages would allow movement of the NP to a derived object 
position to check the necessary features of the NP, in Malagasy this option is not 
available and the first appropriate position would be the subject position. With this 
hypothesis in mind, we will look at other constructions where we might expect to 
find derived objects. 
2.4 Possessor Raising 
Another construction where we have seen derived objects is the Possessor Raising 
(PR) construction. 
An additional typical example of Possessor Raising is given 
below. The possessor kalulu 'hare' appears within the object NP in (1 8a) and in the 
object position in ( I Sb). 
(8) 
Chichewa (from Baker 1 988: 1 1) 
a. 
Fisi 
a-na-dy-a 
nsomba za kalulu. 
Hyena SP-PST-eat-ASP fish 
of hare 
'The hyena ate the hare's fish. t 
b. 
fisi 
a-na-dy-er-a 
kalulu nsomba. 
hyena SP-PST-eat-APPL-ASP hare 
fish 
'The hyena ate the hare's fish.' 
2.4.1 Background 
Similar constructions appear in Malagasy but with an interesting twist. The simple 
picture of Possessor Raising in Malagasy shows that possessors may only raise from 
logical object hosts to grammatical subject landing sites. 
In order to see this, 
however, we will have to look at some very complicated constructions in Malagasy. 

134 
LISA DEMENA TRAVIS 
In the discussion, I will first give an overview of other descriptions of the Malagasy 
data. Then I will present another relevant construction, Agent Raising, and argue 
that only by looking at a subset of the Agent Raising structures can we get at the 
appropriate generalization. 
Some of the original literature on Possessor Raising pointed out that Malagasy 
seems to allow raising only to subject position. 
Examples from Perlmutter and 
Postal (I983a) are given in (19) below, followed by their characterization of the 
language specific restriction on possessor raising needed to capture the Malagasy 
facts. IS 
(19) 
Malagasy (Perlmutter and Postal 1 983a:44) 
a. 
Nantsoin-d Rakoto [ny anaran'ny olona] 
PST-IT-call Rakoto DET name'DET people 
'The names of the people were called by Rakoto.' 
h. 
Nantsoin-d Rakoto anarana [ny 
oiona] 
PST-IT-call Rakoto name 
DET people 
'The people were name-called by Rakoto. ' 
c. 
Niantso 
ny anaran 'ny olona Rakoto 
PST-AT-call DET name'DET people Rakoto 
'Ralcoto called the names ofthe people.' 
d. 
*Niantso 
anarana ny 
olona Rakoto 
PST-AT-call name 
DET people Rakoto 
To prevent such derivations [as in (19a»), the grammar must state that in Malagasy, the 
host of Possessor Ascension must be Q subject. (italics in Perlmutter and Postal) 
This restriction, however, does not accurately account for the all of the facts. HWlg 
( 1988) makes the observation that Possessor raising only occurs with adjectives, 
unaccusative verbs, and passives. 
16 
(20) 
a. 
Malagasy (a-d from Hung 1988) 
[Marary] 
ny zanako. 
PRES. sick DET child-ISG 
'My child is sick.' 
b. 
[Marary 
zanaka] aho. 
PRES.sick child 
I SG 
c. 
[Nianjera] 
ny 
tranon-dRabe. 
PST.AT.collapse DET house-Rabc 
'Rabe's house collapsed.' 

DERIVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
d. 
[Nianjera 
trano] Rabe.17 
PST. AT. collapse house Rabe 
e. 
[Soloan-dRasoa] ny lamban'ny 
zanany 
TT.change-Rasoa DET clothes-DET child-3sG 
'Her child's clothes were changed by Rasoa.' 
f. 
[Soloan-dRasoa 
lamba] ny 
zanany 
TT.change-Rasoa clothes DET child-3SG 
135 
A way of expressing this generalization is that Possessor Raising must obey two 
constraints - it must be launched by the logical object, but its landing site must be 
the subject position. IS In other words, while other languages have possessor raising 
from the logical object position to the grammatical object position, Malagasy only 
allows possessor raising from the logical object position to the grammatical subject 
position. 
This is the simplest picture to give of Malagasy, but in fact the data above need a 
bit more explanation since subsequent to Postal and Perlmutter's work and Hung's 
work, it has been proposed that there are cases where, apparently, there is possessor 
raising to object. 
I will begin by presenting these counterexamples to the 
generalization, but then r will suggest that these are not true cases of possessor 
raising but rather constructions where the possessor is, in fact, base-generated as an 
argument of the verb. 
I will then introduce the Agent Raising construction and 
argue that a subset of these are true raising constructions and in these we can see the 
true restrictions on raising at work. 
First we wil1 look at the examples where it appears that the possessor has raised 
into object position. 
Keenan and Ralalaoherivony (1998) (K&R) present an 
extensive study of Possessor Raising constructions in Malagasy. In this work, it is 
assumed that Possessor Raising is possible to object as well as subject positions. 
Below is a sampling of the examples that they give. 
(21) 
a. 
Possessor Raising to Object in Malagasy (K&R: 80) 
[Manety 
[ny volon-jana-ny)) Rabe 
AT.PRES.cut DET hair-child-3sG Rabe 
'Rabe cut the hair of his child. ' 
b. 
[Manety 
[volo] [an-janany]] 
Rabe 
AT.PRES.Cut hair 
Acc-child-3sG Rabe 
c. 
[Manala 
[ny fatoran'ny gadralJ Rabe 
AT.PRES.remove DET bond-DET prisoner Rabe 
<Rabe removed the bonds of the prisoner.' 

. 
, 
1 36 
d. 
USA DEMENA TRAVIS 
[Manala 
[fatorana] [ny gadra]] Rabe 
AT.PRES.remove bond 
DETprisoner Rabe 
If these are true cases of object raising, we can see that it is possible to have derived 
objects in Malagasy and the central thesis of this paper will be wrong. There are 
reasons, however, to believe that these constructions are base-generated as such. 
Many researchers who work on Possessor Raising constructions point out a possible 
confound in the data. For example. it is not clear whether (2Id) is the result of 
promotion of a possessor to the object position or simply another possible base­
generated structure. As has been pointed out. for example in Massam (1 985), 
possessor raising structures may be syntactic or lexical, and it is possible to have 
both in the same language. In English we get the following examples. 
(22) 
English 
a. 
Ilse kissed Perry's nose. 
b. 
lise kissed Perry on the nose 
c. 
*Ilse kissed Peny on Teddy's nose. J9 
We would not say that (22b) is a case of Possessor Raising even though, as (22c) 
shows, we can't have a distinct possessor. In the case of Malagasy, we can question 
the productivity of possessor raising. For example, in the following examples, we 
see that in these cases, the gossessor cannot move out of the object unlike the 
examples we have see in (21). 0 
(23)a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Mamaky 
ny bokin-dRabe aho 
PRES.AT.read DETbook-Rabe 
ISG 
"I am reading Rabe's book.' 
*Mamaky 
boky an-dRabe aho 
PRES.AT.read book Acc.Rabe ISG 
Mividy 
ny tranon-dRabe aho 
PRES.AT.buy DET house-Rabe ISG 
'I am buying Rabe's house.' 
*Mividy 
trano an-dRabe aho 
PRES.AT.buy house Acc.Rabe I SG 
We can ask, then, if Malagasy has true possessor raising or simply allows 
something with possessor-like meaning to be generated as an argument of the verb. 
In the next section I will argue that Malagasy has both constructions and the only 
way to be sure to have the true raising case is to use a construction called Agent 
Phrase raising . 

DERIVED OBmCfS IN MALAGASY 
1 37 
2.4.2 Agent Phrase Raising 
In order to fu)ly understand the restrictions on Possessor Raising, first we must 
understand a construction called Agent Phrase Raising. 
I begin by outlining the 
observations on Agent Phrase Raising presented in Keenan and Ralalaoherivony 
(1998). I will then show that even in some of these cases, one can argue that the 
raised possessor is base-generated as the argument of the main predicate. 
I will 
claim that only by looking at certain cases of Agent Phrase Raising can we be sure 
to have a true raising structure. 
In Agent Phrase Raising, we get possessor raising from an unexpected position 
which looks like the Agent phrase (Spec, VP) of a relative clause which modifies the 
noun.21 An example given by K.&R is given below. 
(24) 
a. 
Agent Phrase Raising (Keenan and Ralalaoherivony 1 998:86) 
[vp Maro] [ny raharaha sahaniko] 
much DET work 
IT-confront-ISG 
'The work faced by me is great' 
b. 
[vp Maro [raharaha sahaninaJ] 
aho 
much work 
IT-confront I SG 
In (24a) the whole NP ny raharaha sahaniko 'the work faced by me' is the subject 
of the sentence. In (24b), the subject of the sentence, aho 'I'. appears to be extracted 
from Spec, VP position of the clause (sahaniko 'confronted by me') modifying the 
noun raharaha 'work'. K.&R assume that this is done by a type of reanalysis, or at 
least a possible alternative analysis of the data. 
They say the alternative analysis 
would have the "agent" as the possessor of the whole NP (note that the genitive form 
that a possessor takes is identical to the form of an Actor which has not become the 
subject). 
They show that the possessor of the NP can attach even to simple 
postnominal adjectives. Such an example is given in (25) below. 
(25) 
(adapted from Keenan and Ralalaoherivony 1998:87-88) 
a. 
ny raharaha 
'the work' 
b. 
ny raharahako 
'my work' 
c. 
ny raharaha kely 
'the small work' 
d. 
ny raharaha keliko 
'my small work' 
Taking their analysis, if the embedded agent/possessor can also be given the 
structure where it is, in fact, possessor the whole NP, then Possessor Raising can 
occur as before - a Possessor raises out of its NP. 
Interesting for our concerns, K&R point out that Agent Phrase Raising is not 
possible from the object of a transitive verb, while it is possible from the single 
argument of an adjective or an unaccusative (K&R: 88).22 

, 
\ 
138 
(26)a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
(27)a. 
b. 
LISA DEMENA TRAVIS 
Nahita 
ny vola 
verikol notadiaviko 
Rabe 
PST.AT.see DET money TT.lose. 1 SG/PST.1T.seek l SG Rabe 
'Rabe found the money [ lost/was seeking.' 
*Nahita 
vola 
very/notadiavina 
ahy Rabe 
PST. AT. see money rr.lose/pST.TT.seek I SG Rabe 
Mamaky 
Hay boky tiako 
izy 
PRES.AT.read that book TT.love. l SG 3SG 
'He is reading that book that I love.' 
*Mamaky 
boky tiana 
ahy izy 
PRES. AT. read book TT.love l SG 3SG 
Tsy tonga ny 
vahiny nasaiko 
NEG amve DET guest 
PST.rr.invite.l sG 
'The guests that 1 invited have not arrived. ' 
Tsy tonga vahiny nasaina 
abo 
NEG arive guest PST.TT.invite I SG 
'I am in the state of having the guests not show up. • 
As the distinction between (26c) and (26d) on one hand and (27a) and (27b) on the 
other shows, raising of the agent out of a relative clause is possible only when this 
raising takes place to a subject position. While this observation helps support my 
claim, there is a problem with this sort of reasoning. If Agent NP raising is not true 
raising but rather simply a different argument structure, it is difficult to predict 
which predicates might allow this. In other words, it is hard to know if (26b) and 
(26d) are ungrammatical because they are ruled out in principle, or whether the 
verbs mahita 'to see' and mamaky 'to read' simply do not allow this construction as 
we have seen earlier in (23). 
In order to tease apart this issue. I will show that Agent NP Raising cases fall 
into two distinct types - one which I will call true raising cases, the other I will call 
pseudo-raising cases. In this latter group, the apparent possessor will be, in fact, an 
argument ofthe matrix predicate. We will see that part of the distinction depends on 
whether or not the main predicate is a verb or an adjective. If the predicate is an 
adjective, then it will be a case of pseUdo-raising. If the predicate is a verb, in some 
cases it will be a true raising construction, in other cases a pseudo-raising 
construction.23 There are three ways in which the true raising construction can be 
distinguished from the pseudo-raising 
construction: (i) 
the 
pseudo-raising 
constructions often have an idiomatic interpretation while the true raising cases must 
have a compositional meaning, (ii) the pseudo-raising constructions can be 
causativized while true raising constructions cannot be causativized. (iii) in pseudo­
raising constructions, the relative clause is optional while with true raising it is not. 
After some more examples of each type are given, the three criteria will be discussed 

DERIVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
139 
in turn below and I will conclude that only when the main predicate is a verb and the 
construction has compositional meaning is it a true case of raising. 
(28) 
Pseudo-Raising 
(29) 
a. 
Adjective roots (stative): (like the maro 'many' in (24) (from 
K.&R:87) 
Tsy lany 
ny zavatra irin 'ny 
olombelona 
NEG exhausted DET things TT.desire'DET humans 
'The things desired by humankind are unending. • 
b. 
Tsy lany 
zavatra mna 
ny olombelona 
NEG exhausted things TT.desire DET humans 
'Humankind has limitless need of things. ' 
c. 
Iray ny lalana izorantsika 
one DET route CT.go.straight.on-lpL,INCL 
'The route we are taking directly is the same. '  
d. 
lray lalana izorana 
isika 
one route CT.go.straight.on IPL.INCL 
'We are taking the same route.' 
e. 
Fohy/Kely ny andro niveloman-dRabe 
short/few DET days PST.CT.live'Rabe 
'The days during which Rabe lived were short/few.' 
f. 
Fohy/Kely andro nivelomana Rabe 
short/few day 
PST.CT.live Rabe 
'Rabe had a short life. ' 
a. 
True raising 
Verb roots (eventive): (like the tonga 'arrive' in (27» 
(from fieldwork) 
Tsy lasa 
ny 
vahiny nasaiko 
NEG leave DET guest 
PST.TT.invite.1SG 
'The guests that I invited haven't left. • 
b. 
Tsy lasa 
vahiny nasaina 
aho 
NEG leave guest 
PST. TT.invite 1 so 
'The guests that I invited haven't left: 
c. 
Ho 
avy 
ny mpianatra tiako 
FUT 
come DET student 
rr.like.ISG 
'The students that I like will come.' 

, 
\ 
140 
d. 
LISA DEMENA TRAVIS 
Ho avy mpianatra tiana 
aho 
FUT come student 
rr.like 1 SO 
'The students that I like will come. • 
Idiosyncratic meaning: 
The first distinction between the two types of 
constructions comes from the less clear area of semantic shift. 
Keenan and 
Ralalaoherivony point out that many of the constructions which have the possessor 
as the subject are idiomatic in meaning and have a meaning that is not available to 
the non-raised structure where the possessor appears still within the NP. In fact, 
some of the apparently raised structures have no underlying counterpart as shown in 
(30).24 
(30)a. 
b. 
Mafy toto 
ity kirarao ity 
hard pounding this shoe 
this 
'These shoes can take a lot of abuse. • 
*Mafy ny toton'ity 
kirarao ity 
hard the pounding-of-this shoe 
this 
Both adjectives and unaccusative verbs can have idiomatic meanings and in these 
cases I would argue that the possessor has not raised out of the NP but is base­
generated as an argument of the predicate. However, with unaccusative verbs, when 
the meaning is purely compositional as in (29b) and (29d) above, I would argue that 
the Agent has raised.25 What is important for the other two criteria discussed below 
is that in just these cases where the meaning is compositional the construction 
cannot be causativized and the relative clause cannot be deleted. 
Causativization: A second distinction between the true raising and the pseudo­
raising constructions is found when they are causativized. 
If, as suggested by 
Keenan and Ralalaoherivony, Agent Phrase Raising cannot occur to an object 
position, then we would predict that that these constructions cannot be causativized. 
Causativization would make the subject into an object so what formerly showed up 
as raising to a subject position would now show up as raising to an object position. 
In fact, this would be the prediction of the present paper as well. The prediction 
does not hold of the adjectival constructions. Below we see an example where the 
non-raised construction is causativized in (31a) and in (3 Ib) we see an example 
where the raised version of the construction has successfully been causativized. 
(3 1)a. 
Mahamaro 
ny raharaha sahaniko 
ny fidiran 'ny 
PRES.CAUS.much DET work 
rr-confront-l SG DET return'DET 
mpianatra 
students 
'The return of the students causes there to be much work confronted 
by rne.' 

DERlVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
141 
b. 
Mahamaro 
raharaha sabanina 
aby ny fidiran 'ny mpianatra 
PRES.CAUS.much work 
TI-confront ISG DETreturn'DET students 
'The return of the students causes me to have much work to be 
confronted. • 
The verbal construction with compositional meaning, however, behaves 
differently. In (32) below, we see that while the non-raised construction can be 
causativized as in (32a), the raised construction cannot be as shown in (32b). 
(32)a. 
b. 
Mahatonga 
ny vahiny nasaiko 
ny fampisehona 
PRES.CAus.arrive DET guest PST.TI.invite-1 SG DET exposition 
'The exposition caused the guests invited by me to arrive.' 
* Mahatonga 
vabiny nasaina 
. ahy ny 
fampisehona 
PRES.cAuS.arrive guest pST.TI.invite I SG DET exposition 
Optionality of relative clause: Further, if K&R are correct in proposing that 
Agent Raising comes about via a reinterpretation of the Agent of the relative clause 
as the Possessor of the whole NP, the prediction would be that the relative clause 
should be optional. This is, in fact, what we find in the .adjective constructions as 
shown in (33a) below. However, surprisingly, this is not the case with the verbal 
counterparts with compositional meaning as shown in (33b). 
(33)a. 
[vp Maro raharaha (sahanina) ] aho 
much work 
TI-confront ISG 
'I have much work.' 
b. 
[vp Tsy tonga vahiny *(nasaina) ] 
aho' 
NEG arrive guest 
PST.TI.invite ISG 
intended reading: My guests haven't arrived. 
The fact that the relative clause in (33b) is not optional cannot be captured in the 
reanalysis account. However, if this is truly a case of raising out of the embedded 
structure, the embedded verb will be needed to assign a theta-role to the Agent. 
With the most reliable cases of Possessor Raising restricted to these cases of 
Agent NP raising, we can see that Possessor Raising - like applicatives - is 
restricted to promoting NPs to subject position where in other languages it might 
have promoted the NP to object position.26 We have two instances, then, where we 
expect raising to object but get only raising to subject. With this in mind, we return 
to the Raising to Object construction discussed at the beginning of the paper in order 
to determine whether or not true raising has occured. 

, 
\ 
1 42 
LISA DEMENA TRAVIS 
2.5 Another look at raising to object 
If what has been said above is correct and Malagasy has no derived objects, we must 
re-evaluate RtoO constructions which appear to be a core case of derived objects. In 
fact, with a closer look, it is clear that raised objects in Malagasy behave very 
differently from raised objects in English. 
One of the problems of considering 
raised objects in English to have remained in their embedded subject position is that, 
with respect to binding, the object appears to act like a member of the matrix clause. 
As (34) shows, the embedded subject can be a reflexive bound by the matrix subject 
and may not be a pronoun bound by the matrix subject. 
(34)a. 
b. 
The childreni expect themselvesj to receive lots of presents. 
*The childreni expect themj to receive lots of presents. 
Before going into the parallel facts in Malagasy, we have to recognize that 
binding in Malagasy is different from English in a variety of ways. It apfears that 
binding is sensitive to D-structure positions as the data in (35) below show. 7 
(35) 
a. 
Malagasy 
Novonoiny 
ny 
tenany 
pST.'IT.kill.his DET body.3SG 
'Slhe killed himselflherself. ' 
b. 
*Novonoin'ny 
tenany 
izy 
PST.TT.kill'DET body.3SG 3SG 
'Slhe killed himselflherself.' 
c. 
Namono 
ny tenany 
izy 
PST.AT.kill DET body.3SG 3sG 
'He killed himself.' 
d. 
*Namono 
azy ny tenany 
PST.AT.ki1l 3sG DET body.3sG 
'Himself killed him.' 
The grammaticality judgments above indicate that the Agent can bind the Theme 
and not vice versa, independent of the surface realizations of these arguments. 
There have been a variety of accounts for this (see e.g. Wechsler and Arka (1998) 
and Travis (1 998» and, as pointed out in these works, it cannot be dealt with simply 
by saying it applies at D-structure since it can be fed by rules such as passive in 
embedded contexts and raising to object as we will see inunediately in (36b). 
The RtoO data are given below. (36a) shows a simple RtoO example where the 
raised object is the logical subject of the embedded clause and (36b) is a case where 
passive in the lower clause has fed RtoO so that the raised object is the logical object 
of the embedded clause.28 

Ƈ 
I 
I 
i 
1 
!: 
I 
J 
I 
(36) 
a. 
b. 
DERIVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
Malagasy ECM 
Mihevitra 
an'iSoa ho manaja 
an'iBakoly Rakoto. 
PRES. AT. think ACC'Soa PRT PREs.AT.respect Acc'Bakoly Rakoto 
'lit: Rakoto thinks Soa to respect Bakoly.' 
Mihevitra 
an'iBakoly ho hajain'iSoa 
Rakoto. 
PRES.AT.think Acc'Bakoly PRT PRES.TT.respect'Soa Rakoto 
'lit: Rakoto thinks Bakoly to be respected by Soa. ' 
143 
The crucial binding facts are given in (37). While, like English, the raised object 
may be a reflexive bOWld by the matrix subject, WlIike English, it may also be a 
pronoun and retain the coindexation.29 
(37) 
a. 
b. 
(38)a. 
b. 
Binding of ECM object in Malagasy 
Mihevitra 
ny 
tenanYi ho manaja 
an'iBakoly Rakotoi. 
PRES. AT. think DET body.3P PRT PRES.AT.respect Acc'Bakoly Rakoto 
'lit: Rakotoj thinks himselfl to respect Bakoly.· 
Mihevitra 
ny 
tenanYi ho hajain'iSoa 
Rakotoi· 
PRES.AT.think DET body.3p PRT TI.respect'Soa Rakoto 
'lit: Rakotoi thinks himselfl to be respected by Soa.' 
Mihevitra 
azYi 
ho manaja 
an'iBakoly Rakotoj. 
PRES. AT. think 3P.ACC PRT PRES. AT. respect Acc'Bakoly Rakoto 
'lit: Rakotoi thinks himj to respect Bakoly.' 
Mihevitra 
azyi 
ho 
hajain'iSoa 
Rakotoi 
PRES. AT. think 3P.ACC PRT IT.respect'Soa Rakoto 
'lit: Rakotoi thinks himj to be respected by Soa. • 
Clearly this makes the raised object look very different from base-generated objects 
in Malagasy in spite of the adverb argument given by Pearson (2001 :  see (14» . 
Except for some idiosyncratic verbs, pronominal objects canot be co-referential 
with their subjects. 
(39) 
*Manaja 
azyj 
iSoaj. 
PRES.AT.respect 3P.ACC Soa 
'Soai respects himi. ' 
Balinese data show that this binding fact cannot be linked to the other binding facts 
of Malagasy. In other words, it cannot be said that the fact that pronominal raised 
objects may be coindexed with the subject is related to the fact that Malagasy seems 
to allow binding to occur at D-structure. Balinese, in all other respects, has binding 

, 
\ 
144 
LISA DEMENA TRAVIS 
facts parallel to those in Malagasy. Comparable to (35) above, Balinese (an SVO 
language) shows the following pattern. 
(40) 
a. 
b. 
c. 
Balinese (from Wechsler and Arka (1998) ); 
A wakne tingalin=a 
self 
ov.see=3SG 
'(S)he saw himselflherself.' 
*Wayan tingalin=a 
teken awakne 
Wayan ov.see=3SG PREP self 
'Wayan was seen by himself.' 
Ia ningalin awakne 
3sG AV.see self 
'(S)he saw herselflhimself. ' 
(W&A (41» 
(W&A (42» 
(W&A (43» 
Like Malagasy, in a simple Balinese clause, the Agent can bind the Theme 
irrespective of its final syntactic realization. 
However, in RtoO constructions, 
Balinese is like English in that the raised object, if co-referential with the subject, 
must appear in the reflexive form. (41) shows a typical RtoO construction. 
(41) 
RtoO in Balinese 
Tiang nawang Nyoman Santosa mulih 
ISG 
AV.know (name) 
go.home 
'I knew that Nyoman Santosa went home. ' 
(W&A (22b» 
In spite of the fact that binding in Balinese is quite different from binding in English 
in other ways, binding in Actor Voice RtoO constructions mirrors the English facts. 
The raised object must be in the reflexive fonn if it is coindexed with the matrix 
subject. 
(42) 
a. 
Binding in Balinese RtoO constructions 
Iaj nawang awaknei lakar tangkep polisi 
3SG AV.know self 
FUT ov.arrest police 
'Hei knew that the police would arrest selfi.' 
b. 
*Iai 
nawang iai lakar tangkep polisi 
3SG AV.know 3SG FUT OV.arest police 
'Hei knew that the police would arrest himi.' 
(W&A {I l Oa» 
(W&A (1 IOc» 
The binding fact found in the passivization of an RtoO construction, while perhaps 
surprising, is, in fact, consistent with the other facts of Malagasy. The pronominal 
form may remain even though it now is arguably not only in the same domain as its 

DERIVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
145 
antecedent, but c-commands it. This is shown in (43). Again, Balinese acts like 
English rather than Malagasy as shown by (44). 
(43) 
Malagasy 
Heverin-dRakotoj 
ho hajain'iSoa 
izyi 
PREs.TI.think-Rakoto PRT TI.respect'Soa 3SG 
'lit: Hei is thought by Rakotoi to be respected by Soa.· 
(44) 
Balinese 
*Iai 
tawang=ai 
lakar tangkep polisi 
3sG oV.know=3sG FUT OV.arest police 
'Hei knew that the police would arrest himj. ' 
(W&A (l lOd» 
Finally, the appearance of the reflexive in the RtoO construction in Malagasy most 
likely has very little to do with the construction itself. 
Below we can see that 
Malagasy (again unlike Balinese) allows subject reflexives in nonnal embedded 
tensed clauses. (This construction is given a * in P&R.) 
(45) 
Malagasy 
Mihevitra 
Rakotoi fa 
hajain'iSoa 
ny 
tenanYi 
PRES. AT. think Rakoto COMP TI.respect'Soa DET body.3p 
'lit: Rakotoj thinks that hirnselfi is respected by Soa. t 
(46) 
Balinese 
(Wechsler and Arka (l09» 
lai tusing nawang apa ?*awaknej suba ngemaang I Nyoman 
3sg NEG 
mow 
Q 
self 
PERF give 
I Nyoman 
pipis-ne 
money- 3POss 
'Shei does not know whether shei has given I Nyoman his money. ' 
One could say that the difference between Malagasy and Balinese, among other 
things, is that in Malagasy, the raised object never becomes the object of the matrix 
verb while in Balinese it does.3o This conclusion would fit in with the hypothesis 
being explored here that Malagasy does not have derived objects. Raising to Object, 
then, in Malagasy is not truly Raising to Object, just as Possessor Raising never 
truly raises a possessor to the object Űosition. and applicative constructions only 
raise obliques into the subject position. 1 
3. POTENTIAL PROBLEMS 
While there may be reasons to believe that Malagasy resists promotion to a derived 
object position, there are constructions beyond RtoO and the apparent Possessor 
Raising cases already discussed which suggest otherwise. I will explore two of 

. 
I 
146 
LISA DEMENA TRAVIS 
these with the aim of showing, once again, that these are only apparent counter­
examples. One set consists of apparent applicative constructions and the other has 
to do with specific objects. 
3. J Instnlments and Material Themes 
Paul (2000) and Pearson (1998) have done extensive research on another set of 
constructions that could be argued to show derived object characteristics. They 
show that both instrumentals and material themes can appear either as oblique 
arguments or as direct arguments of the verbs. Some examples are given below. 
(47) 
a. 
b. 
(48) 
a. 
Instruments (Paul (2000): 35) 
Nandidy 
ny hena tamin'ny 
antsy Rasoa 
PST.AT.cut DET meat PST. with'DET knife Rasoa 
'Rasoa cut the meat with the knife. ' 
Nandidy 
antsy ny hena Rasoa 
PST.AT.cut knife DET meat Rasoa 
Material Themes (Paul (2000): 34) 
Namafy 
ny tany tamin'ny 
voa Rasoa 
PST.AT.sow DET land PST. with'DET seed Rasoa 
'Rasoa sowed the land with seeds.' 
b. Namafy 
voa ny tany Rasoa 
PST.AT.SOW seed DET land Rasoa 
Although the fonn of the verb does not change in either case, these appear to be 
instances where a P has been incorporated andlor an oblique has been promoted to 
the object position. Both Paul (2000) and Pearson (1998), however. argue for a 
base-generated structure for the (b) examples above and I will follow their lead. In 
both cases. the new object undergoes some change of location in the achievement of 
the event and Pearson calls these arguments displaced themes. 
He assumes that 
every verb that shows such an alternation has this displaced theme as the external 
argument of the predicate GO. Interestingly. not all instruments are able to undergo 
this alternation (from Paul (2000): 43). 
(49)a. 
b. 
Nihinana hena tamin 'ny 
antsy Rasoa. 
PST.AT.eat meat PST. with 'DET knife Rasoa 
'Rasoa ate meat with the knife.' 
*Nihinana antsy ny hena Rasoa. 
PST.AT.eat knife DET meat Rasoa 

DERIVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
147 
To explain this, Pearson distinguishes between instruments that are tools and those 
that are aids. Tools are more closely integrated into the event and as such can be 
generated as higher arguments.39 Paul (2000) raises questions concerning this 
account but. like Pearson, feels that there is some semantic distinction that predicts 
which subset of instruments can appear here. What is crucial, for our purposes, is 
that it is only a subset of obliques that can appear in this position arguing against a 
syntactic movement analysis. 
Another reason that these constructions are different (and distinct) is that in both 
cases this new object can be promoted to subject using a special fOIm of the passive 
called the a-passive. If both instruments and material themes can appear in a special 
position due to their role in the event. it would make sense that there would be a 
special morphogical form to trigger movement (promotion) from this position. 
(50)a. 
b. 
Adidy ny 
hena ny 
antsy. 
a.cut DET meat DET knife 
'The knife is used to cut the meat. • 
Nafafin-dRasoa tany ny 
voa 
PST.a.sow-Rasoa land DET seed 
'The seed was used to sow land. • 
instrument 
material theme 
Interestingly, the apparent derived objects of Possessor Raising and RtoO 
constructions do not consistently use the a-passive fOIm for promotion to subject. 
We have seen a case of RtoO passive in (43) above where the passive (IT) fonn is 
heverina 'to be thought' and we have also seen a passive possessor raising 
construction in (20)e where the passive fonn is soloana 'be changed' - neither an 
a-passi ve fOIm. 
My conclusion here is that these constructions do not argue for a derived object 
position but rather point to an additional argument position within the VP which is 
higher than theme (see e.g. Matsuoka (1999) for similar claims). 
What is crucial is 
that it is not all cases of instruments that can be generated in this position. It is a 
subset of the instruments that fulfill other semantic requirements. If a language were 
to allow all instruments to appear in this position, I would take it rather to be closer 
to the case of Circumstantial Topic in Malagasy and true syntactic derivation. 
3.2 Specific objects 
In this last section I investigate the status of specific object in Malagasy.33 The aim 
in doing this is to tie the data concerning derived objects in granunatical function 
changing operations to the data concerning specific objects. If object shift occurs to 
the same position as does promotion to 2 in RG tenns, then we would expect that a 
language that blocks promotion to 2 will also not show object shift. 
Objects in WMP languages have already come under investigation in various 
studies which explored the possibility that these languages are ergative. The reason 
why objects enter into the ergativity debate concerns their status in constructions 

, 
\ 
148 
LISA DEMENA TRAVIS 
where the highest argument is in the unmarked case - I will use the term NABS 
(Nominative/ABSolutive) from Massam (1991). 
If Malagasy were an ergative 
language, then when the highest argument is in subject position (Le. Actor Topic 
(AT) constructions), the structure would not be transitive but instead anti-passive, i.e. 
the apparent object would in fact be an oblique. This claim has lead to various 
investigations of the objects in AT type constructions in WMP languages. Ones that 
I mention here, Maclachlan (1996) and Maclachlan and Nakamura (1997), note as 
others have done, that objects in Tagalog, a closely related language, must generally 
be non-specific. 
(51) 
Tagalog Specificity Effect 
(from Maclachlan and Nakamura 1997:310) 
Bumili 
ng isda ang 
lalaki 
bought-AT fish.Ace NABS man 
'The man bought (*the) fish.' 
In (51) above, the object can only be interpreted as non-specific. As the example 
below shows, this has nothing to do with the morphology. If the ng NP is the non­
promoted Actor in a Theme Topic construction, either the specific or non-specific 
reading is possible. 
Note further that the underlying object, now promoted to 
subject, must have the specific reading. 
(52) 
BiniIi 
ng lalaki ang 
isda 
bought-IT GEN man 
NABS fish 
'AlThe man bought the fish.' 
This observation relates directly to the question of whether a language has 
derived objects or not. One reason why the notion of derived objects has now 
become a mainstay in a MP type model is that it appears that objects may appear in 
two different places in a given language, often depending on how the object is to be 
interpreted. This is discussed in deHoop (1992) and Diesing (1995) among others 
but I will be using the discussion from Bobaljik (1995). He points out that the 
difference in where the object appears in some languages is tied to information 
structure - whether the object encodes new or old information. 
Two typical 
examples are given below, the first from Icelandic, the second from German.34 
(53) 
Icelandic (from Bobaijik 1995:127-128) 
context: Does he know Bariers? 
(Barriers = old information) 
a. 
Hann les 
Barriers alltaf 
he 
reads Barriers always 
'He is always reading Barriers. ' 

DERIVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
b. 
#Harm les 
alltaf Barriers 
he 
reads always Barriers 
'He is always reading Barriers.' 
(54) 
(55) 
a. 
b. 
a. 
context: Does he know Chomsky's work? 
(Barriers = new infonnation) 
Hann les 
alltaf 
Barriers 
he 
reads always Barriers 
'He is always reading Barriers.' 
#Hann les 
Barriers alltaf 
he 
reads Barriers always 
'He is always reading Barriers.' 
Dutch (from Bobaljik 1995:126) 
dat Jan Marie gisteren gekust heeft 
that Jan Marie yesterday kissed has 
'that Ian kissed Marie yesterday' [Marie::; old information] 
b. 
dat Jan gisteren 
Marie gekust heeft 
that Jan yesterday Marie kissed has 
'that Jan kissed Marie yesterday' 
149 
[felicitous answer to: 'Who did Jan kiss yesterday?' 
new 
information] 
In each case above, we can see that the object encoding old information appears to 
the left of the adverb. The conclusion which has been drawn here is that there is a 
position to which an object must move if it is old infonnation. 
This is similar enough to the Tagalog data to suggest that it is part of the same 
phenomenon.3s Taking the Tagalog data and the Germanic data with relevant 
conclusion together, we can posit, as is done in Maclachlan and Nakamura (1997). 
that Tagalog does not have the option of moving to a derived object position - at 
least in this construction. 
This suggests that Tagalog lacks one construction 
general1y linked with derived objects. With this is mind we tum to Malagasy. 
Unfortunately Malagasy does not show the same data set as Tagalog does. 
Objects in AT constructions in Malagasy can quite easily be specific. 
(56) 
Malagasy Specific Objects 
a. 
Nividy 
ny trondro ny lehilahy 
PST-AT-buy DET fish 
DET man 
'The man bought the fish. ' 

150 
LISA DEMENA TRAVIS 
b. 
ividy 
trondro ny 
lehilahy 
PST-AT-buy fish 
DET man 
'The man bought fish. ' 
Further, there are data much like the Gennanic data above that argue that Malagasy 
does have the capacity to move specific objects to a different position. 
(57)a. 
b. 
c. 
Tsy manasa 
lamba mihitsy ve Rakoto? 
NEG PRES.AT. wash clothes at-all 
Q 
Rakoto 
*Tsy manasa mihitsy lamba ve Rakoto? 
Tsy manasa 
mihitsy ny 
lamba ve Rakoto? 
NEG PRES. AT. wash at-all 
DET clothes Q 
Rakoto 
'Does Rakoto not wash clothes at all?' 
As we can see in (57), non-specific NPs (NPs without detenniners) must be adjacent 
to the V but specific NPs are free to move rightward. 
While apparently problematic for the hypothesis being explored in this paper, the 
movement of specific objects in Malagasy also can be explained without recourse to 
a derived object position. As Bobaljik (1995) points out, there are a variety of ways 
that objects could appear outside of their normal position. He argues for two types 
of object movement - one he calls object shift, the other focus scrambling36• I will 
argue that the object movement in Malagasy is a case of focus scrambling rather that 
object shift. As Bobaljik writes (pg. 124, fh. 6): 
For me, "object shift" is movement of pronouns and full NPs to a fixed position to the 
left of the verb phmsc. In the C85C of full NPs. this position is Spec, AgrO-P; and for 
pronouns some similar position ... This process ... is attcsted in all the Gennanic 
languages save English. The term "focus scrambling" is reserved for a different 
process, quite marked in Dutch through frer in German and perhaps Yiddish. 
Two characteristics of focus scrambling that distinguish it from object shift is its 
optionality and the range of positions that it can occur to. As shown by Rackowski 
(1998), specific objects have a range of possible positions with respect to adverbs in 
the language. The specific object may always appear adjacent to the verb and to the 
left of what would be a very low adverb in terms of Cinque (I 999). The specific 
object, however, can also take a position between a variety of adverbs as the 
following data show (from Rackowski 1998). 
(58) 
Tsy manasa x 
tsara x tanteraka x foana x intsony x mihitsy 
NEG PREs-AT-wash well 
completely always no.longer at.all 
x R akoto. 
Rakoto 
a. Tsy manasa ny lamba tsara tanteraka foana intsony mihitsy Rakoto 

1 
DERIVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
151 
b. Tsy manasa tsara oy lamba tanteraka foana intsony mihitsy Rakoto 
c. Tsy manasa tsara tanteraka ny lamba foana intsony mihitsy Rakoto, etc. 
While perhaps an account could be created which would explain the variability in 
the positioning of the object, by viewing object movement as scrambling with a 
variety of landing sites, this variability is rather straightforward. 
4. SPECULATIONS 
While it is very preliminary to make broad generalizations based on a few facts from 
a few languages, one can form hypotheses that are clear enough to be falsifiable. 
And the stronger the claim, the more interesting the further work. Other work that I 
have been involved in, in particular Rackowski and Travis (2000). suggests that 
Malagasy derives its word order through predicate fronting. We hypothesized two 
types of languages, predicate fronting languages and argument fronting languages. 
Recasting this in theoretical terms, some languages need to check features of 
argument XPs while other languages need to check features on predicate XPS.37 
This may correlate with verb initial languages and sva languages respectively. 
A 
very preliminary speculation would be that derived objects would be more apt to be 
found in subject first languages than in V-first languages. An interesting contrast 
arises in the case of Balinese and Malagasy, similar in many respects, but Balinese is 
SVO and Malagasy is vas. And it is Balinese that seems to have true raising to 
object in RtoO constructions while in Malagasy seems to avoid promotion to object. 
In order to test such a hypothesis, many more languages would require careful 
study. Kimaragang Dusun, for example, is a V-initial language which appears to 
have applicative constructions as in (16) above. Being V-initial, we might expect 
Kimaragang Dusun to be a predicate fronting language which, by hypothesis, should 
not have derived objects and therefore should not have true applicatives .. Kroeger 
(1990) shows that the locative alternation in Kimaragang Dusun changes the 
affectedness pattern of the event (which argument is affected). For Baker (1996), a 
shift in affectedness indicated a difference in how the arguments were base­
generated. If this conclusion is appropriate, Kimaragang Dusun does not have a true 
applicative construction. 
Another language to investigate would be Kalagan, another V-initial language 
which I have argued elsewhere (Travis 1991, 1992) has derived objects. What is 
interesting about KaJagan is that there seem to be no derived subjects. For example, 
while Malagasy indicates movement of various elements to subject position through 
the morphology on the verb, Kalagan seems to indicate movement to an object 
position with the same morphology. This object position is, in fact, the same object 
position in Malagasy - appearing directly after the Agent and before all PPs. This 
is where non-specific objects occur in Malagasy, and it is where 'topics' occur in 
Kalagan. 

152 
LISA DEMENA TRAVIS 
(59) 
Kalagan word order 
a. 
Kumamang aku sa tubig na lata 
kan Ma' 
adti 
balkon na 
AT-get 
I 
the water with the can for Father on the porch on 
lunis 
Monday 
'I'll get the water with the can for Dad on the porch on Monday.' 
b. 
Kamangin aku ya tubig na lata 
kan Ma' 
adti balkon 
na 
TT-get 
he water with the can for Father on the porch on 
tunis 
Monday 
c. 
Pagkamang aku ya lata sa tubig kan Ma' 
adti balkon 
na 
IT-get 
I 
the can the water for Father on the porch on 
lunis 
Monday 
d. 
Kamangan aku ya Ma' sa tubig na lata 
adti balkon 
na 
BT-get 
I 
Father the water with the can on the porch on 
lunis 
Monday 
e. 
Kamangan aku ya balkon sa tubig na lata 
kan Ma' 
na 
LT-get 
I 
the porch the water with the can for Father on 
lunis 
Monday 
We appear then to have a derived object position in a V-initial language. Further, 
unlike Kimaragang Dusun, appearance of an element in this position is not 
thematically restricted. However, while Kalagan is V -initial on the surface, it also 
does not make use of a derived subject position. Therefore, being V-initial does not 
preclude it from being SVO at some syntactic level. The claim here would be that 
the grammatical subject position is, in fact, pre-verbal, but movement to this 
position is covert. 
While it may feel like hairs are being split very thin here, I believe that more can 
be learned about languages and about theory by generating new questions. In the 
end, the hypothesis that promoted these questions may be wrong, but the new data 
discovered in the process of the investigation can only help to further our knowledge 
and understanding. 
NOTES 
I 
The content of this paper has benefitted from comments made by audiences at McGill and the 
Grammatical Functions Workshop at the University of D1inois and CWO anonymous reviewers. I ant 
particularly grateful for input from Jonathan Bobaljik and William Davies. Native language input and 
observations from Saholy Hanitriniaina and Jeannot Fils Ranaivoson were invaluable. 
The usual 

DERIVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
153 
disclaimers apply. Funding for this research was provided by the Social Sciences and Humanities 
Council of Canada (410-98-0452). 
1 
For Baker's discussions of applicatives and ECM constructions, see Baker (1988) p. 231 and p. 488, 
fit. 4 respectively. 
Lasnik (1999, this volwne) has a similar analysis for Raising to Object constructions. Others such as 
Johnson 1991, Pesctsky 1989, Sportiche 1990, Travis 1991 also suggested that objects move in English. 
I call this intermediate non-lexical category Asp(ect) following other work of mine (Travis 1991, 
200) but a similar VP internal functional category has bCC1' posited by Koizumi (1993) for similar 
reasons but which is ȏlled AgIO. 
ǅ 
Following orthographic convention in Malagasy, I put in apostrophes to signal a specific molpho­
phonological process of 'N-bonding' as described in Keenan (200:32). Further, following convention 
within the linguistic literature, I use the tcnninoIogy of Actor Topic, Theme Topic, etc. There is a long 
debate about whether these clements are or are not subjects (I assume that they are subjects). Since they 
have to be specific, they have often been called topics. Se Kroeger (1992) for a discussion of topichood 
in Tagalog, a related language. Kroeger comes to the conclusion that these are not topics in the standard 
sense. 
, 
See Postal (1974) for arguments that these are raising constructions. 
7 
I gloss ho here as PRT (particle) even though it has been analysed as COMP in other work. By deciding 
that it is COMP, we are already settling on an analysis of these constructions that I want to avoid. 
In these examples, I gloss with the same amount of detail as Baker (J 988). 
9 
I will raise the possibility later that this is not, in fact, a true applicative. 
10 We can tell that the word final constituent in (17)a-c (in bold in these examples) is the subject by the 
tests outlined in Kenan (1976a). 
In the examples (17)d-f, since clefting is generally sensitive to 
subjecthood. the clefied element is assumed to be a subject before clefting. Runing the risk of 
overwhelming the reader, I nonetheless present some of the range of circumstantial constructions since it 
may be that the range of elements that can become subjects is important to the eventual analysis (see e.g. 
Paul 2000). 
II A cleft construction is forced in the case of time, price. and manner - as well as others for which I 
have not given examples. For an account of this, se Paul (200). 
12 But se Kenan (2000), and Paul (2000), for examples where it is not clear what P would have 
incOIporateci. 
13 
GHT do link the appearance of arguments to the overt morphology on the verb. CT morphology 
arguably is comprised of thrce morphemes - one that indicates that P-incorporation has occured, one that 
allows the verb to assign genitive case to the nonpromoted Actor, and one that assigns accusative case to 
the object. If accusative case must go to the base-generated object, then it could be said that the derived 
object has no choice but to move to the subject position to be case-rnatked. Baker (1988) however, shows 
that in aplicative constructions, language specific strategies may be used to license the base-generated 
object. Malagasy does, in fact, have double objcct constructions (to be discused below) showing that 
there are ways within the language to license two objects through accusative case assignment 
14 
Paul (2000) argues that, since Malagasy shows the advancement of a wider range of arguments than 
normal applicatives, this is not a true case of appficative. In her account, the oblique becomes the subject 
because it will be the only element that can satisfY the EPP. If her acount of the data is the apropriate 
one, this construction is not relevant for the matter at hand. 

154 
LISA DEMENA TRAVIS 
15 Not all speakers agree on the ungrammaticality of (19)d which is what we might expect given the 
conclusions of this paper where raising to object depends on the lexical specifications of the verb. One of 
my consultants agres that it is ungrammatical, the other finds it to be grammatical. 
16 Brackets are given to show more clearly what is contained in the VP. Keenan and Ralalaoherivony 
(J 998) give several tests to confinn this bracketting. 
17 This case of possessor raising is not universally accepted by Malagasy speakers. 
18 If this characterization is correct, then the single argument of an adjective must be an internal 
argument. This would go against claims made by e.g. Baker (J996b) and Baker and Stewart (1997)­
but as we will see shortly, it is not clear that adjectives allow true possessor raising. 
19 As pointed out to me by Tomokazu Takehisa (p.c.) sentences such as these are good if the possessed 
item can be interpreted as being inalienably possesed by the object - in other words if, for some reason, 
Teddy 's nose has been attached to Perry's face. 
20 Accusative case marking in Malagasy is not a good indicator of objecthood. It only occurs on objects 
that are proper names or family relations, in both cases definite NPs. Since many of the constructions we 
are looking at require indefinite objects, we cannot use the presence/absence of accusative case as an 
indication of anything. 
21 Chamorro may have a similar construction as described by Chung (1998:266) and discussed in Travis 
(2000). 
12 One of my consultants does not like the version of this sentence with veriko 'lost' since he prefers not 
to have -ko attach to adjectives/roots. 
23 Thc distinction between adjectives and unaccusative verbs is interesting for two independent reasons. 
One is the distinction that Baker (1996b) and Baker and Stewart (1997) make between A rots and V 
rots. Another, more specific to Malagasy, is the often blum:d line between adjectival roots and verb 
roots. 
For example, the rot folsam 'fallen' behaves like an adjective. This correlates with native 
speaker intuitions, but is swprising perhaps on translation grounds since it is used for the inchoative 'fall'. 
If this test turns out to be robust, it could be another way of distinguishing an otherwise fine line. 
Ǆ More work needs to be done to detennine the exact structure of both the pseudo-raising cases and the 
true raising cases. 
25 Admittedly, this is a very strange son of movement for which I have no account 
26 
With respect to the Relational Succession Law given in(6), it is interesting to note that the host of the 
raised NP acts like an object in a number of ways though the Relational Succcslon Law predicts that it 
should behave like a l-chomeur. 
Although it cannot bear accusative case since it must always be 
indefinite, it appears to the right of the non-promoted agent and to the left ofVP adverbs. 
17 Malagasy reflexives are fonned by using the word tena 'body'. In the cases 1 show, lena is given with 
a definite deteniner and a posesive as in ny telllny 'the hislher body'. Since subject reflexives must 
always appear in this fonn due to the specificity restriction on subjects, I always choose this fonn even 
though objects can often appear in the bare fonn (Namono (ny) tena(-ny) ;zy 'He killed himselr}. There 
are examples where the non-reflexive reading is possible ('He saw himself vs. 'He saw his body') but I 
have tried to control for this so that I have only the reflexive readings. See Paul (2001), however, for a 
different view of reflexives in Malagasy. She argues that the true reflexive is tena and that ny tenany is 
always logophoric (as in Reinhart and Reuland (1993». 
28 For more details on RtoO in Malagasy, see Paul and Rabaovololona (1998). Below we will see that 
RtoO in Malagasy is different from RtoO in English with respect to binding. There are other differences 

DERIVED OBJECTS IN MALAGASY 
155 
!IS well. 
In Malagasy RtoO is quite productive - P&R give 52 verbs that allow it. 
Further, the 
embedded clause clearly has a tense specification that is independent of the matrix verb. 
29 
While not crucial to dUs paper. it is interesting to note that in both (37) and (38), neither the pronoun 
nor the reflexive can be bound by the Agent of the lower clause SOIl. 
30 Again, more work needs to be done to completely Wlderstand the nature of this construction. It is 
clear, however, that it is not just a matter of scr.unbling - or if it is scrambling. it must be to an A­
position since in the structure where no movement has ocured. the embedded Agent (Soa in (45» may 
also be the antecedent to the anaphor while this is not true of the structure with movement. 
31 
This raises the question of what to do with the adverb data (see (14}).presented in Pe mon (2001). 
The data are not clear are Pearson himself points out. The same example received from Paul and 
Rabaovololona (1998). Further work needs to be done on adverb placement however. 
32 Notice that the fact that only some instruments are allowed to appear in this construction distinguishes 
it from the cases that Marantz (1993) investigates. 
JJ I thank Jonathan Bobaljik in particular for a discussion of the issues presented here. 
34 The discussion of the GCIDlanic instantiation of these facts will be left quite cursory and admittedly, 
the correlation across the language families is only suggestive at dUs point 
lS 
It is interesting to note that in both the Scandinavian cases (a subset of the Germanic cases) and the 
WMP case of Tagalog, at times this restriction is lifted. For example, in the Scandinavian cases, object 
shift is prevented when the fllite verb has not moved to the V2 position (known as Holmberg's 
generalization). When object shift is blocked for independent reasons, the interpretation facts no longer 
hold. This is also true in Tagalog where. in cases where the object canot, for independent reasons. 
become the subject, the specificity restriction is lifted. I mention this as an aside (pointed out to me by 
Jonathan Bobaljik) and one that would be interesting to pursue in further work. 
36 Bobaljik credits NeelClWl (1990) for the tenn of 'focus scrambling'. 
37 
In fact, a closer look at adverb placement in Malagasy suggests that Malagasy checks predicate 
features (has predicate movement) within the VP and the CP domain, but checks argument features (has 
argument movement) in the 1P domain. This would explain why derived subjects but not derived objects 
are allowed. Further. there doesn't seem to be 'normal' wh-movement in Malagasy, just clelling. 


JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
THE DISTRIBUTION OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES IN 
IRISH 
Virtually no one who has thought seriously about language and its structure has been 
able to avoid using the terms 'subject' and 'object'. This is a remarkable fact - that 
perceptive and knowledgeable observers have been willing to talk about 'subjects' 
and 'objects' in very disparate languages and feel reasonably confident that they 
knew what they were talking aboul It is all the more remarkable, then, that in the 
intellectual tradition represented by the frameworks of 'Government and Binding" 
'Principles and Parameters' and the 'Minimalist Program', the notions play no 
(recognized) role at all. That tradition has always insisted that talk of 'subjects' and 
'objects' is either illicit or casual, and that reference to such terms is to be cashed 
out in terms of more primitive notions (phrase-structural measures of prominence, 
featural properties of heads, the theory of A-movement and so on). 
The question that this volume and the workshop from which it derives· asks us to 
consider is whether or not this reductionist program has been carried out 
successfully. How can we measure the success of such a program? By asking, 
presumably, if descriptive success is compromised or enhanced by its adoption. My 
own assessment is that the program has been largely successful. Certainly, for the 
range of cases that I will be considering here, it seems fairly clear that the 
reductionist program provides some rather successful descriptions - descriptions, 
furthermore, which depend on core commitments of the program. 
To be more 
specific, I think that the kind of deconstruction of the unified notion of 'subject' that 
the program insists on has made available a more subtle and more successful 
understanding ofthe architecture ofirish clauses than was previously available.2 
The purpose of the present paper is in the first place to try to show that this is so 
by examining Irish clauses in some detail, and in the second place to address a 
number of open issues within the larger framework in which these proposals have 
been framed. 
1. CLAUSAL ORGANIZATION 
AND THE UNDERSTANDING OF SUBJECTHOOD 
It will be useful to begin by outlining a framework of assumptions. This will involve 
covering some familiar territory, but I want to go through the exercise all the same­
partly to establish some useful background. and partly because it seems to me that 
some of the implications of the general framework have not been widely 
157 
William D. Davies and Stanley Dubinsky (eds.), Objects and other subjects: 
Grammaticalfunctions, functional categories, and configurationality, 157-192. 
ڂ 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands. 

158 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
appreciated. This system of assumptions is not by any means universally accepted 
but it, or something like it, has driven a lot of recent work. 
The understanding of 'subjecthood' (and of 'objecthood') offered in this 
conception is distributed and derivational. There is no 'subject position' and the 
various properties associated with 'the subject' are distributed across a range of 
distinct syntactic positions. some derivationally linked to one another, some not.3 
More particularly, 'subject' properties are associated with phrase structural heads 
and with positions in a local relation with those heads (a-assignment by a lexical 
head, case and agreement associated with an inflectional head or heads, the 
obligatoriness property associated with the highest inflectional head, and so on). 
The inventory and organization of the crucial heads is determined by the theory 
of clausal organization. which can be summarized in roughly the following terms. 
A clause (TP) consists of a thematic domain (an XP within which all the 
semantic roles associated with a given choice of lexical head are realized) and an 
anchoring specification of tense and modality (compare Case Granunar (Fillmore 
1968), see also Pollock 1997). 
The relation between the anchoring element and the thematic domain is 
expressed syntactically by means of the standard phrase structural mechanisms. XP 
is the complement of (the complement of ... ) the specification of tense/modality, 
itself a head T. For the case in which XP is headed by a verb, then, we have: 
TP 
/"-... 
T 
VP 
ª 
lexical domain 
Bare nominal arguments (however they are understood syntactically; NP, DP. or 
KP) are syntactically 'needy'. in that they require special licensing. A lot of what 
we think of as morphosyntax consists of these licensing relationships and there is a 
designated syntactic space - the space above VP and below C - which is reserved for 
these purposes. From this follows the prominence of bare nominal arguments 
(subjects and objects) with respect to other kinds of arguments and with respect to 
VP-level adverbial elements. Bare nominal arguments must raise out of the lexical 
domain to enter into local syntactic relations with the heads which are crucial for 
their morpho syntactic licensing (the heads which license nominative case, 
accusative case, subject agreement, object agreement and so on).4 
Careful descriptive work has revealed the existence of at least three distinct 
licensing positions for bare nominal arguments in the space between C and V 
(Holmberg 1993, Holmberg and Nikanne 1994, Bobaljik and Jonas 1996, Zwart 
1992). 

(1) 
THE DISTRIBUTION OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
159 
CP 
/"-.. 
C 
TP 
/'.. 
POSt 
/'.. 
POS2 
/"-.. 
Positiont ; where expletives appear 
Position2: where nominative case is licensed 
POS3 
VP 
Position): where accusative case is licensed 
© 
a-domain 
All three positions are visibly occupied in a transitive expletive construction like the 
Icelandic example in (2): 
(2) 
lJab borauau margir strakar bjugur 
ekki 
there ate 
many boys 
the-sausages NEG 
'Many·boys did not eat the sausages.' 
(Icelandic) 
(3) shows how (2) relates to the schematic structure in (1): 
(3) 
EXP 
V 
DP 
DP 
NEG 
VP 
[FIN] [NOM] 
[Ace] 
I 
I 
I 
POSt 
Pos2 
Pos) 
0 
The finite verb occupies a position between Position One and Position Two; the 
expletive occupies Position One, the nominative subject occupies Position Two and 
the raised object in accusative case occupies Position Three. 
Within this rough consensus, at least two important open issues can be identified: 
(i) What is the position of origin of the subject? 
(ii) How does the system ensure the right match between the inventory of bare 
nominal arguments within VP and the morpho syntactic mechanisms above VP 
which must license those arguments? 
For the first question, the issue has been whether the position in which 'external 
arguments' (in the sense of Williams (1981) are first licensed is relatively high or 
relatively low. Is this position entirely within the lexical layer (for present purposes, 
entirely within VP), or is it above the licensing-position of. for instance, objects. 
For the second question. two kinds of answers have been offered. Chomsky 
(I995:Chapter Four, 1998, and 1999) suggests that the relevant licensing is 
accomplished by elements which need to be present 'anyway' - that is, heads which 
serve central semantic fimctions. The head which corresponds to the anchoring 
specification of tense and modality (n is the element which licenses subject 
properties (i.e. T licenses both Position 1 and Position 2); the head which introduces 
the external argument is also the head which licenses object properties. That is, this 
head (Chomsky'S 'v', Kratzer's (1994, 1996) 'Voice') licenses both external 

160 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
arguments and Position 3). (It follows from this general approach that there can be 
no principle restricting the number of specifier-positions to one.) 
The second class of answers which has been offered to question (ii) involves the 
postulation of phrase structural projections whose sole purpose it is to license bare 
nominal arguments - the notorious AGR-projections so characteristic of syntactic 
analysis of the late 80's and early to mid 90's. On this view, each of Position 1, 
Position 2 and Position 3 would be the specifier of a distinct head. In one commonly 
accepted conception at least, Position Three is the specifier of an object agreement 
projection, Position Two is the specifier of the tense projection, and Position One is 
the specifier of a subject agreement projection. 
On this view, the problem of matching the choice of VP-intemal arguments with 
the choice of licensing mechanisms in the 'inflectional layer' (Rizzi (1997» arises 
more urgently, since it must be ensured, for instance, that no object agreement 
projection is present if no bare nominal argument is selected as an internal argument 
In what follows. I will have something fairly specific to say about question (i) 
(where external arguments originate). I will have little to say here about question (ii) 
though much of the material to be considered will be relevant for that discussion. 
Before proceeding with all of that though, I would like to make a general 
observation that I think has not been sufficiently emphasized. This system in no way 
requires that clauses have subjects. If a particular set of lexical choices should lead 
to a situation in which there were no bare nominal arguments within VP, what 
would go wrong? Something would go wrong only if that set of choices interacted 
poorly with some forced choice in the inflectional layer - if some head whose 
presence was obligatory, for instance, bore a feature that required the presence of a 
DP - say in its specifier. But in the general scheme of things as laid out here, it is 
very unlikely that that could be a general requirement (one which would hold of 
every language). Inflectional heads are (on this view) the principal locus of inter­
language variation. Whatever kind of feature it is, then, that requires the presence of 
DP within the inflectional layer in some languages should be subject to the same 
potential for variation as other aspects of the inflectional system. 
Unadorned then. this general view of clausal organization predicts the existence 
of languages in which there wilt be no general requirement that clauses have 
'subjects' (or indeed any DP-arguments). I think that this is a correct property of the 
system, and that Irish is, in fact, a language in which the subject-requirement (the 
EPP of Chomsky (I982» is not imposed. The first part of this paper reviews and 
adds to the evidence that this is a reasonable way of looking at Irish clausal 
structure. 
2. ABSENCE OF EPP EFFECTS 
One of the more celebrated properties of Irish syntax is the rigid VSO order (more 
accurately [Verb (Subj) (Obj) (Complement) X]) characteristic of its finite clauses: 

TIlE DISTRIBUTION OF SUBJECf PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
(4)a. 
ThOg sf teach dOfa 
ar an Mhullach Dubh. 
raised she house for-them on the 
'She built a house for them in Mullaghduff. ' 
b. 
Do 
fuair se nuachtan Meiriceanach ona 
dheartluiir 
PAST got 
he newspaper American 
from-his brother 
an hi cheana. 
the-other-day 
'He got an American paper from his brother the other day. ' 
161 
In earlier work (McCloskey 1996a, 1996b), I argued for a particular way of 
understanding the basic facts of Irish finite clauses which involved two core 
assumptions: 
(i) V raises to T in finite clauses (and no further) 
(ii) EPP is inactive and Position 1 of (1) is as a consequence always empo/ 
The ultimate effect of this combination ofasswnptions is illustrated in (6) for a 
simple example like (5): 
(5) 
D' 
61 
sf deoch uisce 
PAST drink she drink wabr 
'She drank a drink of water.' 
(6) 
TP 
I 
å 
T 
VP 
[FIN] 
¨ 
Ð sf tv deoch uisce 
T 
V 
I 
I 
d' 
61 
This treatment has a nwnber of advantages. Most immediately, it provides a 
reasonably accurate account of the basic facts of order, constituency and ellipsis in 
Irish finite clauses (McCloskey 1991a, McCloskey 1996b, Duffield 1995, Carnie 
and Harley 1998) and places all these observations in a plausible typological 
context. The detailed discussion is in the references cited; I will not rehearse the 
argwnents here, but rather sketch just one set of observations - for exemplification, 
and because they will be useful at a later point in the discussion. 
There is in Irish an ellipsis process which is used in the responsive function and 
in a variety of other contexts. In its most usual form, this process results in finite 
clauses which consist only of the finite verb (we will consider at a later point in the 
discussion somt: cases in which there is more material present than this). The 
assertion in (4a), for instance, could be followed naturally by the dialogue in (7): 

. 
\ 
162 
(7)a. 
b. 
c. 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
A-r 
th6g? 
lNTERR-[PAST] raised 
'Did she?' 
Creidim gu-r 
th6g 
I-believe C-PAST raised. 
'I believe she did.' 
TP 
I 
/"-.. 
T 
[FIN] 
I 
v 
I 
th6g 
I xpi 
This ellipsis process mimics all the properties of VP-Ellipsis in English (McCloskey 
1991a. Fiengo and May 1994). Given the proposal we are developing here, the 
process can be understood as ellipsis of the complement ofT (the boxed XP of(7c», 
with the finite verb 'surviving' the ellipsis because it has raised out of VP to T. 
(Compare Hebrew (Doran 1990, Sherman 1997, Doran 1999), Ndendeule 
(Ngonyani 1996), and possibly also Japanese, Chinese and Korean (Otani and 
Whitman 1991, Hoji 1998).) 
On this view,lrish is unlike English in exactly two respects: 
(i) since in English main verbs do not raise as they do in Irish, main verbs never 
survive VP-ellipsis in English. 
(ii) since in Irish subjects do not raise as they do in English, subjects do not in 
general survive VP-ellipsis in Irish. 
Irish, Hebrew and Ndendeule are alike with respect to the first property; Irish 
differs from Hebrew and Ndendeule only in the second property. 
I will return to a more detailed examination of this process later in the paper. For 
now, it seems reasonable to conclude that the proposal about clausal organization 
sketched earlier allows us to understand this otherwise idiosyncratic process in Irish 
and to relate it in a reasonable way to the ellipsis processes in other languages which 
it so closely resembles. 
All of these facts are open to other interpretations of course. If one believes, for 
instance, that the EPP holds universally, then one might propose that every VSO 
clause has the subject OP in a relatively low position (inside VP or in one of the 
lower inflectional positions associated with subject-properties) and that the specifier 
of TP is occupied by a null expletive pro (in effect taking every VSO clause to be a 
transitive expletive construction): 

(8) 
TIlE DISTRIBUTION OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
TP 
å 
pro 
å 
T 
[FIN] 
Ñ 
T 
V 
XP 
§ 
OPNOM tv Complements 
163 
Languages of this general type do exist, I believe, and they show the range of 
properties that one might expect them to. Given what is currently understood of 
expletives, and their relation to nominative associates, two things might be expected 
given (8): (i) that the order [ pro V OP X ] would alternate with the order: [OP V 
t X ], and (ii) that the nominative OP of (8) would show some trace of the 
definiteness restriction 
There very likely are 'VSO languages' which show just these properties. It is 
possible, for instance, that the large number of VSO languages which exhibit a 
regular VSO - SVO alternation might be analyzable in these terms.6 Irish, however, 
is not among these languages. SVO structures, as is well known, are completely 
impossible and there is no restriction on the range of DP's that may appear in the 
post-verbal subject position (a point we return to later). 
On the face of it, then, the analysis schematized in (8) is not a particularly 
plausible alternative. What would be more interesting, though, would be to try to 
make a positive case - to try to show that the inactivity of the EPP is a parameter in 
the old sense Baker (l996b: 6-9) - a single switch whose setting one way or another 
determines an apparently diverse range of effects. I think that a case of this kind can 
be made, although much unclarity remains. In the following sections I argue that 
there are at least three properties of Irish clauses (beyond those already discussed) 
which can all be seen as reflecting a single parameter setting - the inactivity in the 
language of the EPP. 
2.1 Subject-less Clauses 
Irish has a large number of clause-types which, it has been argued (McCloskey 
1996b), entirely lack 'subjects'. That is, these are clause-types which instantiate the 
possibility alluded to in the introductory section - clauses whose initial lexical aray 
includes no bare nominal arguments and which as a consequence deploy none of the 
morphosyntactic mechanisms implicated in the morpho syntax of subjecthood. 
There are a number of sub-cases. One important one is the class of clauses built 
around unaccusative verbs - or more exactly the subclass of unaccusative verbs 
called 'salient unaccusatives' in McCloskey 1996b, a class which happens to have 
the property of selecting only PP and/or CP arguments. 

164 
(9)a. 
b. 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
Chuaigh de mo neart. 
went 
of my strength 
'My strength waned.' 
Bhreathaigh ar an aimsir. 
became-fine on the weather 
'The weather became nice.' 
An additional class of basically the same type is the class of impersonal passives 
derived from unaccusative verbs: 
(lO)a. 
b. 
( II)a. 
b. 
go bhfuil trialtha cho maith agat 
c is 
proved so good by-you 
'that you have proved (to be) so good' 
nuair a bhi tniite sios 
uaidh 
when c was ebbed down from-it 
'when the tide ebbed from around it' 
nuair a bhi bogaithe ag an 
hi 
when c was softened by the day 
'when the day had become milder' 
conus ata iompuighthe amach aige 
how is turned 
out 
by-him 
'how he has turned out' 
In addition to these, there is a large class of lexicalized or semi-Iexicalized 
expressions which show the same fundamental property: 
(l2)a. 
b. 
{l3)a. 
b. 
NA 
fuil ort 
f6s? 
NEG INTERR C is on-you yet 
, Are you not dressed yet?' 
Ta thiar orm (Ie 
mo chuid oibre). 
is back on-me with my share work [GEN] 
'I am behind (with my work). ' 
Beidh daor ort. 
will-be dear on-you 
'You'll be sorry: 
Bhi linn! 
was with-us 
We had won!' 

mE DlSTRmUTION OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
165 
McCloskey (1996b) develops a set of arguments that in such clause·types no 
argument is promoted and further that they also lack null expletives. These are 
cases. it is argued. in which T is the only functional projection in the inflectional 
layer (those projections whose role it is to license bare DP·arguments are not 
projected since there are no DP·arguments to be licensed). Since furthermore EPP is 
inactive. no element appears in the specifier of T. That is, these are minimal clauses 
in a real sense · consisting only of a lexical projection and a T .projection. 
2.2 Optionality of Raising 
McCloskey (1986) documents that (Subject to Subject) Raising is systematically 
optional in Irish. The subject of the non-finite complement to a raising verb may 
appear either within the matrix clause (as in (14a» or within the complement (as 
seen in (14b»7. 
{I4)a. 
b. 
thaibhsigh sUile na 
deilbhe 
di 
a bheith iompaithe dearg 
appeared eyes the[GEN] statue[GEN] to-her be[-FIN] turned 
red 
'the eyes of the statue seemed to her to have turned red' 
LG160 
Thaibhsigh do 
na soilse a bheith nios boige 
appeared 
to-him the lights be [-FIN] more soft [COMP] 
'The lights seemed to him to be softer.' 
LG 179 
When the relevant DP's are pronominal, it can be seen that a DP raised to the matrix 
appears in nominative case (I Sa) but that it appears in a default accusative fonn 
when it remains in the complement clause (ISb): 
(15)a. 
b. 
thaibhsigh siad 
di 
a bheith iompaithe dearg 
appeared they[NOMJ to-her be [-FIN] turned 
red 
'they seemed to her to have hDned red' 
Thaibhsigh do 
iad 
a bheith nios boige 
appeared 
to-him them[Acc] be [-FIN] more soft [COMP] 
'They seemed to him to be softer. • 
Further, the raised DP agrees with the matrix raising verb (16a), but when the DP 
'chooses' to remain within the complement clause in the accusative case, the matrix 
raising verb appears in an invariant fQnn known as the 'analytic' form, which 
encodes no agreement (16b): 
(16)a. 
Do 
ralDlS 
an uair sin a bheith i gContae an Chhiir. 
PAST chance[s2] that time be [-FIN] in County Clare 
'You happened at that time to be in County Clare.' -
------ -- - -
-

166 
b. 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
raingig an uair seo i 
a bheith i gContae an Chhiir 
chanced this-time 
her be [-FIN) in County Clare 
'She happened at this time to be in County Clare.' 
PFI09 
Detailed argumentation can be found in McCloskey 1986 and I will not repeat those 
arguments here. I will concentrate rather on the following question - what aspects of 
Irish grammar make available the two options seen in (14) - (16)? 
The option seen in (14b). (I 5b) and (16b) depends. in the first place, on the 
availability ofa device for licensing accusative case in the subject position ofa non­
finite clause (as in Latin and Classical Greek).8 The availability of this option will be 
a central part of explaining why raising is not obligatory, and of explaining why the 
un-raised subject has the form it has (accusative). 
The availability of this device. though, cannot be the whole story. Three distinct 
factors (some having to do with properties of the raised nominal, some having to do 
with properties of the matrix clause) drive raising in an English case like (17): 
( 17) 
She tends [IP I to go to bed early J. 
Raising- of she in (17) satisfies case requirements of the raised pronoun. In addition 
it satisfies (i) agreement requirements and (ii) the EPP-requirement of the matrix 
clause. IfEPP were active in Irish, (I4b), (ISb) and (I6b) should be impossible. In 
the absence of raising. EPP would be unsatisfied in these examples and they should 
be ungrammatical. The grammaticality of (14a), (1 5a), and (16a) indicates the 
separation of EPP-requirements from Case and agreement requirements argued for 
in Chomsky 1998 and in Chomsky 1999. Raising in these cases is motivated by the 
case requirements of the raised DP (nominative and therefore unlicensable in the 
lower clause), and by agreement properties of the matrix fmite verb complex (see 
McCloskey 1996b:270-273 for more detailed discussion).9 
2.3 Existential Sentences 
Consider now the structure of existential sentences in Irish. In their fmite guise. 
they show the structure schematized in (18a) and exemplified in (ISb) and in the two 
examples of {I 9). 
(1 8)a. 
b. 
(1 9)a. 
[TP be [FIN] DP ann ] 
Ta 
taibhsi an. 
be [PRES] ghosts in-it 
'There are ghosts. • 
Bhi cuid mhor bidh 
ann. 
was a lot 
food [GEN] in-it 
'There was a lot of food. ' 

THE DISTRIBUTION OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
b. 
Beidh 
amadain i gconai an. 
be[FUT) fools 
always in-it 
'There will always be fools. ' 
1 67 
The element ann is a locative XP - originally, and probably still, a PP, meaning 
literally 'in it' but conventionally used to mean 'there': 
(20)a. 
b. 
Cuireadh 
ann muid anuraidh. 
put [PAST-AUT] there us 
last-year 
'We were sent there last year.' 
Bhi se ann. 
was he there 
'He was there.' 
It is clear that ann is a predicate. The evidence is strong that teila bheith takes a small 
clause complement (Chung and McCloskey (1987» , in which case DP of (18a) is 
the subject of the small clause (raised, as we will see. to Position 2 of (1» , and ann 
is its predicate. Ann. furthermore, appears in predicate-position in the full range of 
small clause contexts documented in Chung and McCloskey (I 987): 
(21) 
[s 
fada [sc daoine an a gheilIeann do phiseoga ). 
cOP[PRES] long 
people in-it C yield[PRES) to superstitions 
'There have long been people who believe in superstitions . •  
Existential ann appears in an additional position characteristic of predicative 
expressions - in the predicative copula construction, which has the schematic 
structure in (22) (Doherty 1996, Carnie 1995, Doherty 1997, DeGraff 1997, Legate 
1997, Legate 1998): 
(22) 
[ Tense 
XP[PRED] ( do+)DP ) 
(23a) iIIustrates the basic case. (23b) illustrates the use of ann as a predicative 
expression in the construction: 
(23)a. 
b. 
Is 
as 
Doire do. 
cOP[PRES) out-of Derry to-him 
'He's from Derry.' 
Ni 
ann dwnn a thuilleadh 
COP [NEG] in-it to-us any more 
'We don't exist any morc. ' AGMTS46 
[fall this is on the right track, the structure underlying existentials must include at 

1 68 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
least the substructure (24): 
(24) 
[sc DP [Pled an ]] 
where ann is an existential predicate. That the predicate is semantically contentful 
(that ann is itself the element which corresponds to the existence predicate) can be 
seen from the fact that it can function as contrastive focus in the cleft construction: 
(25) 
Sa 
ann 
a bhi 
an saol neamh-bhuartha an t-am sin. 
COP [PAST] in-it C be [PAST] the life untroubled 
that time 
'It really is true that there was an untroubled life at that time.' ROB71 
(25) is difficult to render in idiomatic English. but its pragmatic effect derives 
exactly from the normal understanding of focus constructions combined with the 
idea that the alternative set in (25) is the pair {'exist'/'not exist}. 
This partial analysis raises a number of difficult questions. The first has to do 
with the status of ann. We have seen that ann is a (semantically contentful) 
existential predicate. But it is also the kind of locative pro-form which is 
characteristic of existential syntax quite generally (Clark 1 978. Lyons 1 967. Lyons 
1 968, Freeze 1992) It seems important, in particular, to make a theoretical link 
among Irish ann, English there and French y. One possibility that suggests itself 
immediately is to follow a line of thought initiated in Moro 1 989, Hoekstra and 
Mulder 1990, and Moro 1997, who propose that elements like existential there in 
English are predicates which raise to Spec,TP to satisiY the EPP. The fact that such 
raising fails to take place in Irish, on this view, would be a further reflection of the 
fact that the EPP is inactive in this language. This account has the advantage of 
making a direct link between the locative pro-forms of Irish and English, and of 
accounting for the different surface syntax found in the two languages in terms of an 
independently attested difference between them: the EPP is active in English, 
inactive in Irish. 
This argument must be considered very tentative, since it rests on an 
understanding of elements like expletive there which is controversial and which may 
or may not turn out to be viable. 
10 
What is clear though is the following. Existential constructions represent one of 
the constructions where 
one can most reliably expect to find impersonal 
. constructions in a language - constructions involving an expletive element and an 
associated indefinite argument. In Irish, though, there is no sign either of an 
expletive element or of the expected definiteness restriction: Definites, proper names 
and pronouns appear freely in the pivot position: 
(26)a. 
T!imse 
ann 6 
roimh Abraham a bheith ann. 
be[PREs s l ]  in-it from before 
be [-FIN] in-it 
'There was me before there was Abraham.' 

! 
1· 
I 
mE DIsTRmunoN OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
b. 
Bhi an dara 
cogadh dornhanda an na blianta sin 
was the second war 
global 
in-it those years 
'There was the Second World War in those years, ' 
EB 1 18 
c. 
TA 
tii 
an. 
be[pRES] you in-it 
'You exist. '''There's you.' 
AFAPl 18 
169 
This property too will fall plausibly into place ifIrish is a language in which the EPP 
is inactive. 
3. INTERIM SUMMARY 
The kinds of arguments I've been trying to marshal here are a little difficult to make, 
because they almost all involve the absence of some feature, configuration or 
construction (the absence of null expletives in particular). And there can be many 
reasons why a given one of them might be absent from a given language. 
Nevertheless, the observations gathered here have, I think, a certain cumulative 
force. All of these apparent idiosyncrasies of Irish gramar fall into place in a 
reasonably natural way ifEPP is not an active force in the language. 
4. PARTIAL RAISING 
Say we assume, then, that Irish is a language in which the EPP is inactive and that 
what that means more particularly is that Position 1 of (1) is never activated. II 
Earlier versions of this general line of analysis (McCloskey 1991 a, for instaty:e), as 
well as the version alluded to in Chomsky 1993, assumed that the external argument 
(when present) did not raise out of the lexical domain at all. It has become steadily 
clearer. though, that this view cannot be right. IfVP contains one or more bare DP­
arguments, then the most prominent of them is subject to a raising requirement. It 
must raise to a position to the right of, and lower than, the position occupied by the 
finite verb (a position which I identify with Position 2 of (I» . This is evident from 
the following kinds of considerations: 
4.1 Passive and Unaccusative Structures 
In passive and unaccusative structures, raising of a DP internal argument to the 
'nominative position' is obligatory in Irish just as it is in well-studied languages (see 
McCloskey (1996b) for detailed argumentation). For a 'salient unaccusativet like 
that in (27a), the evidence is very strong and very clear that the single argument (a 
PP) remains in complement position inside VP. But the evidence is equally strong 
and equally clear that when that single argument is a bare OP (as in (27b» , that 
argument has raised out of VP into 'subject position' (which for us must mean 
Position 2 rather than Position I of (I)). 

1 70 
(27)a. 
b. 
lAMES MCCLOSKEY 
Neartaigh 
ar a ghlor. 
strengthened on his voice 
'His voice strengthened.' 
Neartaigh 
a 
ghlor. 
strengthened his voice 
'His voice strengthened.' 
This contrast emerges in a number of ways, but most obviously in the periphrastic 
progressive aspect where it is evident that the PP-argument remains low (inside VP, 
I believe) but that the DP-argument has raised (to the standard post-verbal 'subject­
position,). 12 
(28)a. 
Til ag nearni 
ar a ghlor. 
is strengthen[PROG] on his voice 
'His voice is strengthening.' 
b. 
Til a ghlor ag neartU. 
is his voice strengthen[PROGl 
'His voice is strengthening . •  
The complex causativelinchoative alternation seen in (29) reveals a similar pattern. 
In the a-example, the CAUSE argument occupies the higher nominative position, 
but in the b-example, the subject of the lower predication occupies that position. as 
is shown clearly again, by the periphrastic form in (30). 
(29)a. 
b. 
Rinne sin leanna:n dinn. 
made that lovers 
of-us 
'That made us lovers.' 
Rinne leanmi:n dinn. 
made lovers 
of-us 
'We became lovers.' 
(30) 
go raibh cabaire breil ag deanamh diom 
c was chatterer fine make[PRoGl of-me 
'that I was becoming a fine chatterer' 
FBF33 
Exactly similar observations hold in the case of the perfective passive, where it is 
clear that a bare DP complement of the passive participle must raise in the routine 
and familiar way. as shown in (31); 

(3 1)a. 
b. 
THE DISTRIBUTION OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
Ta. se 
criochnaithe againn 
Is it [NOM] finished 
by-us 
'It has been finished by us. I 
*Tci crlochnaithe se 
againn. 
is finished 
it[NOM] by-us 
'It has been finished by us.' 
171 
As in the case ofthe unaccusatives discussed earlier, PP-complements need not and 
must not undergo raising: 
(32)a. 
b. 
Ta labhartha agam leo. 
is spoken 
by-me with-them 
'I have spoken to them. ' 
*Ta leo 
labhartha agam. 
is with-them spoken 
by-me 
The pattern suggested so far, then, is that the post-verbal position (which we have 
identified tentatively with Position 2) is associated with the licensing of bare OP 
arguments and that its specifier position is categorially restricted in the way that this 
would suggest. 13 
4.2 Adverbial Distribution 
There is a class of adverbial elements which can appear following the subject but 
preceding complements and adverbials. This class includes riamh (ever). go loil 
(still, yet),Jos (still, yet), choiche (ever), i gconai (always), go minic (often): 
(33)a. 
b. 
c. 
Ni bhfuair aon bhean riamh roimhe greim hiimhe 
air. 
NEG took 
any woman ever 
before-it grip hand [GEN] on-him 
'N 0 woman had ever before taken his hand.' 
CC 1 7  
Ni chluinfeadh aon duine 
choiche aris Ciaran ag gabbail 
NEG hear[ COND J any person ever 
again 
making 
cheoil 
music[GEN] 
'Noone would ever again hear Ciaran making music. • 
nior 
bhuail aon fhear amhain fos Hom 
a bhfuil a 
chuid 
NEG-PAST struck one man one 
yet with-me C is 
his share 
eadaigh 
ghlain 
air. 
clothes[GEN] clean[GEN] on-him 
'I haven't yet met one single man who has his clean clothes on.' AI6 

172 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
The members of this class of adverbs are of course familiar from much recent work 
on constituent order in comparative perspective, and there is good reason to believe 
(on the basis of that typological evidence) that this class of adverbs attaches 
relatively high - no lower, in any case, than the edge of VP. If that interpretation is 
correct, then the fact that the post-verbal subject appears to the left of these adverbs 
indicates that it has raised out ofVP. 
There is in addition some evidence of a straightforward kind from within Irish 
that this class of adverbs attaches outside the Verb Phrase. 14 We have already had 
occasion to discuss the ellipsis process that produces so-called 'responsive' forms of 
the finite verb. The crucial examples are repeated in (34) (the three examples read 
as a dialogue): 
(34)a. 
b. 
c. 
Th6g si 
teach dOfa 
ar an Mhullach Dubh. 
raised she house for-them on the 
'She built a house for them in Mullaghduff.' 
A-r 
tbog? 
INTER.-PAST raised 
'Did she?' 
Creidim gu-r 
tMg. 
I-believe C-[ PAST] raised 
'I believe she did. ' 
As we have seen, this ellipsis process can be understood as elision of the 
complement of T (following raising of finite V to T). Now, exactly the same class 
of adverbs which may follow the subject can be stranded under this ellipsis process: 
(35)a. 
b. 
(36)a. 
An 
bhfuair til 
iit 
ch6naithe? 
INTERR got 
you place living[GEN] 
'Did you find a place to live?' 
Nf bhfuair go foill. 
NEG got 
yet 
'I didn't yet. ' 
An 
raibh tU. 
riamh ar an Chlochin Liath? 
INTERR were you ever on the 
'Were you ever in Dunloe?' 
b. 
Bhi go minic. I Cha raibh go fom. 
was often 
NEG was yet 
'I often was. '1'1 wasn't yet.' 
The adverbs of (35) and (36) must clearly be attached at some point higher than the 

THE DISTRIB1.ITION OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
1 73 
attachment-point of the (elided) complement of T - perhaps adjoined to the 
complement of T, perhaps in some functional projection above that again. In this 
instance, at least, then, we can be sure that the adverbs of (33) must be above and 
outside the Verb Phrase. 
Even if one assumes that the relevant class also has the possibility of attaching 
lower - inside the Verb Phrase, say - the point we wish to make can be made for a 
more restricted subclass of cases. Say one assumed a bifurcated Verb Phrase - vP for 
the external argument if there is one, VP for internal arguments. Say one assumed in 
addition that the relevant class of adverbs has the option of attaching to the lower 
category (VP). The fact that the crucial ordering possibility exists for unaccusatives 
still indicates that raising out of VP has appJied in this subset of cases at least: 
(37)a. 
Fasann 
na preatai 
i gconal sa 
lagan. 
groW[PRES] the potatoes always 
in-the hollow 
'The potatoes always grow in the hollow.' 
b. 
Nior 
phreamaigh na crainn ariamh ar an oilean. 
NEG-PAST root 
the trees 
ever 
on the island 
'The trees never took root on the island.' 
c. 
Ni 
thcinig 
na daoine choiche "na bhaile. 
NEG come[PAST] the people ever 
home 
'The people never came home.' 
4.3 Quantifier Stranding (Quantifier Float) 
Confirmation of these conclusions comes from a consideration of Quantifier Float 
phenomena. Quantifier Float has not been systematically studied in Irish to date, and 
caution is therefore in order. Certain tentative and interim conclusions, however. 
seem reasonable. DP's which are built around the post-nominal quantifier uilig 'all' 
(see for instance (40a» are of the type which we might expect, on the basis of 
typological considerations, to support quantifier float. This expectation is born out 
as is clear from examples like (39). The background here is that it is uncontroversial 
that Object Shift is obligatory in non-finite clauses (McCloSkey and Sells 1988, 
Guilfoyle 1990, Duffield 1995, Carnie 1995, Harley 1995, and much subsequent 
work). Since verb-fronting applies only in finite clauses, this ultimately yields an 
SOVX order in non-finite clauses (abstracting away for the moment from some 
complex and interesting dialectal variations): 
(38) 
B 'fhearr liom [,'P iad 
na paisti 
a thabhairt 'na bhaile ]. 
I-would-prefer 
them the children bring [-FIN] home 
'I would prefer for them to bring the children home. ' 
Consider now (39): 
IS 

1 74 
(39) 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
Ax 
cheart dornh na vearsai a ra 
uilig duit? 
INTERR should to-me the verses say [-FIN] all 
for-you 
'Should I sing all the verses for you?' 
The quantifier uilig, although construed with the fronted object na vearsai, appears 
in exactly the position that one would have thought corresponded to the thematic 
position of the object. From this (and other observations we will consider shortly), it 
seems reasonable to conclude either that uilig appears in the origin-site of Object 
Shift, or else that it attaches to a phrase containing the trace of Object Shift. Under 
either interpretation, we have a diagnostic for A-movement. Consider in that light, 
examples like (40) and (4 I). 
(40)a. 
An 
bhfuil 
sibh 
uilig sasta 
anois? 
INTERR be [PRES] YOU[PL] all 
satisfied now 
'Axe you all satisfied now?' 
b. 
An 
bhfuil 
sibh sasta 
uilig anois? 
INTERR be[pRES] you satisfied all 
now 
'Axe you all satisfied now?' 
SAB208 
(41 )a. 
An 
bhfuil 
na preatai 
uilig cwtha agat? 
INTERR be [PRES] the potatoes all 
sown by-you 
'Have you sown all the potatoes?' 
b. 
An 
bhfuil 
na preatai 
curtha uilig agat? 
INTERR be[pRES] the potatoes sown all 
by-you 
'Have you sown all the potatoes?' 
SAB240 
Here we are dealing with subjects in finite clauses, but parity of reasoning suggests 
that the occurence of uilig which is separated from the DP with which it is 
construed also marks a lower 'subject-position' and therefore signals an application 
of A-movement. It follows, obviously, that the surface position of the post-verbal 
subject is not its position of origin. 
16 . 
4.4 Semantic Properties of Subjects 
There has grown up since the late 80's and early 90's a substantial body of work 
which examines the interpretive possibilities open to classes of DP, and which tries 
to make connections between the interpretive possibilities and the syntactic position 
occupied (at some relevant level of representation) by the DP. Diesing (1992) is one 
of the more authoritative and influential developments of this line of thought. What 
Diesing shows (simplifying a little) is that so-called 'strong' readings are 
characteristic of higher positioning and that so-called 'weak' readings are 
characteristic of lower positioning. For Diesing, the crucial boundary-point is the 
VP-boWldary. DP's trapped within VP at the relevant level of representation are 

I 
I 
I, 
I 
TIrE DISTRIBUTION OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
1 75 
within the domain of existential closure and fonn part of the nuclear scope of larger 
structures of quantification. DP's which raise out of the VP make their semantic 
contribution in the restrictive clause of the quantification structure. The empirical 
consequences of these effects are the following: 
(i) strong quantifiers may not remain within VP (hence may not be the pivot of an 
existential); 
(ii) bare plurals in subject position (outside VP) have generic readings; 
(iii) weak OP's in subject position have 'presuppositional' or 'partitive' 
interpretations. Weak OP's within VP (in the pivot of an existential for 
instance) show only 'cardinal' interpretations; 
(iv) subjects of individual level predications have generic interpretations only. 
With respect to these phenomena, Irish post-verbal subjects behave exactly, as 
far as I can teU. like English pre-verbal subjects. That is, bare plurals (when subjects 
of stage-level predications) may have either weak or strong inteIpretations. The 
strong (generic) interpretation is favored in (42) because the present tense in Irish 
tends to be gnomic: 
(42) 
ImrealUl 
girseachai lead6g. 
play[PREs] girls 
tennis 
'Girls play tennis. • 
The weak inteIpretation is favored in (43) because the combination of past tense and 
progressive aspect favors episodic inteIpretations: 
(43)a. 
b. 
Bhi 
girseachai ag imirt 
lead6g sa 
tsniid. 
be [PAST] girls 
play [PROG] tennis in-the street 
'Girls were playing tennis in the street. • 
bhi 
cearca fraoich ag screadaigh ait 
inteacht 
be[pAST] moor-hens 
cry[PROG] 
place some 
'Moor-hens were calling somewhere.' 
EB 143 
Similarly in (44): 
(44) 
D'fhasadh 
cruithneacht agus coirce sna 
goirt. 
grow[PAST-HABIT] wheat 
and corn in-the fields 
'Wheat and com used to grow in the fields. ' 
Partitive readings of weak OP's are routinely available in subject position: 

1 76 
(45) 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
Labhair 
cuid de na h-ionadaithe 
ag an chruinniu. 
speak[PAST] some of the representatives at the meeting 
'Some of the representatives spoke at the meeting.' 
The readings available in (42) - (45) indicate, if this body of work is on the right 
track, that the 'subject' is outside whatever constituent it is (for Diesing VP) that 
determines the domain of existential closure. To the extent that this line of thought is 
reliable, we have additional reason to believe that the post-verbal subject in Irish is 
not inside VP. 
5. SECOND INTERIM SUMMARY 
The overall conclusion seems to be that in finite clauses the most prominent bare 
nominal argument (if there is one) must raise out ofVP to a position lower than, and 
to the right of, T. 
The point we are at, then, is that we take Irish to be a language in which the 
highest inflectional A-position (Position 1) is systematically unavailable. In this, 
Irish differs from most of the well-studied European languages. However, it 
resembles those languages which have transitive expletive constructions (like 
Icelandic for instance), in exploiting Position 2. This is the position to which the 
most prominent of the bare DP-arguments within VP must raise for licensing 
(external arguments in the case oftransitives and unergatives; internal arguments in 
the case ofunaccusatives and passives). For our analysis to go through here, it must 
be true of this position: 
(i) that it is restricted to phrases of category D (unlike Position I - the position. 
we have hypothesized, which the EPP cares about); 
(ii) that its specifier be filled only by way of movement (there are no Position 2 
expletives). 
It is an interesting and important question how these properties can be 
guaranteed, but let us observe at this point that the analysis, if on the right track, 
provides evidence for the distributed view of subject properties with which we 
opened the paper. In the first place. we have seen evidence for the view that three of 
the properties often attributed to subjects - their obligatoriness, their distinctive 
morphosyntax and the characteristic range of semantic roles with which they are 
linked, are in fact associated with at least three distinct positions and the heads 
associated with those positions. We have also seen the typological peeling apart of 
some of the subject properties which was discussed in the opening sections of the 
paper. Irish is a language. we have argued. in which the obligatoriness property does 
not hold (if we are right, then this language has a broad range of truly SUbject-less 
clauses - all of those clauses, in fact, in which there happen not to be any bare DP 
arguments within VP). 
Even in Irish, though, with its restricted set of subject 
positions, it remains true that subjecthood is distributed across two positions - the 
position 
associated 
with 
a-licensing 
and 
the 
position 
associated 
with 

1lfE DISTRIBUTION OF SUBlECf PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
177 
morphosyntactic licensing of bare DP-arguments. 
6. THE LOCUS OF SEMANTIC ROLE ASSIGNMENT 
We have now seen some evidence for the basic correctness of the view of 
subjecthood outlined in the opening sections of the paper, and we have in addition 
seen some evidence for the more controversial view that the EPP is not a universal 
feature of natural language grammars - a position which is natural within the broader 
framework of assumptions within which we are working, but which has not been 
widely advocated (or even widely considered). 
There is another controversial element within this broader setting which has been 
the focus of a good deal of discussion. This is the issue of what the lowest 'subject 
position' (the thematic position) is. TwĈ influential points of view have emerged in 
this connection. which have rather different implications for larger questions about 
how clauses are organized. 
The proliferation of categories within the inflectional layer has made it difficult 
to point to cases where one can say with confidence that the subject has remained 
within VP. 
Many effective and attractive analyses have been developed which 
depend crucially on the idea that under certain circumstances in certain languages. 
subjects may remain in some position lower than Position 1. What has proved much 
more difficult has been to assemble clear cases where one can be sure that the 
subject remains fully within the Verb Phrase, rather than being in some relatively 
low position within the inflectional layer. 
This unclarity has combined with a revival of interest in some older concerns 
which were articulated clearly by Alec Marantz in the early 1 980's. One of the 
properties of the Internal Subject Hypothesis is that it blurs in a fundamental way the 
distinction. between internal arguments and the external argument (a distinction 
introduced by Williams (1981» . If all semantic role assignment is accomplished 
within lexical projections, then the structural difference between internal and 
external arguments is lessened. 
The distinction remains important, though. Marantz (1984:23-3 1) in particular, 
argues that there is a fundamental difference in the way that semantic roles are 
assigned to internal arguments and the way in which they are assigned to external 
arguments. According to Marantz. complements are arguments of the verb and are 
assigned their semantic role by the verb alone. Subjects, on the other hand, are 
arguments of VP, and are assigned their role by the VP - which is, in turn, a 
composition of the verb with its internal arguments. Angelika Kratzer (1994, 1996) 
returned to these concerns and showed in particular that no curently known theory 
of argument structure can account for these observations, if it is assumed that the 
external argument is a direct argument of the verb. She proposed instead that there is 
a functional projection (which she calls 'Voice') which immediately dominates vp. 
and that it is this functional projection which is responsible for the assignment of 
roles associated with external arguments. 17 
The proposal found in Chomsky 1993, Chomsky 1995 (which adapts earlier 
ideas of Hale and Keyser 1993) is close in spirit to Kratzer's, since it also assumes a 

178 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
distinguished element (in this case a phonologically null verbal element to which 
lower verbs adjoin) which is responsible for the assignment of the roles 
characteristic of external arguments. 
For both Kratzer and Chomsky, the crucial 
element has VP as its complement, and internal arguments originate within VP. For 
both also. unaccusative structures simply lack the higher projection and include only 
(the lower) VP. 
Both of these sets of proposals mark, in an important sense, a return to one of the 
earliest versions of the Internal Subject Hypothesis - that of Koopman and Sportiche 
( 1 991). Koopman and Sportiche held that the external argument is not actually 
internal to VP, but is rather adjoined to VP. The adjunction relation is the structural 
correlate of the predication relation which governs the realization of the external 
argument. The principal difference between this proposal and the more recent ones 
is the postulation of an empty head ('Voice' for Kratzer, 'v' for Chomsky) to 
regularize the phrase structural expression of the crucial semantic relation. 
All of these proposals are conservative in the sense that they preserve the 
essential insight of the Internal Subject Hypothesis - namely that semantic role 
assignment for subjects takes place at a position lower than the position(s) in which 
morphosyntactic properties of subjects are licensed. and that the crucial position is 
in a very local syntactic relation with the projection (VP) in which internal 
arguments are realized. 
But the postulation of a separate head responsible for the realization of external 
arguments has permitted the formulation of proposals which depart more radically 
from these assumptions. Since the head responsible for internal role assignment (V) 
is distinct from the head ('Voice' or 'v') responsible for external role assignment, it 
becomes possible to formulate theories in which the two heads are in a less local 
syntactic relation. Specifically. it becomes possible to propose that certain functional 
projections (Aspect, or the Object Agreement projection) intervene between the two. 
A variety of such theories has been proposed (see especially Travis (1 991). Koizumi 
(1 995), Harley (1 995». They seem to draw their plausibility from two sourt;es. The 
first is that, as we have seen, it has proved unexpectedly difficult to point with 
confidence to cases where the external argument appears unequivocally within VP 
(in a position, say, below the target-position for Object Shift). If the subject 
originates below all the inflectional projections, why should it prove so difficult to 
document cases in which it remains in such a position? The second is that certain 
difficulties for the theory of locality of movement (the difficulty, in particular, of 
how the subject can cross the position of a shifted object) disappear if one assumes 
that the subject always originates in a position higher than that of the shifted object. 
One version of this set of ideas is schematized in (46) in which Ve is the element 
responsible for introducing the external argument, and Vi is the element responsible 
for introducing the internal argument(s) (correspondingly DPe and DPj represent the 
external and internal (OP) arguments respectively). 

THE DISTRffiUTION OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
(46) 
VP 
¦ 
OPe 
å 
Vc 
AgrOP 
å 
OPj 
å 
AgrO 
VP 
¥ 
Vi 
lj 
1 79 
The hypoÙesis underlying theories of this general kind has come to be known as the 
Split VP Hypothesis. 
Duffield (1 995) and Carnie and Harley (1 998: especially Chapter Four) both 
develop a version of these ideas and argue for it on the basis of Irish data 
specifically. In the version developed by Carnie and Harley (1998). it is assumed 
that the element which introduces external arguments is above an aspect projection. 
which is in turn above the projection in which shifted objects are licensed. This last 
projection, in turn, dominates VP - in which the verb and its internal arguments 
originate. That is, they assume a structure like (47): 
(47) 
vP 
å 
OPe 
å 
v 
Asp 
AspP 
å 
AgrOP 
å 
æ 
AgrO 
VP 
¤ 
V internal arguments 
in which two functional projections intervene between the position in which external 
arguments are a-licensed and the position(s) in which internal arguments are initially 
licensed. 
The 'Asp' head of (47) is the locus where, for instance, the progressive particle 
(McCloskey 1 983) ag originates. This particle (historically but not synchronically 
the preposition 'at') combines with the non-finite form of the verb to form 
progressive verbs which in turn then appear in a variety of syntactic contexts: 
(48) 
Biolll 
siad i gconai ag 61 
tae. 
be[PRES-HABlTJ they always 
drink[PROGJ tea 
'They are always drinking tea.' 

180 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
V-raising to Asp in (47) produces complex progressive verb forms like ag 01. 
I want to end this paper by considering some facts which suggest that the more 
conservative view, with its strict bifurcation between the thematic and the 
inflectional layer, is closer to being correct. J8 
6.1 Another Case Marking Strategy 
The crucial evidence will involve a different way of marking subjects in Irish. 
Subjects of non-finite clauses and subjects of small clauses, may, under certain 
circumstances, be marked by the dative preposition do. This way of marking 
subjects has deep historical roots in the language; it occurs in every modem dialect 
and has been well described in traditional sources. It has not, though, figured much 
so far in generative work on the syntax of the language. 
These facts will be of interest to us here for at least two reasons. They will in the 
first place provide us with a way of arguing about the point of origin of external 
arguments (the issue under contention in the debate about the Split VP Hypothesis). 
In addition, though, they raise their own questions about the nature of subjecthood. 
This is so because all informal descriptions of the phenomenon (including the one 
just given here) begin with the statement that the marking strategy in question is 
restricted to 'subjects'. If the broader point of view developed here is on the right 
track, then this reference too to 'subjecthood' must be theoretically eliminable. 
The examples in (49) - (51) will give an initial sense of how this case-strategy 
works. 
(49) 
I ndiaidh dona Cohiisti UJlmhuchain 
druidim 
after 
to-the Colleges prcparation[ GEN] closer -FIN] 
'after the Training CoUeges closed' 
(SO) 
tar cis do lucht na Parlaiminte 
an caisleim a th6gail 
after to people the Parliament[ GEN] the castle 
taker -FIN] 
'after the Parliamentarians took the castle' 
STL233 
(51) 
Cen fath domh an t-abhar seo 
a tharraingt chugam? 
why 
to-me the subject DEMON draw[-FIN] 
to-me 
'Why do I1should IIhave I bringlbrought this topic up?' CST56 
In all cases, the dative preposition do marks the subject of a non-finite clause. 
Notice that both subject and object precede the verb in the transitive structures of 
(49) - (51). A basic understanding of how non-finite clauses in the language work 
will be helpful at this point. Consider once again the schematic structure with which 
we opened our discussion: 

lHE DISTRIBUTION OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
(52) 
CP 
/'-.. 
C 
TP 
./".. 
Pos1 
./".. 
Pos2 
./".. 
Pos3 
VP 
¨ 
a-domain 
181 
For ñon-finite clauses, the absence of tense markers, and the absence of verb-raising 
make it more difficult to detennine what the syntax is than in the case of finite 
clauses. 
Nevertheless, we can summarize the large body of work on non-finite 
clauses in Irish by saying that subjects and objects (both nonnally accusative) 
occupy respectively Position 2 and Position 3 of (52) and that there is no raising of 
V to T. Position 1 is unutilized in non-finite clauses, just as in finite clauses (EPP 
effects are absent as in finite clauses). The ultimate result is the familiar pattern in 
which DP-complements appear to the left of V, but in which complements of other 
categories (CP, PP and so on), as well as most classes of adverbial, appear to its 
right. The other feature that needs to be mentioned is that (accusative) subjects are 
licensed freely in non-finite clauses independently of the external context. Transitive 
structures, as a consequence. look like (53): 
(53)a. 
i ndiaidh 6 
an t-airgead a thabhairt domh in6 
after 
him the money 
giver-FIN] to-me yesterday 
'after he had given me the money yesterday' 
b. 
Bhi iontas 
mor air 
[TP an t-athair mor e sin a ri ] 
was wonder great on-him 
the grandfather that say[ -FIN] 
'He was very surprised that the grandfather wouJd say such a thing.' 
And intransitive structures look like (54). They are as expected; the subject is initial, 
the object is absent, and as a consequence, the preverbal particle - a marker of 
transitivity - is also absent: 
(54)a. 
b. 
Is cuimhneach liom [ Cianin labhairt 
leat 
mar sin ] 
I-remember 
Ciano speak[-FIN] with-you like-that 
'I remember Ciaran speaking to you like that.' 
Nior mhaith leat [ me creidbheail 
sa 
rud ] 
you-wouldn't-like me believer-FIN] in-the thing 
'You wouldn't like me to believe in the thing.' 
I will assume with most work in this area that the particle a is the head of the 

1 82 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
functional projection which licenses accusative case on an object (Le. it is the head 
of which Position 3 is the specifier, sometimes called AgrO) and that V raises to 
right-adjoin to that head, producing complex prosodic words like a thabhairt in 
(53a), or a ra in (53b). 
Notice that the account just sketched does not incorporate any version of the 
Split VP Hypothesis, in that it assumes that the thematic domain (VP of (52» is 
contained wholly within the structures in which subject and object OP's (object 
DP's in particular) undergo morphosyntactic licensing. 
With this much as background, let us go on to consider subjects marked by do. 19 
The examples in (55)-(57) illustrate the case-marking strategy for transitive 
structures: 
(55) 
bliain roimh di 
bas 
a fhail 
year before to-her death get[ -FIN] 
'a year before she died' 
001 17 
(56) 
tar eis do 
an abhainn a chur 
de 
after to-him the river 
put[ -FIN] of-him 
'after he had put the river behind him' 
FEB93 
(57) 
cad chuige duit 
ceist 
a chur 
air sin? 
why 
to-you question put[ -FIN] on-that-one 
'Why did you ask that guy?' 
LG93 
(58)-(60) show the corresponding intransitive structures; 
(58) 
dha uair a' chloig tar eis don 
tseirbhis tosu 
two-hours 
after 
to-the service 
begin[ -FIN] 
'two hours afer the service began' 
SR92 
(59) 
an t-uabhar faoi ndeara do Luicifir titim 
6 
na Flaithis 
the pride 
the-cause-ofto 
fall [-FIN] from the Heavens 
'It was pride that caused Lucifer to fall from the Heavens.' 
AG42 
(60) 
tar eis do 
filleadh 
ar an gcathair seo 
after 
to-him return[-FIN] on the city 
DEMON 
'after he (had) returned to this city' 
00R272 
This case-marking strategy is unrestricted in terms of the internal properties of IP (it 
appears, as we have seen, with both transitive and intransitive structures and the 
dative DP's in 'luestion may bear, as we shall see, a broad range of different 
semantic roles). 
20 
The external distribution of clauses containing dative subjects. however, is very 
restricted. In most varieties, such clauses may appear only in adverbial and 
interrogative contexts (as seen in the examples already presented). Beyond that core 

I 
l 
TIlE DISTRIBUTION OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
1 83 
distributional pattern, there is considerable variation - dialectal, idiolectal and 
register-based. Some speakers and some varieties pennit clauses containing dative 
subjects in the complemeĕt position ofa small subset of lexical heads: 
(6 1) 
nf 
caoch a mheasann tU 
dhom a bheith 
COP[NEO] blind C think 
you to-me bee -FIN] 
'It's not blind that you think I am?' 
GLL243 
Similarly, some speakers and varieties (particularly Munster varieties) permit them 
in small clause complements of various types: 
(62) 
Ba 
mhinic dhomsa im aonar 
COP [PAST] often 
to-me 
by-myself 
'I was often alone. • 
CLIA86 
(63) 
is 
annamh duit 
mar so 
cOP [PRES] rare 
to-you like this 
'You are rarely like this. ' 
E0024 
(64) 
N i 
fada dhom in bhur gcathair mhor 
COP[NEO] long to-me in your city 
great 
'I haven't been long in your great city.' 
EODl 7 
Putting these observations together. we see that dative subjects are licensed in initial 
position in non-finite clauses and in (some) small clauses. We have seen also that 
the larger structures in which dative subjects appear have a restricted distribution. 
Clauses with dative subjects are licensed primarily in adverbial and in interrogative 
clauses, but are also selected (in some varieties and idiolects) by certain verbs and 
adjectives. 
. 
What are we to make of this? Given the larger framework adopted. we are 
virtually required to assume that the dative subject appears in the specifier position 
of some head which bears a feature - call it [DATJ- whose function it is to license 
OP's prefixed with dO.21 [DAT] must be incompatible with a positive specification 
for finiteness - hence the restriction to non-finite and small clauses. Further, the 
feature must in turn be sensitive to the external envirorunent in which it appears -
being selected by certain instances of C. The core pattern is that only those instances 
of C associated with an adverbial or interrogative function select (a head bearing) 
[OAT]. More liberal varieties (those which allow (61) or (62) - (64) permit the 
selection of [DAT] by a broader variety of C elements. Thus the basic facts can be 
described. 
What head bears the [OAT] feature? Given the apparent similarity in positioning 
between accusative and dative subjects of non-finite clauses, it would seem initially 
plausible to assume that they occupy the same position (Position 2 of (1» as do 
accusative subjects such as are found in (53) and (54). 

184 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
This view, however, is not obviously compatible with the selectional restrictions 
to which clauses containing dative subjects are subject. To account for that restricted 
distribution, it must be true that the [DAT] feature, or the head which bears the [DAT] 
feature, is accessible to selection by a higher external head. But Position 2 should 
not be accessible in this way (it is too deeply embedded). Given the structure in (l), 
only the head associated with Position 1 should be accessible to external selection 
(by C, for instance). That being so, we would expect that head position to be the one 
which bears the feature which licenses dative subjects: 
(65) 
TP 
------
KP 
å 
Ñ 
T 
  
do 
DP 
[-FIN] Pos2 
  
[DAT] 
H2 
¡ 
DP 
¢ 
[Ace] 
H3 
[ACC] 
I 
a 
VP 
£ 
9-domain 
We are thus led to predict a difference in positioning between dative subjects and 
accusative subjects of non-finite clauses (since clauses containing accusative 
subjects seem to be absolutely free of lexical restrictions, as documented in some 
detail by McCloskey and Sells (1988» . Dative subjects should appear in a higher 
position than accusative subjects. This difference in position is in most cases 
undetectable, but it emerges in one crucial circumstance. 
Negation in Irish is known to occupy a high position - to the left of and above the 
subject (ChWlg and McCloskey 1 987, McCloskey 1 984, McCloskey 1986, Guilfoyle 
1990, Duffield 1995). In non-finite clauses (and in small clauses) negation takes the 
form of a marker gan: 
(66)a. 
b. 
B'fhearr liom gan 
iad me a fheiceaiI. 
I-would-prefer [NEG] them me see[-FIN] 
'I would prefer for them not to see me.' 
Cen filth 
gan e a bheith nios saoire? 
what reason [NEG] it be [-FIN] cheaper 
'Why isn't it cheaper?' 
Dative subjects, however, must appear to the left of negation: 

(67)a. 
b. 
TIlE DISTRIBUTION OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
Conas d' aomuinach 
gan 
a bheith ag braistint aonarach? 
how 
to solitary-person [NEG] be [-FIN] feel[PROG] solitaI)' 
'How could a solitary person not feel solitary?' 
AGMTS I02 
nf 
rabh iongantas do 
gan 
m6ran muinighin a bheith 
NEG was wonder 
to-him [NEG] much trust 
bel -FIN] 
aige 
as 
at-him out-of-him 
'It was no wonder that he had no confidence in him.' 
BF199 
(68)a. . 
·Conas gan d'aonar.inach a bheith ag braistint aonarach 
b. 
*nf rabh iongantas gan do moran muinighin a bheith aige as 
1 85 
This observation suggests that the dative subjects we are concerned with appear in a 
higher position than do the more routine accusative subjects - in Position 1 rather 
than in Position 2, which is, we have assumed. the position in which accusative 
subjects appear. 
Let's tum now to a more detailed consideration of how the licensing of dative 
subjects works in non-finite and small clauses. 
The first thing that should be stressed is that DP's so marked are not thematically 
resbicted in any way. These 'dative subjects' are not the kinds of dative subjects 
familiar from the literature on inversion and psych-predicates. Such subjects are 
restricted to bearing an EXPERlENCER role. But it should already be apparent from 
the examples cited. which show a range of different semantic roles associated with 
the 'dative' subject, that the dative subjects ofIrish are not so restricted. It becomes 
more apparent still when we observe that 'derived subjects' (the single bare OP 
argument of a passive verb, for instance) may be dative, as shown in (69): 
(69) 
i ndiaidh don 
fhear a bheith bainte 
after 
to-the hay 
be [-FIN] saved 
'after the hay had been saved' 
RRI 04 
The dumy pronoun associated with extraposition structures (Stenson 1981, 
MCCloskey 1996b. Noonan 1 997) may also be dative-marked: 
(70) 
Is 
fada do 
dite ... 
COP[PRES] long to-it said 
'It has long been said that .. .' 
AG l 18 
The conclusion seems to be that the mechanism which licenses dative subjects is not 
part of the system ofthematic licensing in the language. We are dealing here with a 
species of structural case (not thematically restricted). That being so, in the general 
framework adopted here, it should be true that the relevant licensing mechanism is 
part of the morphosyntactic licensing system whose domain is the syntactic space 

1 86 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
between C and V. 
Given these observations, and given the broader framework within which we are 
working, we are virtually forced to assume at this point that dative subjects undergo 
movement to reach their clause-initial position. To receive their semantic role they 
must originate low. But to be in a local relation with their licensing head (which is in 
turn accessible to selection by external heads), they must raise to the highest 
inflectional specifier position in TP. That the movement in question is A-movement 
is suggested by the fact that from their derived position, dative subjects may bind 
anaphors: 
(71) 
Tar cis dhOibh beanmi 
da chime 
after 
to-them greet[ -FIN] to-each-other 
'after they greet(ed) one another' 
(72) 
Tar eis dhoibh a cMile 
a theiscint 
after 
to-them each-other seer -FIN] 
'after they seelhad seen/will see each other' 
If anaphoric elements like reciprocals require A-position antecedents, then from the 
grammaticality of (71) and (72). it follows either that the dative subject itself 
occupies an A-position or that it binds such an A-position (which in tum binds the 
anaphor). 
Summarizing to date, we can bring the properties that we have observed together 
thus: 
(i) Dative subjects are licensed only in non-finite clauses (and in some varieties 
in certain small clauses). 
(ii) They are licensed in the 'subject position' of non-finite and sman clauses. 
(iii) In most varieties, they occur only in adverbial clauses and questions, but in 
more liberal varieties they may also occur in the non-finite complements of 
certain selecting heads. 
(iv) Within the (external) limits defined by (i) - (iii), this licensing device is 
completely productive (its legality does not depend on the verb of its own 
clause or on the semantic roles assigned by that verb). 
(v) Dative marked subjects are not thematically restricted. 
(vi) In all varieties and registers. a dative-marked subject may occupy a high 
'subject-position' (above the position of shifted objects and above 
negation). 
The analysis as developed so far may be summarized thus: 
• 
The particle do may be attached to any DP. 
• 
Its licensing position is Position 1 of (I). More specifically. the head of 
which Position 1 is the specifier must bear a feature [DAT] in order for the 

I 
I 
f 
I 
! 
I 
I 
I 
f 
TIlE DlSTRJBUTION OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
1 87 
'dative DP' to be licensed. 
• 
DP prefixed by do raises from its a-position to its licensing position. This 
movement is A-movement and is subject to the usual locality constraints on 
such movement, such that only the most prominent among the verb's bare 
DP-arguments may raise to the licensing position. 
• 
C-elements also contribute to its licensing, but indirectly. Some, but not all, 
instances of C have the option of selecting an inflectional head bearing the 
feature [OAT] (compare/or-to complements in English). 
We have, at this point, I think, honorably cashed out the illicit references to 
'subjecood' with which oW" informal descriptions were larded. 
6.2 Un-Raised Dative Subjects 
What becomes interesting to note at this point, is that the dative subject in some 
varieties at least. has an additional position available to it.22 Specifically, in 
conservative and formal varieties, dative nominals may in addition occupy a lower 
position - to the right of the shifted object and to the right of the infinitive. This 
alternative is illustrated in (73) - (77): 
(73) 
Ie lin llrnPO 
di 
thar nais 
when turn [ -FIN] to-her back 
'when she turned back' 
5MB 19 
(74) 
roimh theacht 
domsa anso anocht 
before comer -FIN] to-me here tonight 
'before I come/came here tonight' 
LA61 
(75) 
i ndiaidh tosnu 
duinn ar maidin 
after 
start[ -FIN] to-us in-the-moming 
'after we started in the morning' 
(76) 
Le linn an airgid a thabhairt di 
dh6 
when the money giver -FIN] to-her to-him 
'when she gave him the money' 
S65 
(77) 
Tar eis tig 
a thogail dhoibh ar an mBuailtin 
after 
house raiser -FIN] to-them 
'after they built a house in Ballyferriter' 
The examples involving post-verbal positioning of the dative subject are felt to be 
formal and are not common in ordinary speech. They ocĞur fairly freely, however, in 
published texts; they are well documented in traditional grammars (see 6 Cadhlaigh 
(1940) especially), and speakers, in my experience, have firm intuitions about what 

188 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
is possible and what is impossible. The pattern is most frequent, it seems, in 
Munster varieties but is also attested in other dialects, as shown by (78) which 
represents an Ulster variety.23 
(78) 
sa 
bhliain i ndiaidh criochnu don 
chead chogadh domhanda 
in-the year 
after 
cnd[-FIN] to-the first 
war 
global 
'in the year after the first world war ended' 
SSGD 1 08 
What are we to make of this possibility? What is striking about such examples is 
that the dative subject in this pattern occurs in exactly the position where we would 
expect the thematic position to be, given a theory in which the a-domain in its 
entirety (including the position in which the external argument is realized) is below 
the inflectional layer. In particular, the dative subject marks a spot to the right of, 
and below, the Object Shift position (see Jonas 1996: t 70-1 71, McCloskey 2000) for 
similar evidence from Icelandic and a local variety of English respectively.) Since 
we have assumed V-raising to the head which licenses shifted objects (that is, to the 
position occupied by the transitivity marker a) the observed word order is as in (79): 
(79) 
[ C [TP DPObj a+V do-DPsubj ••• ]] 
The interpretation that we need, given the assumptions made already, is that the 
relation between the licensing head bearing the [DAT] feature and the un-raised 
subject is that of 'covert movement' however understood - movement after spell-out, 
movement of features only, or a static AGRE relation governed by locality, the last 
clearly preferable on a number of grounds (Chomsky 1998, 1999). 
It is important to stress that even in this circumstance (when the dative subject is 
un-raised) we crucially need to appeal to the presence and to the licensing ability of 
the higher inflectional head. This is because the same external distributional 
restrictions hold whether the dative subject appears in the lower or in the higher 
position. Those distributional restrictions on our account are determined by the 
[DAT] feature on the higher inflectional head and on the selectional relations that it 
enters into. To account for them in both cases then, it is crucial that the higher 
inflectional head (within the reach of selecting elements) be present whether the 
subject raises or not. At the level of technology, we can say that one of the markers 
of formal register in the more liberal varieties is that [DAT] is a 'weak' rather than a 
'strong' feature. 
From this account in terms of postponed movement (or equivalently for present 
purposes, featural movement or long agreemÿnt) we derive a prediction. On this 
account, there will be no level of representation on which the subject could be a 
possible binder for the shifted object. We therefore expect the kind of binding we 
saw in (71) and (72) to be impossible. This is clearly correct. The examples in (80) 
are well-formed because the dative DP in its thematic position c-commands the 
reciprocal in a less prominent argument position within VP: 

(80)a. 
TIlE DISTRIBUTION OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
Tar eis beannu 
dh6ibh Wi eMile 
after 
greet[ -FIN] to-them to-each-other 
'after they greet one another' 
1 89 
b. 
D' eis an da 
theachtaireacht seo 
a thai! 
dwnn 6-n a cheile 
after the two message 
DEMON get[ -FIN] to-us from each other 
'after we had received these two messages from each other' 
U35 
(81), however, is impossible. This is because the un-raised subject within VP does 
not c-command the raised object in Position 3: 
(81) 
*Tar eis a cheile 
a fheiscint dh6ibh ar an mBuailtin 
after each other seer-FIN] to-them 
'after they had seen one another in Ballyferriter' 
It is known indepbndently of these concerns that postponed raising (or featural 
movement or long agreement) does not create new binding possibilities for 
anaphors. That is, the Wlgrammaticality of (8 1) can be understood in the same terms 
as English (82): 
(82) 
*There seemed to each other/themselves to be many people eligible 
for the job. 
Note that we can be fairly sure that precedence is not the relevant factor in the 
ungrammaticality of (81), since there is no general requirement that the binder of a 
reciprocal precede it. This can be seen with special clarity when the binder is a 
pronoWl which Wldergoes 'Pronoun Postposing' (Chung and McCloskey (1 987), 
Duffield (1995), Adger (1997), McCloskey (1999». 
In such cases, the binder 
appears to the right of the reciprocal which it binds: 
(83) 
Chuir 
si 
i mullach a cheile 
ar an uri&- iad. 
put[PAST] she on-top-of each-other on the floor them 
'She piled them on top of one another on the floor.' 
In addition, reciprocals within predicative phrases in the copula construction may be 
bound by subjects to their right (Doherty (1996»: 
(84) 
Is 
cosuil le-n a cheile 
iad. 
COP[PRES] like 
with each-other them 
'They are like each other.' 

190 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
7. CONCLUSION 
Drawing together the strands of this discussion, two conclusions seem plausible 
which are relevant for the larger issues we have been concerned with. 
The first is that, in this instance also, the 'subjecthood' of the dative DP is best 
understood in distributed and derivational ways. At least two positions and two 
distinct heads are crucial in the licensing of such 'subjects' - a lower position, 
associated with the verb, in which a a-role is licensed, and a higher position, 
associated with the head T, in which its structural case is 
licensed. The two 
positions are derivationally related, and even when the presence of the higher one is 
obscured (because raising has not taken place), its presence is detectable in that 
clauses containing an un-raised subject are subject to just the same selection-based 
distributional restrictions as are clauses containing raised dative subjects. 
The second conclusion is that we have here a new strand of evidence that the 
position of origin of external arguments is below the object shift position (the 
position in which accusative Case is licensed), as well as for the larger 
(architectural) conclusion that there is a more complete segregation between 
thematic and inflectional layers than is envisaged by the Split VP Hypothesis. The 
matter is hardly settled, but the Irish evidence is suggestive, I think, in that it is 
arguably a case where one can detect the lower thematic position directly and 
overtly. It is all the more suggestive in that the results thereby suggested are in 
harmony with similar observations from non-standard English (McCloskey (2000» 
and from Icelandic (Jonas (1996» . 
NOTES 
This paper was prepared for the Workshop on Grammatical Relations in Transformational Gramar, 
held at the University ofnlinois, Champaign-Urbana in July of 1999. My thanks to the conveners of the 
workshop - Stan Dubinsky and Bill Davies - and to the other participants for much help and guidance. I 
am grateful to two anonymous reviewers and to Peter Svenonius for comments on an earlier version of 
the paper. A very detailed and very penetrating set of comments by Noam Chomsky on a pre-final 
version was particularly valuable. I have not ben able to respond to all the issues that arose in that 
correspondence within the limits of this revision. 
The paper will focus on subject properties. But almost everything I will have to say applies equally to 
object properties, as far as I can tell. 
In this, more modem conceptions differ from the 'Aspects' framework (Chomsky (1965), in whieh 
the notion 'subject' could at least be defined derivatively (the cluster of properties asociated with 
subjecthood is asociated with a single phmse struetural position). Between 1965 and 1990, we witnessed, 
in effect, the death of the subject. 
I restrict attention here to the IP-domain. As pointed out by a reviewer, however, it is distinctly 
possible that positions within the CP-Iayer also play a role in the licensing of subjects. This is particularly 
so in the context of the proposals of Rizzi (1997) in which the lowest head in the CP-Iayer encodes 
finiteness. Haegeman (1996) proposes that the specifier of this head is, under certain conditions, an A­
position involved in the licensing of (non-contnlstive) subjects. See also Haegeman 1992, Cardinaletti 
1997 for relevant discussion. The existence of this possibility further strengthens the main point of the 
paper (since it involves a further 'distribution' of subject properties). I will set this possibility aside in 
discussing the Irish evidence, however, since it seems to me that the evidence remains strong that finite 

lliE DISTRIBUTION OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES IN IRISH 
191 
verbs in Irish never raise into the C-Iayer and subjects remain to the right of the position of the finite verb 
(McCloskey 19968, McCloskey 200 I). That being so, the influence of elements in the CP-layer on the 
licensing of subject properties (at least as far as positional properties are concerned) will be limited. For 
non finite clauses, the situation might be different (se the discussion of section 6.1 below especially). 
We will have occasion to qualifY this very general statement in the final section of the paper. 
For some relevant discussion of a closely-related language, see the discussion of 1611 century forms 
of Welsh in Willis (1996: 6.3, pp213-219). 
Examples are frequently cited from published sources. When this is the case, it is indicated by means 
ofa tag at the end of the translation line. For an explanation of these tags, see the Appendix ('Sources'). 
Notice the promissory note: the reference to 'subject' bere too must be discharged in some reasonable 
way. See Chung and McCloskey 1987, McCloskey and Sells 1988. 
Notice further that jf expletives were available in the language (their existence motivated by the 
EPP), then (14b), (ISb), and (16b) should be ungrammatical for the same reason as (i) in English and 
similar languages: 
(i) 
*There seems [ somebody to be at the door ]. 
Note in addition that the clause itself cannot be construed as occupying the EPP-position given 
intervention of adverbial phrases and dative arguments in (14) - (16). 
10 A reviewer in particular points out that the utter impossibility of clefting there in English, in contrast·· . 
with (25) in Irish, raises serious doubts about the idea that it might be in origin an existential predicate. 
II 
We will have occasion to qualify the 'never' in this statement in the final section of the paper. 
11 
Notice that the raising seen in (28b) canot be triggered (in any straightforward way at least) by 
whatever functional structure is associated with progresive aspect, since no such raising is triggered in 
(28a), which presumably contains the same functional material as (28b). 
U 
More detailed discussion and exemplification of all these patterns can be found in McCloskey 
(1 996b). 
• 
. 
14 
I will use the term 'Verb Phrase' as an infonnal cover-term to mean the maximal projection in which 
all the arguments ofa given verb are realized -VP orvP. 
15 
(39) was beard on a radio broadcast ̵ al̶ 6 Cumain 1996: vol. 2, p. 427. 
16 
I assume that the participle in (41) raisys to an Aspect projection. Similarly, the adjective in (40) has 
raised to the functional head from which the small clause is projected. 
17 
Kratzer also asumes that the Voice projection is implicated in accusative case assignment, and thus 
arrives at a very direct structural interpretation of Borzio's Generalization, as indeed does Chomsky by a 
similar route. See also Dechaine 1993 (especially Chap. 2), Dechaine 1994 for distinct but related 
proposals. 
18 
A condensed version of the argmnent is presented in McCloskey 1997. I take this opportunity to 
develop it in proper detail. 
\9 
Those familiar with this body of work will recognize that 1 am setting aside some intricate and 
important dialectal complexities here, in the interest of expositiǺal ease. This simplification is not, as far 
as I can tell, dangerous. For more detail and discussion of all these matters, see McCloskey 1980, 
McCloskey and Sells 1988, Chung and McCloskey 1987, Guilfoyle 1990, Guilfoyle )994, Noonan 1992, 

192 
JAMES MCCLOSKEY 
Carnie 1995. Noonan 1994. Duffield 1995. 
20 This phenomenon should almost certainly be related to that of dative subjccts fOWld in some rot 
jnfinitival clauses in Russian. On this, see Moore and Perlmutter 2000 and references cited there to much 
earlier work. 
%1 
It seems plausible to take do to be a head K which forms an extended projection, in Grimshaw's 
(1991) sense, with DP. 
11 
J am grateful especially to Eibhlin Ni Mhurcbti and to Brid Ni ShUiUeabhliin for their patient help 
with the material of this section. 
:u 
DOnall 6 Baoill makes· the interesting observation that in Ulster the option of lower positioning 
sems to be associated with a transitivity restriction - it is possible for intransitive but not for transitive 
clauses. 
APPENDIX - SOURCES 
Examples are frequently cited from published sources. When this is the case, it is indicated by a tag which 
consists of an abbreviation of the title of the publication, followed by a page-number. The abbreviations 
used have the interpretations specified below. For each text, the major dialect with which it is associated 
is also indicated. 
AFAP: 
AG: 
AGMTS: 
AI: 
BF: 
CC: 
CLlA: 
CST: 
DO: 
EB: 
EDD: 
FBF: 
FEB: 
Gll: 
LA: 
LG: 
ODR2: 
PF: 
RGB: 
RR: 
S: 
SAB: 
5MB: 
SR: 
SSGD: 
STL: 
U: 
An Fear a PhJeasc, Micheal 6 Conghaile, Galway 
An Gabhar Sa Teampall, Miche31 Ua Ciarmhaic, Kerry 
Ar Gaeh Maoilinn Ta Sloeluiin, Padraig 6 Ciobh3in, Kery 
Allagar na hlnise, Tomas 6 Criomhthain, Kerry 
Bruighean Feille, Niall () D6naill, Donegal 
Cruilhneaclrl agus Ceannabhain. Tomas Ba.iread, Galway 
C/iatluin na Sceilge, Mfche81 Ua Ciarmhaic, Kery 
An Chalnl sa tSrdldbhaile, Breandlin 6 hEithir, Galway 
Dil/ann Oililhrigh. Donchadh () Ceileachair, Cork 
Eadarbhaile. translated by Seosamh Mac Orlana, Donegal 
Eisl le Dubh Dorcha, Sean 6g Caomluinach, Kerry 
Fiche Blian ag Fils, Muiris 6 SUilleabh8in, Kery 
Fiolar an Eireabaill Bhain. Sean Pheats Tom () Ceamaigh, Keny 
An Gealas I IAr na Ullhe. Padraig () CiobMin, Keny 
Lti de na Laethanta. Mici Sheain Neill 6 Baoill, Donegal 
Le Gea/aigh. Padraig 6 Ciobluin, Kerry 
6 Donnbluiin ROS.fQ 2. Sean 6 Liling, Keny 
Paroiste an Fheirtiaraigh, Tomas Mac Sithigh. Kerry 
Na Rosa go Brdthach. Fionn Mac Cumhaill, Donegal 
Roise Rua, Padraig Ua Cmimhsi, Donegal 
Seadna. An tAthair Peadar Ua Laoghaire, Cork 
Seanchas Annie Bluin. Anie Nic Ghrianna, ed. Gordon W. MacLennan, Donegal 
Scialra on mBIa.fcaod, Peig Sayers, ed. Kenneth Jackson, Kerry 
Sciuird chun na Ruise. Padraig 6 Fiannachta, Keny 
Stairsheanchas GhaOlh Dobhair. OUt Nic Ghiolla Bhride, Keny 
Seanclras Thomilis LaighJeir, ed. Tomas de Bhaldraithe, Galway 
Unaga, translated by Eoghan () Neachtain, Galway 

GRANT GOODALL 
THE EPP IN SP ANISH* 
O. INTRODUCTION 
One of the unsolved questions in current syntactic theory is why argwnent DPs that 
start out within the lexical layer of the clause (i.e., within vP or VP) must sometimes 
move overtly to a SPEC position within the inflectional layer. 
It is true that a 
relationship must be established between the DP and an inflectional head, in that the 
inflectional head must check a case feature on the DP and the DP must sometimes 
check phi-features on the inflectional head, but we know that this checking can be 
done even when there is no overt movement. 
Given the standard minimalist 
assumption that movement occurs only when necessary, we would then expect that 
the checking would always be done without overt movement. Since this does not 
appear to be true, we must say that certain features can only be checked through 
overt movement to the SPEC position of the head on which the feature appears (or, 
alternatively, through merger of an expletive in this position). Features that trigger 
this type of movement or merger are said to have the "EPP property" (Chomsky 
1 998).1 
An obvious question which arises is why certain features have this property 
and others don't. One way to try to get closer to an answer to this question is to 
ascertain to what extent there is cross-linguistic variation in this regard. One could 
look, for example, at the paterns of raising out of the lexical layer which are 
attested, or at whether a feature which triggers overt movement in one language does . 
so in all languages. It is this latter approach which will be the focus of this paper. 
The particular feature (or bundle of features) that I will examine is that found on T. 
In English, it is well known that T has a feature with the "EPP property," yielding 
the result that SPEC ofT must be occupied, either by overt movement or by merger 
of an expletive.2 This requirement imposed by a feature on T is often called simply 
"the EPP," and it is in this more narrow, traditional sense that I will use the term 
here (as opposed to the wider sense mentioned above in which it refers to any 
feature of any head which requires overt movement or merger). 
This EPP 
requirement has been widely discussed in the literature, but there is still remarkably 
little consensus on its cross-linguistic status. 
Chomsky (1998), for instance, 
presumes that it is universal, while McCloskey (1 996b, this volume) proposes that it 
is not, based on evidence he provides that there is no EPP effect in Modem Irish. 
Alexiadou and Anagnostopoulou (1998), on the other hand, propose that it is 
193 
William D. Davies and Stanley Dubinsky (eds.), Objects and other subjects: 
Grammatical functions, functional categories, and conflgurationality, 193-223. 
\0 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands. 

194 
GRANT GOODALL 
universal but may be satisfied in different ways. In non-null subject languages it is 
satisfied in the usual fashion, by agreement between SPEC of T and T. but in null 
subject languages it is satisfied by head movement of V to T, thus making phrasal 
movement or merger of an expletive in SPEC of T unnecessary. The EPP in the 
traditional, strict sense, then, only occurs in non-null subject languages in their 
analysis. 
The language I will concentrate on here is Spanish, which is of particular 
interest with regard to the EPP for two main reasons.3 First, it has a number of 
properties which would seem to indicate that it does not have an EPP requirement. 
Some of these are apparent at first glance and others require more analysis, but they 
point to the conclusion that SPEC of T does not need to be filled. Spanish would 
thus seem to provide straightforward evidence against the universality of the EPP. 
Second, since Spanish is a quintessential null-subject language, Alexiadou and 
Anagnostopoulou's typology predicts that it will not have the traditional EPP 
requirement, and in fact they use Spanish as evidence for their proposal. This type 
of link (such as they propose) between the presence/absence of the EPP and some 
independently needed property of the language is highly desirable, because it can 
provide the beginnings of an explanation for why some languages have the EPP and 
others don't, if that is indeed the case. If it should turn out that Spanish does have 
the EPP, however, this would seem to destroy any possible link between the absence 
of the EPP and the presence of null subjects. Thus there is a lot at stake in this 
apparently simple question of whether or not Spanish requires that its SPEC of T be 
filled. 
One might think that determining whether Spanish has an EPP requirement 
would be a straightforward matter. V is assumed to occupy T, after all, so a DP 
immediately to the left of V could then be construed as evidence that there is an 
EPP, and the lack of such a DP could be taken as evidence showing the opposite. 
However, some independent properties of Spanish will make our job more difficult. 
For example, Spanish is a null subject language, so the lack of an overt DP to the 
left of V does not preclude the possibility of a null DP in that position. In addition, 
Spanish has very robust topicalization and focus-fronting processes. so it could be 
that a DP to the left of V is there by virtue of that type of movement, rather than by 
being attracted by an EPP feature. These processes involve A'-movement to the CP 
layer of the clause, but ifthere is no EPP and thus nothing in SPEC of T, they could 
have the effect of placing a DP immediately to the left of the V. Thus two major 
tasks in exploring the possibility of the EPP in Spanish will be determining whether 
there is a null DP in cases where SPEC of T appears to be unoccupied and whether 
preverbal DPs are there as a result of A'-movement or A-movement. 
This paper will be organized as follows. In .section I, I will give an overview 
of some of the evidence from the literature that has led to the now predominant view 
that Spanish does not have an EPP requirement. In section 2, I will examine the 
status of preverbal subjects more closely and conclude that their surface position 
must result from EPP-induced movement. In section 3, I attempt to resolve this 
apparent contradiction by returning to the evidence from section I and showing how 
it can be accounted for insightfully under the assumption that there is an EPP. 
General conclusions will be drawn in section 4. 

THE EPP IN SPANISH 
195 
l .  APPARENT EVIDENCE AGAINST THE EPP IN SPANISH 
The first sign that might make us suspect that the EPP does not force movement to 
SPEC of T in Spanish is the fact that verb-initial word order is possible (see 
Ordonez 1997 for discussion), as seen in (1). 
(l) 
Leyo Juan el libro. 
read 
the book 
'Juan read the book: 
This is what we expect if phrases move to the left of the verb only by means of A'­
movement, but it is surprising if T contains an EPP feature that atracts the closest 
DP to its SPEC. Assuming that V is located in T. we should then find this DP in 
preverbal position. The only way out is to say that there is a null expletive which 
satisfies the EPP feature, allowing the other DPs to remain VP-intemal. This seems 
implausible, however, since the expletive should induce a definiteness effect, and (1) 
clearly shows that this does not obtain, as Alexiadou and Anagnostopoulou (1998) 
point out. 
More subtle evidence in favor of an inactive EPP in Spanish comes from 
Uribe-Etxebarria 1 992, who shows that quantified subjects in preverbal position 
have their scope frozen in place, while those in postverbal position do not. Thus in 
. (2), cada senador 'every senator' has obligatorily narow scope with regard to the 
wh-phrase quien in (a), while both narow and wide scope are possible in (b). 
(2)a. 
A quien dices 
que cada senador amaba? 
whom 
say-2ps that each senator 
loves 
h. 
A quien dices 
que amaba cada senador? 
whom 
say-2ps that loves each senator 
'Who do you say that every senator loved?' (Uribe-Etxebarria 1992) 
This is surprising if cada senador has moved leftward in (a) to satisfY an EPP 
feature, since such movement should not afect scope possibilities. as seen by the 
fact that every senator in the English translation may have either wide or narrow 
scope. Uribe-Etxebarla suggests that the facts in (2) are related to those in (3), first 
discussed by Lasnik and Uriagereka (1988). 
(3)a. 
Someone thinks that every problem, Mary solved. 
h. 
Someone thinks that Mary solved every problem. 
Lasnik and Uriagereka claim that every problem in (b) may have either narow or 
(marginally) wide scope, but that when every problem is topicalized, as in (a), only 
the narow scope reading is possible. The descriptive generalization that emerges is 
given in (4) (see Epstein 1992, Kayne 1998 for more recent discussion). 

196 
GRANT GOODALL 
(4) 
Overt A'-movement may not be followed by covert A'-movement of 
the same item. 
(4) can then account for the lack of ambiguity in (3a), and it can do so in (2a) as 
well, Uribe-Etxebarria suggests, if we make the crucial assumption that cada 
senador has moved leftward by means of A'-movement. 
Ord6fiez (I997) shows that this same account can be extended to facts 
regarding wh-in-situ first discussed by JaeggJi (1987). 
Jaeggli showed that an 
embedded subject wh-phrase may remain in situ when it is postverbal, but not 
preverbal, as seen in (5). 
(5)a. 
*Que dijiste que qulin compro el otro dia? 
what say-2ps that who bought the other day 
b. 
Que dijiste 
que compro quien el otro dia? 
what say-2ps that bought who 
the other day 
'What did you say that who bought the other day?' 
(4) allows us to account for (5a): quien must undergo covert movement so that it has 
scope over the entire clause, but it canot, if we assume that it has already 
undergone A'-movement. 
A further reason for thinking that preverbal subjects are the result of A'­
movement and have not been attracted by an EPP-feature is that they are 
incompatible with fronted focus phrases or fronted wh-phrases. as seen in (6) and 
(7), respectively.4 
(6) 
cf. 
(7) 
cf. 
*EL LlBRO Juan compr6 (no la revista). 
the book 
bought not the magazine 
'THE BOOK Juan bought (not the magazine).' 
VEL LmRO compr6 Juan (no la revista). 
the book bought 
not the magazine 
*Que Juan compr6? 
what 
bought 
'What did Juan buy?' 
"'Que compr6 Juan? 
what bought 
This is surprising ifthe EPP is responsible for the preverbal position of the subject, 
since we then expect that the subject would be in SPEC of T and that the focus 
phrase or wh-phrase would be to its left within the CP layer. If. on the other hand, 

TIlE EPP IN SPANISH 
1 97 
the preverbal subject has undergone A'·movement, it is not difficult to imagine an 
analysis of(6) and (7) in which the movement of the subject to a preverbal position 
either competes for the same position as the focus phrase or wh-phrase (sec, for 
example, Zubizareta 1998) or otherwise results in two A'-processes interfering with 
each other (see, for example, Ordonez 1997). 
2. EVIDENCE IN FAVOR OF THE EPP IN SPANISH 
We have now seen some good reasons for thinking that there is no requirement that 
SPEC of T be occupied in Spanish, i.e., that there is no standard EPP requirement. 
If this is true, it means that subjects appearing pre verbally must be there as a result 
of A'·movement into the CP layer of the clause above TP. However, we shall now 
see evidence that seems to point in the opposite direction, suggesting that it is the 
EPP which triggers movement ofthe subject to a preverbal position. 
2. J Preverbal subjects do not have information status of topic or focus 
A'-fronted elements in Spanish typically have a special information status that 
preverbal subjects do not share.' Fernandez Soriano (1999), for instance, points out 
that in a neutral context, preverbal subjects are possible but other fronted elements 
are not. Thus (a) is a possible answer to the question in (8), but (b) is not. 
(8) 
a. 
b. 
lQue paso? 
what happened 
• What happened?' 
Juan me regalo el anillo en el 
parque. 
me gave the ring 
in the park 
'Juan gave me the ring in the park.' 
#En el 
parque me regalo el anillo. 
in the park 
me gave 
the ring 
'In the park he gave me the ring.' 
If we assume that there is a relatively direct relationship between the information 
status of an element and its syntactic position, at least in the sense that phrases 
within the CP layer have a more specific informational role (e.g., topic or focus) and 
phrases within the inflectional level do not, this casts doubt on the idea that subjects 
are always fronted to the same position as topics such as en el parque 'in the park' 
in (b).6 
There may also be differences in the reference possibilities of preverbal 
subjects when compared to other fronted elements. Cardinaletti (1997) claims that 
there are in Italian, and examples such as the following in Spanish seem to support 
this:7 

1 98 
GRANT GOODALL 
(9) 
Ayer 
premiaron 
una pelfcula aeerca de Almodovar. 
yesterday gave-prize-3pp a 
film 
about of 
'Yesterday they gave a prize to a film about Almod6var. • 
(a) 
EI director, el premio 10 recibio 
en el teatro del 
centro. 
the director the prize 
it received in the theater of-the downtown 
'The director, the prize he received at the downtown theater. ' 
(b) 
EI premio, el director 10 recibio en el teatro del 
centro. 
the prize 
the director it received in the theater of-the downtown 
'The prize, the director received at the downtown theater.' 
The initial sentence in (9) brings up two possible directors: Almodovar and the one 
who made a film about Almodovar. This sentence may be followed in the discourse 
by either (a) or (b). both of which contain the DP el director 'the director.' We 
would expect this DP to be able to refer to either of the possible directors, but in (a), 
where it is syntactically a topic, it prefers to refer to the director of the film and not 
to Almodovar. In (b), on the other hand, the DP is a preverbal subject, and it is able 
to refer equally well to either Almodovar or the director of the film8• It is not known 
why this difference should arise, but trying to account for it in a theory in which 
topics and preverbal subjects are in the same position would seem to be much less 
promising than doing so in a theory in which they occupy distinct positions. This in 
turn lends support to the idea that subjects are fronted by a mechanism different 
from that which fronts topics.9 
2.2 Only one preverbal non-topic is aI/owed 
Another distinctive property of preverbal subjects is that only one of them is 
allowed. With a psych-verb such as gustar, for instance, either of the internal 
arguments may be fronted, as seen in (10) and (I I), but not both, as seen in ( l 2). 
(10) 
[A nadie] 
to no one 
Ie gusta esa musica. 
pleases that music 
(I I) 
[Esa musical no 
Ie gusta a nadie. 
that music NEG pleases no one 
(12) 
*[A nadie] [esa musical Ie gusta 
to no one that music pleases 
We shall see in the next section that bare quantifiers like nadie 'no one' cannot be 
topics, and the fact that esa mUsica 'that music' is to the right of nadie in (12) means 
that it cannot be a topic either. 
Thus in (12) neither of the fronted elements is a 

THE EPP IN SPANISH 
199 
topic, and the contrast between (10)/(1 I) and (12) shows that only one such non­
topic, fronted element is possible. Multiple topics, on the other hand, are possible 
(see (9a), for instance), which again suggests that nadie in (10) and (12) is not a 
topic. This contrast between the obligatorily single preverbal subject and possibly 
multiple topics is consistent with the idea that subjects are' fronted because of the 
(single) EPP feature while topics are fronted by means of AI-movement. 
This analysis predicts that if the order of a nadie 'to no one' and esa mu.sica 
'that music' in (12) is reversed, then the sentence should be fine, and indeed this is 
the case: 
(13) 
Esa mUsica. a nadie Ie gusta. 
that music 
to no one pleases 
(13) is grammatical becaue esa mu.sica is able to be a topic (since unlike in (12), it is 
not to the right of a subject), leaving a nadie as the preverbal subject. 
2.3 Preverbal subjects are not in topic position 
There is also substantial syntactic evidence that preverbal subjects and topics do not 
occupy the same position in Spanish. 
First, it has often been noted that bare 
quantifiers are not able to be topics, as shown in (14) (see, e.g., Rizi .1997). 
(14) 
*A nadie, Juan 10 
ha visto. 
no one 
him has seen 
'No one, Juan has seen.' 
Bare quantifiers are perfect as preverbal subjects, however, as in (15). to 
(15) 
Nadie ha visto a Juan. 
nobody has seen 
'Nobody has seen Juan.' 
If topics and preverbal subjects occupy the same position, it is difficult to see why 
this contrast would arise.1l If, on the other hand, topics are in the CP layer and 
preverbal subjects are in SPEC of T, then the contrast between (14) and (1 5) is as 
expected, given the generalization in (4) (or the related account from Rizzi 1997 
mentioned in footnote 1 1). 
Second, Casielles (1997) has pointed out that bare nouns in Spanish are able to 
appear as postverbal subjects, as in (16a), but not as preverbal subjects, as in (16b). 
(I6)a. 
Jugaban ninos 
en el parque. 
played children in the park 

200 
b. 
GRANT GOODALL 
*Niiios 
jugaban en el parque. 
children played in the park 
'Children were playing in the park. ' 
Crucially, bare nouns are able to be topics, as shown in (I7), making it appear 
unlikely that preverbal subjects and topics occupy the same position. 
(17) 
Yo a 61 
Iibros no Ie 
dejo. 
to him books no him-OAT lend 
'Books, I don't lend him.' 
(17) in fact contains three topics (yo 'I', a el 'to him', and libros 'books'), but what 
matters here is that the bare noun Ubros is a topic. 
Casielles proposes that bare 
nouns are NP's, not OP's, and that only OP's are allowed in SPEC of T. This then 
gives us a plausible account of the ungrammaticality of (16b). (17). in contrast, is 
fine, because topics may be of any phrasal type. 
Third, it is well known that topics may be followed by a wh-phrase, as seen in 
(18). 
( 1 8) 
Ese Ubro, cuando 10 compraste? 
that book when 
it bought-2ps 
'That book, when did you buy it?' 
Within the system of Rizzi 1997, for instance, this is because the TopP projection 
may appear higher than the FocP projection which hosts the wh-phrase. Ifpreverbal 
subjects are in SPEC of Topo, they too should be able to appear to the left of a wh­
phrase, and at first glance it appears that they can, as in (19). 
(19) 
Ese libro, cuando fue comprado? 
that book when 
was bought 
'That book, when was it bought?' 
However, the intonation and discourse context for (19) should make us wonder 
whether ese libro here is actually a topic. 
We can avoid this problem by using a 
subject which we know cannot be made into a topic, such as a bare quantifier, as 
seen in (20). 
(20) 
*Nadie, en quº c1ase (no) estudi6? 
no one in what class no studied 
'No one, in which class did they study?' 
cf. 
En que clase no estudi6 nadie? 
in what class no studied no one 
'In which class did no one study?' 

THE EPP IN SPANISH 
201 
As (20) shows, a bare quantifier is incapable of appearing to the left of a wh-phrase, 
which again strongly suggests that preverbal subjects are not in topic position. 
Another contrast between topics and preverbal subjects is that topics create an 
island for wh-movement out of an embedded clause, whereas preverbal subjects do 
not. This is seen in (21 )_(22).12 
(21) 
* A quien crees 
que el premlo se 
10 dieron? 
who 
think-2ps that the prize 
him-DAT it gave-3pp 
'Who do you think that the prize they gave to?' 
(22) 
A quhºn crees 
que Juan Ie 
dio el 
premio? 
who 
think-2ps that 
him-DAT gave the prize 
'Who do you think that Juan gave the prize to?' 
If we assume that wh-movement is successive-cyclic, and that the wh-phrase 
must move to the left periphery of the embedded clause in order to be visible on the 
higher cycle (Chomsky 1998), we can then conclude that only the topic is in the left 
periphery and thus blocks movement of the wh-phrase. The preverbal subject, on 
the other hand, must be lower within the embedded clause and thus does not 
interfere with the movement of the wh-phrase to the left periphery. 
A final piece of evidence concerns dialects in which preverbal subjects are 
possible in infinitival clauses. I) In at least one such dialect, Northern Mexican 
Spanish, preliminary work indicates that although preverbal subjects are possible in 
this context, topics are not, as seen in the contrast between (23) and (24). 
(23) 
Para Juan lavar 
las sabanas. tienen 
que estar muy sueias. 
for 
wash-INF the sheets 
have-3pp that be 
very dirty 
'For Juan to wash the sheets, they have to be very dirty.' 
(24) 
*Para las sabanas lavarlas 
Juan, tienen 
que estar muy sucias. 
for the sheets wash-INF-them 
have-3pp that be 
very dirty 
'For the sheets, wash-INF-CL Juan, they have to be very dirty.' 
Once again, this contrast is difficult to explain if topics and preverbal subjects 
occupy the same position, but it follows without stipulation if topics are in the CP 
layer and subjects are in SPEC of T. Notice that under Rizzi's (1997) analysis of the 
structure of CP, we expect para to occupy FINO, above the TP projection but below 
the postion oftopics. (23) and (24) are consistent with this view. 
We have now seen evidence of various types that the topic and preverbal 
subject are in distinct positions. Significantly, the data in (18)-(24) point also to a 
more specific conclusion: that the preverbal subject is in a position lower than the 
topic. This followed from the fact that preverbal subjects, unlike topics. are not able 
to appear to the left of a wh.phrase and do not interfere with wh-extraction from an 
embedded clause, but are able to appear to the right of a complementizer in F"fN'l. 

202 
GRANT GOODALL 
2.4 
Preverbal subjects are not infocuslwh-position 
The facts we have seen so far would be consistent with the idea that preverbal 
subjects are in the same position as that of fronted focused phrases or wh-phrases 
(SPEC ofFOc;o in Rizzi 1997), which is generally below that of topics in Spanish. 
In this section, I will argue that this idea must be rejected and that the position of 
preverbal subjects is still lower than SPEC of FOCO. 
First, Torrego {l985) has shown that it is possible to extract a wh-phrase out of 
a wh-phrase which has itself been fronted, as seen in (25). 
(25) 
Este es el poema del cual 
no se 
[cuantas traducciones -.l 
this is the poem of which no know-l ps how-many translations 
han 
publicado. 
have-3pp published 
'This is the poem of which I don't know [how many translations _ ]  
they have published.' 
As we would expect, assuming that focused phrases occupy the same position as wh­
phrases, the same is possible with a fronted focused phrase, as seen in (26).14 
(26) 
Este es el poema del cual [ro 
1RADUCCI6N -.l publicaron 
this is the poem of which your translation 
published-3pp 
pero no el 
original) 
but not the original 
'This is the poem of which [YOUR TRANSLATION -1 they pUblished 
(but not the original).' 
Now if preverbal subjects occupy this same position, then wh-extraction should 
be possible out of them. But this is not the case, as seen in (27).IS 
(27) 
*Este es el poema del cuaJ [tu traducci6n _] ha ganado premios. 
this is the poem of which your translation 
has won 
prizes 
'This is the poem of which [your translation -1 has won prizes.' 
So we conclude that preverbal subjects are not in SPEC ofFoco. 
A second argument concerns the fact that focused phrases and wh-phrases 
create islands for further wh-movement, as seen in (28) and (29). 
(28) 
* A qui»n crees 
que EL CARO Ie 
dieron 
(no la 
who 
think-2ps that the car 
him-DAT gave-3pp not the 
moto)? 
motorcycle 
'Who do you think that THE CAR they gave to (not the motorcycle)?' 

TIm EPP IN SPANISH 
(29) 
* A quiin quieres saber cual premio Ie 
dieron? 
who 
want-2ps know which prize 
him-DAT gave-3pp 
'Who do you want to know which prize they gave to?' 
203 
As mentioned earlier, one possible line of explanation here is that in order to 
undergo successive cyclic movement, the wh-phrase must move to the left periphery 
of the embedded clause so that it will be accessible to movement in the higher cycle. 
(28) and (29) are out because this left periphery is already occupied by a focused 
phrase and another wh-phrase, respectively. As we have already seen in (22), 
repeated here as (30), preverbal subjects do not create islands. 
(30) 
A quien crees 
que Juan Ie 
dio el premio? 
who 
think-2ps that 
him-DAT gave the prize 
'Who do you think that Juan gave the prize to?' 
This very strongly suggests that preverbal subjects are in a position lower than 
SPEC ofFoco. 
Finally, it is well known that movement of a wh-phrase (or focused phrase) 
licenses the appearance of a parasitic gap, as in (31). 
(3 1) 
Cu81es libros tiraste 
[sin 
haber 
leido ]? 
which books throw-out-2ps without have-INF read 
'Which books did you throw out [without having read]?' 
A preverbal subject, on the other hand, does not license a parasitic gap. as seen in 
(32). 
(32) 
*Estos libros fueron tirados 
[sin 
haber 
leido]. 
these books were thrown-out without have-INF read 
'These books were thrown out [without having read). , 
This suggests that preverbal subjects, unlike wh-phrases, are not the result of A'-
movement into the CP layer. 
16 
. 
We are now able to conclude that preverbal subjects in Spanish are not located 
in the same position as wh-phrases and focused phrases.17 Moreover, (28)-(30) 
indicate that preverbal subjects are in a position lower than these others. 
3. ANOTHER LOOK AT EVIDENCE AGAINST THE EPP 
At this point we have reached the following three conclusions: preverbal subjects are 
syntactically located in a position lower than the major phrasal elements in the CP 
layer (i.e., fronted topics, focused phrases and wh-phrases), only one preverbal 
subject is allowed, and preverbal subjects do not have the information status or 
reference possibilities of topics. We have seen that these conclusions cast doubt on 

204 
GRANT GOODALL 
the idea that a preverbal subject is a topic or is otherwise the result of A'-movement. 
They are perfectly consistent, on the other hand. with the idea that Spanish has an 
EPP requiring SPEC ofT to be occupied.ls SPEC ofT is structurally lower than the 
SPEC positions within the CP layer, it is generally assumed that there is a single 
EPP feature which is only checked once, and SPEC of T is generally assumed to be 
devoid of the special interpretational properties of SPEC positions within the CP 
layer. 
But how can these conclusions be reconciled with the data we saw in section 1 
which suggested that there is no EPP in Spanish, or at least that phrasal movement 
into SPEC of T is not required? In this section we will examine each of the 
arguments from section 1 in turn and see what sort of analysis is available to us if 
we assume that there is an EPP requirement in Spanish. 
3. J Word order. expletives. and the definiteness effect 
The first fact we have to face is that verb-initial orders are possible. Assuming that 
V is in T, an EPP feature would seem to require a DP to the left of the verb. There 
are two possible ways this problem could be handled. First, we could say that the 
EPP feature is simply optional in Spanish, and that the verb-initial order is what 
results when the feature is not present. The second and more interesting possibility 
is to say that the EPP feature is obligatory, so the verb-initial order must actually 
have a null element to the left of the verb. 
Suppose that this second possibility is what we want to adopt. 
This 
immediately leads us to the second problem that we saw in section I, which was that 
if there is a null expletive, we should observe a definiteness effect, whereas in fact 
none obtains. Zubizarreta (1998) suggests that this problem could be avoided if 
instead of an expletive, we have a null adverb or locative, which would not be 
expected to trigger the definiteness effect. As evidence for this, she shows that in 
Italian (based on work by Pinto ( 1994) and Adger (1 996» . a non-focused postverbaI 
subject is possible only where a null locative is plausible. That is to say, with verbs 
where a location seems intimately tied to the verb's meaning, even though it is not 
overtly expressed syntactically, a non-focused postverbal subject is possible, as seen 
in (33). 
(33)a. 
E arrivato Gigi. 
is arived 
'Gigi has arrived.' 
b. 
Ha telefonato Gigi. 
has telephoned 
'Gigi has telephoned. ' 
With verbs that do not seem to imply any locative argument, this non-focused 
postverbal subject is not possible. as seen in (34). 

(34)a. 
b. 
TIlE EPP IN SPANISH 
*Ha riso 
Gigi. 
has laughed 
'Gigi has laughed.' 
*Hanno stamutito tre 
leoni. 
have sneezed three lions 
'Three lions have sneezed. ' 
205 
These facts can be explained if we say that it is the null locative which satisfies the 
EPP in (33). This null locative is the destination in (33a) and either the source or 
destination in (33b). Since no locative argument is possible in (34), the EPP can 
only be satisfied there by overt movement of the subject, which is then why the 
postverbal subject is disallowed. 
This neat explanation can only go through, of course, if we allow for the 
possibility of null locatives, so the contrast between (33) and (34) thus constitutes 
evidence for their existence. Given this, it is now at least possible that they exist in 
Spanish as well, which could explain why there is no definiteness effect with 
postverbal subjects. However, the equivalents of both (33) and (34) are possible in 
Spanish, which would suggest, as Zubizareta points out, that Spanish allows a 
wider set of null adverbials than does Italian (perhaps including, for example. null 
temporal adverbials). 
If this is true. then evidence along the lines of(33) and (34) will be difficult to 
find in Spanish, since some null adverbial will always be available to satisfy the 
EPP, thus allowing the subject to remain in place. But what we should be able to 
find are cases where adverbials do not need to be expressed overtly in Spanish, but 
where they do in languages like English (assuming that English does not allow null 
adverbials). Such cases seem to exist, as seen in (35). 
(35) 
a. 
(as sign in store) 
Hay pan. 
'There is bread.' 
b. 
#There is bread. 
(35a) is very natural as a sign in a store, whereas (35b) would be quite odd in this 
context. This can be explained if (a) allows for the possibility of a null adverbial, in 
this context understood as "here" or "today." while (b) does not, which results in the 
impression that (b) is a statement of general existence rather than one about a 
particular place and time. Li (1990) notes a similar contrast between existentials in 
Chinese and English: 
(36)a. 
Wo zhidao you gui. 
I 
know have ghost 
'I know that there are ghosts.' 

206 
GRANT GOODALL 
b. 
I know that there are ghosts. 
(36a) is pragmatically natural only when discussing a particular place or time, while 
(36b) may be understood as a general statement of existence independent of any 
particular place. 
Li attributes this contrast to the possibility of a null adverbial 
subject in Chinese.19 
If it is true that verb-initial clauses in Spanish contain a null adverbial which 
satisfies the EPP, how can this be reconciled with the fact that overt adverbials in 
English generally do not satisfy the EPP? One possibility, of course. is that the EPP 
in Spanish is simply different from the EPP in English. in that the former may be 
satisfied by a wider range of categories, but this is not a very appealing solution. A 
more tempting possibility is to say that the EPP is the same in Spanish and English, 
but that (some) locative and temporal adverbials in Spanish have a different 
categorial status than their equivalents in English. 
This actually has some 
plausibility, in that it has been known for a long time that Spanish locatives and 
temporals display a number of nominal characteristics. For instance, a number of 
locatives require the preposition de 'of in order to take an object: 
(37)a 
b. 
c. 
encima de la mesa 
on 
ofthe table 
'on top ofthe table' 
detnis de la casa 
behind of the house 
'behind the house' 
enfrente de la igiesia 
facing 
of the church 
'facing the church' 
Requiring a default preposition in order to take an object is a property of nouns (and 
adjectives), but not of prepositions. Pavon Lucero (1 999) points out as well that 
these locatives, unlike ordinary prepositions, may themselves be the object of a 
preposition when within a DP: 
(38)a 
b. 
Se ha roto 
[el jaron de encima de la mesa] 
SE has broken the vase 
of on 
ofthe table 
??Se ha roto 
[el jaron de sobre la mesa] 
SE has broken the vase of on 
the table 
'The vase on top of the table has broken.' 
This suggests that encima de fa mesa in (38a) is a DP (or NP), not a PP. 

TIlE EPP IN SPANISH 
207 
Another sign of nominal characteristics of some locatives is that basic 
locatives like aqui 'here' and ali 'there' can occupy argwnent positions ordinarily 
reserved for OP's, unlike their English counterparts:20 
(39)a. 
b. 
(40)a. 
b. 
Aqui me 
da 
miedo. 
here me-OAT gives fear 
Am no 
me 
gusta. 
there NEG me-OAT pleases 
"'Here scares me. (cf. This place scares me.) 
1*1 don't like there. (cf. I don't like that place.) 
Even more suggestive is the fact that these locatives can trigger plural agreement, as 
in (41 ), and can raise, as in (42). 
(41) 
Aqui y am me 
gustan. 
here and there meÿOAT please 
'I like here and there.' 
(42) 
Aqui parece darle 
miedo. 
here seems givc-INF-him fear 
'Here seems to scare him. ' 
As Oavies and Dubinsky (this volume) point out, these are typical nominal 
properties. 
Crucially, these facts show that these locatives seems to have phi­
features (allowing for agreement, as in (41». and case-features (allowing for raising, 
as in (42», Le.,just the features that may have the EPP property. 
This area is clearly worthy of further exploration, but at this point we may 
conclude'that it is at least plausible that certain locatives satisfY the EPP in Spanish, 
given that they behave like OP's in significant ways. 
If we assume that null 
locatives with these properties exist as well, it is then possible that it is this type of 
element that satisfies the EPP in cases where there is nothing overt in the preverbal 
position. The Spanish EPP under this view is the standard one; what makes the 
apparent verb-initial order possible is the existence of null locatives with OP 
properties?1 
Thus the fact that Spanish allows clauses with an apparent verb-initial order in 
which there is no definiteness effect on the postverbal subject is not necessarily the 
clear evidence against an EPP requirement in this language that it appeared to be at 
first. 
As we have seen, there is some evidence for the existence of null 
locatives/temporals. and it is conceivable that it is these which satisfY the EPP in 
those cases in which the subject does not raise. 

208 
GRANT GOODALL 
3.2 Quantifier scope 
We now turn to the fact that quantified preverbal subjects in Spanish seem to have 
their scope frozen in place, as we saw earlier in (2), repeated here as (43). 
(43)a. 
A quien dices 
que cada senador amaba? 
whom say-2ps that each senator loves 
b. 
A quien dices 
que amaba cada senador? 
whom 
say-2ps Ŵhat loves each senator 
'Who do you say that every senator loved?' 
As we saw, (b) is ambiguous, whereas in (a) cada senador must have narow scope. 
Uribe-Etxebaria (1992) argued that this freezing of the scope is a sign of A'­
movement. 
This A'-movement property of the preverbal subject would be 
completely unexpected if Spanish has an EPP requirement, since EPP-induced 
movement of the subject to a preverbal position should exhibit only A-movement 
properties. 
However, let us take a new look at this contrast between (43a) and (b) from 
the perspective of the theory of quantifiers of Hornstein 1 999. Hornstein proposes 
that the freezing of scope in a particular position is not a property of A'-movement 
per se, but is characteristic of quantified DP's that are in positions of "informational 
demand." This follows from the following three assumptions: that within a copy 
theory of movement, all copies but one are deleted, that a copy which is in an 
informationally important position will need to be the one which survives, and that 
the position of the surviving copy is the one which determines scope. Now it is 
uncontroversial that there is some informational demand on the preverbal subject in 
Spanish, and indeed this is expected given the fact that there are (at least) two 
possible positions for the subject, just as we expect informational demand on shifted 
objects, in languages in which this is possible, since there is also another position in 
which objects can occur (see Chomsky 1999).22 Thus independently of the type of 
movement involved, preverbal subjects are in a position of some informational 
demand, which in Hornstein's theory means that a quantified DP in that position will 
have its scope frozen. 
So we are now able to explain the contrast in (43) while maintaining the idea 
that it is the EPP which forces the subject to move to a preverbal position. In fact. 
this account of (43) has an advantage over that proposed by Uribe-Etxebarria in 
terms of A'-movement. Many speakers have reported to me that they find the 
contrast between (43a) and (b) very weak, or even non-existent; that is, they at least 
marginally allow a wide-scope reading for cada senador in (43a) (see Gutierrez­
Rexach 1996 for discussion of some of the issues involved). This kind of variability 
injudgments is surprising if the contrast simply involves presence vs. absence of A'· 
movement, but makes more sense if what is at stake is the amount of informational 
demand on the preverbal subject position. As we have seen, there is some such 
demand, but we have also seen that preverbal subjects are allowed in discourse-

THE EPP IN SPANISH 
209 
neutral contexts, suggesting that the demand is not as great as in the case of topics or 
fronted focused phrases. This intermediate status of the infonnational demand on 
the preverbal subject position, combined with Hornstein's theory of scope, could 
then explain why the contrast in (43) is relatively weak. 
3.3 Word order with fronted wh-IJocused phrase 
We now turn to the final argument that there is no EPP effect in Spanish, which 
involved clauses in which a wh-phrase or focused phrase has been fronted. If there 
is an EPP requirement, we would expect to find the whlfocused phrase within the CP 
layer followed by the preverbal subject in SPEC ofT, but this is not what happens. 
Instead, we find that the subject is obligatorily postverbal in structures like this, as 
we saw in (6) and (7). repeated here as (44) and (45). 
(44) 
*EL LlBRO Juan compro (no la revista). 
the book 
boUght not the magazine 
'THE BOOK John bought (not the magazine).' 
cf. 
tl'EL LIBRO compro Juan (no la revista). 
the book bought 
not the magazine 
(45) 
"'Que Juan compro? 
what 
bought 
'What did Juan buy?' 
cf. 
tl'Que compro Juan? 
what bought 
As discussed earlier, if there is no EPP and preverbal subjects are the result of A'­
movement, then it is at least conceivable that such movement would prevent 
fronting of the wh-/focused phrase. 
There is one obvious way to try to preserve the EPP while still accounting for 
(44)-(45). If Spanish has obligatory T -to-C movement, we could then claim that the 
subject does occupy SPEC of T in the well-formed counterparts of (44)-(45), but 
that the verb has moved to a position to its left, just as occurs in wh-questions in 
English. This would indeed solve the problem of (44)-(45), but unfortunately, the 
thrust of the literature of the past several years is that T -to-C movement does not 
occur in environments like these in Spanish. 
Let us now consider some of the evidence that has led to this conclusion. We 
will examine three main arguments against T -to-C movement in wh-questions in 
Spanish, involving properties of embedded clauses, auxiliaries, and adverb 
placement, before returning to the problem of how to account for (44)-(45). 
First, in languages in which T -to-C raising does occur, it is at least very 
common for this raising to be blocked in embedded clauses. perhaps because the C 
position is filled with a null complementizer. This is illustrated for English in (46). 

210 
(46)a. 
b. 
GRANT GOODALL 
I don't know [what [John will buy]J 
*1 don't know [what will [John t buyn 
In Spanish, however, this sort of contrast between matrix and embedded clauses 
does not occur (even though complementizers are generally obligatory in tensed 
embedded clauses), as seen in (47).23 
(47)a. 
b. 
* No se 
que Juan com pro. 
no know-} ps what 
bought 
No se 
que compro Juan. 
no know-I ps what bought 
'I don't know what Juan bought.' 
As (47a) shows, the subject may not follow the wh-phrase in an embedded clause, 
contrary to what occurs in English (46a). This suggests that T -to-C movement is not 
what is responsible for the word order found in wh-clauses. 
Second, T -to-C movement typically affects the auxiliary, if there is one, 
leaving the main verb behind, as seen in English (48). 
(48)a. 
b. 
When has [John's mother t danced]? 
*When bas danced [John's mother I 
]1 
But in Spõsh, as Ord6iiez (1997) points out, this is impossible, as seen in (49). 
(49)a 
*A qu;en hahia la madre de Juan visto? 
who 
had the mother of 
seen 
'Who had Juan's mother seen?' 
b. 
A qUien hahia vlsto la madre de Juan? 
who 
had 
seen the mother of 
'Who had Juan's mother seen? 
It is tempting to say that (49a) is out because auxiliaries in Spanish may never be 
separated from the verb, but Ord6ftez shows that at least in principle, the auxiliary 
and the verb are separable, as in (50), where something like T-to-C movement seems 
to have applied to the infinitive auxiliary. 
(50) 
De haberlo yo sahido. no Ie 
habria dicho nada. 
of had-it 
I 
known no you-DA T have 
said 
nothing 
'Had I known, I would not have told you anything.' 

THE EPP IN SPANISH 
21 1 
Thus if Spanish truly had T -to-C raising in the context of a focused phrase or wh­
phrase, then we would expect that the auxiliary alone would be able to raise, which 
(49a) shows to be impossible. 
Finally, it has been argued by Goodall (1993) and SWier (1994) that the 
placement of certain types of adverbs also provides evidence that T stays within TP 
in wh-questions (and presumably in focus constructions as well). This may be seen 
with adverbs such as barely, which are able to appear to the left of T, as seen in· 
(5 I a). When can here raises to C, as in (Sib), then of course barely can no longer 
appear to its left, as we would expect, and instead we get (SIc). 
(51)a. 
b. 
c. 
You barely can see the screen from that seat. 
*Froni which seat barely can you see the screen? 
From which seat can you barely t see the screen? 
In Spanish, the adverb apenas 'barely' seems to occupy the same position to the left 
ofT (here occupied by the main verb puedes), as seen in (S2a). 
(52)a. 
b. 
Ttl apenas puedes ver la pant alia desde ese asiento. 
you barely can-2ps see the screen 
from that seat 
'You can barely see the screen from that seat.' 
Desde cual asiento apenas puedes ver la pan/alia? 
from which seat 
barely can-2ps see the screen 
'From which seat can you barely see the screen? 
But when there is wh-movement, as in (52b), then the adverb is able to remain in its 
preverbal position, suggesting that the verb has remained in T (and not raised up to 
C). This contrast between (SIb) and (52b) would seem mysterious ifboth languages 
had obligatory T-to-C movement in wh-questions. 
So we conclude that the inability of a preverbal subject to cooccur with a 
fronted wh-phrase or focused phrase cannot be explained by invoking T -to-C 
movement, and (44)-(45) thus continue to pose a serious problem for an account of 
Spanish which claims there is an active EPp.24.2S 
In order to begin solving this problem, let us consider why it might be that T­
to-C movement occurs at all in some languages, and how it is that others seem to do 
without it. We will adopt the standard assumption that C may contain a feature that 
induces overt movement of a wh-/focused phrase to its SPEC, and let us assume as 
well, in the spirit of Rizzi 1 996. that T may also contain such a feature. There are at 
least two types of motivation for this latter assumption. First, a number oflanguages 
exhibit special agreement morphology on the verb in clauses where a wh-phrase has 
been extracted (see, e.g., Chung 1982, Georgopoulos 1985, 1991, Finer 1998), 
suggesting that there is a wh-feature of some sort on one of the inflectional heads 

212 
GRANT GOODALL 
(i.e., within TP). Second, fronting ofa nominative wh-phrase does not trigger T-to­
C movement, as seen in (53). 
(53)a. 
b. 
Who ate the rice? 
·Who did eat the rice? (OK only with emphatic reading) 
This suggests that moving the wh-phrase to SPEC of T accomplishes the same thing 
that T -to-C raising ordinarily accomplishes, thus making the latter unnecessary in 
this case. This makes sense if there is a wh-feature on T: a nominative wh-phrase 
checks this feature when it is in SPEC ofT, to which it is forced to move anyway by 
the EPP, but for other wh-phrases, which move to SPEC of C directly, T must raise 
to C in order for checking to occur. 
The basic feature properties necessary to implement this idea are given in 
(54).26 
(54)a. 
b. 
c. 
C has a Q feature (triggers overt movement) 
T has a Q feature (does not trigger overt movement) 
T is able to move to ų7 
Consider the derivation of a sentence like (53a). Who is attracted to SPEC of T, at 
which point its case feature is checked and it checks the phi-features and Q-feature 
on T. As the derivation continues, who also moves to SPEC ofC.28 Since T does not 
need to move to C for any reason, it does not. Now consider the derivation of a 
sentence with a non-subject wh-phrase, as in (55). 
(55) 
Who can John see? 
The derivation proceeds normally as TP is built up: John moves to SPEC of T, 
where its case feature is checked and it checks the phi-features on T. The Q-feature 
on T is left unchecked for the time being. After C is merged, who will need to move 
to SPEC ofC, attracted by the Q-feature on C. As for the remaining Q-feature on T, 
there are two possibilities: who could have checked it by moving to SPEC ofT on its 
way to SPEC of C, or T could move to C first, thus allowing who to move directly to 
SPEC of C, where it would then be able to check the Q-features on both T and C. 
The second possibility requires only one instance of movement of the wh-phrase 
who, and perhaps because of this is the option that English chooses (although it also 
involves one instance of head movement).29 In embedded clauses where this second 
possibility is not allowed (because T -to-C movement is not allowed), it may be the 
first possibility that is chosen. 
I have now sketched an analysis of T-to-C movement according to which this 
process. occurs as a way to facilitate checking of the Q-features on both T and C. I 

 
TIlE EPP IN SPANISH 
213 
will assume that the Q features on T and C are universal and that T -to-C movement 
is simply one strategy available to allow both of these features to be checked. lfit is 
true, as argued earlier, that Spanish does not have T-to-C movement, then it must 
use some other strategy to check these features. I propose that the strategy Spanish 
uses, in effect, is to move the wh-phrase first to SPEC of T and then to SPEC of C, 
checking each Q-feature in turn.30 To accomplish this, Spanish has the properties in 
(56) (in place of those in (54) for English): 
(56)a 
C has a Q feature (triggers overt movement) 
b. 
T has a Q feature (triggers overt movement) 
Consider first a clause containing a subject wh-phrase. This phrase is atracted first 
to SPEC of T, where it checks the phi-features and Q-feature on T, and then to 
SPEC ofC, where it checks the Q-feature on SPEC ofC, as shown in (57). 
(57) 
[cp whSUBJ [TP t [vp t ... 
The result, then, is essentially the same as in English. When we have a non-subject 
wh-phrase, however, things will play out differently. This phrase will move to 
SPEC ofT because of the Q-feature on T which forces overt movement. We would 
ordinarily expect the subject to be attracted to SPEC of T as well, by virtue of the 
EPP feature on the phi-features on T. but I will assume the descriptive generalization 
in (58). 
(58) 
Only one feature on a head may have an EPP-feature (force overt 
movement). 
This generalization falls out straightforwardly if we assume, as was once standard, 
that movement to check a feature on head H must be to SPEC of H and that each 
head is limited to one such SPEC. This latter assumption in particular is no longer 
accepted uncritically (see Chomsky 1 995 and 1999), with the result that it is no 
longer clear how to derive (58). Descriptively, however, (58) seems to be correct, 
and I will adopt it here. The effect of it for our purposes is that it will be impossible 
to have an EPP-feature on both the phi-features (or some particular phi-feature) and 
the Q-feature. I will assume that the result is that the EPP feature is only on the Q­
feature, i.e., that only the Q-feature triggers overt movement.]1 This means, then, 
that although the wh-phrase moves overtly to SPEC of T, the subject has no reason 
to, 50 it remains in place, as shown in (59).32 
(59) 
rep whoB] [TP t [vp SUB] [vp '" t 

214 
GRANT GOODALL 
Given that the verb moves to T, this derives the obligatorily postverbal position of 
the subject that we observed in (45) (and in (44) as well, asswning that the fronting 
of focused phrases works in parallel fashion). 
Notice that T -to-C movement does not occur here, because it does not need to. 
Comparing (54) and (56), we see that the essential difference between English and 
Spanish is that the Q-feature on T triggers overt movement in Spanish but not in 
English. 
Once the former option is chosen, the need for T -to-C movement 
disappears, because the Q-feature on T will always be checked by an element in its 
SPEC. If the English-style option is chosen, then T -to-C movement becomes at 
least a possibility, as we have seen, as one way to ensure that the Q-feature on T will 
be checked. 
Given this analysis of the fronting of wh-/focused phrases in Spanish, let us 
now look more closely at the nature of the Q-feature on T, since this is the key 
element in the analysis. One question about it which arises is what determines 
whether or not it will appear on a given T. The answer seems to be that it appears 
on the T of the clause over which the wh-/focused phrase has scope. For example, in 
a sentence where a wh-phrase is extracted out of an embedded clause, Q is present 
only on the T of the matrix clause. This is seen clearly in (60), where the subject is 
obligatorily postverbal only in the matrix clause.J3 
(60)a 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Que quiere Juan que Maria compre? 
what wants 
that . 
buy 
Que qui ere Juan que compre Maria? 
what wants 
that buy 
*Que Juan quiere que Marfa compre? 
what 
wants that 
buy 
*Que Juan quiere que compre Maria? 
what 
wants that buy 
'What does Juan want Maria to buy?' 
Within our analysis, it must be that T of the embedded clause contains the usual EPP 
feature (i.e., no Q-feature). Notice that these facts parallel the behavior of T -to-C 
movement in English, which also occurs only in the matrix clause in examples like 
these. This is as we would expect. since T -to-C movement would have no reason to 
occur ifT does no contain a Q-feature. 
We now predict that when the wh-phrase has scope only over the embedded 
clause, as in an embedded question, the T of that embedded clause will have the Q 
feature. This is borne out by the fact that the word order in embedded questions 
parallels that of matrix questions: 
(61)a. *Quiero 
saber 
que Maria compr6. 
want-I ps know-INF what 
bought 

THE EPP IN SPANISH 
215 
b. 
Quiero 
saber 
que compro Marfa. 
want-l ps know-INF what bOught 
'I want to know what Marfa bought.' 
(6Ia) is out because there is nothing to attract the embedded subject Maria to the 
preverbal position. Q on T has already attracted the wh-phrase que there (on its way 
to SPEC of C), and given (58), T may have no other feature which triggers overt 
movement, so Maria must remain in place, as in (6tb). In English, of course, 
embedded questions do not display T -to-C movement, but as mentioned earlier, this 
may be because such movement is independently prohibited in this environment, so 
a well-fonned output is possible only if the wh-phrase checks the Q feature on T on 
its way to SPEC of C. Notice that this does not violate (58), because it is not the Q 
feature on T which triggers overt movement of the wh-phrase. The difference 
between Spanish (61a) and English (62), then, is that the Q feature on the embedded 
T in Spanish triggers overt movement, with the consequence that there will be no 
feature to trigger overt movement of the subject, whereas in English, the Q feature 
on the embedded T does not trigger overt movement. 
(62) 
I want to know what Mary bought. 
The embedded T does trigger overt movement of the subject Mary, and the Q 
feature on C triggers overt movement of the wh-phrase. 
It appears that in relative clauses, wh-movement is triggered by a feature 
distinct from that of wh-questions (or perhaps occurs for reasons other than feature­
checking altQether), so in this environment we do not expect to find a Q-feature on 
either C or T. That this is correct is shown by the relative clause in (63). 
(63) 
cl libro que Maria compro 
the book that 
bought 
'the book which Maria bought' 
Without a Q-feature on T, the usual EPP feature is able to force Maria to move to a 
preverbal position. 
Once again, this is also an environment in which T -to-C 
movement does not occur in English, as we would expect. 
Another question which arises is whether the Q-feature on T and the Q-feature 
on C always co-occur, as they have in all the examples we have seen so far. As we 
shall now see, the facts suggest that they do not. Specifically. it seems that the Q­
feature on T is present only when true quantifier-variable binding is established 
within the clause, whereas the Q-feature on C is not sensitive to this. This may be 
seen in the fact that when the fronted wh-phrase contains quantifier-variable binding 
within it, the subject may be preverbal, as noted by Ordonez (1997) (see also Rizzi 
1997). 

216 
GRANT GOODALL 
(64) 
[A cuat de estas chicas1 tu 
hermana habia visitado en Sicilia? 
which of these girls 
your sister 
had 
visited 
in Sicily 
'Which ofthese girls had your sister visited in Sicily?' 
This would appear to mean that the Q-feature is not present on T here. Another case 
of this comes from wh-questions with the equivalent of why. 
These have been 
widely observed to behave differently from other wh-questions in a number of 
languages, perhaps because they do not involve quantifier-variable binding of the 
usual sort (see Rizzi 1990, 1996). If this is true, then the fact that preverbal subjects 
are possible withpor que 'why' in Spanish is not a surprise: 
(65) 
Por que Juan compro el libro. 
why 
bought the book 
'Why did Juan buy the book?' 
Thus the data in (64) and (65) suggest that it is possible to have the Q-feature on C 
without simultaneously having it on T, because the Q-feature on T is used only for 
true quantifier-variable binding. We would now also expect that T-to-C movement 
would be prohibited in the English equivalents of these envirorpnent, but as the 
English translations of(64) and (65) show, this does not appear to be true. J have no 
explanation for this. 
We are now at the point where we can reach conclusions about the relevance 
of fronted wh-/focused phrases to the question of the existence of the EPP in 
Spanish. As we saw at the outset of this section, a naive view of the EPP would lead 
us to expect that a fronted wh-/focused phrase would be followed by the subject in 
SPEC ofT, but this is impossible in Spanish. We saw, however, that a closer look at 
T -to-C movement suggests that T has a feature that needs to be checked by the 
fronted wh-/focused phrase, and that if T -to-C movement does not occur, then the 
phrase will nced to check it in SPEC of T. This in tum gave us an explanation for 
the inability of the subject to be fronted in this environment: the Q-feature on T 
forces oven movement in Spanish, and a single head can only have one feature with 
this property. Thus the ttaditional EPP is inactive in this environment, but it is 
inactive for a principled reason and in a way which sits comfortably with the view 
that that there is an EPP in Spanish. If this analysis is on the right track, we may 
then conclude that fronted wh-/focused phrases do not provide evidence for the view 
that Spanish does not have an EPP. 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
We have now seen that there is substantial evidence in favor of the EPP in Spanish, 
and that the major evidence against it can be reanalyzed to be made consistent with 
the EPP in what appears to be an insightful way. The most obvious conclusion that 
we can draw from this is that the typology proposed in Alexiadou and 
Anagnostopoulou 1998, in which only non-null subject languages observe the 
traditional EPP involving XP-movement to SPEC of T. does not look very 

THE EPP IN SPANISH 
217 
promising at this point. Spanish is clearly a null subject language, yet what we have 
seen here suggests that it does have an EPP requirement. 
This is not a particularly welcome result, since it may lead us to a scenario in 
which languages differ arbitrarily as to whether they have the EPP. 
This could be 
avoided if we say that the EPP is universal, which would be conceptually more 
pleasing, but this idea · runs into the empirical problem that Alexiadou and 
Anagnostopoulou (1998) and McCloskey (1996b) provide what seems to be 
compelling evidence that Greek and Irish, respectively, do not have the EPP (at 
least, not in the traditional sense). Now Spanish may give us hope that what was 
once thought not to be an EPP language will tum out to be one upon closer 
inspection, but at present that is only a hope with regard to Greek and Irish. 
It is tempting to say that Spanish shows that the EPP must be part of VG 
because the child would have no access to evidence for its existence, but this does 
not seem to be true. First, there is positive syntactic evidence for the EPP in the 
form of sentences like (22), repeated here as (66). 
(66) 
A quien crees 
que Juan Ie 
dio el premio? 
who 
think-2ps that 
him-DAT gave the prize 
'Who do you think that Juan gave the prize åo?' 
The fact that the subject of the embedded clause does not block extraction should 
inform the child that this DP is in SPEC of T and not somewhere higher within the 
left periphery. since in that case it would block extraction. It is quite reasonable to 
assume that sentences such as (66) would be accessible to the child. 
Further evidence for the child may come from the fact that preverbal subjects 
are possible in discourse-neutral contexts. as we saw in (8). repeated here as (67). 
(67) 
a. 
b. 
"Que pas6? 
what happened 
'What happened?' 
Juan me regaI6 el anillo en el parque. 
me give 
the ring in the park 
'J uan gave me the ring in the park.' 
#En el parque me regale el anillo. 
in the park 
me gave 
the ring 
'In the park he gave me the ring.' 
If we make the assumption that phrases within the CP layer always have some 
pragmatically marked value (or very high information demand, in the sense of 
Hornstein 1999), then the fact that (67a) is possible in this context should suggest to 
the child that the preverbal subject is not within the CP layer.3s Since this leaves 
SPEC of T as the only other plausible option. this should inform the child that there 
is an EPP requirement. 

2 1 8  
GRANT GODALL 
Thust although the results of this paper may encourage us to look more 
seriously at the possibility of the EPP being universalt they are not incompatible 
with the possibility that languages vary with respect to the presence or absence of 
the EPP. 
NOTES 
• 
Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the 2911 Linguistic Symposium on Romance 
Languages (University of Michigan), New Mexico State University, Arizona State University, the 
Workshop on Gmmmatical Functions in Transformational Grammar (University of Illinois), Universidad 
Nacional del Comahue, the 1011 Colloquium on Genemtive Grammar (Universidad de Alcala) and the 611 
Encuentro Internacional de Ling1listica en el Noroeste (Universidad de Sonora). I have benefited greatly 
from the comments and suggestions of the audiences at these places, and I am especially grateful to Mark 
Baker, 
Elena Benedicto, Heles Contreras. Lori Donath, Sam Epstein, Paula Kempchinsky, Pino 
Longobardi, Pascual Masullo, Cecilia Poletto, Dan Seely, Myriam Uribe-Etxebarfa and the anonymous 
reviewers of this paper for their useful suggestions. Special thanks to Bill Davies and Stan Dubinsky for 
their many detailed comments on this paper and for their excellent work in organizing the earlier 
workshop upon which this volume is based. 
For possible ways of addressing these problems without use of the EPP, see Martin 1999 and Epstein 
and Seely 1999. 
1 
I will not address here the question of which feature on T (out of ease, Person, Number, or perhaps 
others) is the one which has the EPP property. 
3 
The term "Spanish" is of course an abstraction, and perhaps not a very useful one in this case. The 
data that I will present here are representative of most of mainland Latin American Spanish and at least 
some of Spain, but there are some significant differences between these varieties of Spanish and the many 
others not discussed here. 
The data presented here are the result of work with a large number of 
informants, most (but not all) of whom are from northern Mexico. 
I am using the term 'focus' to refer to constructions such as (6), in which the fronted phrase has no 
corresponding resumptive clitic and in which there is typically a contmstive reading. I will use the term 
'topic' to refer to cases like (i), also known as 'Clitic Left-Dislocation'. 
(i) 
El libro, Juan 10 compro. 
the book 
it bought 
'The book, John bought' 
Here there is an obligatory resumptive clitic when the fronted topic is a definite object DP. There is 
no contrastive reading and no requirement that the subject be postverbal. 
Both (6) and (i) involve fronting ofan object When it is a subject which is fronted. the distinction 
between the focus and topic constructions becomes less obvious, since there is no resumptive clitic: 
(ii) 
Focus 
JUAN compre) el libro (no Maria). 
'Juan bought the book (not Maria).' 
(iii) 
Topic 
Juan, compre) el libro. 
'Juan, bought the book. ' 
Still, differing intonation patterns (roughly indicated by all-capitals in (ii) and by a comma in (iii)) and 
pragmatic contexts suggest that the distinction is nonetheless valid in the case of subjects. 

THE EPP IN SPANISH 
219 
5 A'-fronted elements also sem to have a special intonation patern different from preverbal subjects, 
but I will not explore this area here. 
6 
See Goodall 200 I for further discussion of the idea that the CP layer is restricted to phrases such as 
topics and operators, and se Kempchinsky 2001 for analysis of the nature ofPP preposing in Spanish. 
7 
Creating true minimal pairs that test for reference possibilities of subjects vs. topiǼ without 
introducing unwanted pragmatic interference is vel)' difficult I am grateful to Giuseppe Longobardi and 
Stan Dubinsky for help in improving these examples, though they are not responsible for any remaining 
errors. 
8 
Notice that pragmatically, it is much more plausible for eJ director in (a) and (b) to refer to the 
director of the film and not to Almodovar, given that one ordinarily gives prizes to directors of films, not 
to the people portrayed. It is thus all the more interesting that there is a contrast betwen (a) and (b), 
despite the strong pragmatic preference for only one of the readings. 
9 
By "subject" here I of course mean "non-topicalized subject" (9a) gives an example of a subject 
which has been topicalized. which is clear from the fact that it apears to the left of a topicalized direct 
object Cases in which a subject appears immediately to the left of the verb, however, will generaly be 
ambiguous in terms of the linear string betwen a topicalized and a non-topicaliz.ed structure, ǽthough the 
intonation and the pragmatic context do differentiate the two. Unless otherwise noted in what follows, 
what I refer to as "preverbal subjects" will be non-topicalized. 
10 As would be expected, (IS) remains grammatical when Juan is topicalized. making the sentence more 
parallel to (14): 
(i) 
A Juan, nadie 10 ba visto. 
I I  Ordoilez 1997 and Alexiadou and Anagnostopoulou 1998 are two recent attemptS to explain this 
contrast while maintaining the idea that topics and preverbal subjects ocupy the same position. Ord6ftez 
suggests that the ungrammaticality of cases like (14) is due to an incompatibility between the acusative 
ctitic and the negative quantifier. But this type of explanation seems ad hoc and uninsightfuJ compared to 
Rizzi's (1997) proposal that quantifiers must bind a variable and that clitics don't count as variables. 
Notice that this phenomenon pertains not just to negative quantifiers: 
(i) 
* AJgo, 10 dijiste. 
'Something, you said it' 
In addition, it is bare quantifiers that resist topicalization, not negative expressions in general: 
(ii) 
Ninguna de esas cosas., las tienes til. 
'None of those things, you have them.' 
If (14) is out because of an incompatibility between the negative quantifier and the accusative clitic, 
it is not clear why (ii) is not out also. In Rizzi's (1997) account, on the other hand, (ii) is allowed because 
ninguna 'none' is.able to bind a variable within the topic phrase. 
Alexiadou and Anagnostopoulou (1998) atempt to show that bare quantifiers are possible with a clitic 
when they are specific. This suggests that specific bare quantifiers don't bind variables, so they require a 
resumptive cHtic. But this doesn't addres the fact that in Spanish the same quantifiers with apparently 
the same interpretation show a contrast with respect to topic vs. subject position, as we have seen. It 
appears that the topic position never allows binding of a variable, while the subject position does. 
11 
There is some diǾgrement in the literature about the grammaticality of sentences like (2 J). Masullo 
(1992) finds them ungrammatical, while Ord6ftez reports that they are grammatical. My own informants 
report that (21) is seriously degraded (in contrast to (22), which is perfect), so I will proceed on the 
asumption that (21) is in fact bad. 

220 
GRANT GOODALL 
IJ 
Overt subjects are possible in infinitival clauses in some contexts in standard Spanish, but they are 
generally restricted to being postverbal (see Hemanz (1999) for an overview). 
14 
The assumption that fronted wh-phrases and focused phrases occupy the same position works well as 
a first approximation and I will continue to adopt it here, but it may not hold up under closer examination. 
Barbosa (1999), for instance, presents a number of arguments from Italian (based on data from Rizzi 
1997) that they occupy distinct positions. First, focused phrases can be followed by a topic, as in (i). but 
wh-phrases cannot, as in (ii): 
(i) 
QUESTO a Gianni gli dovrete dire. 
'TIllS to GiaMi we should say.' 
(ii) 
·Che cosa a Gianni gli dovremmo dire? 
'What to Gianni should we sayT 
Second, a focused phrase can be followed by a subject, as in (iii), but a wh-phrnse cannot, as in (iv). 
(iii) 
QUESTO Gianni ha detto (non quello che pensavi). 
'mrs Gianni said (not what you thought). ' 
(iv) 
·Che cosa Gianni ha detto? 
'What has Gianni said?, 
Third, a focused phrase may marginally be followed by a wh-phrase in embedded clauses, as in (v). 
(v) 
?Mi domando A GIANNI che cosa abbiano detto (non B Piero). 
'I wonder TO GIANNI what they said (not to Piero).' 
In addition, Liptak (200) claims that in Hungarian, a focused phrase is possible in certain syntactic 
environments where a wh-phrase is not, suggesting that they occupy distinct positions. None of these 
facts from Italian and Hungarian appears to hold in Spanish, but focused phrases and wh-phrases do 
display differing behavior with regard to negation that may perhaps be attributable to distinct positions. 
As is well known, postverbal negative expressions generally require the presence of no to the left of the 
verb, while preverbal negative expressions prohibit it: 
(vi)a 
*(No) ha venido nadie. 
b. 
Nadie (*no) ha venido. 
"No one has come . •  
However, when a negative object undergoes wh-movement, no is still required. but when it is focused, no 
is prohibited: 
(vii) 
[A ninguno de cuAles estudiantes] *(no) has visto? 
'Which students haven't you seen any of?' 
(vii) 
A NINGUNO (*no) has visto. 
'NO ONE have you seen.' 
I won't attempt an analysis of this here, but it is conceivable that this contrast between (vii) and (viii) 
might be due to different positions for focused phrases and wh-phrases. 
IS (27) is ungrammatical under a neutral reading. As we would expect, though, it improves when tu 
lraduccion 'your translation' is focused, with appropriate intonation and a contrastive reading (parallel to 
(26», since then the focused phrase is in SPEC ofFQcO, allowing for extraction. 

THE EPP IN SPANISH 
16 The fact that (32) is perfect with a resumptive object clitic in the adjunct clause, as in (i), 
(I) 
Estos libros fueron tirados [sin haberlos lefdoJ. 
'These books were thrown out [without having read them].' 
shows that the problem with (32) does not involve control of the PRO subject of the adjunct clause. 
17 See Goodall 1993 for additional discussion of this point 
221 
18 Though I won't explore this option further here, the evidence we have examined is perhaps also 
consistent with the idea that the preverbal subject is lower than fronted topics, focused phrases, and who 
phrases but still higher than SPEC ofT, as is argued for Italian by Poletto (2000). Also worthy of further 
exploration are the possible implications for the analysis presented here of the idea that there are two 
distinct subject positions within the inflectional layer (se McCloskey 1997 for an overview and 
Cardinaletti 1997 for arguments from Romance). 
19 One would then predict that like Spanish, Chinese would allow postverbal subjects without a 
definiteness effect This prediction cannot be tested with unergative clauses, since in this case postverbal 
subjects are not allowed (perhaps because the verb does not raise high enough). With unacusative 
clauses, on the other hand, postverbal subjects are possible, and a definiteness effect is observed: 
(i) 
Lai 
Ie 
yige reno 
come ASP one man 
'A man came.' 
(ii) 
·Lai 
Ie 
tamen. 
come ASP they 
'They came.' 
This is surprising if Chinese allows null adverbials, because such an adverbial should be a possible 
subject for (ii). Li suggests that these facts show that the definiteness effect should not be derived from 
properties of the expletive itself, under the assumption that the subject of (ii) is not necessarily an 
expletive. 
20 As an anonymous reviewer points out, the more complex locatives somewhere, nowhere, anywhere, 
and elsewhere are able to occupy DP argument positions, as is the temporal now. This may be seen in 
cases such as the following: 
(i) 
I don't think anywbere had depresed me more, or made me want to live less. 
Guardian, Nov. 24, 2000 (p. 8, col. 6) 
(ii) 
If we have to go out, find somewhere near here that's nice and old. 
Independent, Weekend Review, Sept. 30, 2000 (p. 20, col. 3) 
(iii) 
Now appears to be the time to buy your package holiday for next summer. 
Times, Oct 21, 2000 (Travel p. 4, col. I) 
At least with regard to the locatives, this is not surprising, since they resemble DP's in their internal 
structure. 
21 There is evidence that temporal expressions also display some DP properties. Eguren (1999) shows, 
for instance, that temporals like hoy 'today' and manana 'tomorrow' can be modified by temporal 
nominals such as days of the week and suggests that this is because of the nominal character of hoy and 
mamma: 

222 
(i) 
(ii) 
hoy lunes 
today Monday 
mailana domingo 
tomorrow Sunday 
GRANT GOODALL 
It is interesting to note that this is impossible in English without a pause between the two words. In 
addition. Eguren shows that many temporal and locative expressions can take the diminutive suffix -ito, 
which is otherwise limited to nouns and adjectives: 
(iii) 
aborita 
ayercito 
aquicito 
'now' 
'yesterday' 
'here' 
There is extensive dialectal variation with regard to this phenomenon, but most dialects seem to allow at 
least a few of these forms (see Eguren 199 for a larger Jist). 
Z2 The concept of "informational demand" clearly deserves a fuller exploration than what I can provide 
here. 
Hornstein's basic idea. however, is that topic and focus positions are canonical examples of 
positions of high infonnational demand, while subject and object positions in a language like English are 
canonical examples of positions of no informational demand. What I am suggesting here is that the 
preverbal subject position in Spanish is of an intermediate status, with less informational demand than a 
topic but more than an English subject. 
23 This may not be true for all dialects, however. See Masullo 1992 and Bakovic 1998 for examples of 
dialects in which the pattern in (41) does not hold for all types of wh-words. 
l4 
For further discussion on the issue of T-to-C movement in Spanish and Romance, see Ordoilez 1991 
and Barbosa 1999. 
25 Groos and Bok-Bennema (1986) and Zubizareta (1998) pursue approaches in which the fronted wh­
Ifocused phrase competes for the same position with the preverbal subject. 
These approaches are 
consistent with the idea that Spanish lacks T-to-C movement and bear some resemblance to the analysis 
to be proposed below. However, we have seen evidence that the preverbal subject is not in the same 
position as the fronted wh-lfocused phrase, so we cannot maintain these approaches without modification. 
16 I will use "Q" as the feature label, in an attempt to be neutral between wh-phrases and focused 
phrases. As will be discussed belOW, it is probably an oversimplification to say that C and T have the 
same feature in any event, but I will maintain this oversimplification here for convenience. 
27 I am not using a feature on C here to motivate movement of T, because 1 just want T to move to C 
when it needs to in order to yield convergence. There is at present very little consensus on how head 
movement of this type works, or even if it exists, but it is not implausible that it is not motivated by the 
type of features that drive phrasal movemenl Sec Chomsky 1999, Mahajan 200. and Pesetsky and 
Tocrego 2001 for a range of recent work on this topic. 
2J Notice that (54a) forces us to assume that subject wh-phrases move to SPEC of C (as in (53a» , 
yielding an instance of "vacuous movement." See Campos 1997 for arguments in favor of such an 
analysis from Spanish (and Grimshaw 1997 for a recent analysis which does not make use of this 
assumption). 
29 As mentioned in footnote 21, it may be that head movement is fundamentally different from phrasal 
movement and is thus not treated the same way by economy conditions. 
lO This follows in spirit the analysis that I proposed in Goodall 1993. 

mE EPP IN SPANISH 
223 
]1 
This may follow from the principle that a specific property takes precedence over a more general one. 
The phi-fearures are more general in the sense that they are present in all tensed clauses, whereas the Q­
feature is only a property of a few specific types of clauses. 
]l 
Since the Q-feature is what triggers movement of the wh-phrase to SPEC of T, this would seem to be 
an instance of A'-movement. Diesing (1990), I believe, was the first to propose that SPEC ofT may be a 
possible landing site for A'-movement (see also Goodall 1 99Ĉ and 1993). 
]] In some dialects this does not sem to be true, however. See Torrego 1982 and Bakovic 1998 for 
discussion. 
14 See, for example, the discussion in Rizi ]997 showing that relative operators appear in SPEC of 
Force, in contrast to the SPEC of Focus position of wh-phrases in questions. 
3S 
This issue merits further exploration. As Mark Baker points out to me, there are languages (Mohawk, 
for example) in which there is good evidence that arguments that have undergone A'-movement to the left 
periphery do not seem to have any special informational demand. This might then mean that the child 
could not conclude from the information content of preverbal subjects that they must be in SPEC of T in 
Spanish. 


DIANE MASSAM 
ON PREDICATION AND THE STATUS OF SUBJECTS 
IN NIUEAN* 
O. INTRODUCTION 
This paper explores the issue of subjecthood in an atempt to ascertain if the 
grammatical function subject has any application in Niuean, an Oceanic language of 
the Tongic subgroup (Pawley 1966. 1 967). Various views of subjecthood will be 
discussed, and various asymmetries among arguments in Niuean will be examined. 
The claim will be that in Niuean there is no grammatical division of a sentence into 
subject and predicate, but rather into core predicate and arguments, with predicate 
fronting rather than subject extemalization satisfying the Extended Projection 
Principle (EPP: Chomsky 1981, 1 995). This predicts that there should be no 
grammatical subject in Niuean, and it is shown that this prediction is upheld. Among 
the verbal arguments, agent and patient behave identically for raising and deletion. 
One argument is distinguished as thematically highest for binding and control, and 
one case - absolutive - is distinguished as obligðtory, but neither the highest 
argument, nor the one with absolutive case acts as grammatical (EPP) subject. 
1 .  SUBJECTHOOD 
It has become part of general knowledge that a sentence consists of a subject and a 
predicate. For example, Harper's English Grammar (Opdycke 1965:222) states that: 
"A sentence is a set of words complete in itself, containing subject and predicate." 
This insight is encoded in formal grammar in various ways, such as the Final 1 Law 
of Relational Gramar, the Extended Projection Principle (EPP) of Government and 
Binding theory and Minimalism, and in the concept of pivot, of Dixon (1979) and 
Foley and Van Valin (1984). Both the Final 1 Law and the EPP effectively state that 
a clause must have a subject.1 In spite of the fact that subject is considered an 
essential notion in grammar, a clear definition of subject has been elusive. In most 
discussions. subject is identified as the NP which exhibits the largest subset of 
certain properties, such as bearing nominative case, having the ability to be raised or 
to float quantifiers. triggering agreement on the verb, having the ability to participate 
in inversion, and so on (egs. Harley 1 995. Keenan 1976b, Kroeger 1992. Schachter 
1996). Theoretically, subject has been defined along traditional lines in terms of a 
225 
William D. Davies and Stanley Dubinsky (eds.), Objects and other subjects: 
Grammatical junctions,junctional categories. and conjigurationality, 225-246. 
o 200 I Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands. 

226 
DIANE MASSAM 
fundamental relation of predication which partitions a sentence into subject and 
predicate. Rothstein (1983) provides the following formulation ofthis view (see also 
Dechaine 1 993). 
(I) Predication (Rothstein 1 983: 19) 
A predicate is an open one-place syntactic function requiring saturation, or closure by 
an argument.. The argument is subject... The paradigm case of predication is the simple 
declarative sentence, where the VP is predicated of an NP, for example [ [JohnlNP 
[saw Mary]Vp ] where the VP is predicated of the NP John. 
In GBfMinimalism attempts are made to combine the two views of subjecthood 
above, by relating subject properties to a structural position created by predication. 
Through predication, one NP is external to the predicate, i.e. it is in the specifier of a 
functional projection above the verbal projection. Because of its superior structural 
position, this NP participates in operations that other NPs in the sentence do not 
participate in, such as raising and inversion. 
In early generative research. the predication relation in a basic transitive clause 
was established at D-structure (eg. Williams 1980, 1981). With the VP-internal 
subject hypothesis however (eg. Fukui and Speas 1986, Kitagawa 1986, Koopman 
and Sportiche 1988, Kuroda 1988), it developed that even in a basic transitive 
sentence, the predication position for the subject was distinct from its thematic 
position so that predication belonged to a higher, grammatical domain of the tree. In 
this view. the grammatical subject is always created by extraction from the theta 
domain. usually of the highest argwnent, by a process known as extemalization. 
which takes place due to an Extended Projection Principle (EPP) feature in INFL 
(Chomsky 1995). This analysis of basic clause structure creates two levels at which 
subjecthood can apply, one within the thematic domain, and one at the level of 
predication (eg. Dixon 1979, Guilfoyle, Hung, and Travis 1992, Kroeger 1992. 
Manning 1 996). Soon thereafter, an additional functional projection was posited 
above V, namely the light verb (v). This reinforces the internal asymmetry (Marantz 
1 984) between the thematic subject and the thematic object. This is illustrated in (2). 
(2) 
IP 
/'.. 
Gr-sbj 
/'.. 
vP 
/'.. 
8-sbj 
v' 
/'.. 
v 
VP 
/"-.. 
V 
DP 

. J  
ON PREDICATION AND mE STATUS OF SUBJECTS IN NIUEAN 
227 
In Niuean it is not readily apparent that the characterization of sentence given in 
(1) can be upheld. There are two principal reasons for the difficulty. First, Niuean is 
a predicate first language. with [V / AgentIPatientlOther] word order. If the notion of 
predicate as defined in (I) above exists in Niuean. it is a discontinuous component 
of the language, since it wraps around a nomina] phrase.2 Second, Niuean has an 
ergative case marking system wherein the agent of a transitive clause receives a 
distinct case marker. As has been discussed extensively in the literature (egs. 
Anderson 1976, Biggs 1974. Dixon 1994). this means that it is difficult to pick out a 
single nominal phrase acting uniformly as subject across the sentences of the 
language. These properties can be seen below in (3a-d). which show the pre-nomina] 
case marking for proper and common agents and patients/themes in transitive and 
intransitive clauses, as well as the predicate-initial nature of the language.] 
(3)a. 
Ne tohitohi a 
Sione. 
Pst writing Abs Sione 
'Sione was writing.' 
b. 
Kua 
egaega e 
kau kauvehe 
Perf rosy 
Abs PI 
cheek 
'The cheeks are rosy.' (Sp.55) 
c. 
Ko e tele e 
Sione a 
Sem. 
Pres kick Erg Sione Abs Sefa 
'Sione is kicking Sefa.' (S.73d:29) 
d. 
Ne kai he pusi ia 
e 
moa 
Pst eat Erg cat 
that 
Abs bird. 
'That cat ate the chicken.' (8.73a:29) 
To understand the case system of Niuean it is essential to note that it cross­
classifies for a proper/common distinction (where proper includes pronominais), as 
shown below.4 
(4) 
Niuean Case Marking 
ERG 
ProperlPronoun 
Common 
e 
he 
AB8 
a 
e 
Even when one delves deeper into the gramar than word order and 
morphological case, a clear candidate for subjecthood does not emerge. Different 
linguists have reached different conclusions about which NP is subject, as we will 
see below. And in the view of Niue an developed in Massam and Smallwood (1997) 
and Massam (2000b, 2001), and for other languages in Davies and Dubinsky (this 
volume) there would seem to be no room for an EPP subject. In this analysis, it is 
the predicate which undergoes fronting to speCifier of IP and this fronting satisfies 

228 
DIANE MASSAM 
the EPP requirement for the sentence. since Niuean is, in Davies and Dubinsky's 
terms, a V -prominent language. Since the EPP requirement is met by predicate 
fronting, there should be no further need to structurally distinguish an argument as 
subject (cf. McCloskey, this volume. who argues that the EPP feature is inactive in 
Irish). 
In the rest of this paper I will first review the two views that have been advanced 
regarding Niuean subjecthood. I will then review the predicate fronting analysis 
mentioned above, summarizing its implications for subjecthood. I win then turn to 
an examination of what distinctions exist between nominals in Niuean, and will 
determine that the grammatical subject/non-subject distinction is not relevant in 
Niuean grammar, although some interesting distinctions are made between 
argwnents at the thematic level. This conclusion is consistent with Schachter (1996) 
who argues that subject is not a relevant notion in Tagalog, and Dixon (1 979, 1994) 
who argues that some languages can be without a pivot,S but it is also consistent 
with the claim discussed above that predication is a fundamental relation of 
sentencehood. and with the concept, also discussed above, that there are two levels 
at which subjecthood can be relevant. 
2. SUBJECTS AND PREDICATES IN NIUEAN 
2.1 Two Views of Niue an Subjects 
In the study of ergativity it is common to use the terms A, S, and 0, from Dixon 
(1968). A refers canonically to the agent of a transitive clause, S refers canonically 
to the single argument of an intransitive clause. and 0 refers canonically to the 
patient of a transitive clause. Of course non-agents can fill the A function, and non­
patients can fill the ° function. as in sentences like [Hariet likes Peter]. I will use 
these terms throughout this paper. A will refer to the ergative DP. 0 will refer to the 
absolutive DP in a transitive clause. and S will refer to the absolutive DP in an 
intransitive clause. Transitivity is defined by the presence or absence of an ergative 
DP. 
In the literature on subjecthood in Niuean, there are two views. In one, argued 
for by Chung (1978), Chung and Seiter (1980), and Seiter (1980), and adopted by 
others, for example, Levin and Massam (1985, 1986), Niuean is viewed as a 
language which is syntactically accusative, though morphologically ergative. In this 
view, the subject of a transitive clause such as in (3c,d) is the ergative argumentų and 
the subject of an intransitive clause such as (3a,b) is the absolutive argument. Thus. 
case does not reflect grammatical relations. and case marking aside, subject can be 
defined as in accusative languages. The Niuean subject is therefore A (canonically 
agent of a transitive clause) or S (single argument of an intransitive clause). and not 
o (canonically patient of a transitive clause), as it is in English. The arguments 
presented for this view are essentially that certain operations, such as control and 
binding, make reference to a class ofNPs consisting of A and S, thus, the traditional 
subject. 

ON PREDICA nON AND THE STATUS OF SUBJECTS IN NRJEAN 
229 
The other view of subjecthood in Niuean is that of Biggs (1 974) and Sperlich 
(1994). In this view Niuean is a language which is syntactically and morphologically 
ergative (though this is not the terminology these authors use). The subject, whether 
of a transitive or intransitive clause, is always the absolutive argument. Case does 
reflect grammatical relations, and subject is defined differently than it is in 
accusative languages, reflecting the differences in the case systems. In this view the 
subject is 0 or S and not A, unlike English. The arguments presented for this view 
centre on the observation that the absolutive NP (i.e. S or 0) is obligatory in a 
sentence. 
Thus, there is disagreement in the literature as to what constitutes the subject of 
the Niuean clause. In following sections we will present the arguments of each side. 
In other Oceanic languages also, there is similar debate as to which nominal fhrase 
is the subject (egs. Cook 1 991, Dukes 1998, Hooper 2000, Lynch 1 972). 
This 
debate is repeated throughout the Austronesian language family (egs. Austin 2000, 
Guilfoyle, Hung and Travis 1992, various papers in Li 1976, Schachter 1976, 1996, 
Travis and Williams 1 983). 
2.2 Niuean Predication 
There has been no discussion of the Niuean grammatical predicate in the sense of 
(I), which is essentially the residue of the sentence once the subject is externalized. 
There is however, discussion of the Niuean predicate in a different sense of the term, 
as outlined below. 
As noted above, Niuean is a predicate first language, often tenned "VSOn• This 
can be seen in the examples in (6). The word order is as shown below (TAM 
represents Tense! Aspect! Mood particles.) 
(5) 
Niuean Word Order 
T AM-(Neg)-Verb-(Adverbial Particles)-Argument(s)-(Obliques) 
The slot after the TAM (which may be null), and after Negation (if present), is 
reserved for the verb, as shown. But, as is well known for Niuean as well as some 
other VSO languages (egs. Carnie 1995 for Irish, Lazard and Peltzer 1 991 for 
Tahitian), it is not the case that only verbs can appear in this slot. This is seen by the 
following sentences, 
which 
show that nominal predicates and 
prepositional 
predicates (in brackets) can also appear in this slot. 
(6)a. 
Ai 
[ko e 
faiaoga] a 
Mele 
Not Pred 
teacher Abs Mele 
'Mele's not a teacher: 
b. 
[Ko e tau kamuta] 
fakamua a 
lautolu 
Pred PI 
carpenter before 
Abs 
they 
'They were carpenters before this: (S: 136b:54) 

230 
c. 
DIANE MASSAM 
[HA 
he fale] 
a 
ia 
Pred 
in house 
Abs she 
'She is in the house.' (M:66) 
It is thus more accurate to refer to Niuean as a predicate first language, rather 
than a VSO language, since the so-called "V" slot can in fact contain nominal or 
prepositional predicates and not only verbs. But, as observed in Massam (2000b) 
this introduces a new use of the word predicate, which is distinct from that in the 
quotes above. We distinguish the two uses by referring to the second type of 
predicate as "core predicate", including either the verb, or the nominal or 
prepositional phrase which substitutes for the verb in a non-verbal sentence. 
The 
concept of predicate in the English sense might be further specified with the term 
"residuaJ predicate". 
The notion core predicate, along with subject, is problematic in Niuean, 
because it seems that it can be either a lexical item (V) or a phrase (DP or PP). It is 
not at all clear why the predicate should vary like this. In other words, why is it not 
possible for the verb and its object to together form the core predicate, as in (7) just 
as the preposition and its argument together form the core predicate in (6c)? 
(7) 
*Ne 
[inu 
e 
kofe 
kona] 
a 
Mele. 
Pst 
drink 
Abs coffee bitter 
Abs Mele 
(,Mele drank the bitter coffee. ') 
Massam (2001) shows that at times, even when the core predicate is verbal, it is 
in fact a phrase (VP) rather than the verb alone which appears in the core predicate 
slot? These examples consist of so-called "Noun Incorporation" sentences, as in (8). 
(8)a. 
Ne [kai 
sipi 
rno 
e 
ika] 
a 
Sione 
Pst eat 
chip and 
Abs 
fish 
Abs 
Sione 
'Sione ate fish and chips. ' 
b. 
Ne [inu 
kofe 
kona] a 
Mele 
Pst drink coffee bitter Abs Mele 
'Mele drank bitter coffee. ' 
The verbal predicate phrase (VP) occurs in the predicate slot precisely when the 
internal argument is an NP, rather than a DP, and hence cannot act as an 
independent argument of the sentence. Thls is supported by the fact that the so­
called incorporated nominal cannot be preceded by any determiners, articles or case 
markers, hence it is arguably not a DP, but rather just an NP.8 (7) shows that the 
incorporated nominal canot be preceded by a case marker such as absolutive e 
(compare (7) with (8b» . 
In most cases then. it is a phrase rather than a lexical item, that appears in the 
core predicate slot. It can be further posited that even in a simple non-incorporation 
sentence, the lexical verb does not appear alone in the predicate slot. Rather, in all 

ON PREDICATION AND TIlE STATUS OF SUBJECTS IN NIUEAN 
23 1 
Niuean sentences, it is a phrase rather than a lexical item, which appears in the 
predicate slot. To advance this view, we hypothesize that in all non-incorporation 
sentences. the object has moved out of the VP via an obligatory object shift, so that 
the verb is the only phonological material remaining in the VP. This VP remnant 
movement, which is presented in detail in Massam (2000b, 2001) and also 
developed in Lee (2000). will be outlined in the following section. 
3. THE NIUEAN CLAUSE 
Given the view of predicate fronting presented above, we can present the 
derivations of basic Niuean clauses. Assuming a Minimalist framework, a Niuean 
transitive clause derivation would proceed as follows, with reference to the syntactic 
structure in (9). 
(9) 
Niuean Transitive Clause (eg. 3c,d) 
IP 
-----
VPi 
I' 
lea; 
_____ 
eat 
I 
vP 
[EPPpred] 
 
hepusi 
vP 
Erg cat 
  
e moaj 
v' 
Abs birdj 
ű 
v 
labs] 
[erg/e) 
tracevpi 
  
(V 
traceDPj) 
First the verb and the object DP are merged to form a VP. Since this VP and the 
DP within it later undergo move, they are shown as traces in (9). The verb and the 
object DP are shown in parentheses, since neither element in the VP is pronounced 
in the merge position. since the object shifts and then the VP remnant fronts to 
specifier ofIP to check the EPPpred feature, as outlined below. A light verb is then 
merged with this VP. This light verb is unlike the English light verb in that it 
contains two case feature bundles, the first, an absolutive case feature, and the 
second, a theta assigning feature with ergative case attached (Ura 1998, Woolford 
1997). Since there are two separate case features, two arguments must appear in 
specifier positions of this head. The issue now becomes one of ordering of feature 
checking, a somewhat underdeveloped issue. I posit that the internal argument 
moves first to check absolutive case before the external argument is merged in. At 
this point, a Predication head, here called INFL,9 merges with the vP. This head 

232 
DIANE MASSAM 
requires that the core predicate (here VP) raise to its specifier position in order to 
check an EPPPred feature. Since the object DP has already vacated the VP in order 
to check absolutive case, only its trace is contained within VP, hence only its trace 
moves along with the core predicate VP to check the [predJ feature.lo TAM particles 
appear to the left ofIP, in higher functional heads. 
Note that it is unclear what principle would order absolutive checking before 
ergative checking. This is not the usual object shift ordering such as discussed in 
Chomsky (1995, 1998), where Merge (of subject) precedes Move (of object). But in 
Niuean, such ordering is essential (in the absence of tucking in - see note 10) in 
order to derive the right word order. We might consider that the strength of the 
absolutive case feature demands, not just the usual checking before the maximal 
projection is complete, but rather, premature checking, that is immediate checking 
before any other operation of merge or move. This degree of immediacy was 
discussed as a possible requirement of strong features - the derivation "cannot 
tolerate" a strong feature (Chomsky 1995:233). Chomsky then relaxed this 
requirement to allow a projection to complete itself before checking of strong 
features (Chomsky 1995:234). Possibly, there is variation on this point, so that 
some strong features require absolutely immediate checking, while others require 
checking before another projection is merged. One property of note here is that the 
merge of the ergative argument involves both theta assigrunent and case checking, 
thus it behaves as an inherently case marked element, while the merge of the 
absolutive argument is purely thematic, with the movement being required only for 
case checking. It might be possible to attribute the delay in the merge of the external 
argument to this inherent property. 
The intransitive clause, shown in (1 0) below is similar except that here vP, 
being intransitive does not contain ergative case, nor an external theta role. Hence, 
the object simply raises to specifier of vP to check absolutive case. 
I I  
(10) 
Niuean Intransitive Clause (eg. 3atb) 
IP 
------
VPi 
I' 
hoko 
 
arive 
I 
vP 
[EPPpredJ 
 
a Sionej 
VI 
Abs Sionej 
 
v 
tracevpi 
[absJ 
 
(V 
traceDPj) 
For completeness, in (I I) I provide a derivation ofa noun incorporating sentence. 

ON PREDICATION AND THE STATUS OF SUBJECTS IN NIUEAN 
(1 1 )  
Niuean Noun Incorporation Clause (eg. 8a,b) 
VP. 
I 
IP 
------
inu kale kona 
drink bitter coffee 
I' 
vP 
I 
[EPPpredl 
 
DP 
a Mele 
Abs Mele 
v' 
 
v 
tracevpi 
Cabs] 
¦ 
[6] 
(V 
NP) 
233 
In (1 1). the light verb head cannot have its Cabs] feature checked by the object. 
since this object is merely an NP, and has no case feature at all. Thus a transitive vP 
(one with an ergative case feature) is ruled out in this circumstance, since a transitive 
vP would then have an absolutive case feature which would not be able to be 
checked (assuming that absolutive case is an obligatory property ofvP). Instead, the 
light verb is intransitive in that it has no ergative case (though it does have an 
external theta role). 
Thus, when the external argument merges into the specifier 
position, it checks absolutive case. When INFL attracts the core predicate to check 
its EPP [pred] feature. the object NP (here kofo kona 'bitter coffee') fronts along 
with the verb. since it has not vacated the VP. 
Based on this -analysis of basic Niuean syntactic structure, an essential difference 
between Niuean and a language such as English emerges. Niuean requires predicates 
to undergo predicate fronting or externalization. and English requires subjects to 
undergo subject fronting or externalization. Both operations move phrases to the 
specifier of a predicational head (IP). We might expand from this to claim that the 
universal requirement for predication involves some sort of extraction from the pre­
predicate domain, and that the requirement can be satisfied by extracting the highest 
argument from the pre-predication domain, or by extracting the core predicate from 
the pre-predication domain. If this view is correct, then while the notion of 
predication is universal. the notion subject is only relevant in languages of the 
English type (Massam and Smallwood 1997, Davies and Dubinsky this volume). 
This view predicts that there is no grammatical EPP subject in Niuean. This in 
tum predicts that the superiority effects due to externalization should not be found in 
Niuean. Let us therefore revisit the issue of Niue an subjects. 
4. ON THE EQUITY OF A,S,O 
In the clause analysis in (9), the A and the 0 arguments are not in distinct specifiers, 
that is each does not have a distinct head for which it is the specifier. Therefore they 
are in the same minimal domain, defined as the smallest subset of elements which 

234 
DIANE MASSAM 
are contained in a maximal projection, excluding the head. (Chomsky 1995:178). 
According to Chomsky (1995), if two elements are in the same minimal domain, 
they are equidistant from a higher attracting head. 
(I 2) 
(Chomsky 1995:356) 
y and p are equidistant. from ct if yand p are in the same minimal 
domain. 
We might expect, therefore, that the A and the 0 arguments in a structure such as 
(9) would show no superiority effects for movement. The structure in (9) resembles 
that proposed for language with overt object shift (Chomsky 1995). In most 
languages with object shift. however, it is not the case that either one or the other 
argument can undergo further movement to become EPP subject, in spite of the fact 
that they are equidistant from INFL, the target. This is ultimately due to the fact that 
only the subject has a case remaining (Le. nominative) to be checked by !NFL, the 
object having had its accusative case checked in specifier ofvP.12 In Niuean, though, 
both arguments· have their cases checked in specifier of vP and there is no further 
case or EPP induced movement to specifier of IP, so the equidistance issue might 
seem to be moot. But there are situations where we can see that the two arguments 
are equidistant for further movement. In raising constructions we can see the lack of 
superiority effects in Niuean, since it is equally permitted to raise either the A, S, or 
o to the matrix clause. 
In Niuean raising, an .argument of a lower clause can raise to become the 
absolutive argument (S) of the matrix sentence.13 I refer to this as "Raising to S". 
An example is given in (13). Note that I assume here that it is possible for a Niuean 
DP to check case twice in two different positions though only the case checked in 
the last position is realized phonologically (Bejar and Massam 1 999). 
(13) 
Raising to S 
a. 
To maeke 
[ke 
lagomatai he 
ekekafo e 
tama e] 
Fut possible Sbjv help 
Erg doctor 
Abs child this 
'The doctor could help this child.' (S. IS8:3a) 
(i.e. 'It is possible for the doctor to help this child. ') 
b. 
To maeke 
e 
ekekafo 
[ke 
lagomatai e 
tamae] 
Fut possible Abs doctor 
Sbjv help 
Abs child this 
'The doctor could help this child.' (S.l S8:4a) 
(Le. 'The doctor is able to help this child. ') 
c. 
To maeke 
e 
tama e 
[ke lagomatai he ekekafo] 
Fut possible Abs child this Sbjv help 
Erg doctor 
'This child could be helped by the doctor.' (S.1 58:5a) 
(Le. 'This child is possible for the doctor to help. ') 

ON PREDICATION AND TIlE STATUS OF SUBJECTS IN NIUEAN 
235 
In (13a), a non-raised sentence is provided, where the embedded A is ergative 
and the embedded 0 is absolutive. In (13b), the embedded A argument, the agent, is 
raised to the matrix clause, appearing now with absolutive case, having become the 
S argument of the matrix clause. In (1 3c), the embedded 0 argument, the patient, is 
raised to the matrix clause to become the matrix S, as evidenced by word order (for 
other arguments that this is a raising operation, see Seiter 1980). These facts are 
discussed at length in Seiter (1 980) and also in Massam (1985).14 
The same holds for Raising to 0, as seen in (14). In these cases an embedded 
S, A, or 0 is raised to act as a matrix 0 of a verb which also takes an ergative A 
argument. 
(14) Raising to 0 
a. 
To 
nakai toka e 
au 
[ ke 
kai he pusi e 
ika] 
Fut 
not 
let 
Erg 
I 
8bjv eat Erg cat 
Abs fish 
'I won't let that the cat eat the fish.' (8.196:76a) 
b. 
To nakai toka e 
au 
e 
pusi [ ke 
kai e 
ika] 
Fut not 
let 
Erg I 
Abs cat 
8bjv eat Abs fish 
'I won't let the cat eat the fish.' (8. 1 96:77a) 
c. 
To 
nakai toka e 
au 
e 
ika [ ke 
kai he 
pusi ] 
Fut 
not 
let 
Erg I 
Abs fish 
Sbjv eat Erg cat 
'I won't let the fish be eaten by the cat' (8.196:78a) 
In both (13) and (14) the argument moves from a specifer position of the 
embedded vP where it has checked either ergative or absolutive case, to the 
absolutive-checking specifier position of the matrix vP. 
This 
movement is 
presumably driven by the need of the matrix absolutive case to be checked. While 
many issues remain regarding Niuean raising, the data provided above show that A, 
S, and 0 arguments are treated identically for extraction in Niuean. 
In fact, there are severaJ other ways also in which A, S, and 0 arguments are 
equal in Niuean. 
Extraction of an argument for relativization, topicalization, 
question formation, and cleft leaves a null trace for A, 8, and 0 as opposed to a 
pronoun copy used for extraction of obliques. (I Sa) shows the deletion of a 
relativized 0, (ISb) shows the deletion of a relativized A, and (1 5c) shows the 
pronominalization with the clitic ai of a relativized oblique. 
(1 5)a. 
b. 
mo 
e 
tagata 
ne 
moto e 
koe (*a 
ia) 
with 
Abs 
person 
[Pst punch Erg you 
Abs him 
'with the person who you punched' (S. 12a.94) 
ke he tama ka kai 
(*e 
ia) e 
tau 
pateta 
to 
child Fut eat 
Erg he Abs PI 
potato 
'to the child who's going to eat the potatoes' (S. l2b.94) 

236 
DIANE MASSAM 
c. 
e 
maga-aho ne kua makona ai 
a 
ia 
Abs piece-day [pst Perf full 
then Abs he1 
'the moment when he was full' (S.I3.b:94) 
Perhaps relatedly, 3rd person animate A, S. and 0 arguments (but not obliques · 
Seiter 1 980) can be null if sufficiently identified by the discourse, as shown for an S 
argument in (16). And a floated quantifier, appearing as a clitic on the verbal 
complex can refer equally to an A, S, or 0 argument, as seen in (1 7a) for S, (l7b) 
for A, and (17c) for O. 
(I 6) 
Ne 
kitia e 
au a 
Maka neafi. 
Maololo lahi. 
Pst 
see 
Erg l
Abs Maka yesterday. strong 
very. 
'I saw Maka yesterday. He's very well.' (S.130a.51) 
(l7)a 
0 
oti [a 
mautolu] 
he motok! 
Go,PI all Abs we,PI, Excl in car 
'We're all going in the car.' 
b. 
Kua tele oti tuai [e 
lautolu] a 
au 
Perf kick all Perf Erg they 
Abs me 
'They all kicked me. ' 
c. 
Ne kai oti e Sione [e 
tau apala] 
Pst eat all Erg Sione Abs PI 
apple 
'Sione ate all the apples. • 
It is easy to make the relevant generalizations about these facts, given the 
proposed structures in (9) and (10). Simply put, any argument in the specifier of vP 
can be null under extraction or under discourse identification. and can be referred to 
by a floated quantifier adverbial. As for the theoretical reasons for these properties, 
we can speculate that these direct arguments are thematically, and, given the 
invariant case properties of the transitive and intransitive light verb, grammatically 
recoverable, and hence can be null. And if quantifier domains are defined in terms of 
locality, then the last fact above falls in with the property of equidistance for 
extraction in that it relies on the A and 0 arguments being within the same minimal 
domain. 
This lack of any distinction between A. S, and 0 arguments supports the claim 
that there is no extemalization of one argwnent for EPP purposes in Niuean, as well 
as the claim that both argwnents are in specifiers of the same functional head (given 
the definition of equidistance in (12» . It would seem that for purposes of locality 
and identification, the relevant distinction in Niuean is A, S, and 0 vs other. 
IS 

ON PREDICA nON AND 1lIE STATUS OF SUBJECTS IN NIUEAN 
237 
5. A,S VS. 0: ACCUSATIVE ORGANIZATION 
Although there appear to be no distinctions made between A, S, and 0 arguments 
for operations involving locality and null argumenthood, there are other operations 
which do make some distinctions. These divide into those which isolate A and S vs 
0, i.e. those which are used by Seiter (1980) to argue that Niuean is syntactically 
accusative, and those which isolate S and 0 vs. A, i.e. those used by Biggs and 
Sperlich to argue that Niuean is syntactically ergative (thOUgh they do not use this 
terminology). In the former group are binding, control and noun incorporation. In 
the next section we will discuss general issues regarding A and S referring rules, 
then we will proceed to examine binding, control and noun incorporation in Niuean. 
In section 6 we tum to the S,O vs A operations. 
5.1 Thematic subjects 
It is interesting indeed that the two main operations which isolate A and S vs 0 are 
binding and control, as these operations have been argued to make reference, not to 
grammatical subject, but instead to deep subject (Dixon 1979. 1994), or argument 
subject (Maning 1996), or VP-internal subject (Guilfoyle, Hung and Travis 1992) 
or thematic subject (Williams 1987, and relatedly, Travis 1998, Wechsler and Arka 
1998). 
As touched on above, many linguists have argued that the grammatical subject is 
not the only relevant NP for discussions of subjecthood. Instead, there are two 
grammatical domains in which some notion of subject is relevant. The first of these 
is the pre-predication, or thematic domain. If we use the term subject here, it refers 
to the argument with the highest thematic role assigned in the vP domain. The other 
notion of subject is relevant in the grammatical. or predication domain. and it refers 
to the argument which has been externalized for predication (EPP) reasons. Often, 
confusingly, these two notions refer to the same argument, as is the case for a 
sentence such as [Hariet saw Peter], where Harriet is both thematic and 
grammatical subject. But in other cases. they do not. For example, in a sentence such 
as [It appears that Hariet is sick], the expletive it is the matrix sentence grammatical 
subject, but not the thematic subject, which could be analyzed as non-existent, or as 
being the phrase that Harriet is sick. depending on whether internal subject is 
defined as the argument external to Y, or as the highest argument in VP, which 
would include unaccusative objects. We adopt the more inclusive definition here. 
Maning (1996) develops these ideas, building on work by others cited above. 
He argues that several of the classic subject referring processes are sensitive to the 
thematic subject (which. working loosely within Lexical Functional Gramar he 
terms the a-subject: "a" standing for argument structure). while others are sensitive 
to the grammatical subject (which he terms gr-subject), These processes are shown 
below. 

238 
(18) 
(19) 
DIANE MASSAM 
Processes sensitive to a-structure: (Manning 1996) 
addressee of 
imperatives, control of DP-deletion in adverbial and 
complement clauses (equi NP deletion), incorporation, binding in 
reflexives . . .  
Processes sensitive to gr-structure: (Manning 1996) 
relativization strategies, restrictions on topicalization, focussing and 
cleft formation, question formation, launching of quantifier float. 
raising restrictions, coreferential omission in co-ordination . . .  
As discussed above, Seiter (1980) argues that i n  Niuean the subject is i n  fact the 
A or S argument, as opposed to the 0 argument. He supports this claim by showing 
that there are in fact, several processes in Niuean which operate with this 
organization, i.e. which pick out either the A or S argument, as opposed to the 0 
argument. These are shown in (13) - see Seiter (1980) for discussion.16 
(20) 
Niuean operations which pick out A-S as oposed to 0: 
(i) reflexivizationlbinding (A. S cannot be reflexive) 
(ii) complement control (only A, S can be controlled by the subject 
of a higher verb) 
(iii) incorporation (Only 0 can be inÑrporated. A, S canot be) 
Notc that these operations are those which have been argued by Manning to refer 
to the a-structure, or thematic, pre-predication domain. This means that prior to 
predication extemalization (which in Niuean involves VP fronting), the Niuean 
sentence structure must allow A and S to form a natural class. Although the A 
argument is merged in the specifier position ofvP, and the S argument moves to the 
specifier of vP (as does the 0 argument), A and S share in common that each is the 
highest argument in the pre-predication domain. It seems therefore that the 
arguments provided by Seiter ( 1980) for a A or S subject in Niuean do not argue for 
an accusative organization of predication-level syntax. Rather, they argue that at the 
thematic level, some Niuean processes single out the highest argument. This is the 
case for other languages also, whether they are ergatively or accusatively case­
marked (Dixon 1994, Manning 1996). 
In the next section we will examine Niuean binding, some aspects of which 
support the claim that it does not make reference to grammatical subject 
5.2 Niuean Binding 
According to Seiter (1980), Niuean binding is relatively conventional. An A 
argument may bind a 0 or oblique, and an S argument may bind an oblique. The 
bound element is a pronoun followed by the emphatic particle ni as shown in (21). 

ON PREDICATION AND TIlE STATUS OF SUBJECTS IN NIUEAN 
(2 1 )  
Kitia he 
tama fifine a 
i a  
nj 
he fakaata 
see 
Erg 
child female Abs her Rfl in mirror 
'The girl sees herself in the mirror,' (S.214a:78) 
239 
In fact, possible binders are not limited to A and S, however, as the following 
example shOWS.17 Here, an oblique NP binds another oblique. Hence the ability to 
bind an argument does not class A and S together as subject. 
(22) 
Ne fakatutala au mo 
Tule hagaao ki 
a 
ia 
ni 
Pst talk 
I 
with Tule about 
to 
Pers him Rfl 
'I spoke with Tule about himself.' (L:7) 
On the other hand, according to Seiter (1 980), an A, or S argument cannot be nf 
marked under co-reference with another nominal. 
(23) 
Kitia he tama tHine 
("'nj) a 
ia 
(ni) 
he fakata. 
see 
Erg child female Rfl Abs 
her 
Rf1 
in mirror 
'The girl sees herself in the mirror.' (S.217a:79) 
Thus, binding can be said to unifY A and S, vs 0 in a nominative/accusative 
pattern in their inability to host ni. This would lead us to posit that A is structurally 
superior to 0. since c-command is usually a condition on binding. 
But when we examine Niuean binding more closely it becomes clear that it is not 
as conventional as the above description suggests. First, the particle ni is optional in 
all cases, including the sentences above. Thus a sentence like (24) is ambiguous, as 
indicated. 
(24) 
Ne kamata ke 
hifi 
e 
Sione a 
ia 
Pst begin 
Sbjv shave Erg Sione Abs he 
'Sione began to shave himself. • 
"Sione began to shave him," 
As discussed in Levin and Massam (1 988), this means that Niuean is a language 
without a pronomina1lanaphor distinction. Thus, Condition B of the Binding Theory 
(Chomsky 1981). namely "Pronouns must be free in their governing category" is not 
relevant in the language. 
In addition to being optional, nf is ambiguous between a reflexive and an 
emphatic meaning, so that (25) is ambiguous, as indicated. Nf can also appear as a 
post-verbal clitic to emphasize the action of the verb, with a meaning 'just, only', 
(25) contains an example of the verbal clitic use of ni, and indeed, it is often the case 
that ni will be found on both a verb and a nominal phrase in a clause. 

240 
(25) 
DIANE MASSAM 
Ita 
ni 
a 
Pulevaka ki a 
ia ni. 
angry Emph Abs Pulevaka to Pers he RtVEmph 
'Pulevaka's angry at himself.' 
'Pulevaka's angry at HIM. • 
This also means that as a particle, nf does not always need to be bound. It is not 
even the case that when the ni-marked OP has a coreference interpretation it must be 
bound (i.e. c-commanded by a coreferential element). This is shown in (26), where i 
a ia 'he' is an oblique agent with a coreference interpretation, but is not c­
commanded by its antecedent. which is a genitive DP contained in the S argument of 
the clause. 
(26) 
Mahele tuai e 
lima ha Sione i 
a 
ia ni 
cut 
Perf Abs hand of Sione Agt Pers him Rfl 
'Sione cut his own hand.' (S.21 5d.79) 
Thus. strict c-command is not required for co-reference between a nominal and a 
pronoun marked with nf. It seems, then that Condition A of the Binding Theory 
"Reflexive pronouns must be bound in their governing category" is also not 
operative in Niuean. 
In addition to there being no reflexive/pronoun distinction in Niuean, there are 
no reciprocal pronouns either. Reciprocity is marked by verbal morphology, as 
indicated in (27). 
(27) 
Ne fe-tele-aki 
e 
lautolu a 
lautolu 
Pst Rcpr-kick-Rcpr Erg they 
Abs they 
'They were kicking each other.' 
Standard Binding Theory (as in Chomsky 1981) is thus not at work in Niuean. 
There is no class of anaphors vs. pronouns. (See also Dukes 1996 on Tongan.) In 
addition, c-command does not appear to be relevant. First, this is seen by example 
(26), where the nf-marked pronominal DP is not c-commanded by the antecedent. 
Second, the non-relevance of c-command might be seen in simple agent/patient 
reflexives. given that in the clause structure argued for above, there is arguably no c­
command relation between agents and patients of regular transitive sentences. 
McGinnis (1998) shows that if two nominals are in specifier positions of the same 
head, there can be no coreference relation between them. She refers to this relation 
as Lethal Ambiguity.IS 
(28) 
Lethal Ambiguitv (McGinnis 1998:32) 
An anaphoric dependency cannot be established between two 
specifiers in the same checking domain. 

ON PREDICATION AND TIlE ST A.TUS OF SUBJECTS IN NlUEAN 
241 
Niuean appears to violate the Lethal Ambiguity constraint because A can antecede 0 
even though. according to the proposed analysis, they are specifiers of the same 
head, the light verb. If Lethal Ambiguity effects are tied to the lack of c-command 
relations between the two specifiers, then it might be that Niuean appears to violate 
Lethal Ambiguity because c-command is not relevant for Niuean binding relations. 
Perhaps, rather than exhibiting a traditional binding relation dependant on c­
command, in Niuean, any pronoun may optionally be construed as coreferential with 
a DP not thematically lower than itself. and if it is, it may optionally be marked with 
ni. If thematic hierarchy rather than c-command is relevant for ni marking, the 
apparent A and S natural class fact is explained.19 The thematically highest argument 
in the sentence will be either the A or the S argument, hence it will never be marked 
with ni. This follows the Thematic Hierarchy Condition ('n Reflexives of lackendoff 
( 1972: 148), as well as more recent proposals such as Wechsler and Arka (1998). 
Clearly, more work remains to be done on the Niuean coreference system. But 
given its unconventional nature, combined with the general claims that binding 
makes reference to vP-internal roles. it seems that the A and S referring character of 
binding in this language noted by Seiter (1980) does not argue for the existence of a 
grammatical subject. 
5.3 Control 
The other operation which appears to pick out A and S vs 0 is control. Seiter (1980) 
states that control is possible only to the A or S argument of the embedded clause, 
and never to O. 
Control. like binding, has been argued to make reference to internal roles. 
Williams (1987)' argues that English binding and control make reference to theta­
roles rather than to NPs. Guilfoyle. Hung, and Travis (1992) argue that the same 
operations make reference to VP-intemal subjects in Tagalog. And control is one of 
Maning's a-structure referring operations, as noted above. 
Niuean control 
sentences are provided below. (29) shows that the controller is thematically 
determined. For the verb Iota 'want', the controller is the experiencer, whereas for 
the verb kotofa 'choose', the controller is the patient. 
(29) also shows that the 
controlled element, which is obligatorily null, can be S or A. If the coreferential 
element is 0, then it appears as a pronoun, as in (30). 
(29)a. 
Fia loto a 
ia 
ke 
tA 
e 
faloku 
want 
Abs 
he 
Sbjv play Abs flute 
'He wants to play the flute! (S. 128a: 136) 
b. 
Kotofa tuai e 
lautolu a 
au ke 
holoholo e 
tau kapiniu. 
choose Perf Erg they 
Abs me Sbjv wash 
Abs PI dish 
'They chose me to wash the dishes.' (S.128b:136) 

242 
(30) 
DIANE MASSAM 
Kua lali lahi 
e 
kapitiga haau ke 
sake e 
au a 
ia 
Perftl)' really Abs friend 
your Sbjv sack Erg I 
Abs him 
'Your friend is really trying to get me to sack him.' (S.130a:137). 
If control makes reference to the thematic structure, then it can simply target the 
highest thematic role of the embedded clause, as being the one with the most control 
over the action. This will result in an A and S pattern. 
5.4 Noun incorporation 
Noun Incorporation, according to Massam (2001) results from the fronting of a VP 
in which the verb still has a complement, i.e. a complement that has not be moved to 
specifier ofvP, as shown in (8) above. It is clear that NI will select only O's, and not 
A's. since A's never appear as a complement of V. As for an S argument, it can 
never appear as the incorporated noun in a noun incorporation structure, because ifit 
remained in VP, there would be no other DP in an intransitive clause to check the 
obligatory absolutive case. This would cause the derivation to crash. 
6. S,O VS. A GROUPING 
We have examined operations which treat A, S, and 0 equivalently, and we have 
examined operations which tre.at A and S differently from O. None of these 
operations makes reference to a grammatical subject, although the latter group 
includes two operations, binding and control, which make reference to the 
thematically highest argument within vP. Since S,A can be grouped together 
thematically, there is no need to class them together as a structural subject. 
Remaining to study are the arguments for the treatment of S,O as a natural class. 
The principal argument provided by Biggs (1974) and Sperlich (1994) for an 
ergative structure, that is for the S,O vs. A definition of subject is that the ergative 
argument in Niuean sentences is optional, in that not all sentences contain an 
ergative NP, and in that if a verb exhibits transitivity alternations, it will be the 
ergative argument which is optionally expressed. (See also Hooper 2000 on 
Tokelauan.) This suggests that ergative case is vel)' different from nominative case 
in English, and that it is in fact, more like accusative case. From this, Sperlich (and 
Dukes 2000 for Tongan) argues that the ergative argument is in fact an internal 
argument, like the by-phrase in English passive sentences (see also Marantz 1984, 
Woolford 1997), and that the absolutive argument is the true subject. Supporting the 
idea that the absolutive argument is the subject is that it appears with umnarked 
case. Biggs (1974) also defines subject as ''what we are talking about", and invokes 
the argument that an important function such as subject should receive a uniform 
case marking. 
The idea that the subject is the single required argument in all sentences is a 
common one, echoed by many who attempt to define the concept. It is clear that this 
test picks out the absolutive DP in Niuean. But we have argued that absolutive case 
is assigned internally to vP, which is supported by the [V/ergative/absolutive) word 

ON PREDICATION AND THE STATUS OF SUBJECTS IN NIUEAN 
243 
order, among other things. Thus, it cannot be argued that absolutive DP fulfills the 
function ofEPP subject, that is, the subject that is extracted from within the thematic 
domain so as to partition the clause. Rather, we might see the absolutive DP as a 
sort of "inner" grammatical subject, following Roberge 2000 who presents a range 
of data which can be construed as exhibiting EPP effects within VP. Operations such 
as binding and control are late, thematically driven top-down operations, always 
isolating the highest theta role. Basic clausal architecture, on the other hand, works 
bottom-up. The verb merges first with its closest argument and ifit is a DP (and not 
an NP as in noun incorporation structures), it will be attracted to specifier of the 
light verb to check absolutive case, which is always present on the light verb.20 If the 
closest argument of the verb is an NP, which carmot check case, then some other 
argument must be merged into the specifier position to check absolutive case. So, 
ultimately, what is responsible for the obligatory nature of the absolutive argument 
is the feature composition of the light verb, which always contains an absolutive 
case feature.21 And the secondary nature of the ergative case and argument (Bittner 
and Hale 1996) is tied to the optionality of the ergative case feature on the light 
verb, or rather, to whether a transitive or intransitive light verb is merged with VP. 
In this way ergative is indeed parallel to accusative case because each is the 
transitive case. 
Differently from many other languages, "pivot" referring rules, i.e. rules that 
refer to 
grammatical 
asymmetries 
between arguments, rather than 
thematic 
asymmetries, are not found in Niuean. At the grammatical level, A, S and 0 appear 
to be equivalent. Moving down into the vP domain, Niuean is ambiguous with 
respect to "subject" identification, which has led to the different positions in the 
literature on this issue. As in other languages, control and binding make reference to 
argument hierarchy, and they are accordingly accusatively organized. What is more 
interesting is that the S,O vs. A character of the language, that is the ergatively 
organized aspect of the language. is also entirely internal to vP. 
Consider this in 
light of the claim in Manning (1996), which echoes common thinking in the field or 
ergativity studies (see also Dixon 1994). that all languages are accusatively 
organized at the level of a-structure. While this is true for Niuean in that the agent is 
merged in a higher position than the patient, it is not true that the external argument 
is obligatory. which is the case for an accusative system at the grammatical level. 
The primacy of absolutive case ensures that argument structure is ergatively 
arranged. However, it would still be unexpected that a language would be entirely 
organized on ergative grounds at the a-level (including binding and control), since 
operations which refer to highest argument (whether in terms of c-command or in 
terms of a thematic hierarchy) would not favour the absolutive argument over the 
ergative argument, since the later is higher than the former. The possibility outlined 
in Sperlich (1994) remains open, however, namely the possibility of a language 
where the agent is expressed always as an oblique rather than as an inherently case 
marked external argument, thus appearing lower in the structure and in the thematic 
hierarchy than the absolutive argument. 

244 
DIANE MASSAM 
7. CONCLUSION 
This paper has examined the notions subject and predicate in Niuean. It was argued, 
based on previous work, that the notions as defined for English are irrelevant for 
Niuean, but that nonetheless Niuean exhibits a process of predication. Predication is 
not realized in Niuean as it is in English by the operation of subject externalization, 
but rather by a different operation of core predicate externalization. Thus, in both 
languages predication is a central grammatical organizing principle, but the 
externalization operations which satisfY predication are different in the two 
languages. Derivations were provided for transitive. intransitive and noun­
incorporation structures in Niuean. If there is no externalization of an argument 
(subject) in Niuean, then it is predicted that no argument in Niuean should exhibit 
subject properties. In examining subject properties, we followed many other 
linguists in dividing them into two classes, namely 
internal or pre·predication 
subject properties and EPP or post-predication subject properties. It was seen that 
operations which refer to internal or thematic relations such as binding and control 
operate accusatively in Niuean, while operations which apply at the level of external 
or grammatical level do not make reference to any privileged DP. An additional 
complication in the language is that the light verb contains an obligatory absolutive 
case which creates an inner subject for the language, which is chosen along an 
ergative patern, targeting the lowest argument in the clause. This has the effect that 
Niuean exhibits ambiguous ergative and accusative structW'e within vP, while 
exhibiting neither pattern at the level of grammatical or predication structure. 
ENDNOTES 
• 
An earlier version of this work was presented at the Fourth International Conference on Ocearuc 
Languages. Niue Island, in July 1999. For help of various sorts, I would like to thank Bil Davies, Stan 
Dubinsky, and Wolfgang Sperlich, as well as Ken Cook, Fakahula Funaki, Robin Hooper, SiCa loane, 
Alana Johns, Hany Manamana. Elizabeth Pearce. Milan Rezac, Carolyn Smallwood, Pita Tanaki and 
anonymous reviewers. All errors are my own. Research funding for this work was provided by SSHRC 
(#410-97-0493). 
I 
For Dixon (1979), a pivot is not necessmy in a language, but the deep subject is universal. This fits 
well with the .view ofNiuean advanced in this paper. 
1 
The predicate wraps around the ergative agent, if the agent is subject, and it wraps around the 
absolutive patient if the patient is subject See below for discussion. Interestingly, it has ben argued for 
another predicate initial language, Irish, that it has no EPP requirement (McCloskey 1996b, 1997, this 
volume). In addition, Davies and Dubinsky (this volume) argue that V-initial languages do not exhibit DP 
SUbjects. 
3 
Examples are taken from a variety of sources, as indicated after each example. Data not identified for 
source is taken from my own consultation notes. The abbreviations used for data sources are: L=Lane 
1978, Mo''McEwen 1970. S=Seiter 1980. Sp=Spcrlich 1997. Where they were lacking, glosses have been 
added in this paper. In some cases, glosses have been changed for consistency. Orthography also has ben 
changed in places to conform to Sperlich 1997. Abbreviations used in glosses are: Abs: absolutive, Agt: 
agent oblique case, Emph:' emphatic, Erg: ergative, Excl: exclusive, Fut: future, Perf: perfect, Pers: person 
marker, PI: plural, Pred: predieative marker, Pres: present, Pst: past, Rcpr: reciprocal, RfI: reflexive, Sbjv: 
subjunctive. 

ON PREDICATION AND THE STATUS OF SUBJECTS IN NIUEAN 
245 
4 
The proper/common split penneates the entire case system, but I focus here on ergative and 
absolutive, since those are the most important cases in this paper. 
S 
For example, Dixon (1994:155) considers Samoan to be a pivotless language, following Mosel and 
Hovdhaugen (1992:704-17) who discuss the difficulties of assigning subjecthood in Samoan. 
6 
Biggs (1974) points out that the debate about subjects goes back a long way in Polynesian grammar 
with such linguists as BataiIlon, Chapin, Churchward, Grezel, Hale, and Milner, taking agents as subjects, 
and others such as W.L Williams. H. W. Williams and Spencer Churchward not taking this position. See 
Biggs 1974 for references. 
1 
Since indirect arguments do not undergo fronting along with the VP in noun incorporation sentences, 
this analysis of noun incorporation necessila1eS a clause structure where they are outside of the minimal 
VP. As for adverbs, they appear between the fronted predicate and the A or S argument along with 
various clitics, as shown in (5). It is unclear if they are adjoined to vP, or if they are part of a clitic 
complex in INFL. 
I 
A case marker can appear within the incorporated noun phrase. as in (8) where the conjoined noun ika 
<fish' is preceded by the case marker e 'Abs' (though this may better be analyzed as part of the 
conjunction mo ·and'). The prohibition is against a case marker on the maximal noun phrase sipi mo e ika 
'chips and fish'. 
9 
I cal this node "INFL" to align Niuean clause structure with that proposed for other languages. But 
INFL in Niuean does not correspond with either Tense or Agreement in other languages. since there is no 
agrement, and tense appears in a higher functional clause, perhaps CPo Perhaps the label "Pred" as in 
Bowers 1993 would be more appropriate than INFL, but I maintain here the more familiar label (See 
Massaro 200b). The labels are important if we want to compare Niuean with other predicate initial 
languages, but they are nonetheless difficult to asign. 
10 
Another possible derivation is as follows. First. the subject merges in and receives ergative case, and 
its theta role. Then, the object DP moves out of VP and "tucks in" under the subject (Richards 1997) in 
order to check absolutive case. Since tucking in was developed for cases of multiple DPs checking one 
and the same featun\ (and is ruled out for object shift by McGinnis (1998:58» . and since here the two 
DPs are checking different features, I will asume the derivation without tucking in, in order to derive the 
ergative-absolutive word order. 
I I 
The intransitive light verb is not part of Chomsky 1995, but has ben argued for by Alexiadou (199). 
Harley & Noyer (1998), and Marantz (1997). It might be more properly labelled AgrO in the intransitive 
cases. Note here that 1 assume no unergative/unaccusa1ive structural distinction for Niuean so that 
intransitive agents would also be base generated in the complement of V. But nothing hinges on this, so 
that intransitive agents could instead be seen as merging directly into the specifier of vP if an 
unergativelunaccusative distinction were to be maintained. I have not found any diagnostics for a 
structural distinction betwen intransitive verb types, and I follow Cummins (200) in considering that, 
even in a language such as French, the claim that there are two intransitive verbs types which have 
different structures associated with them is incorrect. 
1% 
See McGinnis 1998. Chomsky (1995:357) notes that the object could move to specifier ofT, then the 
subject could undergo covert movement, thus satisfying the need for T to check nominative case, but he 
rules this derivation out on grounds of economy. 
Il I assume the emnedded clause in (13) is an indirect object, thus outside of the minimal vp. since it 
does not undergo predicate fronting along with the verb. There are other verbs in Niuean, such as iloa 
·know' which take an ergative argument as well as a sentential argument Here, the sentential argument 
checkS absolutive case. consequently Raising to S or 0 is impossible with these verbs (Levin and Masaro 
1985). 

246 
DIANE MASSAM 
14 
Unfortunately, data is not yet available regarding superiority effects in Wh.questions. Wh-words may 
appear in situ, or, as is more common with agent and patient Wh-words, they may appear as a predicate 
taking a headles relative as subject (se Seiter 1980). 
IS This was also argued to be the relevant distinction among nominals for the eastern .Indonesian 
language Men6-Menń Sasak by Austin (2000). 
16 
Seiter also mentions Relative Clause possessor, a grammatical rule whereby only the A or S of a 
relative clause can be optionally realized as a possessor of the head of the relative clause. I put this aside 
since it belongs, I think, to the nominal clause, which is accusatively organized (Seiter 1980, Massam 
200a) and hence must be discussed separately from the verbal clause. 
17 I have found no examples of 0 as a binder. This would be a crucial example, because it might isolate 
o from all other functions: A, S, Indirect Object and Oblique. This would show that 0 is a natural class 
on its own, which would be relevant, obviously. But what we can sec from the available data is that with 
respect to the ability to be a binder, A, S do not pattern together as a natural class against all other 
functions. 
II It should be noted, however, that McGinnis (1989) is assuming that the relation between the two 
elements is such that the higher specifier has moved past the lower specifier, not, as in Niuean, that the 
higher specifier is base-generated above the lower specifier, which has been moved. 
19 It is clear that precedence is not relevant, since there are examples such as (i), where the reflexively 
marked DP comes to precede its antecedent via clefting. 
(i) 
Ko ia 
nl ne 
fana 
e 
Mele. 
Peed 
her 
Rfl Pst 
shoot Erg Mele 
'It was herself who MeIe shot. (US) 
C-command could still be the relevant factor jf binding relations are established on thematic positions 
(along lines suggested by Guilfoyle, Hung and Travis (J992), Travis (1998), Pearce (2000) and others). 
But then the violation of Lethal Ambiguity, as well as (26), would remain unexplained. Reinhart and 
Reuland (1993) atempt to put aside both c-command and thematic hierarchy conditions on binding in 
favour of conditions on chains. I will not resolve all the relevant issues here. 
:zo I am putting aside equative and existential sentences that do not have an absolutive DP. See Seiter 
1980 and Massam 2001 for a description of these clauses. 
11 Absolutive is thus the obligatory case, and ergative the transitive case, as in Bobaljik (1993) and 
Levin and Masam (1985). 

I 
. 
} 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
1 
t 
:< 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE AND THE 
DISTRIBUTION OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES* 
It has long been assumed that subjects have special properties cross-linguistically. 
Depending on basic assumptions, these have been attributed to the property of 
"subjecthood" itself or to "certain epistemologically prior notions". 
But this 
assumption (underlying both positions) appears to be flawed. 
There is ample 
evidence, cross"linguistically. that no unified notion of subject exists. In this paper, 
we propose a syntactic account for the unified behavior of subjects in certain types 
of languages, showing why it is that subjects in certain other languages fail to 
display these properties. We will first show that languages such as English and 
French hicIude a syntactic requirement that all subjects be DPs-importantly, this 
induces a DP nQde dominating non-NP subjects. However. this is not universal, as 
data from Bulgarian, Russian. and some V-initial languages show. This makes any 
semantic account of subject properties untenable. 
Instead, we suggest that this 
clustering of DP properties is attributable to the [D]-feature, as proposed in 
Chomsky 1995 . English-type languages are 'D-feature prominent' while languages 
without this cluster of subject properties are 'V-feature prominent'. 
We further 
propose that this is correlated with clausal architecture-V prominent languages are 
those in which TP dominates all Agr projections while in 0 prominent languages an 
Agr projection dominates T. 
1 .  NP PROPERTIES OF ENGLISH NON-NP SUBJECTS 
English is a language in which subjects have an identifiable set of properties, and it 
turns out that all these properties can be reasonably classed as NP properties. In our 
discussion of English subject properties, we focus on the behavior of apparent non­
NP subjects, as in (1), showing that they undergo obligatory raising (1 .1). trigger 
subject agreement (1 .2). host emphatic reflexives (1 .3), and license plural adverbs 
(1 .4). 
(I)a. 
[cp that Shelby ]ost it] is true 
b. 
[pp under the bed) is a good place to hide 
247 
Wiliam D. Davies and Stanley Dubinsky (eds.), Objects and other subjects: 
GrammaticaljUnctions.junctional categories. and conflgurationality. 247-279. 
C 2001 Kluwe,. Academic Puhlishe,.s. Printed in the Netherlands. 

248 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
c. 
[AP very tall] is just how he likes his bodyguards 
1.1 Raising 
Whether one adopts the GB or the Minimalist analysis of raising, it is clear in either 
account that NPs undergo raising precisely because they are NPs. That is, NPs raise 
because NPs (as opposed to other categories) need Case, or NPs raise because NPs 
have the capacity (not possessed by other categories) to check off a formal feature in 
T. Given this, the data in (2) are Wlexpected. 1 
(2)a. 
[cp that Shelby lost it]i appears [ tj to be true J 
b. 
[pp under the bedJi appears [ ̴ to be a good place to hide] 
c. 
[AP very tall]i appears [ tj to be just how he likes his bodyguards] 
In (2), the constituents that raise to matrix subject position are not NPs, but a CP, 
PP, and AP, respectively, and the theoretical perspectives that we have just reviewed 
do not account for this. Under either of the standard assumptions about NP­
movement, the raising of non-NPs in (2) is mysterious. In a GB analysis, the non­
NP SUbjects in (2) need not receive Case, thus precluding Case-motivation as a 
factor.2 Thus. while a standard GB account does not explicitly rule these structures 
out, it can provide no coherent explanation for them. Under the Minimalist analysis 
the subjects in (2) lack D-features, and even though they are in spec-Agrs, the D­
features of the head of T should remain unchecked and the derivation should crash. 
The Minimalist position thus fares worse than the standard Case-motivated 
movement account in that it predicts that the sentences in (2) should be ill-formed. 
Moreover, not only must these accounts cope with their failure to motivate 
raising in (2), they must also contend with the fact that raising is obligatory. The 
non-NPs subjects of (2) must raise, as the data in (3) show. 
(3)a. 
"'it/there appears [[cp that Shelby lost it] to be true] 
b. 
"'it/there appears [[pp Wlder the bed] to be a good place to hide] 
c. 
"'it/there appears [[AP very tall] to be just how he likes his bodyguards] 
The fact is that standard OS assumptions wrongly predict that (3) should be the 
grammatical counterparts of (2). since the infinitival subjects should not need Case 
and the pleonastic subjects it/there should satisfy the 1 982 formulation of the EPP. 
The Minimalist model makes similarly wrong predictions. 

FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE AND SUBJECT PROPERTIES 
249 
1.2 Subject agreement 
Like NP subjects, CP, PP, and AP subjects can all trigger agreement on a tensed 
verb. In (2), the non-NP subjects trigger singular agreement on the tensed verb 
appears. Since in many languages third person singular agreement is a default, one 
might contend that the CP, PP, and AP actually play no role in determining the 
morphology on the verb in (2) and that they are indeed not even subjects (a frequent 
claim especially regarding CP subjects).3 However, as pointed out in Levine 1989 
with respect to PPs and in McCloskey 1991 b with respect to CPs, conjoined non­
NPs can (under certain circumstances) trigger plural agreement. This is illustrated in 
(4-6) for CPs, PPs, and APs. 
(4) 
£cp [cp that the march should go ahead] and [ep that it should be 
cancelled]] have been argued by the same people at different times 
(McCloskey 199Ib:564) 
(5)a. 
Sandy talks a lot about her beach house and the family's Appalachian 
camping trips. 
As a result, [pp [pp along the coast] and [pp in the 
mountains]] remind me of Sandy's retirement fantasies 
b. 
[pp [pp under the bed] and [pp in the fireplace]] are not the best 
(combination of) places to leave your toys(Levine 1989: 1 015) 
(6) 
[AP [AP very brawny) and [AP very studious]] are what Cindy aspires to 
be 
The possibility of plural agreement in (4-6) provides evidence that the conjoined 
CPs, PPs, and APs are indeed NP subjects. 
1.3 Emphatic reflexives 
Another NP characteristic of non-NP subjects is the ability to license an emphatic 
reflexive. As illustrated in (7). definite NPs in any position can occur with an 
emphatic reflexive.4 
(7)a. 
The professor herself offered the student sage advice. 
h. 
The zookeeper forced the monkey itself to clean up the cage. 
c. 
I gave my x-rays to the doctor herself. 
Like NPs, CPs and PPs when they are subjects, can license an emphatic reflexive as 
in (8) and (9). s 

250 
(8)a. 
b. 
(9)a. 
b. 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
That Leslie arrived drunk itself put Kelly in a foul mood. 
That there were 25 miles to go was itself enough to discourage Edwin. 
You don't have to get the ball into the net. Right between the two red 
markers is itself sufficient to score. 
Under the bed and in the closet are themselves reasonable places to 
stash the cash. 
However, (1 0) and (1 1) show that outside of subject position. these same CPs and 
PPs cannot license emphatic reflexives. 
(10)a. 
b. 
(l 1)a. 
b. 
Kelly was angry that Leslie arived drunk (·itself). 
Edwin hoped that there were less than 2 miles to go (·itself). 
Sandy wants to retire in the mountains (·itself}. 
We stashed the cash under the bed and in the closet ("'themselves). 
Taken together with the pronominal facts. these data show that CPs and PPs can 
exhibit behavior characteristic of NPs, but crucially only when they are in subject 
position.6 
1.4 Plural adverbs 
One way of licensing the quantificational adverb equally in a sentence is via a plural 
NP or an NP with a mass noun as head.' As the data in (12) and (13) show, plural 
NPs in subject and complement positions are equally available as licensors. 
(12)a. 
b. 
(1 3)a. 
b. 
The combatants were equally intransigent. 
My rabbit and my hamster are equally annoying. 
The professor distributed the As and Fs equally. 
My grandmother was proud of the two children equally. 
In the same way, conjoined CPs, PPs, and APs in subject position can license the 
presence of equally. 
(14)a. 
That he'll resign and that he'll stay in office seem at this point equally 
possible. (McCloskey 1991 b:564) 

FUNCTIONAL ARCHlTECIlJRE AND SUBJECT PROPERTIES 
b. 
Under the bed and in the closet equally remind me of that game of 
hide-and-seek we played. 
25 1 
c. 
Very tall and quaintly studious equally bring to mind my sixth grade 
science teacher. 
However, nonsubject CPs. PPs, and APs cannot license equally. 8 
(15)a. 
Dale thought that Dana left and that Terry wouldn't come (*equally). 
b. 
Leslie hid under the bed and in the closet (*equally). 
c. 
Ashley acts big and surly (*equally). 
These data, together with the foregoing three paradigms, show that subject CPs, PPs, 
and APs display NP-like behavior (as opposed to nonsubject CPs, PPs, and APs). 
The table below sumarizes our findings so far. 
DP j)roperties of non-NP subjeds 
En"lish 
agreement with coordinated non-NP subjects 
YES 
obligatory raising ofnon-NP subjects 
YES 
non-NP subjects host emphatic reflexives 
YES 
non-NP subiects license pimal adverbs 
YES 
1.5 Non-NP subjects are DPs 
As Chomsky (1995:55) suggests, the obligatory nature of the [spec,IP] position is 
"perhaps [due to] a morphological property of I or ... the predicational character of 
VP". We might extrapolate from this and suggest that "subject properties" are also 
attributable either to properties of the functional complex or to semantic 
requirements imposed by the nature of the subject-predicate relation. That is. the 
apparent DP-hood of non-NP subjects might be a consequence of syntactic 
properties of English, or it might stem from semantic constraints on the possible 
denotations of subjects. 
Based on what we have seen above, both views are 
plausible. However, the choice between them is not free. If one assumes the former 
view, that the DP-like behavior of non-NP subjects is due to the functional structure 
and properties of English clauses, then we might reasonably expect to find cross­
linguistic variation in this regard. That is to say. we might find languages with non­
NP subjects which do not exhibit any of the behaviors illustrated above. Adopting 
the latter position entails a stronger claim. If DP-like behavior ofnon-NP subjects is 
a consequence of denotational limitations on subjects themselves, then all varieties 
of subjects in all languages should be expected to exhibit such behaviors. 
In 
sections 3 and 4, following, we will show both that non-NP subjects exhibit DP-like 
behavior in a variety of languages, and that these behaviors are not universal. In so 

252 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
doing, we hope to prove that the range of phenomena seen in this section have a 
syntactic. rather than a semantic explanation. 
The 
syntactic 
explanation 
for what 
we 
have 
seen 
thus 
far 
is 
fairly 
straightforward. All subjects in English must be OPs (sometimes covertly so). This 
means that non-NP subjects have a DP-shell structure in English. and that the 
sentences in (I) actually have the structure given them in (16). in which the null 
head ofOP carries the usual set of «J>-features.9 
( 16)a. 
b. 
c. 
[OP [0 0 ] [cp that Shelby lost it]] is true 
[op [0 0 ] [pp under the bed)) is a good place to hide 
[OP [0 0 ] [AP very tall]] is just how he likes his bodyguards 
Under this view, these "subject" properties in English might be said to result from a 
requirement that the spec,Agr be filled by a OP (or, alternatively, the need to check a 
"strong" D-feature in T). We will have more to say about this in sections 4 and 5. 
In the meantime. we note the similarity of our analysis to proposals made for 
sentential arguments in earlier transformational frameworks. 
Lees (1960) and 
Rosenbaum (1967) both proposed an analysis of sentential subjects and objects in 
which an NP node immediately dominates an S. Our analysis of non-NP subjects is 
clearly uite. similar to these, although we are only adopting it for sentential 
subjects. 0 
The analysis of PP and other non-NP subjects has received similar attention. 
Williams 1984 observes that "copular sentences [may have] ... non-NP subjects", as 
in (1 7). 
(17) 
(=WilIiams 1984. (55» 
a. 
From here to there is a long way. 
b. 
Under the bed is a nice place to hide. 
c. 
Relaxed is what Mary wants to be. 
In attempting to account for this distribution and the fact that such subjects undergo 
raising and other NP-movement, he proposes the following exocentric phrase 
structure rule: 
. 
(1 8) 
NP 4- X, for all X (= Williams 1984: (57» 
However, Williams incorrectly claims that non-NP subjects are restricted to copular 
sentences, I I  and therefore supposes that his exocentric rule would have this limited 
application. On the exocentricity of his proposed rule, Williams defends this "fault" 

FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE AND SUBJECT PROPERTIES 
253 
on the (mistaken) grounds that "verbal agreement is default third singular because 
the rule that introduces them is exocentric" (cf. section 1 .2 above). 
More recently, Bresnan (1994: 1 03-1 1 1) considers the behavior of PPs in NP 
positions (as contrasted with inverted locative PPS).12 On the basis of verb 
agreement. tag question formation. subject-aux inversion, and control of attributive 
VPs. Bresnan concludes that these PPs "behave like nominal phrases, not PPs. 
It 
Accordingly. she proposes analyzing them as "place or time NPs whose missing 
nominal heads are contextually interPreted as instances of ellipsis". as shown in 
(19). 
(1 9)a. 
b. 
[NP (A PLACE) [pp under the bed]] is a good place to hide 
[NP (A TIME) [pp between six and seven]] suits her fine 
She goes on to say that the analysis (of an understood/elided head) helps explain its 
distribution. 
That is, one finds PLACE PPs where a locative is expected and TIME 
PPs where a temporal phrase is expected. 
While sympathetic to the notion that the PPs in (19) are complements of a 
nominal category, we think that our OP analysis is preferable to one involving the 
ellipsis of a lexical noun. This is at least in part because an overt head noun is not 
always acceptable in these circumstances. Consider the following. 
(20)a. 
b. 
??The location (of) under the bed is a good place to hide. 
*The time at 1 o'clock is when to arrive. 
From (20), we see that Bresnan's analysis caries the additional burden of explaining 
why the head noun canot be expressed in some instances. It therefore seems to us 
that under a OP analysis the job of being a phrase of a certain semantic category is 
always the job of the phrase and never the job of the head. This is just as true of NP 
complements of 0 as it is ofCP, PP, and AP complements. OPs under our analysis 
just get their semantics from their complements. 
2. OP PROPERTIES OF NON-NPS INSERTED INTO CANONICAL DP 
COMPLEMENT POSITIONS 
This section will consider a set of analogous cases, in which non-NP complements 
inserted into canonical OP complement positions are found to exhibit OP properties. 
The OP-shell structure posited for English non-NP subjects is thus motivated for a 
separate set of cases, and is not limited to subject position (as Williams 1 984 
supposed). The data in (21) and (22) illustrate non-NP complements in canonical 
OP-complement positions. 
(21 )a. 
they [vp discussed [pp after the holidays]] (=Jaworska 1986: (16a) 

254 
Wl.LIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
b. 
they [vp discussed [NP last year's office party]] 
(22)a. 
they [vp believe [ep that Grady quit the teamll 
b. 
they [vp believe [NP the rumor that Grady quit]] 
(21) and (22), with the verbs discuss and believe, contrast with cases in which only 
PPs or CPs (and not NPs) are allowed as complements. 
(23)a. 
b. 
(24)a. 
\J. 
they all [vp sat [pp in one comer of the room]] 
*they all [vp sat [NP one comer of the room]] 
they [vp hope [cp that Grady quit the team]] 
*they (vp hope [NP the rumor that Grady quit]] 
Crucially, these non-NP complements exhibit a range ofDP properties. and some of 
these are the same as we find for English non-NP subjects. 
These non-NPs 
passivize (2.1), are islands for extraction (2.2), host emphatic reflexives (2.3), and 
license plural adverbs (2.4). 
2.1 Passive 
It has been noticed previously (Webelhuth 1992) that CP complements of verbs that 
can also take NP complements (such as believe) exhibit behaviors not available to 
CP complements of verbs that do not allow NP complements (such as hope). For 
instance, in (25), the CP complement of believe. but not that of hope. can passivize. 
(25)a. 
b. 
[cp that Grady will quit the team] is believed by everyone 
*[cp that Grady will quit the team] is hoped by everyone 
The same contrast can be seen in (26) with PP complements of discuss and sit. 13 
(26)a. 
b. 
[pp after the holidays] was discussed by everone in the office for the 
entire month of January. 
*[pp in that comer ofthe room] was sat by everyone in the seminar for 
the longest time. 
This contrast is readily explained by assuming that the derived subjects in (25a) and 
(26a) both have a DP-shell structure, and that they are inserted into the structure as 

FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE AND SUBJECT PROPERTIES 
255 
DP complements of believe and discuss, respectively. The ungramatical sentences 
(2Sb) and (26b) each involve verbs that do not allow DP complements. 
2.2 Subjacency 
When non-NPs are inserted into canonical DP-complement positions, they resist 
extraction in the manner of complex NP islands. This is clearly evident when the 
complement is an apparent PP. 
(27) 
Dale chose under the couch instead of behind the door. 
*What did you choose under? (* with intended meaning) 
(28) 
Dale looked under the couch. What did you look under? 
Similarly. we find that PP complements of Ps can also block extraction in the 
manner of DPs, as (29) and (30) illustrate. 
(29) 
(30)a. 
b. 
c. 
We've been getting a lot of water damage lately. Pat is worried about 
behind the garage, the shed. and the retaining wall. *What are you 
worried about behind? 
He lifted one end of the pole to above shoulder height. 
What position did he lift one end of the pole to? 
*What did he lift one end of the pole to above? 
The ungrammaticality of the interrogative in (29) is predicted if we understand it to 
have the structure given in (3 1).14 
(3 1)a. 
*whatl are [IP you worried [pp about [oP [pp behind tl ]]]] 
b. 
what kind of handgun do you believe [that he bought]? 
c. 
*what kind of handgun do you believe [op the assertion [that he 
bought]]? 
In (3 1a), the insertion of an extra DP node has the same effect on extractability as it 
does in the case of complex NP islands such as in (3 1 c). Accordingly, the contrast 
between (27) and (28) is similar to the contrast seen in (31 b) and (3 1 c). 
The same prediction (and result) obtains for CP complements. although the 
argument is a bit more complicated. Clearly, extraction is possible from the CP 
complement of believe. as in (32). 

256 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
(32) 
who. do you believe [cp that Dale saw t. ] 
However, it must be remembered that the complement of believe is only optionally a 
DP position (Wllike the complement position of choose). 
In order to induce 
subjacency effect of the sort observed in (27), we must construct a sentence in which 
the CP complement of believe must be assigned a DP-shell structure. When this is 
done, we find that extraction out of CP is impossible. In this regard, we find that 
coordinated CP conjuncts of believe will resist across-the-board (ATB) extraction, if 
something in the clause triggers for them a DP-shell structure. 
Having shown, 
above, that the adverb equally indicates the presence of DP structure, we can test 
extraction out of the clausal complement of believe using this adverb. 
Compare 
(33a) and (33b). 
(33)a. 
b. 
Who do you believe that Dale saw and Dana heard? 
??Who did Dana believe equally that Dale would leave and that Terry 
wouldn't help? 
(from: 'Dana believed equally that Dale would leave John and that 
Terry wouldn't help him. ') 
In (33a), ATB extraction is possible out of the complements of believe (as we would 
expect for conjoined CP complements). However, in (33b), however, the presence 
of equally imposes a DP-shell structure on the complement clauses. In this instance, 
we see that across-the-board extraction is impossible. 
2.3 Emphatic reflexives 
Emphatic reflexives reveal a similar pattern. Section 1 .3 demonstrated that subject 
PPs and CPs exhibit the nominal-like ability to host emphatic reflexives. While PP 
complements do not nonnally allow emphatic reflexives, it turns out that PPs 
occuring in positions canonically filled by DP complements can do so. Compare 
the data in (34). 
(34)a. 
I chose under the bed and in the closet themselves rather than under 
the sofa and behind the door. 
b. 
*1 hid my comics books under the bed and in the closet themselves, 
rather than under the sofa and behind the door. 
The PPs in (34a) occur as complements of a verb choose that canonically takes DP 
complements, while those in (34b) arc garden-variety locative PPs. As we might 
expect, only the PPs in the fonner can license an emphatic reflexive. 
The same argument can be made for complement CPs, although the fact that 
they are in optional DP-positions, rather than canonical ones, seems to make the 

FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE AND SUBJECf PROPERTIES 
257 
judgments less robust. 
Nevertheless, in the right context, we can contrast the 
complement of a verbs like resent which does allow DP complements, with that of 
hope which does not. 
(35)a. 
?I don't just resent that John used vile words in talking to me, but 
resent that he yelled at me in public itself. 
(cf. It's not just that he swore at me. That John yelled at me in public 
itself made me want to quit my job.) 
b. 
*I'm not just hoping that we have a Democratic majority on the school 
board again, but hoping that Carol won itself. 
(cf. It's not just having a Democratic majority on the school board 
which is a good thing. That Carol won itself wiIJ start to produce 
positive changes.) 
While the emphatic reflexive is in general not as good with complement CPs as with 
subject CPs, (35a) is still noticably more acceptable than (35b). 
2.4 Plural adverbs 
The fourth diagnostic used to establish the DP-like behavior of non-OP subjects was 
their ability to license the quantity adverb equally. Again we find plural PP in 
canonical OP positions have the ability to license equally (36a) while plural PPs in 
other non-subject positions cannot (36b). 15 
(36)a. 
b. 
I worried about behind the garage and along the driveway equally. 
Leslie hid under the bed and in the closet (*equaUy). 
We also find that CP complements of verbs that also take DP complements (such as 
believe) can license equally in the same way, while those (such as hope) do not. 
(37)a. 
b. 
Dale resented equally that Dana wouldn't pay for gas and that she kept 
begging for rides. 
??Oale hoped equally that Dana would start chipping in for gas and 
that she would stop asking for rides. 
Thus, once more we find that non-OP complements exhibit DP-like behavior when 
occuring in potential DP-positions. The following table suinmarizes the results 
reported in this section. 

258 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
Properties of non-NP complements in DP positions 
English 
passivization 
YES 
islands for subjacency 
YES 
non-NP subjects host emphatic reflexives 
YES 
non-NP subjects license plural adverbs 
YES 
3. NON-NP SUBJECTS IN FRENCH 
The OP nature of non-NP subjects is not simply an artifact of English; there are a 
number of other languages which both have non-NP subjects and which show 
evidence of these subjects being DPs covertly. One of the languages that we have 
examined that falls into this category is French. Examples of non-NP subjects are 
illustrated in (38). 
(38) 
a. 
Non-NP subjects in French (CPs, PPs, VPs): 
[ep que tu me plait] est evident 
'That you please me (I am attracted to you) is evident. • 
b. 
[pp SOlls Ie lit] n'est pas un bon endroit pour se cacher 
'Under the bed is not a good place to hide oneself. • 
c. 
[vp longer la cote] me parait une faÆon admirable pour connaitre la 
vrai France 
'To go along the coast appears to me to be an admirable way to get to 
know the real France.' 
3. J Raising facts 
As we found for English, non-NP subjects in French undergo raising in a manner 
similar to that of NPs, indicating (insofar as raising is case-motivated) that these 
constituents have a OP-shell structure. 
Example (39) illustrates the facts. As the contrast between (39a) and (39b) 
shows, the subject PP must be raised from the complement clause to the matrix 
subject position when the complement clause is infinitival. Conversely, raising of 
the PP subject cannot occur if the embedded clause has a tensed verb, as seen in a 
comparison of(39c) and (39d). 
(39)a. 
II ne me semble pas que soilS Ie lit soit/est un bon endroit pour se 
cachero 
'It doesn't seem to me that under the bed islwere[subjunctive] a good 
place to hide oneself. • 

FUNCTIONAL ARCHITEClURE AND SUBJECT PROPERTIES 
259 
b. 
*11 ne me semble pas sous Ie lit etre un bon endroit pour se cachero 
(It doesn't seem to me that under the bed to be a good place to hide 
oneself) 
c. 
Sous Ie lit ne me semble pas etre un bon endroit pour se cachero 
'Under the bed doesn't seem to me to be a good place to hide oneself.' 
d. 
*Sous Ie lit ne me semble pas que soitlest un bon endroit pour se 
cachero 
(Under the bed doesn't seem to me that is were a good place to hide 
oneself.) 
When we examine the distribution of CPs, the paradigm is a little less complete, 
since the analog of (39a) with a CP subject is hard to get. 
This is because of a 
doubling violation that is created by the insertion of a que clause immediately 
following the complementizer que. 
Of course, the same CP subject cannot be 
inserted into an infinitival complement clause, even though there is no que 
complementizer to block it {see (40a» . 
In (40b). though. it is clear that the CP 
subject of the complement clause can only occupy the matrix subject position when 
the complement clause is infinitival. 
16 
(40)a. 
b. 
*11 me semble que Shelby )'a perdu etre un fait. 
(It seems to me [that Shelby lost it] to be a fact.) 
Qpe Shelby I'a perdu me semble etre/*est un fait. 
(That Shelby lost it seems to me to bel*is a fact.) 
3.2 Agreement 
In French as well, coordinated non-NP subjects can trigger plural agreement (under 
the right circumstances). Examples of these, involving CPs, infinitival phrases, and 
PPs, are given in (4 1). 
(41 )a. 
b. 
Que Ie defile continue ou qu'il soit annule alont Ête discute par les 
memes gens a differentes occasions. 
'That the march should go ahead or that it should be cancelled 
has/have been argued by the same people at different times.' 
Qu'il demissionera ou qu'il restera toujours a son poste me semblent 
egalement possibles. 
'That he'll resign and that he'll stay in office seem to me equally 
possible. ' 

260 
c. 
d. 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
Sejoumer dans les montagnes et longer la cote me paraissent une 
falton admirable pour connaitre la vrai Fiance. 
'Traveling through the mountains and going the coast appear to me an 
admirable way to get to know the real France. ' 
Sous Ie lit ou dans Ie placard ne sont pas de bons endroits pour se 
cachero 
'Under the bed and in the closet are not good places to hide oneself.' 
The above data support the claim that non-NP subjects in French display NP-like 
properties with respect to subject-verb agreement. 
3.3 Emphatic reflexives 
French also has an emphatic reflexive whose distribution. like that of English, 
indicates that non-NP subjects are nominal. In French, though. lUi-mime 'himself 
tends to be used only with persons. Abstract and non-sentient NPs normally have 
lui-meme as the complement ofan appropriate preposition, as example (42) shows. 
(42)a. 
b. 
Le fait qu'il y avait 25 kilometres a' traverser etait, par/de lui-meme, 
assez pour decourager Edouard. 
'The fact that there were 25 kilometers yet to go, by/of itself, was 
enough to discourage Edward. ' 
*Le fait qu'it y avait 25 kilometres it traverser elait, lui-meme, assez 
pour decourager Edouard. 
(The fact that there were 25 kilometers yet to go. itself, was enough to 
discourage Edward.) 
In (42a), the emphatic reflexive associated with a 'the fact that . . . •  clause is preceded 
by the preposition par or de. 
In (43), we find that a bare CP subject licenses the 
same emphatic reflexives as do clausal subjects headed by fait 'fact'. 
(43)a. 
b. 
Qu'il y avait 25 kilometres Ii traverser ctait, par/de lui-rneme, assez 
pour decourager Edouard. 
'That there were 25 kilometers to go was. by/of itself, was enough to 
discourage Edward. ' 
*Qu'il y avait 25 kilometres it traverser etait, lui-rneme, assez pour 
decourager Edouard. 
(That there were 25 kilometers· to go was, by/of itself, was enough to 
discourage Edward.) 

FUNCTIONAL ARCHITEClJRE AND SUBJECT PROPERTIES 
261 
ǈmphatic reflexives are also possible for PP subjects, and involve the preposition en 
'in'. The data in (44) show that emphatic reflexives are available for PP subjects but 
not for PP complements, indicating once again the special nominal nature of the 
subject position. 
(44)a. 
Sous Ie lit en lui-meme n'est pas un bon endroit pour se cachero 
'Under the bed in itself is not a good place to hide oneself. • 
b. 
*Shelby Ita perdu sous Ie lit en lui-meme. 
(Shelby lost it under the bed in itselflhimseJ£) 
When non-NP subjects are conjoined, we find that a bare emphatic reflexive is 
possible. (45a) and (4Sb) illustrate this for conjoined CPs and PPs, respectively. 
(45)a. 
Qu'it demissionera et qu'il restera toujours Ii son poste me semblent 
maintenant eux-memes possibles. 
'That he will resign and that he will remain in office seem to me at 
this point themselves possible.' 
b. 
S6joumer dans les montagnes et longer la cote eux-memes me 
paraissent une faǉon admirable pour cOlUlaitre la vrai France. 
'Traveling in the mountains and going along the coast themselves 
appear to me an admirable way to get to know the real France.' 
The appearance of eux-memes with the non-NP subjects in (45) supports the notion 
that they are in fact nominals covertly. 
The facts above, taken together, present a convincing case for positing an 
obligatory OP structure for subjects in French and English. In the table below, we 
summarize the properties ofnon-NP subjects presented thus far. 
Properties of non-NP subjects 
Eoelish 
French 
obligatory raising of non-NP subjects 
YES 
YES 
agreement with coordinated non-NP subjects 
YES 
YES 
non-NP subjects host emphatic reflexives 
YES 
YES 
non-NP subjects license plural adverbs 
YES 
(n.a.) 
3.4 Subjacency and the relevance of subject islandhood 
There is one additional diagnostic yet to be considered, that of subject islandhood. 
We have saved this for last because, under curent P&P and Minimalist assumptions, 
the resistance to extraction of clauses in subject position is unconnected to their 
categorial status. This has not always been the case. In an attempt to provide a 
unified analysis for Ross' (1967) island effects, Chomsky (1973) adopted the Lees 

262 
WILIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
(1 960) and Rosenbaum (1 967) NP-over-S analysis of sentential subjects, thereby 
providing a unified account for complex NP and subject islands (among others). 
Chomsky (1986a) abandoned the theory of bounding nodes in an attempt to 
unify the subjacency account of subject and adjunct islands. 
(46)a. 
*what) did [IP [ep t' l that John bought t) ] upset Jack] 
(subject island) 
b. 
*what) did [IP Julia leave the party after [cp t' l Jack said tl ]) 
(adjunct island) 
c. 
what 1 did [IP Julia think [ep t' ) that Jack said t) ]] 
In (46a) and (46b), extraction out of a CP in either subject or adjunct position 
creates a subjacency violation. These contrast with (46c), in which wh-movement is 
out of a CP complement of the verb think. This contrast is taken to result from the . 
failure of subjects and adjuncts to be L-marked. That is, they are not (in Chomsky's 
terms) "directly 8-marked by a lexical category" . Neither the subject CP in (46a) 
nor the adjunct CP in (46b) are L-marked. Both are therefore barriers. The lP that 
inunediately dominates them is also a barrier (by inheritance). Thus, movement 
from t 'l to whatl crosses two bariers, violating subjacency. In (46c), by contrast. 
the CP object is L-marked and is not a barrier; extraction is therefore possible. 
Thus, in the Barriers model, sentential subjects are not islands for extraction due to 
any structural difference between them and sentential objects, but only due to 
differences in the way that they are 8-marked. 
A closer look at the data shows that subjects and adjuncts are not quite as 
similar as Chomsky (and others) have supposed. It twns out that adjuncts, unlike 
subjects, are not always islands for extraction. 
(47) illustrates three varieties of 
adjuncts, while (48) illustrates the same phrases as SUbjects. 
(47)a. 
b. 
c. 
(48)a. 
b. 
c. 
*who) did [she go to Harvard [because she wanted to work with tl ]] 
whol did [she go to Harvard [in order to work with tl ]] 
(Culicover 1997:253) 
?whatl did [he finish his thesis [without checking tl J] 
*what, is [(that she wanted to learn tl ] unfortunate] 
*whatl is [[to learn tl ] very hard) . 
*whatl is [[checking tl ] absolutely necessary before you turn in your 
thesis] 
Here, we see that adjuncts are not always islands for extraction. In (47b) and (47c), 
extraction is possible out of an infinitival purpose clause and marginally out of a 

FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE AND SUBJECT PROPERTIES 
263 
gerundive prepositional complement (in contrast with the tensed because adjunct in 
(47a» . Notice that the same phrases, in subject position, Wliformly disallow wh· 
extraction. 
A Barriers.style account of subjacency applied to adjuncts wrongly 
predicts that (47b) and (47c) should be as ungrammatical as (47a), since neither is L· 
marked. 
More recently, Uriagereka (1999) attributes subject islandhood to a left branch 
constraint on interpretation, and proposes that a system with multiple "speII·out" can 
predict certain islands. According to this account, if a category X is spelled.out, the 
system doesn't have access to its constituent parts, thus X becomes an island after its 
spell-out. By simplifying Kayne's ( 1994) LCA to its base step (iff A conunands B, 
A precedes B), he ensures that right branches do not spell.out early, but left 
branches do. Since left-branches must spell·out early, if they are to be linearized by 
the LeA, left branching constituents such as subjects (in the languages we have 
examined) are predicted to be islands. 
When we examine the facts of Bulgarian, we will have cause to question both of 
these curent approaches to subject islandhood. However, we first want to establish 
that extraction from subject clauses is impossible for both languages under 
consideration. 
In French, as shown in (49) and (50), we find that extraction is 
impossible from both finite and infinitival subject clauses. 
(49)a. 
b. 
(50)a. 
b. 
[que Marie a achete une nouvelle auto], cela I'a enerve 
'That Mary bought a new car] made him angry. ' 
*quelle auto pensez·vous [que Marie a achetee] I'enervera 
(Which car do you think that Mary bought will make him angry?) 
je pense [qu' acheter une nouvelle auto], I'enervera 
'I think that to buy a new car will make him angry. ' 
*que pensez-vous [qu'acheter] l'enervera 
(What do you think to buy will make him angry?) 
From these and the preceding facts we can see that subjects are uniformly islands for 
extraction in both English and French. In the following table, these results are added 
to what we have already reported. Of course, if either the Barriers or the Minimalist 
accounts of subject islandhood are correct, then these facts are irrelevant to our 
curent discussion of islandhood. 
However, note that both accounts make very 
strong claims regarding the universality of subject islandhood. Under the Barriers 
account. subject islandhood should be universal (since it is derived from the 
differences in how subjects and complements are assigned thematic roles). In the 
Uriagereka's Minimalist formulation, subjects should be islands whenever they are 
initial (i.e. occupy the left branch ofa structure). In the following section, facts from 
Bulgarian will be seen to confound both accounts, and will lead us to propose that 
subject islandhood is connected with DP·hood of subjects, and that subjacency is 
best formulated in terms of boWl ding nodes (i.e., via reference to category labels). 

264 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
Properties of non-NP subjects 
Enfdish 
French 
obligatory raising ofnon-NP subjects 
YES 
YES 
am-_eement with coordinated non-NP subjects 
YES 
YES 
non-NP subjects host emphatic reflexives 
YES 
YES 
non-NP subjects license plural adverbs 
YES 
(n.a.) 
non-NP (clausal) subjects are extraction islands 
YES 
YES 
4. THE CASE AGAINST A SEMANTIC ACCOUNT OF SUBJECT PROPERTIES 
We made our initial observations about the constellation of properties characteristic 
of subjects and noted in particular that non-NP subjects and non-NPs in canonical 
NP complement positions displayed the full range of properties characteristic of 
DPs. Getting to this point. we were immediately hopeful of having discovered or 
come closer to discovering what the content of the EPP was. And if all languages 
exhibited these DP-properties, we'd have no reason to doubt that we were correct in 
our initial speculation. However, it did not take long to find that subjects do not 
exhibit this constellation of facts in all languages. 
For one thing, verb-initial 
languages routinely allow extraction from sentential subjects. a point we return to 
below. Of more immediate interest. however, is the case of Russian and Bulgarian. 
where we encounter languages in which non-NP subjects do not exhibit DP 
properties and not all subjects are islands. The Slavic data appear to support the 
position that subjects are islands when they are DPs and provide additional support 
for the notion that the islandhood of subjects can be reduced to the complex noun 
phrase constraint (CNPC). We will focus here on data from Bulgarian. 
4.1 Bulgarian 
Bulgarian has both "infinitival" IP subjects as in (51), and DP clausal subjects as in 
(52). that contain a clause headed by tova 'this' or lakt 'fact'. Infinitival subjects 
contrast with those in (52) in that they exhibit no DP properties (verb agreement, the 
ability to license emphatic reflexives, and islandhood).17 
(5 1) 
[IP da zakasnjava§ 
na zasedanija] bese neprostimo 
to be.late2sG.lMP for meetings 
was inexcusable 
'To be late for meetings was inexcusable.' 
(52)a. 
[DP tovalfaktat ce Marija zabravi statijata] bese neprostimo 
this/the.fact that Maria forgot 
the.paper was inexcusable 
'(The fact) that Maria forgot the paper was inexcusable.' 

FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE AND SUBJECT PROPERTIES 
b. 
[oP zabravja-ne-to na knigataJ bese neprostimo ot 
strana na 
forget-ing-the of the. book was inexcusable from side of 
Marija 
Maria 
'Maria's forgetting of the book was inexcusable. t 
265 
Bulgarian verbs agree with their subjects in person and number (and in gender 
with adjectival participles). As (53) shows, conjoined NPs obligatorily determine 
plural agreement on the copula with a predicate adjective. 
(53)a. 
b. 
Ivan i 
Lili bjaxa nevnimatelni. 
Ivan and Lily were inattentive.PL 
'Ivan and Lily were inattentive. ' 
*1 van i 
Lili bese {nevnimatelnalnevnimatelen}. 
Ivan and Lily was {inattentive.FEM.SG/inattentive.MASC.SG} 
While conjoined non-NP subjects in English and French can all trigger plural 
agreement on the verb, we find that plural agreement is not possible with conjoined 
infinitival subjects in Bulgarian. (54a) contrasts with (53) and (54b). 
(54)a. 
b. 
[IP da zakasnjavas na zasedanija] i 
[IP da zabravjas knigite] 
to be.late 
for meetings 
and 
to forget 
the.books 
belie neprostimo I 
*bjaxa neprostimi 
was inexcusable. so were inexcusable.PL 
'To be late for meetings and to forget the books wasJ*were 
inexcusable. ' 
[op tova ce toj ne pozvani] i 
[op tova ce ne se 
izvini ] 
this that he not called 
and 
this that not self apologized 
?bese neprostimo I bjaxa neprostimi 
was inexcusable.sG were inexcusable.PL 
'That he didn't call and that he didn't apologize ?waslwere 
inexcusable. ' 
We next examine the OP property of emphatic reflexives. Bulgarian NP subjects 
license emphatic reflexives, as in (55), where profesorka licenses samata. As (56) 
shows, NP objects can also license the emphatic reflexive. 
(57) shows that 
nominalized -ne clauses andJakt a clauses also license emphatic reflexives. 
(55) 
Samata 
profesorka proveri ispita 
mi. 
the.herself professor graded the. exam my 
'The professor herself graded my exam. ' 

266 
(56) 
(57)a. 
b. 
WIT.LIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
(Az) vzex intervju 
ot 
sarnija 
profesor. 
(I) 
took interview from the. himself professor 
'I interviewed the professor himself.' 
Samoto zabravjane na knigata bese neprostimo ot 
strana na. 
the.itself forgetting of the. book was inexcusable from side of 
Marija 
Maria 
'Maria's forgetting of the book itself was inexcusable.' 
Samijat fakt ce 
Marija zabravi knigata bese neprostim. 
the. self fact that Maria forgot the.book was 
inexcusable 
'The fact that Maria forgot the book itself was inexcusable. ' 
Thus, emphatic reflexives can be licensed in Bulgarian by any type of NP in any 
position, just as in English and French. However, unlike English. infinitival subjects 
cannot license emphatic reflexives in Bulgarian. 
This is shown in (58), whose 
ungrammaticality is due to the presence of the emphatic reflexive samoro. 
(58) 
*Samoto da zabravi§ knigata 
bese neprostimo. 
the.self to forget 
the. book was inexcusable 
(To forget the book was itself inexcusable.) 
The ungrarnmaticality of (58) is evidence that non-nominal subjects in Bulgarian are 
not open to the DP-shell analysis proposed above for English. 
We have established, in examining data from English and French, that non-NP 
subjects have DP properties in these languages, and also that extraction from 
sentential subjects is unifonnly barred. If these two properties are correlated, as we 
have shown above, then extraction from infinitival subjects in Bulgarian should be 
possible. In fact, it is. 
(59) 
(60)a. 
b. 
Kakvo bese neprostimo da zabravis? 
what 
was inexcusable to forget 
'What to forget was inexcusable?' 
Da publikuva roman bese celta 
na nejnata kariera. 
to 
publish 
novel 
was the. goal of the.hers career 
'To publish a novel was an important goal of her career.' 
Kakvo da publikuva be§e eel 
na nejnata kariera? 
what to publish 
was goal of the. hers career 
'What to publish was an important goal of her career?' 

(6I)a. 
b. 
c. 
(62)a. 
b. 
c. 
FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE AND SUBJECI' PROPERTIES 
Mislja ce za nego beie vaZno 
da otide na kino. 
I.think that for him was important to go 
to cinema 
'I think that it was important for him to go to the cinema. ' 
267 
?na kalevol mislis 
[ce 
bese vaZno 
za nego [ da otide tl ]] 
to what 
you.think that was important for him 
to go 
'To what do you think that it was important for him to go?' 
na kakvol mislis 
[ce 
[da otide tl ] bese vaZno 
za nego] 
to what you.think that to go 
was important for him 
'To what do you think that to go was important for him?' 
Tova ce toj steSe da otide na kino 
oese vaZno 
za nego. 
this that he would to go 
to cinema was important for him 
'That he go to the cinema was important for him. • 
Za nego be§e vaino 
tova ce 
toj steSe da otide na kino. 
for him was important this that he would to go 
to cinema 
'It was important for him that he go to the cinema.' 
*na kakvo, za nego bde vaZno 
[tova ce toj ste§e da otide tt l 
to what for him was important this that he would to go 
(To what was it important for him that he go?) 
In (59) and (60b). a wh element has been extracted from the infinitival subject of the 
matrix clause ,*ith grammatical results. In (61b) and (61c), a wh phrase extracted 
from the infinitival subject of the clausal complement of 'thinks' results in a well­
formed constituent question. Notice in (62c), that extraction from a pronominally 
headed tova re clause is impossible (showing that, while extraction from subject 
clauses is possible, Bulgarian still has CNPC effects). 
These data show unequivocally that extraction is possible from some subject 
clauses in Bulgarian (extraction which would be impossible in English and French). 
In fact, any explanation that does not appeal to a principled difference between 
Bulgarian infinitival subjects and their counterparts in English and French will fail. 
We would suggest that extraction out of Bulgarian clausal subjects is correlated with 
the language not requiring that all subjects be OPs. In contrast, extraction out of 
clausal subjects is impossible in English and French precisely because of the 
requirement that all subjects be OPs. With the OP node dominating the non-NP 
node, any extraction would necessarily cross two phrasal nodes and thus violate 
subjacency (under the more traditional node-based fonnulation), just as in a CNPC 
violation. In Bulgarian, when there is no DP node dominating a clausal subject, 
extraction does not entail a concomitant subjacency violation.18 
The contrast between Bulgarian and the other languages examined above 
precludes the aûcounts of subject islandhood proposed in Chomsky 1986a and in 
Uriagereka 1999. 
Since not all subjects in all languages are islands, subject 

268 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
islandhood (where it is detennined) cannot be a consequence of the manner in which 
subjects are assigned thematic roles. 
The non-universality of subject islands is 
further demonstrated in a number of V-initial languages (to be taken up in section 
4.2). Accordingly, a thematically-based (i.e., semantic) explanation. such as that 
attempted in Chomsky 1 986a, fails. An explanation based on some application of 
the Left Branch Condition (as Uriagereka (1999) suggests) fares even worse. 
Consider again the facts in (61). In (61c), the embedded infinitival subject occupies 
a left branch of the embedded clause whereas in (6tb) the subject is postposed and 
occupies a right branch. 
Under Uriagereka's linearization-dependent account of 
islands, we would predict (6tb) to be acceptable and (61c) to be ill-fonned; 
however, native speakers report that (61 c) is, in fact, preferable to (6tb). This points 
once again to the conclusion that the difference rests in the category membership of 
the subjects in question, rather than their position. In other words, subject islands 
are simply another case of complex NP islands. 
Given the distribution of properties summarized below, there is good evidence 
that Slavic non-NP subjects are not open to the OP-shell analysis we have proposed 
for English and . French. This is especially important in that the Slavic data point 
away from a semantic explanation for the OP-like behavior of non-NP subjects in 
languages which do exhibit it, leading us to a syntactic account for the phenomena 
described in sections 1 and 3. This affinns our initial contention that the observed 
properties are due to the imposition of category membership (that is, a OP-shell 
structure). In the following section, we will consider the case of V -initial languages, 
and suggest that the ability of a language to impose OP-shell structure on subjects is 
at least to some extent configurationally dependent. 
Properties of non-NP subjects 
English! 
BulgarianJ 
French 
Russian 
obligatory raising of non-NP subjects 
YES 
(n.a.) Iǃ 
agreement with coordinated non-NP subjects 
YES 
NO 
non-NP subjects license emphatic reflexives 
YES 
NO 
non-NP subjects license plural adverbs 
YES 
(n.a.) 
non-NP (clausal) subjects are extraction islands 
YES 
NO 
4.2 V-initia/ /anguages 
This section examines V-initial languages with respect to obligatory OP-structure 
for subjects. 
We find that these languages fail to exhibit such properties. and 
propose that the reason for this is attributable to their structure. 
Specifically, we 
suggest that V -initial languages do not and cannot require their subjects to be OPs 
because of the manner in which VP constituents interact with the functional 
complex. In this regard, we follow Massaro and Smal1wood (1997) in their proposal 
for Niuean, wherein only the verb moves into the functional complex (and not the 
subject). By adopting their proposal as a general property of V -initial languages, we 
predict that such languages should (as a class) fail to have the subject properties 
found in English and French. Having argued, successfully we believe. that subject 

L 
FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTIJRE AND SUBJECT PROPERTIES 
269 
islandhood is a sub case of the CNPC, we will assume that it is another marker of 
obligatory OP-hood for subject position. 
One immediately salient difference between languages, such as English and 
French, and V-initial languages is that raising (when attested) turns out not to be 
obligatory in V -initial languages. This is true at least for Irish (McCloskey 1985 and 
this volume), Malagasy (Travis, this volume), and Niuean (Seiter 1983). If V-initial 
languages do not require OP-hood of their subjects, then this is not surprising. 
Malagasy, an Austronesian language of Madagascar, appears to provide some 
additional confirming evidence of our characterization of V-initial languages. 
Malagasy has a basic VOS structure, and there is evidence that non-NP subjects 
cannot be analyzed as NPs, thus making the OP-shell analysis untenable. NPs and 
CPs can appear as subjects, and can be conjoined; however, NPs and CPs take 
different coordinating conjunctions. 
The data in (63) illustrate conjoined CP 
subjects.2o 
(63)a. 
mahasosotra an'i 
Soa [cp fa 
nihira mafy i 
Bozy 
annoy 
ACC Soa 
COMP PST.sing hard DET Bozy 
ary (*fa) 
nitabataba 
i 
Be] 
and 
COMP pST.make.noise DET Be 
'That Bozy sang loudly and that Be made a lot of noise annoys Soa.' 
b. 
heveriko [cp fa 
tsara tarehy i 
Soa ary (*fa) 
kinga saina i 
TT.think.me COMP good face 
DET Soa and 
COMP quick mind DET 
Rija] 
RUa 
'Soa is pretty and Rija is intelligent is thOUght by me. ' 
In (63a) and (63b) the conjoined sentences are subjects.21 As (63) shows, ary is the 
coordinator for CP and IP constituents. In contrast, sy is the coordinator for NPs and 
smaller constituents, as seen below in (64) and (66). Thus, the first bit of evidence 
that the subjects in (63a) and (63b) are not NPs comes from the choice of 
coordinating conjunction. If the conjoined CP subjects in (63) were covert NPs (as 
might be expected if the EPP in this language involved a D-feature), then we might 
expect coordinated CP subjects to contrast with coordinated CP objects with respect 
to the coordinating conjunction that they selected. 
The other piece of evidence for the non-OP-hood of CP subjects comes from the 
distribution of the quantificational adverb samy 'each'. When used preverbally, 
samy requires a plural subject; but crucially, only NPs can license this construction. 
(64) illustrates this with simple NPs. 
(64) 
Samy mamy ny siramamy sy 
ny tantely. 
each sweet DET sugar 
and DET honey 
'Both honey and sugar are sweet. • 

270 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
When the ßonjoined subjects are CPs, this construction is illicit, as exemplified by 
the ungrammaticality of the sentence in (65). 
(65) 
*Samy mahasosotra anti 
Soa [ep fa 
nihira 
mafy i 
Bozy 
each annoy 
ACC Soa 
COMP PST. sing hard DET Bozy 
ary (fa) 
nitabataba 
i 
Be]. 
and COMP pST.make.noise DET Be 
(Both that Bozy sang loudly and that Be made a lot of noise annoyed 
Soa.) 
(65) is ungrammatical with or without the second complementizer. This contrasts 
with conjoined nominalized clauses, which, as NPs take sy as a coordinator and can 
license the occurrence of samy. 
(66) 
Samy mahasosotra an'i Soa i 
Bozy nihira 
mafy sy 
i 
Be 
each annoy 
ACC Soa DET Bozy pST.sing hard and DET Be 
nitabataba. 
PST.make.noise 
'Both Bozy singing loudly and Be making noise annoyed Soa.' 
That the conjoined subjects in (66) are nominalized clauses is indicated by the word 
order (the agent ofthe action here precedes rather than follows the verb). 
Inasmuch as Malagasy clausal subjects do not display OP properties and thus are 
not candidates for the OP-shell analysis, the fact that they are possible sites for 
extraction is consistent with our proposal regarding subject islands. (67) illustrates 
extraction from a clausal subject. 
(67) 
Oviano no nolazain-dRabe 
fa 
nanasa 
lamba Rakoto? 
when 
FOC PST.rr.say-GEN.Rabe COMP PST. wash cloth Rakoto 
'When was that Rakoto washed clothes said by Rabe?' 
In this example, oviano 'when' crucially has scope over either the matrix or the 
embedded predicate, and the resulting ambiguity reflects the possibility of extraction 
from the CP subject. 
As Chung (1982) points out, extraction is generally possible out of at least some 
sentential subjects in V-initial languages. 
(68) provides an illustration from 
Chamorro (from Chung 1982). 
(68) 
hafal um-istoba hao [ni 
maloago'-a 
. i 
Ihi-mu 
tl ]? 
what UM-disturb you COMP want+NMLz-his the son-your 
'What does that your son wants disturb you?' 
Here, hafa 'what' has been extracted from the CP subject ni maloago'-a i Ihi-mu 
'that your son wants x'. 
Based on the evidence we have thus far and the 

FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE AND SUBJECT PROPERTIES 
271 
descriptions that we have available, we are led to the operative assumption that V­
initial languages such as CharnoITo, Malagasy. and Niuean do not require subjects to 
be DPs. Our analysis will follow on this assumption. 
5. 
A TYPOLOGY OF SUBJECT-PROPERTIES AND 
A THEORY OF SUBJECT POSITIONS 
In this paper. we have tried to show that certain subject properties (when present) 
can be attributed to the language requiring that its subjects be DPs. The Bulgarian 
facts show that this property set is not universal. and is therefore unrelated to the 
semantic properties of subjects per se. 
lt is reasonable therefore to suggest that the requirement that an subjects be DPs 
(when a language imposes it) is due to the presence of some grammatical feature in 
a functional projection. 
In this regard, a D feature (Chomsky 1995) could be 
enlisted to do the job of explaining this requirement. 
Since an uninterpretable 
feature will force a derivation to crash if unchecked, the existence of a feature that is 
checked off by DPs might reasonably be expected to require that there be DPs to 
check. Thus, PP and CP subjects without OP shells would fail to check off the D­
feature and would not yield licit derivations. 
5.1 A typology 
In comparing this state of affairs with that seen in V -initial languages, we might 
reasonably adopt Massam and SmaIlwood's (1997) account, which explains the 
language's V-iriiūal (or predicate-initial) word order. the fact that ''there are no 
[subject] expletives in the language" and that "gramatical subject 
.. . is not 
associated with a unified position", and, by our predictions, the inability of Niuean 
and other V-initial languages to require subjects to be DPs. What emerges from this 
is a tentative typology of languages with respect to the requirement that their 
subjects be DPs. We have seen that SVO languages can , but do not always, impose 
a DP-subject requirement. For V-initial languages, the grammatical feature that 
produces V-initial (or predicate-initial) word order supplants the one that yields (in 
English) the DP-subject requirement, such that no V-initial language can require its 
subjects to be DPs. This typology is expressed in the table here below. 
V-medial 
V-initial 
All subjects must be DP 
English, French 
-
Subjects need not be DP 
Russian, Bulgarian 
ChamoITo, Irish, 
Malagasy. Niuean 
From everything we have seen thus far. this typology appears to be correct. If it is 
not (that is. if there are V-initial languages whose non-NP subjects exhibit DP 
behavior), then Massam and Smallwood's account for V-initial order would need to 

272 
Wll.LIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
be revisited. In what follows, we will propose an accoWlt in which Slavic languages 
share certain functional architecture of V ·initial languages, even though their surface 
word order seems more like that ofEngJish and French. 
5.2 A theory 
Our proposal for the distribution of subject properties is as foHows: Languages may 
be either V -prominent or D·prominent at the level of the clause. D·prominence 
correlates with the presence of a D·feature on T. V.prominence correlates with T 
being higher than Agr, and with the presence of a V·feature on T. Under this view, 
the EPP involves checking syntactic category features in T, which will be either D 
or V. In D-prominent languages, the EPP feature is checked by a DP in a spec 
position. In V -prominent languages, the EPP feature is checked by a verb moving 
into T.22 
Given the mechanics of the EPP (or D·) feature Wlder recent accounts such as 
Bobaljik & Jonas 1 996 (B&J), the checking off of the D·feature of T will vary 
according to whether or not T projects a specifier position. Thus. fOT languages in 
which TP has no specifier (such as English), T (or the EPP feature itself) moves to 
Agr. and the D·feature of T is checked by an clement in spcc,AgrP. 
This is 
illustrated in (69). 
Now, as B&J have shown for Icelandic, some languages 
(optionally) have a spec,TP position in which the EPP D-feature can be checked. 
This results in transitive expletive constructions, such as (70) [=B&J:(27)]. The 
basic clausal architecture of Icelandic is given in in (7 1). 
(69) 
[AgrP Spec [Age' 
Agr rTP T ... ]]] 
T 
I 
4+b]-l 
English 
(70) 
[AgTSP paO [AgT' klaruOu2 [TP margar mysl h' [ alveg [vp tl t2 
(71) 
there 
finished 
many mice 
completely 
ostinn] ... 
the.cheese 
[AgTP Spec [Aw' Agr [TP (Spec) h' T 
... 
]]) 
[+D] 
Icelandic 
In languages such as Icelandic, the D·feature ofT can be checked from spec,TP (ifit 
is present) or from spec.AgrP (assuming that the feature is passed up the tree when 
TP has no specifier position). According to Bobaljik 1995, the availability of a 
spec,TP correlates with the independence of tense and agreement morphology. In 
Bobaljik's terms "if tense morphology blocks agreement mOIphology, then that 
language does not license [spec,TP]." 
Icelandic contrasts with English in this 
regard, in having separable tense and agreement morphology. 
In' this respect, 

FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE AND SUBJECT PROPERTIES 
273 
Bulgarian is similar to Icelandic. This is especially salient in the perfective verb 
conjugation, given in (72). 
(72) 
perfective 
lsg 
kupja 
2sg 
kupis 
3sg 
kupi 
lpl 
kupim 
lpl 
kupite 
3pl 
kupjat 
infinitival 
da kupja 
da kupis 
da kupi 
da kupim 
da kupite 
da kupjat 
aorist 
kupix 
kupi 
kupi 
kupixme 
kupixte 
kupixa 
future 
Ite kupja 
Ste kupis 
ite kupi 
ite kupim 
ite kupite 
ite kupjat 
What is interesting about this verb conjugation is that the agreeing form cannot 
normally be used as a main clause predicate without additional tense morphology, as 
(73) shows. 
With added tense morphology, kupya can appear as a main or 
embedded verb. This is shown in (74). 
(73) 
(74}a. 
b. 
c. 
*(Az) kupja 
pica. 
I 
buy. ISG.PERF pizza 
(I (will) buy pizza.) 
(Az) kupix 
pica. 
I 
bought. 1 SG pizza 
'[ bought a pizzaÇ • 
(Az) ste kupja 
pica. 
I' 
will buy. l SG pizza 
'I will buy a pizza. ' 
(Az) iskam 
da kupja 
pica. 
want. 1 SG to buy. 1 SG pizza 
'I want to buy a pizza. ' 
The independence of Case/agreement from tense is further attested by the fact that 
subjects of infinitival complements are nominative, when overt. This is seen in (32). 
Thus, if Bobaljik's proposed correlation is accurate, Bulgarian should license (at 
least optionally) a specifier of TP. We would propose that the special characteristics 
of Bulgarian (and some other Slavic languages) arise from TP being superior to 
AgrP, as in (75). In other words, Bulgarian is V-prominent. 
(75) 
(Az) iskam 
tja da kupi 
pica. 
(76) 
want. ! SG she to buy.3sG pizza 
'I want her to buy a pizza.' 
[ TP 
(Spec) [y. T [AgrP Spec [Agr' Agr 
. .. 
]]] 
[+V] 
Bulgarian 

274 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
Thus. unlike Icelandic (and English and French). Bulgarian has a V-feature in T, 
rather than a D-feature. and imposes no OP requirement on its subjects. 
The structure proposed in (76) can explain other aspects of Bulgarian. If TP is 
higher than AgrP and if its specifier is optional, then we might expect to find clauses 
that are V -initial and which do not have any null pronominal preverbally. We do, in 
fact, find such structures and can show through definiteness restriction (DR) effects 
that they are truly V -initial, as Alexiadou and Anagnostopoulou 1998 (A&A) have 
done for Greek. Compare the English and Icelandic data in (77) [(34b)=A&A:(34)] 
with the Bulgarian example (78). 
(77)a. 
h. 
There arrived some studentsl*the studentsl*every student. 
English 
Lum nottina 
hami [e] sokkilS nokkrir batar / *baturinn. 
Icelandic 
in 
the.night had 
sunk 
several boats 
the. boat 
(78) 
Dojdoxa njakolko studenti / studentite / fsicki studenti. Bulgarian 
came 
some 
students 
the. students all 
students 
As (77) shows, DR effects correlate with the presence of an expletive pronoun in 
subject position, whether overt or null. The lack of such effects in VS constructions 
can be argued to correlate with the absence of any such pronoun, and is consistent 
for Bulgarian with our proposal that the specifier of TP is optional. 
A partial 
derivation of (78) is given in (79). 
(79) 
['" h dOirxal 
[ ... studentite [..,. , I 
... 
III 
Notice that the inversion of TP and AgrP removes the need for an expletive to 
mediate the agreement of the verb with its following subject. 
In this account, 
studentite 'the students' does occupy spec,AgrP and has its agreement features and 
Case checked in the standard way. 
Dative subject/nominative object experiencer verb constructions are another 
well-studied phenomenon that benefits under our account of Bulgarian clause 
structure. 
An example of this construction is given in (80). 
As is well known 
(perlmutter 1978, Moore & Perlmutter 1997), the experiencer exhibits certain 
subject properties and the theme exhibits others. In particular, dative experiencers in 
Slavic are commonly found to precede the verb, as in (80). to antecede reflexives (in 
Russian, where the experiencer is a case-marked noun), and to control infinitival 
subjects as in (81). At the same time, the nominative theme controls verb agreement 
and carries nominative case. The structure of (80), in our account, is given in (82). 

FUNCTIONAL ARCHITEC1UR.E AND SUBJECT PROPERTIES 
(80) 
Na Marija i 
xaresva 
stolat. 
to Maria to.her is.pleasing the.chair.NOM 
'The chair is pleasing to MarialMaria likes the chair' 
(81) 
Na Marija i 
e neobxodimo da kupi knigata. 
to Maria to.her is necessary 
to buy the.book 
'To Maria it is necessary to buy the book.' 
275 
Here, we see that those subject properties best explained by command relations 
adhere to the dative argument in spec, TP 
J while the nominative/agreement properties 
are discharged in a lower AgrP. Coupled with the optionality of spec,TP and the 
absence of an EPP D-feature, this accoWlt can predict the possibility of V-initial 
order seen in (83), as well as the inversion of argument order, shown in (84). 
(83) 
Xaresva 
i 
stolat 
na Marija. 
is.pleasing to.her the. chair. NOM to Maria 
(84) 
Stolat 
i 
xaresva 
na Marija. 
the. chair. NOM to.her is. pleasing to Maria 
In (83), we would assume that spec,TP is not instantiated, and in (84) we would 
suppose that the nominative theme moves through spec,AgrP to spec, TP and the 
dative cxperienōr remains in situ. As noted in Moore & Perlmutter, when the 
nominative theme occupies the higher position, it acquires additional subject 
properties, such as the ability to be a controlled PRO. 
(85)a. 
Marijal napravi fsiŎko vazmoZno 01 
da mi 
se xaresa na men 
Maria did 
all 
possible 
PRO to to.me self please to me 
'Maria did everything in order to please me.' 
b. 
*Marijal napravi fsicko vazmoZno na men da mi 
se xaresa 001 
Maria 
did 
all 
possible to me to to.me self please PRO 
This is seen in (85). When the null pronominal is prcverbal, it can be controlled by 
the subject of the matrix clause, and when the preverbal position is occupied by the 
dative experiencer phrase it cannot. Finally, if Bulgarian has the structure that we 
have proposed here and if V -initial languages also have TP as a highest functional 
projection (as in Massarn & Smallwood), then the distinction between a language 
like Bulgarian and V-initial languages lies in the parametrization of spec,TP. 
According to our findings, Bulgarian is a fusion of Icelandic and Niuean properties. 

276 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND ST ANtEY DUBINSKY 
ENDNOTES 
We are extremely grateful to the fOllowing individuals for their questions, comments, and 
suggestions: Samuel Bayer. Si Belasco, Odutan Bode, Chris Culy. Alice Davison. Jila Ghomesi, Paula 
Kempchinsky, Gary Miller, Deana Paul, Eric Potsdam, Nicholas Sobin, three anonymous reviewers for 
NLLT, participants at the 1999 LSA Institute Workshop on Grammatical Functions in Transfonnational 
Syntax, and audiences at ESCOL 1999 and WECOL 1999. 
Additionally, we are indebted to the 
following native speakers for extending their time and energy on behalf of our research: Hanaa Dornik, 
Elena Gavruseva, Denis Kopyl, Olga Petrova, Eric Roman, Elena Schmitt, and Mill Tasseva­
Kurktchieva. Previous versions of parts of this paper have been presented andlor appeared as Davies & 
Dubinsky 1999a, b, and 2eOOb. 
These observations are not novel. Stowell (1981) cites them in passing and Safir (1983) cites them as 
well, claiming that non-NPs in subject position are "honorary NPs" and for that reason must raise to 
receive case. We show below that actually the NP nature of all subjects is not "honorary" at all but is due 
to a much deeper facts about subjects, a fact which has ramifications beyond explaining the mysterious 
raising facts. Further, both Stowell (1981) and Safir (1983) claim that non-NP subjects are possible only 
with the copula be, a claim shown below to be incorrect. 
Indeed, Stowell (1981) proposes that CPs should be prohibited from appearing in Case positions. His 
proposal follows from the widely accepted view first expounded in Emonds 1976 and Koster 1978. that 
sentential and prepositional subjects are not, in fact, subjects but in a topic position. Stowell's (1981) 
formalization of these claims is captured in his "Case Resistance Principle", which prohibits CPs, IPs, 
VPs, and PPs from appearing in Case-marked positions. 
In Davies and Dubinsky 2eeCe, we provide 
evidence that casts serious doubt on this view. We sbow that much of the data used to argue for this 
position are open to alternative (non-syntactic) explanations. or are simply not as unacceptable as 
previous authors have indicated (as measured by responses from a large number of speakers). 
For independent reasons Sobin (1997) argues against the existence of default agrement in English. 
As noted by Chris Culy (personal communication). there are cases in which an indefinite NP can host 
an emphatic reflexive pronoun. 
(i) Of course, thatla woman herself could decide to change her name. 
Although a thorough account of the distribution of emphatic reflexives is outside the bounds of the 
curent discussion, we observe that such exceptions necessarily involve 'possibility' modals such as 
could. can, might, or may. When the modal in (i) is absent, the emphatic reflexive is only possible with 
the definite NP, as (iO shows. 
(ii) 
Of course, thatl*a woman herself decided to change her name. 
For reasons that arc not entirely clear to us, emphatic reflexives with non-NP subjects are particularly 
perspicuous in be enough to locutions. 
Since emphatic reflexives can only be used with pbrases wbose denotation is defmite. AP subjects, 
which are properties. do not share this NP-like characteristic. 
It is important to note that equally can also be licenslld by conjOined predicates, as in (i). In (i), the 
subject is singular and the adverb equally is triggered by the two conjoined predicates. 
(i) Judy equally loved the candy and enjoyed the flowers. 
For this reason, in testing the ability of APs to trigger equally, we are careful not to consider APs which 
are argument taking functions (i.e. predicates), but ruther those which are arguments of a function (e.g. 
complements of a verb). 

FUNCTIONAL ARCirrEC1URE AND SUBJECT PROPERTIES 
277 
Chris Culy (personal communication) points out that the acceptability of equally with conjoined CP 
complements varies according to the choice of main verb. For instance, our example (1 Sa) with think can 
be improved by use of the verb believe. 
0) 
Dale believed equally that affinnative action is right and that he deserved to get the job. 
In section S, we will return to this issue, and demonstrate that the acceptability of (i) is dependent on the 
ability of believe (in contrast with think) to take a DP complement 
9 
As stated above (note 2). our analysis precludes accoWlts of CP subjects that involve Case resistance 
(e.g., Stowell 198 1). since "DP-covered" CP subjects ocupy the nonna! subject position and behave as 
NPs. In Davies and Dubinsky 20ooc, we show that finite clausal subjects are in fact not banned from 
inverted (and other relevant) contexts, as much of the literature has previously supposed. 
A fwther question arises as to the mechanism for licensing the null head of OP, which (appearing in 
spec,AgrP) ocupies an Wlgovemed position. One possible mechanism for such licensing (as sugested 
by Liliane Haegeman, p.c.) would be to assume movement of the non-DP constituent to the spec,OP. The 
CP complement in (16a) would thus move as shown in (i). 
(i) 
[DP [cp that Shelby lost it] I [D 0 ] tl ] 
10 More recnUy, Webelhuth (1992) has proposed that external arguments must be nonverbal, i.e. [-VJ. 
m his ac;OWlt, the distribution of CPs is constrained by their having to bind DP traces, rather than their 
being OPs themselves. We will return to this issue in section 5, which discusses the category type and 
distribution of verb complements. 
\I 
Williams may have gotten this notion from Stowell 1981, in which it is claimed that subject PPs 
"appear to be strictly limited to copular construc:tions". However, cOWlterevidence against this assertion 
is abWldant (see, for example, Jaworska 1986). 
12 Another recent paper, by Conway (1996), considers the status of certain PPs in subject and object 
positions. Based on similar evidence, Conway proposes an NP structure for these PPs, comparable to the 
one we have positccl for non-NP subjects in general. However, her accOtmt suggests that these structures 
an: limited to PPs and that their distribution is governed by semantic factors. 
13 In his accoWlt of (2S) and similar facts, Webelbuth proposes that "sentences can only bind OP traces". 
Under his analysis (25a) is gramatical bec:ause the trace follOwing believed is a DP-trace (since believe 
allows a OP complement); (2Sb) is iII-fonned because hope does not c-select OPs and the trace linked to 
the passivized subject canot be a DP (as required). This accoWlt will not, however, explain the contrast 
in (26). 
14 This analysis of the aparent island effect in (29) might lead one to wonder about the acceptability of 
sentences such as (i). 
(i) 
What rock did that crep crawl out from Wlder? 
We would suggest that the PP complements of oUl and of/rom am necessarily not OPs. This can be 
shown by trying to insert a OP in their place, as in (ii). 
(ii)a. 
·That crep crawled out it 
b. 
·That crep crawled out from it. 
c. 
That creep crawled out from under it. 
Examples (iia) and (iib) contrast with (iii). 
(iii) 
I'm worried about it. 

278 
WILLIAM D. DAVIES AND STANLEY DUBINSKY 
IS 
To say that plural or mass DPs license equally oversimplifies the situation. In fact, outside the case of 
conjoined predicates (cf. note 7), while a plural or mass DP is a necesary condition for licensing equally 
it is not a sufficient condition. It appears that there is some conditioning by vernal semantics as well. 
Thus, we find the following paradigm: 
(i)a. 
I believe Kerry and Kelsey equally. 
b. 
??I believe Kerry and Kelsey equally well. 
(ii)a. 
I treat Kerry and Kelsey equally. 
b. 
I treat Kerry and Kelsey equally well. 
(iii)a. 
?I know Kerry and Kelsey equally. 
b. 
1 know Kerry and Kelsey equally well. 
Important here is the fact that to the extent that (iiia) is acceptable, it is synonymous with (iiib). There is 
no such synonymy between (iia) and (iib), nor between (ia) and the unacceptable (ib). Thus, even though 
we have a plural DP in (iiia), equally is not licensed, a fact we attribute to the semantics of know. 
16 Of course, the PP and CP subjects can occur clause initially if the matrix clause has an impersonal 
subject U and the embedded clause contains a resumptive pronoun that is coindexed with it. 
(i) 
sous Ie lith it ne me semble pas que eel soit un bon endroit pour sc cacher 
'Under the bed, it doesn't seem to me that it is a good place to hide oneself.' 
(ii) 
que Shelby I'a perdUh il me semble que cel soit un fait 
'That Shelby lost it, it seems to me that it is a fact. ' 
11 
We focus here on infinitival subjects because 
they represent a class of elements that 
are 
unambiguously subjects and therefore allow us to make clear tests regarding the behavior ofNP and non­
NP subjects. While there are CP subjects and PP subjects which display the same properties as the 
infinitival subjects, there are at times confounding tactors of analysis. CP subjects can be difficult to 
distinguish from complex NPs in certain environments, and because of this, it is difficult to stale with 
certainty that a tensed exhibiting NP-like behavior is in tact a CP subject. PPs present an inverse case. 
The highly variable word order of the language makes it sometimes difficult to detenine with certainty 
which clause-initial PPs are subjects and which ones are other left-dislocated phrases. 
Both locative 
inversion PPs and logical subject PPs of psychological predicates figure in this confusion. It can thus be 
difficult to ascertain whether the failure of a clause-initial PP to exhibit NP properties is due to the failure 
of subject position to induce such properties or to the mere fact that the PP in question is not a subject. 
18 
Many have suggested to us that our DP-shell CNPC explanation for subject islands is challenged by 
the asymetry in extraction from subject and object DPs, as exemplified in (i). 
(i)a. 
·whol were lDP these books about tl ] written by Ashley? 
b. 
whol did Ashley write [DP these bODks about tl )? 
In Davies & Dubinsky 200030 we show: (I) that extractions such as in (ib) are quite limited in their 
distribution and normally involve activation of nominal argument structure, and (2) that extractions such 
as in (ia) are in tact licensed in Bulgarian. 
(ii) 
Za 
kogo e knigata Ʈena ot celija 
klas 
about whom is book.the read 
by whole. the class 
• About whom is the book being read by the class?' 

FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE AND SUBJECT PROPERTIES 
279 
This suggests to us that the contnlst in (i), rather than being a problem for the analysis presented here, is 
. instead a confinnation of it. 
. 
19 The absence of raising conslnlctions in Bulgarian and Rusian turns out to be unsurprising if (as we 
show in section 5.2) their syntax is comparable to that ofV.initial languages. 
20 We are indebted to Deana Paul for the Malagasy data. 
11 In (2Sb) and (29), the verb is in the Theme Topic (TI) voice, one of the passive constructions in the 
language. In these sentences, the CP element is subject and the agent occurs in the genitive, suffixed to 
the verb. 
U 
In the languages considered here, the choice ofD or V as an EPP feature happens to correlate with the 
relative prominence of Agr and T. That is, the D1'rominent languages English and French appear to have 
AgrP dominating TP, while the V·prominent languages (e.g. Bulgarian, Irish, and Niuean) have TP 
dominating AgrP. Goodall (in chapter 8) shows that Spanish has a D·feature in T (like English) but has 
TP dominating AgrP (as in Irish). He derives from this the behavior of pre· and post.verba) subjects. 
Proposals along these lines, in which a category oriented EPP feature is subject to parametric variation, 
have also been made in Masam and Smallwood 1997 and in Nash and Rouveret 1997 (although the 
particular implementation proposed is different in each case). 


j 
_1 -
REFERENCES 
Abney, Steven. 1987. 11re English Noun Phrase in Its Sentential Aspect, Doctoral dissertation, 
Masachusets Institute of Technology. 
Adger, David. 1996. 'Economy and Optionality: Interpretations ofsubjec;ts in Italian' Probus 8, 1 11-136. 
Adger, David. 1997. 'VSO Order and Weak Pronouns in Goidelic Celtic', Canadian Journal of 
Lingujstics 42, 9-29. 
Aissen, Judith. 1983. 'Indirect Object Advancement in Tzotzil' in David Perlmutter (eel.), Studies in 
RelatioTUZl Grammar J, Universi1;Y of Chicago Pres, Chicago, pp. 272-302. 
Aissen, Judith and David Perlmutter. 1976. 'Clause Reduction in Spanish', Procedings 0/ the Annual 
Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society 2, 1·30. Revised version in David Perlmutter (ed.), 1983, 
StudieJ in Relational Grammar, University of Chicago Pres, Ch:cago, pp. 360-403. 
Alexiadou, Artemis. 1999. On the Syntax oj Nominaiization and Possesion: Remarks on panerns oj 
Ergativity, Doctoral dissertation. Universitat Potsdam. 
Alexiadou, Artemis and Elena Anagnostopoulou. 1998. 'Parametrizing AGR: Word order, V-movement 
and EPP-ehecking', Natural Language and Linguistic 11reory 16, 491·539. 
Allen. Barbara, Donald Frantz. Donna Gardiner, and David Perlmutter. 1990. 'Verb Agreement, 
Possessor Ascension. and Multistratal Representation in Southern Tiwa" in Paul Postal and Brian 
Joseph (cds.), Studies in Relational Grammar 3, University of Chicago Pres, Chicago, pp. 321-383. 
A1sina, Alex. 1992 'On the Argument Structure of Causalives', Linguistic Inquiry 23, 517-555. 
Alsina, Alex. 1993. Predicate composition: A theory of syntactic fUnction alternations, Doctoral 
dissertation, Stanford University. 
Alsina, Alex. 1996a. 11re Role OJ Argument Structure in G1'tlI1I1IIJlT: Evidence from Romance, CSLI 
Publications, Stanford. 
A1sina, Alex. 1996b. 'Passive Types and the Theory of Object Asymmetries', Natural Language and 
Linguistic Theory 14, 673.123. 
Alsina, Alex. 1999. 'Where's the Mirror Principle?', The Linguistic Review 16, 1-42. 
Alsina, Alex. 2001 .  'On the Nonsemantic Nature of Argument Structure', Language Sciences 23, 
355-389. 
Alsina, Alex and 'Sam Mchombo. 1993. 'Object Asymmetries and the Chichewa Applicative 
Construction', in Sam Mcbombo (ed.), 11reoretical Aspects 0/ Bantu Grammar, CSLI Publications, 
Stanford. pp. 17-45. 
Anderson, Stephen. 1976. 'On the notion of subject in ergative languages', in Charles Li (cd.), Subject 
and Topic, Academic Pres, New York. pp. 1-24. 
Austin, Peter. 2000. 'Arguments and Non-Arguments in Men6-Mene Sasak. Eastern Indonesia', Paper 
presented at the 7th Annual Meeting of the Austronesian Fonnal Linguistics Asociation, Vrije 
Universiteit, Amsterdam. 
Baker, Mark. 1988a. lncorporation: A 17Jeory ojGrammatical Function Changing. University of Chicago 
Pres, Chicago. 
Baker, Mark. 1988b. 'Theta Theory and the Syntax of Applicatives in Chichewa'. Natural Language and 
Linguistic 11reory 6, 353-389. 
Baker, Mark. 1991. 'On Some Subject/Object Non·Asymetries in Mohawk', Natural Language and 
Linguistic 17Jeory 9, 537-576. 
Baker, Mark. 1993. 'Noun Incorporation and the Nature of Linguistic Representation" in Wmiam Foley 
(ed.), The role of theory in iangutlge description, Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 1 3-4. 
Baker, Mark. 1995. 'On the Absence of Certain Quantifiers in Mohawk', in Emmon Bach et aI. (005.), 
Quantification in Natural Languages, KJuwer, Dordrecht, pp. 21·58. 
Baker, Mark. 19963. 'On the Structural Position of Themes and Goals', in Johan Rooryek and Laurie 
Zaring (eels.), Phrase Structure and the Lexicon, Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp. 7-34. 
Baker, Mark. 1996b. The Polysynthesis Parameter, Oxford University Pres, Oxford. 
Baker, Mark. 1996c. 
'Unaccusativity and the Adjective/Verb Distinction: English and Mohawk 
Evidence', Proceedings of the Eastern States Conference on Linguistics '96, 12.35. 
Baker, Mark. 1997: 'Thematic Roles and Syntactic Structure', in Liliane Haegeman (ed.), Elements of 
Grammar: Handbook of Generative Syntax, KJuwer, Dordrechr, pp. 73-137. 
Baker, Mark. 200. 'The Natures ofNonconfigu@tionality', in Mark Baltin and Chris Collins (eds.), 17re 
Handbook o/Contemporary Syntactic 17Jwry, Blll(:kwell, Oxford. 
Baker, Mark. to appear. On Lexical Categories and Category Systems •. Cambridge University Pres, 
Cambridge. 
281 

REFERENCES 
282 
Baker, Mark, Kyle Johnson, and Ian Roberts. 1989. 'Passive Arguments Raised', Linguistic Inquiry 20, 
219-252. 
. 
Baker, Mark and Osamuyimen Stewart. 1997. 'Un3Cusativity and the AdjectiveNerb Distinction: Edo 
Evidence', Proceedings o/the North Eastern linguistic Society 27, 33-48. 
Bakovi6, Eric. 1998. 'Optimality and Inversion in Spanish', in Pilar Barbosa et aI. (eds.), Is the Best 
Good Enough?, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Barbosa, Pilar. 1999. 
'On Inversion in Wh.questions in Romance', unpublished manuscript, 
Universidade do Minho. 
Barss, Andrew. t 986. Chains and Anaphoric Dependence: On Reconstruction and Its Implications, 
Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Barss, Andrew and Howard Lasnik. 1986. 'A Note on Anaphora and Double Objects', Linguistic Inquiry 
17, 347·354. 
Bejar, Susana and Diane Massam. 199. 'Multiple Case Checking', Syntax 2, 65.79. 
Bell, Sarah. 1976. Cebuano Subjects in Two Frameworks, Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology. 
Bell, Sarah. 1983. 'Advancements and Ascensions in Cebuano', in David Perlmutter (ed.), Studies in 
Relational Grammar I, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 143-218. 
Belletti, Adriana and Luigi Rizzi. t 988. 'Psych-Verbs and 9. Theory', Natural Language and Linguistic 
Theory 6, 291·352. 
Biber, Douglas. 1989. 'A Typology of English Texts', Linguistics 27, 3-43. 
Bickerton, Derek. 1990. Language and species, University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Biggs, Bruce. 1 974. 'Some Problems of Polynesian grammar', Jounral o/the Polynesian Society 83, 401· 
426. 
Blake, Barry. t 990. Relational Grammar. Routledge, London. 
Bittner, Maria 1988. Canonical and Non-Canonical Argument Positions, Doctoral dissertation, 
University of Texas, Austin. 
Bittner, Maria and Kenneth Hale. 1996. 'Ergativity: Towards a Theory of a Heterogeneous Class', 
Linguistic llU/wry 27, 531-604. 
Bobaljik, Jonathan. 1992. 'Nominally Absolutive is Not Absolutely Nominative', Proceedings 0/ the 
West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics 1 1 , 44-60. 
Bobaljik, Jonathan. 1993. 'On Ergativity and Ergative Parameters', MIT Worldng Papers in Linguistics 
19, 45-88. 
Boba/jik, Jonathan. 1995. Morphosyntax: the Syntax of Verbal Inflection, Doctoral dissertation, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Bobaljik, Jonathan David and Dianne Jonas. 1996. 'Subject Positions and the Roles of TP', Linguistic 
Inquiry 27, 195-236. 
Boecla, Cedric. 200. 'Quirky Agreement', Studia Linguistica 54, 354-380. 
Bonet, Eulalia. 1995. 'Feature Structure of Romance Clitics', Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 
13, 607-641. 
Borer, Hagit. 1980. 'Empty Subjects in Modem Hebrew and Constraints on Thematic Relations', 
Proceedings o/the North Eastem Linguistics Society 10, 25·38. 
Borer, Hagit 1984. Parametric Syntax: Case Studies in Semitic and Romance Languages, Foris, 
Dordrecht 
BoƖkovic, bJjko. 1997. The Syntax of Nonflnile Complementation: An Economy Approach, MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA. 
Bowers. John. 1993. 'The Syntax of Predication' , Linguistic Inquiry 24, 591-656. 
Branigan, Philip. 1992. Subjects and Complementizers, Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 
Branigan, Philip. 1996. 'Verb Second and the A-Bar Syntax of Subjects', Studiea Linguistica 50, 50-79. 
Bresnan, Joan. 1972. Theory o/Complementation ;n English syntax, Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. 
. 
Bresnan, Joan. 1978. 'Realistic Transfonnational Grammar', in Morris Halle et aI. (edS.), Linguistic 
Theory and Psychological Reality, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Bresnan, Joan. 1980. 'Polyadicity: Part I of a Theory of Lexical Rules" in Teun Hoekstra et al.(eds.). 
Lexical Grammar, Foris, Dordrocht. 
Bresnan. Joan. I 982a. 'Control and Complementation', in Joan Bresnan (ed.>, The Mental Representation 
o/Grammalical Relations, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. pp. 282-390. 

REFERENCES 
283 
Bresnan, Joan (ed.). 1 982b. 
The Mental Representation of Grammatical Relations, MIT Pres, 
Cambridge, MA. 
Bresnan, loan. 1994. 'Locative Inversion and the Arcbitecture of Universal Grammar', Language 70, 72-
131. 
Bresnan, Joan. 2000. Lexical Functional Syntax, Blackwell, Oxford. 
Bresnan, Joan and Jonni Kanerva. 1 989. 'Locative Inversion in Cbichewa: A Case Study of Factorization 
in Grammar'. Linguistic Inquiry 20, I-SO. 
Bresnan, Joan and Lioba Moshi. 1990. 'Object Asymmetries in Comparative Bantu syntax', Linguistic 
Inquiry 21, 147-185. 
Bresnan, loan and Sam Mcbombo. 1 985. 'Agreement and Pronominal lncorporation in Cbicbewa', 
unpublished manuscript, Stanford University. 
Bresnan, Joan and Sam Mchombo. 1987. 'Topic, Pronoun, and Agĺment in Chichewa', Language 63, 
741-782. 
Burzio, Luigi. 1986. IUllian Syntax: A Government-Binding Approach, Reidel, Dordrecbt 
Campana, Mark. 1992. A Movement Theory of Ergalivity, Doctoral dissertation, McGill University. 
Campos, Hector. 1997. 'On Subject Extraction and the Antiagreement Effect in Romance', Linguistic 
Inquiry 28, 92-1 19. 
Cardinaletti, Anna. 1997. 
'Subjects and Clause Structure'. in Liliane Haegeman (cd.>, The New 
Comparative Syntax. Addison, Wesley, Longman, London, pp. 33-63. 
Carnie, 
Andrew. 
1995. 
Non-Verbal 
Predication 
and 
Head-Movement, 
Doctoral 
dissertation. 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Carnie, Andrew and Eithne Guilfoyle (cds.). 2000. The Syntax of Verb Initial Languages, Oxford 
University Pres, Oxford. 
Carnie, Andrew and Heidi Harley. 1998. 'Clausal architecture: tbe licensing of major constituents in a 
verb initial languagc', unpublished manuscript, University of Arizona 
Carstairs-McCarthy, Andrew. 1999. The Origins o/Complex Language: An InqUiry into the Evolutio1/QT')' 
Beginnings a/Sentences, Syllables, and Truth, Oxford University Pres, Oxford. 
Casielles Suarez, Eugenia. 1 997. 'On Topical Phrases in Spanish', Paper presented at 7" Congreso de 
Gramatica Generativa, Universidad de Oviedo. 
Chametsky, Robert 200. Phrase Structure: From GB to Minlmalism, Blackwell, Oxford. 
Chomsky, Noam. 1 955. 'The Logical Structure of Linguistic Theory', unpublished manu!iCript, Harvard 
University an̳, Massachusetts lnstitute of Technology. Revised 1956 version published in part by 
Plenum, New Y-ork ( 1975) and University of Chicago Press, Chicago ( 1985). 
Chomsky, Noam. 1965. Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Chomsky, Noam. 1973a. 'Conditions on Transformations', in Steven Anderson and Paul Kiparsky (eds.), 
A Festschrijifor Morris Halle, Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York. 
Chomsky, Noam. 1973b. 'Remarks on Nominalizations', in Steven Anderson and Paul Kiparsky (eds.), A 
Festschriftfor Morris Halle, Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York. 
Chomsky, Noam. 198 1 .  Lectures on Government and Binding. Studif!.f in Generative Grammar 9, Foris, 
Dordrecht. 
Chomsky, Noam. 1982. Some Concepts and Consequences of the Theory of Government and Binding, 
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Chomsky, Noam. 1 986a Barriers. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Chomsky, Noam. 1 986b. Knowledge of Language: Its Nature, Origin, and Use, Praeger, New York. 
Chomsky, Noam. 1991. 'Some Notes on Economy of Derivation and Representation', in Robert Freidin 
(ed.), Principles and Parameters in Comparative Grammar, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass, pp. 417-
454. Reprinted (with minor revisions) in Noam Chomsky, 1 993, The Minimalist Program, pp. 129-
166. 
Chomsky, Noam. 1 993. 'A Minimalist Program for Linguistic Theory', in Kenneth Hale and Samuel Jay 
Keyser (eds.), The View from Building 20: Esays in Linguistics in Honor of Sylvain Bromberger, 
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. pp. 1 -52. 
Chomsky, Noam. 1995. The Minimalist Program. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Chomsky, Noam. 1998. 'Minimalist Inquiries: the Framework', MIT Occasional Papers in Linguistics 
15, MIT Working Papers in Linguistics, Cambridge, MA. Reprinted in Roger Martin et aI. (eds.), 
200, Step by step: Essays on minimalist syntax in honor of Howard Lasnik, MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA, pp. 89-156. 

REFERENCES 
284 
Chomsky, Noam. 1999. 'Derivation by phase', MIT Occasional Papers in Linguistics 18. MIT Working 
Papers in Linguistics, Cambridge, MA Reprinted in Michael Kenstowicz (ed.), 2001, Ken Hale: A 
Life in Language, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 1·52. 
Chung, Sandra. 1976. ' An Object Creating Rule in Bahasa Indonesia', Linguistic Inquiry 7, 41·87. 
Ghung, Sandra. 1978. Case Marking and Grammatical Relations in Polynesian, University of Texas 
Pres, Austin. 
Chung, Sandra. 1982. 'Unbounded Dependencies in Chamorro Grammar" Linguistic Inquiry 13, 39.77. 
Chung, Sandra. 1983. 'An Object·Creating Rule in Bahasa Indonesia', in David Perlmutter (ed.), Studies 
in Relational Graml1Ulr I, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 219·271. 
Chung, Sandra. 1998. The Design of Agreement, University of Chicago Pres, Chicago. 
Chung, Sandra and James McCloskey. 1987. 'Government, Bariers and Small Clauses in Modem Irish', 
Linguislic lnquiry 18, 173-237. 
Chung, Sandra and WiUiam Seiter. 1980. 'The History of Raising and Relativization in Polynesian', 
Language 56, 622-638. 
Cinque, Gugliemo. 1 990. 'Ergative Adjectives and the Lexicalist Hypothesis', Natural Language and., 
Linguistic Theory 8, 1-40. 
Cinque. Guglielmo. 1999. Adverbs and Functional Heads: A Cross·Linguistic Perspective. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford. 
Clark, Eve. 1978. 'Locationals: Existential, Locative, and Possessive Constructions" in Joseph Greenberg 
et a1. (eds.), Universals ofHul1Uln Language, Vol. 4, Stanford University Press, Stanford. pp. 85·1 26. 
Cole, Peter and Gabriella Hermon. 1981. 'Subjecthood and fslandhood: Evidence from Quechua', 
Linguistic Inquiry 12, 1·30. 
Collins, Chris and HOskuldur Thn\insson. 1996. 'VP·Internal Structure and Object Shift in Icelandic" 
Linguistic Inquiry 27, 391-444. 
Contreras, Heles. 1991. 'On the Position of Subjects', in Susan Rothstein (ed.), Perspectives on Phrase 
Structure: Heads and Licensing, Syntax and Semantics Vol. 25. Academic Press, New York. 
Conway, Laura. 1996. 'NPs in Disguise', unpublished manuscript, University of Connecticut. 
Cook, Kenneth. 1991. 'The Search for Subject in Samoan', in Robert Blust (ed.), Curents in Pacific 
Linguistics, Australian National University, Pacific Linguistics C·1 17. Canberra 
Croft, William. 1998. 'Event Structure in Argument Linking', in Miriam Butt and Wilhelm Geuder (eds.), 
The Projecdon of Arguments: Lexical and Compositional Factors, CSLI Publications, Stanford, pp. 
21-63. 
Culicover, Peter. 1997. Principles and Parameters: An Introduction to Syntactic Theory, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford. 
Cummins, Sarah. 2000. 'Autopsie d'un diagnostic'. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Canadian 
Linguistics Association. 
Dalrymple, Mary, Sam Mchombo. and Stanley Peters. 1994. 'Semantic Similarities and Syntactic 
Contrasts Between Chichewa and English Reciprocals', Linguistic Inquiry 25. 145·1 63. 
Davies. William. 1984. 'Antipassive: Choctaw Evidence for a Universal Characterization', in David 
Perlmutter and Paul Postal (cds.), Studies in Relational Groml1Ulr 2, University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago, pp. 331·376. 
Davies, William and Stanley Dubinsky. 1999a. 'Sentential Subjects as Complex NPs: New Reasons for 
an Old Account of Subjacency', CLS 34: The Main Session, 83·94. 
Davies, William and Stanley Dubinsky. I 999b. 'The Syntax of Non·NP Subjects in an Exploration of 
Subject Properties'. Paper presented at The Role of Grammatical Functions in Transformational 
Syntax Workshop, University of Illinois. 
Davies, William and Stanley Dubinsky. 20ooa. 'Bypassing Subjacency Effects: How Event Structure 
Amnesties Extraction out of Object NPs', Paper presented at North Eastern Linguistics Society 31. 
Georgetown University. 
Davies, William and Stanley Dubinsky. 20oob. 'Functional Suucrure and a Parameterized Account of 
Subject Properties'. Proceedings of the Eastern States Conference on Linguistics '99, 48-59. 
Davies, William and Stanley Dubinsky. 
20OOc. 'Why Sentential Subjects Do So Exist (but are 
Nonetheless !Gnda Weird)'. Paper presented at South Eastern Conference on Linguistics, University 
of Mississippi. 
Davies, William and Asuncion Martfnez-Arbelaiz. 1995. 'Mapping Basque Psych Verbs', in Clifford 
Burgess et al. (eds.), Grammadcal Relations: Theorelical Approaches to Empirical Questions. CSLI 
Publications, Stanford, pp. 33-44. 

REFERENCES 
285 
Davies, William and Carol Rosen. 1988. 'Unions as Multi-predicate Clauses', Language 64, 52-88. 
"Davies, William and Luis Enrique Sam-Colop. 1990. 'K'iche' and the Structure of Antipassive', 
Language 66, 522-549. 
de Hoop, Helen. 1992. Case Configuration and Noun Phrase Interpretation, Doctoral dissertation, 
University ofGroningen. 
DƯhaine, Rose-Marie. 1993. Predicates Across Categories: Towards a Category-Neutral Syntax, 
Dcx:toral dissertation, University of Masachusets. 
Dechaine, Rose-Marie. 1994. [Ellipsis and the Position of Subjects', Proceedings of the North Eastern 
Linguistics Society 24, 47-63. 
DeGraff, Michel. 1997. 'Nominal Predication in Haitian and Irish', Proceedings of the West Coast 
ConJerenceon Formtll Linguistics 16, 1 13-128. 
Demonte, Violeta. 1987. 'C-command, Prepositions, and Predication', Linguistic Inquiry 18, 147-157. 
den Dikken, Martel. 1995. 'Binding, Expletives, and Levels', Linguistic Inquiry 26, 347-354. 
Diesing, Molly. 1990. 'Verb Movement and the Subject Position in Yiddish', Natural Language and 
Linguistic Theory 8, 41-80. 
Diesing. Molly. 1m. Indefinites. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Diesing, Molly. 1996. 'Semantic Variables and Object Shift', in Hoskuldur Thrainsson et aI. (cds.), 
Studies in Comparative Germanic Syntax, Vol. II. Kluwer. Dordrecht. pp. 66-84. 
Dixon, R M. W. 1968. The Dyirbal Language of North Queensland, Doctoral dissertation, University of 
London. 
Dixon, R. M. W. 1979. 'Ergativity', Language 5, 59-138. 
Dixon, R. M. W. 1994. ErgativiJy, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Doherty, Catha!. 1996. 'Clausal Structure and the Modem Irish Copula', Natural Language & Linguistic 
Theory 14, 1-48. 
Doherty, Cathal. 1997. 'Predicate Initial Constructions in Irish', Proceedings of the West Coast 
Conference on Formal Linguistics IS, 8t-9S. 
Doron, Edit 1991. 'V-Movement and VP Ellipsis', unpublished manuscript, The Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem. 
Doron, Edit. 1999. 'V-Movement and VP ellipsis', in Shalom Lapin and Elabbas Benmamoun (eds.), 
Fragments: Studies in EUipsis and Gapping, Oxford University Pres, Oxford, pp. 124-140. 
Dowty, David. 1979. Word Meaning and Montague Grammar, Reidel, Dordrecht 
Dowty, David. 1991, 'Thematic Proto-Roles and Argument Selection', Language 67, 547-619. 
Dryer, Matthew. 1986. 'PrimIlJY Objects, Secondary Objects, and Antidative', Language 62, 808-845. 
Duffield, Nigel. 1995. Particles and Projections in Irish Syntax, K1uwer, Dordrecht. 
Dubinsky, Stanley. 1990. 'Japanese Direct Object to Indirect Object Demotion', in Paul Postal and Brian 
Joseph (cds.), Studies in relational gramar 3, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 49-86. 
Dubinsky, Stanley. 1997. 'Predicate Union and the Syntax of Japanese Passives'. Journal of Linguistics 
33, 1-37. 
Dukes, Michael. 1996. On the Non-Existence of Anaphors and Pronomina/s in the Grammar of Tongan, 
Doctoral dissertation, University ofCalifomia, Los Angeles. 
Dukes, Michael. 1998. 'Evidence for Grammatical Functions in Tongan', Paper presented at LFG98: 
International Lexical Functional Gramar Conference. 
Dukes, Michael. 200. 'Grammatical Properties of the Ergative Noun Phrase in Tongan', unpublished 
manuscript. Stanford University and University of Canterbury, New Zealand. 
Eguren, Luis. 1999. 'Pronombres y Adverbios Demostrativos: las Relaciones Defcticas', in Ignacio 
Bosque and Violeta Demonte (cds.), Gromatica DescriptiVQ de fa Lengua Espano/a, Vol. 1, Espasa 
Calpe, Madrid. 
Emonds, Joseph. 1970. Root and Structure-Preserving Transformations, Doctoral dissertation, 
Masachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Emonds, Joseph. 1976. A Transformational Approach to English Syntax: Root, Structure-Preserving. 
and Local Transformations, Academic Press, New York. 
Epstein, Samuel. 1992. 'Derivational Constraints on A'-chain Formation', Linguistic Inquiry 23, 235-258. 
Epstein, Samuel and Daniel Seely. 1999. 'Spec-itying the GF 'Subject': Eliminating A-chains and the 
EPP within a Derivational Model', Paper presented at The Role of Grammatical Functions in 
Transformational Syntax Workshop. University of Illinois. 
Fernandez Soriano, Olga 199. 'Two Types of Impersonal Sentences in Spanish: Locative and Dative 
Subjects', Syntax 2, 101-140. 

REFERENCES 
286 
Fiengo, Robert and Robert May. 1994. Indices and Identity, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Fillmore, Charles. 1 968. 'The Case for Case', in Emmon Bach and Robert Harms (eds.), Universals in 
linguistic Theory. Holt, Rinehart. and Winston, Ncw York. 
Finer, Daniel. 1997. 'Contrasting A'-Dependencies in Selayarese', Natural Language and linguistic 
Theory 15, 677-728. 
Fodor, Jerry. 1970. 'Thre Reasons for Not Deriving 'Kill' from 'Cause to Die", Linguistic Inquiry 1, 429-
438. 
Foley, William and Robert Van Valen Jr .. 1984. Functional Syntax and Universal Grammar, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Franco, Jon. 1993. On Object Agreement in Spanish, Doctoral dissertation, University of Southern 
California. 
Freeze, Ray. 1 992. 'Existentials and Other Locatives', Language 68, 553-595. 
Freidin, Robert. 1978. 'Cyclicity and the Theory of Grammar', Linguistic Inquiry 9, 519-550. 
Fukui, Naoki and Margaret Speas. 1986. 'Specifiers and Projections' MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 
8, 128-1 72. 
Georgopoulos, Carol. 1985. 'Variables in Palauan Syntax', Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 3, 
59-94. 
Georgopoulos, Carol. 199 1 .  Syntactic Variables: Resumptive Pronouns and A-bar Binding in Pa/auan, 
Kluwer, Dordrecht. 
Gibson, Jeanne. 1980. Clause Union in Chamorro and in Universal Gramnuzr, Doctoral dissertation, 
University of Cali fomi a, San Diego. 
Gibson, Jeanne and Eduardo Raposo. 1986. 'Clause Union, the Stratal Uniqueness Law and the ChOmeur 
Relation', Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 4, 295-33 1. 
Goodall, Grant 1992. 'On the Status of SPEC of IP', Proceedings of the West Coast Conference on 
Formal LinguistiCS 1 0, 1 75-1 82. 
Goodall, Grant. 1993. 'SPEC of IP and SPEC of CP in Spanish wh-questions', in William Ashby et aI. 
(005.), Linguistic Perspectives on the Romance Languages, John Benjamins, Amsterdam, pp. 199-
209. 
Goodall, Grant 2001. 'On Preverbal Subjects in Spanish', in Diana Cresti et aI. (eds.), Current Issues in 
linguistics Theory: Selected Papers from the 29th Linguistics Symposium on Romance Languages, 
John Benjamins, Amsterdam, pp. 92-106. 
Green, Georgia M. 1974. Semantics and Syntactic Regularity, Indiana University Pres, Bloomington. 
Grimshaw, Jane. 1979. 'Complement Selection and the Lexicon', Linguistic Inquiry 10, 279-326. 
Grimshaw. Jane. 1982. 'On the Lexical Representation of Romance Reflexive Clitics.. in Joan Bresnan 
(cd), The Mental RepresenJation of Grammatical Relations, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 87-148. 
Grimshaw, Jane. 1987. 'Psych Verbs and the Structure of Argument Structure', unpublished manuscript, 
Brandeis University. 
Grimshaw, Jane. 199 1 .  'Extended Projection', unpublished manuscript, Rutgers University. 
Grimshaw, Jane. 1997. 'Projections, Heads and Optimality', Linguistic Inquiry 28, 373-422. 
Groos, Anneke and Reineke Bok-Bennema 1986. 'The Structure of the Sentence in Spanish', in Ivonne 
Bordelois et al. (cds.), Genuative Studies in Spanish Syntax, Foris, Dordrecht, pp. 67-80. 
Gruber, Jeffrey. 1976. Lexical Stroctures in Syntax and Semantics. North.Holland, New York. 
Guilfoyle, Eithne. 1990. Functional Categories and Phrase Structure Parameters, Doctoral dissertation, 
McGill University. 
Guilfoyle, Eithne. 1994. 'VNP's, Finitenes and External Arguments', Proceedings of the North Eastern 
Linguistics Sociely 24, 141-155. 
Guilfoyle, Eithne, Henrietta Hung, and Lisa deMena Travis. 1 992. 'Spec of lP and Spec of VP: Two 
Subjects in Austronesian Languages', Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 10, 375-414. 
Gutierrez Rexach. Javier. 1996. 'The Scope of UniversaJ Quantifiers in Spanish Interrogatives', in Karen 
Zagona (cd), Grammatical Theory and Romance Languages, John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 
Haeberli, Eric. 2000. 'Towards Deriving the EPP and Abstract Case', Generative Grammar in Geneva 
(GG@G) I, 1 05-139. 
Haegeman. Liliane. 1 991. Introduction to Government and Binding Theory, Blackwell. Oxford. 
Haegeman, Liliane. 1992. Theory and Description in Generative Grammar: A Case Study in West 
Flemish, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Haegeman, Liliane. 1996. 'Verb Second, the Split CP, and Initial Null Subjects in Early Dutch fmite 
Clauses'. GenGenP, Geneva Working Papers in Generative Linguistics. 133-1 75. 

REFERENCES 
287 
Haegeman, Liliane (ed.) 1997. Elements of Gramar: Handbook of Generative SynllJX, Kluwer, 
Dordrecht 
Hale, Kenneth. 1983. 'Warlpiri and the Grammar of Nonconfigurational Languages', Natural Language 
and Linguistic Theory I, 549. 
Hale, Kenneth and Samuel Jay Keyser. 1993. 'On Argument Structure and the Lexical Expression of 
Syntactic Relations', in Kenneth Hale and Samuel Jay Keyser (eds.), The View from Building 20: 
Essays in Honor of Sylvain Bromberger, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. pp. 53-109. 
Harley, Heidi. 1995. Subjects, Events and Licensing, Doctoral dissertation, Masachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 
Harley, Heidi and RolfNoyer. 1998. 'Mixed NominaliZl\tions. Short Verb Movement and Object Shift in 
English', Proceedings of the North Eastern Linguistic Society 28. 
Hawkins, lohn. 1994. A Peifonnance Theory of Order and Constituency, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge. 
Hernanz, M. Llulsa 1999. 'EI Infinitivo', in Ignacio Bosque and Violeta Demonte (eds.), Gramanca 
Descriptiva de la LenguJ Espoiola, Vol 2, Espasa Calpe, Madrid. 
Hoekstra. Teun. 1984. Transitivity: Grammatical Relations in Government-Binding Theory, Foris, 
Dordrecht 
Hoekstra. Teun and Ren6 Mulder. 1990. 'Unergatives as Copula Verbs: Locational and Existential 
Predication', The Linguistic Review 7, 1-79. 
Hojj, Hajime. 1985. Logical Form CJnslraints and Configurational Sructure.s in Japanese. Doctoral 
dissertation, University of Washington. 
Hoji, Hajime. 1998. 'Null Objects and Sloppy Identity in Japanese', Linguistic Inquiry 28, 127-152. 
Holmberg. Anders. 1 986. Word Order and Syntactic Features in tile Scandinavian Languages and 
English, Doctoral dissertation, University of Stockholm. 
Holmberg, Anders. 1993. 'Two Subject Positions in IP in Mainland Scandinavian', Working Papers in 
Scandinavian SynllJX 52, 29-41. 
Holmberg, Anders and Urpo Nikanne. 1994. 'Expletives and Subject Positions in Finnish' Proceedings of 
Nonh Eastern Linguistics Society 24, 173-1 87. 
Holmberg, Anders and Christer PlalZack. 1995. The Role of Inflection in Scandinavian Syntax, Oxford 
University Pres, Oxford. 
Hooper, Robin. 2000. 'Revisiting the Subject Propenies of Ergative and Absolutive Arguments in 
Tokelauan', Leo Pasijilaz: Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Oceanic 
Linguistics. 1 56-172. 
Hornstein, Norbert 1999. 'Minimalism and Quantifier Raising', in Samuel Epstein and Norbert Hornstein 
(eds.), Working Minimalism. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Hung, Henrietta 1988. 'Malagasy Field Notes', unpublished manuscript, McGill University. 
Iatridou, Sabine. 1990 . •  About Agr(P)' , Linguistic Inquiry 21, 551-577. 
Jackendoff. Ray. 1 972. Semantic Interpretation in Generative Grammar, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge. 
lackendoff, Ray. 1990. 'On Larson's Treatment of the Double Object Construction', Linguistic Inquiry 
21, 427455. 
Jackendoff. Ray. 1996. 'The Proper Treatment of Measuring Out, TeJicity, and Perhaps Even 
Quantification in English', Natural Longuage and Linguistic Theory 14, 305-354. 
Jackendoff, Ray. 1997. The Architecture of the Language Faculty, MIT Press, Cambridge. MA. 
Jaeggli, Osvaldo. 1987. 'ECP Effects at LF in Spanish', in lean-Pierre Montreuil (ed.), Advances in 
Romance Linguistics, Foris, Dordrecht 
Jaworska, Ewa. 1986. 'Prepositional Phrases as Subjects and Objecf, Joumai ofLinguistic.s 22, 355-74. 
Jayaseelan, Karatuparambil. 1990. 'Incomplete VP Deletion and Gapping', Linguistic Analysis 20, 64-
81. 
Johnson. David and Paul Postal. 1980. Arc Pair Grammar, Princeton University Press, Princeton. 
Johnson, Kyle. 1991. 'Object Positions', Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 9, 577-636. 
Jonas, Dianne. 1996. Clause Structure, Expletives and Movement, in Werner Abraham et aI. (eds.), 
Minimal Ideas: Syntactic Studies in the Minimalist Framework, John Benjamins, Amsterdam and 
Philadelphia, pp. 67-188. 
Kayne, Richard. 1975. French Syntax, MIT Pres, Cambridge, MA 
Kayne, Richard. 1984. Connectedne.fs and Binary Branching, Foris, Dordrecht. 

REFERENCES 
288 
Kayne. Richard. 1985. 'Principles of Particle Constructions', in Jacqueline Gueron et al. (eds.), 
Grammatical Representation, Foris, Dordrecht, pp. 101-140. 
Kayne. Richard. 1989. 'Facets of Romance Past Participle Agreement', in Paola Benincit (ed.), Dialect 
Variation and the Theory of Grammar, Foris, Dordrecht. 
Kayne, Richard. 1994. The Antisymmetry o/Syntax, MIT Pres, Cambridge, MA. 
Kayne, Richard. 1998. 'Overt vs. Covert Movement', Syntax I ,  128-191. 
Keenan, Edward. 1976a 'Remarkable Subjects in Malagasy', in Charles Li (cd.), Subject and Topic. 
Academic Press, New York, pp. 249-301. 
Keenan, Edward. 1976b. 'Towards a Universal Definition of .. Subject' .. , in Charles Li (ed.), Subject and 
Topic, Academic Press, New York, pp. 303-333. 
Keenan, Edward. 1999. 'Morphology is Structure: a Malagasy Test Case', in Deana Paul et al. (eds.), 
Formal Issues in Austronesian LinguistiCS, Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp. 27-47. 
Keenan, Edward and Bernard Comrie. 1977. 'Noun Phrase Accessibility and Universal Grammar', 
Linguistic Inquiry 8, 63-99. 
Keenan, Edward and Baholisoa Ralalaoherivony. 1998. 'Raising from NP in Malagasy', UCLA Working 
Papers in Linguistics. 
Kempchinsky, Paula 2001. 'PP Preposing in Spanish and English: A Minimalist View' in Diana Cresti et 
a1. (cds.), Curent Issues in Linguistics Theory: Selected Papers from the 29th Linguistics Symposium 
on Romance Languages, John Benjamins, Amsterdam, pp. 140-153. 
Kim, Jeong-Seok. 1997. Syntactic Focus Movement and Ellipsis: A Minimalist Approach. Doctoral 
dissertation, University of Connecticut 
Kiss, Katalin. 1996. 'Two Subject Positions in English', The Linguistic Review 13, 1 19-142. 
Kitagawa, Yoshihisa 1986. Subjects in Japanese and English, Doctoral dissertation, University of 
Massachusetts. 
Koizumi, Masatoshi 1993. 'Object Agreement Phrases and the Split VP Hypothesis', Papers on Case 
and Agreement /, MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 18, 99-148. 
Koizumi, Masatoshi. 1995. Phrase Structure in Minimalist Syntax, Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. 
Koopman, Hilda and Dominique Sportiche. 1988. 'Subjects', unpublished manuscript, University of 
California, Los Angeles. 
Koopman, Hilda and Dominique Sportiche. 1991. 'The Position of Subjects', Lingua 85. 211-258. 
Koster, Jan. 1978. 'Why Subject Sentences Don't Exist', in Samuel Jay Keyser (ed.), Recent 
Transformational Srudies in European languages, MIT Pres, Cambridge, MA, pp. 53-64. 
Kratzer, Angelika. 1994. 'The Event Argument and the Semantics of Voice', unpublished manuscript, 
University of Masachusetts. 
Kratzer, Angelika. 1996. 'Severing the External Argument from Its Verb', in loban Rooryck and Laurie 
Zaring (eds.), Phrase Structure and the Lexicon, Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp.l 09-138. 
Kroeger, Paul. 1990. 'The Morphology of Afectedness in Kimaragang Dusun', unpublished manuscript, 
Stanford University. 
Kroeger, Paul. 1992. Phrase Structure and Grammatical Relations in Tagalog. CSLI Publications, 
Stanford. 
Kuroda, S. Y. 1988. 'Whether we Agree or Not: A Comparative Syntax of English and Japanese', 
Lingvisticae Investigationes 12, 1-47. Also appears in William Poser (ed.) Papers from the Secand 
International Workshop on Japanese Syntax, CSLI Publications, Stanford University, pp. 103-143. 
Lane, Chris. 1978. 'Niuean Field Notes', unpublished manuscript, Victoria University of Wellington. 
Langacker, Ronald. 1969. 'On Pronominalization and the Chain of Command', in David Reibel and 
Sanford Schane (cds.), Modem Studies in English, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, pp. 160-186. 
Larson, Richard. 1988. 'On the Double Object Construction', Linguistic Inquiry 19, 335-391. 
Larson, Richard. 1990. 'Double Objects Revisited: A Reply to Jackendoff, Linguistic Inquiry 21, 589-
632. 
Lasnik, Howard. 1976. 'Remarks on Corefercnce', Linguistic Analysis 2, 1-22. Reprinted, with minor 
revisions, in Howard Lasnik, 1989, Essays on Anaphora, Kluwer, Dordrechl. 
Lasnik, Howard. 1989. Esays on Anaphora, Kluwer, Dordrecht 
Lasnik, Howard. 1995a 'Case and Expletives Revisited', Linguistic Inquiry 26, 615-634. 
Lasnik, Howard. 1995b. 'Last Resort', in Shosuke Haraguchi and Michio Funaki (eds.), Minimali.fm and 
Linguistic Theory, Hituzi Syobo, Tokyo, pp. 1·32. Reprinted with minor revisions, in Howard 
Lasnik. 1999, Minimalist Analysis, Blackwell, Oxford. 

REFERENCES 
289 
Lasnik, Howard. 1995c. 'Last Resort and Attract F', Proceedings of the Formal Lmguistics Society of 
Mid-America, 6, 62-81 . 
Lasnik. Howard. I 99Sd. 'A note on Pseudogapping', Papers on Minimalist Syntax. MIT Working Papers 
in linguistics 27, 143-163. Reprinted with minor revisions, in Howard Lasnik, 1999. Minimalist 
AlUllysis, Blackwell, Oxford. 
Lasnik, Howard. 1997. 'Levels of RepresentatioD and the Elements of Anaphom', in Hans Benis et a!. 
(eds.), Atomism and Binding. Foris, Dordrecht. pp. 251 -268. Reprinted, with minor revisions, 
Howard Lasnik, 1999, Minimalist Analysis, Blackwell, Oxford. 
Lasnik. Howard. 1998a 'On a Scope Reconstruction Paradox', unpublished manusc:ript. University of 
Connecticut. Posted on 'Chomsky Celebration' web page. 
Lasnik, Howard. 1998b. 'Some Reconstruction Riddles', University of Pennsylvania Worlcing Papers in 
LinguistiCS 5, 83·98. 
Lasnik, Howard. 1999. 'Chains of Arguments', in Samuel Epstein and Norbert Hornstein (eds.), Working 
Minimalism, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Lasnik, Howard. 200 1. 'A Note on the EPP', Linguistic I"'luiry 32, 356-362. 
Lasnik, Howard. in pres. 'Feature Movement or Agreement at a Distance?', in Artemis Alexiadou et aI. 
(eds.), Remnant Movement, F-Movement and the T.model, John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 
Lasnik, Howard and Mamoru Saito. 1991. 'On the Subject of Infinitives', CLS 27: The General SesSion, 
324·343. Reprinted with minor revisions, in Howard Lasnik, 199, Minimalist AlUllysis, Blackwell. 
Oxford. 
Lasnik, Howard and Juan Uriagereka 1988. A Course in GB Syntax, MIT Pres, Cambridge, MA. 
Lazard Gilbert and Louise Peltzer. 1991. 'Predicates in Tahitian', Oceanic Linguistics 30, 1-31. 
Lee, Felicia. 200. 'Remnant VP-movement and VSO in Quiavinf Zapotec and Berber', in Andrew 
Camie·and Eithne Guilfoyle (eds.), The Syntax of Verb Initial Languages, Oxford University Pres, 
Oxford. pp. 143-162. 
Lees, Robert. 1960. The Grammar of English NomilUllizations. Mouton, The Hague. 
Legate, Julie. 1997. Irish Predication: A Minimalist Analysis, Masters thesis, University ofToronto. 
Legate, Julie. 1998. 'Reconstruction and the Irish Nonverbal Predicate Construction', unpublished 
manusc:ript. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Levin, Beth and Maika Rappaport. 1986. 'The Formation of Adjectival Passives', Linguistic i"'lwry 17, 
623·661. 
Levin, Beth and ȣka Rappaport Hovav. 1995. UlUlccusativity: A t  the Syntax-Lexical Semantics 
Intet/ace, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Levin, Juliette and Diane Masaro. 1985. 'Surface Ergativity: Casefl'heta Relations Reexamined', 
Proceedings of the NorthetlSt Linguistics Society 1 S, 286·301. 
Levin, Juliette and Diane Masaro. 1986. 'Clasification of Niuean Verbs: Notes on Case', FOC4L I: 
Papersfrom the International Conference on Austronesian Linguistics 4, 231-244. 
Levin, Juliette and Diane Masaro. 1988. 'Raising and Binding in Niuean', in Richard McGinn (ed.>, 
Studies in AustronesiDn Linguistics, Ohio University Monographs in International Studies, Southeast 
Asia Series No. 76, pp. 253-274. 
Levin, Nancy. 1979. Main Verb Ellipsis in Spoken English, Doctoml dissertation, The Ohio State 
University. Published 1986 by Garland, New York. 
Levine, Robert. 1989. 'On Focus Inversion: Syntactic Valence and the Role of a SUBCAT list', Linguistics 
17, 1013·55. 
Li, Charles (ed.). 1976. Subject and Topic, Academic Pres, New York. 
Li, Yen-Hui Audrey. 1990. Order and Constituency in Mandarin Chinese, Kluwer, Dordrecht. 
Lightfoot, David. 1991. How to Set Parameters: Arguments from Language Change, MIT Pres, 
Cambridge, MA. 
Liptak, Anik6. 200Q. 'On the Difference Between Focus Movement and Wh-Movement', Paper presented 
at GLOW Workshop on Focus, University ofDeusto. 
Lobeck, Ann. 1995. Ellipsis, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Lynch, John. 1972. 'Passives and Statives in Tongan', Journal of the Polynesian Society 81, 5-18. 
Lyons, John. 1967. 'A Note on Possessive, Existential, and Locative Sentences', Foundations of 
Language 3, 390-96. 
Lyons, John. 1968. 'Existence, Location, Possession, and Tmnsitivity', in B. van Rootselaar and T.F. 
Stal (eds.), Logic. Methodology, and Philosophy of Science, m, North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 
495-509. 

REFERENCES 
290 
Maclachlan, Anna. 1996. Aspects ofErgotivity in Tagalog, Doctoral dissertation, McGill University. 
Maclachlan, Anna and Masanori Nakamura. 1997. 'Case Checking and Specificity in Tagalog', The 
linguistic Review 14, 307.333. 
Mahajan, Anoop. 2000. 'Eliminating Head Movement'. Paper presented at GLOW Colloquium, 
Univcrsidad del Pals VascolEuskal Herriko Unibertsitatea. 
Manning, Christopher. 
1996. Ergotivity: Argument Struclure and Grammatical Relations, CSLI 
Publications, Stanford. 
Marantz, Alec. 1984. On the Nature a/Grammatical Relations, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Marantz, Alec. 1993. 'Implications of Asymmetries in Double Object Constructions" in Sam Mchombo 
(ed.), Theoretical Aspects o/Bantu Grammar, CSLl Publications, Stanford, pp. 1 13· 150. 
Marantz, Alec. 1997. 'No Escape from Syntax: Don't Try a Morphological Analysis in the Privacy of 
Your Own Lexicon', unpublished manuscript, Massachusetts Institute ofTcchnology. 
Martin, Roger. 1999. 'case, the Extended Projection Principle, and Minimalism', in Samuel Epstein and 
Norbert Hornstein (eds.), Working Minimalism, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA 
Massaro, Diane. 1 985. Case Theory and the Projection Principle, Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. 
Massaro, Diane. 1991. 'The Syntax of Split Ergativity', Paper presented at North Eastern Linguistics 
Society 22, University of Delaware. 
Massaro, Diane. 1998. 'Niuean Noun Incorporation', Paper read at AFLA V, University of Hawaii. 
Massaro, Diane. 20ooa. 'Niuean Nominalization', Proceedings 0/ AFLA 7, 121·132. 
Massam. Diane. 200b. 'VSO and VOS: Aspects of Niuean Word Order', in Andrew Carnie and Eithnc 
Guilfoyle (eds.>, The Syntax o/V.lnitial Languages, Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 97·1 16. 
Massaro, Diane. 2001 .  'Pseudo-Noun Incorporation in Niuean', Natural Langunge and Linguistic Theory 
1 9, 1 53·197. 
Massaro, Diane and Carolyn Smallwood. 1 997. 'Essential Features of Predication in English and Niuean', 
Proceedings of the North Eastern Lingui.ȗtics Society 27, 263-272. 
Masullo, Pascual Jose. 1992. Incorporation and Case Theory in Spanish: A Cross-Linguistic Perspective, 
Doctoral dissertation, University of Washington. 
Matsuoka. Mikinari. 1999. 'Two Independent Positions for Dative Arguments', Proceedings 0/ the 1999 
Annual Conference 0/ the Canadian Linguistic Association, Cahiers Linguistiques d 'Otawa, 201· 
212. 
May, Robert. 1977. The Grammar 0/ Quantification, Doctoral dissertation, Masachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 
May, Robert. 1985. Logical Form: Its Structure and Derivation. MIT Press. Cambridge. MA. 
McCawley. James. 1 976. Grammar and Meaning, Academic Press, New York. 
McCawley, James. 1 988. 'Review article on "Knowledge of Language: Its Structure, Origin, and Use''', 
Language 64, 355·365. 
McCloskey, James. 1980. 'Is there Raising in Modem Irish?', Eriu 3 1 , 59-99. 
McCloskey, James. 1983. 'A VP in a VSO language', in Gerald Gazdar et al. (eds.), Order, Concord and 
Constituency, Foris, Dordrecht, pp. 9-55. 
McCloskey, James. 1 984. 'Raising, Subcategorization, and Selection in Modem Irish', Natural Language 
and Linguistic Theory 1, 441-485. 
McCloskey, James. 1985. 'Case, movement, and raising in Modem Irish. Proceedings of the West Coast 
Conference on Formal Linguistics 4, 190-205. 
McCloskey, James. 1 991a. 'Clause Structure, Ellipsis and Proper Government in Irish', Lingua 85, 259-
302. 
McCloskey, James. 1 991 b. There, It, and Agreement. Linguistic I"'luiry 22, 563.67. 
McCloskey, James. I 996a. 'On the Scope of Verb Raising in Irish', Natural Language and Linguistic 
Theory 14, 47-104. 
McCloskey, James. I 996b. 'SUbjects and Subject.Positions in Irish', in Robert Borsley and Ian Roberts 
(cds.), The Syntax a/the Celtic Languages: A Comparative Perspective, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, pp. 241·283. 
McCloskey, James. 1997. 'Subjccthood and Subject Positions', in Liliane Haegeman (cd.), Elements of 
Grammar: Handbook a/Generative Syntax, Kluwcr, Dordrecht, pp. 197-235. 
McCloskey, James. 1999. 'On the Right Edge in Irish' , Syntax 2, 189-209. 
McCloskey, James. 2000. 'Quantifier Float and Wh-Movcment in an Irish English', Linguistic I"'luiry 31, 
57-84. 

REFERENCES 
291 
McCloskey, James. 2001 .  'The Morphosyntax of Wh-Extraction in Irish'. Journal 0/ linguistics 37, 67-
100. 
McCloskey, James and Peter Sells. 1 988. 'Control and A·Chains in Modem Irish', Natural Language and 
Linguistic Theory 6, 143-1 89. 
McEwen, J.M. 1970. Niue Dictionary. Dept. of MAori and Island Affairs, Wellington. 
McGinnis, Martha Jo. 1998. Lomlity in A-movement, Doctoral dissertation, Massachusets Institute of 
Technology. 
Mchombo, Sam. 1992. 'Reciprocalization in Chichewa: A Lexical Account', Linguistic Analysis 21, 3-22. 
Mchombo, Sam. 1993 . 'On the Binding of the Reflexive and the Reciprocal in Chichewa', in Sam 
Mchombo (ed.), Theoretical aspects a/Bantu grammar. CSLI Publications, Stanford, pp. 81.207. 
Mejias-Bikandi, Errapel. 1 990. 'Clause Union and Case Marking in Basque', in Katarzyna Dziwirek, et 
aI. (cds.), Grammatical Relations: A cross-theoretical Perspective. CSLI Publications. Stanford, pp. 
263-277. 
Mohanan, K. P. 1982. 'Grammatical Relations and Clause Structure in Malayalam', in Joan Bresnan 
{ed.), The MentIJl RepresentlJtion 0/ Grammatical Relations, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. S04-
S89. 
Mohanan, K.P. 1980. 'Grammatical Relations and Anaphora in MaJayalam'. unpublished manuscript, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Mohanan, K. P. and Tara Mohanan. 1 998. 'Strong and Weak Projection: Lexical Reflexives and 
Reciprocals', in Miriam Butt and Wilhelm Geuder (eds.), The Projection 0/ Arguments: Lexical and 
Compositional FacIQrs, CSLI Publications, Stanford, pp. 165·194. 
Montrul, Silvina 1998. 'The L2 Acquisition of Dative Experiencer Subjects', Second Language Research 
14, 27.61. 
Moore, John and David Penn utter. 2000. 'What does it take to be a Dative Subject?' Natural Language 
and Linguistic Theory 18, 373-4 16. 
Moro, Andrea 1989: 'ThereiCi as Raised Predicates', unpUblished manuscript, Masachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 
Moro, Andrea. 1 997. The Raising a/Predicates, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Mosel, Ulrike and Even Hovdhaugen. 1 992. Samoan Reference Grammar, Scandinavian University 
Pres, Oslo. 
Murasugi, Kumiko. 1992. Cross anff Nested Paths: NP Movement in Accusative and Ergative Languages, 
Doctoral dissenation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Nash, Lca and Alain Rouveret 1997. 'Proxy Categories in Phrase Structure Theory', Proceedings o/the 
North Eastern Linguistic Society 27, 287-304. 
Neeleman, Ad. 1990. 'Scrambling as a D-Structure Phenomenon', in Norbert Corver and Henk van 
Riemsdijk (eds.), Scrambling, Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin. 
. 
Newmeyer, Frederick. 1998. Language Form and Language Function. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Ngonyani, Deo. 1996. 'VP Ellipsis in Ndendeule and Swahili Applicatives', Syntax at Sunset, UCLA 
Working Papers in Syntax and Semantics I, 109-128. 
Noonan. Maire. 1992. Case and SyntlJctic Geometry. Doctoral dissertation, McGill University. 
Noonan, Maire. 1994. 'VP Internal and VP External AgroP: Evidence from Irish', Proceedings o/ the 
West Coast Conference on Formal linguistiCS 13, 31 8-333. 
Noonan, Maire. 1997. 'Functional Architecture and Wh·Movement Irish as a Case in Point', Canadian 
Journalo/Linguistics 42, 1 1 1-139. 
6 Cadhlaigh, Cormac. 1940. Gnos no Gaeilge, Government Publications Office. Dublin. 
6 Cwnain, Brian. 1996. Aspects 0/ the Irish 0/ larras Aithneach, County Galway. Doctoral dissertation, 
University College Dublin. 
Oehrle, Richard. 1976. The Grammatical Status 0/ the English Dative Alternation. Doctoral dissertation, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Oehrle, Richard. 1 977. 'Review of Semantics and Syntactic Regularity by G. Green', Language 53, 198-
208. 
Opdycke, John. 1965. Harper's English Grammar. Popular Library, New York. 
OrdMez, Francisco. 1997. Word Order and Clause Structure in Spanish and Other Romance Languages, 
Doctoral dissertation, City University of New York. 
Ordonez, Francisco and Esthela Trevii'io. 1999. 'Left Dislocated Subjects and the Pro-Drop Parameter: A 
Case Study of Spanish', Lingua 1 07, 39-68. 
Otani, Kazuyo and John Whitman. 1 991. 'V-raising and VP-ellipsis', Linguistic Inquiry 22, 345-358. 

REFERENCES 
292 
Parsons, Terence. 1990. Events in the Semantics of English: a Study in Subatomic Semantics, MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA. 
Paul, Ileana 2000. Malagasy Clause StnJClUre. Doctoral dissertation, McGill University. 
Paul, Ileana 200 I. 'On Extraction Asymmetries', Paper read at AFLA VIII, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 
Paul, Ileana and Lucie Rabaovololona. 1998. 'Raising to Object in Malagasy', UCLA Occasional Papers 
in Linguistics: The Structure of Malagasy II, 50-64. 
Pavon Lucero, M." Victoria. 1999. 'Clases de Partlculas: Preposici6n, Conjunci6n y Adverbio', in Ignacio 
Bosque and Violeta Demonte (eds.), GramAtica Descriptiva de la Lengua Espanola, Vol I, Espasa 
Calpe, Madrid. 
Pawley, Andrew. 1 966. 'Polynesian Languages: a Subgrouping Based on Shared Innovations in 
Morphology', Journal of the Polynesian Sodety 75, 39-64. 
Pawley, Andrew. 1967. 'The Relationships of Polynesian Outlier Languages', Joumal of the Polynesian 
Society 76, 259-96. 
Pearce. Elizabeth. 2000. 'Argument Positions and Anaphora in the MAori clause', Proceedings of the 
Fourth International Conference on Oceanic Linguistics, 313-325. 
Pearson, Mathew. 1998. 'Event Strucblre and the Syntax of Themes and Instruments: the Case of the 
Malagasy Translative Voice (A-Passive)" Paper read at AFLA V, University of Hawaii. 
Pearson, Matthew. 2001 .  The Clause Structure of Malagasy: A Minimalist Approach. Doctoral 
dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles. 
Perlmutter, David. 
1978. 
'Evidence for Inversion in Russian, Japanese, and Kanada', unpublished 
manuscript, Massachusetts Instiblte ofTcchnology. 
Perlmutter, David. 
1978. 
'Impersonal Passives and the Unaccusative Hypothesis', Proceedings of the 
Annual Meeting of the Berlceley Linguistics Society 4, 157-189. 
Perlmutter, David (cd.). 1983. Studies in Relational Grammar 1, University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Perlmutter, David 1984a 'The Inadequacy of Some Monostmtal Theories of Passive', in David 
Perlmutter and Carol Rosen (cds.), Studies in Relational Grammar 2. University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago, pp. 3-37. 
Perlmutter, David 1984b. 'Working Is and Inversion in Italian, Japanese and Qucchua', in David 
Perlmutter and Carol Rosen (eds.), Studies in Relational Grammar 2. University of Chicago Pres, 
Chicago, pp. 292-330. 
Perlmutter, David and Paul Postal. 1 972. "The Relational Succession Law", unpublished manuscript, 
Masachusetts Instiwte of Technology. Revised version in David Perlmutter (cd.), 1 983, Studies in 
Relational Grammar 1, University of Chicago Pres, Chicago. 
Perlmutter, David and Paul Postal. 1974. Lectures on Relational Grammar, LSA Linguistic Instiwte, 
University of Massachusetts, Amherst 
Perlmutter, David and Paul Postal. 1977. 'Toward a Universal Characterization of Passivization', 
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Berlceley Linguistics Society 3, 394-417. Reprinted in 
David Perlmutter (ed.), 1983, Studies in Relational Grammar 1, University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago, pp. 3-29. 
Perlmutter, David and Paul Postal. 1983a 'The Relational Succession Law', in David Perlmutter (ed.), 
Studies in Relational Grammar 1, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 30-80. 
Perlmutter, David and Paul Postal. 1983b. 'Some Proposed Laws of Basic Clause Structure', in David 
Perlmutter (ed.), Studies in Relational Grammar 1, University of ChŦcago Press, Chicago, pp. 
81-128. 
Perlmutter, David and Paul Postal. 1983c. 'Toward a Universal Characterization of Passivization', in 
David Perlmutter (ed.), Studies in Relational Grammar I, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 
3-29. 
Perlmutter, David and Paul Postal. 1984. 'Impersonal Passives and Some Relational Laws', in David 
Perlmutter and Carol Rosen (eds.), Studies in relational grammar 2, University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago, pp. 126-1 70. 
Pesetsky, David 
1 982. Paths and Categories, Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Instibltc of 
Technology. 
Pesetsky, David. 1989. 'The Earliness Principle', unpublished manuscript, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 
Pesetsky, David. 1995. Zero Syntax: Experiencers and Cascades, MIT Press. Cambridge, MA. 

REFERENCES 
293 
Pesetsky, David and Esther Torrego. 2001. 'T·to-C Movement: Causes and consequences', in Michael 
Kenstowicz (ed.), Ken Hale: a Life in Language, MIT Pres, Cambridge, MA. 
Pinto, M. 1994. 'Subjects in Italian: Distribution and Interpretation', in R. Bok·BelUlema and C. Cremers 
(eds.), Linguistics in the Netherlands, John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 
Poletto, Cecilia 2000. 'Subject Positions', unpublished manuscript, Universiê di Padova 
Pollard, Carl and Ivan Sag. 1994. Head-drilJen Phrase Structure Grammar, University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago. 
Pollock, Jean·Yves. 1989. 'Verb Movement, Universal Grammar, and the Structure of IP', Linguistic 
Inquiry 20, 365424. 
Pollock, Jean-Yves. 1997. 'Notes on Clause Structure', in Liliane Haegeman (ed.), Elements 0/ 
Grammar: Handbook o/Generative Syntax, Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp. 237-279. 
Postal, Paul. 1974. On Raising: One Rule 0/ English Grammar and Its Theoretical Implications, MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Postal, Paul. 1977. 'Antipassive in French', Lingvisticae InlJestigationes I, 333-374. 
Pullum, Geoffrey. 1996. 'Review of "The View from Building 20" by KelUleth Hale and Wayne O'Neil 
(Eds.),Journal o/Linguistics 32, 1 17·147. 
Rackowski, Andrea. 1998. 'Malagasy Adverbs', in Ileana Paul (ed.), The Structure o/Malagasy, Volume 
II, UCLA Occasional Papers in Linguistics, pp. 1 1·33. 
Rac:kowski, Andrea and Lisa deMena Travis. 200. 'V.lnitial Languages: X or XP Movement and 
Adverbial Placement', in Andrew Carnie and Eithne Guilfoyle (cds.), The Syntax of V·IniIill 
Languages, Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 1 17-41. 
Radford, Andrew. 1997. Syntactic Theory and the Structure 0/ English: A Minimalist Approach, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Reinhart, Tanya 1976. The Syntactic Domain of Anaphora, Doctoral dissertation, Masachusetts Institute 
of Technology. 
Reinhart. Tanya 1983. Anaphora and Semantic Interpretation, University of Chicago Pres, Chicago. 
Reinhart, Tanya and Eric Reuland. 1993. 'Reflexivity', Linguistic IfU/Uiry 24, 657-720. 
Richards, Norvin. 1997. What Moves Where When in Which language?, Doctoral dissertation, 
Massachusetts Institute ofTcchnology. 
Rigau, Gemma 1988. 'Strong Pronouns', Linguistic Inquiry 19, 503·51 1. 
Rizzi, Luigi. 1990. Relativized Minimality, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Rizzi, Luigi. 1996. ,'Residual Verb Second and the Wh-Criterion', in Adriana Belletti and Luigi Rizi 
(eds.), Parameters and Functional Heads: Essays in Comparative Syntax, Oxford University Pres, 
Oxford. 
Rizzi, Luigi. 1997. 'The Fine Structure of the Left Periphery', in Liliane Haegeman (ed.), Elements of 
Grammar: Handbook of Generative Syntax, K.luwer, Dordrecht, pp. 281·337. 
Roberge, Yves. 2000. 'Inner EPP Effects', unpublished manuscript, University of Toronto. 
. 
Rosen, Carol. 1983. 'Universals of Causative Union: A Co-proposal to the Gibson.Raposo Typology', 
CLS 19: The Main Session, 338·52. 
Rosen, Carol. 1984. 'The Interface Between Semantic Roles and Initial Grammatical Relations', in David 
Perlmutter and Carol Rosen (eds.), Studies in Relational Grammar 2, University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago, pp. 38-77. 
Rosenbaum, Peter. 1967. The Grammar of English Predicate Complement Constructions. 
MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA. 
Ross, John. 1967. Constraint of Variables in Syntax, Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 
Ross, John. 1973. 'The Penthouse Principle and the Order of Constituents', in Claudia Corum et 81. (eds.), 
You Take the High Node and I'll take the Low Node, Chicago Linguistic Society, Chicago, pp. 397· 
422. 
Rothstein, Susan. 1983. The Syntactic Forms of Predication, Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. 
Rothstein, Susan. 1992. 'Case and NP Licensing', Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 10, 1 19·139. 
Safir, Kenneth. 1983. 'On Small Clauses as Constituents', Linguistic Inquiry 14, 730·35. 
Saito, Mamoru. 1985. Some Asymmetries in Japanese and Their Theoretical Implication.r, Doctoral 
dissertation, Masachusetts Institute ofTec:hnology. 
Schathter, Paul. 1976. 'The Subject in Philippine Languages: Topic. Actor, Actor.Topic, or None of the 
Above?' in Charles Li (ed.), Subject and Topic, Academic Press, New York, pp. 491·5 18. 

REFERENCES 
294 
Schachter, Paul. 1 996. 'The Subject in Tagalog: Still None of the Above', UCLA Occasional Papers in 
Linguistics IS, 1 -61. 
Seiter, William. 1980. Studies in Niuean Syntax, Garland, New York. 
Seiter, William. 1983. 'Subject-Direct Object Raising in Niuean', in David Perlmutter (ed.) Studies in 
Relational Grammar I, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 31 7-59. 
Sells, Peter, Annie Zaenen, and Dmga Zec. 1987. 'Reflexivization Variation: Relations between Syntax, 
Semantics, and Lexical Structure', in Masayo Iida et aI. (eds.), Working Papers in Grammatical 
Theory and Discourse Strocture, CSLI Publications, Stanford, pp. 169-238. 
Sherman (Ussishkin), Adam. 1 998. 'VP Ellipsis and Subject Positions in Modern Hebrew', Proceedings 
a/the Israel Association o/Theoretical Linguistics 13, 21 1-229. 
Simpson, Jane. 1 991. War/piri Morpho-Syntax: a Le.xicalist Approach, Kluwer, Dordrecht. 
Sobin, Nicholas. 1 997. 'Agreement, Default Rules, and Grammatical Viruses', Linguistic Inquiry 28. 
3 18-43. 
Speas, Margaret. 1990. Phrase Structure in Natural Language, Kluwer, Dordrecht 
Sperlich, Wolfgang. 1994. 'A Theory of Verb Classes and Case Morphology in Niuean', Proceedings 0/ 
the International Conference on Austronesian Languages 7, 22·27. 
Sperlich, Wolfgang (ed.). 1997. Tohi Vagahau Niue: Niue Language Dictionary, Government of Niue 
and University ofHawai'i Press, Alofi and Honolulu. 
Sportiche, Dominique. 1 988. 'A Theory of Floating Quantifiers and Its Corollaries for Constituent 
Structure', Linguistic Inquiry 19, 425.449. 
Sportiche, Dominique. 1990. 'Movement, Agreement, and Case', unpublished manuscript, University of 
California, Los Angeles. 
Sportiche, Dominique. 1996. 'Clilic Constructions', in Johan Rooryck and Laurie Zaring (eds.), Phrase 
Structure and the Lexicon, Kluwer, Dordrecht. 
Stechow, Amim von. 1995. 'Lexical Decomposition in Syntax', in Urs Egli and Peter Pause (ed.), Lexical 
Knowledge in the Organization 0/ Language, John Benjamins, Amsterdam, pp. 8 J -I ] 8. 
Stenson, Nancy. 1981. Studies in Irish Syntax, Max Niemeyer Verlag, Ttlbingen. 
Stowell, Timothy. 1981. ElemenLr 0/ Phrase Structure, Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 
Stowell, Timothy. 1983. ·Subjects Across Categories', The Linguistic Review 2, 285-3 12. 
Sufter, Margarita. 1988. 'The Role of Agreement in Clilic-Doubled Constructions', Natural Language 
and Linguistic 17reory 6, 391-434. 
SUiler, Margarita. 1 994. 'V-movement and the Licensing of Argumental Wh-Phrases in Spanish', Natural 
Language and Linguistic Theory 1 2, 335·372. 
Takahashi, Daiko. 1994. Minimality of Movement, Doctoral dissertation, University of Connecticut. 
Tanaka, Hidekazu. 1999. 'Raised Objects and Superiority', Linguistic Inquiry 30, 317-325. 
Thr8insson, HOskuldur. 1996. 'On the Non-Universality of Functional Categories', in Werner Abraham et 
aI. (eds.), Minimal Ideas: Syntactic Studies in the Minimalist Framework, John Benjamins, 
Amsterdam, pp. 253-281 .  
Torrego, Esther. 1985. 'On Empty Categories i n  Nominals', unpublished manuscript, University of 
Masachusetts at Boston. 
Travis, Lisa deMena 1991. 'Derived Objects, Inner Aspect, and the Structure ofVP', Paper presented at 
North Eastern Linguistics Society 22. 
Travis, Lisa deMena 1992. 'Inner Aspect and the Structure of VP'. Cahiers Linguistique de I'UQAM I, 
130-146. 
Travis, Lisa deMena 1 998. 'Theta Positions and Binding in Balinese and Malagasy', Canadian Journal 
0/ Linguistics 43, 435-467. 
Travis, Lisa deMena 2000a 'Eight Possible Paper Topics on Chamorro and Related Languages', 
Oceanic Linguistics. 39, 1 ·29. 
. 
Travis, Lisa deMena 2000b. 'Event Structure in Syntax', in Carol Tenny and James Pustejovsky (eds.), 
Events as Grammatical Objects, CSLI Publications, Stanford, pp. 45-1 85. 
Travis, Lisa deMena and Edwin Williams. 1983. 'Externalization of Arguments in Malaya-Polynesian 
Languages', The Linguistic Review 2, 57-78. 
Ura, Hiroyuki. 1998. 'Ergativity and Checking Theory', unpublished manuscript, Osaka University. 
Uriagereka, Juan. 1 988. On Government, Doctoml dissertation. University of Connecticut. 
Uriagereka, Juan. 1999. 'Minimal Restrictions on Basque Movements', Natural Language and Linguistic 
Theory 17, 403-444. 

REFERENCES 
295 
Uribe.Etxebania, Myriam. 
1995. 'On the Structure of SPECIP and its Relevance for Scope 
Asymmetries', in Jon Amastae et al. (eds.), Contemporary Research in Romance Linguistics, John 
Benjamins, Amsterdam. pp. 355·367. 
Wasow, Thomas. 1976. 'McCawley on Generative Semantics', Linguistic Analysis 2, 279-301 .  
Webelhuth, Gert. 1992. Principles and Parameters of Syntactic Saturation, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford. 
Wecbsler, Stephen and Wayan Arka 1998. 'Syntactic Ergativity in Balinese', Natural Language and 
Linguistic Theory 1 6, 387-441 .  
Williams, Edwin. 1980. 'Predication', Linguistic Inquiry 1 1, 203.238. 
Williams, Edwin. 1981. 'Argument Structure and Morphology', The Linguistic Review 1, 81-1 14. 
Williams, Edwin. 1984. 'Grammatical Relations', Linguistic Inquiry 15, 639·73. 
Williams, Edwin. 1 987. 'Implicit Arguments, the Binding Theory and Control', Natural Language and 
Linguistic Theory 5, 151·180. 
Williams, Edwin. 1994. Thematic Structure in Syntax, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Willis, David. 1996. The Loss of Verb-Second in Welsh: A Study of Syntactic Change, Doctoral 
dissertation, UniveISity of Oxford. 
Woolford, Ellen. 1993. 'Symmetric and Asymmetric Passivcs', Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 
I I, 679-728. 
Woolford, Ellen. 1997. 'Four-way Case Systems: Ergative, Nominative, Objective and Accusative', 
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 15, ) 81 -227. 
Zubizareta, Maria Luisa 1982. On the Relationship of the Lexicon to Syntax, Doctoral dissertation, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Zubizareta, Marla Luisa 1998. Prosody, Focus, and Word Order, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Zwart. Jan-Wouter. 1992. 'Dutch Expletives and Small Clause Predicate Raising', Proceedings of the 
North Eastern Linguistics Society 23, 477-491. 


AUTHOR INDEX 
Abney, S., 28 
Adger, D., 1 89, 204 
Aissen, J., 4, 93, 94, 100, 1 02 
Alexiadou, A.. 193-195, 216, 2 1 7, 
219, 245, 274 
Allen, B., 1 25 
Aisina, A., 10, 78, 82, 83, 86, 90, 9 1 ,  
99-102 
Anagnostopoulou, E., 1 93-195, 2 1 6, 
2 1 7, 21 9, 274 
Anderson, S., 227 
Austin, P., 229, 246 
Baker, M., 3, 5, 10, 27, 30, 40, 47, 
50, 53, 56-62, 64, 65, 67-72, 74, 
75, 77, 79-81 ,  85, 87, 88, 90-92, 
99, 101, 102, 124, 126, 127, 13 1 ,  
133, 1 5 1 ,  153, 154, 163, 218, 223 
Bakovic, Eo, 222, 223 
Barbosa, P., 220, 222 
Barss, A., 30, 75, 1 05 
Bejar, S., 234 
Bell. So. 8 
Belletti, A., 84 
Biber, D., 73 
Bickerton, D., 74 
Biggs. B., 227. 229, 237, 242, 245 
Bittner, M., 1 9, 243 
Bobaljik, J., 4, 7, 17, 128, 148-150, 
152, 1 55, 1 58, 246, 272, 273 
Bok-Bermema, Ro, 222 
Bonet, Eo, 102 
Borer. Hot 55, 88 
BoJkovic, Z., 1 17, 1 1 8, 121 
Bowers, Jo, 9, 245 
Branigan, P., 8, 1 09, 1 10 
Bresnan, Jo, 3, 24, 36, 78, 80, 82, 89, 
90, 99, 100, 102, 1 13, 253 
Burzio, L., 3, 47, 191 
Campana, M., 19 
Campos, Ho, 222 
Cardinaletti, A., 8, 190, 1 97, 221 
Carnie, A., 1 6 1 ,  1 67, 173. 179, 192, 
229 
Carstairs-McCarthy, Ao, 74 
Chametsky, R., 74 
297 
Chomsky, N., 1-9, 1 8, 22, 23, 26-28. 
30, 37, 38, 44-46, 50, 53-55, 59, 
60, 63, 64, 74. 75, 87, 96, 1 0 1 ,  
103-109, 1 12-1 14. 1 1 6, 1 1 9-121, 
124, 125, 149, 159, 160, 1 66, 169, 
1 77, 1 78, 1 88, 1 90, 191, 1 93, 201, 
208, 213, 222, 225, 226, 232, 234, 
239, 240. 245, 247, 25 1 , 261, 262, 
267, 271 
Chung, So, 3, 125, 1 54. 167, 1 84, 
1 89, 191 , 2 1 1 , 228, 270 
Cinque, G., 47, 150 
Clark, Eo, 168 
Collins, C., 10 I 
Comrie, Bo, 35 
Contreras, Ho, 2 1 8  
Conway, Lo, 277 
Cook, K., 229, 244 
Croft, W., 75 
Culicover, P., 262 
Cummins, So, 245 
Dalrymple, Mo, 90 
Davies, Wo, 13, 74, 75, 98, 101, 1 19, 
152, 190, 207, 2 1 8, 227, 233, 244, 
276-278 
Dechaine, R., 191, 226 
DeGraff, Mo, 1 67 
Demonte, Vo, 84 
den Diken, M., 106 
Diesing, Mo, 121, 148, 1 74, 1 76, 223 
Dixon, Ro M. Wo, 225-228, 237, 238, 
243-245 
Doherty, Co, 167, 1 89 
Doron, E., 162 
Dowty, Do, 46, 48, 60, 61, 65-67, 75 
Dryer. Mo, 82, 100 
Dubinsky, S., 13. 74, 75, 1 0 1 ,  1 19, 
190, 207, 2 18, 219, 227, 233, 244, 
276-278 
Duffield, N., 161, 173, 179, 1 84, 189, 
1 92 
Dukes, M., 229, 240, 242 
Eguren, L., 221, 222 
Emonds, 1., 55, 67. 276 
Epstein, S., 1 95, 21 8 

298 
Fernandez Soriano, 0., 197 
Fiengo, R., 1 62 
Fillmore, C., 54, 55, 158 
Finer, D., 21 1 
Fodor, J., 64, 65, 70, 75 
Foley, W., 225 
Franco, J., 9 
Freeze, R., 168 
Freidin, R., 55 
Fukui, N., 45, 123, 226 
Georgopoulos, C.,21 1 
Gibson, J., 4, 95 
Goodall, G., 12, IS, 21 1, 219, 221-
223, 279 
Green, G., 63 
Grimshaw, J., 1 1, 36, 63, 91, 192, 
222 
Groos, A., 222 
Gruber, J., 54 
Guilfoyle, E., 4, 7, 8, 123, 173, 184, 
191, 226, 229, 237, 241, 246 
Haegeman, L., 8, 1 9, 84, 190, 277 
Hale. K., 30, 45, 46, 57-60, 62-64, 
69, 177, 243, 245 
Harley, H., 65, 74, 75, 161, 173, 178, 
1 79, 225, 245 
Hawkins, J., 73 
Hemanz, M., 220 
Hoekstra, T., 3, 168 
Hoji, H., 30, 162 
Holmberg, A., 79, 127, 128, 155, 1 58 
Hooper, R., 229, 242, 244 
Hornstein, N., 208, 209, 21 7, 222 
Hovdhaugen, E., 245 
Hung, H., 4, 7, 8, 123, 134, 135, 226, 
229, 237, 241, 246 
Iatridou, S., 9 
Jackendoft: R., 30, 54, 55, 63, 70, 74, 
75, 241 
Jaeggli, 0., 196 
Jaworska, E., 253, 277 
Jayaseelan, K., 107 
Johnson, D., 33 
Johnson, K., 75, I I I, 1 12, 1 1 6, 121. 
153 
AUTHOR INDEX 
Jonas, D., 4, 7, 128, 1 58, 188, 190, 
272 
Kanerva, J., 78, 102 
Kayne, R., 9, 7 1 ,  83, I l l ,  1 12, 195, 
263 
Keenan, E., 18, 35, 135, 137, 140, 
153, 154, 225 
Kempchinsky, P., 218, 219, 276 
Keyser, S., 45, 46, 57-60, 62-64, 69, 
177 
Kim, J. S., 121 
Kiss, K., 8 
Kitagawa, Y., 4, 123, 226 
Koizumi, M., 9, 14, 106, 153, 178 
Koopman, H., 123, 1 78, 226 
Koster. J, 276 
Kratzer, A., 46, 1 59, 177, 1 78, 191 
Kroeger, P., 131, 151, 1 53, 225, 226 
Kuroda, S.-Y., 6, 123, 226 
Lane, C., 244 
Langacker, R., 109 
Larson, R., 4, 5, 8, 9, 28, 30, 50, 60, 
70, 71, 74, 121 
Lasnik, H., 10, 14-1 6, 1 8, 19, 30, 39, 
75, 101, 103, 104, 106, 107, 109, 
1 10, 1 1 1, 1 13, 1 14, 1 19-121, 153, 
195 
Lazard, G., 229 
Lee, F., 231 
Lees, R., 252, 261 
Legate, J., 167 
Levin, B., 48, 62, 74, 239 
Levin, l, 17, 228, 245, 246 
Levin, N., 120 
Levine, R., 249 
Li, Y.-H., 205. 206, 221 
Li, C., 229 
Lightfoot, D., 74 
Liptak, A., 220 
Lynch, J., 229 
Lyons, J.t 168 
Maclachlan, A., 148, 149 
Mahajan, A., 222 
Manning, C., 226, 237, 238, 241, 243 
Marantz, A., 3, 27, 91, 102, 1 55, 177, 
226, 242, 245 

Martin, R., 109, 2 1 8  
Martinez-Arbelaiz. A., 98 
AUTHOR INDEX 
Massam, D., 1 0, 12, 14-17, 123, 136, 
1 48, 227, 228, 230, 23 1 ,  233-235, 
239, 242, 245, 246, 268, 27 1 . 275, 
279 
Masullo, Po, 2 1 8, 2 1 9, 222 
Matsuoka, M., 147 
May, R, 1 19, 1 62 
McCawley, J., 63, 104 
McCloskey, J., 4, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 15, 
1 7, 161-163, 1 65- 167, 1 69, 173, 
179. 1 84, 1 85, 1 88-191, 1 93, 217, 
221 , 228, 244, 249, 250, 269 
McEwen, J., 244 
McGinnis, M., 240, 245, 246 
Mchombo, So, 78, 82, 89, 90, 100, 
1 02 
Mejias-Bikandi, E., 98 
Mohanan, K. Po, 24, 29, 39, 98 
Mohanan, To, 98 
Montrul, So, 9 
Moore. Jo, 1 92, 274, 275 
Moro, A., 1 68 
Mosel, U .• 245 
Mulder, Ro, 1 68 
Murasugi, K., 1 9  
Nakamura, M., 148, 149 
Nash, L., 9, 279 
Neelernan, A., 155 
Newmeyer, F., I I, 73 
Ngonyani, D., 1 62 
Nikanne, U., 158 
Noonan, M., 1 85, 1 9 1  
Noyer, R., 245 
6 Cadhlaigh, C., 187 
6 Curn3.in, Bo, 191 
Oehrle, R., 63 
Opdycke, J., 225 
Ordonez, F., 196. 197. 2 10, 2 1 5, 219, 
222 
Otani, K., 162 
Parsons, T., 46 
Paul, 1., 146. 147. 1 53- 1 55, 276, 279 
Pavon Lucero, M.& V., 206 
Pawley, A., 225 
299 
Pearce, E., 244, 246 
Pearson, M., 130, 1 43, 146, 147, 155 
Peltzer, L., 229 
Perlmutter, D., I ,  3, 4, 24-26, 78, 84, 
100, 127, 134, 1 35, 192, 274. 275 
Pesetsky, D., 5, 9, 63, 75, 153, 222 
Peters, S., 90 
Pinto, M., 204 
Platzack, Co, 79 
Poletto, C., 2] 8, 22] 
Pollard, C., 43 
Pollock, J.-Y., 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 1 58 
Postal, P., 1. 3. 19, 25, 26, 33, 78, 
1 00, 103, 1 04, 109, 1 1 6, 1 19, 120, 
1 34, 135, 1 53 
Pullum, G., 64 
Rabaovololona, L., 1 54, 1 55 
Rackowski, A., IS, ISO, 1 5 1  
Ralalaoherivony, B., 1 35, 137, 140, 
1 54 
Raposo, E., 4, 95 
Rappaport Hovav, Mo, 47, 62, 74 
Reinhart, T., 36, 37, 40, 1 54, 246 
Reuland, E., 1 54, 246 
Richards, N., 245 
Rigau, G., 84 
Rizzi, L., 84, 1 60, 190. 199, 200, 
201 , 202, 2 1 1, 2 1 5, 2 1 6, 2 1 9, 220, 
223 
Roberge, Y., 243 
Roberts, I., 75 
Rosen, C., 1 1  
Rosenbaum, Po, 70, 124, 252, 262 
Ross, J., 73, 26 1 
Rothstein, So, 63, 226 
Rouveret, A., 9, 279 
Safir, Ko. 276 
Sag, 1., 43 
Saito, M., 1 9, 30, 103, 104, 106, 1 09, 
1 13, 120 
Schachter, P., 123, 225, 228, 229 
Seely, D., 1 19. 120, 218 
Seiter, Wo, 12, 228, 235-239, 241 ,  
244, 246, 269 
Sells, P., 91 , 1 73, 1 84, 19 1 
Sherman (Ussishkin), A., 162 

300 
AUTHOR INDEX 
Simpson, J., 24, 29, 50 
Smallwood, C., 1 5, 123, 227, 233. 
244, 268, 271, 275, 279 
Sobin, N., 276 
Speas, M., 26, 27, 31, 45, 123, 226 
Sperlich, W., 229, 237, 242-244 
Sportiehe, D., 4, 6, 9, 123, 153, 178, 
226 
Stechow, A. von, 46 
Stenson, N., 185 
Stewart. 0., 39, 154 
Stowell, T., 28, 276, 277 
SWier, M., 84, 21 1 
Takahashi, D., 1 10 
Tanaka, H., 1 17, 1 18, 121 
Thrainsson, H., 9, 101 
Torrego, E., 202, 222, 223 
Travis, L., 4, 7, 8, 10, 14, 15, 65, 123. 
142, 151. 153, 154, 178, 226, 229, 
237, 241, 246, 269 
Ura, H., 231 
Uriagereka, J., 108, 195. 263, 267 
Uribe-Etxebarria, M., 195, 196, 208, 
218 
Wasow, T., 63 
Wayan, A., 144 
Webelhuth, G., 254, 277 
Wechsler, S., 142, 144, 145, 237, 241 
Whitman, J., 162 
Williams, E., 45, 56, 75, 159, 177, 
226, 229. 237. 241. 245. 252, 253, 
277 
Willis, D., 191 
Woolford, E., 102, 231, 242 
Zaenen, A., 91 
Zee, D., 91 
Zubizarreta, M., 1 12, 197, 204, 205, 
222 
Zwart, J., 158 

SUBJECT INDEX 
absolutive, 13, 16, 17, 19, 225, 228-
235, 242-246 
accusative, 8, 16, 1 7, 78, 79, 83-85, 
87-90, 92, 95, 96, 98, 100-102, 
1 19, 126, 1 53, 1 54, 158, 159, 165, 
1 66, 181-185, 190, 191, 219, 228, 
229, 234, 237-239, 242-244 
advancements, 35, 102, 131, 133, 1 53 
AgrP, 4, 5, 9, 10, 1 3-18, 103, 107, 
1 10, 1 19, 121, 247, 252, 272-275, 
277, 279 
AgrIO, 9 
AgrO, S, 9, 14, IS-1,7, 1 9, 103, 
105, 107-1 10, l t9-121. 127, 
128, 1 53, 179, 1 82, 245 
AgrS, 5, 9, 10, 14-17, 19, 78, 103, 
106-108, BO, 1 19, 127 
!NFL, 4, 7, 9, 33, 70, 72, 73, 226, 
231 , 233, 234, 245 
alignment hypotheses, see: 
Deep Alignment Hypothesis, 
Unifonnity of Theta Assignment 
Hypothesis, 
Universal Alignment Hypothesis. 
applicatives, 95, 1 02, 124-126, 131, 
133, 141, 145, 146, 151, 153 
bare nouns, 199, 200 
binding, 10, 14, 28, 30, 41, 43, 50, 
54, 71, 83, 86, 90-92, 96-98, 105-
108, 1 10, I l l, 116, t 18, 120, 142-
144, 1 54, 188, 189, 215, 216, 219, 
225, 228, 237, 238, 239, 241-244, 
246 
binding conditions, see: 
Condition A, 
Condition B, 
Condition C. 
Binding Theory, 30, 50, 54, 239, 240 
bound variable anaphora, 37, 39-41, 
68 
Case 
abstract, 77-80, 82, 85, 86, 90, 97, 
99, 100, 102 
inherent, 10, 79-82, 84-89, 91-102 
301 
structW'al, 10, 77, 79-82, 84-86, 
88·101 
case, grammatical, 77, 79, 80, 82, 85, 
86, 90. 92, 97-100. 126 
Case Filter, 79, 82 
Case Resistance Principle, 276, 277 
causatives, 47, 57, 86, 87, 88, 90, 94, 
98, 102, 138, 140, 141, 170 
chc)meu, 82, 100 
clefting, 27-30, 1 53, ISS, 168, 191, 
235, 238, 246 
cliticization, 29. 30, 1 16 
clitics, 9, 29, 30, 75, 83, 87. 89-92. 
102, 218, 219, 221 , 235, 236, 239, 
245 
command 
a-command, 36 
c-comrnand, 24, 28. 30, 36-38, 40-
43, 47, 48, 50, 68, 70, 71, 73, 
75, 104, 105, 1 19, 120. 189, 
239-241, 243, 246 
f-command, 36, 50 
o-command, 43 
complex NP islands, 255, 268 
Condition A, 1 03, lOS, 120, 240 
Condition B, 39, 120, 239 
Condition C, 37, 39, 41, 48, 50, 68, 
71, lOS, 1 09, 1 16, 1 17 
constituency, S. 10, 21. 22. 24-31, 36, 
SO, 161 
constituency tests. 5, 1 0, 22, 24, 
27-31, 36 
control, I I, 25, 27, 29, 36, 75, 120, 
1 54. 221 , 225, 228, 237, 238, 241-
244, 253, 274 
c-structure, 30 
dative subjects, 1 82-188, 192 
Deep Alignment Hypothesis, 53, 60-
68, 74, 75 
double object constructions, 25, 30, 
35, S0, 77, 79, 82, 83, 85, 86, 88, 
90, 92. 94, 120, 124, IS3 
DP-shell, 252.254, 256, 258. 266. 
268-271, 278 

302 
ECM (exceptional Case marking), 
see: raising, ECM 
Empty Category Principle, 29, 57, 58, 
74 
EPP, 4, 6, 8, 12-1 8, 103, 107, 1 19, 
120, 121, 1 53, 160-1 63, 1 65, 166, 
1 68, 169, 1 76, 177, 1 8 1 ,  191, 193-
1 97, 199, 203-209, 21 1 , 2 12, 213-
218, 225-228, 23 1-234, 236, 237, 
243, 244, 248, 264, 269, 272, 275, 
279 
EPP-feature, 8, 12, 13, 15, 194-196, 
199. 204, 213-21 5, 228, 272, 279 
(EPP) D-feature, 12, 14, 1 5, 247, 
252, 269, 27 1, 272, 274, 275, 
279 
(EPP) V-feature, 247, 272, 274 
ergative, 16. 1 7. 19, 147. 227-229, 
23 1-233, 235, 237, 242-246 
existential constructionss, 106, 166-
1 68, 175, 1 76, 191, 205, 246 
expletives, 7, 106, lOS, 1 59, 162, 
16S, 1 76, 193, 195, 204, 221, 
237, 272, 274 
Extended Standard Theory, 50 
feature checking, 121, 23 1 
feature movement, 120, 121 
focus, 22, 34, 1 1 6, 1 1 7, 121, 150, 
1 55, 168, 1 77, 190. 193, 196, 197, 
202, 203, 209, 2 1 1 , 2 14, 216. 218, 
220-222, 245, 247, 264, 278 
functional heads, 1 1, 1 5, IS, 29, 103, 
105, 191, 232, 236 
functional structure (f-structure), 10, 
26, 32, 34, 191, 25 1 
Generative Semantics, 46, 63, 64 
Government and Binding theory, 1 ,  
3, 4, 50, 54, 77-80, 1 0 1 ,  102, 123-
126, 1 3 1 , 157, 225, 226, 248 
Government Transparency Corollary, 
126, 127 
Head 
Driven 
Phrase 
Structure 
Grammar, 17, 35, 43 
incorporation, 3, 10, 16, 25, 30, 56-
59, 74, 126, 127, 237, 238, 242, 
243, 245 
SUBJECT INDEX 
inflectional layer, 8, 9, 1 3, 15, 18, 
1 60, 1 65, 1 77, 180, 1 88, 190, 193, 
22 1 
languages 
Austronesian, 7, 8, 123, 229, 269 
Balinese, 143-145, 151 
Cebuano, 8, 25 
Chamorro, 95, 154, 270, 271 
Kalagan, 151, 152 
Kimaragang Dusun, 1 3 1 ,  lSI, 
152 
Malagasy, 10, 14, 15, 123-125, 
129- 136, 142-145, 147-151, 
1 53-155, 269-271, 279 
Niuean, 12-17, 123, 225-246, 
268, 269, 271 , 275, 279 
Tagalog, 7, 123, 14S. 149, 1 53, 
155, 228, 241 
Tahitian, 229 
Bantu, 89 
Chichewa, 57, 77, 79-83, 85-
102, 1 3 1, 133 
Kichaga, 99 
K1nyanwanda, 85, 1 3 1  
Ndendeule, 162 
Basque, 98 
Chinese, 1 62, 205, 206, 221 
Dravidian, 
Kannada, 98 
MaJayaJam, 24, 28, 29, 39, 98 
Edo, 39 
Gennanic, 
Gennan, 84, 98, 148, 150 
Icelandic, 7, 79, 1 27, 128, 148, 
159, 176, 188, 1 90, 272. 274, 
275 
Greek, Classical, 166 
Hebrew, Modem, 162 
.Hindi, 30 
Irish, 6, 12-15. 17, 49. 157, 160-
1 63, 165, 166, 1 68, 169, 172, 
1 73, 175, 1 76, 179-18 1 ,  184, 
1 85. 190, 191. 193, 217, 228, 
229, 244, 269, 271, 279 
Japanese, 6, 27, 30, 40, 85, 162 
Korean, 162 

SUBJECT INDEX 
İohawk, 24, 30, 40, 50, 223 
Navajo, 26, 3 1  
Oneida, 126 
Romance, 4, 19, 83, 89, 218, 221 ,  
222 
Catalan, 77, 83-92, 95-98, 100, 
1 02 
French, 6, 9, 1 3, 15, 1 9, 83, 91, 
168, 245, 247, 258, 259-261 ,  
263-269, 271 , 272, 274, 279 
Italian, 84, 197, 204, 205, 220, 
22 1 
Latin, 79, 98, 1 66, 218 
Spanish, 9, 12-15, 1 7, 84, 194, 
1 95, 197, 199, 201-21 1, 213- , 
223, 279 
Slavic 
Bulgarian, 1 3, 15, 247, 263-268, 
271 , 273-275, 278, 279 
Russian, 1 92, 247, 264, 268, 
271, 274, 279 
Thai, 39 
Turkish, 98 
Tzotzil, 93-95 
Warlpiri, 24, 29, 30, 50 
Larsonian shells. 28, 29. 70, 71, 74 
Left Branch Codition, 268 
Lethal Ambiguity, 240, 241 ,  246 
Lexical-Functional Grammar, I, 3, 
17, 21, 26, 27, 30, 34, 35, 78, 80, 
100 
lexical semantics, I I , 21. 46, 48. 50 
light verb, 226, 23 1 ,  233, 236, 241 ,  
243-245 
minimal domain, 233, 234, 236 
İinimalist Program, 1 ,  1 9, 50, 60, 
61, 101, 1 23-127, 1-57, 23 1, 248, 
261 , 263 
nominative, I I ,  12, 15-17, 25, 78, 79, 
82, 158, 159, 1 63, 165, 166, 169, 
170. 2 12, 225, 234, 239, 242, 245, 
273-275 
null adverbials. 205, 206, 221 
object shift, 1 03, 106, 108-1 1 0, 1 l2, 
1 14, 1 16-1 19, 124, 127, 147, 150, 
303 
ISS, 173, 174, 178, 188, 190, 23 1, 
232, 234, 245 
obliqueness hierarchy, 35 
passives, 23, 25-27, 29, 35, 47, 54, 
55, 67, 75, 80-82, 85-87. 92-94, 
1 02, 1 14, 1 34, 142, 144, 147, 164, 
169, 170, 176, 185, 242, 258, 279 
predicate fronting. 1 5 1  , 225, 228. 
23 1 , 233, 245 
predicate. core, 225. 230, 232. 233. 
244 
predication, 56, 84, 1 70, 1 78, 225, 
226, 228, 229, 23 1, 233, 237, 238, 
244 
Principles and Parameters, 50, 63, 64, 
101, 157 
Projection Principle, 4, 8, 16, 55, 56, 
225 
prominence 
D-prominence, 13-1 7, 247, 272, 
279 
embedding prominence, 1 1, 36-39, 
41-4. 46, 48-50, 59, 62. 67-75 
relational prominence, 10, 1 1, 36-
39, 41-50, 59, 62, 67-69, 73-75 
V-prominence, 13-17, 228, 247, 
272, 273, 279 
pseudogapping, 107-1 10, 120, 121 
Q-feature, 12, 212-2 16, 223 
quantifier float, 6, 1 73, 236, 238 
quantifier lowering, 1 14, 1 15 
raising, 84, 124, 125, 130. 131. 141. 
142, 144, 145, 147, l S I ,  153, 154 
agent phrase raising, 134-138, 140, 
141 
ascensions, 35, 127 
ECM, 8, 84, 101. 103, 104, 106-
108, 1 12-1 16, 1 18, 120. 121, 
125, 126, 143, 153 
raising to object, 84, 124, 125, 
130, 131, 141, 142, 144, 145, 
147, 151, 1 53, 154 
possessor raising, 124-129, 1 3 1, 
133-137, 141, 145, 147, 154 
pseudo-raising constructions. 138, 
140 

304 
quanti fier raising, 105, 106 
raising to subject, 1 13, 1 14, 141 
reciprocals, 37, 41, 68, 71, 90-92, 
1 02, 108, 1 86, 1 88, 189, 240, 244 
reflexives, 7, 14, 23-25, 28, 29, 39, 
54, 83, 90-92, 142-145, 154, 1 55, 
238-240, 244, 246, 249. 256, 260. 
261 , 265, 266, 274, 276 
emphatic reflexives. 247, 249-251, 
254, 256-258, 260, 261, 264, 
265, 266, 268, 276 
Relational Grammar, 1 , 2, 3, 5, 8, 17, 
21, 24-29, 31-33, 35, 38, 39, 47, 
49, 50, 78, 82, 100, 102, 124, 127, 
131, 133, 147, 225 
relational hierarchy, 35, 36, 47 
Relational SuccCssion Law, 127, 154 
sentential subjects, 13, 252, 262, 264, 
266, 270 
small clauses, 28, 54. 56, 167, 180, 
183-1 86, 191 
Specified Subject Condition, 3 
Split VP Hypothesis, 179, 180, 182, 
190 
Standard Theory, 3, 124 
subjacency, 255, 261 
subject condition, 109-1 1 1  
subject islands, 261, 263, 267, 269, 
270, 278 
subjecthood, 33, 153, 158, 1 63, 176, 
1 77, 180, 187, 190, 225-229, 237, 
245, 247 
superiority, 10, 1 1 , 13, 15, 38, 41, 42, 
48, 1 17, 1 18, 233, 234, 246 
TAM 
(TenselAspect/Mood), 
229, 
232 
thematic layer, 9, 10, IS, 18 
theŹatic roles, 10, 1 1, 3 1, 35, 45, 47, 
53, 54, 56, 58, 59, 61, 62, 67, 74, 
75, 79-81, 83, 84, 86-88, 90, 96-
98, 102, 141, 232, 233, 237, 241-
243, 245, 263, 268 
proto-roles, 60, 61, 65, 71, 75 
theoretical frameworks, see: 
Extended Standard Theory, 
Generative Semantics, 
SUBJECT INDEX 
Government and Binding theory, 
Head 
Driven 
Phrase 
Structure 
Grammar, 
Lexical-Functional Gramar, 
Minimalist Program, 
Principles and Parameters, 
Relational Grammar, 
Standard Theory. 
Theta Criterion, 55, 56, 62, 63, 67, 
74, 75 
topic, 1. 5, 18, 22, 89, 1 02, 151, 153, 
180, 1 97-203, 209, 21 8-222, 276 
TP, 7, 9, 10, 13, 107, 108, 1 58, 1 59, . 
161-163, 168, 173, 181, 1 84, 186, 
188, 1 97, 201, 21 1-213, 247, 272-
275, 279 
transformational syntax, I ,  3, 4, 27, 
53 
T-to-C movement, 209-21 1, 212, 
214-216, 222 
unaccusative, 4, 1 1, 13, 1 6, 47, 62, 
64. 65, 108, 134, 137, 140, 154, 
163, 164, 169, 171, 173, 176, 178, 
221, 237, 245 
unergative, 16, 176, 221, 245 
Uniformity 
of Theta 
Assignment 
Hypothesis, 53, 56, 57, 59-63, 67, 
74, 75, 87 
Universal Alignment Hypothesis, 75 
Universal Grammar, 4, 9, 25, 55, 217 
VoiceP, 46, 144, 1 59, 177, 178, 191 
vP, 5, 9, 1 1, 14-16, 33, 45, 47, 49, 59, 
65, 70, 129, 1 73, 179, 191, 193, 
213, 226, 231-238, 242-245 
VP-ellipsis, 1 62 
VP-intemal subject hypothesis, 4, 6, 
9, 45, 46, 177, 178, 226 
VP-shells, see: 
Larsonian shells 
wh-movement, 105, 106, 1 10, 1 12, 
1 17, 1 18, 1 55, 201 , 202, 2 1 1 , 215, 
220, 262 
word order 
SVO, 130, 144, 151. 152, 163. 271 
vas, 120, 129, 130, 151, 269 
VSO, 123, 160, 1 62, 1 63, 229, 230 

I 
I 
l 
i 
L 
Studies in Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 
Managing Editors 
Liliane Haegeman. University 0/ Geneva 
Joan Maling. Brandeis University 
James McCloskey. University o/California. Santa Cruz 
Publications 
1 .  
L. Burzio: Italian Syntax. A Government-binding Approach. 1986. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
1 0. 
1 1 . 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
1 7. 
1 8. 
ISBN Hb 90-277-2014-2; Pb 90-277-2015-0 
w.n. Davies: Choctaw Verb Agreement and Universal Grammar. 1986. 
ISBN Hb 90-277-2065-7; Pb 90-277-2 1 42-4 
K. E. Kiss: Configurationality in Hungarian. 1987. ISBN Hb 90-277-1907-1· 
Pb 90-277 
.. 
D. PuUeyblank: Tone in Lexical Phonology. 1986. 
ISBN Hb 90-277-21 
Pb 90-277-21 
L. HeHan and K. K. Christensen: Topics in Scandinavian Syntax. 1986. 
ISBN Hb 90-277-21 66- 1 ;  Pb 90-277-2167-X . 
K. P. Mohanan: The Theory of Lexical Phonology. 1986. 
ISBN Hb 90-277-2226-9; 
Pb 90-277-2227-7 
J. L. Aissen: Tzotzil Clause Structure. 1 987. 
ISBN Hb 90-277-2365-6; 
Pb 90-277-2441 -5 
T. Gunji: Japanese Phrase Structure Grammar. A Unification-based Approach. 
1 987. 
ISBN 1 -55608-020-4 
W. U. Wurzel: Inflectional Morphology and Naturalness. 1989 
ISBN Hb 1 -55608-025-5; Ph 1-55608-026-3 
C. Neidle: The Role o/Case in Russian Syntax. 1988 
ISBN 1 -55608-042-5 
C. Lefebvre and P. Muysken: Mixed Categories. NominaIizations in Quechua. 
1 988. 
ISBN Hb 1-55608-050-6; Pb 1 -55608-05 1 -4 
K. Michelson: A Comparative Study 0/ Lake-Iroquoian Accent. 1 988 
ISBN 1-55608-054-9 
K. Zagona: Verb Phrase Syntax. A Parametric Study of English and Spanish. 
1988 
ISBN Hb 1 -55608-064-6; Pb 1-55608-065-4 
R. Hendrick: Anaphora in Celtic and Universal Gramar. 1988 
ISBN 1-55608-066-2 
O. Jaeggli and K.J. Safir (eds.): The Null Subject Parameter. 1 989 
ISBN Hb 1-55608-086-7; Pb 1-55608-087-5 
H. Lasnik: Essays on Anaphora. 1 989 
ISBN Hb 1 -55608-090-5; 
Pb 1 -55608-09 1-3 
S. Steele: Agreement and Anti-Agreement. A Syntax of Luiseiio. 1990 
ISBN 0-7923-0260-5 
E. Pearce: Parameters in Old French Syntax. Infinitival Complements. 1990 
ISBN Hb 0-7923-0432-2; Ph 0-7923-0433-0 

